ghost, and not even the ghost of a ghost seemed inclined to reveal
itself to me.



10. THE WATCHER IS WATCHED


I have never been able exactly to satisfy my own mind as to the precise
period during my occupation of the Uninhabited House when it occurred to
me that I was being watched. Hazily I must have had some consciousness
of the fact long before I began seriously to entertain the idea.

I felt, even when I was walking through London, that I was being often
kept in sight by some person. I had that vague notion of a stranger
being interested in my movements which it is so impossible to define to
a friend, and which one is chary of seriously discussing with oneself.
Frequently, when the corner of a street was reached, I found myself
involuntarily turning to look back; and, prompted by instinct, I
suppose, for there was no reason about the matter, I varied my route to
and from the Uninhabited House, as much as the nature of the roads
permitted. Further, I ceased to be punctual as to my hours of business,
sometimes arriving at the office late, and, if Mr. Craven had anything
for me to do Cityward, returning direct from thence to River Hall
without touching Buckingham Street.

By this time February had drawn to a close, and better weather might
therefore have been expected; instead of which, one evening as I paced
westward, snow began to fall, and continued coming down till somewhere
about midnight.

Next morning Mrs. Stott drew my attention to certain footmarks on the
walks, and beneath the library and drawing-room windows--the footmarks,
evidently, of a man whose feet were not a pair. With the keenest
interest, I examined these traces of a human pursuer. Clearly the
footprints had been made by only one person, and that person deformed in
some way. Not merely was the right foot-track different from that of the
left, but the way in which its owner put it to the ground must have been
different also. The one mark was clear and distinct, cut out in the snow
with a firm tread, while the other left a little broken bank at its
right edge, and scarcely any impression of the heel.

"Slightly lame," I decided. "Eases his right foot, and has his boots
made to order."

"It is very odd," I remarked aloud to Mrs. Stott.

"That it is, sir," she answered; adding, "I hope to gracious none of
them mobsmen are going to come burglaring here!" "Pooh!" I replied;
"there is nothing for them to steal, except chairs and tables, and I
don't think one man could carry many of them away."

The whole of that day I found my thoughts reverting to those foot-marks
in the snow. What purpose anyone proposed to serve by prowling about
River Hall I could not imagine. Before taking up my residence in the
Uninhabited House, I had a theory that some malicious person or persons
was trying to keep the place unoccupied--nay, further, imagination
suggested the idea that, owing to its proximity to the river, Mr.
Elmsdale's Hall might have taken the fancy of a gang of smugglers, who
had provided for themselves means of ingress and egress unknown to the
outside world. But all notions of this kind now seemed preposterous.

Slowly, but surely, the conviction had been gaining upon me that, let
the mystery of River Hall be what it would, no ordinary explanation
could account for the phenomena which it had presented to tenant after
tenant; and my own experiences in the house, slight though they were,
tended to satisfy me there was something beyond malice or interest at
work about the place.

The very peace vouchsafed to me seemed another element of mystery, since
it would certainly have been natural for any evil-disposed person to
inaugurate a series of ghostly spectacles for the benefit of an
investigator like myself; and yet, somehow, the absence of supernatural
appearances, and the presence of that shadowy human being who thought it
worth while to track my movements, and who had at last left tangible
proof of his reality behind him in the snow, linked themselves together
in my mind.

"If there is really anyone watching me," I finally decided, "there must
be a deeper mystery attached to River Hall than has yet been suspected.
Now, the first thing is to make sure that some one is watching me, and
the next to guard against danger from him."

In the course of the day, I made a, for me, curious purchase. In a
little shop, situated in a back street, I bought half a dozen reels of
black sewing-cotton.

This cotton, on my return home, I attached to the trellis-work outside
the drawing-room window, and wound across the walk and round such trees
and shrubs as grew in positions convenient for my purpose.

"If these threads are broken to-morrow morning, I shall know I have a
flesh-and-blood foe to encounter," I thought.

Next morning I found all the threads fastened across the walks leading
round by the library and drawing-room snapped in two.

It was, then, flesh and blood I had come out to fight, and I decided
that night to keep watch.

As usual, I went up to my bedroom, and, after keeping the gas burning
for about the time I ordinarily spent in undressing, put out the light,
softly turned the handle of the door, stole, still silently, along the
passage, and so into a large apartment with windows which overlooked
both the library and drawing-room.

It was here, I knew, that Miss Elmsdale must have heard her father
walking past the door, and I am obliged to confess that, as I stepped
across the room, a nervous chill seemed for the moment to take my
courage captive.

If any reader will consider the matter, mine was not an enviable
position. Alone in a desolate house, reputed to be haunted, watching
for some one who had sufficient interest in the place to watch it and
me closely.

It was still early--not later than half-past ten. I had concluded to
keep my vigil until after midnight, and tried to while away the time
with thoughts foreign to the matter in hand.

All in vain, however. Let me force what subject I pleased upon my
mind, it reverted persistently to Mr. Elmsdale and the circumstances
of his death.

"Why did he commit suicide?" I speculated. "If he had lost money, was
that any reason why he should shoot himself?"

People had done so, I was aware; and people, probably, would continue to
do so; but not hard-headed, hard-hearted men, such as Robert Elmsdale
was reputed to have been. He was not so old that the achievement of a
second success should have seemed impossible. His credit was good, his
actual position unsuspected. River Hall, unhaunted, was not a bad
property, and in those days he could have sold it advantageously.

I could not understand the motive of his suicide, unless, indeed, he was
mad or drunk at the time. And then I began to wonder whether anything
about his life had come out on the inquest--anything concerning habits,
associates, and connections. Had there been any other undercurrent,
besides betting, in his life brought out in evidence, which might help
me to a solution of the mystery?

"I will ask Mr. Craven to-morrow," I thought, "whether he has a copy of
the _Times_, containing a report of the inquest. Perhaps--"

What possibility I was about to suggest to my own mind I shall never now
know, for at that moment there flamed out upon the garden a broad,
strong flame of light--a flame which came so swiftly and suddenly, that
a man, creeping along the River Walk, had not time to step out of its
influence before I had caught full sight of him. There was not much to
see, however. A man about the middle height, muffled in a cloak, wearing
a cap, the peak of which was drawn down over his forehead: that was all
I could discern, ere, cowering back from the light, he stole away into
the darkness.

Had I yielded to my first impulse, I should have rushed after him in
pursuit; but an instant's reflection told me how worse than futile such
a wild-goose chase must prove. Cunning must be met with cunning,
watching with watching.

If I could discover who he was, I should have taken the first step
towards solving the mystery of River Hall; but I should never do so by
putting him on his guard. The immediate business lying at that moment to
my hand was to discover whence came the flare of light which, streaming
across the walk, had revealed the intruder's presence to me. For that
business I can truthfully say I felt little inclination.

Nevertheless, it had to be undertaken. So, walking downstairs, I
unlocked and opened the library-door, and found, as I anticipated, the
room in utter darkness. I examined the fastenings of the shutters--they
were secure as I had left them; I looked into the strong-room--not even
a rat lay concealed there; I turned the cocks of the gas lights--but no
gas whistled through the pipes, for the service to the library was
separate from that of the rest of the house, and capable of being shut
off at pleasure. I, mindful of the lights said to have been seen
emanating from that room, had taken away the key from the internal tap,
so that gas could not be used without my knowledge or the possession of
a second key. Therefore, as I have said, it was no surprise to me to
find the library in darkness. Nor could I say the fact of the light
flaring, apparently, from a closely-shut-up room surprised me either.
For a long time I had been expecting to see this phenomenon: now, when I
did see it, I involuntarily connected the light, the apartment, and the
stranger together.

For he was no ghost. Ghosts do not leave footmarks behind them in the
snow. Ghosts do not break threads of cotton. It was a man I had seen in
the garden, and it was my business to trace out the connection between
him and the appearances at River Hall.

Thinking thus, I left the library, extinguished the candle by the aid of
which I had made the investigations stated above, and after lowering the
gaslight I always kept burning in the hall, began ascending the broad,
handsome staircase, when I was met by the figure of a man descending the
steps. I say advisedly, the figure; because, to all external appearance,
he was as much a living man as myself.

And yet I knew the thing which came towards me was not flesh and
blood. Knew it when I stood still, too much stupefied to feel afraid.
Knew it, as the figure descended swiftly, noiselessly. Knew it, as,
for one instant, we were side by side. Knew it, when I put out my hand
to stop its progress, and my hand, encountering nothing, passed
through the phantom as through air. Knew, it, when I saw the figure
pass through the door I had just locked, and which opened to admit the
ghostly visitor--opened wide, and then closed again, without the help
of mortal hand.

After that I knew nothing more till I came to my senses again and found
myself half lying, half sitting on the staircase, with my head resting
against the banisters. I had fainted; but if any man thinks I saw in a
vision what I have described, let him wait till he reaches the end of
this story before expressing too positive an opinion about the matter.

How I passed the remainder of that night, I could scarcely tell.
Towards morning, however, I fell asleep, and it was quite late when I
awoke: so late, in fact, that Mrs. Stott had rung for admittance
before I was out of bed.

That morning two curious things occurred: one, the postman brought a
letter for the late owner of River Hall, and dropped it in the box;
another, Mrs. Stott asked me if I would allow her and two of the
children to take up their residence at the Uninhabited House. She
could not manage to pay her rent, she explained, and some kind
friends had offered to maintain the elder children if she could keep
the two youngest.

"And I thought, sir, seeing how many spare rooms there are here, and the
furniture wanting cleaning, and the windows opening when the sun is out,
that perhaps you would not object to my staying here altogether. I
should not want any more wages, sir, and I would do my best to give
satisfaction."

For about five minutes I considered this proposition, made to me whilst
sitting at breakfast, and decided in favour of granting her request. I
felt satisfied she was not in league with the person or persons engaged
in watching my movements; it would be well to have some one in care of
the premises during my absence, and it would clearly be to her interest
to keep her place at River Hall, if possible.

Accordingly, when she brought in my boots, I told her she could remove
at once if she liked.

"Only remember one thing, Mrs. Stott," I said. "If you find any ghosts
in the dark corners, you must not come to me with any complaints."

"I sleep sound, sir," she answered, "and I don't think any ghosts will
trouble me in the daytime. So thank you, sir; I will bring over a few
things and stay here, if you please."

"Very good; here is the key of the back door," I answered; and in five
minutes more I was trudging Londonward.

As I walked along I decided not to say anything to Mr. Craven concerning
the previous night's adventures; first, because I felt reluctant to
mention the apparition, and secondly, because instinct told me I should
do better to keep my own counsel, and confide in no one, till I had
obtained some clue to the mystery of that midnight watcher.

"Now here's a very curious thing!" said Mr. Craven, after he had opened
and read the letter left at River Hall that morning. "This is from a man
who has evidently not heard of Mr. Elmsdale's death, and who writes to
say how much he regrets having been obliged to leave England without
paying his I O U held by my client. To show that, though he may have
seemed dishonest, he never meant to cheat Mr. Elmsdale, he encloses a
draft on London for the principal and interest of the amount due."

"Very creditable to him," I remarked. "What is the amount, sir?"

"Oh! the total is under a hundred pounds," answered Mr. Craven; "but
what I meant by saying the affair seemed curious is this: amongst Mr.
Elmsdale's papers there was not an I O U of any description."

"Well, that is singular," I observed; then asked, "Do you think Mr.
Elmsdale had any other office besides the library at River Hall?"

"No," was the reply, "none whatever. When he gave up his offices in
town, he moved every one of his papers to River Hall. He was a reserved,
but not a secret man; not a man, for instance, at all likely to lead a
double life of any sort."

"And yet he betted," I suggested.

"Certainly that does puzzle me," said Mr. Craven. "And it is all against
my statement, for I am certain no human being, unless it might be Mr.
Harringford, who knew him in business, was aware of the fact."

"And what is your theory about the absence of all-important documents?"
I inquired.

"I think he must have raised money on them," answered Mr. Craven.

"Are you aware whether anyone else ever produced them?" I asked.

"I am not; I never heard of their being produced: but, then, I should
not have been likely to hear." Which was very true, but very
unsatisfactory. Could we succeed in tracing even one of those papers, a
clue might be found to the mystery of Mr. Elmsdale's suicide.

That afternoon I repaired to the house of one of our clients, who had, I
knew, a file of the _Times_ newspapers, and asked him to allow me to
look at it.

I could, of course, have seen a file at many places in the city, but I
preferred pursuing my investigations where no one was likely to watch
the proceeding.

"_Times!_ bless my soul, yes; only too happy to be able to oblige Mr.
Craven. Walk into the study, there is a good fire, make yourself quite
at home, I beg, and let me send you a glass of wine."

All of which I did, greatly to the satisfaction of the dear old
gentleman.

Turning over the file for the especial year in which Mr. Elmsdale had
elected to put a pistol to his head, I found at last the account of the
inquest, which I copied out in shorthand, to be able to digest it more
fully at leisure; and as it was growing dusk, wended my way back to
Buckingham Street.

As I was walking slowly down one side of the street, I noticed a man
standing within the open door of a house near Buckingham Gate.

At any other time I should not have given the fact a second thought, but
life at River Hall seemed to have endowed me with the power of making
mountains out of molehills, of regarding the commonest actions of my
fellows with distrust and suspicion; and I was determined to know more
of the gentleman who stood back in the shadow, peering out into the
darkening twilight.

With this object I ran upstairs to the clerk's office, and then passed
into Mr. Craven's room. He had gone, but his lamp was still burning, and
I took care to move between it and the window, so as to show myself to
any person who might be watching outside; then, without removing hat or
top-coat, I left the room, and proceeded to Taylor's office, which I
found in utter darkness. This was what I wanted; I wished to see without
being seen; and across the way, standing now on the pavement, was the
man I had noticed, looking up at our offices.

"All right," thought I, and running downstairs, I went out again, and
walked steadily up Buckingham Street, along John Street, up Adam Street,
as though _en route_ to the Strand. Before, however, I reached that
thoroughfare, I paused, hesitated, and then immediately and suddenly
wheeled round and retraced my steps, meeting, as I did so, a man walking
a few yards behind me and at about the same pace.

I did not slacken my speed for a moment as we came face to face; I did
not turn to look back after him; I retraced my steps to the office;
affected to look out some paper, and once again pursued my former route,
this time without meeting or being followed by anyone, and made my way
into the City, where I really had business to transact.

I could have wished for a longer and a better look at the man who
honoured me so far as to feel interested in my movements; but I did not
wish to arouse his suspicions.

I had scored one trick; I had met him full, and seen his face
distinctly--so distinctly that I was able to feel certain I had seen it
before, but where, at the moment, I could not remember.

"Never mind," I continued: "that memory will come in due time; meanwhile
the ground of inquiry narrows, and the plot begins to thicken."



11. MISS BLAKE ONCE MORE


Upon my return to River Hall I found in the letter-box an envelope
addressed to ---- Patterson, Esq.

Thinking it probably contained some circular, I did not break the seal
until after dinner; whereas, had I only known from whom the note came,
should I not have devoured its contents before satisfying the pangs of
physical hunger!

Thus ran the epistle:--

    "DEAR SIR,--

    "Until half an hour ago I was ignorant that you were the person who
    had undertaken to reside at River Hall. If you would add another
    obligation to that already conferred upon me, _leave that terrible
    house at once_. What I have seen in it, you know; what may happen to
    you, if you persist in remaining there, I tremble to think. For the
    sake of your widowed mother and only sister, you ought not to expose
    yourself to a risk which is _worse than useless_. I never wish to
    hear of River Hall being let again. Immediately I come of age, I
    shall sell the place; and if anything could give me happiness in
    this world, it would be to hear the house was razed to the ground.
    Pray! pray! listen to a warning, which, believe me, is not idly
    given, and leave a place which has already been the cause of so much
    misery to yours, gratefully and sincerely,

    "HELENA ELMSDALE."

It is no part of this story to tell the rapture with which I gazed upon
the writing of my "lady-love." Once I had heard Miss Blake remark, when
Mr. Craven was remonstrating with her on her hieroglyphics, that "Halana
wrote an 'unmaning hand,' like all the rest of the English," and, to
tell the truth, there was nothing particularly original or
characteristic about Miss Elmsdale's calligraphy.

But what did that signify to me? If she had strung pearls together, I
should not have valued them one-half so much as I did the dear words
which revealed her interest in me.

Over and over I read the note, at first rapturously, afterwards with a
second feeling mingling with my joy. How did she know it was I who had
taken up my residence at River Hall? Not a soul I knew in London,
besides Mr. Craven, was aware of the fact, and he had promised
faithfully to keep my secret.

Where, then, had Miss Elmsdale obtained her information? from whom
had she learned that I was bent on solving the mystery of the
"Uninhabited House"?

I puzzled myself over these questions till my brain grew uneasy with
vain conjectures.

Let me imagine what I would--let me force my thoughts into what grooves
I might--the moment the mental pressure was removed, my suspicions
fluttered back to the man whose face seemed not unfamiliar.

"I am confident he wants to keep that house vacant," I decided. "Once
let me discover who he is, and the mystery of the 'Uninhabited House'
shall not long remain a mystery."

But then the trouble chanced to be how to find out who he was. I could
not watch and be watched at the same time, and I did not wish to take
anyone into my confidence, least of all a professional detective.

So far fortune had stood my friend; I had learnt something suspected by
no one else, and I made up my mind to trust to the chapter of accidents
for further information on the subject of my unknown friend.

When Mr. Craven and I were seated at our respective tables, I
said to him:

"Could you make any excuse to send me to Miss Blake's to-day, sir?"

Mr. Craven looked up in utter amazement. "To Miss Blake's!" he repeated.
"Why do you want to go there?"

"I want to see Miss Elmsdale," I answered, quietly enough, though I felt
the colour rising in my face as I spoke.

"You had better put all that nonsense on one side, Patterson," he
remarked. "What you have to do is to make your way in the world, and you
will not do that so long as your head is running upon pretty girls.
Helena Elmsdale is a good girl; but she would no more be a suitable wife
for you, than you would be a suitable husband for her. Stick to law, my
lad, for the present, and leave love for those who have nothing more
important to think of."

"I did not want to see Miss Elmsdale for the purpose you imply," I said,
smiling at the vehemence of Mr. Craven's advice. "I only wish to ask her
one question."

"What is the question?"

"From whom she learned that I was in residence at River Hall," I
answered, after a moment's hesitation.

"What makes you think she is aware of that fact?" he inquired.

"I received a note from her last night, entreating me to leave the
place, and intimating that some vague peril menaced me if I persisted in
remaining there."

"Poor child! poor Helena!" said Mr. Craven, thoughtfully; then spreading
a sheet of note-paper on his blotting-pad, and drawing his cheque-book
towards him, he proceeded:

"Now remember, Patterson, I trust to your honour implicitly. You must
not make love to that girl; I think a man can scarcely act more
dishonourably towards a woman, than to induce her to enter into what
must be, under the best circumstances, a very long engagement."

"You may trust me, sir," I answered, earnestly. "Not," I added, "that I
think it would be a very easy matter to make love to anyone with Miss
Blake sitting by."

Mr. Craven laughed; he could not help doing so at the idea I had
suggested. Then he said, "I had a letter from Miss Blake this morning
asking me for money."

"And you are going to let her have some of that hundred pounds you
intended yesterday to place against her indebtedness to you," I
suggested.

"That is so," he replied. "Of course, when Miss Helena comes of age, we
must turn over a new leaf--we really must."

To this I made no reply. It would be a most extraordinary leaf, I
considered, in which Miss Blake did not appear as debtor to my
employer but it scarcely fell within my province to influence Mr.
Craven's actions.

"You had better ask Miss Blake to acknowledge receipt of this," said my
principal, holding up a cheque for ten pounds as he spoke. "I am afraid
I have not kept the account as I ought to have done."

Which was undeniably true, seeing we had never taken a receipt from
her at all, and that loans had been debited to his private account
instead of to that of Miss Blake. But true as it was, I only answered
that I would get her acknowledgment; and taking my hat, I walked off
to Hunter Street.

Arrived there, I found, to my unspeakable joy, that Miss Blake was out,
and Miss Elmsdale at home.

When I entered the shabby sitting-room where her beauty was so
grievously lodged, she rose and greeted me with kindly words, and sweet
smiles, and vivid blushes.

"You have come to tell me you are not going ever again to that dreadful
house," she said, after the first greeting and inquiries for Miss Blake
were over. "You cannot tell the horror with which the mere mention of
River Hall now fills me."

"I hope it will never be mentioned to you again till I have solved the
mystery attached to it," I answered.

"Then you will not do what I ask," she cried, almost despairingly.

"I cannot," was my reply. "Miss Elmsdale, you would not have a soldier
turn back from the battle. I have undertaken to find out the secret
attached to your old home, and, please God, I shall succeed in my
endeavours."

"But you are exposing yourself to danger, to--"

"I must take my chance of that. I cannot, if I would, turn back now, and
I would not if I could. But I have come to you for information. How did
you know it was I who had gone to River Hall?"

The colour flamed up in her face as I put the question.

"I--I was told so," she stammered out.

"May I ask by whom?"

"No, Mr. Patterson, you may not," she replied. "A--a friend--a kind
friend, informed me of the fact, and spoke of the perils to which you
were exposing yourself--living there all alone--all alone," she
repeated. "I would not pass a night in the house again if the whole
parish were there to keep me company, and what must it be to stay in
that terrible, terrible place alone! You are here, perhaps, because you
do not believe--because you have not seen."

"I do believe," I interrupted, "because I have seen; and yet I mean to
go through with the matter to the end. Have you a likeness of your
father in your possession, Miss Elmsdale?" I asked.

"I have a miniature copied from his portrait, which was of course
too large to carry from place to place," she answered. "Why do you
wish to know?"

"If you let me see it, I will reply to your question," I said.

Round her dear throat she wore a thin gold chain. Unfastening this, she
handed to me the necklet, to which was attached a locket enamelled in
black. It is no exaggeration to say, as I took this piece of personal
property, my hand trembled so much that I could not open the case.

True love is always bashful, and I loved the girl, whose slender
neck the chain had caressed, so madly and senselessly, if you will,
that I felt as if the trinket were a living thing, a part and parcel
of herself.

"Let me unfasten it," she said, unconscious that aught save awkwardness
affected my manipulation of the spring. And she took the locket and
handed it back to me open, wet with tears--her tears.

Judge how hard it was for me then to keep my promise to Mr. Craven and
myself--how hard it was to refrain from telling her all my reasons for
having ever undertaken to fight the dragon installed at River Hall.

I thank God I did refrain. Had I spoken then, had I presumed upon her
sorrow and her simplicity, I should have lost something which
constitutes the sweetest memory of my life.

But that is in the future of this story, and meantime I was looking at
the face of her father.

I looked at it long and earnestly; then I closed the locket, softly
pressing down the spring as I did so, and gave back miniature and chain
into her hand.

"Well, Mr. Patterson?" she said, inquiringly.

"Can you bear what I have to tell?" I asked.

"I can, whatever it may be," she answered.

"I have seen that face at River Hall."

She threw up her arms with a gesture of despair.

"And," I went on, "I may be wrong, but I think I am destined to solve
the mystery of its appearance."

She covered her eyes, and there was silence between us for a minute,
when I said:

"Can you give me the name of the person who told you I was at
River Hall?"

"I cannot," she repeated. "I promised not to mention it."

"He said I was in danger."

"Yes, living there all alone."

"And he wished you to warn me."

"No; he asked my aunt to do so, and she refused; and so I--I thought I
would write to you without mentioning the matter to her."

"You have done me an incalculable service," I remarked, "and in return I
will tell you something."

"What is that?" she asked.

"From to-night I shall not be alone in the house."

"Oh! how thankful I am!" she exclaimed; then instantly added, "Here
is my aunt."

I rose as Miss Blake entered, and bowed.

"Oh! it is you, is it?" said the lady. "The girl told me some one
was waiting."

Hot and swift ran the colour to my adored one's cheeks.

"Aunt," she observed, "I think you forget this gentleman comes from
Mr. Craven."

"Oh, no! my dear, I don't forget Mr. Craven, or his clerks either,"
responded Miss Blake, as, still cloaked and bonneted, she tore open Mr.
Craven's envelope.

"I am to take back an answer, I think," said I.

"You are, I see," she answered. "He's getting mighty particular, is
William Craven. I suppose he thinks I am going to cheat him out of his
paltry ten pounds. Ten pounds, indeed! and what is that, I should like
to know, to us in our present straits! Why, I had more than twice ten
yesterday from a man on whom we have no claim--none whatever--who,
without asking, offered it in our need."

"Aunt," said Miss Elmsdale, warningly.

"If you will kindly give me your acknowledgment, Miss Blake, I should
like to be getting back to Buckingham Street," I said. "Mr. Craven will
wonder at my absence."

"Not a bit of it," retorted Miss Blake. "You and Mr. Craven understand
each other, or I am very much mistaken; but here is the receipt, and
good day to you."

I should have merely bowed my farewell, but that Miss Elmsdale stood up
valiantly.

"Good-bye, Mr. Patterson," she said, holding out her dainty hand, and
letting it lie in mine while she spoke. "I am very much obliged to you.
I can never forget what you have done and dared in our interests."

And I went out of the room, and descended the stairs, and opened the
front door, she looking graciously over the balusters the while, happy,
ay, and more than happy.

What would I not have done and dared at that moment for Helena Elmsdale?
Ah! ye lovers, answer!



12. HELP


"There has been a gentleman to look at the house, sir, this afternoon,"
said Mrs. Stott to me, when, wet and tired, I arrived, a few evenings
after my interview with Miss Elmsdale, at River Hall.

"To look at the house!" I repeated. "Why, it is not to let."

"I know that, sir, but he brought an order from Mr. Craven's office to
allow him to see over the place, and to show him all about. For a widow
lady from the country, he said he wanted it. A very nice gentleman, sir;
only he did ask a lot of questions, surely--"

"What sort of questions?" I inquired.

"Oh! as to why the tenants did not stop here, and if I thought there was
anything queer about the place; and he asked how you liked it, and how
long you were going to stay; and if you had ever seen aught strange in
the house.

"He spoke about you, sir, as if he knew you quite well, and said you
must be stout-hearted to come and fight the ghosts all by yourself. A
mighty civil, talkative gentleman--asked me if I felt afraid of living
here, and whether I had ever met any spirits walking about the stairs
and passages by themselves."

"Did he leave the order you spoke of just now behind him?"

"Yes, sir. He wanted me to give it back to him; but I said I must keep
it for you to see. So then he laughed, and made the remark that he
supposed, if he brought the lady to see the place, I would let him in
again. A pleasant-spoken gentleman, sir--gave me a shilling, though I
told him I did not require it."

Meantime I was reading the order, written by Taylor, and dated two
years back.

"What sort of looking man was he?" I asked.

"Well, sir, there was not anything particular about him in any way.
Not a tall gentleman, not near so tall as you, sir; getting into
years, but still very active and light-footed, though with something
of a halt in his way of walking. I could not rightly make out what it
was; nor what it was that caused him to look a little crooked when you
saw him from behind.

"Very lean, sir; looked as if the dinners he had eaten done him no good.
Seemed as if, for all his pleasant ways, he must have seen trouble, his
face was so worn-like."

"Did he say if he thought the house would suit?" I inquired.

"He said it was a very nice house, sir, and that he imagined anybody not
afraid of ghosts might spend two thousand a year in it very comfortably.
He said he should bring the lady to see the place, and asked me
particularly if I was always at hand, in case he should come tolerably
early in the morning."

"Oh!" was my comment, and I walked into the dining-room, wondering what
the meaning of this new move might be; for Mrs. Stott had described, to
the best of her ability, the man who stood watching our offices in
London; and--good heavens!--yes, the man I had encountered in the lane
leading to River Hall, when I went to the Uninhabited House, after
Colonel Morris' departure.

"That is the man," thought I, "and he has some close, and deep, and
secret interest in the mystery associated with this place, the origin of
which I must discover."

Having arrived at this conclusion, I went to bed, for I had caught a bad
cold, and was aching from head to foot, and had been sleeping ill, and
hoped to secure a good night's rest.

I slept, it is true, but as for rest, I might as well, or better, have
been awake. I fell from one dream into another; found myself wandering
through impossible places; started in an agony of fear, and then dozed
again, only to plunge into some deeper quagmire of trouble; and through
all there was a vague feeling I was pursuing a person who eluded all my
efforts to find him; playing a terrible game of hide-and-seek with a man
who always slipped away from my touch, panting up mountains and running
down declivities after one who had better wind and faster legs than I;
peering out into the darkness, to catch a sight of a vague figure
standing somewhere in the shadow, and looking, with the sun streaming
into my eyes and blinding me, adown long white roads filled with a
multitude of people, straining my sight to catch a sight of the coming
traveller, who yet never came.

When I awoke thoroughly, as I did long and long before daybreak, I knew
I was ill. I had a bad sore throat and an oppression at my chest which
made me feel as if I was breathing through a sponge. My limbs ached more
than had been the case on the previous evening whilst my head felt
heavier than a log of teak.

"What should I do if I were to have a bad illness in that house?" I
wondered to myself, and for a few minutes I pondered over the expediency
of returning home; but this idea was soon set aside.

Where could I go that the Uninhabited House would not be a haunting
presence? I had tried running away from it once before, and found it
more real to me in the King's Road, Brighton, than on the banks of the
Thames. No!--ill or well, I would stay on; the very first night of my
absence might be the night of possible explanation.

Having so decided, I dressed and proceeded to the office, remaining
there, however, only long enough to write a note to Mr. Craven, saying I
had a very bad cold, and begging him to excuse my attendance.

After that I turned my steps to Munro's lodgings. If it were possible
to avert an illness, I had no desire to become invalided in Mr.
Elmsdale's Hall.

Fortunately, Munro was at home and at dinner. "Just come in time, old
fellow," he said, cheerily. "It is not one day in a dozen you would have
found me here at this hour. Sit down, and have some steak. Can't
eat--why, what's the matter, man? You don't mean to say you have got
another nervous attack. If you have, I declare I shall lodge a complaint
against you with Mr. Craven."

"I am not nervous," I answered; "but I have caught cold, and I want you
to put me to rights."

"Wait till I have finished my dinner," he replied; and then he proceeded
to cut himself another piece of steak--having demolished which, and seen
cheese placed on the table, he said:

"Now, Harry, we'll get to business, if you please. Where is this cold
you were talking about?"

I explained as well as I could, and he listened to me without
interruption. When I had quite finished, he said:

"Hal Patterson, you are either becoming a hypochondriac, or you are
treating me to half confidences. Your cold is not worth speaking about.
Go home, and get to bed, and take a basin of gruel, or a glass of
something hot, after you are in bed, and your cold will be well in the
morning. But there is something more than a cold the matter with you.
What has come to you, to make a few rheumatic pains and a slight sore
throat seem of consequence in your eyes?"

"I am afraid of being ill," I answered.

"Why are you afraid of being ill? why do you imagine you are going to be
ill? why should you fall ill any more than anybody else?"

I sat silent for a minute, then I said, "Ned, if I tell you, will you
promise upon your honour not to laugh at me?"

"I won't, if I can help it. I don't fancy I shall feel inclined to
laugh," he replied.

"And unless I give you permission, you will not repeat what I am going
to tell you to anyone?"

"That I can safely promise," he said. "Go on."

And I went on. I began at the beginning and recited all the events
chronicled in the preceding pages; and he listened, asking no questions,
interposing no remark.

When I ceased speaking, he rose and said he must think over the
statements I had made.

"I will come and look you up to-night, Patterson," he observed. "Go home
to River Hall, and keep yourself quiet. Don't mention that you feel ill.
Let matters go on as usual. I will be with you about nine. I have an
appointment now that I must keep."

Before nine Munro appeared, hearty, healthy, vigorous as usual.

"If this place were in Russell Square," he said, after a hasty glance
round the drawing-room, "I should not mind taking a twenty-one years'
lease of it at forty pounds a year, even if ghosts were included in the
fixtures."

"I see you place no credence in my story," I said, a little stiffly.

"I place every credence in your story," was the reply. "I believe you
believe it, and that is saying more than most people could say nowadays
about their friends' stories if they spoke the truth."

It was of no use for me to express any further opinion upon the matter.
I felt if I talked for a thousand years I should still fail to convince
my listener there was anything supernatural in the appearances beheld at
River Hall. It is so easy to pooh-pooh another man's tale; it is
pleasant to explain every phenomenon that the speaker has never
witnessed; it is so hard to credit that anything absolutely
unaccountable on natural grounds has been witnessed by your dearest
friend, that, knowing my only chance of keeping my temper and preventing
Munro gaining a victory over me was to maintain a discreet silence, I
let him talk on and strive to account for the appearances I had
witnessed in his own way.

"Your acquaintance of the halting gait and high shoulder may or might
have some hand in the affair," he finished. "My own opinion is he has
not. The notion that you are being watched, is, if my view of the
matter be correct, only a further development of the nervous excitement
which has played you all sort of fantastic tricks since you came to
this house. If anyone does wander through the gardens, I should set him
down as a monomaniac or an intending burglar, and in any case the very
best thing you can do is to pack up your traps and leave River Hall to
its fate."

I did not answer; indeed, I felt too sick at heart to do so. What he
said was what other people would say. If I could not evolve some clearer
theory than I had yet been able to hit on, I should be compelled to
leave the mystery of River Hall just as I had found it. Miss Blake had,
I knew, written to Mr. Craven that the house had better be let again, as
there "was no use in his keeping a clerk there in free lodgings for
ever": and now came Ned Munro, with his worldly wisdom, to assure me
mine was a wild-goose chase, and that the only sensible course for me to
pursue was to abandon it altogether. For the first time, I felt
disheartened about the business, and I suppose I showed my
disappointment, for Munro, drawing his chair nearer to me, laid a
friendly hand on my shoulder and said:

"Cheer up, Harry! never look so downhearted because your nervous system
has been playing you false. It was a plucky thing to do, and to carry
out; but you have suffered enough for honour, and I should not continue
the experiment of trying how much you can suffer, were I in your shoes."

"You are very kind, Munro," I answered; "but I cannot give up. If I had
all the wish in the world to leave here to-night, a will stronger than
my own would bring me back here to-morrow. The place haunts me. Believe
me, I suffer less from its influence, seated in this room, than when I
am in the office or walking along the Strand."

"Upon the same principle, I suppose, that a murderer always carries the
memory of his victim's face about with him; though he may have felt
callously indifferent whilst the body was an actual presence."

"Precisely," I agreed.

"But then, my dear fellow, you are not a murderer in any sense of the
word. You did not create the ghosts supposed to be resident here."

"No; but I feel bound to find out who did," I answered.

"That is, if you can, I suppose?" he suggested.

"I feel certain I shall," was the answer. "I have an idea in my mind,
but it wants shape. There is a mystery, I am convinced, to solve which,
only the merest hint is needed."

"There are a good many things in this world in the same position, I
should say," answered Munro. "However, Patterson, we won't argue about
the matter; only there is one thing upon which I am determined--after
this evening, I will come and stay here every night. I can say I am
going to sleep out of town. Then, if there are ghosts, we can hunt them
together; if there are none, we shall rest all the better. Do you agree
to that?" and he held out his hand, which I clasped in mine, with a
feeling of gratitude and relief impossible to describe.

As he said, I had done enough for honour; but still I could not give
up, and here was the support and help I required so urgently, ready
for my need.

"I am so much obliged," I said at last.

"Pooh! nonsense!" he answered. "You would do as much or more for me any
day. There, don't let us get sentimental. You must not come out, but,
following the example of your gallant Colonel Morris, I will, if you
please, smoke a cigar in the garden. The moon must be up by this time."

I drew back the curtains and unfastened the shutter, which offered
egress to the grounds, then, having rung for Mrs. Stott to remove the
supper-tray, I sat down by the fire to await Munro's return, and began
musing concerning the hopelessness of my position, the gulf of poverty
and prejudice and struggle that lay between Helena and myself.

I was determined to win her; but the prize seemed unattainable as the
Lord Mayor's robes must have appeared to Whittington, when he stood at
the foot of Highgate Hill; and, prostrated as I was by that subtle
malady to which as yet Munro had given no name, the difficulties grew
into mountains, the chances of success dwarfed themselves into
molehills.

Whilst thus thinking vaguely, purposelessly, but still most miserably, I
was aroused from reverie by the noise of a door being shut cautiously
and carefully--an outer door, and yet one with the sound of which I was
unacquainted.

Hurrying across the hall, I flung the hall-door wide, and looked out
into the night. There was sufficient moonlight to have enabled me to
discern any object moving up or down the lane, but not a creature was in
sight, not a cat or dog even traversed the weird whiteness of that
lonely thoroughfare.

Despite Munro's dictum, I passed out into the night air, and went down
to the very banks of the Thames. There was not a boat within hail. The
nearest barge lay a couple of hundred yards from the shore.

As I retraced my steps, I paused involuntarily beside the door, which
led by a separate entrance to the library.

"That is the door which shut," I said to myself, pressing my hand gently
along the lintel, and sweeping the hitherto unbroken cobwebs away as I
did so. "If my nerves are playing me false this time, the sooner their
tricks are stopped the better, for no human being opened this door, no
living creature has passed through it."

Having made up my mind on which points, I re-entered the house, and
walked into the drawing-room, where Munro, pale as death, stood draining
a glass of neat brandy.

"What is the matter?" I cried, hurriedly. "What have you seen, what--"

"Let me alone for awhile," he interrupted, speaking in a thick, hoarse
whisper; then immediately asked, "Is that the library with the windows
nearest the river?"

"Yes," I answered.

"I want to go into that room," he said, still in the same tone.

"Not now," I entreated. "Sit down and compose yourself; we will go into
it, if you like, before you leave."

"Now, now--this minute," he persisted. "I tell you, Patterson, I must
see what is in it."

Attempting no further opposition, I lit a couple of candles, and giving
one into his hand, led the way to the door of the library, which I
unlocked and flung wide open.

To one particular part Munro directed his steps, casting the light
from his candle on the carpet, peering around in search of something
he hoped, and yet still feared, to see. Then he went to the shutters
and examined the fastenings, and finding all well secured, made a
sign for me to precede him out of the room. At the door he paused,
and took one more look into the darkness of the apartment, after
which he waited while I turned the key in the lock, accompanying me
back across the hall.

When we were once more in the drawing-room, I renewed my inquiry as to
what he had seen; but he bade me let him alone, and sat mopping great
beads of perspiration off his forehead, till, unable to endure the
mystery any longer, I said:

"Munro, whatever it may be that you have seen, tell me all, I entreat.
Any certainty will be better than the possibilities I shall be conjuring
up for myself."

He looked at me wearily, and then drawing his hand across his eyes, as
if trying to clear his vision, he answered, with an uneasy laugh:

"It was nonsense, of course. I did not think I was so imaginative, but I
declare I fancied I saw, looking through the windows of that now utterly
dark room, a man lying dead on the floor."

"Did you hear a door shut?" I inquired.

"Distinctly," he answered; "and what is more, I saw a shadow flitting
through the other door leading out of the library, which we found, if
you remember, bolted on the inside."

"And what inference do you draw from all this?"

"Either that some one is, in a to me unintelligible way, playing a very
clever game at River Hall, or else that I am mad."

"You are no more mad than other people who have lived in this house,"
I answered.

"I don't know how you have done it, Patterson," he went on, unheeding my
remark. "I don't, upon my soul, know how you managed to stay on here. It
would have driven many a fellow out of his mind. I do not like leaving
you. I wish I had told my landlady I should not be back. I will, after
this time; but to-night I am afraid some patient may be wanting me."

"My dear fellow," I answered, "the affair is new to you, but it is not
new to me. I would rather sleep alone in the haunted house, than in a
mansion filled from basement to garret, with the unsolved mystery of
this place haunting me."

"I wish you had never heard of, nor seen, nor come near it," he
exclaimed, bitterly; "but, however, let matters turn out as they will, I
mean to stick to you, Patterson. There's my hand on it."

And he gave me his hand, which was cold as ice--cold as that of one
dead.

"I am going to have some punch, Ned," I remarked. "That is, if you will
stop and have some."

"All right," he answered. "Something 'hot and strong' will hurt neither
of us, but you ought to have yours in bed. May I give it to you there?"

"Nonsense!" I exclaimed, and we drew our chairs close to the fire, and,
under the influence of a decoction which Ned insisted upon making
himself, and at making which, indeed, he was much more of an adept than
I, we talked valiantly about ghosts and their doings, and about how our
credit and happiness were bound up in finding out the reason why the
Uninhabited House was haunted.

"Depend upon it, Hal," said Munro, putting on his coat and hat,
preparatory to taking his departure, "depend upon it that unfortunate
Robert Elmsdale must have been badly cheated by some one, and sorely
exercised in spirit, before he blew out his brains."

To this remark, which, remembering what he had said in the middle of the
day, showed the wonderful difference that exists between theory and
practice, I made no reply.

Unconsciously, almost, a theory had been forming in my own mind, but I
felt much corroboration of its possibility must be obtained before I
dare give it expression.

Nevertheless, it had taken such hold of me that I could not shake off
the impression, which was surely, though slowly, gaining ground, even
against the dictates of my better judgment.

"I will just read over the account of the inquest once again," I
decided, as I bolted and barred the chain after Munro's departure; and
so, by way of ending the night pleasantly, I took out the report, and
studied it till two, chiming from a neighbouring church, reminded me
that the fire was out, that I had a bad cold, and that I ought to have
been between the blankets and asleep hours previously.



13. LIGHT AT LAST


Now, whether it was owing to having gone out the evening before from a
very warm room into the night air, and, afterwards, into that chilly
library, or to having sat reading the report given about Mr.
Elmsdale's death till I grew chilled to my very marrow, I cannot say,
all I know is, that when I awoke next morning I felt very ill, and
welcomed, with rejoicing of spirit, Ned Munro, who arrived about
mid-day, and at once declared he had come to spend a fortnight with me
in the Uninhabited House.

"I have arranged it all. Got a friend to take charge of my patients;
stated that I am going to pay a visit in the country, and so forth. And
now, how are you?"

I told him, very truthfully, that I did not feel at all well.

"Then you will have to get well, or else we shall never be able to
fathom this business," he said. "The first thing, consequently, I shall
do, is to write a prescription, and get it made up. After that, I mean
to take a survey of the house and grounds."

"Do precisely what you like," I answered. "This is Liberty Hall to the
living as well as to the dead," and I laid my head on the back of the
easy-chair, and went off to sleep.

All that day Munro seemed to feel little need of my society. He examined
every room in the house, and every square inch about the premises. He
took short walks round the adjacent neighbourhood, and made, to his own
satisfaction, a map of River Hall and the country and town thereunto
adjoining. Then he had a great fire lighted in the library, and spent
the afternoon tapping the walls, trying the floors, and trying to obtain
enlightenment from the passage which led from the library direct to the
door opening into the lane.

After dinner, he asked me to lend him the shorthand report I had made of
the evidence given at the inquest. He made no comment upon it when he
finished reading, but sat, for a few minutes, with one hand shading his
eyes, and the other busily engaged in making some sort of a sketch on
the back of an old letter.

"What are you doing, Munro?" I asked, at last.

"You shall see presently," he answered, without looking up, or pausing
in his occupation.

At the expiration of a few minutes, he handed me over the paper, saying:

"Do you know anyone that resembles?"

I took the sketch, looked at it, and cried out incoherently in my
surprise.

"Well," he went on, "who is it?"

"The man who follows me! The man I saw in this lane!"

"And what is his name?"

"That is precisely what I desire to find out," I answered. "When did you
see him? How did you identify him? Why did--"

"I have something to tell you, if you will only be quiet, and let me
speak," he interrupted. "It was, as you know, late last night before I
left here, and for that reason, and also because I was perplexed and
troubled, I walked fast--faster than even is my wont. The road was very
lonely; I scarcely met a creature along the road, flooded with the
moonlight. I never was out on a lovelier night; I had never, even in the
country, felt I had it so entirely to myself.

"Every here and there I came within sight of the river, and it seemed,
on each occasion, as though a great mirror had been put up to make every
object on land--every house, every tree, bush, fern, more clearly
visible than it had been before. I am coming to my story, Hal, so don't
look so impatient.

"At last, as I came once again in view of the Thames, with the moon
reflected in the water, and the dark arches of the bridge looking black
and solemn contrasted against the silvery stream, I saw before me, a
long way before me, a man whose figure stood out in relief against the
white road--a man walking wearily and with evident difficulty--a man,
too, slightly deformed.

"I walked on rapidly, till within about a score yards of him, then I
slackened my speed, and taking care that my leisurely footsteps should
be heard, overtook him by degrees, and then, when I was quite abreast,
asked if he could oblige me with a light.

"He looked up in my face, and said, with a forced, painful smile and
studied courtesy of manner:

"'I am sorry, sir, to say that I do not smoke.'

"I do not know exactly what reply I made. I know his countenance struck
me so forcibly, it was with difficulty I could utter some commonplace
remark concerning the beauty of the night.

"'I do not like moonlight,' he said, and as he said it, something, a
connection of ideas, or a momentary speculation, came upon me so
suddenly, that once again I failed to reply coherently, but asked if he
could tell me the shortest way to the Brompton Road.

"'To which end?' he inquired.

"'That nearest Hyde Park Corner,' I answered.

"As it turned out, no question could have served my purpose better.

"'I am going part of the way there,' he said, 'and will show you the
nearest route--that is,' he added, 'if you can accommodate your pace to
mine,' and he pointed, as he spoke, to his right foot, which evidently
was causing him considerable pain.

"Now, that was something quite in my way, and by degrees I got him to
tell me about the accident which had caused his slight deformity. I told
him I was a doctor, and had been to see a patient, and so led him on to
talk about sickness and disease, till at length he touched upon diseases
of a morbid character; asking me if it were true that in some special
maladies the patient was haunted by an apparition which appeared at a
particular hour.

"I told him it was quite true, and that such cases were peculiarly
distressing, and generally proved most difficult to cure--mentioning
several well-authenticated instances, which I do not mean to detail to
you, Patterson, as I know you have an aversion to anything savouring of
medical shop.

"'You doctors do not believe in the actual existence of any such
apparitions, of course?' he remarked, after a pause.

"I told him we did not; that we knew they had their rise and origin
solely in the malady of the patient.

"'And yet,' he said, 'some ghost stories--I am not now speaking of those
associated with disease, are very extraordinary, unaccountable--'

"'Very extraordinary, no doubt,' I answered; 'but I should hesitate
before saying unaccountable. Now, there is that River Hall place up the
river. There must be some rational way of explaining the appearances in
that house, though no one has yet found any clue to that enigma.'

"'River Hall--where is that?' he asked; then suddenly added, 'Oh! I
remember now: you mean the Uninhabited House, as it is called. Yes,
there is a curious story, if you like. May I ask if you are interested
in any way in that matter?'

"'Not in any way, except that I have been spending the evening there
with a friend of mine.'

"'Has he seen anything of the reputed ghost?' asked my companion,
eagerly. 'Is he able to throw any light on the dark subject?'

"'I don't think he can,' I replied. 'He has seen the usual appearances
which I believe it is correct to see at River Hall; but so far, they
have added nothing to his previous knowledge.'

"'He has seen, you say?'

"'Yes; all the orthodox lions of that cheerful house.'

"'And still he is not daunted--he is not afraid?'

"'He is not afraid. Honestly, putting ghosts entirely on one side, I
should not care to be in his shoes, all alone in a lonely house.'

"'And you would be right, sir,' was the answer. 'A man must be mad to
run such a risk.'

"'So I told him,' I agreed.

"'Why, I would not stay in that house alone for any money which could be
offered to me,' he went on, eagerly.

"'I cannot go so far as that,' I said; 'but still it must be a very
large sum which could induce me to do so.'

"'It ought to be pulled down, sir,' he continued; 'the walls ought to be
razed to the ground.'

"'I suppose they will,' I answered, 'when Miss Elmsdale, the owner,
comes of age; unless, indeed, our modern Don Quixote runs the ghost to
earth before that time.'

"'Did you say the young man was ill?' asked my companion.

"'He has got a cold,' I answered.

"'And colds are nasty things to get rid of,' he commented, 'particularly
in those low-lying localities. That is a most unhealthy part; you ought
to order your patient a thorough change of air.'

"'I have, but he won't take advice,' was my reply. 'He has nailed his
colours to the mast, and means, I believe, to stay in River Hall till he
kills the ghost, or the ghost kills him.'

"'What a foolish youth!'

"'Undoubtedly; but, then, youth is generally foolish, and we have all
our crotchets.'

"We had reached the other side of the bridge by this time, and saying
his road lay in an opposite direction to mine, the gentleman I have
sketched told me the nearest way to take, and bade me a civil good
night, adding, 'I suppose I ought to say good morning.'"

"And is that all?" I asked, as Munro paused.

"Bide a wee, as the Scotch say, my son. I strode off along the road he
indicated, and then, instead of making the detour he had kindly sketched
out for my benefit, chose the first turning to my left, and, quite
convinced he would soon pass that way, took up my position in the
portico of a house which lay well in shadow. It stood a little back from
the side-path, and a poor little Arab sleeping on the stone step proved
to me the policeman was not over and above vigilant in that
neighbourhood.

"I waited, Heaven only knows how long, thinking all the time I must be
mistaken, and that his home did lie in the direction he took; but at
last, looking out between the pillars and the concealing shrubs, I saw
him. He was looking eagerly into the distance, with such a drawn, worn,
painful expression, that for a moment my heart relented, and I thought I
would let the poor devil go in peace.

"It was only for a moment, however; touching the sleeping boy, I bade
him awake, if he wanted to earn a shilling. 'Keep that gentleman in
sight, and get to know for me where he lives, and come back here, and I
will give you a shilling, and perhaps two, for your pains.'

"With his eyes still heavy with slumber, and his perceptions for the
moment dulled, he sped after the figure, limping wearily on. I saw him
ask my late companion for charity, and follow the gentleman for a few
steps, when the latter, threatening him with his stick, the boy dodged
to escape a blow, and then, by way of showing how lightly his bosom's
load sat upon him, began turning wheels down the middle of the street.
He passed the place where I stood, and spun a hundred feet further on,
then he gathered himself together, and seeing no one in sight,
stealthily crept back to his porch again.

"'You young rascal,' I said, 'I told you to follow him home. I want to
know his name and address particularly.'

"'Come along, then,' he answered, 'and I'll show you. Bless you, we all
knows him--better than we do the police, or anybody hereabouts. He's a
beak and a ward up at the church, whatever that is, and he has
building-yards as big, oh! as big as two workhouses, and--'"

"His name, Munro--his name?" I gasped.

"Harringford."

I expected it. I knew then that for days and weeks my suspicions had
been vaguely connecting Mr. Harringford with the mystery of the
Uninhabited House.

This was the hiding figure in my dream, the link hitherto wanting in my
reveries concerning River Hall. I had been looking for this--waiting for
it; I understood at last; and yet, when Munro mentioned the name of the
man who had thought it worth his while to watch my movements, I shrunk
from the conclusion which forced itself upon me.

"Must we go on to the end with this affair?" I asked, after a pause, and
my voice was so changed, it sounded like that of a stranger to me.

"We do not yet know what the end will prove," Munro answered; "but
whatever it may be, we must not turn back now."

"How ought we to act, do you think?" I inquired.

"We ought not to act at all," he answered. "We had better wait and see
what his next move will be. He is certain to take some step. He will try
to get you out of this house by hook or by crook. He has already striven
to effect his purpose through Miss Elmsdale, and failed. It will
therefore be necessary for him to attempt some other scheme. It is not
for me to decide on the course he is likely to pursue; but, if I were in
your place, I should stay within doors at night. I should not sit in the
dark near windows still unshuttered. I should not allow any strangers to
enter the house, and I should have a couple of good dogs running loose
about the premises. I have brought Brenda with me as a beginning, and I
think I know where to lay my hand on a good old collie, who will stay
near any house I am in, and let no one trespass about it with impunity."

"Good heavens! Munro, you don't mean to say you think the man would
_murder_ me!" I exclaimed.

"I don't know what he might, or might not do," he replied. "There is
something about this house he is afraid may be found out, and he is
afraid you will find it out. Unless I am greatly mistaken, a great deal
depends upon the secret being preserved intact. At present we can only
surmise its nature; but I mean, in the course of a few days, to know
more of Mr. Harringford's antecedents than he might be willing to
communicate to anyone. What is the matter with you, Hal? You look as
white as a corpse."

"I was only thinking," I answered, "of one evening last week, when I
fell asleep in the drawing-room, and woke in a fright, imagining I saw
that horrid light streaming out from the library, and a face pressed up
close to the glass of the window on my left hand peering into the room."

"I have no doubt the face was there," he said, gravely; "but I do not
think it will come again, so long as Brenda is alive. Nevertheless, I
should be careful. Desperate men are capable of desperate deeds."

The first post next morning brought me a letter from Mr. Craven, which
proved Mr. Harringford entertained for the present no intention of
proceeding to extremities with me.

He had been in Buckingham Street, so said my principal, and offered to
buy the freehold of River Hall for twelve hundred pounds.

Mr. Craven thought he might be induced to increase his bid to fifteen
hundred, and added: "Miss Blake has half consented to the arrangement,
and Miss Elmsdale is eager for the matter to be pushed on, so that the
transfer may take place directly she comes of age. I confess, now an
actual offer has been made, I feel reluctant to sacrifice the property
for such a sum, and doubt whether it might not be better to offer it for
sale by auction--that is, if you think there is no chance of your
discovering the reason why River Hall bears so bad a name. Have you
obtained any clue to the mystery?"

To this I replied in a note, which Munro himself conveyed to the office.

"I have obtained an important clue; but that is all I can say for the
present. Will you tell Mr. Harringford I am at River Hall, and that you
think, being on the spot and knowing all about the place, I could
negotiate the matter better than anyone else in the office? If he is
desirous of purchasing, he will not object to calling some evening and
discussing the matter with me. I have an idea that a large sum of money
might be made out of this property by an enterprising man like Mr.
Harringford; and it is just possible, after hearing what I have to say,
he may find himself able to make a much better offer for the Uninhabited
House than that mentioned in your note. At all events, the interview can
do no harm. I am still suffering so much from cold that it would be
imprudent for me to wait upon Mr. Harringford, which would otherwise be
only courteous on my part."

"Capital!" said Munro, reading over my shoulder. "That will bring my
gentleman to River Hall--. But what is wrong, Patterson? You are surely
not going to turn chickenhearted now?"

"No," I answered; "but I wish it was over. I dread something, and I do
not know what it is. Though nothing shall induce me to waver, I am
afraid, Munro. I am not ashamed to say it: I am afraid, as I was the
first night I stayed in this house. I am not a coward, but I am afraid."

He did not reply for a moment. He walked to the window and looked out
over the Thames; then he came back, and, wringing my hand, said, in
tones that tried unsuccessfully to be cheerful:

"I know what it is, old fellow. Do you think I have not had the feeling
myself, since I came here? But remember, it has to be done, and I will
stand by you. I will see you through it."

"It won't do for you to be in the room, though," I suggested.

"No; but I will stay within earshot," he answered.

We did not talk much more about the matter. Men rarely do talk much
about anything which seems to them very serious, and I may candidly say
that I had never felt anything in my life to be much more serious than
that impending interview with Mr. Harringford.

That he would come we never doubted for a moment, and we were right. As
soon as it was possible for him to appoint an interview, Mr.
Harringford did so.

"Nine o'clock on to-morrow (Thursday) evening," was the hour he named,
apologizing at the same time for being unable to call at an earlier
period of the day.

"Humph!" said Munro, turning the note over. "You will receive him in the
library, of course, Hal?"

I replied such was my intention.

"And that will be a move for which he is in no way prepared," commented
my friend.

From the night when Munro walked and talked with Mr. Harringford, no
person came spying round and about the Uninhabited House. Of this fact
we were satisfied, for Brenda, who gave tongue at the slightest murmur
wafted over the river from the barges lying waiting for the tide, never
barked as though she were on the track of living being; whilst the
collie--a tawny-black, unkempt, ill-conditioned, savage-natured, but yet
most true and faithful brute, which Munro insisted on keeping within
doors, never raised his voice from the day he arrived at River Hall,
till the night Mr. Harringford rang the visitor's-bell, when the animal,
who had been sleeping with his nose resting on his paws, lifted his head
and indulged in a prolonged howl.

Not a nice beginning to an interview which I dreaded.



14. A TERRIBLE INTERVIEW


I was in the library, waiting to receive Mr. Harringford. A bright fire
blazed on the hearth, the table was strewn with papers Munro had brought
to me from the office, the gas was all ablaze, and the room looked
bright and cheerful--as bright and as cheerful as if no ghost had been
ever heard of in connection with it.

At a few minutes past nine my visitor arrived. Mrs. Stott ushered him
into the library, and he entered the room evidently intending to shake
hands with me, which civility I affected not to notice.

After the first words of greeting were exchanged, I asked if he would
have tea, or coffee, or wine; and finding he rejected all offers of
refreshment, I rang the bell and told Mrs. Stott I could dispense with
her attendance for the night.

"Do you mean to tell me you stay in this house entirely alone?" asked
my visitor.

"Until Mrs. Stott came I was quite alone," I answered.

"I would not have done it for any consideration," he remarked.

"Possibly not," I replied. "People are differently constituted."

It was not long before we got to business. His offer of twelve hundred
pounds I pooh-poohed as ridiculous.

"Well," he said--by this time I knew I had a keen man of business to
deal with--"put the place up to auction, and see whether you will
get as much."

"There are two, or rather, three ways of dealing with the property,
which have occurred to me, Mr. Harringford," I explained. "One is
letting or selling this house for a reformatory, or school. Ghosts in
that case won't trouble the inmates, we may be quite certain; another is
utilizing the buildings for a manufactory; and the third is laying the
ground out for building purposes, thus--"

As I spoke, I laid before him a plan for a tri-sided square of building,
the south side being formed by the river. I had taken great pains with
the drawing of this plan: the future houses, the future square, the
future river-walk with seats at intervals, were all to be found in the
roll which I unfolded and laid before him, and the effect my sketch
produced surprised me.

"In Heaven's name, Mr. Patterson," he asked, "where did you get this?
You never drew it out of your own head!"

I hastened to assure him I had certainly not got it out of any other
person's head; but he smiled incredulously.

"Probably," he suggested, "Mr. Elmsdale left some such sketch behind
him--something, at all events, which suggested the idea to you."

"If he did, I never saw nor heard of it," I answered.

"You may have forgotten the circumstance," he persisted; "but I feel
confident you must have seen something like this before. Perhaps amongst
the papers in Mr. Craven's office."

"May I inquire why you have formed such an opinion?" I said, a
little stiffly.

"Simply because this tri-sided square was a favourite project of the
late owner of River Hall," he replied. "After the death of his wife,
the place grew distasteful to him, and I have often heard him say he
would convert the ground into one of the handsomest squares in the
neighbourhood of London. All he wanted was a piece of additional
land lying to the west, which piece is, I believe, now to be had at
a price--"

I sat like one stricken dumb. By no mental process, for which I could
ever account, had that idea been evolved. It sprang into life at a
bound. It came to me in my sleep, and I wakened at once with the whole
plan clear and distinct before my mind's eye, as it now lay clear and
distinct before Mr. Harringford.

"It is very extraordinary," I managed at last to stammer out; "for I can
honestly say I never heard even a suggestion of Mr. Elmsdale's design;
indeed, I did not know he had ever thought of building upon the ground."

"Such was the fact, however," replied my visitor. "He was a speculative
man in many ways. Yes, very speculative, and full of plans and projects.
However, Mr. Patterson," he proceeded, "all this only proves the truth
of the old remark, that 'great wits and little wits sometimes jump
together.'"

There was a ring of sarcasm in his voice, as in his words, but I did not
give much heed to it. The design, then, was not mine. It had come to me
in sleep, it had been forced upon me, it had been explained to me in a
word, and as I asked myself, By whom? I was unable to repress a shudder.

"You are not well, I fear," said Mr. Harringford; "this place seems to
have affected your health. Surely you have acted imprudently in risking
so much to gain so little."

"I do not agree with you," I replied. "However, time will show whether I
have been right or wrong in coming here. I have learned many things of
which I was previously in ignorance, and I think I hold a clue in my
hands which, properly followed, may lead me to the hidden mystery of
River Hall."

"Indeed!" he exclaimed. "May I ask the nature of that clue?"

"It would be premature for me to say more than this, that I am inclined
to doubt whether Mr. Elmsdale committed suicide."

"Do you think his death was the result of accident, then?" he inquired,
his face blanching to a ghastly whiteness.

"No, I do not," I answered, bluntly. "But my thoughts can have little
interest for anyone, at present. What we want to talk about is the sale
and purchase of this place. The offer you made to Mr. Craven, I consider
ridiculous. Let on building lease, the land alone would bring in a
handsome income, and the house ought to sell for about as much as you
offer for the whole property."

"Perhaps it might, if you could find a purchaser," he answered; "and the
land might return an income, if you could let it as you suggest; but, in
the meantime, while the grass grows, the steed starves; and while you
are waiting for your buyer and your speculative builder, Miss Blake and
Miss Elmsdale will have to walk barefoot, waiting for shoes you may
never be able to provide for them."

There was truth in this, but only a half-truth, I felt, so I said:

"When examined at the inquest, Mr. Harringford, you stated, I think,
that you were under considerable obligations to Mr. Elmsdale?"

"Did I?" he remarked. "Possibly, he had given me a helping-hand
once or twice, and probably I mentioned the fact. It is a long time
ago, though."

"Not so very long," I answered; "not long enough, I should imagine, to
enable you to forget any benefits you may have received from Mr.
Elmsdale."

"Mr. Patterson," he interrupted, "are we talking business or sentiment?
If the former, please understand I have my own interests to attend to,
and that I mean to attend to them. If the latter, I am willing, if you
say Miss Elmsdale has pressing need for the money, to send her my cheque
for fifty or a hundred pounds. Charity is one thing, trade another, and
I do not care to mix them. I should never have attained to my present
position, had I allowed fine feelings to interfere with the driving of a
bargain. I don't want River Hall. I would not give that," and he snapped
his fingers, "to have the title-deeds in my hands to-morrow; but as Miss
Elmsdale wishes to sell, and as no one else will buy, I offer what I
consider a fair price for the place. If you think you can do better,
well and good. If--"

He stopped suddenly in his sentence, then rising, he cried, "It is a
trick--a vile, infamous, disgraceful trick!" while his utterance grew
thick, and his face began to work like that of a person in convulsions.

"What do you mean?" I asked, rising also, and turning to look in the
direction he indicated with outstretched arm and dilated eyes.

Then I saw--no need for him to answer. Standing in the entrance to the
strong room was Robert Elmsdale himself, darkness for a background, the
light of the gas falling full upon his face.

Slowly, sternly, he came forward, step by step. With footfalls that
fell noiselessly, he advanced across the carpet, moving steadily
forward towards Mr. Harringford, who, beating the air with his hands,
screamed, "Keep him off! don't let him touch me!" and fell full length
on the floor.

Next instant, Munro was in the room. "Hullo, what is the matter?" he
asked. "What have you done to him--what has he been doing to you?"

I could not answer. Looking in my face, I think Munro understood we had
both seen that which no man can behold unappalled.

"Come, Hal," he said, "bestir yourself. Whatever has happened, don't
sink under it like a woman. Help me to lift him. Merciful Heaven!" he
added, as he raised the prostrate figure. "He is dead!"

To this hour, I do not know how we managed to carry him into the
drawing-room. I cannot imagine how our trembling hands bore that inert
body out of the library and across the hall. It seems like a dream to me
calling up Mrs. Stott, and then tearing away from the house in quest of
further medical help, haunted, every step I took, by the memory of that
awful presence, the mere sight of which had stricken down one of us in
the midst of his buying, and bargaining, and boasting.

I had done it--I had raised that ghost--I had brought the man to his
death; and as I fled through the night, innocent as I had been of the
thought of such a catastrophe, I understood what Cain must have felt
when he went out to live his life with the brand of murderer upon him.

But the man was not dead; though he lay for hours like one from whom
life had departed, he did not die then. We had all the genius, and
knowledge, and skill of London at his service. If doctors could have
saved him, he had lived. If nursing could have availed him, he had
recovered, for I never left him.

When the end came I was almost worn out myself.

And the end came very soon.

"No more doctors," whispered the sick man; "they cannot cure me. Send
for a clergyman, and a lawyer, Mr. Craven as well as any other. It is
all over now; and better so; life is but a long fever. Perhaps he will
sleep now, and let me sleep too. Yes, I killed him. Why, I will tell
you. Give me some wine.

"What I said at the inquest about owing my worldly prosperity to him was
true. I trace my pecuniary success to Mr. Elmsdale; but I trace also
hours, months, and years of anguish to his agency. My God! the nights
that man has made me spend when he was living, the nights I have spent
in consequence of his death--"

He stopped; he had mentally gone back over a long journey. He was
retracing the road he had travelled, from youth to old age. For he was
old, if not in years, in sorrow. Lying on his death-bed, he understood
for what a game he had burnt his candle to the socket; comprehended how
the agony, and the suspense, and the suffering, and the long, long fever
of life, which with him never knew a remittent moment, had robbed him of
that which every man has a right to expect, some pleasure in the course
of his existence.

"When I first met Elmsdale," he went on, "I was a young man, and an
ambitious one. I was a clerk in the City. I had been married a couple of
years to a wife I loved dearly. She was possessed of only a small dot;
and after furnishing our house, and paying for all the expenses incident
on the coming of a first child, we thought ourselves fortunate in
knowing there was still a deposit standing in our name at the
Joint-Stock Bank, for something over two hundred pounds.

"Nevertheless, I was anxious. So far, we had lived within our income;
but with an annual advance of salary only amounting to ten pounds, or
thereabouts, I did not see how we were to manage when more children
came, particularly as the cost of living increased day by day. It was a
dear year that of which I am speaking.

"I do not precisely remember on what occasion it was I first saw Mr.
Elmsdale; but I knew afterwards he picked me out as a person likely to
be useful to him.

"He was on good terms with my employers, and asked them to allow me to
bid for some houses he wanted to purchase at a sale.

"To this hour I do not know why he did not bid for them himself. He gave
me a five-pound note for my services; and that was the beginning of our
connection. Off and on, I did many things for him of one sort or
another, and made rather a nice addition to my salary out of doing them,
till the devil, or he, or both, put it into my head to start as builder
and speculator on my own account.

"I had two hundred pounds and my furniture: that was the whole of my
capital; but Elmsdale found me money. I thought my fortune was made, the
day he advanced me my first five hundred pounds. If I had known--if I
had known--"

"Don't talk any more," I entreated. "What can it avail to speak of such
matters now?"

He turned towards me impatiently.

"Not talk," he repeated, "when I have for years been as one dumb,
and at length the string of my tongue is loosened! Not talk, when,
if I keep silence now, he will haunt me in eternity, as he has
haunted me in time!"

I did not answer, I only moistened his parched lips, and bathed his
burning forehead as tenderly as my unaccustomed hands understood how to
perform such offices.

"Lift me up a little, please," he said; and I put the pillows in
position as deftly as I could.

"You are not a bad fellow," he remarked, "but I am not going to leave
you anything."

"God forbid!" I exclaimed, involuntarily.

"Are not you in want of money?" he asked.

"Not of yours," I answered.

"Mine," he said; "it is not mine, it is his. He thought a great deal of
money, and he has come back for it. He can't rest, and he won't let me
rest till I have paid him principal and interest--compound interest.
Yes--well, I am able to do even that."

We sat silent for a few minutes, then he spoke again.

"When I first went into business with my borrowed capital, nothing I
touched really succeeded. I found myself going back--back. Far better
was my position as clerk; then at least I slept sound at nights, and
relished my meals. But I had tasted of so-called independence, and I
could not go back to be at the beck and call of an employer. Ah! no
employer ever made me work so hard as Mr. Elmsdale; no beck and call
were ever so imperative as his.

"I pass over a long time of anxiety, struggle, and hardship. The world
thought me a prosperous man; probably no human being, save Mr. Elmsdale,
understood my real position, and he made my position almost unendurable.

"How I came first to bet on races, would be a long story, longer than I
have time to tell; but my betting began upon a very small scale, and I
always won--always in the beginning. I won so certainly and so
continuously, that finally I began to hope for deliverance from Mr.
Elmsdale's clutches.

"I don't know how"--the narrative was not recited straight on as I am
writing it, but by starts, as strength served him--"Mr. Elmsdale
ascertained I was devoting myself to the turf: all I can say is, he did
ascertain the fact, and followed me down to Ascot to make sure there was
no mistake in his information.

"At the previous Derby my luck had begun to turn. I had lost then--lost
heavily for me, and he taxed me with having done so.

"In equity, and at law, he had then the power of foreclosing on every
house and rood of ground I owned. I was in his power--in the power of
Robert Elmsdale. Think of it--. But you never knew him. Young man, you
ought to kneel down and thank God you were never so placed as to be in
the power of such a devil--

"If ever you should get into the power of a man like Robert Elmsdale,
don't offend him. It is bad enough to owe him money; but it is worse for
him to owe you a grudge. I had offended him. He was always worrying me
about his wife--lamenting her ill-health, extolling her beauty,
glorifying himself on having married a woman of birth and breeding; just
as if his were the only wife in the world, as if other men had not at
home women twice as good, if not as handsome as Miss Blake's sister.

"Under Miss Blake's insolence I had writhed; and once, when my usual
prudence deserted me, I told Mr. Elmsdale I had been in Ireland and seen
the paternal Blake's ancestral cabin, and ascertained none of the family
had ever mixed amongst the upper thousand, or whatever the number may be
which goes to make up society in the Isle of Saints.

"It was foolish, and it was wrong; but I could not help saying what I
did, and from that hour he was my enemy. Hitherto, he had merely been my
creditor. My own imprudent speech transformed him into a man lying in
wait to ruin me.

"He bided his time. He was a man who could wait for years before he
struck, but who would never strike till he could make sure of inflicting
a mortal wound. He drew me into his power more and more, and then he
told me he did not intend to continue trusting anyone who betted--that
he must have his money. If he had not it by a certain date, which he
named, he would foreclose.

"That meant he would beggar me, and I with an ailing wife and a
large family!

"I appealed to him. I don't remember now what I said, but I do recollect
I might as well have talked to stone.

"What I endured during the time which followed, I could not describe,
were I to talk for ever. Till a man in extremity tries to raise money,
he never understands the difficulty of doing so. I had been short of
money every hour since I first engaged in business, and yet I never
comprehended the meaning of a dead-lock till then.

"One day, in the City, when I was almost mad with anxiety, I met
Mr. Elmsdale.

"'Shall you be ready for me, Harringford?' he asked.

"'I do not know--I hope so,' I answered.

"'Well, remember, if you are not prepared with the money, I shall be
prepared to act,' he said, with an evil smile.

"As I walked home that evening, an idea flashed into my mind. I had
tried all honest means of raising the money; I would try dishonest. My
credit was good. I had large transactions with first-rate houses. I was
in the habit of discounting largely, and I--well, I signed names to
paper that I ought not to have done. I had the bills put through. I had
four months and three days in which to turn round, and I might, by that
time, be able to raise sufficient to retire the acceptances.

"In the meantime, I could face Mr. Elmsdale, and so I wrote, appointing
an evening when I would call with the money, and take his release for
all claims upon me.

"When I arrived at River Hall he had all the necessary documents ready,
but refused to give them up in exchange for my cheque.

"He could not trust me, he said, and he had, moreover, no banking
account. If I liked to bring the amount in notes, well and good; if not,
he would instruct his solicitors.

"The next day I had important business to attend to, so a stormy
interview ended in my writing 'pay cash' on the cheque, and his
consenting to take it to my bankers himself.

"My business on the following day, which happened to be out of town,
detained me much longer than I anticipated, and it was late before I
could reach River Hall. Late though it was, however, I determined to go
after my papers. I held Mr. Elmsdale's receipt for the cheque,
certainly; but I knew I had not an hour to lose in putting matters in
train for another loan, if I was to retire the forged acceptances. By
experience, I knew how the months slipped away when money had to be
provided at the end of them, and I was feverishly anxious to hold my
leases and title-deeds once more.

"I arrived at the door leading to the library. Mr. Elmsdale opened it as
wide as the chain would permit, and asked who was there. I told him,
and, grumbling a little at the unconscionable hour at which I had
elected to pay my visit, he admitted me.

"He was out of temper. He had hoped and expected, I knew, to find
payment of the cheque refused, and he could not submit with equanimity
to seeing me slip out of his hands.

"Evidently, he did not expect me to come that night, for his table was
strewed with deeds and notes, which he had been reckoning up, no doubt,
as a miser counts his gold.

"A pair of pistols lay beside his desk--close to my hand, as I took the
seat he indicated.

"We talked long and bitterly. It does not matter now what he said or I
said. We fenced round and about a quarrel during the whole interview. I
was meek, because I wanted him to let me have part of the money at all
events on loan again; and he was blatant and insolent because he fancied
I cringed to him--and I did cringe.

"I prayed for help that night from Man as I have never since prayed for
help from God.

"You are still young, Mr. Patterson, and life, as yet, is new to you, or
else I would ask whether, in going into an entirely strange office, you
have not, if agitated in mind, picked up from the table a letter or
card, and kept twisting it about, utterly unconscious for the time being
of the social solecism you were committing.

"In precisely the same spirit--God is my witness, as I am a dying man,
with no object to serve in speaking falsehoods--while we talked, I took
up one of the pistols and commenced handling it.

"'Take care,' he said; 'that is loaded'; hearing which I laid it
down again.

"For a time we went on talking; he trying to ascertain how I had
obtained the money, I striving to mislead him.

"'Come, Mr. Elmsdale,' I remarked at last, 'you see I have been able to
raise the money; now be friendly, and consent to advance me a few
thousands, at a fair rate, on a property I am negotiating for. There is
no occasion, surely, for us to quarrel, after all the years we have done
business together. Say you will give me a helping-hand once more, and--'

"Then he interrupted me, and swore, with a great oath, he would never
have another transaction with me.

"'Though you have paid _me_,' he said, 'I know you are hopelessly
insolvent. I cannot tell where or how you have managed to raise that
money, but certain am I it has been by deceiving some one; and so sure
as I stand here I will know all about the transaction within a month.'

"While we talked, he had been, at intervals, passing to and from his
strong room, putting away the notes and papers previously lying about on
the table; and, as he made this last observation, he was standing just
within the door, placing something on the shelf.

"'It is of no use talking to me any more,' he went on. 'If you talked
from now to eternity you could not alter my decision. There are your
deeds; take them, and never let me see you in my house again.'

"He came out of the darkness into the light at that moment, looking
burly, and insolent, and braggart, as was his wont.

"Something in his face, in the tone of his voice, in the vulgar
assumption of his manner, maddened me. I do not know, I have never been
able to tell, what made me long at that moment to kill him--but I did
long. With an impulse I could not resist, I rose as he returned towards
the table, and snatching a pistol from the table--fired.

"Before he could realize my intention, the bullet was in his brain. He
was dead, and I a murderer.

"You can understand pretty well what followed. I ran into the passage
and opened the door; then, finding no one seemed to have heard the
report of the pistol, my senses came back to me. I was not sorry for
what I had done. All I cared for was to avert suspicion from myself, and
to secure some advantage from his death.

"Stealing back into the room, I took all the money I could find, as well
as deeds and other securities. These last I destroyed next day, and in
doing so I felt a savage satisfaction.

"He would have served them the same as me,' I thought. All the rest you
know pretty well.

"From the hour I left him lying dead in the library every worldly plan
prospered with me. If I invested in land, it trebled in value. Did I
speculate in houses, they were sought after as investments. I grew rich,
respected, a man of standing. I had sold my soul to the devil, and he
paid me even higher wages than those for which I engaged--but there was
a balance.

"One after another, wife and children died; and while my heart was
breaking by reason of my home left desolate, there came to me the first
rumour of this place being haunted.

"I would not believe it--I did not--I fought against the truth as men
fight with despair.

"I used to come here at night and wander as near to the house as I
safely could. The place dogged me, sleeping and waking. That library was
an ever-present memory. I have sat in my lonely rooms till I could
endure the horrors of imagination no longer, and been forced to come
from London that I might look at this terrible house, with the silent
river flowing sullenly past its desolate gardens.

"Life seemed ebbing away from me. I saw that day by day the blood left
my cheeks. I looked at my hands, and beheld they were becoming like
those of some one very aged. My lameness grew perceptible to others as
well as to me, and I could distinguish, as I walked in the sunshine, the
shadow my figure threw was that of one deformed. I grew weak, and worn,
and tired, yet I never thoroughly lost heart till I knew you had come
here to unravel the secret.

"'And it will be revealed to him,' I thought, 'if I do not kill him
too.'

"You have been within an ace of death often and often since you set
yourself this task, but at the last instant my heart always failed me.

"Well, you are to live, and I to die. It was to be so, I suppose; but
you will never be nearer your last moment, till you lie a corpse, than
you have been twice, at any rate."

Then I understood how accurately Munro had judged when he warned me to
be on my guard against this man--now harmless and dying, but so recently
desperate and all-powerful for evil; and as I recalled the nights I had
spent in that desolate house, I shivered.

Even now, though the years have come and the years have gone since I
kept my lonely watch in River Hall, I start sometimes from sleep with a
great horror of darkness upon me, and a feeling that stealthily some one
is creeping through the silence to take my life!



15. CONCLUSION


I can remember the day and the hour as if it had all happened yesterday.
I can recall the view from the windows distinctly, as though time had
stood still ever since. There are no gardens under our windows in
Buckingham Street. Buckingham Gate stands the entrance to a desert of
mud, on which the young Arabs--shoeless, stockingless--are disporting
themselves. It is low water, and the river steamers keep towards the
middle arches of Waterloo. Up aloft the Hungerford Suspension rears
itself in mid air, and that spick-and-span new bridge, across which
trains run now ceaselessly, has not yet been projected. It is a bright
spring day. The sunshine falls upon the buildings on the Surrey side,
and lights them with a picturesque beauty to which they have not the
slightest title. A barge, laden with hay, is lying almost motionless in
the middle of the Thames.

There is, even in London, a great promise and hope about that pleasant
spring day, but for me life has held no promise, and the future no hope,
since that night when the mystery of River Hall was solved in my
presence, and out of his own mouth the murderer uttered his
condemnation.

How the weeks and the months had passed with me is soon told. Ill when I
left River Hall, shortly after my return home I fell sick unto death,
and lay like one who had already entered the Valley of the Shadow.

I was too weak to move; I was too faint to think; and when at length I
was brought slowly back to the recollection of life and its cares, of
all I had experienced and suffered in the Uninhabited House, the time
spent in it seemed to me like the memory of some frightful dream.

I had lost my health there, and my love too. Helena was now further
removed from me than ever. She was a great heiress. Mr. Harringford had
left her all his money absolutely, and already Miss Blake was
considering which of the suitors, who now came rushing to woo, it would
be best for her niece to wed.

As for me, Taylor repeated, by way of a good joke, that her aunt
referred to me as a "decent sort of young man" who "seemed to be but
weakly," and, ignoring the fact of ever having stated "she would not
mind giving fifty pounds," remarked to Mr. Craven, that, if I was in
poor circumstances, he might pay me five or ten sovereigns, and charge
the amount to her account.

Of all this Mr. Craven said nothing to me. He only came perpetually to
my sick-bed, and told my mother that whenever I was able to leave town I
must get away, drawing upon him for whatever sums I might require. I did
not need to encroach on his kindness, however, for my uncle, hearing of
my illness, sent me a cordial invitation to spend some time with him.

In his cottage, far away from London, strength at last returned to me,
and by the autumn my old place in Mr. Craven's office was no longer
vacant. I sat in my accustomed corner, pursuing former avocations, a
changed man.

I was hard-working as ever, but hope lightened my road no longer.

To a penny I knew the amount of my lady's fortune, and understood Mr.
Harringford's bequest had set her as far above me as the stars are above
the earth.

I had the conduct of most of Miss Elmsdale's business. As a compliment,
perhaps, Mr. Craven entrusted all the work connected with Mr.
Harringford's estate to me, and I accepted that trust as I should have
done any other which he might choose to place in my hands.

But I could have dispensed with his well-meant kindness. Every visit I
paid to Miss Blake filled my soul with bitterness. Had I been a porter,
a crossing-sweeper, or a potman, she might, I suppose, have treated me
with some sort of courtesy; but, as matters stood, her every tone, word,
and look, said, plainly as possible, "If you do not know your station, I
will teach it to you."

As for Helena, she was always the same--sweet, and kind, and grateful,
and gracious; but she had her friends about her: new lovers waiting for
her smiles. And, after a time, the shadow cast across her youth would,
I understood, be altogether removed, and leave her free to begin a new
and beautiful life, unalloyed by that hideous, haunting memory of
suicide, which had changed into melancholy the gay cheerfulness of her
lovely girlhood.

Yes; it was the old story of the streamlet and the snow, of the rose and
the wind. To others my love might not have seemed hopeless, but to me it
was dead as the flowers I had seen blooming a year before.

Not for any earthly consideration would I have made a claim upon her
affection.

What I had done had been done freely and loyally. I gave it all to her
as utterly as I had previously given my heart, and now I could make no
bargain with my dear. I never for a moment thought she owed me anything
for my pains and trouble. Her kindly glances, her sweet words, her
little, thoughtful turns of manner, were free gifts of her goodness, but
in no sense payment for my services.

She understood I could not presume upon them, and was, perhaps, better
satisfied it should be so.

But nothing satisfied Miss Blake, and at length between her and Mr.
Craven there ensued a serious disagreement. She insisted he should not
"send that clerk of his" to the house again, and suggested if Mr. Craven
were too high and mighty to attend to the concerns of Miss Elmsdale
himself, Miss Blake must look out for another solicitor.

"The sooner the better, madam," said Mr. Craven, with great state; and
Miss Blake left in a huff, and actually did go off to a rival attorney,
who, however, firmly declined to undertake her business.

Then Helena came as peacemaker. She smoothed down Mr. Craven's
ruffled feathers and talked him into a good temper, and effected
a reconciliation