ing. "I tell
you," said he, "the more I can irritate and exasperate this villain the
better. Besides, he slandered me behind my back; and I'll have the writ
served upon himself. I'll do everything I can to take him down. If a
man wants to be my lawyer he must enter into my feelings a little."

Wheeler, to whom he was more valuable than ever now, consented somewhat
reluctantly, and called at Huntercombe Hall next day with the writ, and
sent in his card.

Lady Bassett heard of this, and asked if it was Mr. Bassett's friend.

The butler said he thought it was.

Lady Bassett went to Sir Charles in his study. "Oh, my dear," said she,
"here is Mr. Bassett's lawyer."

"Well?"

"Why does he come here?"

"I don't know."

"Don't see him."

"Why not?"

"I am so afraid of Mr. Bassett. He is our evil genius. Let me see this
person instead of you. _May_ I?"

"Certainly not."

"Might I see him _first,_ love?"

"You will not see him at all."

"Charles!"

"No, Bella; I cannot have these animals talking to my wife."

"But, dear love, I am so full of forebodings. You know, Charles, I
don't often presume to meddle; but I am in torture about this man. If
you receive him, may I be with you? Then we shall be two to one."

"No, no," said Sir Charles, testily. Then, seeing her beautiful eyes
fill at the refusal and the unusual tone, he relented. "You may be in
hearing if you like. Open that door, and sit in the little room."

"Oh, thank you!"

She stepped into the room--a very small sitting-room. She had never
been in it before, and while she was examining it, and thinking how she
could improve its appearance, Mr. Wheeler was shown into the study. Sir
Charles received him standing, to intimate that the interview must be
brief. This, and the time he had been kept waiting in the hall, roused
Wheeler's bile, and he entered on his subject more bruskly than he had
intended.

"Sir Charles Bassett, you wrote a letter to Mr. Hardwicke, reflecting
on my client, Mr. Bassett--a most unjustifiable letter."

"Keep your opinion to yourself, sir. I wrote a letter, calling him what
he is."

"No, sir; that letter is a libel."

"It is the truth."

"It is a malicious libel, sir; and we shall punish you for it. I hereby
serve you with this copy of a writ. Damages, five thousand pounds."

A sigh from the next room passed unnoticed by the men, for their voices
were now raised in anger.

"And so that is what you came here for. Why did you not go to my
solicitor? You must be as great a blackguard as your client, to serve
your paltry writs on me in my own house."

"Not blackguard enough to insult a gentleman in my own house. If you
had been civil I might have accommodated matters; but now I'll make you
smart--ugh!"

Nothing provokes a high-spirited man more than a menace. Sir Charles,
threatened in his wife's hearing, shot out his right arm with
surprising force and rapidity, and knocked Wheeler down in a moment.

In came Lady Bassett, with a scream, and saw the attorney lying doubled
up, and Sir Charles standing over him, blowing like a grampus with rage
and excitement.

But the next moment be staggered and gasped, and she had to support him
to a seat. She rang the bell for aid, then kneeled, and took his
throbbing temples to her wifely bosom.

Wheeler picked himself up, and, seated on his hams, eyed the pair with
concentrated fury.

"Aha! You have hurt yourself more than me. Two suits against you now
instead of one."

"Conduct this person from the house," said Lady Bassett to a servant
who entered at that moment.

"All right, my lady," said Wheeler; "I'll remind you of that word when
this house belongs to us."


CHAPTER X.

WITH this bitter reply Wheeler retired precipitately; the shaft pierced
but one bosom; for the devoted wife, with the swift ingenuity of
woman's love, had put both her hands right over her husband's ears that
he might hear no more insults.

Sir Charles very nearly had a fit; but his wife loosened his neckcloth,
caressed his throbbing head, and applied eau-de-Cologne to his
nostrils. He got better, but felt dizzy for about an hour. She made him
come into her room and lie down; she hung over him, curling as a vine
and light as a bird, and her kisses lit softly as down upon his eyes,
and her words of love and pity murmured music in his ears till he
slept, and that danger passed.

For a day or two after this both Sir Charles and Lady Bassett avoided
the unpleasant subject. But it had to be faced; so Mr. Oldfield was
summoned to Huntercombe, and all engagements given up for the day, that
he might dine alone with them and talk the matter over.

Sir Charles thought he could justify; but when it came to the point he
could only prove that Richard had done several ungentleman-like things
of a nature a stout jury would consider trifles.

Mr. Oldfield said of course they must enter an appearance; and, this
done, the wisest course would be to let him see Wheeler, and try to
compromise the suit. "It will cost you a thousand pounds, Sir Charles,
I dare say; but if it teaches you never to write of an enemy or to an
enemy without showing your lawyer the letter first, the lesson will be
cheap. Somebody in the Bible says, 'Oh, that mine enemy would write a
book!' I say, 'Oh, that he would write a letter--without consulting his
solicitor."

It was Lady Bassett's cue now to make light of troubles. "What does it
matter, Mr. Oldfield? All they want is money. Yes, offer them a
thousand pounds to leave him in peace."

So next day Mr. Oldfield called on Wheeler, all smiles and civility,
and asked him if he did not think it a pity cousins should quarrel
before the whole county.

"A great pity," said Wheeler. "But my client has no alternative. No
gentleman in the county would speak to him if he sat quiet under such
contumely."

After beating about the bush the usual time, Oldfield said that Sir
Charles was hungry for litigation, but that Lady Bassett was averse to
it. "In short, Mr. Wheeler, I will try and get Mr. Bassett a thousand
pounds to forego this scandal."

"I will consult him, and let you know," said Wheeler. "He happens to be
in the town."

Oldfield called again in an hour. Wheeler told him a thousand pounds
would be accepted, with a written apology.

Oldfield shook his head. "Sir Charles will never write an apology:
right or wrong, he is too sincere in his conviction."

"He will never get a jury to share it."

"You must not be too sure of that. You don't know the defense."

Oldfield said this with a gravity which did him credit.

"Do you know it yourself?" said the other keen hand.

Mr. Oldfield smiled haughtily, but said nothing. Wheeler had hit the
mark.

"By the by," said the latter, "there is another little matter. Sir
Charles assaulted me for doing my duty to my client. I mean to sue him.
Here is the writ; will you accept service?"

"Oh, certainly, Mr. Wheeler and I am glad to find you do not make a
habit of serving writs on gentlemen in person."

"Of course not. I did it on a single occasion, contrary to my own wish,
and went in person--to soften the blow--instead of sending my clerk."

After this little spar, the two artists in law bade each other farewell
with every demonstration of civility.

Sir Charles would not apologize.

The plaintiff filed his declaration.

The defendant pleaded not guilty, but did not disclose a defense. The
law allows a defendant in libel this advantage.

Plaintiff joined issue, and the trial was set down for the next
assizes.

Sir Charles was irritated, but nothing more. Lady Bassett, with a
woman's natural shrinking from publicity, felt it more deeply. She
would have given thousands of her own money to keep the matter out of
court. But her very terror of Richard Bassett restrained her. She was
always thinking about him, and had convinced herself he was the ablest
villain in the wide world; and she thought to herself, "If, with his
small means, he annoys Charles so, what would he do if I were to enrich
him? He would crush us."

As the trial drew near she began to hover about Sir Charles in his
study, like an anxious hen. The maternal yearnings were awakened in her
by marriage, and she had no child; so her Charles in trouble was
husband and child.

Sometimes she would come in and just kiss his forehead, and run out
again, casting back a celestial look of love at the door, and, though
it was her husband she had kissed, she blushed divinely. At last one
day she crept in and said, very timidly, "Charles dear, the anonymous
letter--is not that an excuse for libeling him--as they call telling
the truth?"

"Why, of course it is. Have you got it?"

"Dearest, the brave lady took it away."

"The brave lady! Who is that?"

"Why, the lady that came with Mr. Oldfield and pleaded your cause with
papa--oh, so eloquently! Sometimes when I think of it now I feel almost
jealous. Who is she?"

"From what you have always told me, I think it was the Sister of
Charity who nursed me."

"You silly thing, she was no Sister of Charity; that was only put on.
Charles, tell me the truth. What does it matter _now?_ It was some lady
who loved you."

"Loved me, and set her wits to work to marry me to you?"

"Women's love is so disinterested--sometimes."

"No, no; she told me she was a sister of--, and no doubt that is the
truth."

"A sister of whom?"

"No matter: don't remind me of the past; it is odious to me; and, on
second thoughts, rather than stir up all that mud, it would be better
not to use the anonymous letter, even if you could get it again."

Lady Bassett begged him to take advice on that; meantime she would try
to get the letter, and also the evidence that Richard Bassett wrote it.

"I see no harm in that," said Sir Charles; "only confine your
communication to Mr. Oldfield. I will not have you speaking or writing
to a woman I don't know: and the more I think of her conduct the less I
understand it."

"There are people who do good by stealth," suggested Bella timidly.

"Fiddledeedee!" replied Sir Charles; "you are a goose--I mean an
angel."

Lady Bassett complied with the letter, but, goose or not, evaded the
spirit of Sir Charles's command with considerable dexterity.



"DEAR MR. OLDFIELD--You may guess what trouble I am in. Sir Charles
will soon have to appear in open court, and be talked against by some
great orator. That anonymous letter Mr. Bassett wrote me was very base,
and is surely some justification of the violent epithets my dear
husband, in an unhappy moment of irritation, has applied to him. The
brave lady has it. I am sure she will not refuse to send it me. I wish
I dare ask her to give it me with her own hand; but I must not, I
suppose. Pray tell her how unhappy I am, and perhaps she will favor us
with a word of advice as well as the letter.

"I remain, yours faithfully,

"BELLA BASSETT."



This letter was written at the brave lady; and Mr. Oldfield did what
was expected, he sent Miss Somerset a copy of Lady Bassett's letter,
and some lines in his own hand, describing Sir Charles's difficulty in
a more businesslike way.

In due course Miss Somerset wrote him back that she was in the country,
hunting, at no very great distance from Huntercombe Hall; she would
sent up to town for her desk; the letter would be there, if she had
kept it at all.

Oldfield groaned at this cool conjecture, and wrote back directly,
urging expedition.

This produced an effect that he had not anticipated.

One morning Lord Harrowdale's foxhounds met at a large covert, about
five miles from Huntercombe, and Sir Charles told Lady Bassett she must
ride to cover.

"Yes, dear. Charles, love, I have no spirit to appear in public. We
shall soon have publicity enough."

"That is my reason. I have not done nor said anything I am ashamed of,
and you will meet the county on this and on every public occasion."

"I obey," said Bella.

"And look your best."

"I will, dearest."

"And be in good spirits."

"Must I?"

"Yes."

"I will try. Oh!--oh!--oh!"

"Why, you poor-spirited little goose! Dry your eyes this moment."

"There. Oh!"

"And kiss me."

"There. Ah! kissing you is a great comfort."

"It is one you are particularly welcome to. Now run away and put on
your habit. I'll have two grooms out; one with a fresh horse for me,
and one to look after you."

"Oh, Charles! Pray don't make me hunt."

"No, no. Not so tyrannical as that; hang it all!"

"Do you know what I do while you are hunting? I pray all the time that
you may not get a fall and be hurt; and I pray God to forgive you and
all the gentlemen for your cruelty in galloping with all those dogs
after one poor little inoffensive thing, to hunt it and kill it--kill
it twice, indeed; once with terror, and then over again with mangling
its poor little body."

"This is cheerful," said Sir Charles, rather ruefully. "We cannot all
be angels, like you. It is a glorious excitement. There! you are too
good for this world; I'll let you off going."

"Oh no, dear. I won't be let off, now I know your wish. Only I beg to
ride home as soon as the poor thing runs away. You wouldn't get me out
of the thick covers if I were a fox. I'd run round and round, and call
on all my acquaintances to set them running."

As she said this her eyes turned toward each other in a peculiar way,
and she looked extremely foxy; but the look melted away directly.

The hounds met, and Lady Bassett, who was still the beauty of the
county, was surrounded by riders at first; but as the hounds began to
work, and every now and then a young hound uttered a note, they
cantered about, and took up different posts, as experience suggested.

At last a fox was found at the other end of the cover, and away
galloped the hunters in that direction, all but four persons, Lady
Bassett, and her groom, who kept respectfully aloof, and a lady and
gentleman who had reined their horses up on a rising ground about a
furlong distant.

Lady Bassett, thus left alone, happened to look round, and saw the lady
level an opera-glass toward her and look through it.

As a result of this inspection the lady cantered toward her. She was on
a chestnut gelding of great height and bone, and rode him as if they
were one, so smoothly did she move in concert with his easy,
magnificent strides.

When she came near Lady Bassett she made a little sweep and drew up
beside her on the grass.

There was no mistaking that tall figure and commanding face. It was the
brave lady. Her eyes sparkled; her cheek was slightly colored with
excitement; she looked healthier and handsomer than ever, and also more
feminine, for a reason the sagacious reader may perhaps discern if he
attends to the dialogue.

_"So,"_ said she, without bowing or any other ceremony, "that little
rascal is troubling you again."

Lady Bassett colored and panted, and looked lovingly at her, before she
could speak. At last she said, "Yes; and you have come to help us
again."

"Well, the lawyer said there was no time to lose; so I have brought you
the anonymous letter."

"Oh, thank you, madam, thank you."

"But I'm afraid it will be of no use unless you can prove Mr. Bassett
wrote it. It is in a disguised hand."

"But you found him out by means of another letter."

"Yes; but I can't give you that other letter to have it read in a court
of law, because--Do you see that gentleman there?"

"Yes."

"That is Marsh."

"Oh, is it?"

"He is a fool; but I am going to marry him. I have been very ill since
I saw you, and poor Marsh nursed me. Talk of women nurses! If ever you
are ill in earnest, as I was, write to me, and I'll send you Marsh. Oh,
I have no words to tell you his patience, his forbearance, his
watchfulness, his tenderness to a sick woman. It is no use--I must
marry him; and I could have no letter published that would give him
pain."

"Of course not. Oh, madam, do you think I am capable of doing anything
that would give you pain, or dear Mr. Marsh either?"

"No, no; you are a good woman."

"Not half so good as you are."

"You don't know what you are saying."

"Oh yes, I do."

"Then I say no more; it is rude to contradict. Good-by, Lady Bassett."

"Must you leave me so soon? Will you not visit us? May I not know the
name of so good a friend?"

"Next week I shall be _Mrs. Marsh."_

"And you will give me the great pleasure of having you at my house--you
and your husband?"

The lady showed some agitation at this--an unusual thing for her. She
faltered: "Some day, perhaps, if I make him as good a wife as I hope
to. What a lady you are! Vulgar people are ashamed to be grateful; but
you are a born lady. Good-by, before I make a fool of myself; and they
are all coming this way, by the dogs' music."

"Won't you kiss me, after bringing me this?"

"Kiss you?" and she opened her eyes.

"If you please," said Lady Bassett, bending toward her, with eyes full
of gratitude and tenderness.

Then the other woman took her by the shoulders, and plunged her great
gray orbs into Bella's.

They kissed each other.

At that contact the stranger seemed to change her character all in a
moment. She strained Bella to her bosom and kissed her passionately,
and sobbed out, wildly, "O God! you are good to sinners. This is the
happiest hour of my life--it is a forerunner. Bless you, sweet dove of
innocence! You will be none the worse, and I am all the better--Ah!
Sir Charles. Not one word about me to him."

And with these words, uttered with sudden energy, she spurred her great
horse, leaped the ditch, and burst through the dead hedge into the
wood, and winded out of sight among the trees.

Sir Charles came up astonished. "Why, who was that?"

Bella's eyes began to rove, as I have before described; but she replied
pretty promptly, "The brave lady herself; she brought me the anonymous
letter for your defense."

"Why, how came she to know about it?"

"She did not tell me that. She was in a great hurry. Her fiance was
waiting for her."

"Was it necessary to kiss her in the hunting-field?" said Sir Charles,
with something very like a frown.

"I'd kiss the whole field, grooms and all, if they did you a great
service, as that dear lady has," said Bella. The words were brave, but
the accent piteous.

"You are excited, Bella. You had better ride home," said Sir Charles,
gently enough, but moodily.

"Thank you, Charles," said Bella, glad to escape further examination
about this mysterious lady. She rode home accordingly. There she found
Mr. Oldfield, and showed him the anonymous letter.

He read it, and said it was a defense, but a disagreeable one. "Suppose
he says he wrote it, and the facts were true?"

"But I don't think he will confess it. He is not a gentleman. He is
very untruthful. Can we not make this a trap to catch him, sir? _He_
has no scruples."

Oldfield looked at her in some surprise at her depth.

"We must get hold of his handwriting," said he. "We must ransack the
local banks; find his correspondents."

"Leave all that to me," said Lady Bassett, in a low voice.

 Mr. Oldfield thought he might as well please a beautiful and loving
woman, if he could; so he gave her something to do for her husband.
"Very well; collect all the materials of comparison you can--letters,
receipts, etc. Meantime I will retain the two principal experts in
London, and we will submit your materials to them the night before the
trial."

Lady Bassett, thus instructed, drove to all the banks, but found no
clerk acquainted with Mr. Bassett's handwriting. He did not bank with
anybody in the county.

She called on several persons she thought likely to possess letters or
other writings of Richard Bassett. Not a scrap.

Then she began to fear. The case looked desperate.

Then she began to think. And she thought very hard indeed, especially
at night.

In the dead of night she had an idea. She got up, and stole from her
husband's side, and studied the anonymous letter.

Next day she sat down with the anonymous letter on her desk, and
blushed, and trembled, and looked about like some wild animal scared.
She selected from the anonymous letter several words--"character,
abused, Sir, Charles, Bassett, lady, abandoned, friend, whether, ten,
slanderer" etc.--and wrote them on a slip of paper. Then she locked up
the anonymous letter. Then she locked the door. Then she sat down to a
sheet of paper, and, after some more wild and furtive glances all
around, she gave her whole mind to writing a letter.

And to whom did she write, think you?

To Richard Bassett.


CHAPTER XI.

"MR. BASSETT--I am sure both yourself and my husband will suffer in
public estimation, unless some friend comes between you, and this
unhappy lawsuit is given up.

"Do not think me blind nor presumptuous; Sir Charles, when he wrote
that letter, had reason to believe you had done him a deep injury by
unfair means. Many will share that opinion if this cause is tried. You
are his cousin, and his heir at law. I dread to see an unhappy feud
inflamed by a public trial. Is there no personal sacrifice by which I
can compensate the affront you have received, without compromising Sir
Charles Bassett's veracity, who is the soul of honor?

"I am, yours obediently,

"BELLA BASSETT."



She posted this letter, and Richard Bassett had no sooner received it
than he mounted his horse and rode to Wheeler's with it.

That worthy's eyes sparkled. "Capital!" said he. "We must draw her on,
and write an answer that will read well in court."

He concocted an epistle just the opposite of what Richard Bassett, left
to himself, would have written. Bassett copied, and sent it as his own.



"LADY BASSETT--I thank you for writing to me at this moment, when I am
weighed down by slander. Your own character stands so high that you
would not deign to write to me if you believed the abuse that has been
lavished on me. With you I deplore this family feud. It is not of my
seeking; and as for this lawsuit, it is one in which the plaintiff is
really the defendant. Sir Charles has written a defamatory letter,
which has closed every house in this county to his victim. If, as I now
feel sure, you disapprove the libel, pray persuade him to retract it.
The rest our lawyers can settle,

"Yours very respectfully,

"RICHARD BASSETT."



When Lady Bassett read this, she saw she had an adroit opponent. Yet
she wrote again:



"MR. BASSETT--There are limits to my influence with Sir Charles. I have
no power to make him say one word against his convictions.

"But my lawyer tells me you seek pecuniary compensation for an affront.
I offer you, out of my own means, which are ample, that which you
seek--offer it freely and heartily; and I honestly think you had better
receive it from me than expose yourself to the risks and mortifications
of a public trial.

"I am, yours obediently,

"BELLA BASSETT."



"LADY BASSETT--You have fallen into a very natural error. It is true I
sue Sir Charles Bassett for money; but that is only because the law
allows me my remedy in no other form. What really brings me into court
is the defense of my injured honor. How do you meet me? You say,
virtually, 'Never mind your character: here is money.' Permit me to
decline it on such terms.

"A public insult cannot be cured in private.

"Strong in my innocence, and my wrongs, I court what you call the risks
of a public trial.

"Whatever the result, _you_ have played the honorable and womanly part
of peacemaker; and it is unfortunate for your husband that your gentle
influence is limited by his vanity, which perseveres in a cruel
slander, instead of retracting it while there is yet time.

"I am, madam, yours obediently,

"RICHARD BASSETT."



"MR. BASSETT--I retire from a correspondence which appears to be
useless, and might, if prolonged, draw some bitter remark from me, as
it has from you.

"After the trial, which you court and I deprecate, you will perhaps
review my letters with a more friendly eye.

"I am, yours obediently,

"BELLA BASSETT."



In this fencing-match between a lawyer and a lady each gained an
advantage. The lawyer's letters, as might have been expected, were the
best adapted to be read to a jury; but the lady, subtler in her way,
obtained, at a small sacrifice, what she wanted, and that without
raising the slightest suspicion of her true motive in the
correspondence.

She announced her success to Mr. Oldfield; but, in the midst of it, she
quaked with terror at the thought of what Sir Charles would say to her
for writing to Mr. Bassett at all.

She now, with the changeableness of her sex, hoped and prayed Mr.
Bassett would admit the anonymous letter, and so all her subtlety and
pains prove superfluous.

Quaking secretly, but with a lovely face and serene front, she took her
place at the assizes, before the judge, and got as near him as she
could.

The court was crowded, and many ladies present.

_Bassett v. Bassett_ was called in a loud voice; there was a hum of
excitement, then a silence of expectation, and the plaintiff's counsel
rose to address the jury.


CHAPTER XII.

"MAY it please your Lordship: Gentlemen of the Jury--The plaintiff in
this case is Richard Bassett, Esquire, the direct and lineal
representative of that old and honorable family, whose monuments are to
be seen in several churches in this county, and whose estates are the
largest, I believe, in the county. He would have succeeded, as a matter
of course, to those estates, but for an arrangement made only a year
before he was born, by which, contrary to nature and justice, he was
denuded of those estates, and they passed to the defendant. The
defendant is nowise to blame for that piece of injustice; but he
profits by it, and it might be expected that his good fortune would
soften his heart toward his unfortunate relative. I say that if
uncommon tenderness might be expected to be shown by anybody to this
deserving and unfortunate gentleman, it would be by Sir Charles
Bassett, who enjoys his cousin's ancestral estates, and can so well
appreciate what that cousin has lost by no fault of his own."

"Hear! hear!"

"Silence in the court!"

_The Judge._--I must request that there may be no manifestation of
feeling.

_Counsel._--I will endeavor to provoke none, my lord. It is a very
simple case, and I shall not occupy you long. Well, gentlemen, Mr.
Bassett is a poor man, by no fault of his; but if he is poor, he is
proud and honorable. He has met the frowns of fortune like a
gentleman--like a man. He has not solicited government for a place. He
has not whined nor lamented. He has dignified unmerited poverty by
prudence and self-denial; and, unable to forget that he is a Bassett,
he has put by a little money every year, and bought a small estate or
two, and had even applied to the Lord-Lieutenant to make him a justice
of the peace, when a most severe and unexpected blow fell upon him.
Among those large proprietors who respected him in spite of his humbler
circumstances was Mr. Hardwicke, one of the county members. Well,
gentlemen, on the 21st of last May Mr. Bassett received a letter from
Mr. Hardwicke inclosing one purporting to be from Sir Charles Bassett--

_The Judge._--Does Sir Charles Bassett admit the letter?

_Defendant's Counsel_ (after a word with Oldfield).--Yes, my lord.

_Plaintiff's Counsel._--A letter admitted to be written by Sir Charles
Bassett. That letter shall be read to you.

The letter was then read.

The counsel resumed: "Conceive, if you can, the effect of this blow,
just as my unhappy and most deserving client was rising a little in the
world. I shall prove that it excluded him from Mr. Hardwicke's house,
and other houses too. He is a man of too much importance to risk
affronts. He has never entered the door of any gentleman in this county
since his powerful relative published this cruel libel. He has drawn
his Spartan cloak around him, and he awaits your verdict to resume that
place among you which is due to him in every way--due to him as the
heir in direct line to the wealth, and, above all, to the honor of the
Bassetts; due to him as Sir Charles Bassett's heir at law; and due to
him on account of the decency and fortitude with which he has borne
adversity, and with which he now repels foul-mouthed slander."

"Hear! hear!"

"Silence in the court!"

"I have done, gentlemen, for the present. Indeed, eloquence, even if I
possessed it, would be superfluous; the facts speak for
themselves.--Call James Hardwicke, Esq."

Mr. Hardwicke proved the receipt of the letter from Sir Charles, and
that he had sent it to Mr. Bassett; and that Mr. Bassett had not
entered his house since then, nor had he invited him.

Mr. Bassett was then called, and, being duly trained by Wheeler,
abstained from all heat, and wore an air of dignified dejection. His
counsel examined him, and his replies bore out the opening statement.
Everybody thought him sure of a verdict.

He was then cross-examined. Defendant's counsel pressed him about his
unfair way of shooting. The judge interfered, and said that was
trifling. If there was no substantial defense, why not settle the
matter?

"There is a defense, my lord."

"Then it is time you disclosed it."

"Very well, my lord. Mr. Bassett, did you ever write an anonymous
letter?"

"Not that I remember."

"Oh, that appears to you a trifle. It is not so considered."

_The Judge._--Be more particular in your question.

"I will, my lord.--Did you ever write an anonymous letter, to make
mischief between Sir Charles and Lady Bassett?"

"Never," said the witness; but he turned pale.

"Do you mean to say you did not write this letter to Miss Bruce? Look
at the letter, Mr. Bassett, before you reply."

Bassett cast one swift glance of agony at Wheeler; then braced himself
like iron. He examined the letter attentively, turned it over, lived an
age, and said it was not his writing.

"Do you swear that?"

"Certainly."

_Defendant's Counsel._--I shall ask your lordship to take down that
reply. If persisted in, my client will indict the witness for perjury.

_Plaintiff's Counsel._--Don't threaten the witness as well as insult
him, please.

_The Judge._--He is an educated man, and knows the duty he owes to God
and the defendant.--Take time, Mr. Bassett, and recollect. Did you
write that letter?"

"No, my lord."

Counsel waited for the judge to note the reply, then proceeded.

"You have lately corresponded with Lady Bassett, I think?"

"Yes. Her ladyship opened a correspondence with me."

"It is a lie!" roared Sir Charles Bassett from the door of the grand
jury room.

"Silence in the court!"

_The Judge._--Who made that unseemly remark?

_Sir Charles._--I did, my lord. My wife never corresponded with the
cur.

_The Plaintiff._--It is only one insult more, gentlemen, and as false
as the rest. Permit me, my lord. My own counsel would never have put
the question. I would not, for the world, give Lady Bassett pain; but
Sir Charles and his counsel have extorted the truth from me. Her
ladyship did open a correspondence with me, and a friendly one.

_The Plaintiff's Counsel._--Will your lordship ask whether that was
after the defendant had written the libel?

The question was put, and answered in the affirmative.

Lady Bassett hid her face in her hands. Sir Charles saw the movement,
and groaned aloud.

_The Judge._--I beg the case may not be encumbered with irrelevant
matter.

Counsel replied that the correspondence would be made evidence in the
case. _(To the witness.)_--You wrote this letter to Lady Bassett?"

"Yes."

"And every word in it?"

"And every word in it," faltered Bassett, now ashy pale, for he began
to see the trap.

"Then you wrote this word 'character,' and this word 'injured,' and
this word--"

_The Judge_ (peevishly).--He tells you he wrote every word in those
letters to Lady Bassett.--What more would you have?

_Counsel._--If your lordship will be good enough to examine the
correspondence, and compare those words in it I have underlined with
the same words in the anonymous letter, you will perhaps find I know my
business better than you seem to think. (The counsel who ventured on
this remonstrance was a sergeant.)

"Brother Eitherside," said the judge, with a charming manner, "you
satisfied me of that, to my cost, long ago, whenever I had you against
me in a case. Please hand me the letters."

While the judge was making a keen comparison, counsel continued the
cross-examination.

"You are aware that this letter caused a separation between Sir Charles
Bassett and the lady he was engaged to?"

"I know nothing about it."

"Indeed! Well, were you acquainted with the Miss Somerset mentioned in
this letter?"

"Slightly."

"You have been at her house?"

"Once or twice."

"Which? Twice is double as often as once, you know."

"Twice."

"No more?"

"Not that I recollect."

"You wrote to her?"

"I may have."

"Did you, or did you not?"

"I did."

"What was the purport of that letter?"

"I can't recollect at this distance of time."

"On your oath, sir, did you not write urging her to co-operate with you
to keep Sir Charles Bassett from marrying his affianced, Miss Bella
Bruce, to whom that anonymous letter was written with the same object?"

The perspiration now rolled in visible drops down the tortured liar's
face. Yet still, by a gigantic effort, he stood firm, and even planted
a blow.

"I did not write the anonymous letter. But I believe I told Miss
Somerset I loved Miss Bruce, and that _her_ lover was robbing me of
mine, as he had robbed me of everything else."

"And that was all you said--on your oath?"

"All I can recollect." With this the strong man, cowed, terrified,
expecting his letter to Somerset to be produced, and so the iron chain
of evidence completed, gasped out, "Man, you tear open all my wounds at
once!" and with this burst out sobbing, and lamenting aloud that he had
ever been born.

Counsel waited calmly till he should be in a condition to receive
another dose.

"Oh, will nobody stop this cruel trial?" said Lady Bassett, with the
tears trickling down her face.

The judge heard this remark without seeming to do so.

He said to defendant's counsel, "Whatever the truth may be, you have
proved enough to show Sir Charles Bassett might well have an honest
conviction that Mr. Bassett had done a dastardly act. Whether a jury
would ever agree on a question of handwriting must always be doubtful.
Looking at the relationship of the parties, is it advisable to carry
this matter further? If I might advise the gentlemen, they would each
consent to withdraw a juror."

Upon this suggestion the counsel for both parties put their heads
together in animated whispers; and during this the judge made a remark
to the jury, intended for the public: "Since Lady Bassett's name has
been drawn into this, I must say that I have read her letters to Mr.
Bassett, and they are such as she could write without in the least
compromising her husband. Indeed, now the defense is disclosed, they
appear to me to be wise and kindly letters, such as only a good wife, a
high-bred lady, and a true Christian could write in so delicate a
matter."

_Plaintiff's Counsel._--My lord, we are agreed to withdraw a juror.

_Defendant's Counsel._--Out of respect for your lordship's advice, and
not from any doubt of the result on _our_ part.

_The Crier._--WACE _v._ HALIBURTON!

And so the car of justice rolled on till it came to Wheeler v. Bassett.

This case was soon disposed of.

Sir Charles Bassett was dignified and calm in the witness-box, and
treated the whole matter with high-bred nonchalance, as one unworthy of
the attention the Court was good enough to bestow on it. The judge
disapproved the assault, but said the plaintiff had drawn it on himself
by unprofessional conduct, and by threatening a gentleman in his own
house. Verdict for the plaintiff--40s. The judge refused to certify
for costs.

Lady Bassett, her throat parched with excitement, drove home, and
awaited her husband's return with no little anxiety. As soon as she
heard him in his dressing-room she glided in and went down on her knees
to him. "Pray, pray don't scold me; I couldn't bear you to be defeated,
Charles."

Sir Charles raised her, but did not kiss her.

"You think only of me," said he, rather sadly. "It is a sorry victory,
too dearly bought."

Then she began to cry.

Sir Charles begged her not to cry; but still he did not kiss her, nor
conceal his mortification: he hardly spoke to her for several days.

She accepted her disgrace pensively and patiently. She thought it all
over, and felt her husband was right, and loved her like a man. But she
thought, also, that she was not very wrong to love him in her way.
Wrong or not, she felt she could not sit idle and see his enemy defeat
him.

The coolness died away by degrees, with so much humility on one side
and so much love on both: but the subject was interdicted forever.

A week after the trial Lady Bassett wrote to Mrs. Marsh, under cover to
Mr. Oldfield, and told her how the trial had gone, and, with many
expressions of gratitude, invited her and her husband to Huntercombe
Hall. She told Sir Charles what she had done, and he wore a very
strange look. "Might I suggest that we have them alone?" said he dryly.

"By all means," said Lady Bassett. "I don't want to share my paragon
with anybody."

In due course a reply came; Mr. and Mrs. Marsh would avail themselves
some day of Lady Bassett's kindness: at present they were going abroad.
The letter was written by a man's hand.

About this time Oldfield sent Sir Charles Miss Somerset's deed,
canceled, and told him she had married a man of fortune, who was
devoted to her, and preferred to take her without any dowry.



Bassett and Wheeler went home, crestfallen, and dined together. They
discussed the two trials, and each blamed the other. They quarreled and
parted: and Wheeler sent in an enormous bill, extending over five
years. Eighty-five items began thus: "Attending you at your house for
several hours, on which occasion you asked my advice as to whether--"
etc.

Now as a great many of these attendances had been really to shoot game
and dine on rabbits at Bassett's expense, he thought it hard the
conversation should be charged and the rabbits not.

Disgusted with his defeat, and resolved to evade this bill, he
discharged his servant, and put a retired soldier into his house, armed
him with a blunderbuss, and ordered him to keep all doors closed, and
present the weapon aforesaid at all rate collectors, tax collectors,
debt collectors, and applicants for money to build churches or convert
the heathen; but not to _fire_ at anybody except his friend Wheeler,
nor at him unless he should try to shove a writ in at some chink of the
building.

This done, he went on his travels, third-class, with his eyes always
open, and his heart full of bitterness.

Nothing happened to Richard Bassett on his travels that I need relate
until one evening when he alighted at a small commercial inn in the
city of York, and there met a person whose influence on the events I am
about to relate seems at this moment incredible to me, though it is
simple fact.

He found the commercial room empty, and rang the bell. In came the
waiter, a strapping girl, with coal-black eyes and brows to match, and
a brown skin, but glowing cheeks.

They both started at sight of each other. It was Polly Somerset.

"Why, Polly! How d'ye do? How do you come here?"

"It's along of you I'm here, young man," said Polly, and began to
whimper. She told him her sister had found out from the page she had
been colloguing with him, and had never treated her like a sister after
that. "And when she married a gentleman she wouldn't have me aside her
for all I could say, but she did pack me off into service, and here I
be."

The girl was handsome, and had a liking for him. Bassett was idle, and
time hung heavy on his hands: he stayed at the inn a fortnight, more
for Polly's company than anything: and at last offered to put her into
a vacant cottage on his own little estate of Highmore. But the girl was
shrewd, and had seen a great deal of life this last three years; she
liked Richard in her way, but she saw he was all self, and she would
not trust him. "Nay," said she, "I'll not break with Rhoda for any
young man in Britain. If I leave service she will never own me at all:
she is as hard as iron."

"Well, but you might come and take service near me, and then we could
often get a word together."

"Oh, I'm agreeable to that: you find me a good place. I like an inn
best; one sees fresh faces."

Bassett promised to manage that for her. On reaching home he found a
conciliatory letter from Wheeler, coupled with his permission to tax
the bill according to his own notion of justice. This and other letters
were in an outhouse; the old soldier had not permitted them to
penetrate the fortress. He had entered into the spirit of his
instructions, and to him a letter was a probable hand-grenade.

Bassett sent for Wheeler; the bill was reduced, and a small payment
made; the rest postponed till better times. Wheeler was then consulted
about Polly, and he told his client the landlady of the "Lamb" wanted a
good active waitress; he thought he could arrange that little affair.

In due course, thanks to this artist, Mary Wells, hitherto known as
Polly Somerset, landed with her boxes at the "Lamb "; and with her
quick foot, her black eyes, and ready tongue soon added to the
popularity of the inn. Richard Bassett, Esq., for one, used to sup
there now and then with his friend Wheeler, and even sleep there after
supper.

By-and-by the vicar of Huntercombe wanted a servant, and offered to
engage Mary Wells.

She thought twice about that. She could neither write nor read, and
therefore was dreadfully dull without company; the bustle of an inn,
and people coming and going, amused her. However, it was a temptation
to be near Richard Bassett; so she accepted at last. Unable to write,
she could not consult him; and she made sure he would be delighted.

But when she got into the village the prudent Mr. Bassett drew in his
horns, and avoided her. She was mortified and very angry. She revenged
herself on her employer; broke double her wages. The vicar had never
been able to convert a smasher; so he parted with her very readily to
Lady Bassett, with a hint that she was rather unfortunate in glass and
china.

In that large house her spirits rose, and, having a hearty manner and a
clapper tongue, she became a general favorite.

One day she met Mr. Bassett in the village, and he seemed delighted at
the sight of her, and begged her to meet him that night at a certain
place where Sir Charles's garden was divided from his own by a ha-ha.
It was a very secluded spot, shut out from view, even in daylight, by
the trees and shrubs and the winding nature of the walk that led to it;
yet it was scarcely a hundred yards from Huntercombe Hall.

Mary Wells came to the tryst, but in no amorous mood. She came merely
to tell Mr. Bassett her mind, viz., that he was a shabby fellow, and
she had had her cry, and didn't care a straw for him now. And she did
tell him so, in a loud voice, and with a flushed cheek.

But he set to work, humbly and patiently, to pacify her; he represented
that, in a small house like the vicarage, every thing is known; he
should have ruined her character if he had not held aloof. "But it is
different now," said he. "You can run out of Huntercombe House, and
meet me here, and nobody be the wiser."

"Not I," said Mary Wells, with a toss. "The worse thing a girl can do
is to keep company with a gentleman. She must meet him in holes and
corners, and be flung off, like an old glove, when she has served his
turn."

"That will never happen to you, Polly dear. We must be prudent for the
present; but I shall be more my own master some day, and then you will
see how I love you."

"Seeing is believing," said the girl, sullenly. "You be too fond of
yourself to love the likes o' me."

Such was the warning her natural shrewdness gave her. But perseverance
undermined it. Bassett so often threw out hints of what he would do
some day, mixed with warm protestations of love, that she began almost
to hope he would marry her. She really liked him; his fine figure and
his color pleased her eye, and he had a plausible tongue to boot.

As for him, her rustic beauty and health pleased his senses; but, for
his heart, she had little place in that. What he courted her for just
now was to keep him informed of all that passed in Huntercombe Hall.
His morbid soul hung about that place, and he listened greedily to Mary
Wells's gossip. He had counted on her volubility; it did not disappoint
him. She never met him without a budget, one-half of it lies or
exaggerations. She was a born liar. One night she came in high spirits,
and greeted him thus: "What d'ye think? I'm riz! Mrs. Eden, that
dresses my lady's hair, she took ill yesterday, and I told the
housekeeper I was used to dress hair, and she told my lady. If you
didn't please our Rhoda at that, 'twas as much as your life was worth.
You mustn't be thinking of your young man with her hair in your hand,
or she'd rouse you with a good crack on the crown with a hair-brush. So
I dressed my lady's hair, and handled it like old chaney; by the same
token, she is so pleased with me you can't think. She is a real lady;
not like our Rhoda. Speaks as civil to me as if I was one of her own
sort; and, says she, 'I should like to have you about me, if I might.'
I had it on my tongue to tell her she was mistress; but I was a little
skeared at her at first, you know. But she will have me about her; I
see it in her eye."

Bassett was delighted at this news, but he did not speak his mind all
at once; the time was not come. He let the gypsy rattle on, and bided
his time. He flattered her, and said he envied Lady Bassett to have
such a beautiful girl about her. "I'll let my hair grow," said he.

"Ay, do," said she, "and then I'll pull it for you."

This challenge ended in a little struggle for a kiss, the sincerity of
which was doubtful. Polly resisted vigorously, to be sure, but briefly,
and, having given in, returned it.

One day she told him Sir Charles had met her plump, and had given a
great start.

This made Bassett very uneasy. "Confound it, he will turn you away. He
will say, 'This girl knows too much.'"

"How simple you be!" said the girl. "D'ye think I let him know? Says
he, 'I think I have seen you before.' 'Yes, sir,' says I, 'I was
housemaid here before my lady had me to dress her.' 'No,' says he, 'I
mean in London--in Mayfair, you know.' I declare you might ha' knocked
me down wi' a feather. So I looks in his face, as cool as marble, and I
said, 'No, sir; I never had the luck to see London, sir,' says I. 'All
the better for you,' says he; and he swallowed it like spring water, as
sister Rhoda used to say when she told one and they believed it."

"You are a clever girl," said Bassett. "He would have turned you out of
the house if he had known who you were."

She disappointed him in one thing; she was bad at answering questions.
Morally she was not quite so great an egotist as himself, but
intellectually a greater. Her volubility was all egotism. She could
scarcely say ten words, except about herself. So, when Bassett
questioned her about Sir Charles and Lady Bassett, she said "Yes," or
"No," or "I don't know," and was off at a tangent to her own sayings
and doings.

Bassett, however, by great patience and tact, extracted from her at
last that Sir Charles and Lady Bassett were both sore at not having
children, and that Lady Bassett bore the blame.

"That is a good joke," said he. "The smoke-dried rake! Polly, you might
do me a good turn. You have got her ear; open her eyes for me. What
might not happen?" His eyes shone fiendishly.

The young woman shook her head. "Me meddle between man and wife! I'm
too fond of my place."

"Ah, you don't love me as I love you. You think only of yourself."

"And what do you think of? Do you love me well enough to find me a
better place, if you get me turned out of Huntercombe Hall?"

"Yes, I will; a much better."

"That is a bargain."

Mary Wells was silly in some things, but she was very cunning, too; and
she knew Richard Bassett's hobby. She told him to mind himself, as well
as Sir Charles, or perhaps he would die a bachelor, and so his flesh
and blood would never inherit Huntercombe. This remark entered his
mind. The trial, though apparently a drawn battle, had been fatal to
him--he was cut; he dared not pay his addresses to any lady in the
county, and he often felt very lonely now. So everything combined to
draw him toward Mary Wells--her swarthy beauty, which shone out at
church like a black diamond among the other women; his own loneliness;
and the pleasure these stolen meetings gave him. Custom itself is
pleasant, and the company of this handsome chatterbox became a habit,
and an agreeable one. The young woman herself employed a woman's arts;
she was cold and loving by turns till at last he gave her what she was
working for, a downright promise of marriage. She pretended not to
believe him, and so led him further; he swore he would marry her.

He made one stipulation, however. She really must learn to read and
write first.

When he had sworn this Mary became more uniformly affectionate; and as
women who have been in service learn great self-government, and can
generally please so long as it serves their turn, she made herself so
agreeable to him that he began really to have a downright liking for
her--a liking bounded, of course, by his incurable selfishness; but as
for his hobby, that was on her side.

Now learning to read and write was wormwood to Mary Wells; but the
prize was so great; she knew all about the Huntercombe estates, partly
from her sister, partly from Bassett himself. (He must tell his wrongs
even to this girl.) So she resolved to pursue matrimony, even on the
severe condition of becoming a scholar. She set about it as follows:
One day that she was doing Lady Bassett's hair she sighed several
times. This was to attract the lady's attention, and it succeeded.

"Is there anything the matter, Mary?"

"No, my lady."

"I think there is."

"Well, my lady, I am in a little trouble; but it is my own people's
fault for not sending of me to school. I might be married to-morrow if
I could only read and write."

"And can you not?"

"No, my lady."

"Dear me! I thought everybody could read and write nowadays."

"La, no, my lady! not half of them in our village."

"Your parents are much to blame, my poor girl. Well, but it is not too
late. Now I think of it, there is an adult school in the village. Shall
I arrange for you to go to it?"

"Thank you, my lady. But then--"

"Well?"

"All my fellow-servants would have a laugh against me."

"The person you are engaged to, will he not instruct you?"

"Oh, he have no time to teach me. Besides, I don't want him to know,
either. But I won't be his wife to shame him." (Another sigh.)

"Mary," said Lady Bassett, in the innocence of her heart, "you shall
not be mortified, and you shall not lose a good marriage. I will try
and teach you myself."

Mary was profuse in thanks. Lady Bassett received them rather coldly.
She gave her a few minutes' instruction in her dressing-room every day;
and Mary, who could not have done anything intellectual for half an
hour at a stretch, gave her whole mind for those few minutes. She was
quick, and learned very fast. In two months she could read a great deal
more than she could understand, and could write slowly but very
clearly.

Now by this time Lady Bassett had become so interested in her pupil
that she made her read letters and newspapers to her at those parts of
the toilet when her services were not required.

Mary Wells, though a great chatterbox, was the closest girl in England.
Limpet never stuck to a rock as she could stick to a lie. She never
said one word to Bassett about Lady Bassett's lessons. She kept strict
silence till she could write a letter, and then she sent him a line to
say she had learned to write for love of him, and she hoped he would
keep his promise.

Bassett's vanity was flattered by this. But, on reflection, he
suspected it was a falsehood. He asked her suddenly, at their next
meeting, who had written that note for her.

"You shall see me write the fellow to it when you like," was the reply.

Bassett resolved to submit the matter to that test some day. At
present, however, he took her word for it, and asked her who had taught
her.

"I had to teach myself. Nobody cares enough for me to teach me. Well,
I'll forgive you if you will write me a nice letter for mine."

"What! when we can meet here and say everything?"

"No matter; I have written to you, and you might write to me. They all
get letters, except me; and the jades hold 'em up to me: they see I
never get one. When you are out, post me a letter now and then. It will
only cost you a penny. I'm sure I don't ask you for much."

Bassett humored her in this, and in one of his letters called her his
wife that was to be.

This pleased her so much that the next time they met she hung round his
neck with a good deal of feminine grace.

Richard Bassett was a man who now lived in the future. Everybody in the
county believed he had written that anonymous letter, and he had no
hope of shining by his own light. It was bitter to resign his personal
hopes; but he did, and sullenly resolved to be obscure himself, but the
father of the future heirs of Huntercombe. He would marry Mary Wells,
and lay the blame of the match upon Sir Charles, who had blackened him
in the county, and put it out of his power to win a lady's hand.

He told Wheeler he was determined to marry; but he had not the courage
to tell him all at once what a wife he had selected.

The consequence of this half confession was that Wheeler went to work
to find him a girl with money, and not under county influence.

One of Wheeler's clients was a retired citizen, living in a pretty
villa near the market town. Mr. Wright employed him in little matters,
and found him active and attentive. There was a Miss Wright, a meek
little girl, palish, on whom her father doted. Wheeler talked to this
girl of his friend Bassett, his virtues and his wrongs, and interested
the young lady in him. This done, he brought him to the house, and the
girl, being slight and delicate, gazed with gentle but undisguised
admiration on Bassett's _torso._ Wheeler had told Richard Miss Wright
was to have seven thousand pounds on her wedding-day, and that excited
a corresponding admiration in the athletic gentleman.

After that Bassett often called by himself, and the father encouraged
the intimacy. He was old, and wished to see his daughter married before
he left her and this seemed an eligible match, though not a brilliant
one; a bit of land and a good name on one side, a smart bit of money on
the other. The thing went on wheels. Richard Bassett was engaged to
Jane Wright almost before he was aware.

Now he felt uneasy about Mary Wells, very uneasy; but it was only the
uneasiness of selfishness.

He began to try and prepare; he affected business visits to distant
places, etc., in order to break off by degrees. By this means their
meetings were comparatively few. When they did meet (which was now
generally by written appointment), he tried to prepare by telling her
he had encountered losses, and feared that to marry her would be a bad
job for her as well as for him, especially if she should have children.

Mary replied she had been used to work, and would rather work for a
husband than any other master.

On another occasion she asked him quietly whether a gentleman ever
broke his oath.

"Never," said Richard.

In short, she gave him no opening. She would not quarrel. She adhered
to him as she had never adhered to anything but a lie before.

Then he gave up all hope of smoothing the matter. He coolly cut her;
never came to the trysting-place; did not answer her letters; and,
being a reckless egotist, married Jane Wright all in a hurry, by
special license.

He sent forward to the clerk of Huntercombe church, and engaged the
ringers to ring the church-bells from six o'clock till sundown. This
was for Sir Charles's ears.

It was a balmy evening in May. Lady Bassett was commencing her toilet
in an indolent way, with Mary Wells in attendance, when the
church-bells of Huntercombe struck up a merry peal.

"Ah!" said Lady Bassett; "what is that for? Do you know, Mary?"

"No, my lady. Shall I ask?"

"No; I dare say it is a village wedding."

"No, my lady, there's nobody been married here this six weeks. Our
kitchen-maid and the baker was the last, you know. I'll send, and know
what it is for." Mary went out and dispatched the first house-maid she
caught for intelligence. The girl ran into the stable to her
sweetheart, and he told her directly.

Meantime Lady Bassett moralized upon church-bells.

"They are always sad--saddest when they seem to be merriest. Poor
things! they are trying hard to be merry now; but they sound very sad
to me--sadder than usual, somehow."



The girl knocked at the door. Mary half opened it, and the news shot
in--"'Tis for Squire Bassett; he is bringing of his bride home to
Highmore to-day."

"Mr. Bassett--married--that is sudden. Who could he find to marry him?"
There was no reply. The house-maid had flown off to circulate the news,
and Mary Wells was supporting herself by clutching the door, sick with
the sudden blow.

Close as she was, her distress could not have escaped another woman's
eye, but Lady Bassett never looked at her. After the first surprise she
had gone into a reverie, and was conjuring up the future to the sound
of those church-bells. She requested Mary to go and tell Sir Charles;
but she did not lift her head, even to give this order.

Mary crept away, and knocked at Sir Charles's dressing-room.

"Come in," said Sir Charles, thinking, of course, it was his valet.

Mary Wells just opened the door and held it ajar. "My lady bids me tell
you, sir, the bells are ringing for Mr. Bassett; he's married, and
brings her home tonight."

A dead silence marked the effect of this announcement on Sir Charles.
Mary Wells waited.



"May Heaven's curse light on that marriage, and no child of theirs ever
take my place in this house!"

"A-a-men!" said Mary Wells.

"Thank you, sir!" said Sir Charles. He took her voice for a man's, so
deep and guttural was her "A--a--men" with concentrated passion.

She closed the door and crept back to her mistress.

Lady Bassett was seated at her glass, with her hair down and her
shoulders bare. Mary clinched her teeth, and set about her usual work;
but very soon Lady Bassett gave a start, and stared into the glass.
"Mary!" said she, "what _is_ the matter? You look ghastly, and your
hands are as cold as ice. Are you faint?"

"No."

"Then you are ill; very ill."

"I have taken a chill," said Mary, doggedly.

"Go instantly to the still-room maid, and get a large glass of spirits
and hot water--quite hot."

Mary, who wanted to be out of the room, fastened her mistress's back
hair with dogged patience, and then moved toward the door.

"Mary," said Lady Bassett, in a half-apologetic tone.

"My lady."

"I should like to hear what the bride is like."

"I'll know that to-night," said Mary, grinding her teeth.

"I shall not require you again till bedtime."

Mary left the room, and went, not to the still-room, but to her own
garret, and there she gave way. She flung herself, with a wild cry,
upon her little bed, and clutched her own hair and the bedclothes, and
writhed all about the bed like a wild-cat wounded.

In this anguish she passed an hour she never forgot nor forgave. She
got up at last, and started at her own image in the glass. Hair like a
savage's, cheek pale, eyes blood-shot.

She smoothed her hair, washed her face, and prepared to go downstairs;
but now she was seized with a faintness, and had to sit down and moan.
She got the better of that, and went to the still-room, and got some
spirits; but she drank them neat, gulped them down like water. They
sent the devil into her black eye, but no color into her pale cheek.
She had a little scarlet shawl; she put it over her head, and went into
the village. She found it astir with expectation.

Mr. Bassett's house stood near the highway, but the entrance to the
premises was private, and through a long white gate.

By this gate was a heap of stones, and Mary Wells got on that heap and
waited.

When she had been there about half an hour, Richard Bassett drove up in
a hired carriage, with his pale little wife beside him. At his own gate
his eye encountered Mary Wells, and he started. She stood above him,
with her arms folded grandly; her cheek, so swarthy and ruddy, was now
pale, and her black eyes glittered like basilisks at him and his bride.
The whole woman seemed lifted out of her low condition, and dignified
by wrong.

He had to sustain her look for a few seconds, while the gate was being
opened, and it seemed an age. He felt his first pang of remorse when he
saw that swarthy, ruddy cheek so pale. Then came admiration of her
beauty, and disgust at the woman for whom he had jilted her; and that
gave way to fear: the hater looked into those glittering eyes, and saw
he had roused a hate as unrelenting as his own.


CHAPTER XIII.

FOR the first few days Richard Bassett expected some annoyance from
Mary Wells; but none came, and he began to flatter himself she was too
fond of him to give him pain.

This impression was shaken about ten days after the little scene I have
described. He received a short note from her, as follows:



"SIR--You must meet me to-night, at the same place, eight o'clock. If
you do not come it will be the worse for you.

"M. W."



Richard Bassett's inclination was to treat this summons with contempt;
but he thought it would be wiser to go and see whether the girl had any
hostile intentions. Accordingly he went to the tryst. He waited for
some time, and at last he heard a quick, firm foot, and Mary Wells
appeared. She was hooded with her scarlet shawl, that contrasted
admirably with her coal-black hair; and out of this scarlet frame her
dark eyes glittered. She stood before him in silence.

He said nothing.

She was silent too for some time. But she spoke first.

"Well, sir, you promised one, and you have married another. Now what
are you going to do for me?"

"What _can_ I do, Mary? I'm not the first that wanted to marry for
love, but money came in his way and tempted him."

"No, you are not the first. But that's neither here nor there, sir.
That chalk-faced girl has bought you away from me with her money, and
now I mean to have my share on't."

"Oh, if that is all," said Richard, "we can soon settle it. I was
afraid you were going to talk about a broken heart, and all that stuff.
You are a good, sensible girl; and too beautiful to want a husband
long. I'll give you fifty pounds to forgive me."

"Fifty pounds!" said Mary Wells, contemptuously. "What! when you
promised me I should be your wife to-day, and lady of Huntercombe Hall
by-and-by? Fifty pounds! No; not five fifties."

"Well, I'll give you seventy-five; and if that won't do, you must go to
law, and see what you can get."

"What, han't you had your bellyful of law? Mind, it is an unked thing
to forswear yourself, and that is what you done at the 'sizes. I have
seen what you did swear about your letter to my sister; Sir Charles
have got it all wrote down in his study: and you swore a lie to the
judge, as you swore a lie to me here under heaven, you villain!" She
raised her voice very loud. "Don't you gainsay me, or I'll soon have
you by the heels in jail for your lies. You'll do as I bid you, and
very lucky to be let off so cheap. You was to be my master, but you
chose her instead: well, then, you shall be my servant. You shall come
here every Saturday at eight o'clock, and bring me a sovereign, which I
never could keep a lump o' money, and I have had one or two from Rhoda;
so I'll take it a sovereign a week till I get a husband of my own sort,
and then you'll have to come down handsome once for all."

Bassett knitted his brows and thought hard. His natural impulse was to
defy her; but it struck him that a great many things might happen in a
few months; so at last he said, humbly, "I consent. I have been to
blame. Only I'd rather pay you this money in some other way."

"My way, or none."

"Very well, then, I will bring it you as you say."

"Mind you do, then," said Mary Wells, and turned haughtily on her heel.

Bassett never ventured to absent himself at the hour, and, at first,
the blackmail was delivered and received with scarcely a word; but
by-and-by old habits so far revived that some little conversation took
place.

Then, after a while, Bassett used to tell her he was unhappy, and she
used to reply she was glad of it.

Then he began to speak slightingly of his wife, and say what a fool he
had been to marry a poor, silly nonentity, when be might have wedded a
beauty.

Mary Wells, being intensely vain, listened with complacency to this,
although she replied coldly and harshly.

By-and-by her natural volubility overpowered her, and she talked to
Bassett about herself and Huntercombe House, but always with a secret
reserve.

Later--such is the force of habit--each used to look forward with
satisfaction to the Saturday meeting, although each distrusted and
feared the other at bottom.

Later still that came to pass which Mary Wells had planned from the
first with deep malice, and that shrewd insight into human nature which
many a low woman has--the cooler she was the warmer did Richard Bassett
grow, till at last, contrasting his pale, meek little wife with this
glowing Hebe, he conceived an unholy liking for the latter. She met it
sometimes with coldness and reproaches, sometimes with affected alarm,
sometimes with a half-yielding manner, and so tormented him to her
heart's content, and undermined his affection for his wife. Thus she
revenged herself on them both to her heart's content.

But malice so perverse is apt to recoil on itself; and women, in
particular, should not undertake a long and subtle revenge of this
sort; since the strongest have their hours of weakness, and are
surprised into things they never intended. The subsequent history of
Mary Wells will exemplify this. Meantime, however, meek little Mrs.
Bassett was no match for the beauty and low cunning of her rival.

Yet a time came when she defended herself unconsciously. She did
something that made her husband most solicitous for her welfare and
happiness. He began to watch her health with maternal care, to shield
her from draughts, to take care of her diet, to indulge her in all her
whims instead of snubbing her, and to pet her, till she was the
happiest wife in England for a time. She deserved this at his hands,
for she assisted him there where his heart was fixed; she aided his
hobby; did more for it than any other creature in England could.



To return to Huntercombe Hall: the loving couple that owned it were no
longer happy. The hope of offspring was now deserting them, and the
disappointment was cruel. They suffered deeply, with this
difference--that Lady Bassett pined and Sir Charles Bassett fretted.

The woman's grief was more pure and profound than the man's. If there
had been no Richard Bassett in the world, still her bosom would have
yearned and pined, and the great cry of Nature, "Give me children or I
die," would have been in her heart, though it would never have risen to
her lips.

Sir Charles had, of course, less of this profound instinct than his
wife, but he had it too; only in him the feeling was adulterated and at
the same time imbittered by one less simple and noble. An enemy sat at
his gate. That enemy, whose enduring malice had at last begotten equal
hostility in the childless baronet, was now married, and would probably
have heirs; and, if so, that hateful brood--the spawn of an anonymous
letter-writer--would surely inherit Bassett and Huntercombe, succeeding
to Sir Charles Bassett, deceased without issue. This chafed the
childless man, and gradually undermined a temper habitually sweet,
though subject, as we have seen, to violent ebullitions where the
provocation was intolerable. Sir Charles, then, smarting under his
wound, spoke now and then rather unkindly to the wife he loved so
devotedly; that is to say, his manner sometimes implied that he blamed
her for their joint calamity.

Lady Bassett submitted to these stings in silence. They were rare, and
speedily followed by touching regrets; and even had it not been so she
would have borne them with resignation; for this motherless wife loved
her husband with all a wife's devotion and a mother's unselfish
patience. Let this be remembered to her credit. It is the truth, and
she may need it.

Her own yearning was too deep and sad for fretfulness; yet though,
unlike her husband's, it never broke out in anger, the day was gone by
when she could keep it always silent. It welled out of her at times in
ways that were truly womanly and touching.

When she called on a wife the lady was sure to parade her children. The
boasted tact of women--a quality the narrow compass of which has
escaped their undiscriminating eulogists--was sure to be swept away by
maternal egotism; and then poor Lady Bassett would admire the children
loudly, and kiss them, to please the cruel egotist, and hide the tears
that rose to her own eyes; but she would shorten her visit.

When a child died in the village Mary Wells was sure to be sent with
words of comfort and substantial marks of sympathy.

Scarcely a day passed that something or other did not happen to make
the wound bleed; but I will confine myself to two occasions, on each of
which her heart's agony spoke out, and so revealed how much it must
have endured in silence.

Since the day when Sir Charles allowed her to sit in a little room
close to his study while he received Mr. Wheeler's visit she had fitted
up that room, and often sat there to be near Sir Charles; and he would
sometimes call her in and tell her his justice cases. One day she was
there when the constable brought in a prisoner and several witnesses.
The accused was a stout, florid girl, with plump cheeks and pale gray
eyes. She seemed all health, stupidity, and simplicity. She carried a
child on her left arm. No dweller in cities could suspect this face of
crime. As well indict a calf.

Yet the witnesses proved beyond a doubt that she had been seen with her
baby in the neighborhood of a certain old well on a certain day at
noon; that soon after noon she had been seen on the road without her
baby, and being asked what had become of it, had said she had left it
with her aunt, ten miles off; and that about an hour after that a faint
cry had been heard at the bottom of the old well--it was ninety feet
deep; people had assembled, and a brave farmer's boy had been lowered
in the bight of a cart-rope, and had brought up a dead hen, and a live
child, bleeding at the cheek, having fallen on a heap of fagots at the
bottom of the well; which child was the prisoner's.

Sir Charles had the evidence written down, and then told the accused
she might make a counter-statement if she chose, but it would be wiser
to say nothing at all.

Thereupon the accused dropped him a little short courtesy, looked him
steadily in the face with her pale gray eyes, and delivered herself as
follows:

"If you please, sir, I was a-sitting by th' old well, with baby in my
arms; and I was mortal tired, I was, wi' carring of him; he be uncommon
heavy for his age; and, if you please, sir, he is uncommon resolute;
and while I was so he give a leap right out of my arms and fell down
th' old well. I screams, and runs away to tell my brother's wife, as
lives at top of the hill; but she was gone into North Wood for dry
sticks to light her oven; and when I comes back they had got him out of
the well, and I claims him directly; and the constable said we must
come before you, sir; so here we be."

This she delivered very glibly, without tremulousness, hesitation, or
the shadow of a blush, and dropped another little courtesy at the end
to Sir Charles.

Thereupon he said not one word to her, but committed her for trial, and
gave the farmer's boy a sovereign.

The people were no sooner gone than Lady Bassett came in, with the
tears streaming, and threw herself at her husband's knees. "Oh,
Charles! can such things be? Does God give a child to a woman that has
the heart to kill it, and refuse one to me, who would give my heart's
blood to save a hair of its little head? Oh, what have we done that he
singles us out to be so cruel to us?"

Then Sir Charles tried to comfort her, but could not, and the childless
ones wept together.



It began to be whispered that Mrs. Bassett was in the family way.
Neither Sir Charles nor Lady Bassett mentioned this rumor. It would
have been like rubbing vitriol into their own wounds. But this reserve
was broken through one day. It was a sunny afternoon in June, just
thirteen months after Mr. Bassett's wedding--Lady Bassett was with her
husband in his study, settling invitations for a ball, and writing
them--when the church-bells struck up a merry peal. They both left off,
and looked at each other eloquently. Lady Bassett went out, but soon
returned, looking pale and wild.

_"Yes!"_ said she, with forced calmness. Then, suddenly losing her
self-command, she broke out, pointing through the window at Highmore,
_"He_ has got a fine boy--to take our place here. Kill me, Charles!
Send me to heaven to pray for you, and take another wife that will love
you less but be like other wives. That villain has married a fruitful
vine, and" (lifting both arms to heaven, with a gesture unspeakably
piteous, poetic, and touching) "I am a barren stock."


CHAPTER XIV.

OF all the fools Nature produces with the help of Society, fathers of
first-borns are about the most offensive.

The mothers of ditto are bores too, flinging their human dumplings at
every head; but, considering the tortures they have suffered, and the
anguish the little egotistical viper they have just hatched will most
likely give them, and considering further that their love of their
firstborn is greater than their pride, and their pride unstained by
vanity, one must make allowances for them.

But the male parent is not so excusable. His fussy vanity is an
inferior article to the mother's silly but amiable pride. His obtrusive
affection is two-thirds of it egotism, and blindish egotism, too; for
if, at the very commencement of the wife's pregnancy the husband is
sent to India, or hanged, the little angel, as they call it--Lord
forgive them!--is nurtured from a speck to a mature infant by the other
parent, and finally brought into the world by her just as effectually
as if her male confederate had been tied to her apron-string: all the
time, instead of expatriated or hanged.

Therefore the Law--for want, I suppose, of studying Medicine--is a
little inconsiderate in giving children to fathers, and taking them by
force from such mothers _as can support them;_ and therefore let
Gallina go on clucking over her first-born, but Gallus be quiet, or
sing a little smaller.

With these preliminary remarks, let me introduce to you a character new
in fiction, but terribly old in history--

         THE CLUCKING COCK.

Upon the birth of a son and heir Mr. Richard Bassett was inflated
almost to bursting. He became suddenly hospitable, collected all his
few friends about him, and showed them all the Boy at great length, and
talked Boy and little else. He went out into the world and made calls
on people merely to remind them he had a son and heir.

His self-gratulation took a dozen forms; perhaps the most amusing, and
the richest food for satire, was the mock-querulous style, of which he
showed himself a master.

"Don't you ever marry," said he to Wheeler and others. "Look at me; do
you think I am the master of my own house? Not I; I am a regular slave.
First, there is a monthly nurse, who orders me out of my wife's
presence, or graciously lets me in, just as she pleases; that is Queen
1. Then there's a wet-nurse, Queen 2, whom I must humor in everything,
or she will quarrel with me, and avenge herself by souring her milk.
But these are mild tyrants compared with the young King himself. If he
does but squall we must all skip, and find out what he ails, or what he
wants. As for me, I am looked upon as a necessary evil; the women seem
to admit that a father is an incumbrance without which these little
angels could not exist, but that is all."

He had a christening feast, and it was pretty well attended, for he
reminded all he asked that the young Christian was the heir to the
Bassett estates. They feasted, and the church-bells rang merrily.

He had his pew in the church new lined with cloth, and took his wife to
be churched. The nurse was in the pew too, with his son and heir. It
squalled and spoiled the Liturgy. Thereat Gallus chuckled.

He made a gravel-walk all along the ha-ha that separated his garden
from Sir Charles's, and called it "The Heir's Walk." Here the nurse and
child used to parade on sunny afternoons.

He got an army of workmen, and built a nursery fit for a duke's nine
children. It occupied two entire stories, and rose in the form of a
square tower high above the rest of his house, which, indeed, was as
humble as "The Heir's Tower" was pretentious. "The Heir's Tower" had a
flat lead roof easy of access, and from it you could inspect
Huntercombe Hall, and see what was done on the lawn or at some of the
windows.

Here, in the August afternoons, Mr. and Mrs. Bassett used to sit
drinking their tea, with nurse and child; and Bassett would talk to his
unconscious boy, and tell him that the great house and all that
belonged to it should be his in spite of the arts that had been used to
rob him of it.

Now, of course, the greater part of all this gratulation was merely
amusing, and did no harm except stirring up the bile of a few old
bachelors, and imbittering them worse than ever against clucking cocks,
crowing hens, inflated parents, and matrimony in general.

But the overflow of it reached Huntercombe Hall, and gave cruel pain to
the childless ones, over whom this inflated father was, in fact,
exulting.

As for the christening, and the bells that pealed for it, and the
subsequent churching, they bore these things with sore hearts, and
bravely, being things of course. But when it came to their ears that
Bassett and his family called his new gravel-walk "The Heir's Walk,"
and his ridiculous nursery "The Heir's Tower," this roused a bitter
animosity, and, indeed, led to reprisals. Sir Charles built a long wall
at the edge of his garden, shutting out "The Heir's Walk" and
intercepting the view of his own premises from that walk.

Then Mr. Bassett made a little hill at the end of his walk, so that the
heir might get one peep over the wall at his rich inheritance.

Then Sir Charles began to fell timber on a gigantic scale. He went to
work with several gangs of woodmen, and all his woods, which were very
extensive, rang with the ax, and the trees fell like corn. He made no
secret that he was going to sell timber to the tune of several thousand
pounds and settle it on his wife.

Then Richard Bassett, through Wheeler, his attorney, remonstrated in
his own name, and that of his son, against this excessive fall of
timber on an entailed estate.

Sir Charles chafed like a lion stung by a gad-fly, but vouchsafed no
reply: the answer came from Mr. Oldfield; he said Sir Charles had a
right under the entail to fell every stick of timber, and turn his
woods into arable ground, if he chose; and even if he had not, looking
at his age and his wife's, it was extremely improbable that Richard
Bassett would inherit the estates: the said Richard Bassett was not
personally named in the entail, and his rights were all in supposition:
if Mr. Wheeler thought he could dispute both these positions, the Court
of Chancery was open to his client.

Then Wheeler advised Bassett to avoid the Court of Chancery in a matter
so debatable; and Sir Charles felled all the more for the protest. The
dead bodies of the trees fell across each other, and daylight peeped
through the thick woods. It was like the clearing of a primeval forest.

Richard Bassett went about with a witness and counted the fallen.

The poor were allowed the lopwood: they thronged in for miles round,
and each built himself a great wood pile for the winter; the poor
blessed Sir Charles: he gave the proceeds, thirteen thousand pounds, to
his wife for her separate use. He did not tie it up. He restricted her
no further than this: she undertook never to draw above 100 pounds at a
time without consulting Mr. Oldfield as to the application. Sir Charles
said he should add to this fund every year; his beloved wife should not
be poor, even if the hated cousin should outlive him and turn her out
of Huntercombe.

And so passed the summer of that year; then the autumn; and then came a
singularly mild winter. There was more hunting than usual, and Richard
Bassett, whom his wife's fortune enabled to cut a better figure than
before, was often in the field, mounted on a great bony horse that was
not so fast as some, being half-bred, but a wonderful jumper.

Even in this pastime the cousins were rivals. Sir Charles's favorite
horse was a magnificent thoroughbred, who was seldom far off at the
finish: over good ground Richard's cocktail had no chance with him; but
sometimes, if toward the close of the run they came to stiff fallows
and strong fences, the great strength of the inferior animal, and that
prudent reserve of his powers which distinguishes the canny cocktail
from the higher-blooded animal, would give him the advantage.

Of this there occurred, on a certain 18th of November, an example
fraught with very serious consequences.

That day the hounds met on Sir Charles's estate. Sir Charles and Lady
Bassett breakfasted in Pink; he had on his scarlet coat, white tie,
irreproachable buckskins, and top-boots. (It seemed a pity a speck of
dirt should fall on them.) Lady Bassett was in her riding-habit; and
when she mounted her pony, and went to cover by his side, with her
blue-velvet cap and her red-brown hair, she looked more like a
brilliant flower than a mere woman.

A veteran fox was soon found, and went away with unusual courage and
speed, and Lady Bassett paced homeward to wait her lord's return, with
an anxiety men laugh at, but women can appreciate. It was a form of
quiet suffering she had constantly endured, and never complained, nor
even mentioned the subject to Sir Charles but once, and then he
pooh-poohed her fancies.

The hunt had a burst of about forty minutes that left Richard Bassett's
cocktail in the rear; and the fox got into a large beech wood with
plenty of briars, and kept dodging about it for two hours, and puzzled
the scent repeatedly.

Richard Bassett elected not to go winding in and out among trees, risk
his horse's legs in rabbit-holes, and tire him for nothing. He had kept
for years a little note book he called "Statistics of Foxes," and that
told him an old dog-fox of uncommon strength, if dislodged from that
particular wood, would slip into Bellman's Coppice, and if driven out
of that would face the music again, would take the open country for
Higham Gorse, and probably be killed before he got there; but once
there a regiment of scythes might cut him out, but bleeding, sneezing
fox-hounds would never work him out at the tail of a long run.

So Richard Bassett kept out of the wood, and went gently on to
Bellman's Coppice and waited outside.

His book proved an oracle. After two hours' dodging and maneuvering the
fox came out at the very end of Bellman's Coppice, with nothing near
him but Richard Bassett. Pug gave him the white of his eye in an ugly
leer, and headed straight as a crow for Higham Gorse.

Richard Bassett blew his horn, collected the hunt, and laid the dogs
on. Away they went, close together, thunder-mouthed on the hot scent.

After a three miles' gallop they sighted the fox for a moment just
going over the crest of a rising ground two furlongs off. Then the
hullabbaloo and excitement grew furious, and one electric fury animated
dogs, men, and horses. Another mile, and the fox ran in sight scarcely
a furlong off; but many of the horses were distressed: the Bassetts,
however, kept up, one by his horse being fresh, the other by his
animal's native courage and speed.

Then came some meadows, bounded by a thick hedge, and succeeded by a
plowed field of unusual size--eighty acres.

When the fox darted into this hedge the hounds were yelling at his
heels; the hunt burst through the thin fence, expecting to see them
kill close to it.

But the wily fox had other resources at his command than speed.
Appreciating his peril, he doubled and ran sixty yards down the ditch,
and the impetuous hounds rushed forward and overran the scent. They
raved about to and fro, till at last one of the gentlemen descried the
fox running down a double furrow in the middle of the field. He had got
into this, and so made his way more smoothly than his four-footed
pursuers could. The dogs were laid on, and away they went
helter-skelter.

At the end of this stiff ground a stiffish leap awaited them; an old
quickset had been cut down, and all the elm-trees that grew in it, and
a new quickset hedge set on a high bank with double ditches.

The huntsman had an Irish horse that laughed at this fence; he jumped
on to the bank, and then jumped off it into the next field.

Richard Bassett's cocktail came up slowly, rose high, and landed his
forefeet in the field, and so scrambled on.

Sir Charles went at it rather rashly; his horse, tried hard by the
fallow, caught his heels against the edge of the bank, and went
headlong into the other ditch, throwing Sir Charles over his head into
the field. Unluckily some of the trees were lying about, and Sir
Charles's head struck one of these in falling; the horse blundered out
again, and galloped after the hounds, but the rider lay there
motionless.

Nobody stopped at first; the pace was too good to inquire; but
presently Richard Bassett, who had greeted the accident with a laugh,
turned round in his saddle, and saw his cousin motionless, and two or
three gentlemen dismounting at the place. These were newcomers. Then he
resigned the hunt, and rode back.

Sir Charles's cap was crushed in, and there was blood on his white
waistcoat; he was very pale, and quite insensible.

The gentlemen raised him, with expressions of alarm and kindly concern,
and inquired of each other what was best to be done.

Richard Bassett saw an opportunity to conciliate opinion, and seized
it. "He must be taken home directly," said he. "We must carry him to
that farmhouse, and get a cart for him."

He helped carry him accordingly. The farmer lent them a cart, with
straw, and they laid the insensible baronet gently on it, Richard
Bassett supporting his head. "Gentlemen," said he, rather pompously,
"at such a moment everything but the tie of kindred is forgotten."
Which resounding sentiment was warmly applauded by the honest squires.

They took him slowly and carefully toward Huntercombe, distant about
two miles from the scene of the accident.



This 18th November Lady Bassett passed much as usual with her on
hunting days. She was quietly patient till the afternoon, and then
restless, and could not settle down in any part of the house till she
got to a little room on the first floor, with a bay-window commanding
the country over which Sir Charles was hunting. In this she sat, with
her head against one of the mullions, and eyed the country-side as far
as she could see.

Presently she heard a rustle, and there was Mary Wells standing and
looking at her with evident emotion.

"What is the matter, Mary?" said Lady Bassett.

"Oh, my lady!" said Mary. And she trembled, and her hands worked.

Lady Bassett started up with alarm painted in her countenance.

"My lady, there's something wrong in the hunting field."

"Sir Charles!"

"An accident, they say."

Lady Bassett put her hand to her heart with a faint cry. Mary Wells ran
to her.

"Come with me directly!" cried Lady Bassett. She snatched up her
bonnet, and in another minute she and Mary Wells were on their road to
the village, questioning every body they met.

But nobody they questioned could tell them anything. The stable-boy,
who had told the report in the kitchen of Huntercombe, said he had it
from a gentleman's groom, riding by as he stood at the gates.

The ill news thus flung in at the gate by one passing rapidly by was
not confirmed by any further report, and Lady Bassett began to hope it
was false.

But a terrible confirmation came at last.

In the outskirts of the village mistress and servant encountered a
sorrowful procession: the cart itself, followed by five gentlemen on
horseback, pacing slowly, and downcast as at a funeral.

In the cart Sir Charles Bassett, splashed all over with mud, and his
white waistcoat bloody, lay with his head upon Richard Bassett's knee.
His hair was wet with blood, some of which had trickled down his cheek
and dried. Even Richard's buckskins were slightly stained with it.

At that sight Lady Bassett uttered a scream, which those who heard it
never forgot, and flung herself, Heaven knows how, into the cart; but
she got there, and soon had that bleeding head on her bosom. She took
no notice of Richard Bassett, but she got Sir Charles away from him,
and the cart took her, embracing him tenderly, and kissing his hurt
head, and moaning over him, all through the village to Huntercombe
Hall.

Four years ago they passed through the same village in a
carriage-and-four--bells pealing, rustics shouting--to take possession
of Huntercombe, and fill it with pledges of their great and happy love;
and as they flashed past the heir at law shrank hopeless into his
little cottage. Now, how changed the pageant!--a farmer's cart, a
splashed and bleeding and senseless form in it, supported by a
childless, despairing woman, one weeping attendant walking at the side,
and, among the gentlemen pacing slowly behind, the heir at law, with
his head lowered in that decent affectation of regret which all heirs
can put on to hide the indecent complacency within.


CHAPTER XV.

AT the steps of Huntercombe Hall the servants streamed out, and
relieved the strangers of the sorrowful load. Sir Charles was carried
into the Hall, and Richard Bassett turned away, with one triumphant
flash of his eye, quickly suppressed, and walked with impenetrable
countenance and studied demeanor into Highmore House.

Even here he did not throw off the mask. It peeled off by degrees. He
began by telling his wife, gravely enough, Sir Charles had met with a
severe fall, and he had attended to him and taken him home.

"Ah, I am glad you did that, Richard," said Mrs. Bassett. "And is he
very badly hurt?"

"I am afraid he will hardly get over it. He never spoke. He just
groaned when they took him down from the cart at Huntercombe."

"Poor Lady Bassett!"

"Ay, it will be a bad job for her. Jane!"

"Yes, dear."

"There is a providence in it. The fall would never have killed him; but
his head struck a tree upon the ground; and that tree was one of the
very elms he had just cut down to rob our boy."

"Indeed?"

"Yes; he was felling the very hedgerow timber, and this was one of the
old elms in a hedge. He must have done it out of spite, for elm-wood
fetches no price; it is good for nothing I know of, except coffins.
Well, he has cut down _his."_

"Poor man! Richard, death reconciles enemies. Surely you can forgive
him now."

"I mean to try."

Richard Bassett seemed now to have imbibed the spirit of quicksilver.
His occupations were not actually enlarged, yet, somehow or other, he
seemed full of business. He was all complacent bustle about nothing. He
left off inveighing against Sir Charles. And, indeed, if you are one of
those weak spirits to whom censure is intolerable, there is a cheap and
easy way to moderate the rancor of detraction--you have only to die.
Let me comfort genius in particular with this little recipe.

Why, on one occasion, Bassett actually snubbed Wheeler for a mere
allusion. That worthy just happened to remark, "No more felling of
timber on Bassett Manor for a while."

"For shame!" said Richard. "The man had his faults, but he had his good
qualities too: a high-spirited gentleman, beloved by his friends and
respected by all the county. His successor will find it hard to
reconcile the county to his loss."

Wheeler stared, and then grinned satirically.

This eulogy was never repeated, for Sir Charles proved ungrateful--he
omitted to die, after all.

Attended by first-rate physicians, tenderly nursed and watched by Lady
Bassett and Mary Wells, he got better by degrees; and every stage of
his slow but hopeful progress was communicated to the servants and the
village, and to the ladies and gentlemen who rode up to the door every
day and left their cards of inquiry.

The most attentive of all these was the new rector, a young clergyman,
who had obtained the living by exchange. He was a man highly gifted
both in body and mind--a swarthy Adonis, whose large dark eyes from the
very first turned with glowing admiration on the blonde beauties of
Lady Bassett.

He came every day to inquire after her husband; and she sometimes left
the sufferer a minute or two to make her report to him in person. At
other times Mary Wells was sent to him. That artful girl soon
discovered what had escaped her mistress's observation.

The bulletins were favorable, and welcomed on all sides.

Richard Bassett alone was incredulous. "I want to see him about again,"
said he. "Sir Charles is not the man to lie in bed if he was really
better. As for the doctors, they flatter a fellow till the last moment.
Let me see him on his legs, and then I'll believe he is better."

Strange to say, obliging Fate granted Richard Bassett this moderate
request. One frosty but sunny afternoon, as he was inspecting his
coming domain from "The Heir's Tower," he saw the Hall door open, and a
muffled figure come slowly down the steps between two women: It was Sir
Charles, feeble but convalescent. He crept about on the sunny gravel
for about ten minutes, and then his nurses conveyed him tenderly in
again.

This sight, which might have touched with pity a more generous nature,
startled Richard Bassett, and then moved his bile. "I was a fool," said
he; "nothing will ever kill that man. He will see me out; see us all
out. And that Mary Wells nurses him, and I dare say in love with him by
this time; the fools can't nurse a man without. Curse the whole pack of
ye!" he yelled, and turned away in rage and disgust.

That same night he met Mary Wells, and, in a strange fit of jealousy,
began to make hot protestations of love to her. He knew it was no use
reproaching her, so he went on the other tack.

She received his vows with cool complacency, but would only stay a
minute, and would only talk of her master and mistress, toward whom her
heart was really warming in their trouble. She spoke hopefully, and
said: "'Tisn't as if he was one of your faint-hearted ones as meet
death half-way. Why, the second day, when he could scarce speak, he
sees me crying by the bed, and says he, almost in a whisper, 'What are
_you_ crying for?' 'Sir,' says I, ''tis for you--to see you lie like a
ghost.' 'Then you be wasting of salt-water,' says he. 'I wish I may,
sir,' says I. So then he raised himself up a little bit. 'Look at me,'
says he; 'I'm a Bassett. I am not the breed to die for a crack on the
skull, and leave you all to the mercy of them that would have no
mercy'--which he meant you, I suppose. So he ordered me to leave
crying, which I behooved to obey; for he will be master, mind ye, while
he have a finger to wag, poor dear gentleman, he will."

And, soon after this, she resisted all his attempts to detain her, and
scudded back to the house, leaving Bassett to his reflections, which
were exceedingly bitter.

Sir Charles got better, and at last used to walk daily with Lady
Bassett. Their favorite stroll was up and down the lawn, close under
the boundary wall he had built to shut out "The Heir's Walk."

The afternoon sun struck warm upon that wall and the walk by its side.

On the other side a nurse often carried little Dicky Bassett, the heir;
but neither of the promenaders could see each other for the wall.

Richard Bassett, on the contrary, from "The Heir's Tower," could see
both these little parties; and, as some men cannot keep away from what
causes their pain, he used to watch these loving walks, and see Sir
Charles get stronger and stronger, till at last, instead of leaning on
his beloved wife, he could march by her side, or even give her his arm.

Yet the picture was, in a great degree, delusive; for, except during
these blissful walks, when the sun shone on him, and Love and Beauty
soothed him, Sir Charles was not the man he had been. The shake he had
received appeared to have damaged his temper strangely. He became so
irritable that several of his servants left him; and to his wife he
repined; and his childless condition, which had been hitherto only a
deep disappointment, became in his eyes a calamity that outweighed his
many blessings. He had now narrowly escaped dying without an heir, and
this seemed to sink into his mind, and, co-operating with the
concussion his brain had received, brought him into a morbid state. He
brooded on it, and spoke of it, and got back to it from every other
topic, in a way that distressed Lady Bassett unspeakably. She consoled
him bravely; but often, when she was alone, her gentle courage gave
way, and she cried bitterly to herself.

Her distress had one effect she little expected; it completed what her
invariable kindness had begun, and actually won the heart of a servant.
Those who really know that tribe will agree with me that this was a
marvelous conquest. Yet so it was; Mary Wells conceived for her a real
affection, and showed it by unremitting attention, and a soft and
tender voice, that soothed Lady Bassett, and drew many a silent but
grateful glance from her dove-like eyes.

Mary listened, and heard enough to blame Sir Charles for his
peevishness, and she began to throw out little expressions of
dissatisfaction at him; but these were so promptly discouraged by the
faithful wife that she drew in again and avoided that line. But one
day, coming softly as a cat, she heard Sir Charles and Lady Bassett
talking over their calamity. Sir Charles was saying that it was
Heaven's curse; that all the poor people in the village had children;
that Richard Bassett's weak, puny little wife had brought him an heir,
and was about to make him a parent again; he alone was marked out and
doomed to be the last of his race. "And yet," said he, "if I had
married any other woman, and you had married any other man, we should
have had children by the dozen, I suppose."

Upon the whole, though he said nothing palpably unjust, he had the tone
of a man blaming his wife as the real cause of their joint calamity,
under which she suffered a deeper, nobler, and more silent anguish than
himself. This was hard to bear; and when Sir Charles went away, Mary
Wells ran in, with an angry expression on the tip of her tongue.

She found Lady Bassett in a pitiable condition, lying rather than
leaning on the table, with her hair loose about her, sobbing as if her
heart would break.

All that was good in Mary Wells tugged at her heart-strings. She flung
herself on her knees beside her, and seizing her mistress's hand, and
drawing it to her bosom, fell to crying and sobbing along with her.

This canine devotion took Lady Bassett by surprise. She turned her
tearful eyes upon her sympathizing servant, and said, "Oh, Mary!" and
her soft hand pressed the girl's harder palm gratefully.

Mary spoke first. "Oh, my lady," she sobbed, "it breaks my heart to see
you so. And what a shame to blame you for what is no 