d them a half-hour before,
and rearrange them.

Joy watched her for a minute or so. Then--"You aren't going to need
me?" she asked with a misleading quietness. "Because if you aren't
I--I have something to do for a little while."

"Not a bit. Run along," granted Gail. "I'll have some toil ready for
you when you get back, if you like."

Joy was like the lady in the poem, who died in such a hurry.

  "She did not stop to don her coat,
  She did not stop to smooth her bed."

She fled hatless in the direction of a place that had always meant
soothed feelings and comfort generally, the Harrington house.
Phyllis wouldn't be there, to be sure, but the place would have her
peace and sunniness about it.

The children were ranging up and down the garden paths with squeals
and shouts of happiness which were, apparently, merely because of
life in general. They fell upon her with still wilder shouts; or at
least Philip did, while Angela clung as far up as she could reach.

Joy hugged all the children she could reach with a warm sense of
gratitude to them for wanting her, and (still led by gratitude)
entered enthusiastically into tag herself. It was quite new to her,
because she had never played children's games, but she found that
she liked it exceedingly.... Suppose Gail did go slidingly around
explaining to everybody convincingly that everybody else was in love
with her--suppose it was even true? Why, even then--when you're
young and alive it's fun to go running up and down a garden in the
stimulating October air.

They ended in the big swing. Philip insisted on doing most of the
pushing, because, as he explained, they were all girls and he
wasn't. Joy held little Angela fast, and gave herself up to the
delight of being swung. Philip pushed her higher and higher, till
they were both screaming with pleasure, and, when the swing was at
the top, could see over the tall hedge to the road outside.

There was something chugging inquiringly out there. And it was--it
was, indeed, John's little doctor-car. And it held John, and it was
slowing up. As these facts, one by one, became apparent to Joy and
Angela in their excursions above the hedge, there was great
happiness in the garden.

"I knew he'd come!--He said he'd come!" announced Philip gleefully,
pushing like mad. "He said he would! He's been here every day since
they went. I asked him yesterday"--these sentences were interspersed
with the pantings necessary to pushing a swingful of ladies--"I
asked him whyn't he stay for dinner, and he said--he said he wanted
to go home an' have luncheon wiv Joy. So I s'pose he'll stay today,
long's you're here."

In Joy's naughty mind a Great Idea sprang to birth. Whyn't he stay,
indeed? He didn't know about Gail's coming to brighten his fireside,
and there wasn't any reason why he should.

"He'll stay if I can make him," she told Philip gaily.

In the back of her head--she should unquestionably have had her
hands slapped--there was a beautiful and complete picture of Gail
being insolently alluring to three empty chairs and a luncheon table
and four unoccupied walls.

"See John!" screamed Angela, trying to clap her hands, and having to
be grabbed hastily so she shouldn't fall out of the swing. "Johnny!
Johnny! Come in!"

John looked up in time to see the swing before it went downward
again. He waved his hand as it came up, and the third time it rose
Joy saw the car still, but no John. He was coming in.

He appeared a moment later, striding over the lawn. The children
dashed for him, as usual.

"Johnny, Johnny!" they clamored. "She says you can stay to lunch!
She says she will if you will."

With the way made so easy for her erring feet, what could Joy say
but "Don't you want to?"

She did not insist.

But John accepted on the spot with unsuspecting heartiness, and
Philip solved the last problem by scampering off over the rustling
leaves to telephone that John wouldn't be home for luncheon.

So they had a very merry luncheon, though an occasional whiff of
guilt made Joy fall silent--which was not noticeable, because
Philip's conversation flowed on brightly in all the breaks, and
sometimes when there weren't any.

"Want me to take you back, Joy?" John asked when they were done,
looking down at her quizzically, as he had a trick of doing. "Gail
must want you by this time."

"Gail!" stammered Joy. Then her courage came back, as it usually did
when she summoned it, and she laughed.

"Heavens, I am discovered!" she quoted. "Why, John, you don't mean
to tell me you ran away too?"

"I didn't run away," countered John. "I promised Philip yesterday
that I'd stay here to luncheon with him. In fact, I think I promised
to summon you. I stopped at the house to do it just now and found
you here already. I explained matters to Gail, and she is up in
Mother's room, having her luncheon there."

He turned to the children. "Say good-by to Joy now, infants--I'm
going to take her away with me."

"You do that a great deal of the time, it seems to me," observed
Philip regretfully. "But of course, I suppose she really does belong
to you."

"Exactly," laughed John, lifting the little boy up to kiss him. "She
does. Come, my property."

They got into the car amicably, laughing over Philip. But John
wasn't through with her.

"Was it quite courteous, my dear," he asked gently, but with a
certain firmness, "to leave Gail that way? It was only a chance that
I was able to explain it. In a sense she was a guest in your house."

Joy flamed up.

"Was it quite courteous of Gail," she demanded passionately, "to
come in and take my house away from me, and demand that I hand her
over the housekeeping--no, not demand it, calmly take it?"

John looked a little perplexed for the moment, which gave Joy time
to calm down a little, and remind herself that men were like that.

"Somehow one doesn't expect Gail to be considerate," he explained
finally. "It--well, it isn't one of her qualities. I think I heard
her say once that she had never found it necessary. But you--I
expect so much more of you, Joy!"

One would suppose that this might have been soothing. John seemed to
consider it so. But it wasn't.

"She's so charming that nobody expects anything else of her," Joy
flashed back, "and I have to be good, because all people can like me
for is my goodness--is that what you mean?"

And she stood up, as the car slowed before the Hewitt house, and
sprang out. She had seen Clarence Rutherford sunning himself
expectantly on the steps.

"There's the man who sent her over, if you approve of it all so
highly," were her departing words to John. "I promise not to be
inhospitable to him!"

She waved her hand.

"Mr. Rutherford!" she called. "Come on down and go off somewhere
with me!"

Clarence unfolded himself with more haste than usual, and obliged.

"To the end of the world, Sorcerette, or any little place like
that," he said sweetly. "I have no car, alas, but I can telephone
for one."

"No, don't," said Joy, whose one idea was to get away. "Just go into
the house and bring me my cap and any wrap you can find."

She did not dare look back to John. She felt she was being
everything she oughtn't to, but she also felt that she had cause.

"Here's your hat," said Clarence, coming out with it, and refraining
from completing the quotation. "Where do you want to go? I have many
beautiful plans to offer you, principally about your being leading
lady in my comic opera. You are going to have to get an extension of
parole from the dear ones at home."

"Oh, do you really think I can act in it?" asked Joy happily as they
went down the leafy road together. She gave a little frisk as she spoke.

"Of course you can," said he. "As a matter of fact, that's my
principal reason for getting it up. I have a book that contains all
the Gilbert librettos in my most bulging pocket. You and I will
wander out into the wonderful autumn woods, and sit down on a soft,
pleasant log, and pick out the opera, and the cast, and be happy
generally. Only I won't play unless, as. I explained last night, you
are a leading lady with a real star part. As I'm a wonderful stage
manager I feel strongly that it will be thus."

"Thank you," said Joy amiably but absently. Something appalling had
just occurred to her.

"Good gracious," she told him, "it's a special occasion, and the
cook and the waitress are both going off to funerals or something,
and Gail is going to have to get that whole dinner single-handed!"






CHAPTER TWELVE

DINNER FOR FIVE

Clarence smiled most agreeably.

"You should try to be more of an optimist, dear Joy," he reproved.
"Try to live up to your name."

"I got it out of Blake," said Joy, "or they did--and I never did see
why you should live up to a name your grandfather pinned on you out
of a poetry book."

"Pardon this seeming curiosity," hinted Clarence, "but didn't you
ever have any parents, not even to the extent of their having a
chance to name you?"

"They died before I was born," Joy explained. "At least, as much as
they could. My father quite did and my mother died before I was a
week old. So Grandfather had it all to do, as far as naming went.
You know that horrid poem--

  _"I have no name--
  I am but three days old:"_

"And it's called Infant Joy, and so was I."

"They seem to have begun wrecking your taste for literature early,"
observed Clarence.

"Oh--literature!" said Joy wearily.

"Your tone hints that we didn't come off to discuss the poets. You
are quite right, Sorcerette. When two charming young persons like
ourselves are alone together on a wonderful fall afternoon they
should discuss only each other. And you must admit that my
references to literature were only incidental to yourself."

"Well, anyway," stated Joy, pausing as they strolled, and beginning
to braid into a garland a handful of wild asters she had gathered,
"anyway, I ought to go back to the house and help Gail get dinner.
John likes things just so."

"Heavens, how marital!" sighed Clarence, wincing. Then suddenly he
seemed more in earnest than Joy had ever known him. "Can't you ever
talk or think of anything but the admirable John? How on earth did
he get you so thoroughly broken in?"

Joy's cheeks flamed.

"He didn't 'break me in,'" she defended. "But I think I ought to see
to it that things are all right. You see, when your cousin came and
offered to take over the housekeeping--if she wasn't your cousin, I
might say she got it away from me--she thought she was helping
herself to a 'nice, clane, aisy job,' as the Irishman said about
being a bishop. It really isn't fair to let her in for work she
didn't expect."

The look Clarence bent on her this time held genuine admiration.

"I think it is exceedingly fair," was all he said.

"Really?" she asked. She certainly did not want to go back to the
house, and, noble as Clarence might think her, she didn't feel a bit
like taking orders from Gail.

"She has made her bed--or it may even be, her beds," said Clarence.
"Now why don't you let her lie in it, or them?"

"Well, I don't want to go home," said Joy a little sadly.

"Let us be optimists, as I suggested some yards back," said Clarence
cheerfully. "Let us think of the wonderful effect it will all have
on Gail's moral nature. By the time she has produced the
eight-course dinner which I gather the worthy Dr. Hewitt requires to
keep him the good citizen he is, she will be ennobled to a terrible
degree. You have heard of the ennobling influence of toil, dear
child?"

"I have, but I never believed in it," said Joy. "It makes you cross,
especially peeling potatoes, and it's bad for your hands. And
judging by the number of maids who steal, it doesn't work at all."

"I suppose," Clarence resigned himself, "that if Melisande were
still spared to us in the flesh, she really would have talked this
way, except that she would have used a few more dots. But one is an
idealist. One is jarred. If you could recite, in your soft,
clear-cut voice that is so admirably adapted for poetry, a few
stanzas of something heartbreaking----" voluntarily.

Joy, not unnaturally, lost patience.

"I have spent my whole life, or a lot more of it than I want to,
reciting heartbreaking poetry," she told him. "If you want it, go
buy a phonograph record. And if you want me out here in the woods
with you, stop talking about it!"

She really shouldn't have been so cross. Clarence was supposed to be
very clever when he talked. But just then she was only half
listening to him, and there came a sudden vision of the night
before--the cozy room, and the wood fire, and John across from her,
smiling gravely at her, and talking in a way that didn't make her
feel, as Clarence's way did, that he was laughing at her underneath,
when he thought she couldn't see.

John had told her once that his ideal girl wore something white or
blue, and had her hair parted, and was connected in his mind some
way with a wood fire. And he had talked and acted as if she was that
girl. She'd had on the little blue dress that she'd bought, and made
look modern with a fichu of Mrs. Hewitt's....

Clarence's voice interrupted her thoughts, rather plaintively.

"Dear Joy! I _will_ buy a phonograph record! I will buy a whole
album of them. I will purchase a copy of the Last Ravings of John
McCullough, and have it rave to me the last thing every night, as a
penance, if you will only stop looking off into space, and give at
least a fair imitation of knowing that I exist."

Joy's heart misgave her. She really wasn't being very polite.

"Of course you exist," she said penitently. "And you are very nice
and polite, in your way, and you must make allowance for my not
being clever. I keep telling you that all the time."

"I am delighted that you are not, as you call it, clever," said
Clarence with undoubted sincerity. "You lack verbal dexterity of a
certain kind, because you have never associated freely with people
you could be disrespectful to. But you are quite a new kind of girl,
or else a survival, and I adore you for it. I never thought I was
going to adore any one so much. Why, I even think it is humorous
when you sit on me, and that, my dear, is a very bad symptom. In
short, I am very much in love with you."

Clarence had a habit of talking that way, and Joy didn't pay much
attention to it. In a phrase of his own, it was like kissing over
the telephone--it didn't get you anywhere, but it had a cunning
sound. It has a warming feeling to think that any one is in love
with you, even if you know they aren't. She said as much.

But Clarence became what was, for him, sulky. Clarence had one
curious thing about him: he never showed his temper at all, but you
couldn't be with him ten minutes without being morally certain that
he had a very bad and sullen one, which he merely kept concealed for
reasons of his own. Whereas John Hewitt's temper, which
undisguisedly was in existence, wasn't a thing you ever thought of
excepting rather amusedly and affectionately. It was such a
little-boy thing in comparison with the grown-up, responsible rest
of him! It would undoubtedly appear some time this afternoon or
evening. At the thought of it Joy felt her usual affectionate
amusement. When it was over he would be very sorry.

"You haven't told me anything about the comic opera yet," she hinted
to Clarence, who had been quite silent for the last while. "Don't
you want to?"

"I do!" said Clarence, coming out of his muse and turning into his
ordinary self. "We will sit down on the next stump or stone we see,
and go into the matter thoroughly."

It was a large flat stone, with a tree for Joy to lean against. They
sat down on it, and Clarence pulled the libretto book out of his
pocket, and they went to work.

Joy knew the Gilbert and Sullivan operas from a copy of the words
that had always been around the house. So there was no delay while
she read the book through, as Clarence seemed to have expected.

"To my mind it lies between 'Patience' and 'Iolanthe,'" said
Clarence. "The 'Mikado' has been done to death, and so has 'Trial by
Jury.' And 'Princess Ida' is too full of blank verse, and the men's
solos are too hard."

So far as Joy was concerned nothing had been done to death. She
would quite willingly have been the humblest chorus-girl in
"Pinafore," if Clarence had willed to have that much-done classic.
But he seemed determined to have her play a large part in whatever
it was, and to have whatever it was _Iolanthe_. He wanted to be
_Strephon_, it seemed; in fact, he had been. And he wanted Joy
for the _Phyllis_ or _Iolanthe_.

Joy had a faint feeling that Phyllis Harrington ought to have the
part with her own name, but Clarence explained that names had
nothing whatever to do with it unless you were a movie star, when
you used your first name in order to make the public more interested
in your personality.

"We will give Gail the part you don't want," he told her, "as a
punishment for not letting you cook your eight-course dinner
tonight. By the way, we must time ourselves to get back and eat it.
I wonder whether Gail can cook. On second thoughts, why not stay out
till it's over?"

"The play!" said Joy imperatively.

"Well," he said, yielding, "would you rather be a fairy princess or
a shepherdess from Arcady? I'd prefer to have you the shepherdess,
for personal reasons. I wish to be the shepherd."

"Whatever you say," said Joy absently. "It's getting colder. Hadn't
we better walk a little?"

"Very well," said Clarence. "We can argue as we walk."

The problem of making sixteen young women willing to be a chorus and
of finding sixteen or twenty young men to be anything, took them
quite a while to discuss. They walked on as they talked, until it
began to get darker.

"By the way, have you any idea where we are?" inquired Clarence,
stopping short to look about him. "New England woods are not my
native habitat."

"Nor mine," said Joy, startled. "I think we ought to go back to the
high road."

"If there's any left to go back to," suggested Clarence. "We've been
on one way-path after another so long that I don't think I could
find it again."

They turned around, and continued to follow way-paths back. Clarence
had no pocket compass, such as people who get lost ought to possess.
And it was getting relentlessly darker and darker. Joy had never
been lost before, and she was surprised to find the feeling of panic
that possessed her when she grasped the fact that neither of them
knew where they were. Finally they gained a clear space where there
was a tolerably traveled-looking road.

"If we wait here somebody may come along," said Clarence. "Jove, I'm
hungry!"

"So am I," said Joy.

But there wasn't anything to do about _that_. Finally Joy
remembered that she had some chocolate in her little handbag, and
they divided it and ate it. After that life was a little brighter.

"Do you suppose we'll have to stay here all night?" demanded Joy.
"We'll freeze to death if we do."

"No, I don't," said Clarence. "But, Joy dear, if we do----"

The mockery was all out of his voice.

"Oh, don't talk about it!" she exclaimed. "Surely somebody will come
get us--or couldn't we go up this road till we find a farmhouse?"

"If you like," said Clarence.

They rose and walked on for a while.

"Oh, listen!" Joy whispered. "I hear something!"

"It's a car," said Clarence hopefully.

And it was. It was John's car, with John in it, and the temper Joy
had been thinking of tenderly was with him. He was evidently
thoroughly angry, for he scarcely spoke, even when he found them.

"See here, Hewitt," Clarence protested. "You aren't doing the thing
at all properly. You should say, 'My own! At last I have found you!'
instead of backing up the car with a short sentence like that."

What John had said, as a matter of fact, was, "Get in the car. It's late."

He did come to a little at Clarence's flippant reminder, and smiled
reluctantly.

"Well, you see, it was self-evident. I _had_ found you both. You
oughtn't to have walked so far if you didn't know where you were going."

"It is also self-evident that it is late," said Clarence stiffly,
and, it must be confessed, a little sulkily. "Nevertheless, we're
having a very pleasant time.... Is dinner over?"

John, for no apparent reason, smiled frankly at this. "Not in the
least," he said. "They are waiting dinner till the prodigals'
return. My mother has had hers sent up to her, but Gail and your
friend Tiddy are kindly keeping the rest of it hot."

It is a quicker journey in a car than when you stroll leisurely
along, discussing light opera and your disposition. They were
surprised to find how near, comparatively, they were, to the village.

"Joy, do you suppose I am invited to dinner?" asked Clarence in a
stage whisper. "If it is not thus I shall probably starve by the
roadside, because Gail sent her mother to a bridge-and-high-tea
before she went, and the maids there had no orders about food.
That's why I was prowling about the hospitable Hewitt mansion."

Joy couldn't help smiling. "I think you must be," she said.

But she didn't understand John's allusion to Tiddy. He was abjectly
devoted to Gail, but it did seem that devotion had its limits, when
it came to following her to somebody else's house.

"What is Tiddy doing in these parts?" Clarence asked for her, as
people so often do ask your questions for you if you only give them
time. "Dinner-party, is it?"

"Tiddy," said John dryly, "is making himself useful."

"That is nothing at all new in Tiddy's life," said Gail's cousin.
"People who dwell about Gail do. Am I to understand that he is chief
cook and bottle-washer?"

"You are," said John.

They got out and went into the house, Joy feeling as mussy as only a
girl can who has been away from home all day. She followed the
curious-minded Clarence into the kitchen.

The sight that met their eyes was an interesting one. The kitchen
was a pleasant sight to any one from outside, being warmed and
lighted. It was further decorated by Gail, in a very low and
clinging black frock trimmed with poppies, which it occurred to Joy
must have been in the grip. She was sitting in absolute idleness in
a kitchen chair, with her feet on a footstool, and Tiddy, swathed in
an apron with pink checks, was engaged at the kitchen range.

"Good work, old boy!" Clarence called out to him. "What have you got?"

Tiddy turned a scarlet face toward him, and waved one hand, with a
spoon in it.

"Gail said there had to be a good dinner," he said worriedly, "but I
don't know how to make many things. This is soup.... It doesn't look
right to me, somehow. Come here, Clarence, and give it a once over."

Joy, leaning against the lintel with John a little behind her as
usual, couldn't help but admire Gail. She knew perfectly well that
it would never have occurred to her in Gail's place to sit placidly
in a chair while a lad who ought to have been at home studying-Tiddy
was cramming to catch up with his class at college--wrestled with
the stove. But, after all, that was the sort of thing she had always
read of sirens doing. And even if the victim was only a little
college boy, of what Clarence called frying size, it was a sight to
make one wishful. Also apprehensive--mightn't Gail set John peeling
potatoes next? That sight would be an annoying one from various angles.

John showed no signs of being about to yield, at least at the
moment. He joined Clarence in teasing Tiddy, who took it very
sweetly, but he finally came forward and showed the lad how to
manage the drafts.

"Call us when you're ready, Cookie," said Clarence amiably, and
sauntered out. John followed him.

"Can't I help?" asked Joy, staying conscientiously behind. She still
felt that it was her responsibility.

"Not a bit," said Gail. "We're getting along wonderfully. You'd
better go up and get straightened out, though--you look blown to
bits. Oh, and send John back as you go through, Tiddy can't do the
drafts right."

Joy went out obediently.

"John, I am to send you back as I go through. Tiddy can't do the
drafts right," she repeated in a colorless voice that had anger
underneath it, and walking on as she spoke.

"Drafts--nonsense--Gail's lonesome," Clarence answered cheerfully,
from the couch where he had thrown himself.

"All right," said John, who was the soul of politeness, but an
annoyingly dense person compared to Clarence, it seemed to Joy. He
went out. Joy ran upstairs as fast as she could go. She arrived at
the top, breathless and still angry, and remembered that she ought
to go in and see Mrs. Hewitt. But the lights were low, generally a
sign that the lady was asleep, so she went on to her own room.

"Blown to bits!" she said to herself bitterly, stopping opposite her
confidant, the mirror. "And _she_ sitting on a chair looking
like Marie Antoinette being taken to execution in a kitchen chair!"

It was a breathless and tautological remark, but it relieved her
feelings. "I oughtn't to feel that way," she reminded herself.
"Because after all, Gail _was_ here first!"

This didn't seem to make much difference in the feelings. And it was
unquestionable that she was blown about, and very young and owned no
black dress with poppies, nor yet any college boy who would cook for
her at a wave of the hand.

She pawed her wardrobe through furiously. Joy was always very
dependent for encouragement on the clothes she wore. The proper gown
could make her feel the way it looked, always. They almost had moods
sewed into them around the bottom, she thought sometimes.

The way she had felt last time she wore the amber satin with the
poem to it, that one she had hated so furiously--could she feel that
way again if she put on the dress? She'd felt young--oh, yes, but as
if youth were a perfectly splendid thing to have. And very alive,
and superior, and rebellious. And ready to have a lover, and to
treat him, if necessary, like a dog--like a whole kennel of dogs!

So she put it on. She made herself exactly the little princess of
Grandfather's reception days, trailing chiffon panels, swinging
jewel-filleted braids and all, and swept downstairs with her head high.

Tiddy had by this time managed to get the dinner on the table, and
the other two men, out of sheer pity, were helping him. In fact,
having enthroned Gail at the table, they were making a frolic of the
whole thing.

"Here, catch the steak, Rutherford," John was saying cheerfully. And
Clarence, with carving-knife and fork outheld, was making as neat a
catch as possible.

"Here, Tiddy, don't try to stagger in along under those biscuits.
You made 'em. That kind takes two strong men--I know, I've eaten
your biscuits before."

"I made these the regular way, with yeast," said Tiddy in an injured
voice. "_I_ couldn't help it if they didn't rise in the oven.
Go rag the cookbook."

Joy could stand it no longer. Forgetting her real state, she rushed
out on them, where they wrestled with the dinner and Tiddy. They
were playing handball with the biscuits by this time.

"Oh, _Tiddy!_ You didn't put _yeast_ in those biscuits!"
she reproached him. "Why, you poor unfortunate boy, yeast has to
rise over night, or an afternoon anyhow! They're no use!"

They all three stopped simultaneously at the vision which she had
quite honestly forgotten she presented. Tiddy listened humbly, and
Clarence made a low bow.

"The Queen came in the kitchen, speaking bread and honey," he quoted
appositely, while John looked both pleased and proud.

"There, I told you so," he said with triumph. "I said you were in
wrong with those biscuits. Joy always knows."

"'It was the very best butter,'" quoted Tiddy (who was not without a
sense of humor), from "Alice."

"But what can we do?" asked John, who was concentrated on the
situation. "The steak's all right--any idiot can broil steak, as
Tiddy has proved--" he had to stop short to dodge a biscuit--"and
the soup came out of a can, so maybe that'll do. But there isn't a
bit of bread, and we simply have to have it. At least I suppose so."

"Get me an apron, please," Joy asked of the surroundings, and two
aprons were offered her excitedly by three willing hands. She pinned
both on, as a precaution against ruining the amber satin, though she
didn't much mind if it had been ruined, and began by investigating
the soup. It was the best canned tomato bisque, but its cook had not
known or read that it should be watered, or milked, and it was so
thick it was almost stiff. She sent Clarence for milk out of the
refrigerator, and treated it properly. Then she looked at the
biscuits, such as had escaped destruction. They were indeed hopeless.

"I can make biscuits in a minute, but it will take a half-hour to
bake them in this range," she told them, where they stood, anxiously
awaiting her verdict. "If you didn't mind having them baked on a
griddle----"

"Like the ones the fellow does in the window at Childs'! Fine!"
responded Tiddy enthusiastically. "I'll get the griddle. I've
learned where everything grows."

He produced it accordingly, and watched Joy, as did the others,
entranced, while she mixed and cut out biscuits, and baked them in
the griddle scone-fashion.

They made it a triumphal procession after that, with the biscuits
borne high by Tiddy before Joy, who came in carrying the steak,
followed by Clarence and John with a dish of canned vegetables
apiece. It was far from being the dinner Joy had planned, but the
biscuits were greatly admired, and every one was happy. That is, Joy
was, and apparently the men were. Joy was so pleased to think that
she had been able to straighten out things, and get them a good
dinner, that she forgot to think about Gail at all. She sat in the
tall armchair at the head of the table where John had placed her,
and poured coffee in big cups, to be taken with the dinner, with
flushed cheeks and a gay heart.

"But what I want to know is," demanded Clarence, "why nobody's ever
seen that frock before."

"I have," John answered from the foot. "Joy had that on the very
first time I saw her, amber beads and crown and all. I never thought
then I'd see her making my biscuits in it."

"It's an allegory," said Clarence. "Man captures the beautiful
princess of his dream, and sets her to drudging in his kitchen. _I_
think there is something sad but sweet, as Shaw would say, about it."

"But I wanted to make the biscuits!" cried Joy before she thought.
"If I hadn't there wouldn't have been any for dinner--and you
_had_ to have dinner."

"They didn't at all," said Gail. "You spoil men. If you always say,
'But he has to have it!' and then go tearing around getting it for
him, why----"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"There are excellent biscuits a half-mile away, at the baker's in
the village, and a motor-car outside."

Joy laughed blithely.

"But you see, I'm not used to a motor-car. I'm not motor-people at
all.... Well, I suppose when you live with a poet you get in the
habit of feeling you must do what people want of you. Grandfather
was so great, you see, we felt it was--well, only polite. At least
Grandmother brought me up that way."

"I--I say! Was your grandfather _the_ Alton Havenith!"
exclaimed Tiddy, opening his eyes widely. "The one in all the
readers and cram-books and anthologies?"

"Is." corrected Joy. "He's quite alive. Yes, that's Grandfather--and
this is one of my dresses for his receptions," she added as an
afterthought.

"Good _gracious!_" breathed Tiddy reverently. They were at the
canned peaches and pound-cake by this time. "I--I suppose you
couldn't say any of his things?" he ended diffidently. He was
evidently a worshiper.

Joy felt quite herself by now, the old self-possessed Joy of the
salon and recitations.

"Well, not over the dessert," she said, laughing. "But as soon as
dinner is over, if you want me to. There's one I say to a harp.
There's a harp here."

"Can you play a harp, too?" demanded Clarence, "as well as make
biscuits? See here, Tiddy, you forget your position in life. You're
a cook. Get thee to the kitchen, while Joy entertains us, who are
the real quality folks."

"Nonsense," smiled John. "We'll leave things as they are--can't we, Joy?"

He led the way into the parlor and uncovered the harp for her. No
one would have guessed by his demeanor that this was the first sign
he had had of Joy's accomplishment--he was as matter-of-fact as
possible about it. Only once he smiled across at her secretly, as if
they had something private between them, as she asked him which
thing he thought she had better say to begin with, and named one
immediately.

She flung back the chiffon that trailed down one slim, round arm,
and, after a little preliminary tuning, began to play. It was "To
Myrtilla at Seventeen" that John had suggested, and harp-music went
well with it. Then she went on to more. She had never thought that
Grandfather would help her this way!

They kept her at the harp most of the evening. From Grandfather's
poems she slid to some of Grandmother's old songs, plaintive old
things of Civil War days. She was earnestly trying to make her
guests and John's have as good a time as lay in her power, and she
never thought about Gail, quiet and quite out of the center of the
stage, at all.

Tiddy, rapt and worshipful, clung close to her till the evening was
over.

"I say," he told her when the others were going, "you--do you know,
you're wonderful! I--do you mind if I come over tomorrow? There's a
lot of things I'd like to ask you about Alton Havenith. I--could I?"

"Why, of course," said Joy, with her usual eager desire to do
anything nice she could for people.

He thanked her fervently, and went with obvious reluctance. Gail was
a little silent, even for her, who only talked when she chose. And
at last Joy and John were alone. She felt a little shy of him.

"I must go clear up," she said presently, as he did not speak,
moving toward the dining-room.

"You must not," he told her, with the affectionate note in his voice
she loved to hear. "I want to stay here and appreciate my princess a
little, and I can't do it well when she's away--or I don't want to.
Sit down, Joy. I scarcely ever see anything of you any more.... Dear
child, why on earth did you let Gail rampage all over the house this
way? You could have had a maid in from the village."

"But she said she was going to--and I thought you knew!" cried Joy,
her heart leaping up.

"Oh, you mean she took possession?" he said. "I see. That is like
Gail. Well--don't let her, next time, my dear."

"I'd much, much rather not!" said Joy enthusiastically, "but she
said she'd made it all right with your mother, and----"

"Oh, in that case," said John, "all right." Then he dismissed the
subject, looking into the fire. "I find out some new thing about you
every day, kiddie," he said. "I'm afraid I must seem like a rather
quiet and unaccomplished person to you,--compared to other men."

"You mean because I ran off with Clarence," said Joy with remorseful
directness, and her usual child-likeness. "I _was_ cross because
you liked Gail."

He laughed. "And _I_ was cross because you liked Clarence.
Shall we both reform a bit, little girl?"

"Oh, yes!" replied Joy radiantly. "Only I haven't much to reform
about," she added thoughtfully. "Except he's kind to me, and he
understands things sometimes you don't...."

John sighed a little. "I see. Yes, he's that sort. Well, try to make
me understand, dear, won't you? ... I want to."

She slipped her hand impulsively in his as she did sometimes.

"Then that's all right," he said contentedly.

But the most all right thing, to Joy's unregenerate heart, was next
morning, when she went up to pay her usual morning visit to Mrs. Hewitt.

"Joy, will you tell me," demanded the lady, "what you meant by
telling Gail you wanted her to do the housekeeping?"






CHAPTER THIRTEEN

THE SERIOUS BUSINESS OF "IOLANTHE"

There was no use having it out with Gail. Joy was not one of those
nerve-shaking people who insist on having things out, anyhow. She
was perfectly content with things as they were.

The weather settled down to be legitimate October weather, a little
early: crisply lovely outdoors, and of the temperature to be an
excuse for fires indoors at night. Tiddy transferred his allegiance,
still a little shyly, to Joy. The change was good for him, because
they were, after all, very much of an age. They got to be excellent
friends. Also Joy kept him at his studies in a fashion that was, for
her, quite severe: he had asked her if she wouldn't, and she did.
She went off for tramps with him when John was otherwise employed,
which seemed to please John, and prevented her from having Clarence
too much underfoot.

Gail referred to Tiddy's desertion with her usual note of indolent
amusement--it did not occur to Joy till years later that Gail might
occasionally pretend a superiority to such things as annoy other
girls--and summoned another man from the city for week-ends. Tiddy
was indigenous to the soil. This, as Clarence, with _his_ amiable
superiority, said, was so much to the good, for when you come to
amateur theatricals every man is a man. Clarence was working with an
industry nobody would ever have suspected in him, over "Iolanthe."

It was easy enough to collect the principals. With a certain amount
of nobility of character, Clarence assigned himself the part of
_Lord Chancellor_, remarking that he could make a fool of
himself rather better than most men he knew. Incidentally he played
opposite to Joy, who refused flatly to take the leading part of
_Phyllis_, and was therefore cast for _Iolanthe_. They found
a suitable and sufficiently stalwart _Fairy Queen_ in the
neighborhood, and made Gail's weekend man _Private Willis_, because
two rehearsals a week were enough for that part, and he was the tallest
man, nearly, that any one had ever seen. He was six feet three and
a half, which is about two and a half inches more than is necessary
for beauty and suitability, to quote Clarence again; but quite what
they wanted just here.

"But where on earth to get a chorus!" wailed Clarence, after a
rehearsal in the big Hewitt parlor. They were keeping it more or
less a family affair. The Harringtons had returned, bringing the De
Guenthers with them in triumph. Mrs. De Guenther was a dear little
old lady who took a deep interest in the whole scheme, and was of
great use in the costuming. Mr. De Guenther, scholarly, soft-voiced,
and courteously precise, was also allowed to be present at
rehearsals; not because of the costuming, but because he remembered
performances at the Savoy when he was a young man in London, and
could coach them in the business.

"With a whole village full of people, I should think you could!"
said Gail. "The trouble with you is, Clarry, you're lazy." She
leaned back herself in a long chair as she said it, looking the
personification of indolence.

"Of course I could!" he said scornfully. "My good girl, have you
seen the worthy New Englanders in this village? There are some of
the most beautiful characters, hereabouts, I was told when I went
seeking for chorus-ladies, that ever existed. But they are far from
being worn on the outside."

"Laura Ward is coming down over that week, to stay with me," Gail
offered.

"Yes, and Laura Ward has played _Celia_, and is going to have
to do it again," stated Clarence. "We can't waste a good dancer like
that on the chorus."

John, who was _Lord Mountararat_, one of _Phyllis'_ two
suitors from the House of Lords, was looking out of the window
absently, humming under his breath one of his songs:

  _"It seems that she's a fairy
  From Andersen's lib_rary
  _And we took her for
  The proprietor
  Of a Ladies' Semi_nary!"

One of the unaccountable silences which sometimes fall made every
absently-sung word quite audible. As he ended Clarence sprang at him
in what would have been a wild embrace if he had not ducked in time.

"Here, don't let your troubles drive you crazy, Rutherford," John
protested, holding him off with a strong hand.

"They haven't!" proclaimed Clarence. "But 'them beautiful words!'
See here, you dwellers in this happy vale, isn't there a girls'
school somewhere adjacent? Why don't we bribe the teachers by making
it a benefit for whatever they want--a stained glass window to their
founder, or a new laboratory or something--and lift those girls
bodily, as a chorus?"

They had been seeking painfully for some worthy object to give the
opera for, and so far hadn't been able to find a thing. So his
project was greeted joyfully.

"John, as usual, will have to go ask," suggested Allan. "Johnny, old
boy, what _would_ we do without your reputation? You physish at
that school, and I hear they kiss your very shadow."

"It's probably all they get a chance at," Gail kindly helped John out.

John, who was wildly adored, as a matter of fact, by most of the
fifteen-year-olds of the school, said "Nonsense!" sternly.

"Oh, do!" begged Tiddy. Tiddy was _Strephon_, the leading
juvenile, "a fairy down to his waist," and was passionately anxious
to have the whole thing go through. "If you will _I'll_ go and
see what I can yank out of my old prep school. There ought to be
enough boys with changed voices and long legs----"

"Harold Gray, you are inspired!" said Gail, for once shaken out of
her indolence. _She_ had taken unto herself the part of _Phyllis_
and was also anxious for the success of "Iolanthe." "And I myself will
go with you. I'll go work my rabbit's foot on the masters. There's
one over there who has already known my fatal charm."

"You mean the rabbit's foot, or----"

"I mean that one of the masters is in love with me. The classical
master. We'll work him," stated Gail brutally.

"If you can make him sell you sixteen boys into slavery your fatal
charm has been some use for once," said Clarence, unruffled.

Phyllis and John, who were the most serious-minded of the roomful,
saw breakers ahead, but they said nothing.

"My dear, I _don't_ think the way Miss Maddox talks is nice,"
whispered Mrs. De Guenther, who had taken to Joy as all old ladies
did.

"Don't worry, dear," murmured Phyllis from the other side of her.
"Other people don't, either. But nobody takes her seriously."

It was a light in Joy's mind on Gail. Nobody took her seriously. She
was just a reckless, erratic creature who said and did as she pleased,
and paid the penalty. Joy never felt so in awe of Gail again.

"It is a very modern school," said Phyllis to the company in her
sweet, carrying voice. "The teachers are quite in favor of esthetic
dancing, I know, and I am sure if you had two or three of the teachers
in it, too, to look after the girls, there would be no difficulty.
I will go and ask, if you like. We need a _Leila_ and _Fleta_."

"Oh, say, Mrs. Harrington, I thought you were going to be one of
those, at least!" protested Tiddy, to whom it seemed a shame that
Phyllis' golden loveliness should be wasted. Allan was _Lord
Tolloller_, the other suitor, but Phyllis preferred, she said, to
be generally useful. She was practically understudy to every one in
the place, having a quick memory and a good ear, and spent her time,
besides, hearing parts. Her real reason for not wanting to play was
that she was afraid the De Guenthers would be left too much to
themselves if she was tied up to rehearsals. Clarence worked every
one mercilessly.

She shook her head good-naturedly.

"I shall probably have to take the leading man's part on the night,"
she told him. "Oh, I forgot it was you, Tiddy--I beg your pardon.
Well, Clarence's, then. And until that awful moment, let me be happy
in obscurity!"

Joy, who had _Iolanthe's_ long, hard part to learn, and was
delighted with the idea, fixed her eyes on the opposite wall and
tried to remember what she had to say first. She was staying on by
special permission, for the opera. Mrs. Hewitt herself had written
Grandmother. Grandfather, very much pleased at the idea that Joy had
inherited another form of his own talent, had said she could stay
the full week of the performance. As they planned to give it on a
Tuesday night, this was almost a week to the good.

"Then it's settled that Mrs. Harrington and Gail, with as many more
as are needed, go chorus-hunting tomorrow," said Clarence with
finality. "Now we'll start that 'When darkly looms the day' duet.
Tiddy, Joy! Look interested, please. Bang the piano, if you don't
mind, Mrs. Harrington. Now!"

Joy and Tiddy accordingly burst into song, assisted by Allan and
John. Mrs. Hewitt, who had to be very stealthy about coming in,
because she had been put out several times for talking in the middle
of some exciting moment, slid into a chair beside the De Guenthers,
and behaved nobly. She was quite able to be around now, and Joy was
beginning to feel that she ought to accede to Phyllis' requests to
go back and stay with them a while. The children demanded her daily.

"I do hope the gate receipts will be more than the expenses,"
Clarence said hopefully in a resting-space. "The last time I got up
anything like this we cleared just two dollars. We'd formally
dedicated it to a Home for the Aged, in the blessed hope that the
directresses would sell tickets enough to fill the hall. But they
didn't. They took our two dollars away from us just the same. I
always begrudged them that two-spot."

"If you have the girls' school in it that can't happen," Gail
reminded him. "They're little demons at ticket-selling."

So next day Phyllis took Joy with her, and also the De Guenthers as
an evidence of deep respectability, and they drove over to the
school, and actually secured the co-operation of the girls and their
teachers. The thing was being so hurried through, as amateur
theatricals should be to go well, that the whole thing would be over
in two and a half weeks more. As Phyllis was personally very much
liked by the principal, there was very little trouble made about it.
Indeed, the teachers planned to take notes and borrow costumes, and
give the thing themselves as a commencement entertainment the next
June, if it proved possible.

The boys were rather harder to get, but here, too, they succeeded,
finally. And "Iolanthe" went prosperously on.

In a couple more days Phyllis, who really could get almost anything
she wanted from almost anybody, if she took the trouble, coaxed Joy
back from Mrs. Hewitt.

"You'll have her most of the rest of your natural life," she
pleaded. "And I saw her first. I think I ought to have her now."

So Mrs. Hewitt reluctantly gave her up, and she went back to the
Harrington house.

She saw scarcely less of John, because he continued to come
regularly to see them in the mornings on his way home, and generally
got in a little visit in the afternoons, not counting the fact that
he took her on his rounds with him three days out of five. And then,
of course, there were the rehearsals.

"My dear," he remonstrated with her, as they were on their way home
from one of these, "I don't want to seem to scold you, but you
shouldn't let young Gray put his arm around you the way he does."

"Put his arm around me?" demanded Joy, quite honestly surprised.
"Why, what do you mean? Oh--the rehearsals! Why--why, John! You and
Allan have to put your arms around Gail every little while, and so
does everybody else. And I'm supposed to be _Strephon's_ mother.
People have to, in theatricals."

"Clarence seems to think so," said John dryly, and Joy turned her
head to look at him more closely in the moonlight.

"And now Clarence! Little Philip Harrington does, too, and I suppose
you'll be telling me to have him stop next!"

But at the scorn in her voice John only became firmer.

"Gail Maddox is entirely different," he explained. It seemed to Joy
that if he had offered her that explanation once he had a hundred
times.

"Gail is not different," said Joy firmly. "Anyway, Tiddy is just a baby."

John could not help laughing.

"He's not the only one who is just a baby," he said. "You little
goose, he's three or four years older than you ... and heaven knows
how much younger than I am." The thought of that, for some strange
reason, worked a change in his mind. "Never mind me, little girl. I
suppose I'm unreasonable."

"Well, yes, I think you are," said Joy honestly. Then she laughed.
It was very comfortable to have John jealous, even if it _was_
silly of him. "All right, John, hereafter I will wear a wire cage
whenever I have any scenes with Tiddy."

"Better wear it when you have scenes with Clarence," said John rather
sharply. "And let me tell you, a man that will try to steal----"

"Oh, nonsense!" said Joy calmly again. "First you say that Clarence
is toying with me, then you say he's trying to steal me. Now it
stands to reason he can't do both."

She was so practical about it that John stopped in spite of himself.

"I'm afraid I'm too much given to thinking people want to steal
you," he said a little soberly.

Joy wondered for the thousandth time about the nature of men....
Sometimes she almost thought she had made John care a good deal for
her. And then again, when he rose up and defended Gail, she quite
thought she hadn't. But as for Clarence, all that was very foolish.
From the time she had seen him every one in the village who had come
near her, it seemed to her, had carefully made it plain that
Clarence was a male flirt, a love pirate, a gay deceiver, a trifler,
a person with no intentions--anything but a man who was in love with
her. He had practically said so himself, as far as she could
remember. And she had been very pleased with the idea, and enjoyed
his behavior--happy in the belief that everything he said had a
stout string to it--very much. Even John admitted that he was
amusing, and certainly he was good-looking and clever.

But she smiled up at John.

"It is very nice of you to feel that way," she said. "I appreciate it."

"You annoying little person!" he replied, half-laughing. "Joy, if I
hadn't learned that you were one of the most honest, straightforward
girls in the world, sometimes I would think you were a good deal of
a coquette."

"We're here," said Joy irrelevantly for an answer. She still wished
she knew more about men.

Phyllis' remark about being useful seemed to be in a fair way to be
fulfilled. Allan threatened to put out a sign, he said, on the front
gate, "No coaching done between twelve and three A.M." Finally he
did discover an excellent scheme, which consisted of making the
house and garden look deserted, and locking himself and Phyllis in
the library most of the day.

"It's rather pleasant," he informed her. "Since I developed this
plan I'm really getting more of your uninterrupted society than I
have since this terrible "Iolanthe" devastated the village.... Just
why did it happen, Phyllis--have you any idea?"

"Speak lower," said Phyllis. "I'm perfectly certain I heard footsteps."

"Probably a deputation from Miss Addams' school, to ask you whether
the right or left foot comes first," her husband answered her quite
accurately.

"But, Allan dear," protested Phyllis, "you know perfectly well that
if I don't go out and stem the tide they will find Joy, and tear the
child away from the first moment she's had with John alone since I
don't know when."

"This is the first moment I've had alone with you since I don't know
when," he answered, unmoved, coming over and putting both arms
around her, to draw her resolutely away from the door. "And if you
will consider carefully, my darling, you will remember that Joy is
much younger than either of us, and hence has many more years to
spend with John than you have with me. Now cease to be a slave to
duty, or whatever it is, and come sit on the arm of my chair."

"You'll never grow up!" said Phyllis protestingly; but she ceased to
be a slave to duty immediately, and sat on the arm of his chair until
he pulled her down on his lap, which he did almost on the spot.

Meanwhile Joy, walking up and down in the garden paths and
memorizing her part, had been found by John, who was trying to lure
her off for a ride.

"Nobody can find us on a galloping car," he said persuasively.

But Joy was more steadfast than Phyllis.

"I expect Tiddy over to rehearse with me," she said. "He will be
here in about five minutes. You know that 'Good morrow, good mother'
thing that he has to do prancing in and playing on a pipe. And none
of us can make out what a pipe is. Tiddy says if there's no further
light on it by next rehearsal he's going to use a meerschaum."

"You might let me rehearse with you," grumbled John. "Every time I
come near I find you dancing hand-in-hand with Tiddy or Clarence or
Mrs. Beeson" (Mrs. Beeson was the gigantic Fairy Queen) "or sewing
on some wild thing for some seminary child."

"Some of those seminary children are only a year younger than I am,"
she reminded him. "But if you would like to rehearse your part with
me you'll have to go find Allan. All your scenes are with him."

"Allan has a well-trained wife and a lock on his door," said John,
who didn't in the least need to rehearse. "I have neither. Mother
has made our house a happy hunting-ground, and at this moment Gail
and Tiddy and Clarence are putting the Chorus of Peers through its
paces. They aren't properly hand-picked. One of 'em squeaks."

"They had to pick him, because he was so grand and tall," Joy
explained. "He isn't supposed to sing. I suppose he got carried away."

"Suppose you get carried away," coaxed John, returning to the charge.

"Now, John, you know the thing is to be given in a week," remonstrated
Joy. "And I have heaps to learn, and any amount more to sew."

"Nevertheless--" said John, and suddenly laughed and tried to pick
her up. He was very strong, and she was light and little, but she
resisted valiantly. They were laughing and struggling like a couple
of children, when they heard footsteps, and shamefacedly composed
themselves to look very civilized. The choruses were all over the
village at all times of the day and night after study hours, and
John specially had to look after his decorum in their presence. But
it was only Philip.

"Seems to me it would be pleasanter," he remarked without preface,
"if Angela and I had parts in this play. Angela thinks so, too."

"Where is Angela?" asked Joy idly.

"I put her up a tree," said Philip. "She's playing she's a little
birdie. You haven't got any candy that we could play was worms, have
you, Johnny?" he finished insinuatingly.

But John and Joy had heard a wail in the direction whence Philip had
come, and neither of them stopped to reply. Angela alone and up a
tree was a picture that had appalling possibilities, and she was
certainly crying as if the worst of them had happened.

The wails seemed to come from the little pleasance where the
fountain was, and Joy, as she ran, had a vision of a tree which
Philip did climb with a ladder, and which he was quite capable of
making Angela climb, too. The drop from his favorite limb was quite
six feet.

Joy reached the pleasance first. It was Angela who was shrieking,
but the worst had not quite happened. She had wriggled herself out
of the safe crotch where Philip had put her, and it was Heaven's
mercy that she had not fallen. But her frock was a stout blue
gingham, fortunately, and a projecting branch-stump was thrust
through it, holding her in a horizontal position along the bough.
She was crying and wriggling, and in another minute or so she might
have fallen to the ground. There was a slight chance that she would
have struck on the fountain.

Joy was up the ladder and had the child in her arms in a moment. She
held her till John, reaching up from below, relieved her of the
burden, and set Angela on the grass, where she continued to cry.

"Such a lot of crying about just a little hole in your frock!"
remarked Philip to Angela. "I should think you'd be ashamed!"

At which Angela stopped crying.

"_Big_ hole!" she said defensively, with a gulped-down sob, and
began smoothing it down, where she sat on the grass.

"Angela, Angela! Oh, Angela, is my baby hurt?" cried Phyllis, flying
in from the garden path outside. She had heard the child cry, from
where she and Allan were in the living-room, and with a mother's
instinct had fled out and down to where the child was. Allan was
hurrying behind her, but before he could catch her she had caught
her foot on the root that stood out of the ground in a loop, and
fallen headlong, striking her head on the edge of the marble basin.

She lay, white and still, where she had fallen. Allan was at her
side in a moment, begging her to speak to him.

"Is she dead, John?" he demanded passionately of John, kneeling
beside her. "Good God, man, can't you speak--is she dead?"

"She's stunned," John answered. "I think that's all."

"Her heart is beating," said her husband, with his hand on it. "I--I
think it is. Oh, Phyllis, darling, won't you speak to me?"

Joy put her hand quietly on his shoulder.

"Allan," she said, "John can't do anything as long as you won't let
him get near Phyllis. He can help quicker than you can."

Allan shivered a little, then raised Phyllis so that her head rested
on his knee, and John could get at her.

"Do something quickly, John," he said. "I shall go crazy if she lies
that way much longer. It's the first time I ever asked her for
anything that she didn't give it to me--" his throat caught.

"She'll be all right in a minute, old fellow. Don't take it that
way," John reassured him. "Joy, dear, run to the house and get some
brandy and spirits of ammonia, and a spoon. Hurry."

Joy sped back to the house, and got the things from Lily-Anna, who
unlocked and found with quick, capable hands, though she was
evidently trying not to cry as she did it.

"Jus' a natural-born angel," she said. "Here, hurry back, Miss Joy.
Yas, that kind's too good to live. I might a' knowed it long ago.
There's everything, child. Now go on!"

It had seemed forever to Joy, but John assured her that she had been
very swift. They forced a little of the stimulant through Phyllis'
teeth, and presently her color began to come back.

"There, she's coming round, Allan," said John. "You see there was no
need to be so worried."

"It wasn't you," said Allan briefly, then straightway forgot
everything else, as Phyllis' eyes opened.

"I'm dizzy," she said faintly. Then she saw Allan's face over hers,
and farther away the others, grave and anxious, and she smiled.
"Why, Allan, you poor boy, I've worried you to death. I'm--sorry--dear."

Her breath came a little hard for a moment, for it had been a bad
fall; but she was nearly all right again in a few minutes more, and
laughing.

"Allan, if you don't stop looking as if the world had come to an
end, I shall faint again, whether I want to or not," she said. "You
foolish man, didn't you ever see anything like that before?"

"The world nearly did come to an end," said Allan in a low voice.

She made no answer to this in words, but Joy saw her catch Allan's
hand and hold it hard for a moment before the men helped her to rise
to her feet. She was perfectly able to walk, she declared, after
standing a moment and recovering from the dizziness that came over
her for a moment when she got up. She went back to the house with
Allan's arm around her, and the children, whom nobody had as yet
taken time to scold, following, awestruck and very meek, at a safe
distance behind.

"He _did_ act as if the world had come to an end," mused Joy
aloud. "I was frightened for a minute, though."

"You didn't show it. You were very brave and clear-headed," John
told her comfortingly.... "I don't know that I'd have behaved very
differently in his place. As he said, it wasn't I."

"Oh, was that what he meant?" said Joy. "I didn't quite know."

"Thank heaven it wasn't!" said John.






CHAPTER FOURTEEN

THE SLIGHTLY SURPRISING CLARENCE

Phyllis was perfectly all right the next day. She stayed in the
hammock because Allan made her, and she confessed to a shadow of a
headache, but altogether, she said, her accident was worth much less
fuss than was made over it. The rehearsals swept relentlessly on,
past all stemming. Clarence was getting thinner under the strain,
which was very becoming, and pleased him exceedingly.

Joy, too, was a little affected by the current of things. In all
Clarence's off moments he was either with her or trying to be, and
she could not at all make him out. If he had been anybody else she
would have thought he was very much in earnest about trying to make
her marry him. But, then, John, when she came to think of it, could
have been described the same way. A bit of Gail's careless wisdom,
dropped one day at rehearsal, gave her a clue to things. Gail had
been stating to one of the teachers, who played _Fleta_, one of
the leaders of the chorus, that she'd had four proposals that
summer. Gail's attitude of cynical frankness about her desire to
collect scalps was something to make the average person gasp. She
really meant it. She was, as Joy had discovered by this time, quite
without malice--also quite without considerateness.

"It isn't difficult," said Gail to the stiffening teacher.
"Competition is the soul of trade. If I can give the poor souls an
idea that other men want me--quite flaunt them, you know--they all
come bounding up to want me, too. It's very cheering, don't you
think, to have a faithful hound or so about?"

Fortunately the teacher was called away by the exigencies of her
part, just at that moment. Joy, who was not easily shocked by Gail,
having spent nearly four weeks in her immediate vicinity now,
lingered. She had an inquiring mind.

"Do you think that really is true, Gail, or were you just trying to
shock Miss Archinard?" she asked.

Gail laughed, her peculiar short, low laugh, that, like everything
she said and did, had something a little mocking in it. It was
curiously at variance with her boyishness. You could not say she was
masculine, but there was a something stripped away from her which
most people class as feminineness. Joy wondered if it was softness
she missed--pity, perhaps, or tenderness. She was, at least, brilliant
to the last degree when she talked, though it was a perfectly useless
brilliance. Gail's life had no other end than amusing herself with
whatever persons or things came her way. If they could be laughed
at or employed in her service that was all she wanted.

"Shocking Miss Archinard is a pathetic sort of performance," said
Gail. "Any child can do it. You doubtless do yourself. Joy, she
probably thinks your coloring too vivid for ladylikeness. Why, I'm
perfectly willing to shock her--it's more interesting than talking
to her as an equal--but I merely told the truth. You never in the
world would have robbed me of the faithful Tiddy who now crawls at
your feet, if he hadn't seen John and Clarence running frantically
in your direction."

That principle, it dawned on Joy, could be extended. Probably John
and Clarence kept each other interested. There was a great deal to
learn about men, but on the other hand, there seemed to be a few
broad elementary rules to follow--if you were the kind of person who
could be cold-blooded enough to follow them.

"But don't you ever feel badly when you think how they get hurt?"
she asked Gail a little timidly.

"Everybody gets hurt once or twice that way," said Gail placidly. "I
might as well have the satisfaction of doing it as some other girl."
She looked reflectively across at her week-end man, who was just now
wrestling with his solo, and obviously wanted to get back to her.
"Besides--if you don't hurt _you_ get hurt.... Oh, I was a
good, sweet, unselfish, considerate young thing once. I wasted much
valuable time trying to be as nice as I could be.... Then _I_
got hurt, and I decided that there wasn't anything in this
consideration game. People seem to like me just as well now I'm
perfectly selfish as they did when I wasn't."

She laughed a little again, and lifted an eyebrow imperceptibly
toward Private Willis, who promptly lost a bar of his solo.

It was a difficult statement to correct without being rude. Joy let
it go. For the first time in her acquaintance with Gail she had the
key. She felt sorry for Gail for a moment--for that far-off childish
Gail who had been so badly hurt that she hadn't ever dared let
herself feel again. She did not know such a great deal about living
herself, but she felt that Gail was wrong--that it was better to let
things come to you and hurt you, if they would, and go on living,
being a complete human being, no matter what happened to you.

Then Gail spoke again, and Joy discovered that it was difficult to
go on being sorry for her--for the present her, that is.

"When you go back to your well-known grandparents," she stated with
a frankness which had ceased to mislead Joy, "I shall make a final
effort to ensnare John. He doesn't approve of me, but that will make
life still more exciting. You don't mind, my child, do you?"

Joy laughed.

"You may have him--if you can get him!" she answered very gallantly
considering the circumstances.

What Gail said showed her something with a certainty which had been
lacking before. John had never belonged to Gail. If Joy herself
hadn't been so entirely in love with John she might have been made
surer of him. But it is very hard to be positive of getting anything
you want too intensely.

As she rested silent a moment John himself came up beside her.

"Tired, kiddie?" he said with the affectionate note in his voice
that he always had when he used the little name he had for her. "You
should have farmed out that sewing."

"Do you mean to say you took a bundle of those gauze frocks to do,
Joy?" demanded Gail.

Joy nodded. Gail made her feel, as usual, as if she had been silly
and imposed upon. The seminary girls were crowding their time as it
was to get in the rehearsals, and the Principal had stated with
finality that it would be impossible to give them time extra to work
on their costumes. The mothers of some of them had been written home
to and had responded, but some others of the girls had no one who
could or would do the sewing, so Joy had volunteered, together with
Phyllis, to run up the five or six of them that had to be done. She
_was_ a little tired.

"I shall come over tomorrow morning and hide them," John threatened.
But he smiled approvingly at her as he said it, and she knew that he
liked her having done it. She knew well enough the long hours he
spent with his charity patients, and all the things he did for the
people in the village--things he never spoke of.

She thought with a pang that was not a selfish one of John's lot, if
he did finally marry Gail. She did not think he could be happy with
a girl who would never try to make him so. His mother's affection
for him was irresponsible enough, but it was very real and selfless.
You couldn't imagine Gail married to John.

"It'll be too late to hide them," she answered him brightly, coming
out of her muse with an effort. "They're all done. There wasn't much
work on them, comparatively."

  _"Good morrow, good mother,
  Good mother, good morrow!
  By some means or other,
  Pray banish your sorrow!"_

sang Tiddy, frisking gently up to her. "It's our turn next, Joy.
Clarence says he thinks we ought to emigrate in a body to the Opry
House, and go through this thing _right_."

John moaned.

"Clarence is always having unnecessary thoughts of that sort. To
hear him talk, you would think we had spent the last two weeks going
through it wrong."

"So we have," said Clarence. "Come now--all out. We are going over
to rehearse on the august boards of the opera house, and then we are
going home for brief bites, and then we are going back for a dress
rehearsal. Tomorrow night is the night, and may the Lord have mercy
on your souls!"

At this reminder Clarence's weary company bestirred itself. The
principals had been rehearsing, as usual, at the Hewitt house. They
were to meet the chorus, it appeared, at the village opera house,
and go through the whole thing there with the orchestra of tomorrow
night; a kind-hearted orchestra which was willing to rehearse twice.

"Why any of us ever began this thing, I _don't_ see," growled
John, as he deftly captured Joy, having made a neat flank movement
which prevented Clarence from getting her. "Do you know, Joy"--he
was putting her cloak on for her in the hall by this time--"I've
seen about half as much of you as I would if I hadn't been lured
into this. The rest of this week, after tomorrow night, you are
going to have to spend exclusively in spoiling me. I'm twice as
deserving as a high-school girl, and three times as deserving as
Clarence and Tiddy. And I've more right to you, besides."

"If you want rights, sometimes you have to take them," said Joy
demurely.

He laughed.

"Is that a suggestion? If so, it's an excellent one. Consider
yourself thoroughly taken. You are not to be discovered in corners
with Clarence, nor showing Tiddy how his steps should go."

But Joy only laughed.

There was little time for discussion after that. They rehearsed
steadily, with the frenzied feeling of unpreparedness that only
amateurs can fully know, till it was more than time for the "brief
bite" of Clarence's description. Then the choruses were shepherded
over to the Hewitt house and the Maddox house respectively, and fed,
Clarence and Tiddy standing over them to see that no time was wasted.

Then they went back, and went through the whole opera. The audience
consisted of a few carefully chosen relatives who had insisted on
being there, including the Harrington children. Phyllis was letting
them see the dress rehearsal instead of the real performance,
because the latter was to end with a dance, and there would have
been some difficulty in tearing Philip away while things were still
going on. The dress rehearsal promised to be over by nine-thirty,
for they had started at six, and were sweeping through without a
break, happily unconscious that Clarence intended them to do it all
over again with all the mistakes severely corrected, as soon as they
had ended the final chorus.

"Gail, that isn't the way to do it," Clarence called to her sharply,
as she danced in with the minimum of effort, in the "Good morrow,
good mother" song that she had with Joy and Tiddy, respectively
_Iolanthe_ and _Strephon_. "Pick up your feet. You'll be down
over that garland in the corner if you don't look out."

"I'll pick them up tomorrow night," said Gail, pausing to answer
him. "No use putting all this work on rehearsal."

She was undoubtedly right. And undoubtedly the garland had no
business to swing so loose, as Clarence himself afterwards admitted.

But the fact remained. As Gail stepped reluctantly back, and
recommenced her song, her high-heeled slipper caught in the swinging
garland, and she came down flat, with the ankle badly turned under her.

The opera stopped short while the others crowded around her and
tried to find out how badly she was hurt. She sat up straight and
tried to smile-Gail disliked having or showing feelings of any
sort--but she was white with the pain, and when she tried to stand
on the ankle it hurt her, as she admitted.

They carried her off the stage in a chair, and John, who was donning
his robes in the other dressing-room, was hurried over to see how
badly she was hurt.

"Don't stop for me, Clarence," Gail ordered. "On with the dance, let
Joy be unrefined. That is, if she can. I know you're hungering to
lash your wretched infant-school forward."

Clarence remarked that she was plucky, patted her shoulder, and went
thankfully off to put his chorus through an evolution or so while he
could.

John, meanwhile, with Phyllis' help, took off the pretty pink satin
slipper, with its rosette, and the pink silk stocking, and found
that Gail's ankle was badly sprained. They did it up properly, and
Phyllis took Gail home.

"Now what shall we do?" demanded Clarence at the end of the act,
pushing the Lord Chancellor's wig to one side, and staring around him.

"What about Gail's guest, the one that's coming down tomorrow?"
offered Tiddy.

"We have her cast, anyway," Clarence answered dolefully.

"She's played Celia, the one that's a sort of lieutenant-fairy, before,
and I remember the time I had getting her to memorize her words--not
a long part at all. She could no more play Phyllis than I can."

"Were you talking about the part, or about me?"' asked Phyllis
Harrington, coming in again.

"How is Gail?" asked everybody.

"Ask John," said Phyllis. "Her ankle seems to be hurting her badly,
poor girl. I hope it will be all right tomorrow night. I made her go
to bed, and her mother is sworn to make her stay there. I'll go
through her part for her now, Clarence, if it will be any help."

Clarence stared at her.

"Can you?" he asked.

"Well, I know the words," said Phyllis. "And I don't think she will
be able to rehearse again. It will be as much as she can do to get
up tomorrow night and go through it."

John shook his head. "I'm afraid she won't be able to do even that,"
he said.

"Then you'll have to take the part, Phyllis!" said Clarence with a
sudden decision. "Never mind dressing now. Take your hat off and see
what you can do."

"Understand, I'm only holding it," said Phyllis, but she would have
been more than human if she had not flushed a little with pleasure
at the idea.

They began rehearsals again, and this time the opera went through
with scarcely a hitch. The little chorus girls had come to adore
Phyllis by this time, the boys were fond of her--there was scarcely
one of the cast whom she had not helped over or through or under
some one of the little hitches incident to private theatricals--and
the whole cast was on its tiptoes to see her through. There was a
new feeling in the thing, that Clarence noticed directly.

"By Jove, we ought to have insisted on her doing it from the first,"
he told Tiddy, his lieutenant, under his breath. "I could have
gotten twice as much work out of 'em.'

"Who'd have broken the news to Cousin?" he wanted to know.

Clarence eyed him with the detached interest that was his, and
meditated with a certain amusement on the changeableness of college
boys. Two weeks before Tiddy would have lowered his voice in
reverence at Gail's name. Then he glanced across at Joy, sitting
close by Phyllis in her gauzes, with her wonderful bronze-gold hair
hanging around her like a mantle, and conceded within himself that
it was not so surprising after all.

Sure enough, Gail was unable to bear much weight on her foot by the
next day. She insisted on being dressed and driven down to the
hurried last rehearsal on the afternoon of the performance. But she
could not walk without support.

"You'll have to take it, Phyllis," she conceded. "I shall look as
beautiful as I can, and sit in the audience and hate you."

"You ought to," said Phyllis mournfully. "I know if it were I in
your place, I couldn't bear to come down and look at you."

"I have to, anyway, on account of Laura," said Gail. Miss Ward had
come, and was at that moment getting out of her wraps preparatory to
meeting the cast and rehearsing.

As Phyllis left her to go into the dressing-room and introduce the
stranger, whom she had met, to the others, she heard Joy cry out in
surprise.

"Why, I know you--at least I've seen you, only you don't remember
me," Joy was saying impulsively.

Laura Ward, in the act of slipping off her coat, stopped in surprise.

"Why, I have seen _you_" she said. "Where was it?"

"I was posing for the Morrows," explained Joy. "You ran in and got
some fixative. They had me for their mural decorations----"

_"Joy!"_ called somebody in the tone of imperative need which
is almost as summoning as a telephone bell, and Joy dashed off,
holding up her green water-weeds with one hand and her draperies
with the other. The meeting with Laura Ward seemed a pleasant sort
of crowning to the day. She was the very same vivid, gipsy-looking
girl who had dashed into the Morrow studio for a moment, and who had
seemed to stand, to Joy then, for all the kinds of girl she had
wanted to be and couldn't. And now she seemed just a pleasant person
like oneself. Joy had caught up to her. It was like an omen.

"What is it?" she called dutifully as she ran.

She found no opportunity to see more of Miss Ward. She wanted to,
for she was sure she was going to like her. She had always wanted to.

"It's a good audience," breathed Clarence over her shoulder, as they
looked through peep-holes in the curtain. "All the sisters and
cousins and aunts have turned up. I say, Joy, the Fairy Queen was
good for ten tickets at least. There's a row of her dear ones right
across from aisle to aisle."

The moment of the play had come all too swiftly, and in ten
nerve-shattering minutes the curtain would go up. Ten minutes after
that Joy would be rising out of a trap-door, in the character of a
fairy who had spent the last twenty years at the bottom of a stream;
incidentally she would be acting for the first time in her life.
There was enough to be excited over; and yet it was none of these
things that excited her--it was the curious note in Clarence
Rutherford's voice as he spoke his trivial words in her ear.

She moved away from him automatically. She was a little tired,
tonight, of his persistent flirtation. It was all very well for a
while, but surely--surely, she thought, it was time he'd had enough
of it; and she went back off the stage, looking, though she scarcely
acknowledged it to herself, for John. She felt as if she wanted to
see as much of him as she could.

He ought to have been in his dressing-room, but he was not. He was
looking for her, she almost thought, for he came quickly toward her
with his face lighted.

"I'm so glad I found you before the thing commenced, kiddie," he
said. "I just wanted to tell you that you're not to be frightened.
Do you hear? I forbid you to be frightened." He smiled down at her
protectingly. "You say you always do as I tell you--so you must this
time. I know you're going to make a howling success of the opera....
My dear, _don't_ look so worried about it all!"

They were in a little dim passage where no one was likely to come,
and he drew her close to him, and kept his arm around her.

"Do I look worried?" she answered simply. "I wasn't thinking about
'Iolanthe' so much. I suppose I'm tired with rehearsals, for it
seems to me as if something I didn't like was going to happen....
John, I never asked you before, but I feel so little and lonesome
tonight, and suddenly far away from everybody. Please say that you
haven't minded all the naughty things I've done--that you like me,
and forgive me, and----"

"Like you and forgive you, foolish child! ... I don't know that I
like you...." He looked down at her, laughingly. "And I have nothing
to forgive you for. Why, Joy, it goes a great deal further than
that. I thought you knew how much I cared for you."

She clung to him, there in her green and white draperies, with her
gold hair falling over them. She could scarcely believe the thing
his words and voice said, but it was there to believe. She gave a
little shiver and clung closer to him.

"You--care?"

"Of course I care!"

He released her enough to lift up her flushed little face, and bend
down and kiss it. "You knew that a long time ago. Kiddie----"

It was just then that the call-bell rang.

She hurried to her place, her heart beating and her cheeks burning
under the rouge. She was nearly sure that she had won--that the
wishing ring had given her what she had asked of it. John had not
said, "You and I are lovers, and we are going to be married" in so
many words--but his voice--and his touch--and his laughing certainty----

She was very happy, so happy that she went through the opera in the
state of some one drugged to ecstasy. She sang and danced and
laughed, and helped Phyllis whenever she could in her difficult task
of assuming a leading part at one day's notice, and felt as if the
play had carried her into a veritable fairyland. Tiddy forgot half
of his lines, the first time he spoke with her, watching her
brilliant eyes and vividness, and she laughed and pulled him
through. She was like a flame throughout the performance. Phyllis
did wonders, considering the short time she had had in which to
prepare, and the performance generally was so good that even the
people who were in it were surprised.

When it was safely over, and the dance was beginning--the dance was
taking place at the Hewitt house--Joy flung herself down for a
moment behind the curtains of the little alcove she knew so well by
now, and caught her breath. She was hiding a little. She still had a
curious reluctance to see Clarence again, and she felt as if she did
not want to see John, either, for a little while. Because the next
time she saw him she would probably know whether she was right or
wrong. She was nearly certain she was right, but there was a little
shivering possibility that she might not be. There was always Gail!...

"Sorcerette, dear!" said Clarence's voice wooingly in the dim doorway.

He had changed back to evening clothes, and looked very handsome, if
a little theatrical, for the black was not quite yet off his brows
and lashes. He, too, looked excited.

"Come out and dance, Joy of my life," he said.

"I'm--I'm waiting for John," she stammered. She still did not want
to go with him.

"John's otherwise engaged," Clarence informed her coolly. "Did you
think Gail intended to go without one kind word the whole evening?
Not so! Come, or I'll think you mean to be highly impolite."

The same reluctance still held Joy's feet, and she did not like the
insinuation, but there really seemed no way out.

"Cheer up, Sorcerette, dear," he said in her ear, as he swept her
away. "'Get happy, chile, ain't you done got me?'"

She did not talk. She did not feel like it. She merely danced
lightly on with Clarence, letting him say what he pleased.

"Do you remember the first time we danced together, Joy, the first
time you ever danced with any one? I have always been so glad I was
the first man you ever danced with."

"Why?" she asked absently. She wanted to get away, to get back to
John Hewitt.

His arms tightened.

"Why? You know perfectly well why. You have got me--do you know it?
From the very first minute I ever saw you."

She smiled up at him, and shook her head.

"You make love beautifully," she heard herself saying coolly. "But
you really shouldn't make it to your host's fiancee in his house. It
isn't done."

"Don't you suppose I know that?" answered Clarence tempestuously.
"Joy Havenith, do you mean to say that you think I'm doing the
ordinary love-making one does in any conservatory?"

She smiled a little. He was more like the Clarence she usually knew,
and she did not take it at all seriously.

"Why, you do it better than most," she said. "Go on. I like it."

If there was one thing she knew well, it was Clarence's love-making.
Indeed, she had come to the point where Clarence's remarks scarcely
constituted love-making at all in her eyes. They were merely his
kind of manners, and she was a little tired of them.

"Good heavens! How on earth am I going to convince you?" she heard
him say, with a little surprise. This was not the kind of thing he
said ordinarily. "Joy, I fell in love with you, the real kind of
love, the first night I saw you. You've known it all along. I wish
you'd stop pretending not to--I'm getting tired of it. I want to
marry you--I'd marry you tonight if you said the word. I'll come
over and get you tomorrow and marry you if you'll let me. I don't
suppose you will. But I do expect to keep on at you till you do....
Good heaven, child, haven't you seen I was in earnest?" he broke off
at the expression of her wide-open eyes.

Joy believed in love at first sight, as she had every personal
reason to, but in spite of Clarence's intensity she was not quite
convinced. She looked up at him. He was white, and his mouth was
tense. And he was holding her like a vise. He was in earnest.

"Maybe--maybe you think you do mean it now." she said breathlessly.
"If you do--I'm sorry for you. It isn't nice to be in love unless
the other person is, too."

"What do you know about it?" he burst out angrily. "You aren't in
love with that virtuous citizen of yours, whether or not he is with
you. Let him go back to Gail. She's been considering one of her tame
cats for a year, and she'd about decided to marry him when you came
along and broke it up. You'd sweep any man off his feet. You and I
belong together, Joy darling. I'm going to marry you, if you were
engaged to the whole College of Surgeons."

"The dance is over," said Joy a little faintly.

"Then come over here where it's quiet. I haven't finished."

"Oh, please no--" cried Joy, freeing herself from his hold eagerly.
This was getting unexpectedly like earnest, and it had been a shock.
She did not want to hear any more about how Clarence felt.

She hurried across the floor without waiting for him, to where Allan
and Phyllis were still standing together. They had stolen a dance
with each other--they danced together altogether too much for
married people, anyway, Mrs. Hewitt said.

The atmosphere of happiness and serenity that was about Phyllis was
something Joy could always rest in thankfully. Her own moods
alternated so that Phyllis' calmness was an especial comfort.

"I--I'm so tired," she said wistfully. "Couldn't we go soon?"

"I should think we could," said Phyllis willingly, while Allan
seconded the motion with joy.

"There's no place like home," he said. "I've been considering the
fact that it was getting on for four, and that I have an appointment
at ten tomorrow, for a half-hour. Go get your wraps, Phyllis, my
darling, and I'll get John, as my share of the bargain. We'll be
awaiting you happily in a dark corner of the porch."

Joy wanted to flee from Clarence. And she looked forward happily to
being with John on the back seat of the motor, and talking over the
evening with him. She would learn, perhaps, just what he had meant
when he had seen her last. Her heart beat hard with the excitement
of the thought. She was nearly sure--dear wishing ring!

She slipped off, after speaking to Mrs. Hewitt, and saw Allan and
John moving off together to the men's cloak-room.

She sang softly to herself as she put on her cloak. She would be
with John again in a moment. He had smiled at her as he passed out
of sight. What were Clarences and such small things? This was a
wonderful world.

She and Phyllis came down the stairs together as unobtrusively as
they could, so as not to betray to the rest that they were going.
She had forgotten about Gail.

But Gail was the first thing she saw--half-lying on a couch in a
dark corner of the hall, holding court with Laura Ward. There were
two or three men around them, and they were laughing and talking
together. Joy waved her hand as they passed, and Gail looked up from
her laughter.

"Farewell, my dears, until tomorrow! Good-by, Joy. It was a well-done
opera, even if I was sitting in the audience being fiendishly jealous....
Oh, I forgot to tell you that I have learned your dark secret, my child!
I think you're the most ingenious little wretch that ever lived. Till
tomorrow! I'm going to give a tea--be prepared!"

She looked at Laura Ward and laughed again.






CHAPTER FIFTEEN

THE GIFT OF THE RING

Joy had no idea in the world how she got into the car. John's
guiding hand on her arm probably was all that saved her from
stumbling into the hedge, or trying to walk up a tree, she thought
afterwards. She was on the back seat, finally, with John by her. She
laid her head back with a little tired half-moan, and felt John's
strong, comforting arm drawing her over so that she could rest
against his shoulder.

"You poor little girl, you're all worn out," she heard him say
tenderly. "But I was proud of you, little Joy. I didn't know what a
wonderful person I had found.... Little fairy princess!"

Ten minutes earlier the note of affection and pride in his voice
would have made Joy so deliriously happy that she wouldn't have
known what to do. But ... Gail knew ... Gail knew all about it
all! ... How could men! And she had said she was going to give a tea.
That probably meant that she was going to tell everybody everything,
and laugh about it.

She _was_ tired, and the shock of Gail's words had taken all
the capacity for action out of her. She knew that if she'd had any
proper feelings she would have moved coldly away from John, and
accused him of betraying her to Gail, and demanded why he had done
it. Evidently she had no proper feelings. You can't have, if you
love people hard. She merely lay against John's strong, broad
shoulder that felt so alive and comforting, and thought that this
was the last time she would ever lean against it, or feel, as she
always did when he touched her, as if there was some one who would
look after her, and stand between her and every one else. She could
not talk.

When they reached the Harrington house Allan took the car around to
the garage at the back, himself, and Phyllis said she would stay in
the car with him while he locked the garage. The men began to tease
her for the idea she had offered, but Joy, hearing Phyllis
laughingly defend herself, and explain what she really meant, knew
that it was Phyllis' way of giving John a chance to say good-night
to her alone.

"Dear Phyllis!" she thought, with a gush of gratitude in her heart
that there was one person in the world so unfailingly thoughtful and
honest and dependable. The world did not quite go down in ruins
while Phyllis stood her friend.

"Dear Phyllis!" she heard John's gay voice say, as if in echo of her
own thoughts. "She knew I'd want a chance to see you alone a
minute.... What an awful amount of people too many there are in the
world, aren't there, kiddie? I'm beginning to think with yearning of
Crusoe's isle, and a barbed-wire fence around that."

He drew her into the shadow of the vines on the porch, and took her
in his arms. ... And he had told Gail ... oh, how _could_ men?

For a moment she stood, passive. Then the nearness of him, and the
cruel last-timeness of it all, swept over her again, and she threw
her arms around his neck convulsively, and kissed him over and over
again. She wanted it to remember.

"Good-by, my dearest!" she whispered.

"Not good-by, dear--good-night!" he answered her. "It's a long time
till tomorrow, but thank goodness, it's coming. And all the
tomorrows after that."

"No--" she started to say, when she heard footsteps, and John
released her.

"It's a very dark night," said Allan sadly. "I couldn't see my best
friend, even if he were on my own porch. Coming in, John?"

"Allan, you have the tact of Talleyrand, or whoever it was they used
to kick," responded John amiably. "No, I can't come in. It's at
least four o'clock, and I have to be up at seven tomorrow. I'll drop
in some time in the morning--you won't have a chance to miss me."

He said good-night to them all, and went down from the porch. They
could hear him whistling "With Strephon for Your Foe" joyously down
the path, and, more dimly, down the road that led to his house.

"There goes, I should say, a fairly happy man," remarked Allan to
the world at large. "Now, Joy, if any one asked you, what would you
say made him so contented with life?"

Joy liked Allan's brotherly teasing as a rule, but tonight it seemed
as if she could not answer him, or anybody. She did, not feel as if
she could talk any more, and looked appealingly at Phyllis.

"She's dead to the world, Allan," Phyllis interposed. "And if we
stay down here talking those imps of ours are going to wake up and
demand tribute."

"Great Scott, they are!" said Allan, "and the buns and stuff you
held Mrs. Hewitt up for are in the bottom of the car, locked up in
the garage--where _you_ wanted to be."

"Which is providential," said the children's mother thankfully.
"It's an alibi. They can't get any till tomorrow, no matter how much
we want to give them any."

So they tiptoed up the stairs. Joy turned off into her own room, but
she heard enough to know that no soft-footedness had availed. She
heard Philip's clear, deliberate little voice demanding, "How much
party did you bring me home, Mother?" and the hopeful patter of
Angela's feet.

She shut her door tight before she knew how it turned out. She had a
good deal to do, because she was going to have to take a train that
got her away from Wallraven before John found time from his rounds
to come back next morning. Gail might have told Mrs. Hewitt--any
number of people--by this time. She did not want to see any of them
again. And she loved them all very much.

She took off her frock with slow, careful fingers, and put on a
kimono to pack in. Her trunk was against the wall. As she worked
steadily over the tissue-paper and hangers and things to be folded,
she thought she was beyond feeling anything at all, till she felt
something wet on her face, and found that she was crying silently,
without having known it in the least.

The green and silver frock--the white top-coat--that had burrs on
it, where she had gotten out by the roadside to pick some goldenrod,
and John had not gotten them all quite off--the little blue dress
with the fichu that John had said made her look as if she belonged
in a house instead of a story-book--the gray silk she had loved so,
and worn so hard it was middle-age-looking already--the brown wool
jersey suit she must travel in----

She laid this last across a chair, and tried to go on packing. That
was the frock she had worn when John came to her in the woods, and
was so kind, and so good, and told her he would let her have her
happy month.... Well, she'd had it. And it was worth it--it was
worth anything!

But she put her head down on the side of the trunk and sobbed and
sobbed.

Presently she went on with her packing, and finished it by a little
after four-thirty. The suitcase had to be filled. When it was done
she took a bath and dressed, and lay down on the bed as she was.
There was a train at nine-ten, that got her back home late in the
afternoon, and she was taking no chances.

She slept a little, always with the nine-ten train on her mind, and
finally rose and locked her trunk at half-past seven. She put the
key and her ticket and what money she had in her hand-bag, fastened
on her cap, took her suitcase, and stole downstairs. Nobody was
astir yet but Lily-Anna, and Viola, who was giving the early-waking
Angela her breakfast in an informal way in the corner of the
kitchen.

"Could I have a cup of coffee in a little while now, Lily-Anna?" she
asked the cook, who was making beaten biscuit in an echoing fashion
that would have penetrated any but the thick hundred-year-old walls
of the kitchen.

"Why, Miss Joy--you goin' off on a ride with Dr. Johnny this early?"
inquired Lily-Anna, thinking the natural thing. "Course you can.
I'll make it right now. An' I'll tell Mis' Harrington."

Joy had forgotten Phyllis in her wild desire for flight. But she
remembered now. She would have to call Phyllis and tell her. Indeed,
she would rather tell her herself than have Gail know. She couldn't
go off this way, as if she was taking the silver with her.

She retraced her steps up the stairs, opened the door of Phyllis'
room softly. Phyllis' bed was near the door, and she sat up at the
slight noise. Joy beckoned to her, and she slipped out of bed,
flinging around her a blue kimono that lay across the footboard and
setting her feet noiselessly in slippers as she came out with the
swift, gliding step that was characteristic of her. She gathered
back the loose masses of her amber-colored hair and flung them over
her shoulder, shut the door softly in order not to disturb Allan,
and followed Joy down the hall.

"What is it, dear?" she asked. "Telephone at this unchristian hour?"

"I'm sorry to disturb you," Joy answered, "but I had to. Where can
we go where I can talk to you for half an hour--or maybe ten minutes?"

There was a glowing fire in the living-room, and, of old custom, a
long couch stood before it. Phyllis led the way downstairs to this,
and established Joy on it, drawing a chair up to it herself.

"Now tell me all about it," she said comfortingly. "And lie down,
child--you look dead."

But Joy was too nervous to lie down.

"I have to go away on the nine-ten," she said.... "No, please,
Phyllis, wait till I tell you, and you'll see I do. You would, too."

Phyllis always took the least nerve-wearing way--you could count on
her for that. She listened encouragingly.

"Gail said last night she--she knew my dark secret." Joy began
nervously in the middle. "And you know Gail does tell anything about
anybody she wants to, especially if she thinks it makes a funny
story,--sometimes I think perhaps she likes making people
ridiculous.... She doesn't care about feelings...."

"Why, you poor child, have you a dark secret?" asked Phyllis,
smiling. "Let me hear the worst. I promise to love you still."

"Oh _please_ do!" implored Joy. She dropped her head on the
couch cushions and talked with her face hidden on one arm. "Phyllis,
I--I never was engaged to John!"

The bombshell did not at all have the effect she had expected.

"I'm sorry to contradict you, but you certainly are," said Phyllis
placidly.

"You don't understand," went on Joy, coming out from her shelter.
"Listen."

So she told Phyllis, with both her quivering little hands locked in
one of Phyllis' strong, firm ones, the whole story--the story of the
shut up, youthless life among the people who came to give her
grandfather homage, and regarded her as a plaything or a
stage-property, and of how she had seen the two young lovers one wet
day, and been stirred into a wild rebellion for a youth of her own.

"I understand," said Phyllis here. "You were 'half-sick of shadows.'
I went through that myself. There comes a time when you'd do
_anything_."

"You understand?" asked Joy with wide eyes, "you with a husband that
adores the ground you walk on?"

"I do understand," affirmed Phyllis, with her mind flying back for a
moment to a gray February day in a Philadelphia library--a day that
was eight years old now. "I think I can understand anything you are
going to tell me."

But Joy went on to the day when she had hidden on the stairs to get
away from the people, and John had come in, with the light glinting
on his hair, and catching in the ring on his finger.

"I suppose I fell in love with him then, though I didn't know what
it was," Joy confessed. "And when I met you and Philip and Allan I
loved you all so, too, and it seemed so queer you liked me--just me,
you know, not somebody's granddaughter that he used for trimmings!"

"Who wouldn't?" said Phyllis matter-of-factly. "So far as I can see,
most people are crazy over you."

"And Grandfather wouldn't let me go unless I'd been engaged--or he
said that was the only reason--he thought I couldn't be, of course.
And--and it flew out. And I used John's name when he cornered me,
because I remembered him, and how kind he'd been. And on top of
that----"

"And on top of that John turned up! Good gracious!" said Phyllis.
She could not help a little laugh but her face sobered swiftly.
"_Think_ of that man's cleverness and self-control! Why--why,
Joy, no man would do all that unless he cared for you a little,
anyhow."

"John would," said Joy with conviction. "You know how he is about
honor and courtesy and doing things for people."

Phyllis nodded. That was an incontrovertible fact.

"And he's told Gail," Joy went on. "That's the only secret I ever
had in my life, so it _must_ be that. So I'm going to run away.
I simply can't stay and..."

"Told Gail! Ridiculous!" cried Phyllis. "Unless ... unless----"

"Unless there was some understanding between them before and John
was simply overchivalrous when he helped me," Joy finished steadily.
"Yes, that's the only answer.... I'm going. Please don't forget me."

"You foolish child!"

"There's another reason," Joy added. "Clarence proposed last night.
I'd be almost sure to say 'yes' to save my face abou