"Academic precision and the respectable excellencies
of-the-usual;--you have put away childish things and become a man."

"Where did you hear that?" he said bluntly.

"I heard it when I said it. You know, Mr. Drene, I am not wholly
uneducated, although your amiable question insinuates as much."

"I'm not unamiable. Only I didn't suppose--"

"Oh, you never have supposed anything concerning me.  So why are you
surprised when I express myself with fragmentary intelligence?"

"I'm sorry--"

"Listen to me.  I'm not afraid of you any more.  I've been afraid
for two years. Now, I'm not. Your study is masterly. I know it. You
know it. You didn't know I knew it; you didn't know I knew anything.
And you didn't care."

She sat down on the sofa, facing him with a breathless smile.

"You don't care what I think, what I am, what interests I may have,
what intellect, what of human desire, hope, fear, ambition animates
me; do you? You don't care whether I am ignorant or educated, bad or
good, ill or well--as long as it does not affect my posing for you;
whether I am happy or unhappy, whether I--"

"For Heaven's sake--"

"But you don't care! . . . Do you?"

He was silent; he stood looking at her in a stupid sort of way.

After a moment or two she rose, picked up her hat, went to the glass
and pinned it on, then strolled slowly back, drawing on her gloves.

"It's five o'clock, you know, Drene."

"Yes, certainly."

"Do you want me to-morrow?"

"Yes. Yes, of course."

"You are not offended?"

He did not answer.  She came up to him and repeated the question in
a childishly anxious voice that was a trifle too humble. And looking
down into her eyes he saw a gleam of pure mischief in them.

"You little villain!" he said; and caught her wrists. "A lot you
care whether I am offended!"

She looked away from him, turning her profile.  Her expression was
inscrutable. After a silence he dropped her wrists with a vague
laugh.

"You should have let me alone," he said.

"'The woman tempted me,'" she repeated, still looking away from him.
He said nothing.

"Good night," she nodded, and turned toward the door.

He went with her, falling into step beside her.  One arm slipped
around her waist as they entered the hallway. They walked slowly to
the door. He unlatched it, hesitated; she moved one foot forward,
and he took a step at the same time which brought her across his
path so closely that contact was unavoidable. And he kissed her.

"Oh," she said.  "So you are human after all!  I often wondered."

She looked up, trying to laugh, but could not seem to take it as
coolly as she might have wished to.

"Not that a kiss is very important in these days," she continued,
"yet it might interest you to hear that a friend of yours rather
fancies me. He wouldn't like you to do it. But--" She lifted her
blue eyes with faint malice--"What is a woman between friends?"

"Who is he?"

"Jack Graylock."

Drene remained motionless.

"I haven't encouraged him," she said. "Perhaps that is why."

"Why he fancies you?"

"Why he asked me to marry him.  It was the only thing he had not
asked."

"He asked that?"

"After he realized it was the only way, I suppose," she said coolly.
Drene took her into his arms and kissed her deliberately on the
mouth. Looking up at him she said: "After all, he is your friend,
isn't he?"

"A friend of many years.  But, as you say, what is a woman between
friends?"

"I don't know," said the girl. And, still clasped in his arms, she
bent her head, thoughtfully, considering the question.

And as though she had come to some final conclusion, she raised her
head, lifted her eyes slowly, and her lips, to the man whose arms
enfolded her. It was her answer to his question, and her own.

When she had gone, he went back and stood again by the great window,
watching the cote on a neighboring roof, where the pigeons were
strutting and coquetting in the last rays of the western sun.



II

When she came again to the studio, she was different, subdued,
evading, avoiding, smiling a little in her flushed diffidence at his
gay ease of manner--or assumption of both ease and gaiety.

He was inclined to rally her, tease her, but her reticence was not
all embarrassment. The lightest contact, the slightest caress from
him, added a seriousness to her face, making it very lovely under
its heightened color, and strangely childlike.

Model and master they would have remained no longer had it been for
him to say, he desiring now to make it a favor and concession on her
part to aid him professionally, she gravely insisting on
professionalism as the basis of whatever entente might develop
between them, as well as the only avowed excuse for her presence
there alone with him.

"Please.  It's respectable," she insisted her agreeable, modulated
voice. "I had rather the reason for my coming here be
business--whatever else happens."

"What has happened," he said, balancing a handful of wet clay in one
hand and looking laughingly up at her, where she stood on the
model-stand, "is that a pretty girl strolled in here one day and
held up a mirror to a solemn ass who was stalking theatrically
through life. That solemn ass is very grateful for the glimpse he
had of himself. He behaved gratefully, didn't he?"

"Very," she said with a forced smile.

"Do you object to the manner in which he expressed his gratitude?"

She hung her head.

"No," she said.

After a while she raised her eyes, her head still lowered.  He was
working, darkly absorbed as usual in the plastic mass under his
fingers.

She watched him curiously, not his hands, now, but his lean, intent
face, striving to penetrate that masculine mask, trying to
understand. Varying and odd reflections and emotions possessed her
in turn, and passed--wonder, bewilderment at herself, at him; a
slight sense of fear, then a brief and sudden access of shyness,
succeeded by the by glow of an emotion new and strange and deep. And
this, in turn, by vague bewilderment again, in which there was both
a hint of fear, and a tinge of something exquisite.

Within herself she was dimly conscious that a certain gaiety, an
irresponsibility and lightness had died out in her, perhaps
permanently, yet leaving no void. What it was that replaced these
she could not name--she only was conscious that if these had been
subdued by a newer knowledge, with a newer seriousness, this
unaccustomed gravity had left her heart no less tender, and had
deepened her capacity for emotion to depths as profound and
unexplored as the sudden mystery of their discovery by herself.

Always, now, while she posed, she was looking at him with a still
intentness, as though he really wore a mask and she, breathlessly
vigilant, watched for the moment when he might forget and lift it.

But during the weeks that followed, if the mask were indeed only the
steady preoccupation that his visage wore, she seemed to learn
nothing more about him when his features lost their dark absorption
and he caught her eye and smiled. No, the smile revealed nothing
except another mask under the more serious cast of
concentration--only another disguise that covered whatever this man
might truly be deeper down--this masculine and unknown invader of
frontiers surrendered ere she had understood they were even
besieged.

And during these weeks in early spring their characteristics, even
characters, seemed to have shifted curiously and become reversed;
his was now the light, irresponsible, half-mocking badinage--almost
boyishly boisterous at times, as, for instance, when he stepped
forward after the pose and swung her laughingly from the
model-platform to her corner on the sofa.

"You pretty and clever little thing," he said, "why are you becoming
so serious and absent-minded?"

"Am I becoming so?"

"You are.  You oughtn't to: you've made a new and completely
different man of me."

As though that were an admirable achievement, or even of any
particular importance. And yet she seemed to think it was both of
these when, resting against him, within the circle of his arm, still
shy and silent under the breathless poignancy of an emotion which
ever seemed to sound within her depths unsuspected.

But when he said that she had made a new and completely different
man of him, she remembered his low-voiced when that change impended as
he held her by her wrists a moment, then dropped them. He had said,
half to himself: "You should have let me alone!"

Sometimes at noon she remembered this when they went out for
luncheon realizing they would never have been seated together in a
restaurant had she not satisfied her curiosity. She should have let
him alone; she knew that. She tried to wish that she had--tried to
regret everything, anything; and could not, even when within her the
faint sense of alarm awoke amid the softly unchangeable unreality of
these last six weeks of spring.

Was this then really love?--this drifting through alternating dreams
of shyness, tenderness, suspense, pierced at moments by tiny flashes
of fear, as lightning flickers, far buried in softly shrouded depths
of cloud?

She had long periods of silent and absorbed dreaming, conscious only
that she dreamed, but not of the dream itself.

She was aware, too, of a curious loneliness within her, and dimly
understood that it was the companion of a lifetime she was
missing--her conscience. Where was it? Had it gone? Had it died?
Were the little, inexplicable flashes of fear proof of its
disintegration? Or its immortal vitality?

Dead, dormant, departed, she knew not which, she was dully aware of
its loss--dimly and childishly troubled that she could remember
nothing to be sorry for. And there was so much.

Men in his profession who knew him began to look askance at him and
her, amused or otherwise, according to their individual characters.

That Cecile White went about more or less with the sculptor Drene
was a nine days' gossip among circles familiar to them both, and was
forgotten--as are all wonders--in nine days.

Some of his acquaintances recalled what had been supposed to be the
tragedy of his life, mentioning a woman's name, and a man's--Drene's
closest friend. But gossip does not last long among the busy--not
that the busy are incapable of gossip, but they finish with it
quickly, having other matters to think about.

Even Quair, after recovering from his wonder that his own
condescending advances had been ignored, bestowed his fatuously
inflammable attentions elsewhere.

He had been inclined to complain one day in the studio, when he and
Guilder visited Drene professionally; and Guilder looked at his
dapper confrere in surprise and slight disgust; and Drene, at first
bored, grew irritable.

"What are you talking about?" he said sharply.

"I'm talking about Cecile White," continued Quair, looking rather
oddly at the sculptor out of his slightly prominent eyes. "I didn't
suppose you could be interested in any woman--not that I mind your
interfering with any little affair between Cecile and me--"

"There wasn't any."

"I beg your pardon, Drene--"

"There wasn't any!" repeated Drene, with curt contempt.  "Don't talk
about her, anyway."

"You mean I'm not to talk about a common artist's model--"

"Not that way."

"Oh.  Is she yours?"

"She isn't anybody's, I fancy.  Therefore, let her alone, or I'll
throw you out of doors."

Quair said to Guilder after they had departed:

"Fancy old Drene playing about with that girl on a strictly pious
basis! He's doubtless dub enough to waste his time. But what's in it
for her?"

"Perhaps a little unaccustomed masculine decency."

"Everybody is decent enough to her as far as I know."

"Including yourself?"

"Certainly, including myself," retorted Quair, adding naively:
"Besides, I knew any attempt at philandering would be time wasted."

"Yet you tried it," mused Guilder, entering his big touring car and
depositing a bundle of blue-prints and linen tracing paper at his
own ponderous feet. Quair followed him and spoke briefly to the
chauffeur, then:

"Tried nothing," he said.  "A little chaff, that's all.  When it
comes to a man like Jack Graylock going so far as to ask her to
marry him, good night, nurse! Nothing doing, even for me."

"Even for you," repeated Guilder in his moderate and always
modulated voice. "Well, if she's escaped you and Graylock, she's
beyond any danger from Drene, I fancy."

Quair smiled appreciatively, as though a delicate compliment had
been offered him. Several times on the way to call on Graylock he
insisted on stopping the car at as many celebrated cafes. Guilder
patiently awaited him in the car and each time Quair emerged from
the cafe bar a little more flushed and a trifle jauntier than when
he had entered.

He was a man so perfectly attired and so scrupulously fastidious
about his person that Guilder often speculated as to just why Quair
always seemed to him a trifle soiled.

Now, looking him over as he climbed into the car, unusually red in
the face, breathing out the aroma of spirits through his little,
pinched nostrils, a faint sensation of disgust came over the senior
member of the firm as though the junior member were physically
unclean.

"That's about ten drinks since luncheon," he remarked, as the car
rolled on down Fifth Avenue.

Quair, who usually grew disagreeably familiar when mellow, poked his
gloved thumb:

"You're a merry old cock, aren't you?" he inquired genially, "--like
a pig's wrist! If I hadn't the drinking of the entire firm to do,
who'd ever talk about Guilder and Quair, architects?"

It was common rumor that Quair did his brilliant work only when
"soused." And he never appeared to be perfectly sober, even when he
was.

Graylock received them in his office--a big, reckless-eyed, handsome
man, with Broad Street written all over him and "danger" etched in
every deepened line of his face.

"Well, how about that business of mine?" he inquired.  "It's all
right to keep me waiting, of course, while you and Quair here match
for highballs at the Ritz."

"I had to see Drene--that's why we are late," explained Guilder.
"We're ready to go ahead and let your contracts for you--"

"Drene?" interrupted Graylock, looking straight at Guilder with a
curious and staring intensity. "Why drag Drene into an excuse?"

"Because we went to his studio," said Guilder.  "Now about letting
the contracts--"

"Were you at Drene's studio?"

"Yes.  He's doing the groups for the new opera for us."

Quair, watching Graylock, was seized with a malicious impulse:

"Neat little skirt he has up there--that White girl," he remarked,
seating himself on Graylock's polished table.

A dull flush stained Graylock's cheekbones, and his keen eyes turned
on Quair. The latter lighted a cigarette, expelled the smoke in two
thin streams from his abnormally narrow nostrils.

"Some skirt," he repeated.  "And it looks as though old Drene had
her number--"

Guilder's level voice interrupted:

"The contracts are ready to be--"

But Graylock, not heeding, and perhaps not hearing, and looking all
the time at Quair, said slowly:

"Drene isn't that kind. . . .  Is he?"

"Our kind, you mean?" inquired Quair, with a malice so buried under
flippancy that the deliberate effrontery passed for it with
Graylock. Which amused Quair for a moment, but the satisfaction was
not sufficient. He desired that Graylock should feel the gaff.

"Drene," he said, "is one of those fussers who jellify when hurled
on their necks--the kind that ask that kind of girl to marry them
after she's turned down everything else they suggest."

Graylock's square jaw tightened and his steady eyes seemed to grow
even paler; but Quair, as though perfectly unconscious of this man's
record with the wife of his closest friend, and of the rumors which
connected him so seriously with Cecile White, swung his leg
unconcernedly, where it dangled over the table's edge, and smiled
frankly and knowingly upon Graylock:

"There's always somebody to marry that sort of girl; all mush isn't
on the breakfast table. When you and I are ready to quit, Graylock,
Providence has created a species of man who settles our bills."

He threw back his head, inhaled the smoke of his cigarette, sent two
thin streams through his nose.

"Maybe Drene may marry her himself.  But--I don't believe he'll have
to. . . . Now, about those contracts--" he affected a yawn, "--go on
and tell him, Guilder," he added, his words distorted by another
yawn.

He stepped down to the floor from his perch on the table, stretched
his arms, looking affably all the while at Graylock, who had never
moved a muscle.

"I believe you had a run-in with that Cecile girl once, didn't you,
Graylock? Like the rest of us, eh? Oh, well--my hat off to old Drene
if he wins out. I hold no malice. After all, Graylock, what's a
woman between friends?"

And he nodded gaily at Graylock and sauntered leisurely to the
window.

And kept his back turned, fearful of exploding with laughter in the
very face of the man who had been staring at him out of pale,
unchanging eyes so steadily and so long.

Guilder's patient, bored, but moderate voice was raised once more:

"In regard to the letting of these contracts--"

But Graylock, staring at Quair's back, neither heeded nor heard him,
for his brain was still ringing with the mockery of Quair's
words--"What is a woman between friends?" And now, for the first
time, he was beginning to understand what the answer might be.



III

She had not posed for Drene during the last two weeks, and he had
begun to miss her, after his own fashion--that is, he thought of her
when not preoccupied and sometimes desired her companionship when
unoccupied.

And one evening he went to his desk, rummaged among note-books, and
scribbled sheets of paper, until he found her address, which he
could never remember, wrote it down on another slip of paper,
pocketed it, and went out to his dinner.

But as he dined, other matters reoccupied his mind, matters
professional, schemes little and great, broad and in detail, which
gradually, though not excluding her entirely, quenched his desire to
see her at that particular time.

Sometimes it was sheer disinclination to make an effort to
communicate with her, sometimes, and usually, the self-centering
concentration which included himself and his career, as well as his
work, seemed to obliterate even any memory of her existence.

Now and then, when alone in his shabby bedroom, reading a dull book,
or duly preparing to retire, far in the dim recesses of heart and
brain a faint pain became apparent--if it could still be called
pain, this vague ghost of anger stirring in the ashes of dead
years--and at such moments he thought of Graylock, and of another;
and the partly paralyzed emotion, which memory of these two evoked,
stirred him finally to think of Cecile.

It was at such times that he always determined to seek her the next
day and continue with her what had been begun--an intimacy which
depended upon his own will; a destiny for her which instinct
whispered was within his own control. But the next day found him at
work; models of various types, ages, and degrees of stupidity came,
posed, were paid, and departed; his studies for the groups in
collaboration with Guilder and Quair were approaching the intensely
interesting period--that stage of completion where composition has
been determined upon and the excitement of developing the
construction and the technical charm of modeling begins.

And evening always found him physically tired and mentally
satisfied--or perturbed--to the exclusion of such minor interests as
life is made of--dress, amusement, food, women. Between a man and a
beloved profession in full shock of embrace there is no real room
for these or thought of these.

He ate irregularly and worked with the lack of wisdom characteristic
of creative ability, and he grew thinner and grayer at the temples,
and grayer of flesh, too, so that within a month, between the torrid
New York summer and his own unwisdom, he became again the gaunt,
silent, darkly absorbed recluse, never even stirring abroad for air
until some half-deadened pang of hunger, or the heavy warning of a
headache, set him in reluctant motion.

He heard of Cecile now and then; Cosby had used her for a figure on
a fountain destined to embellish the estate of a wealthy young man
somewhere or other; Greer employed her for the central figure of
Innocence in his lovely and springlike decoration for some Western
public edifice. Quair had met her several times at Manhattan Beach
with various and assorted wealthy young men.

And one evening Guilder came alone to his studio and found him lying
on the lounge, his lank, muscular hands, still clay-stained, hanging
inert to the floor above an evening paper fallen there.

"Hello, Guilder," he said, without rising, as the big architect
shambled loosely through the open doorway.

"How are you, Drene?"

"All right.  It's hot."

"There's not a breath of air.  It looks like a thunder-storm in the
west."

He pulled up a chair and sprawled on it, wiping his grave features
with a damp handkerchief.

"Drene," he said, "a philanthropic guy of sorts wants to add a
chapel to the church at Shallow Brook, Long Island. We've pinched
the job. Can you do an altar piece?"

"What sort?"

"They want a Virgin.  It's to be called the Chapel of the Annunciation.
It's for women to repair to--under certain and natural circumstances."

"I've so much on hand--"

"It's only a single figure-barring the dove.  Why don't you do it?"

"There are plenty of other men--"

"They want you. There'll be no difficulty about terms."

Drene said with a shrug:

"Terms are coming to mean less and less to me, Guilder.  It costs
very little for me to live." He turned his gray, tired face. "Look
at this barn of a place; and go in there and look at my bedroom. I
have no use for what are known as necessities."

"Still, terms are terms--"

"Oh, yes.  A truck may run over me.  Even at that, I've enough to
live life out as I am living it here--between these empty walls--and
that expanse of glass overhead. That's about all life holds for
me--a sheet of glass and four empty walls--and a fistfull of wet
clay."

"Are you a trifle morbid, Drene?"

"I'm not by any means; I merely prefer to live this way.  I have
sufficient means to live otherwise if I wish. But this is enough of
the world to suit me, Guilder--and I can go to a noisy restaurant to
eat in when I'm so inclined--" He laughed a rather mirthless laugh
and glanced up, catching a peculiar expression in Guilder's eyes.

"You're thinking," said Drene coolly, "what a god I once set up on
the altar of domesticity. I used to talk a lot once, didn't I?--a
hell of a clamor I made in eulogy of the domestic virtues. Well,
only idiots retain the same opinions longer than twentyfour hours.
Fixity is imbecility; the inconstant alone progress; dissatisfaction
is only a synonym for intelligence; contentment translated means
stagnation. . . . . I have changed my opinion concerning the virtues
of domesticity."

Guilder said, in his even, moderate voice:

"Your logic is weird, Drene: in one breath you say you have changed
your opinion; in another that you are content; in another that
contentment is the fixedness of imbecility--"

Drene, reddening slightly, half rose on one elbow from his couch:

"What I meant was that I change in my convictions from day to day,
without reproaching myself with inconstancy. What I believed with
all my heart to be sacred yesterday I find a barrier to-day; and
push it aside and go on."

"Toward what?"

"I go on, that's all I know--toward sanctuary."

"You mean professionally."

"In every way--ethically--spiritually.  The gods of yesterday, too,
were very real--yesterday."

"Drene, a man may change and progress on his way toward what never
changes. But standards remained fixed. They were there in the
beginning; they are immutable. If they shifted, humanity could have
no goal."

"Is there a goal?"

"Where are you going, then?"

"Just on."

"In your profession there is a goal toward which you sculptors all
journey."

"Perfection?"

Guilder nodded.

"But," smiled Drene, "no two sculptors ever see it alike."

"It is still Perfection.  It is still the goal to the color-blind
and normal alike, whatever they call it, however, they visualize it.
That is its only importance; it is The Goal. . . . . In things
spiritual the same obtains--whether one's vision embraces Nirvana,
or the Algonquin Ocean of Light, or a pallid Christ half hidden in
floating clouds--Drene, it is all one, all one. It is not the Goal
that changes; only our intelligence concerning its existence and its
immortality."

Drene lay looking at him:

"You never knew pain--real pain, did you?  The world never ended for
you, did it?"

"In one manner or another we all must be reborn before we can
progress."

"That is a cant phrase."

"No; there's truth under the cant.  Under all the sleek, smooth,
canty phrases of ecclesiastic proverb, precept, axiom, and lore,
there is truth worth the sifting out."

"You are welcome to think so, Guilder."

"You also could come to no other conclusion if you took the trouble
to investigate."

Drene smiled:

"Morals are no more than folk-ways--merely mental condition
consequent upon custom. Spiritual beliefs are radically dependant
upon folkways and the resultant physical and mental condition of the
human brain which creates everything that has been and that is to
be."

"Physiology has proven that no idea, no thought, ever originated
within the concrete and physical brain."

"I've read of those experiments."

"Then you can't ignore a conclusion."

"I haven't reached a conclusion.  Meanwhile, I have my own beliefs."

"That's all that's necessary," said Guilder, gravely, "--to
entertain some belief, temporary or final." He smiled slightly down
at Drene's drawn, gray visage.

"You and I have been friends of many years, Drene, but we have never
before talked this way. I did not feel at liberty to assume any
intimacy with you, even when I wanted to, even when--when you were
in trouble--" He hesitated.

"Go on," grunted the other. "I'm out of trouble now."

"I just--it's a whimsical notion--no, it's a belief;--I just wanted
to tell you one or two things concerning my own beliefs--"

"Temporary?"

"I don't know.  It doesn't matter; they are beliefs.  And this is
one: all physical and mental ills are created only by our own
minds--"

"Christian Science?" sneered Drene.

"Call it what you like," said Guilder serenely.  "And call this what
you like: All who believe worthily will find that particular belief
true in every detail after death."

"What do you call that?" demanded Drene, amused.

"God knows.  It seems to be my interpretation of the Goal.  I seem
to be journeying toward it without more obstacles and more
embarrassments to encounter than confront the wayfarer who professes
any other creed."

After a while Drene sat up on his couch:

"How did all this conversation start?" he asked uneasily.

"It was about the Virgin for that chapel we are going to do. . . . .
That's part of my belief: those who pray for her intercession will
find her after death, interceding--" he smiled, "--if any
intercession be necessary between us and Him who made us."

"And those unlisted millions who importune Mohammed and Buddha?"

"They shall find Mohammed and Buddha, who importune them worthily."

"And--Christ?"

"He bears that name also--He!"

"Oh!  And so, spiritually as well as artistically, you believe in
the Virgin?"

"You also can make a better Virgin if you believe in her otherwise
than esthetically."

Drene gazed at him incredulously, then, with a shrug:

"When do you want this thing started?"

"Now."

"I can't take it on now."

"I want a sketch pretty soon--the composition.  You can have a model
of the chapel to--morrow. We went on with it as a speculation. Now
we've clinched the thing. When shall I send it up from the office?"

"I'll look it over, but--"

"And," interrupted Guilder, "you had better get that Miss White for
the Virgin--before she goes off somewhere out of reach."

Drene looked up somberly:

"I haven't kept in touch with her. I don't know what her engagements
may be."

"One of her engagements just now seems to be to go about with
Graylock," said Guilder.

Drene flushed, but said nothing.

"If he marries her," added Guilder, "as it's generally understood he
is trying to, the best sculptor's model in town is out of the
question. Better secure her now."

"He wants to marry her?" repeated Drene, in a curiously still voice.

"He's mad about her.  He's abject.  It's no secret among his
friends. Men like that--and of that age--sometimes arrive at such a
terminal--men with Graylock's record sometimes get theirs. She has
given him a run, believe me, and he's brought up with a crash
against a stone wall. He is lying there all doubled up at her feet
like a rabbit with a broken back. There was nothing left for him to
do but lie there. He's lying there still, with one of her little feet
on his bull neck. All the town knows it."

"He wants to marry her," repeated Drene, as though to himself.

"She may not take him at that. They're queer--some women.  I suppose
she'd jump at it if she were not straight. But there's another
thing--" Guilder looked curiously at Drene. "Some people think she's
rather crazy about you."

Drene gazed into space.

"But that wouldn't hurt her," added Guilder, in his calm, pleasant
voice. "She's a straight little thing--white and straight. She could
come to no harm through a man like you."

Drene continued to stare at space.

"So," continued the other, confident, "when she recovers from a
natural and childlike infatuation for you she'll marry somebody. . .
Possibly even such a man as Graylock might make her happy. You
can't ever tell about such men at the eleventh hour."

Drene turned his eyes on him. There was no trace of color in his
face.

"Aren't you pretty damned charitable?"

"Charitable?  Well, I--I'm so inclined, I fancy."

"You'd be content to see that girl marry a dog like that?"

"I did not say so.  I am no judge of men.  No man knows enough to
condemn souls."

Drene looked at him:

"Well, I'll tell you something.  I know enough to do it.  I had
rather damn my soul--and hers, too--than see her marry the man you
have named. It would be worth it to me."

After a strained silence, Guilder said:

"There is a mode of dealing with those who have injured you, which
is radically different--"

"I deal with such people in my own fashion!"

"But, after all, the infamy is Graylock's.  Why oblige him by
sharing it with him?"

"Do you know what he did to me and mine?"

"A few of us know," said Guilder, gently, "--your old friends."

There came a pale, infernal flicker into Drene's eyes:

"I'll take your commission for that altar piece," he said.

"What is it?  An Annunciation?"



IV

Composition had been determined upon, and the sketch completed by
the middle of August; Cecile had sat for him every day from nine
until five; every evening they had dined together at the seashore or
other suburban and cool resorts. Together they had seen every summer
entertainment in town, had spent the cooler, starlit evenings
together in his studio, chatting, reading loud sometimes, sometimes
discussing he work in hand or other subjects of he moment, even
topics covering a wider and more varied range than he had ever
before discussed with any woman.

He seemed to have become utterly changed; the dark preoccupation had
been absent from his face--the gauntness, the grayness, seemed to
have become subdued; the deep lines of pain, imperceptible at times,
smoothed out and shadowed in an almost gay resurgence of youth.

If, during the first week or two of her companionship, his gaiety
had been not entirely spontaneous, his smile shadowed with something
duller, his laughter a trifle forced, she had not perceived it in
her surprised and shyly troubled preoccupation with this amazing and
delightful transfiguration.

At first she scarcely knew what to look for, what to expect from
him, from herself, when she came into the studio after many weeks of
absence; and she always halted in the doorway, trembling a little,
as always, when in contact with him.

But he was very delightful, smiling, easy, and deferential enough to
reassure her with a greeting that became him, as he saluted her
pretty hand, held it a moment in possession, laughingly, and
released it.

From the moment of their reunion he had never touched her, save for
a quick, firm, smiling hand-clasp in the morning and another at the
night's parting.

Now, little by little, she was finding herself delightfully at ease
with him, emerging by degrees from her charming bewilderment out of
isolation to a happy companionship never before shared with any man.

Nor even vaguely had she dreamed that Drene could be such a man,
such a friend, never had she imagined there was in him such
kindness, such patience, such gentleness, such comprehension, such
virile sense and sympathy.

And never, now, was her troubled consciousness aware of anything
disquieting in his attitude, of anything to perturb her.

He seemed to enjoy himself like a boy, with her companionship,
wholly, heartily, without any motive other than the pleasure of the
moment; and so, little by little, she gave herself up to it too, in
the same fashion, unguardedly, frankly, innocently revealing herself
to him by degrees as their comradeship became deliciously
unembarrassed.

He was making a full length study in clay now.  All day long she sat
there enthroned, her eyes partly closed, the head lifted a trifle
and fallen back, and her lovely hands resting on her heart--and
sometimes she strove to imagine something of the divine moment which
she was embodying; pondering, dreaming, wondering; and sometimes, in
the stillness, through her trance crept a thrill, subtle, exquisite,
as though in faint perception of the heavenly moment. And once, into
her halfdreaming senses came the soft stirring of wings, and she
opened her eyes and looked up, startled and thrilled.

But it was only a pigeon which had come through the great window
from the cote on the adjacent roof and which circled above her on
whimpering wings for a moment and then sheered out into the
sunlight.

They dined together at a roof garden that evening, the music was
particularly and surprisingly good, and what surprised him even more
was that she knew it and spoke of it. And continued speaking of
music, he not interrupting.

Reticent hitherto concerning her antecedents he learned now
something of them--and inferred more; nothing unusual--a musical
career determined upon, death intervening dragging over her
isolation the steel meshes of destitution--the necessity for
self-support, a friend who knew a painter who employed models--not
anything unusual, not even dramatic.

He nodded as she ended:

"Have you saved anything?"

"A hundred dollars."

"That's fine."

She smiled, then sighed unconsciously.

"You are thinking," he said, "that youth is flying."

She smiled wistfully.

"Youth is the time to study.  You were thinking that, too."

She nodded.

"You could have married."

"Why?" she asked, troubled.

"To obtain the means for a musical education."

She gazed at him in amazement, then: "I could go out on the street,
too, as far as that is concerned. It would be no more disgraceful."

"Folk-ways sanction self-sale, when guaranteed by the clergy," he
said. She turned her head and he saw the pure, cold profile against
the golden table-lamp, and he saw something else under the palms
beyond--Graylock's light eyes riveted upon them both.

"You know," he said, under his breath, "that I shall not marry you.
But--would you care to begin your studies again?"

There was a long silence: She remained with face partly averted
until the orchestra ceased. Then she turned and looked at him, and
he saw her lip tremble.

"I had not thought you meant to ask me--that.  I do not quite
understand what you mean."

"I care enough for you to wish to help you.  May I?"

"I was not sure you cared--enough--"

"Do you--for me?"

"Before I say that I do--care for you--" she began, tremulously
--"tell me that I have nothing to fear--"

Neither spoke.  Over her shoulder Drene stared at the distant man
who stared back at him.

Presently his eyes reverted to hers, absently studying the childlike
beauty of her.

"I'm going to tell you something," he said.  "Love is no more
wonderful than hate, no more perfect, no more eternal. And it is
less fierce, and not as strong."

"What!" she whispered, bewildered at the sinister change in him.

"And I want to tell you another thing.  I am alone in the world.
What I have, I have devised to you--in case I step out--suddenly--"

He paused, hesitated, then:

"Also I desire you to hear something else," he went on.  "This is
the proper time for you to hear it, I think--now--to-night--"

He lifted his blazing eyes and looked at the other man.

"There was a woman," he said--"She happened to be my wife.  Also
there was my closest friend: and myself. The comedy was cast.
Afterward she died--abroad. I believe he was there at the time--Kept
up a semblance--But he never married her. . . . And I do not intend
to marry--you."

After a moment: "And that," she whispered, "is why you once said to
me that I should have let you alone."

"Did I say that to you?"

"Yes." She looked up at him, straight into his eyes: "But if you
care for me--I do not regret that I did not let you alone."

"I shall not marry you."

Her lip trembled but she smiled.

"That is nothing new to me," she said.  "Only one man has offered
that."

"Why didn't you take him?" he asked, with an ugly laugh.

"I couldn't.  I cared for you."

"And now," he said, "are you afraid of me?"

"Yes--a little."

He leaned forward suddenly, "You'd better steer clear of me!"  Her
startled eyes beheld in him a change as swift as his words.

"Fair warning!" he added: "look out for yourself."  Everything that
was brutal in him; everything ruthless and violent had marred his
features so that all in a moment the mouth had grown ugly and a
hard, bruised look stamped the pallid muscles of his features and
twitched at them.

"You're taking chances from now on," he said. "I told you once to
let me alone. You'd better do it now. And--" he stared at the
distant man--"I told you that hate is more vital than love. It is.
I've waited a long time to strike. Even now it isn't in me to do it
as I have meant to do it. And so I tell you to keep away from me;
and I'll strike in the old-fashioned way, and end it--to-night."

Stunned by his sudden and dreadful metamorphosis, her ears ringing
with his disjointed incoherencies, she rose, scarcely knowing what
she was doing, scarcely conscious that he was beside her, moving
lightly and in silence out into the brilliant darkness of the
streets.

It was only at her own door that he spoke again: standing there on
the shabby steps of her boarding-house, the light from the transom
yellowing his ghastly face.

"Something snapped"--he passed an unsteady hand across his eyes;--
"I care very deeply for you. I--they'll make over to you--what I
have. You can study on it--live on it, modestly--"

"W-what is the matter? Are you ill?" she stammered, white and
frightened.

But he only muttered that she had her warning and that she should
keep away from him, and that it would not be long before she should
have an opportunity in life. And he went his way not looking back.

When he reached his studio the hall was dark.  As he turned the key
he thought he heard something stirring in the shadows, but went
in--leaving the door into the hallway open--and straight on across
the room to his desk.

He was putting something into his coat pocket, and his back was
still turned to the open door when Graylock stepped quietly across
the threshold; and Drene heard him, but closed his desk, leisurely,
and then, as leisurely, turned, knowing who had entered.

And so they stood alone together after many years.



V

Graylock looked at Drene's heavily sagging pocket and knew what was
in it. A sudden sweat chilled his temples, but he said steadily
enough:

"I'd like to say a word or two--if you'll give me time."  And, as
Drene made no reply;--"You're quite right: This business of ours
should be finished one way or another. I can't stand it any longer."

"In that case," remarked Drene with an evil stare at him, "I may
postpone it--to find out how much you can stand." He dropped his
right hand into the sagging pocket, looking intently at Graylock all
the while:

"What do you want here anyway?"

"I fancy that you have already guessed."

"Maybe.  All the same, what do you want?"--fumbling with his bulging
pocket for a moment and then remaining motionless.

Graylock's worn eyes rested on the outline of the shrouded weapon:
he stood eyeing it absently for a moment, then seated himself on the
sofa, his heavy eyes shifting from one object to another.

But there were few objects to be seen in that silent place;--a star
overhead glimmering through the high expanse of glass
above;--otherwise gray monotony of wall, a clay shape or two swathed
in wet clothes, a narrow ring of lamp light, and formless shadow.

"It's a long time, Drene."

Drene mused in silence, now and then watching the other obliquely.

Presently he withdrew his right hand from his coat pocket, pulled an
armchair toward him and seated himself.

"It's many years," repeated Graylock.  "I expected you to do
something before this."

"Were you uneasy?" sneered Drene.  Then he shrugged, knowing that
Graylock was no coward, sorry he had intimated as much, like a man
who deals a premature and useless blow.

He sat brooding for a while, his lean dangerous head lowered
sideways as though listening; his oblique glance always covering
Graylock.

"I suppose you'll be surprised when I tell you one reason that I
came here," said Graylock.

"Do you suppose you can still surprise me by anything you may say or
do?"

The man remained silent, sitting with his hands tightly clasped on
his knees.

"Drene," he said, in a low voice, "don't strike at me through this
young girl."

Drene began to laugh, unpleasantly.

"Are you in love with her?"

"Yes. . . .  You know it."

Drene said, still laughing: "It's the common rumor.  You may imagine
it amuses your friends--if you have any left."

Graylock spoke in a voice that had a ghostly sound in the great
room:

"Don't harm her, Drene.  It is not necessary.  I shall never see
her again--if that will content you."

Drene laughed: "I never saw my wife again.  Did that help me?  I
never saw her again, but as long as she lived I knew what she was
. . . My wife. And when she died, still my wife. There was no
relief--no relief."

Graylock, deathly white, framed his haggard face between his hands
and stared at nothing:

"I know," he said.  "I understand now.  I am here to-night to pay
the reckoning."

"You can't pay it."

"No, not the whole score.  There's another bill, I suppose, waiting
for me--somewhere. But I can settle my indebtedness to you--"

"How?"

"That's up to you, Drene."

"How?" repeated Drene, violently.

Graylock made a slight gesture with his head toward Drene's sagging
pocket: "That way if you like. Or," he added, "There is a harder
punishment."

"What is it?"

"To give her up."

"Yes," said Drene, "that is harder.  But I can make it even harder
than that. I can make it as hard for you as you made it for me. I
can let you live through it."

He laughed, fisted in his pocket, drew out the lumpy automatic and
leisurely pushed the lever to "safe."

He said: "To kill you would be like opening the cell door for a
lifer. You know what you are while you're alive; maybe you'd forget
if you were dead. I--"

He ceased, fiddling absently with the dull-colored weapon on his
knee; and for a while they remained silent, not looking at each
other. And when Drene spoke again he was still intent upon the
automatic.

"If I knew what happens after a man dies I could act intelligently."
He shot an ugly look at Graylock: "I don't know about you, either.
You're a rat. But you might fool me at that. You might be repentant.
And in that case you'd get away--if it's true that the eleventh hour
is not too late. . . . If it's true that Christ is merciful. . . .
So I'll take no chances of a getaway. You might fool me--one way or
another--if you were dead."

Graylock lifted his head from his hands: "I don't know how much of
the other debt I've already paid, Drene. But I've paid heavily since
I knew her--if that is any satisfaction to you. And since I knew she
cared for you, and when I realized that you meant to strike me
through her--I have paid, heavily. . . . Yet, if you were honestly
in love with her--"

"Is that any of your damned business?"

"She's only a child--"

"You rat!  That's what's coming to you!"

"If you say so.  But what is coming to her, Drene?"

"Continue to guess.  But I know you.  It's yourself you're sorry for
and what you'll have to endure--live through. That's what you can't
stand, and remain the sleek, self-satisfied rat you are. No, it will
make earth a living hell for you; never a second, day or night, will
you be able to forget--if you really do love her. . . . And I
believe you do--I don't understand how a thing like you can
love--but it seems it can."

After a silence Graylock said: "You don't care if you damn
yourself?"

"It's worth it to me."

"Are you willing that I should know you are as great a blackguard as
I am?" Drene's gaunt features reddened and he set his jaws in
silence.

"Don't you care what you do to her?" asked Graylock, unsteadily.
"It's a viler business than that for which you are punishing me."

For a long time Drene sat there looking down at the weapon on his
knees. And after a while, the other man spoke huskily: "It's bad
enough either way for me, Drene. I'll do what you wish in the
matter. I'll leave the country; I'll stay; whichever you say. Or,"
he said with a ghastly smile, "I'll clean out that automatic for you
to-night--if you'll marry her."

Drene looked up, slowly:

"What did you say?"

"I said that I'd clean out your automatic for you--to-night--if you
wish. . . . It can be an accident or not, just as you say."

"Where?"

"In my own rooms--if it is to be an accident."

"Do you offer--"

"Yes; if you'll marry her afterwards.  If you say you will I'll take
your word."

"And then you'll be out of your misery, you damned coward!"

"God knows. . . .  But I think not," said Graylock, under his
breath.

Drene twisted the automatic, rose and continued to twirl it,
considering. Presently he began to pace the floor, no longer
noticing the other man. Once his promenade brought him up facing the
wall where a calendar hung.

He stood for a while looking at it absently.  After a few moments he
stepped nearer, detached the sheet for the present month, then one
by one tore off the remaining sheets until he came to the month
marked December, Graylock watching him all the while.

"I think it happened on Christmas," remarked Drene turning toward
the other and laying a finger on the number 25 printed in red.

Graylock's head bent slightly.

"Very well.  Suppose about eleven o'clock on Christmas night you
give your automatic a thorough cleaning.

"If you say so."

"You have one?"

"I shall buy one."

"Didn't you come here armed?"

"No."

Drene looked at him very intently.  But Graylock had never been a
liar. After a few moments he went over to his desk, replaced the
weapon under the papers, and, still busy, said over his shoulder:

"All right. You can go."



VI

He wrote to Cecile once:

Hereafter keep clear of men like Graylock and like me.
We're both of a stripe--the same sort under our skins.
I've known him all my life. It all depends upon the
opportunity, the circumstances, and the woman. And, what
is a woman between friends--between such friends as
Graylock and I once were--or between the sort of friends
we have now become? Keep clear of such men as we are.
We were boys together.


For a week or two he kept his door locked and lived on what the
janitor provided for him, never going out of the studio at all.

He did no work, although there were several unexecuted commissions
awaiting his attention and a number of sketches, clay studies, and
one marble standing around the studio in various stages of progress.
The marble was the Annunciation. The head and throat and slender
hands were completed, and one slim naked foot.

Sometimes he wandered from one study to the next, vague-eyed,
standing for a long time before each, staring, lost in thought.
Sometimes, in the evening he read, choosing a book at random among
the motley collection in a corner case--a dusty, soiled assortment
of books, ephemeral novels of the moment, ponderous volumes which
are in everybody's library but which nobody reads, sets of
histories, memoirs, essays, beautifully bound and once cared for,
but now dirty from neglect--jetsam from a wrecked home.

There had been a time when law, order and neatness formed the basis
of Drene's going forth and coming in. He had been exact, precise,
fastidious; he had been sensitive to environment, a lover of
beautiful things, a man who deeply appreciated any symbol that
suggested home and hearth and family.

But when these three were shattered in the twinkling of an eye,
something else broke, too. And he gradually emerged from chaos,
indifferent to all that had formerly been a part of him, a silent
emotionless, burnt out thing, callous to all that he had once cared
for.

Yet something of what he had been must have remained latent within
him for with unimpaired precision and logic he constructed his clay
and chiseled his marble; and there must have been in him something
to express, for the beauty of his work, spiritual and material, had
set him high among the highest in his profession.

Sometimes sorrow changes the dross from the lamp of the spirit so
that it burns with a purity almost unearthly; sometimes sorrow
sears, rendering the very soul insensible; and sometimes sorrow
remains under the ashes, a living coal steadily consuming all that
is noble, hardening all that is ignoble; and is extinguished leaving
a devil behind it--fully equipped to slay the crippled soul.

Alone in his studio at night, motionless in his chair, Drene was
becoming aware of this devil. Reading by lamplight he grew conscious
of it; recognized it as a companion of many years, now understanding
that although pain had ended, hatred had remained, hiding, biding,
and very, very quiet.

And suddenly this hatred had flamed like hell-fire, amazing even
himself--that day when, lifted out of his indifference for an
instant by a young girl's gaiety--and with a smile, half-responsive,
on his own unaccustomed lips, he had learned from her in the same
instant, that the man he had almost ceased to remember was honestly
in love with her.

And suddenly he knew that he hated and that he should strike, and
that there could be no comparison in perfection between hatred and
what perhaps was love.

Sometimes, at night, lying on the studio couch, he found himself
still hesitating. Could Graylock be reached after death? Was it
possible? If he broke his word after Graylock was dead could he
still strike and reach him through the woman for whose sake he,
Graylock, was going to step out of things?

That occupied his mind continually, now.  Was there anybody who
could tell him about such matters? Did clergymen really know whether
the soul survived? And if it did, and if truly there were a hell,
could a living man add anything to its torments for his enemy's
benefit?

One day the janitor, lingering, ventured to ask Drene whether he was
feeling quite well.

"Yes" said Drene, "I am well."

The janitor spoke of his not eating.  And, as Drene said nothing, he
mentioned the fact that Drene had not set foot outside his own
quarters in many weeks.

Drene nodded: "I expect to go for a walk this evening."

But he did not.  He lay on his couch, eyes open in the darkness,
wondering what Graylock was doing, how he lived, what occupied his
days.

What were the nights of a condemned man like?  Did Graylock sleep?
Did he suffer? Was the suspense a living death to him? Had he ever
suspected him, Drene, of treachery after he, Graylock, had fulfilled
his final part of the bargain.

For a long time, now, a fierce curiosity concerning what Graylock
was thinking and doing had possessed Drene. What does a man, who is
in good physical health, do, when he is at liberty to compute to the
very second how many seconds of life remain for him?

Drene's sick brain ached with the problem day and night.

In November the snow fell.  Drene had not been out except in
imagination.

Day after day, in imagination, he had followed Graylock, night after
night, slyly, stealthily, shirking after him through busy avenues at
midday, lurking by shadowy houses at midnight, burning to see what
expression this man wore, what was imprinted on his
features;--obsessed by a desire to learn what he might be
thinking--with death drawing nearer.

But Drene, in the body, had never stirred from his own chilly
room--a gaunt, fierce-eyed thing, unkempt, half-clothed, huddled all
day in his chair brooding above his bitten nails, or flung starkly
across his couch at night staring at the stars through the dirty
crust of glass above.

One night in December when the stars were all staring steadily back
at him, and his thoughts were out somewhere in the darkness
following his enemy, he heard somebody laughing in the room.

For a while he lay very still, listening; but when he realized that
the laughter was his own he sat up, pressing his temples between hot
and trembling fingers.

It seemed to silence the laughter: terror subsided to a tremulous
apprehension--as though he had been on the verge of something
horrible sinking into it for a moment--but had escaped.

Again he found himself thinking of Graylock, and presently he
laughed; then frightened, checked himself. But his fevered brain had
been afire too long; he lay fighting with his thoughts to hold them
in leash lest they slip out into the night like blood hounds on the
trail of the man they had dogged so long.

Trembling, terrified, he set his teeth in his bleeding lip, and
clenched his gaunt fists: He could not hold his thoughts in leash;
could not control the terrifying laughter; hatred blazed like
hell-fire scorching the soul in him, searing his aching brain with
flames which destroy.

In the darkness he struggled blindly to his feet; and he saw the
stars through the glass roof all ablaze in the midnight sky; saw the
infernal flicker of pale flames in the obscurity around him, heard a
voice calling for help--his own voice--

Then something stirred in the darkness; he listened, stared,
striving to pierce the obscurity with fevered eyes.

Long since the cloths that swathed the clay figures in the studio
had dried out unnoticed by him. He gazed from one to another,
holding his breath. Then his eyes rested upon the altar piece, fell
on the snowy foot, were lifted inch by inch along the marble folds
upward slowly to the slim and child-like hands--

"Oh, God!" he whispered, knowing he had gone mad at last.

For, under the carven fingers, the marble folds of the robe over the
heart were faintly glowing from some inward radiance. And, as he
reeled forward and dropped at the altar foot, lifting his burning
eyes, he saw the child-like head bend toward him from the slender
neck--saw that the eyes were faintly blue--

"Mother of God!" he screamed, "my mind is dying--my mind is dying!
. . . We were boys, he and I. . . . Let God judge him. . . . Let him
be judged . . . mercifully. . . . I am worse than he. . . . There is
no hell. I have striven to fashion one--I have desired to send him
thither--Mother of God--Cecile--"

Under his fevered eyes he was confusing them, now, and he sank down
close against the pedestal and laid his f ace against her small cold
foot.

"I am sick," he rambled on--"and very tired. . . .  We were boys
together, Cecile. . . . When I am in my right mind I would not harm
him. . . . He was so handsome and daring. There was nothing he dared
not do. . . . So young, and straight, and daring. . . . I would not
harm him. Or you, Cecile. . . . Only I am sick, burning out, with
only a crippled mind left--from being badly hurt--It never got well.
. . . And now it is dying of its hurt--Cecile!--Mother of God!--before
it dies I do forgive him--and ask forgiveness--for Christ's sake--"

Toward noon the janitor broke in the door.



VII

It was late in December before Drene opened his eyes in his right
senses. He unclosed them languidly, gazed at the footboard of his
bed, then, around at the four shabby walls of his room.

"Cecile?" he said, distinctly.

The girl who had been watching him laid aside her sewing, rose, and
bent over him. Suddenly her pale face flushed and one hand flew to
her throat.

"Dearest?" he said, inquiringly.

Then down on her knees fell the girl, and groped for his wasted hand
and laid her cheek on it, crying silently.

As for Drene, he lay there, his hollow eyes roaming from wall to
wall. At last he turned his head on the pillow and looked down at
her.

The next day when he opened his eyes from a light sleep his skin was
moist and cool and he managed to move his hand toward hers as she
bent over him.

"I want--Graylock," he whispered.  The girl flushed, bent nearer,
gazing at him intently.

"Graylock," he repeated.

"Not now," she murmured, "not today.  Rest for a, while."

"Please," he said, looking up at her trustfully--"Graylock.  Now."

"When you are well--"

"I am--well.  Please, dear."

For a while she continued sitting there on the side of his bed, his
limp hands in hers, her lips pressed against them. But he never took
his eyes from her, and in them she saw only the same wistful
expression, unchanging, trustful that she would do his bidding.

So at last she went into the studio and wrote a note to Graylock.
It was late. She went downstairs to the janitor's quarters where
there was a messenger call. But no messenger came probably Christmas
day kept them busy. Perhaps, too, some portion of the holiday was
permitted them, for it was long after dinner and the full tide of
gaiety in town was doubtless at its flood.

So she waited until it was plain that no messenger was coming; then
she rose from the chair and stood gazing out into the wintry
darkness through the dirty basement window. Clocks were striking
eleven.

As she turned to go her eye fell upon the telephone.  She hesitated.
But the memory of Drene's eyes, their wistfulness and trust decided
her.

After a little waiting she got Graylock's apartment.  A servant
asked her to hold the wire.

After an interval she recognized Graylock's voice at the telephone,
pleasant, courteous, serenely wishing her the happiness of the
season.

"What are you doing this Christmas night?" she asked.  "Surely you
are not all alone there at home?"

"I am rather too old for anything else," he said.

"But what are you doing?  Reading?"

"As a matter of fact," he said, "I happened to be cleaning an
automatic revolver when you called up."

"What a gay employment for Christmas night!  Is that your idea of
celebrating?"

"There happens to be nothing else for me to do tonight."

"But there is.  You are requested to make a call."

"On whom?" he asked, quietly.

"On Mr. Drene."

For a full minute he remained silent, although she spoke to him
twice, thinking the connection might have been interrupted. Then his
voice came, curiously altered:

"Who asked that of me?"

"Mr. Drene."

"Mr. Drene is very ill, I hear."

"He is convalescent."

"Did he ask you to call me?"

"Certainly."

"Then--you are with him?"

"Yes."

"Where?"

"In his apartment.  I came downstairs to the janitor's rooms.  I am
telephoning from there what he wished me to ask you."

After a pause Graylock said: "Is his mind perfectly clear?"

"Perfectly, now."

"He asked for me?"

"Yes.  Will you come?"

"He asked for me?  Tonight?  At eleven o'clock?"

She said: "I don't think he knows even what month it is.  He has
only been conscious for a day or two. Had he known it was Christmas
night perhaps he might not have disturbed you. But--will you come?"

"I am afraid it is too late--to-night."

"Tomorrow, then?  Shall I tell him?"

There was a silence. She repeated the question.  But Graylock's
reply was inaudible and she thought he said good-bye instead of good
night.

Somewhere in the rear of the basement the janitor and his family and
probably all his relatives were celebrating. A fiddle squeaked in
there; there was a steady tumult of voices and laughter.

The girl stood a while listening, a slight smile on her lips.
Blessed happiness had come to her in time for Christmas--a strange
and heavenly happiness, more wonderful than when a life is spared to
one who loves, for it had been more than the mere life of this man
she had asked of God: it had been his mind.

He lay asleep when she entered and stood by the shaded lamp, looking
down at him.

After a while she seated herself and took up her sewing.  But laid
it aside again as there came a low knocking at the door.

Drene opened his eyes as Graylock entered all alone and stood still
beside the bed looking down at him. In the studio Cecile moved about
singing under her breath. They both heard her.

Drene nodded weakly.  After a moment he made the effort to speak:

"I am trying to get well--to start again--better--live more--nobly.
. . . Take your chance, too."

"If you wish, Drene."

"Yes.  I was not--very--well.  I had been ill--very--a long while
. . . And you are not to clean the automatic. . . . Only your
own-soul. . . . Ask help. . . . You'll get it. . . . . I did. . . .
And--all that is true--what we believed--as boys. . . . I know.
I've seen. And it's all true--all true--what we believed--as little
boys."

He looked up at Graylock, then closed his eyes with the shadow of a
smile in them.

"Good-bye--Jack," he whispered.

Graylock's mouth quivered, his lips moved in speech; and perhaps
Drene heard and understood, for he opened his eyes and looked once
more at his boyhood friend.

"Somewhere--somebody will straighten out--all this," he murmured,
closing his eyes again: "We can't; we can only try--to straighten
out--ourselves."

Graylock looked down at him in silence, then, tall and heavily
erect, he turned away.

Cecile met him from the studio.

"Good night," she said, offering her hand. . . .  "And a happy
Christmas. . . . I hope you will not be lonely."

He took her hand, gravely, thanked her, and went his way forever.

For a few minutes she lingered in the doorway connecting Drene's
bedroom with the studio. She held a sprig of holly.

After a little while he opened his eyes and looked at her, and,
smiling, she came forward to the bedside.

"It was a terrible dream," he whispered--"all those years.  But it
was a dream."

"You must dream no more."

"No.  Come nearer."

She rested on the bed's edge beside him and laid one hand on his.
The other held the holly, but he did not notice it until she offered
it.

"Dear," she whispered, "it is Christmas night.  And you did not even
know it."

Suddenly the tears he had not known for years burned in his eyes,
and he closed them, trembling, awed by the mercy of God that had
been vouchsafed to him at the eleventh hour, else he had slain his
soul.

After a while he felt her lips touching his brow. And now silent in
the spell of the dream that invaded her--the exquisite vision of
wifehood--she sat motionless with childlike eyes lost in thought.

Once more he turned his head and looked at her.  Then her slender
neck bent, and he saw that her eyes were divinely blue--

"Cecile!"--he faltered--"Madonna inviolate! . . .  The
woman--between--friends--"



THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Between Friends, by Robert W. Chambers





Produced by Andrea Ball, Charles Franks, Juliet Sutherland,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




BUSINESS CORRESPONDENCE


VOLUME I


HOW TO WRITE THE BUSINESS LETTER: _24 chapters on preparing to write
the letter and finding the proper viewpoint; how to open the letter,
present the proposition convincingly, make an effective close; how
to acquire a forceful style and inject originality; how to adapt
selling appeal to different prospects and get orders by letter--
proved principles and practical schemes illustrated by extracts from
217 actual letters_




CONTENTS

BUSINESS CORRESPONDENCE
VOLUME I


PART I
_Preparing to Write the Letter_
CHAPTER
1:  What You Can Do With a Postage Stamp
2:  The Advantages of Doing Business by Letter
3:  Gathering Material and Picking Out Talking Points
4:  When You Sit Down to Write


PART II
_How to Write the Letter_
5:  How to Begin a Business Letter
6:  How to Present Your Proposition
7:  How to Bring the Letter to a Close


PART III
_Style--Making the Letter Readable_
8:  "Style" in Letter Writing--And How to Acquire It
9:  Making the Letter Hang Together
10: How to Make Letters Original
11: Making the Form Letter Personal


PART IV
_The Dress of a Business Letter_
12: Making Letterheads and Envelopes Distinctive
13: The Typographical Make-up of Business Letters
14: Getting a Uniform Policy and Quality in Letters
15: Making Letters Uniform in Appearance


PART V
_Writing the Sales Letter_
16: How to Write the Letter That Will "Land" the Order
17: The Letter That Will Bring An Inquiry
18: How to Close Sales by Letter
19: What to Enclose With Sales Letters
20: Bringing in New Business by Post Card
21: Making it Easy for the Prospect to Answer


PART VI
_The Appeal to Different Classes_
22: How to Write Letters That Appeal to Women
23: How to Write Letters That Appeal to Men
24: How to Write Letters That Appeal to Farmers



What You Can _Do_ With a
POSTAGE STAMP

PART I--PREPARING TO WRITE THE LETTER--CHAPTER 1


_Last year [1910] fifteen billion letters were handled by the post
office--one hundred and fifty for every person. Just as a thousand
years ago practically all trade was cash, and now only seven per
cent involves currency, so nine-tenths of the business is done today
by letter while even a few decades ago it was by personal word. You
can get your prospect, turn him into a customer, sell him goods,
settle complaints, investigate credit standing, collect your
money_--ALL BY LETTER. _And often better than by word of mouth. For,
when talking, you speak to only one or two; by letter you can talk
to a hundred thousand in a sincere, personal way. So the letter is
the_ MOST IMPORTANT TOOL _in modern business--good letter writing is
the business man's_ FIRST REQUIREMENT.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a firm in Chicago, with a most interesting bit of inside
history. It is not a large firm. Ten years ago it consisted of one
man. Today there are some three hundred employees, but it is still a
one-man business. It has never employed a salesman on the road; the
head of the firm has never been out to call on any of his customers.

But here is a singular thing: you may drop in to see a business man
in Syracuse or San Francisco, in Jacksonville or Walla Walla, and
should you casually mention this man's name, the chances are the
other will reply: "Oh, yes. I know him very well. That is, I've had
several letters from him and I feel as though I know him."

Sitting alone in his little office, this man was one of the first to
foresee, ten years ago, the real possibilities of the letter. He saw
that if he could write a man a thousand miles away the right kind of
a letter he could do business with him as well as he could with the
man in the next block.

So he began _talking_ by mail to men whom he thought might buy his
goods--talking to them in sane, human, you-and-me English. Through
those letters he sold goods. Nor did he stop there. In the same
human way he collected the money for them. He adjusted any
complaints that arose. He did everything that any business man could
do with customers. In five years he was talking not to a thousand
men but to a million. And today, though not fifty men in the million
have ever met him, this man's personality has swept like a tidal
wave across the country and left its impression in office, store and
factory--through letters--letters _alone_.

This instance is not cited because it marks the employment of a new
medium, but because it shows how the letter has become a universal
implement of trade; how a commonplace tool has been developed into a
living business-builder.

The letter is today the greatest potential creator and transactor of
business in the world. But wide as its use is, it still lies idle,
an undeveloped possibility, in many a business house where it might
be playing a powerful part.

The letter is a universal implement of business--that is what gives
it such great possibilities. It is the servant of every business,
regardless of its size or of its character. It matters not what
department may command its use--wherever there is a business in
which men must communicate with each other, the letter is found to
be the first and most efficient medium.

Analyze for a moment the departments of your own business. See how
many points there are at which you could use _right_ letters to
good advantage. See if you have not been overlooking some
opportunities that the letter, at a small cost, will help develop.

Do you sell goods? The letter is the greatest salesman known to
modern business. It will carry the story you have to tell wherever
the mail goes. It will create business and bring back orders a
thousand miles to the very hand it left. If you are a retailer, the
letter will enable you to talk your goods, your store, your service,
to every family in your town, or it will go further and build a
counter across the continent for you.

If you are a manufacturer or wholesaler selling to the trade, the
letter will find prospects and win customers for you in remote towns
that salesmen cannot profitably reach.

But the letter is not only a direct salesman, it is a supporter of
every personal sales force. Judiciously centered upon a given
territory, letters pave the way for the salesman's coming; they
serve as his introduction. After his call, they keep reminding the
prospect or customer of the house and its goods.

Or, trained by the sales manager upon his men, letters keep them in
touch with the house and key up their loyalty. With regular and
special letters, the sales manager is able to extend his own
enthusiasm to the farthest limits of his territory.

So in every phase of selling, the letter makes it possible for you
to keep your finger constantly upon the pulse of trade.

If you are a wholesaler or manufacturer, letters enable you to keep
your dealers in line. If you are a retailer, they offer you a medium
through which to keep your customers in the proper mental attitude
toward your store, the subtle factor upon which retail credit so
largely depends. If you sell on instalments, letters automatically
follow up the accounts and maintain the inward flow of payments at a
fraction of what any other system of collecting entails.

Do you have occasion to investigate the credit of your customers?
The letter will quietly and quickly secure the information. Knowing
the possible sources of the data you desire you can send forth half
a dozen letters and a few days later have upon your desk a
comprehensive report upon the worth and reliability of almost any
concern or individual asking credit favors. And the letter will get
this information where a representative would often fail because it
comes full-fledged in the frankness and dignity of your house.

Does your business involve in any way the collecting of money?
Letters today bring in ten dollars for every one that collectors
receive on their monotonous round of homes and cashiers' cages.
Without the collection letter the whole credit system would be
toppling about our ears.

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE LETTER
    SELLS GOODS
      DIRECT
        TO CONSUMERS
        TO DEALERS
        TO AGENTS

      INDIRECT
        BUILDS UP LISTS
          SECURES NAMES
          ELIMINATES DEAD WOOD
          CLASSIFIES LIVE PROSPECTS

        OPENS UP NEW TERRITORY
          THROUGH CONSUMERS
          CREATES DEMAND
          DIRECTS TRADE

          THROUGH DEALERS
          SHOWS POSSIBLE PROFIT
          INTRODUCES NEW LINES

        AID TO SALESMEN
          EDUCATES TRADE

          CO-OPERATION
          INTRODUCES
          BACKS UP
          KEEPS LINED UP

        AID TO DEALERS
          DRUMS UP TRADE
          HOLDS CUSTOMERS
          DEVELOPS NEW BUSINESS

    HANDLES MEN
      INSTRUCTION
        ABOUT GOODS
        ABOUT TERRITORY
        ABOUT PROSPECTS
        HOW TO SYSTEMIZE WORK

      INSPIRATION
        GINGER TALES
        INSPIRES CONFIDENCE
        SECURES CO-OPERATION
        PROMOTES LOYALTY

    COLLECTS MONEY
      MERCANTILE ACTS - RETAIL ACTS - INSTALLMENT ACTS - PETTY ACTS
        PERSUASION
          EMPHASIZE HOUSE POLICY
          EMPHASIZE ADVANTTAGAE OF GOODS
          ESTABLISHMENT OF FORCED COLLECTIONS
          COST OF FORCED COLLECTIONS
          CASH-UP PROPOSITION
          EXTENSION OF ACCOMMODATION

        PRESSURE
          THROUGH THREATS
            OF SUIT
            OF SHUTTING OFF CREDIT
            OF WRITING TO REFERENCES
          THROUGH LEGAL AVENUES
            THROUGH LEGAL AGENCIES
            HOUSE COLLECTION BUREAUS
            REGULAR COLLECTION BUREAUS
            THROUGH ATTORNEYS

    HANDLES LONG RANGE CUSTOMERS
      SUPPLIES PERSONAL CONTACT
      SHOWS INTEREST IN CUSTOMER
      WINS CONFIDENCE
      DEVELOPS RE-ORDER SCHEMES
      BUILDS UP STEADY TRADE

    HANDLES COMPLAINTS
      ADJUSTS
      INVESTIGATES
      MAKES CAPITAL OUT OF COMPLAINTS
      WINS BACK CUSTOMERS

    DEVELOPS PRESTIGE
      GIVES PERSONALITY TO BUSINESS
      BUILDS UP GOOD WILL
      PAVES WAY FOR NEW CUSTOMERS

_The practical uses of the business letter are almost infinite:
selling goods, with distant customers, developing the prestige of
the house--there is handling men, adjusting complaints, collecting
money, keeping in touch scarcely an activity of modern business that
cannot be carried on by letter_

       *       *       *       *       *

Do you find it necessary to adjust the complaint of a client or a
customer? A diplomatic letter at the first intimation of
dissatisfaction will save many an order from cancellation. It will
soothe ruffled feelings, wipe out imagined grievances and even lay
the basis for firmer relations in the future.

So you may run the gamut of your own business or any other. At every
point that marks a transaction between concerns or individuals, you
will find some way in which the letter rightly used, can play a
profitable part.

There is a romance about the postage stamp as fascinating as any
story--not the romance contained in sweet scented notes, but the
romance of big things accomplished; organizations developed,
businesses built, great commercial houses founded.

In 1902 a couple of men secured the agency for a firm manufacturing
extracts and toilet preparations. They organized an agency force
through letters and within a year the manufacturers were swamped
with business, unable to fill the orders.

Then the men added one or two other lines, still operating from one
small office. Soon a storage room was added; then a packing and
shipping room was necessary and additional warehouse facilities were
needed. Space was rented in the next building; a couple of rooms
were secured across the street, and one department was located over
the river--wherever rooms could be found.

Next the management decided to issue a regular mail-order catalogue
and move to larger quarters where the business could be centered
under one roof. A floor in a new building was rented--a whole floor.
The employees thought it was extravagance; the managers were
dubious, for when the business was gathered in from seven different
parts of the city, there was still much vacant floor space.

One year later it was again necessary to rent outside space. The
management then decided to erect a permanent home and today the
business occupies two large buildings and the firm is known all over
the country as one of the big factors of mail-order merchandising.

It has all been done by postage stamps.

When the financial world suddenly tightened up in 1907 a wholesale
dry goods house found itself hard pressed for ready money. The
credit manager wrote to the customers and begged them to pay up at
once. But the retailers were scared and doggedly held onto their
cash. Even the merchants who were well rated and whose bills were
due, played for time.

The house could not borrow the money it needed and almost in despair
the president sat down and wrote a letter to his customers; it was
no routine collection letter, but a heart-to-heart talk, telling
them that if they did not come to his rescue the business that he
had spent thirty years in building would be wiped out and he would
be left penniless because he could not collect _his_ money. He had
the bookkeepers go through every important account and they found
that there was hardly a customer who had not, for one reason or
another, at some time asked for an extension of credit. And to each
customer the president dictated a personal paragraph, reminding him
of the time accommodation had been asked and granted. Then the
appeal was made straight from the heart: "Now, when I need help, not
merely to tide me over a few weeks but to save me from ruin, will
you not strain a point, put forth some special effort to help me
out, just as I helped you at such and such a time?"

"If we can collect $20,000," he had assured his associates, "I know
we can borrow $20,000, and that will probably pull us through."

The third day after his letters went out several checks came in; the
fourth day the cashier banked over $22,000; within ten days $68,000
had come in, several merchants paying up accounts that were not yet
due; a few even offered to "help out the firm."

The business was saved--by postage stamps.

Formality to the winds; stereotyped phrases were forgotten;
traditional appeals were discarded and a plain talk, man-to-man,
just as if the two were closeted together in an office brought
hundreds of customers rushing to the assistance of the house with
which they had been dealing.

Sixty-eight thousand dollars collected within two weeks when money
was almost invisible--and by letter. Truly there is romance in the
postage stamp.

Twenty-five years ago a station agent wrote to other agents along
the line about a watch that he could sell them at a low price. When
an order came in he bought a watch, sent it to the customer and used
his profit to buy stamps for more letters. After a while he put in
each letter a folder advertising charms, fobs and chains; then
rings, cuff buttons and a general line of jewelry was added. It soon
became necessary to give up his position on the railroad and devote
all his time to the business and one line after another was added to
the stock he carried.

Today the house that started in this way has customers in the
farthermost parts of civilization; it sells every conceivable
product from toothpicks to automobiles and knockdown houses. Two
thousand people do nothing but handle mail; over 22,000 orders are
received and filled every day; 36,000 men and women are on the
payroll.

It has all been done by mail. Postage stamps bring to the house
every year business in excess of $65,000,000.

One day the head correspondent in an old established wholesale house
in the east had occasion to go through some files of ten and twelve
years before. He was at once struck with the number of names with
which he was not familiar--former customers who were no longer
buying from the house. He put a couple of girls at work making a
list of these old customers and checking them up in the mercantile
directories to see how many were still in business.

Then he sat down and wrote to them, asking as a personal favor that
they write and tell him why they no longer bought of the house;
whether its goods or service had not been satisfactory, whether some
complaint had not been adjusted. There must be a reason, would they
not tell him personally just what it was?

Eighty per cent of the men addressed replied to this personal
appeal; many had complaints that were straightened out; others had
drifted to other houses for no special reason. The majority were
worked back into the "customer" files. Three years later the
accounting department checked up the orders received from these
re-found customers. The gross was over a million dollars. The
business all sprung from one letter.

Yes, there is romance in the postage stamp; there is a latent power
in it that few men realize--a power that will remove commercial
mountains and erect industrial pyramids.




The ADVANTAGES Of Doing
_Business_ By Letter

PART I--PREPARING TO WRITE THE LETTER--CHAPTER 2


_Letters have their limitations and their advantages. The
correspondent who is anxious to secure the best results should
recognize the inherent weakness of a letter due to its lack of
personality in order to reinforce these places. Equally essential is
an understanding of the letter's great_ NATURAL ADVANTAGES _so that
the writer can turn them to account--make the most of them. It
possesses qualities the personal representative lacks and this
chapter tells how to take advantage of them_

       *       *       *       *       *

While it is necessary to know how to write a strong letter, it is
likewise essential to understand both the limitations of letters and
their advantages. It is necessary, on the one hand, to take into
account the handicaps that a letter has in competition with a
personal solicitor. Offsetting this are many distinct advantages the
letter has over the salesman. To write a really effective letter, a
correspondent must thoroughly understand its carrying capacity.

A salesman often wins an audience and secures an order by the force
of a dominating personality. The letter can minimize this handicap
by an attractive dress and force attention through the impression of
quality. The letter lacks the animation of a person but there can be
an individuality about its appearance that will assure a respectful
hearing for its message.

The personal representative can time his call, knowing that under
certain circumstances he may find his man in a favorable frame of
mind, or even at the door he may decide it is the part of diplomacy
to withdraw and wait a more propitious hour. The letter cannot back
out of the prospect's office; it cannot shape its canvass to meet
the needs of the occasion or make capital out of the mood or the
comments of the prospect.

The correspondent cannot afford to ignore these handicaps under
which his letter enters the prospect's office. Rather, he should
keep these things constantly in mind in order to overcome the
obstacles just as far as possible, reinforcing the letter so it will
be prepared for any situation it may encounter at its destination.
Explanations must be so clear that questions are unnecessary;
objections must be anticipated and answered in advance; the fact
that the recipient is busy must be taken into account and the
message made just as brief as possible; the reader must be treated
with respect and diplomatically brought around to see the
relationship between _his_ needs and _your_ product.

But while the letter has these disadvantages, it possesses qualities
that the salesman lacks. The letter, once it lies open before the
man to whom you wish to talk, is your counterpart, speaking in your
words just as you would talk to him if you were in his office or in
his home. That is, the _right_ letter. It reflects your personality
and not that of some third person who may be working for a
competitor next year.

The letter, if clearly written, will not misrepresent your
proposition; its desire for a commission or for increased sales will
not lead it to make exaggerated statements or unauthorized promises.
The letter will reach the prospect just as it left your desk, with
the same amount of enthusiasm and freshness. It will not be tired
and sleepy because it had to catch a midnight train; it will not be
out of sorts because of the poor coffee and the cold potatoes served
at the Grand hotel for breakfast; it will not be peeved because it
lost a big sale across the street; it will not be in a hurry to make
the 11:30 local; it will not be discouraged because a competitor is
making inroads into the territory.

You have the satisfaction of knowing that the letter is immune from
these ills and weaknesses to which flesh is heir and will deliver
your message faithfully, promptly, loyally. It will not have to
resort to clever devices to get past the glass door, nor will it be
told in frigid tones by the guard on watch to call some other day.
The courtesy of the mail will take your letter to the proper
authority. If it goes out in a dignified dress and presents its
proposition concisely it is assured of a considerate hearing.

It will deliver its message just as readily to some Garcia in the
mountains of Cuba as to the man in the next block. The salesman who
makes a dozen calls a day is doing good work; letters can present
your proposition to a hundred thousand prospects on the one
forenoon. They can cover the same territory a week later and call
again and again just as often as you desire. You cannot time the
letter's call to the hour but you can make sure it reaches the
prospect on the day of the week and the time of the month when he is
most likely to give it consideration. You know exactly the kind of
canvass every letter is making; you know that every call on the list
is made.

The salesman must look well to his laurels if he hopes to compete
successfully with the letter as a selling medium. Put the points of
advantage in parallel columns and the letter has the best of it;
consider, in addition, the item of expense and it is no wonder
letters are becoming a greater factor in business.

The country over, there are comparatively few houses that appreciate
the full possibilities of doing business by mail. Not many
appreciate that certain basic principles underlie letter writing,
applicable alike to the beginner who is just struggling to get a
foothold and to the great mail-order house with its tons of mail
daily. They are not mere theories; they are fundamental principles
that have been put to the test, proved out in thousands of letters
and on an infinite number of propositions.

The correspondent who is ambitious to do by mail what others do by
person, must understand these principles and how to apply them. He
must know the order and position of the essential elements; he must
take account of the letter's impersonal character and make the most
of its natural advantages.

Writing letters that pull is not intuition; it is an art that anyone
can acquire. But this is the point: _it must be acquired_. It will
not come to one without effort on his part. Fundamental principles
must be understood; ways of presenting a proposition must be
studied, various angles must be tried out; the effectiveness of
appeals must be tested; new schemes for getting attention and
arousing interest must be devised; clear, concise description and
explanation must come from continual practice; methods for getting
the prospect to order now must be developed. It is not a game of
chance; there is nothing mysterious about it--nothing impossible, it
is solely a matter of study, hard work and the intelligent
application of proved-up principles.




_Gathering_ MATERIAL And _Picking_
Out TALKING Points

PART I--PREPARING TO WRITE THE LETTER--CHAPTER 3


_Arguments--prices, styles, terms, quality or whatever they may
be--are effective only when used on the right "prospect" at the
right time. The correspondent who has some message of value to carry
gathers together a mass of "raw material"--facts, figures and
specifications on which to base his arguments--and then he selects
the particular talking points that will appeal to his prospect. By
systematic tests, the relative values of various arguments may be
determined almost to a scientific nicety. How to gather and classify
this material and how to determine what points are most effective is
the subject in this chapter_

       *       *       *       *       *

An architect can sit down and design your house on paper, showing
its exact proportions, the finish of every room, the location of
every door and window. He can give specific instructions for
building your house but before you can begin operations you have got
to get together the brick and mortar and lumber--all the material
used in its construction.

And so the correspondent-architect can point out the way to write a
letter: how to begin, how to work up interest, how to present
argument, how to introduce salesmanship, how to work in a clincher
and how to close, but when you come to writing the letter that
applies to your particular business you have first to gather the
material. And just as you select cement or brick or lumber according
to the kind of house you want to build, so the correspondent must
gather the particular kind of material he wants for his letter,
classify it and arrange it so that the best can be quickly selected.

The old school of correspondents--and there are many graduates still
in business--write solely from their own viewpoint. Their letters
are focused on "our goods," "our interests" and "our profits." But
the new school of letter writers keep their own interests in the
background. Their sole aim is to focus on the viewpoint of the
reader; find the subjects in which he is interested, learn the
arguments that will appeal to him, bear down on the persuasion that
will induce him to act at once.

And so the successful correspondent should draw arguments and
talking points from many sources; from the house, from the customer,
from competitors, from the news of the day from his knowledge of
human nature.

"What shall I do first?" asked a new salesman of the general
manager.

"Sell yourself," was the laconic reply, and every salesman and
correspondent in the country could well afford to take this advice
to heart.

Sell yourself; answer every objection that you can think of, test
out the proposition from every conceivable angle; measure it by
other similar products; learn its points of weakness and of
superiority, know its possibilities and its limitations. Convince
yourself; sell yourself, and then you will be able to sell others.

The first source of material for the correspondent is in the house
itself. His knowledge must run back to the source of raw materials:
the kinds of materials used, where they come from, the quality and
the quantity required, the difficulties in obtaining them, the
possibilities of a shortage, all the problems of mining or gathering
the raw material and getting it from its source to the plant--a vast
storehouse of talking points.

Then it is desirable to have a full knowledge of the processes of
manufacture; the method of handling work in the factory, the labor
saving appliances used, the new processes that have been perfected,
the time required in turning out goods, the delays that are liable
to occur--these are all pertinent and may furnish the strongest kind
of selling arguments. And it is equally desirable to have inside
knowledge of the methods in the sales department, in the receiving
room and the shipping room. It is necessary for the correspondent to
know the firm's facilities for handling orders; when deliveries can
be promised, what delays are liable to occur, how goods are packed,
the condition in which they are received by the customer, the
probable time required in reaching the customer.

Another nearby source of information is the status of the customer's
account; whether he is slow pay or a man who always discounts his
bills. It is a very important fact for the correspondent to know
whether the records show an increasing business or a business that
barely holds its own.

Then a most important source--by many considered the most valuable
material of all--is the customer himself. It may be laid down as a
general proposition that the more the correspondent knows about the
man to whom he is writing, the better appeal he can make.

In the first place, he wants to know the size and character of the
customer's business. He should know the customer's location, not
merely as a name that goes on the envelope, but some pertinent facts
regarding the state or section. If he can find out something
regarding a customer's standing and his competition, it will help
him to understand his problems.

Fortunate is the correspondent who knows something regarding the
personal peculiarities of the man to whom he is writing. If he
understands his hobbies, his cherished ambition, his home life, he
can shape his appeal in a more personal way. It is comparatively
easy to secure such information where salesmen are calling on the
trade, and many large houses insist upon their representatives'
making out very complete reports, giving a mass of detailed
information that will be valuable to the correspondent.

Then there is a third source of material, scarcely less important
than the study of the house and the customer, and that is a study of
the competitors--other firms who are in the same line of business
and going after the same trade. The broad-gauged correspondent never
misses an opportunity to learn more about the goods of competing
houses--the quality of their products, the extent of their lines,
their facilities for handling orders, the satisfaction that their
goods are giving, the terms on which they are sold and which
managers are hustling and up to the minute in their methods.

The correspondent can also find information, inspiration and
suggestion from the advertising methods of other concerns--not
competitors but firms in a similar line.

Then there are various miscellaneous sources of information. The
majority of correspondents study diligently the advertisements in
general periodicals; new methods and ideas are seized upon and filed
in the "morgue" for further reference.

Where a house travels a number of men, the sales department is an
excellent place from which to draw talking points. Interviewing
salesmen as they come in from trips and so getting direct
information, brings out talking points which are most helpful as are
those secured by shorthand reports of salesmen's conventions.

Many firms get convincing arguments by the use of detailed forms
asking for reports on the product. One follow-up writer gets
valuable pointers from complaints which he terms "reverse" or
"left-handed" talking points.

Some correspondents become adept in coupling up the news of the day
with their products. A thousand and one different events may be
given a twist to connect the reader's interest with the house
products and supply a reason for "buying now." The fluctuation in
prices of raw materials, drought, late seasons, railway rates,
fires, bumper crops, political discussions, new inventions,
scientific achievements--there is hardly a happening that the clever
correspondent, hard pressed for new talking points, cannot work into
a sales letter as a reason for interesting the reader in his goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOURCES OF MATERIAL:

                                               / 1. SOURCES
                        /   1. RAW MATERIALS --| 2. QUALITY
                        |                      | 3. SUPPLY
                        |                      \ 4. PRICE
                        |
                        |                      / 1. CAPACITY OF
                        PLANT                  |    PLANT
                        |                      | 2. NEW EQUIPMENT
                        |   2. PROCESSES OF  --| 3. TIME SAVING
                        |      MANUFACTURE     |    DEVICES
                        |                      \ 4. IMPROVED METHODS
   /- 1. THE HOUSE------|
   |                    |                      / 1. METHODS OF
   |                    |                      |    SALESMEN
   |                    |   3. KNOWLEDGE OF  --| 2. POLICY OF
   |                    |      DEPARTMENTS     |    CREDIT DEPT.
   |                    |                      | 3. CONDITIONS IN
   |                    |                      |    RECEIVING &
   |                    |                      \    SHIPPING DEPTS.
   |                    |
   |                    |   4. KNOWLEDGE OF
   |                    |      COSTS
   |                    |
   |                    |   5. STATUS OF       / 1. CREDIT
   |                    |      CUSTOMER'S    --|    STANDING
   |                    |      ACCOUNT         | 2. GROWING
   |                    |                      \    BUSINESS
   |                    |
   |                    |                      / 1. OLD LETTERS
   |                    |                      | 2. ADVERTISEMENTS
   |                    |   6. DOCUMENTS     --| 3. BOOKLETS,
   |                    |                      |    CIRCULARS, ETC.
   |                    |                      \ 4. TESTIMONIALS
   |                    |
   |                    |                      / 1. ACQUAINTANCES
   |                    |                      |    OF OFFICERS
   |                    \   7. PERSONNEL OF  --| 2. INTERESTS &
   |                           FIRM            |    RELATIONS
   |                                           \    OF OFFICERS
   |
   |                    /   1. CHARACTER OR
   |- 2. THE CUSTOMERS--|      KIND OF BUSINESS
   |                    |
   |                    |   2. SIZE OF BUSINESS
   |                    |
   |                    |   3. LENGTH OF TIME
   |                    |      IN BUSINESS
   |                    |
SOURCES                 |   4. LOCATION & LOCAL
  OF                    |      CONDITIONS
MATERIAL                |
   |                    |   5. COMPETITION
   |                    |
   |                    |   6. STANDING WITH
   |                    |      CUSTOMERS
   |                    |
   |                    |   7. METHODS & POLICIES
   |                    |
   |                    |   8. HOBBIES & PERSONAL
   |                    \      PECULIARITIES
   |
   |                                           / 1. QUALITY
   |                    /   1. GOODS         --| 2. EXTENT OF LINES
   |                    |                      \ 3. NEW LINES
   |                    |
   |                    |                      / 1. TERMS
   |                    |   2. POLICIES      --| 2. TREATMENT OF
   |                    |                      \    CUSTOMERS
   |                    |
   |- 3. COMPETITORS----|                      / 1. SIZE OF PLANT
   |                    |   3. CAPACITY      --| 2. EQUIPMENT
   |                    |                      | 3. FACILITIES FOR
   |                    |                      \    HANDLING ORDER
   |                    |
   |                    |                      / 1. NEW CAMPAIGNS
   |                    \   4. METHODS       --| 2. ADVERTISING
   |                                           \ 3. AGGRESSIVENESS
   |
   |                    /   1. METHODS
   |                    |
   |- 4. OTHER METHODS--|   2. ADVERTISING
   |     (NOT           |
   |     COMPETITORS)   \   3. SALES CAMPAIGNS
   |
   |                                           / 1. METHODS
   |                    /   1. SUPPLY HOUSES --\ 2. CAPACITY
   |                    |
   |                    |   2. GENERAL MARKET
   \- 5. MISCELLANEOUS--|      CONDITIONS
                        |
                        |   3. CURRENT EVENTS
                        |
             