e,
as his absence might have the most terrible results. I mentioned also my
interview with Susanna, and the manuscript she had left in my hands.
After having sent off the letter, I did not go out of the house all day,
and pondered all the time on what might be happening at the Ratsches'. I
could not make up my mind to go there myself. I could not help noticing
though that my aunt was in a continual fidget; she ordered pastilles to
be burnt every minute, and dealt the game of patience, known as 'the
traveller,' which is noted as a game in which one can never succeed. The
visit of an unknown lady, and at such a late hour, had not been kept
secret from her: her imagination at once pictured a yawning abyss on the
edge of which I was standing, and she was continually sighing and
moaning and murmuring French sentences, quoted from a little manuscript
book entitled _Extraits de Lecture_. In the evening I found on the
little table at my bedside the treatise of De Girando, laid open at the
chapter: On the evil influence of the passions. This book had been put
in my room, at my aunt's instigation of course, by the elder of her
companions, who was called in the household Amishka, from her
resemblance to a little poodle of that name, and was a very sentimental,
not to say romantic, though elderly, maiden lady. All the following day
was spent in anxious expectation of Fustov's coming, of a letter from
him, of news from the Ratsches' house... though on what ground could
they have sent to me? Susanna would be more likely to expect me to visit
her.... But I positively could not pluck up courage to see her without
first talking to Fustov. I recalled every expression in my letter to
him.... I thought it was strong enough; at last, late in the evening, he
appeared.


XIX


He came into my room with his habitual, rapid, but deliberate step. His
face struck me as pale, and though it showed traces of the fatigue of
the journey, there was an expression of astonishment, curiosity, and
dissatisfaction--emotions of which he had little experience as a rule. I
rushed up to him, embraced him, warmly thanked him for obeying me, and
after briefly describing my conversation with Susanna, handed him the
manuscript. He went off to the window, to the very window in which
Susanna had sat two days before, and without a word to me, he fell to
reading it. I at once retired to the opposite corner of the room, and
for appearance' sake took up a book; but I must own I was stealthily
looking over the edge of the cover all the while at Fustov. At first he
read rather calmly, and kept pulling with his left hand at the down on
his lip; then he let his hand drop, bent forward and did not stir again.
His eyes seemed to fly along the lines and his mouth slightly opened. At
last he finished the manuscript, turned it over, looked round, thought a
little, and began reading it all through a second time from beginning to
end. Then he got up, put the manuscript in his pocket and moved towards
the door; but he turned round and stopped in the middle of the room.

'Well, what do you think?' I began, not waiting for him to speak.

'I have acted wrongly towards her,' Fustov declared thickly. 'I have
behaved... rashly, unpardonably, cruelly. I believed that... Viktor--'

'What!' I cried; 'that Viktor whom you despise so! But what could he say
to you?'

Fustov crossed his arms and stood obliquely to me. He was ashamed, I saw
that.

'Do you remember,' he said with some effort, 'that... Viktor alluded
to... a pension. That unfortunate word stuck in my head. It's the cause
of everything. I began questioning him.... Well, and he--'

'What did he say?'

'He told me that the old man... what's his name?... Koltovsky, had
allowed Susanna that pension because... on account of... well, in fact,
by way of damages.'

I flung up my hands.

'And you believed him?'

Fustov nodded.

'Yes! I believed him.... He said, too, that with the young one... In
fact, my behaviour is unjustifiable.'

'And you went away so as to break everything off?'

'Yes; that's the best way... in such cases. I acted savagely, savagely,'
he repeated.

We were both silent. Each of us felt that the other was ashamed; but it
was easier for me; I was not ashamed of myself.


XX


'I would break every bone in that Viktor's body now,' pursued Fustov,
clenching his teeth, 'if I didn't recognise that I'm in fault. I see now
what the whole trick was contrived for, with Susanna's marriage they
would lose the pension.... Wretches!'

I took his hand.

'Alexander,' I asked him, 'have you been to her?'

'No; I came straight to you on arriving. I'll go to-morrow... early
to-morrow. Things can't be left so. On no account!'

'But you... love her, Alexander?'

Fustov seemed offended.

'Of course I love her. I am very much attached to her.'

'She's a splendid, true-hearted girl!' I cried.

Fustov stamped impatiently.

'Well, what notion have you got in your head? I was prepared to marry
her--she's been baptized--I'm ready to marry her even now, I'd been
thinking of it, though she's older than I am.'

At that instant I suddenly fancied that a pale woman's figure was seated
in the window, leaning on her arms. The lights had burnt down; it was
dark in the room. I shivered, looked more intently, and saw nothing, of
course, in the window seat; but a strange feeling, a mixture of horror,
anguish and pity, came over me.

'Alexander!' I began with sudden intensity, 'I beg you, I implore you,
go at once to the Ratsches', don't put it off till to-morrow! An inner
voice tells me that you really ought to see Susanna to-day!'

Fustov shrugged his shoulders.

'What are you talking about, really! It's eleven o'clock now, most
likely they're all in bed.'

'No matter.... Do go, for goodness' sake! I have a presentiment....
Please do as I say! Go at once, take a sledge....'

'Come, what nonsense!' Fustov responded coolly; 'how could I go now?
To-morrow morning I will be there, and everything will be cleared up.'

'But, Alexander, remember, she said that she was dying, that you would
not find her... And if you had seen her face! Only think, imagine, to
make up her mind to come to me... what it must have cost her....'

'She's a little high-flown,' observed Fustov, who had apparently
regained his self-possession completely. 'All girls are like that... at
first. I repeat, everything will be all right to-morrow. Meanwhile,
good-bye. I'm tired, and you're sleepy too.'

He took his cap, and went out of the room.

'But you promise to come here at once, and tell me all about it?' I
called after him.

'I promise.... Good-bye!'

I went to bed, but in my heart I was uneasy, and I felt vexed with my
friend. I fell asleep late and dreamed that I was wandering with Susanna
along underground, damp passages of some sort, and crawling along
narrow, steep staircases, and continually going deeper and deeper down,
though we were trying to get higher up out into the air. Some one was
all the while incessantly calling us in monotonous, plaintive tones.


XXI


Some one's hand lay on my shoulder and pushed it several times.... I
opened my eyes and in the faint light of the solitary candle, I saw
Fustov standing before me. He frightened me. He was staggering; his face
was yellow, almost the same colour as his hair; his lips seemed hanging
down, his muddy eyes were staring senselessly away. What had become of
his invariably amiable, sympathetic expression? I had a cousin who from
epilepsy was sinking into idiocy.... Fustov looked like him at that
moment.

I sat up hurriedly.

'What is it? What is the matter? Heavens!'

He made no answer.

'Why, what has happened? Fustov! Do speak! Susanna?...'

Fustov gave a slight start.

'She...' he began in a hoarse voice, and broke off.

'What of her? Have you seen her?'

He stared at me.

'She's no more.'

'No more?'

'No. She is dead.'

I jumped out of bed.

'Dead? Susanna? Dead?'

Fustov turned his eyes away again.

'Yes; she is dead; she died at midnight.'

'He's raving!' crossed my mind.

'At midnight! And what's the time now?'

'It's eight o'clock in the morning now.

They sent to tell me. She is to be buried to-morrow.'

I seized him by the hand.

'Alexander, you're not delirious? Are you in your senses?'

'I am in my senses,' he answered. 'Directly I heard it, I came straight
to you.'

My heart turned sick and numb, as always happens on realising an
irrevocable misfortune.

'My God! my God! Dead!' I repeated. 'How is it possible? So suddenly! Or
perhaps she took her own life?'

'I don't know,' said Fustov, 'I know nothing. They told me she died at
midnight. And to-morrow she will be buried.'

'At midnight!' I thought.... 'Then she was still alive yesterday when I
fancied I saw her in the window, when I entreated him to hasten to
her....'

'She was still alive yesterday, when you wanted to send me to Ivan
Demianitch's,' said Fustov, as though guessing my thought.

'How little he knew her!' I thought again. 'How little we both knew her!
"High-flown," said he, "all girls are like that."... And at that very
minute, perhaps, she was putting to her lips... Can one love any one and
be so grossly mistaken in them?'

Fustov stood stockstill before my bed, his hands hanging, like a guilty
man.


XXII


I dressed hurriedly.

'What do you mean to do now, Alexander?' I asked.

He gazed at me in bewilderment, as though marvelling at the absurdity of
my question. And indeed what was there to do?

'You simply must go to them, though,' I began. 'You're bound to
ascertain how it happened; there is, possibly, a crime concealed. One
may expect anything of those people.... It is all to be thoroughly
investigated. Remember the statement in her manuscript, the pension was
to cease on her marriage, but in event of her death it was to pass to
Ratsch. In any case, one must render her the last duty, pay homage to
her remains!'

I talked to Fustov like a preceptor, like an elder brother. In the midst
of all that horror, grief, bewilderment, a sort of unconscious feeling
of superiority over Fustov had suddenly come to the surface in me....
Whether from seeing him crushed by the consciousness of his fault,
distracted, shattered, whether that a misfortune befalling a man almost
always humiliates him, lowers him in the opinion of others, 'you can't
be much,' is felt, 'if you hadn't the wit to come off better than that!'
God knows! Any way, Fustov seemed to me almost like a child, and I felt
pity for him, and saw the necessity of severity. I held out a helping
hand to him, stooping down to him from above. Only a woman's sympathy is
free from condescension.

But Fustov continued to gaze with wild and stupid eyes at me--my
authoritative tone obviously had no effect on him, and to my second
question, 'You're going to them, I suppose?' he replied--

'No, I'm not going.'

'What do you mean, really? Don't you want to ascertain for yourself, to
investigate, how, and what? Perhaps, she has left a letter... a document
of some sort....'

Fustov shook his head.

'I can't go there,' he said. 'That's what I came to you for, to ask you
to go... for me... I can't... I can't....'

Fustov suddenly sat down to the table, hid his face in both hands, and
sobbed bitterly.

'Alas, alas!' he kept repeating through his tears; 'alas, poor girl...
poor girl... I loved... I loved her... alas!'

I stood near him, and I am bound to confess, not the slightest sympathy
was excited in me by those incontestably sincere sobs. I simply
marvelled that Fustov could cry _like that_, and it seemed to me
that _now_ I knew what a small person he was, and that I should, in
his place, have acted quite differently. What's one to make of it? If
Fustov had remained quite unmoved, I should perhaps have hated him, have
conceived an aversion for him, but he would not have sunk in my
esteem.... He would have kept his prestige. Don Juan would have remained
Don Juan! Very late in life, and only after many experiences, does a man
learn, at the sight of a fellow-creature's real failing or weakness, to
sympathise with him, and help him without a secret self-congratulation
at his own virtue and strength, but on the contrary, with every humility
and comprehension of the naturalness, almost the inevitableness, of sin.


XXIII


I was very bold and resolute in sending Fustov to the Ratsches'; but
when I set out there myself at twelve o'clock (nothing would induce
Fustov to go with me, he only begged me to give him an exact account of
everything), when round the corner of the street their house glared at
me in the distance with a yellowish blur from the coffin candles at one
of the windows, an indescribable panic made me hold my breath, and I
would gladly have turned back.... I mastered myself, however, and went
into the passage. It smelt of incense and wax; the pink cover of the
coffin, edged with silver lace, stood in a corner, leaning against the
wall. In one of the adjoining rooms, the dining-room, the monotonous
muttering of the deacon droned like the buzzing of a bee. From the
drawing-room peeped out the sleepy face of a servant girl, who murmured
in a subdued voice, 'Come to do homage to the dead?' She indicated the
door of the dining-room. I went in. The coffin stood with the head
towards the door; the black hair of Susanna under the white wreath,
above the raised lace of the pillow, first caught my eyes. I went up
sidewards, crossed myself, bowed down to the ground, glanced... Merciful
God! what a face of agony! Unhappy girl! even death had no pity on her,
had denied her--beauty, that would be little--even that peace, that
tender and impressive peace which is often seen on the faces of the
newly dead. The little, dark, almost brown, face of Susanna recalled the
visages on old, old holy pictures. And the expression on that face! It
looked as though she were on the point of shrieking--a shriek of
despair--and had died so, uttering no sound... even the line between the
brows was not smoothed out, and the fingers on the hands were bent back
and clenched. I turned away my eyes involuntarily; but, after a brief
interval, I forced myself to look, to look long and attentively at her.
Pity filled my soul, and not pity alone. 'That girl died by violence,' I
decided inwardly; 'that's beyond doubt.' While I was standing looking at
the dead girl, the deacon, who on my entrance had raised his voice and
uttered a few disconnected sounds, relapsed into droning again, and
yawned twice. I bowed to the ground a second time, and went out into the
passage.

In the doorway of the drawing-room Mr. Ratsch was already on the
look-out for me, dressed in a gay-coloured dressing-gown. Beckoning to
me with his hand, he led me to his own room--I had almost said, to his
lair. The room, dark and close, soaked through and through with the sour
smell of stale tobacco, suggested a comparison with the lair of a wolf
or a fox.


XXIV


'Rupture! rupture of the external... of the external covering.... You
understand.., the envelopes of the heart!' said Mr. Ratsch, directly the
door closed. 'Such a misfortune! Only yesterday evening there was
nothing to notice, and all of a sudden, all in a minute, all was over!
It's a true saying, "heute roth, morgen todt!" It's true; it's what was
to be expected. I always expected it. At Tambov the regimental doctor,
Galimbovsky, Vikenty Kasimirovitch.... you've probably heard of him... a
first-rate medical man, a specialist--'

'It's the first time I've heard the name,' I observed.

'Well, no matter; any way he was always,' pursued Mr. Ratsch, at first
in a low voice, and then louder and louder, and, to my surprise, with a
perceptible German accent, 'he was always warning me: "Ay, Ivan
Demianitch! ay! my dear boy, you must be careful! Your stepdaughter has
an organic defect in the heart--hypertrophia cordialis! The least thing
and there'll be trouble! She must avoid all exciting emotions above
all.... You must appeal to her reason."... But, upon my word, with a
young lady... can one appeal to reason? Ha... ha... ha...'

Mr. Ratsch was, through long habit, on the point of laughing, but he
recollected himself in time, and changed the incipient guffaw into a
cough.

And this was what Mr. Ratsch said! After all that I had found out about
him!... I thought it my duty, however, to ask him whether a doctor was
called in.

Mr. Ratsch positively bounced into the air.

'To be sure there was.... Two were summoned, but it was already
over--abgemacht! And only fancy, both, as though they were agreeing'
(Mr. Ratsch probably meant, as though they had agreed), 'rupture!
rupture of the heart! That's what, with one voice, they cried out. They
proposed a post-mortem; but I... you understand, did not consent to
that.'

'And the funeral's to-morrow?' I queried.

'Yes, yes, to-morrow, to-morrow we bury our dear one! The procession
will leave the house precisely at eleven o'clock in the morning.... From
here to the church of St. Nicholas on Hen's Legs... what strange names
your Russian churches do have, you know! Then to the last resting-place
in mother earth. You will come! We have not been long acquainted, but I
make bold to say, the amiability of your character and the elevation of
your sentiments!...'

I made haste to nod my head.

'Yes, yes, yes,' sighed Mr. Ratsch. 'It... it really has been, as they
say, a thunderbolt from a clear sky! Ein Blitz aus heiterem Himmel!'

'And Susanna Ivanovna said nothing before her death, left nothing?'

'Nothing, positively! Not a scrap of anything! Not a bit of paper! Only
fancy, when they called me to her, when they waked me up--she was stiff
already! Very distressing it was for me; she has grieved us all
terribly! Alexander Daviditch will be sorry too, I dare say, when he
knows.... They say he is not in Moscow.'

'He did leave town for a few days...' I began.

'Viktor Ivanovitch is complaining they're so long getting his sledge
harnessed,' interrupted a servant girl coming in--the same girl I had
seen in the passage. Her face, still looking half-awake, struck me this
time by the expression of coarse insolence to be seen in servants when
they know that their masters are in their power, and that they do not
dare to find fault or be exacting with them.

'Directly, directly,' Ivan Demianitch responded nervously. 'Eleonora
Karpovna! Leonora! Lenchen! come here!'

There was a sound of something ponderous moving the other side of the
door, and at the same instant I heard Viktor's imperious call: 'Why on
earth don't they put the horses in? You don't catch me trudging off to
the police on foot!'

'Directly, directly,' Ivan Demianitch faltered again. 'Eleonora
Karpovna, come here!'

'But, Ivan Demianitch,' I heard her voice, 'ich habe keine Toilette
gemacht!'

'Macht nichts. Komm herein!'

Eleonora Karpovna came in, holding a kerchief over her neck with two
fingers. She had on a morning wrapper, not buttoned up, and had not yet
done her hair. Ivan Demianitch flew up to her.

'You hear, Viktor's calling for the horses,' he said, hurriedly pointing
his finger first to the door, then to the window. 'Please, do see to it,
as quick as possible! Der Kerl schreit so!'

'Der Viktor schreit immer, Ivan Demianitch, Sie wissen wohl,' responded
Eleonora Karpovna, 'and I have spoken to the coachman myself, but he's
taken it into his head to give the horses oats. Fancy, what a calamity
to happen so suddenly,' she added, turning to me; 'who could have
expected such a thing of Susanna Ivanovna?'

'I was always expecting it, always!' cried Ratsch, and threw up his
arms, his dressing-gown flying up in front as he did so, and displaying
most repulsive unmentionables of chamois leather, with buckles on the
belt. 'Rupture of the heart! rupture of the external membrane!
Hypertrophy!'

'To be sure,' Eleonora Karpovna repeated after him, 'hyper... Well, so
it is. Only it's a terrible, terrible grief to me, I say again...' And
her coarse-featured face worked a little, her eyebrows rose into the
shape of triangles, and a tiny tear rolled over her round cheek, that
looked varnished like a doll's.... 'I'm very sorry that such a young
person who ought to have lived and enjoyed everything... everything...
And to fall into despair so suddenly!'

'Na! gut, gut... geh, alte!' Mr. Ratsch cut her short.

'Geh' schon, geh' schon,' muttered Eleonora Karpovna, and she went away,
still holding the kerchief with her fingers, and shedding tears.

And I followed her. In the passage stood Viktor in a student's coat with
a beaver collar and a cap stuck jauntily on one side. He barely glanced
at me over his shoulder, shook his collar up, and did not nod to me, for
which I mentally thanked him.

I went back to Fustov.


XXV


I found my friend sitting in a corner of his room with downcast head and
arms folded across his breast. He had sunk into a state of numbness, and
he gazed around him with the slow, bewildered look of a man who has
slept very heavily and has only just been waked. I told him all about my
visit to Ratsch's, repeated the veteran's remarks and those of his wife,
described the impression they had made on me and informed him of my
conviction that the unhappy girl had taken her own life.... Fustov
listened to me with no change of expression, and looked about him with
the same bewildered air.

'Did you see her?' he asked me at last.

'Yes.'

'In the coffin?'

Fustov seemed to doubt whether Susanna were really dead.

'In the coffin.'

Fustov's face twitched and he dropped his eyes and softly rubbed his
hands.

'Are you cold?' I asked him.

'Yes, old man, I'm cold,' he answered hesitatingly, and he shook his
head stupidly.

I began to explain my reasons for thinking that Susanna had poisoned
herself or perhaps had been poisoned, and that the matter could not be
left so....

Fustov stared at me.

'Why, what is there to be done?' he said, slowly opening his eyes wide
and slowly closing them. 'Why, it'll be worse... if it's known about.
They won't bury her. We must let things... alone.'

This idea, simple as it was, had never entered my head. My friend's
practical sense had not deserted him.

'When is... her funeral?' he went on.

'To-morrow.'

'Are you going?'

'Yes.'

'To the house or straight to the church?'

'To the house and to the church too; and from there to the cemetery.'

'But I shan't go... I can't, I can't!' whispered Fustov and began
crying. It was at these same words that he had broken into sobs in the
morning. I have noticed that it is often so with weeping; as though to
certain words, for the most of no great meaning,--but just to these
words and to no others--it is given to open the fount of tears in a man,
to break him down, and to excite in him the feeling of pity for others
and himself... I remember a peasant woman was once describing before me
the sudden death of her daughter, and she fairly dissolved and could not
go on with her tale as soon as she uttered the phrase, 'I said to her,
Fekla. And she says, "Mother, where have you put the salt... the salt...
sa-alt?"' The word 'salt' overpowered her.

But again, as in the morning, I was but little moved by Fustov's tears.
I could not conceive how it was he did not ask me if Susanna had not
left something for him. Altogether their love for one another was a
riddle to me; and a riddle it remained to me.

After weeping for ten minutes Fustov got up, lay down on the sofa,
turned his face to the wall, and remained motionless. I waited a little,
but seeing that he did not stir, and made no answer to my questions, I
made up my mind to leave him. I am perhaps doing him injustice, but I
almost believe he was asleep. Though indeed that would be no proof that
he did not feel sorrow... only his nature was so constituted as to be
unable to support painful emotions for long... His nature was too
awfully well-balanced!


XXVI


The next day exactly at eleven o'clock I was at the place. Fine hail was
falling from the low-hanging sky, there was a slight frost, a thaw was
close at hand, but there were cutting, disagreeable gusts of wind
flitting across in the air.... It was the most thoroughly Lenten,
cold-catching weather. I found Mr. Ratsch on the steps of his house. In
a black frock-coat adorned with crape, with no hat on his head, he
fussed about, waved his arms, smote himself on the thighs, shouted up to
the house, and then down into the street, in the direction of the
funeral car with a white catafalque, already standing there with two
hired carriages. Near it four garrison soldiers, with mourning capes
over their old coats, and mourning hats pulled over their screwed-up
eyes, were pensively scratching in the crumbling snow with the long
stems of their unlighted torches. The grey shock of hair positively
stood up straight above the red face of Mr. Ratsch, and his voice, that
brazen voice, was cracking from the strain he was putting on it. 'Where
are the pine branches? pine branches! this way! the branches of pine!'
he yelled. 'They'll be bearing out the coffin directly! The pine! Hand
over those pine branches! Look alive!' he cried once more, and dashed
into the house. It appeared that in spite of my punctuality, I was late:
Mr. Ratsch had thought fit to hurry things forward. The service in the
house was already over; the priests--of whom one wore a calotte, and the
other, rather younger, had most carefully combed and oiled his
hair--appeared with all their retinue on the steps. The coffin too
appeared soon after, carried by a coachman, two door-keepers, and a
water-carrier. Mr. Ratsch walked behind, with the tips of his fingers on
the coffin lid, continually repeating, 'Easy, easy!' Behind him waddled
Eleonora Karpovna in a black dress, also adorned with crape, surrounded
by her whole family; after all of them, Viktor stepped out in a new
uniform with a sword with crape round the handle. The coffin-bearers,
grumbling and altercating among themselves, laid the coffin on the
hearse; the garrison soldiers lighted their torches, which at once began
crackling and smoking; a stray old woman, who had joined herself on to
the party, raised a wail; the deacons began to chant, the fine snow
suddenly fell faster and whirled round like 'white flies.' Mr. Ratsch
bawled, 'In God's name! start!' and the procession started. Besides Mr.
Ratsch's family, there were in all five men accompanying the hearse: a
retired and extremely shabby officer of roads and highways, with a faded
Stanislas ribbon--not improbably hired--on his neck; the police
superintendent's assistant, a diminutive man with a meek face and greedy
eyes; a little old man in a fustian smock; an extremely fat fishmonger
in a tradesman's bluejacket, smelling strongly of his calling, and I.
The absence of the female sex (for one could hardly count as such two
aunts of Eleonora Karpovna, sisters of the sausagemaker, and a hunchback
old maiden lady with blue spectacles on her blue nose), the absence of
girl friends and acquaintances struck me at first; but on thinking it
over I realised that Susanna, with her character, her education, her
memories, could not have made friends in the circle in which she was
living. In the church there were a good many people assembled, more
outsiders than acquaintances, as one could see by the expression of
their faces. The service did not last long. What surprised me was that
Mr. Ratsch crossed himself with great fervour, quite as though he were
of the orthodox faith, and even chimed in with the deacons in the
responses, though only with the notes not with the words. When at last
it came to taking leave of the dead, I bowed low, but did not give the
last kiss. Mr. Ratsch, on the contrary, went through this terrible
ordeal with the utmost composure, and with a deferential inclination of
his person invited the officer of the Stanislas ribbon to the coffin, as
though offering him entertainment, and picking his children up under the
arms swung them up in turn and held them up to the body. Eleonora
Karpovna, on taking farewell of Susanna, suddenly broke into a roar that
filled the church; but she was soon soothed and continually asked in an
exasperated whisper, 'But where's my reticule?' Viktor held himself
aloof, and seemed to be trying by his whole demeanour to convey that he
was out of sympathy with all such customs and was only performing a
social duty. The person who showed the most sympathy was the little old
man in the smock, who had been, fifteen years before, a land surveyor in
the Tambov province, and had not seen Ratsch since then. He did not know
Susanna at all, but had drunk a couple of glasses of spirits at the
sideboard before starting. My aunt had also come to the church. She had
somehow or other found out that the deceased woman was the very lady who
had paid me a visit, and had been thrown into a state of indescribable
agitation! She could not bring herself to suspect me of any sort of
misconduct, but neither could she explain such a strange chain of
circumstances.... Not improbably she imagined that Susanna had been led
by love for me to commit suicide, and attired in her darkest garments,
with an aching heart and tears, she prayed on her knees for the peace of
the soul of the departed, and put a rouble candle before the picture of
the Consolation of Sorrow.... 'Amishka' had come with her too, and she
too prayed, but was for the most part gazing at me, horror-stricken....
That elderly spinster, alas! did not regard me with indifference. On
leaving the church, my aunt distributed all her money, more than ten
roubles, among the poor.

At last the farewell was over. They began closing the coffin. During the
whole service I had not courage to look straight at the poor girl's
distorted face; but every time that my eyes passed by it--'he did not
come, he did not come,' it seemed to me that it wanted to say. They were
just going to lower the lid upon the coffin. I could not restrain
myself: I turned a rapid glance on to the dead woman. 'Why did you do
it?' I was unconsciously asking.... 'He did not come!' I fancied for the
last time.... The hammer was knocking in the nails, and all was over.


XXVII


We followed the hearse towards the cemetery. We were forty in number, of
all sorts and conditions, nothing else really than an idle crowd. The
wearisome journey lasted more than an hour. The weather became worse and
worse. Halfway there Viktor got into a carriage, but Mr. Ratsch stepped
gallantly on through the sloppy snow; just so must he have stepped
through the snow when, after the fateful interview with Semyon
Matveitch, he led home with him in triumph the girl whose life he had
ruined for ever. The 'veteran's' hair and eyebrows were edged with snow;
he kept blowing and uttering exclamations, or manfully drawing deep
breaths and puffing out his round, dark-red cheeks.... One really might
have thought he was laughing. 'On my death the pension was to pass to
Ivan Demianitch'; these words from Susanna's manuscript recurred again
to my mind. We reached the cemetery at last; we moved up to a freshly
dug grave. The last ceremony was quickly performed; all were chilled
through, all were in haste. The coffin slid on cords into the yawning
hole; they began to throw earth on it. Mr. Ratsch here too showed the
energy of his spirit, so rapidly, with such force and vigour, did he
fling clods of earth on to the coffin lid, throwing himself into an
heroic pose, with one leg planted firmly before him... he could not have
shown more energy if he had been stoning his bitterest foe. Viktor, as
before, held himself aloof; he kept muffling himself up in his coat, and
rubbing his chin in the fur of his collar. Mr. Ratsch's other children
eagerly imitated their father. Flinging sand and earth was a source of
great enjoyment to them, for which, of course, they were in no way to
blame. A mound began to rise up where the hole had been; we were on the
point of separating, when Mr. Ratsch, wheeling round to the left in
soldierly fashion, and slapping himself on the thigh, announced to all
of us 'gentlemen present,' that he invited us, and also the 'reverend
clergy,' to a 'funeral banquet,' which had been arranged at no great
distance from the cemetery, in the chief saloon of an extremely superior
restaurant, 'thanks to the kind offices of our honoured friend Sigismund
Sigismundovitch.'... At these words he indicated the assistant of the
police superintendent, and added that for all his grief and his Lutheran
faith, he, Ivan Demianitch Ratsch, as a genuine Russian, put the old
Russian usages before everything. 'My spouse,' he cried, 'with the
ladies that have accompanied her, may go home, while we gentlemen
commemorate in a modest repast the shade of Thy departed servant!' Mr.
Ratsch's proposal was received with genuine sympathy; 'the reverend
clergy' exchanged expressive glances with one another, while the officer
of roads and highways slapped Ivan Demianitch on the shoulder, and
called him a patriot and the soul of the company.

We set off all together to the restaurant. In the restaurant, in the
middle of a long, wide, and quite empty room on the first storey, stood
two tables laid for dinner, covered with bottles and eatables, and
surrounded by chairs. The smell of whitewash, mingled with the odours of
spirits and salad oil, was stifling and oppressive. The police
superintendent's assistant, as the organiser of the banquet, placed the
clergy in the seats of honour, near which the Lenten dishes were crowded
together conspicuously; after the priests the other guests took their
seats; the banquet began. I would not have used such a festive word as
banquet by choice, but no other word would have corresponded with the
real character of the thing. At first the proceedings were fairly quiet,
even slightly mournful; jaws munched busily, and glasses were emptied,
but sighs too were audible--possibly sighs of digestion, but possibly
also of feeling. There were references to death, allusions to the
brevity of human life, and the fleeting nature of earthly hopes. The
officer of roads and highways related a military but still edifying
anecdote. The priest in the calotte expressed his approval, and himself
contributed an interesting fact from the life of the saint, Ivan the
Warrior. The priest with the superbly arranged hair, though his
attention was chiefly engrossed by the edibles, gave utterance to
something improving on the subject of chastity. But little by little all
this changed. Faces grew redder, and voices grew louder, and laughter
reasserted itself; one began to hear disconnected exclamations,
caressing appellations, after the manner of 'dear old boy,' 'dear heart
alive,' 'old cock,' and even 'a pig like that'--everything, in fact, of
which the Russian nature is so lavish, when, as they say, 'it comes
unbuttoned.' By the time that the corks of home-made champagne were
popping, the party had become noisy; some one even crowed like a cock,
while another guest was offering to bite up and swallow the glass out of
which he had just been drinking. Mr. Ratsch, no longer red but purple,
suddenly rose from his seat; he had been guffawing and making a great
noise before, but now he asked leave to make a speech. 'Speak! Out with
it!' every one roared; the old man in the smock even bawled 'bravo!' and
clapped his hands... but he was already sitting on the floor. Mr. Ratsch
lifted his glass high above his head, and announced that he proposed in
brief but 'impressionable' phrases to refer to the qualities of the
noble soul which,'leaving here, so to say, its earthly husk (die
irdische Hulle) has soared to heaven, and plunged...' Mr. Ratsch
corrected himself: 'and plashed....' He again corrected himself: 'and
plunged...'

'Father deacon! Reverend sir! My good soul!' we heard a subdued but
insistent whisper, 'they say you've a devilish good voice; honour us
with a song, strike up: "We live among the fields!"'

'Sh! sh!... Shut up there!' passed over the lips of the guests.

...'Plunged all her devoted family,' pursued Mr. Ratsch, turning a
severe glance in the direction of the lover of music, 'plunged all her
family into the most irreplaceable grief! Yes!' cried Ivan Demianitch,
'well may the Russian proverb say, "Fate spares not the rod."...'

'Stop! Gentlemen!' shouted a hoarse voice at the end of the table, 'my
purse has just been stolen!...'

'Ah, the swindler!' piped another voice, and slap! went a box on the
ear.

Heavens! What followed then! It was as though the wild beast, till then
only growling and faintly stirring within us, had suddenly broken from
its chains and reared up, ruffled and fierce in all its hideousness. It
seemed as though every one had been secretly expecting 'a scandal,' as
the natural outcome and sequel of a banquet, and all, as it were, rushed
to welcome it, to support it.... Plates, glasses clattered and rolled
about, chairs were upset, a deafening din arose, hands were waving in
the air, coat-tails were flying, and a fight began in earnest.

'Give it him! give it him!' roared like mad my neighbour, the
fishmonger, who had till that instant seemed to be the most peaceable
person in the world; it is true he had been silently drinking some dozen
glasses of spirits. 'Thrash him!...'

Who was to be thrashed, and what he was to be thrashed for, he had no
idea, but he bellowed furiously.

The police superintendent's assistant, the officer of roads and
highways, and Mr. Ratsch, who had probably not expected such a speedy
termination to his eloquence, tried to restore order... but their
efforts were unavailing. My neighbour, the fishmonger, even fell foul of
Mr. Ratsch himself.

'He's murdered the young woman, the blasted German,' he yelled at him,
shaking his fists; 'he's bought over the police, and here he's crowing
over it!!'

At this point the waiters ran in.... What happened further I don't know;
I snatched up my cap in all haste, and made off as fast as my legs would
carry me! All I remember is a fearful crash; I recall, too, the remains
of a herring in the hair of the old man in the smock, a priest's hat
flying right across the room, the pale face of Viktor huddled up in a
corner, and a red beard in the grasp of a muscular hand.... Such were
the last impressions I carried away of the 'memorial banquet,' arranged
by the excellent Sigismund Sigismundovitch in honour of poor Susanna.

After resting a little, I set off to see Fustov, and told him all of
which I had been a witness during that day. He listened to me, sitting
still, and not raising his head, and putting both hands under his legs,
he murmured again, 'Ah! my poor girl, my poor girl!' and again lay down
on the sofa and turned his back on me.

A week later he seemed to have quite got over it, and took up his life
as before. I asked him for Susanna's manuscript as a keepsake: he gave
it me without raising any objection.


XXVIII


Several years passed by. My aunt was dead; I had left Moscow and settled
in Petersburg. Fustov too had moved to Petersburg. He had entered the
department of the Ministry of Finance, but we rarely met and I saw
nothing much in him then. An official like every one else, and nothing
more! If he is still living and not married, he is, most likely,
unchanged to this day; he carves and carpenters and uses dumb-bells, and
is as much a lady-killer as ever, and sketches Napoleon in a blue
uniform in the albums of his lady friends. It happened that I had to go
to Moscow on business. In Moscow I learned, with considerable surprise,
that the fortunes of my former acquaintance, Mr. Ratsch, had taken an
adverse turn. His wife had, indeed, presented him with twins, two boys,
whom as a true Russian he had christened Briacheslav and Viacheslav, but
his house had been burnt down, he had been forced to retire from his
position, and worst of all, his eldest son, Viktor, had become
practically a permanent inmate of the debtors' prison. During my stay in
Moscow, among a company at a friendly gathering, I chanced to hear an
allusion made to Susanna, and a most slighting, most insulting allusion!
I did all I could to defend the memory of the unhappy girl, to whom fate
had denied even the charity of oblivion, but my arguments did not make
much impression on my audience. One of them, a young student poet, was,
however, a little moved by my words. He sent me next day a poem, which I
have forgotten, but which ended in the following four lines:

  'Her tomb lies cold, forlorn, but even death
   Her gentle spirit's memory cannot save
   From the sly voice of slander whispering on,
   Withering the flowers on her forsaken tomb....'


I read these lines and unconsciously sank into musing. Susanna's image
rose before me; once more I seemed to see the frozen window in my room;
I recalled that evening and the blustering snowstorm, and those words,
those sobs.... I began to ponder how it was possible to explain
Susanna's love for Fustov, and why she had so quickly, so impulsively
given way to despair, as soon as she saw herself forsaken. How was it
she had had no desire to wait a little, to hear the bitter truth from
the lips of the man she loved, to write to him, even? How could she
fling herself at once headlong into the abyss? Because she was
passionately in love with Fustov, I shall be told; because she could not
bear the slightest doubt of his devotion, of his respect for her.
Perhaps; or perhaps because she was not at all so passionately in love
with Fustov; that she did not deceive herself about him, but simply
rested her last hopes on him, and could not get over the thought that
even this man had at once, at the first breath of slander, turned away
from her with contempt! Who can say what killed her; wounded pride, or
the wretchedness of her helpless position, or the very memory of that
first, noble, true-hearted nature to whom she had so joyfully pledged
herself in the morning of her early days, who had so deeply trusted her,
and so honoured her? Who knows; perhaps at the very instant when I
fancied that her dead lips were murmuring, 'he did not come!' her soul
was rejoicing that she had gone herself to him, to her Michel? The
secrets of human life are great, and love itself, the most impenetrable
of those secrets.... Anyway, to this day, whenever the image of Susanna
rises before me, I cannot overcome a feeling of pity for her, and of
angry reproach against fate, and my lips whisper instinctively, 'Unhappy
girl! unhappy girl!'

1868.






THE DUELLIST


I


A regiment of cuirassiers was quartered in 1829 in the village of
Kirilovo, in the K--- province. That village, with its huts and
hay-stacks, its green hemp-patches, and gaunt willows, looked from a
distance like an island in a boundless sea of ploughed, black-earth
fields. In the middle of the village was a small pond, invariably
covered with goose feathers, with muddy, indented banks; a hundred paces
from the pond, on the other side of the road, rose the wooden
manor-house, long, empty, and mournfully slanting on one side. Behind
the house stretched the deserted garden; in the garden grew old
apple-trees that bore no fruit, and tall birch-trees, full of rooks'
nests. At the end of the principal garden-walk, in a little house, once
the bath-house, lived a decrepit old steward. Every morning, gasping and
groaning, he would, from years of habit, drag himself across the garden
to the seignorial apartments, though there was nothing to take care of
in them except a dozen white arm-chairs, upholstered in faded stuff, two
podgy chests on carved legs with copper handles, four pictures with
holes in them, and one black alabaster Arab with a broken nose. The
owner of the house, a careless young man, lived partly at Petersburg,
partly abroad, and had completely forgotten his estate. It had come to
him eight years before, from a very old uncle, once noted all over the
countryside for his excellent liqueurs. The empty, dark-green bottles
are to this day lying about in the storeroom, in company with rubbish of
all sorts, old manuscript books in parti-coloured covers, scantily
filled with writing, old-fashioned glass lustres, a nobleman's uniform
of the Catherine period, a rusty sabre with a steel handle and so forth.
In one of the lodges of the great house the colonel himself took up his
abode. He was a married man, tall, sparing of his words, grim and
sleepy. In another lodge lived the regimental adjutant, an emotional
person of fine sentiments and many perfumes, fond of flowers and female
society. The social life of the officers of this regiment did not differ
from any other kind of society. Among their number were good people and
bad, clever and silly.... One of them, a certain Avdey Ivanovitch
Lutchkov, staff captain, had a reputation as a duellist. Lutchkov was a
short and not thick-set man; he had a small, yellowish, dry face, lank,
black hair, unnoticeable features, and dark, little eyes. He had early
been left an orphan, and had grown up among privations and hardships.
For weeks together he would be quiet enough,... and then all at once--as
though he were possessed by some devil--he would let no one alone,
annoying everybody, staring every one insolently in the face; trying, in
fact, to pick a quarrel. Avdey Ivanovitch did not, however, hold aloof
from intercourse with his comrades, but he was not on intimate terms
with any one but the perfumed adjutant. He did not play cards, and did
not drink spirits.

In the May of 1829, not long before the beginning of the manoeuvres,
there joined the regiment a young cornet, Fyodor Fedorovitch Kister, a
Russian nobleman of German extraction, very fair-haired and very modest,
cultivated and well read. He had lived up to his twentieth year in the
home of his fathers, under the wings of his mother, his grandmother, and
his two aunts. He was going into the army in deference solely to the
wishes of his grandmother, who even in her old age could not see a white
plumed helmet without emotion.... He served with no special enthusiasm
but with energy, as it were conscientiously doing his duty. He was not a
dandy, but was always cleanly dressed and in good taste. On the day of
his arrival Fyodor Fedoritch paid his respects to his superior officers,
and then proceeded to arrange his quarters. He had brought with him some
cheap furniture, rugs, shelves, and so forth. He papered all the walls
and the doors, put up some screens, had the yard cleaned, fixed up a
stable, and a kitchen, even arranged a place for a bath.... For a whole
week he was busily at work; but it was a pleasure afterwards to go into
his room. Before the window stood a neat table, covered with various
little things; in one corner was a set of shelves for books, with busts
of Schiller and Goethe; on the walls hung maps, four Grevedon heads, and
guns; near the table was an elegant row of pipes with clean mouthpieces;
there was a rug in the outer room; all the doors shut and locked; the
windows were hung with curtains. Everything in Fyodor Fedoritch's room
had a look of cleanliness and order.

It was quite a different thing in his comrades' quarters. Often one
could scarcely make one's way across the muddy yard; in the outer room,
behind a canvas screen, with its covering peeling off it, would lie
stretched the snoring orderly; on the floor rotten straw; on the stove,
boots and a broken jam-pot full of blacking; in the room itself a warped
card-table, marked with chalk; on the table, glasses, half-full of cold,
dark-brown tea; against the wall, a wide, rickety, greasy sofa; on the
window-sills, tobacco-ash.... In a podgy, clumsy arm-chair one would
find the master of the place in a grass-green dressing-gown with crimson
plush facings and an embroidered smoking-cap of Asiatic extraction, and
a hideously fat, unpleasant dog in a stinking brass collar would be
snoring at his side.... All the doors always ajar....

Fyodor Fedoritch made a favourable impression on his new comrades. They
liked him for his good-nature, modesty, warm-heartedness, and natural
inclination for everything beautiful, for everything, in fact, which in
another officer they might, very likely, have thought out of place. They
called Kister a young lady, and were kind and gentle in their manners
with him. Avdey Ivanovitch was the only one who eyed him dubiously. One
day after drill Lutchkov went up to him, slightly pursing up his lips
and inflating his nostrils:

'Good-morning, Mr. Knaster.'

Kister looked at him in some perplexity.

'A very good day to you, Mr. Knaster,' repeated Lutchkov.

'My name's Kister, sir.'

'You don't say so, Mr. Knaster.'

Fyodor Fedoritch turned his back on him and went homewards. Lutchkov
looked after him with a grin.

Next day, directly after drill he went up to Kister again.

'Well, how are you getting on, Mr. Kinderbalsam?'

Kister was angry, and looked him straight in the face. Avdey
Ivanovitch's little bilious eyes were gleaming with malignant glee.

'I'm addressing you, Mr. Kinderbalsam!'

'Sir,' Fyodor Fedoritch replied, 'I consider your joke stupid and
ill-bred--do you hear?--stupid and ill-bred.'

'When shall we fight?' Lutchkov responded composedly.

'When you like,... to-morrow.'

Next morning they fought a duel. Lutchkov wounded Kister slightly, and
to the extreme astonishment of the seconds went up to the wounded man,
took him by the hand and begged his pardon. Kister had to keep indoors
for a fortnight. Avdey Ivanovitch came several times to ask after him
and on Fyodor Fedoritch's recovery made friends with him. Whether he was
pleased by the young officer's pluck, or whether a feeling akin to
remorse was roused in his soul--it's hard to say... but from the time of
his duel with Kister, Avdey Ivanovitch scarcely left his side, and
called him first Fyodor, and afterwards simply Fedya. In his presence he
became quite another man and--strange to say!--the change was not in his
favour. It did not suit him to be gentle and soft. Sympathy he could not
call forth in any one anyhow; such was his destiny! He belonged to that
class of persons to whom has somehow been granted the privilege of
authority over others; but nature had denied him the gifts essential for
the justification of such a privilege. Having received no education, not
being distinguished by intelligence, he ought not to have revealed
himself; possibly his malignancy had its origin in his consciousness of
the defects of his bringing up, in the desire to conceal himself
altogether under one unchanging mask. Avdey Ivanovitch had at first
forced himself to despise people, then he began to notice that it was
not a difficult matter to intimidate them, and he began to despise them
in reality. Lutchkov enjoyed cutting short by his very approach all but
the most vulgar conversation. 'I know nothing, and have learned nothing,
and I have no talents,' he said to himself; 'and so you too shall know
nothing and not show off your talents before me....' Kister, perhaps,
had made Lutchkov abandon the part he had taken up--just because before
his acquaintance with him, the bully had never met any one genuinely
idealistic, that is to say, unselfishly and simple-heartedly absorbed in
dreams, and so, indulgent to others, and not full of himself.

Avdey Ivanovitch would come sometimes to Kister, light a pipe and
quietly sit down in an arm-chair. Lutchkov was not in Kister's company
abashed by his own ignorance; he relied--and with good reason--on his
German modesty.

'Well,' he would begin, 'what did you do yesterday? Been reading, I'll
bet, eh?'

'Yes, I read....'

'Well, and what did you read? Come, tell away, old man, tell away.'
Avdey Ivanovitch kept up his bantering tone to the end.

'I read Kleist's _Idyll_. Ah, what a fine thing it is! If you don't
mind, I'll translate you a few lines....' And Kister translated with
fervour, while Lutchkov, wrinkling up his forehead and compressing his
lips, listened attentively.... 'Yes, yes,' he would repeat hurriedly,
with a disagreeable smile,'it's fine... very fine... I remember, I've
read it... very fine.'

'Tell me, please,' he added affectedly, and as it were reluctantly,
'what's your view of Louis the Fourteenth?'

And Kister would proceed to discourse upon Louis the Fourteenth, while
Lutchkov listened, totally failing to understand a great deal,
misunderstanding a part... and at last venturing to make a remark....
This threw him into a cold sweat; 'now, if I'm making a fool of myself,'
he thought. And as a fact he often did make a fool of himself. But
Kister was never off-hand in his replies; the good-hearted youth was
inwardly rejoicing that, as he thought, the desire for enlightenment was
awakened in a fellow-creature. Alas! it was from no desire for
enlightenment that Avdey Ivanovitch questioned Kister; God knows why he
did! Possibly he wished to ascertain for himself what sort of head he,
Lutchkov, had, whether it was really dull, or simply untrained. 'So I
really am stupid,' he said to himself more than once with a bitter
smile; and he would draw himself up instantly and look rudely and
insolently about him, and smile malignantly to himself if he caught some
comrade dropping his eyes before his glance. 'All right, my man, you're
so learned and well educated,...' he would mutter between his teeth.
'I'll show you... that's all....'

The officers did not long discuss the sudden friendship of Kister and
Lutchkov; they were used to the duellist's queer ways. 'The devil's made
friends with the baby,' they said.... Kister was warm in his praises of
his friend on all hands; no one disputed his opinion, because they were
afraid of Lutchkov; Lutchkov himself never mentioned Kister's name
before the others, but he dropped his intimacy with the perfumed
adjutant.


II


The landowners of the South of Russia are very keen on giving balls,
inviting officers to their houses, and marrying off their daughters.

About seven miles from the village of Kirilovo lived just such a country
gentleman, a Mr. Perekatov, the owner of four hundred souls, and a
fairly spacious house. He had a daughter of eighteen, Mashenka, and a
wife, Nenila Makarievna. Mr. Perekatov had once been an officer in the
cavalry, but from love of a country life and from indolence he had
retired and had begun to live peaceably and quietly, as landowners of
the middling sort do live. Nenila Makarievna owed her existence in a not
perfectly legitimate manner to a distinguished gentleman of Moscow.

Her protector had educated his little Nenila very carefully, as it is
called, in his own house, but got her off his hands rather hurriedly, at
the first offer, as a not very marketable article. Nenila Makarievna was
ugly; the distinguished gentleman was giving her no more than ten
thousand as dowry; she snatched eagerly at Mr. Perekatov. To Mr.
Perekatov it seemed extremely gratifying to marry a highly educated,
intellectual young lady... who was, after all, so closely related to so
illustrious a personage. This illustrious personage extended his
patronage to the young people even after the marriage, that is to say,
he accepted presents of salted quails from them and called Perekatov 'my
dear boy,' and sometimes simply, 'boy.' Nenila Makarievna took complete
possession of her husband, managed everything, and looked after the
whole property--very sensibly, indeed; far better, any way, than Mr.
Perekatov could have done. She did not hamper her partner's liberty too
much; but she kept him well in hand, ordered his clothes herself, and
dressed him in the English style, as is fitting and proper for a country
gentleman. By her instructions, Mr. Perekatov grew a little Napoleonic
beard on his chin, to cover a large wart, which looked like an over-ripe
raspberry. Nenila Makarievna, for her part, used to inform visitors that
her husband played the flute, and that all flute-players always let the
beard grow under the lower lip; they could hold their instrument more
comfortably. Mr. Perekatov always, even in the early morning, wore a
high, clean stock, and was well combed and washed. He was, moreover,
well content with his lot; he dined very well, did as he liked, and
slept all he could. Nenila Makarievna had introduced into her household
'foreign ways,' as the neighbours used to say; she kept few servants,
and had them neatly dressed. She was fretted by ambition; she wanted at
least to be the wife of the marshal of the nobility of the district; but
the gentry of the district, though they dined at her house to their
hearts' content, did not choose her husband, but first the retired
premier-major Burkolts, and then the retired second major Burundukov.
Mr. Perekatov seemed to them too extreme a product of the capital.

Mr. Perekatov's daughter, Mashenka, was in face like her father. Nenila
Makarievna had taken the greatest pains with her education. She spoke
French well, and played the piano fairly. She was of medium height,
rather plump and white; her rather full face was lighted up by a kindly
and merry smile; her flaxen, not over-abundant hair, her hazel eyes, her
pleasant voice--everything about her was gently pleasing, and that was
all. On the other hand the absence of all affectation and
conventionality, an amount of culture exceptional in a country girl, the
freedom of her expressions, the quiet simplicity of her words and looks
could not but be striking in her. She had developed at her own free
will; Nenila Makarievna did not keep her in restraint.

One morning at twelve o'clock the whole family of the Perekatovs were in
the drawing-room. The husband in a round green coat, a high check
cravat, and pea-green trousers with straps, was standing at the window,
very busily engaged in catching flies. The daughter was sitting at her
embroidery frame; her small dimpled little hand rose and fell slowly and
gracefully over the canvas. Nenila Makarievna was sitting on the sofa,
gazing in silence at the floor.

'Did you send an invitation to the regiment at Kirilovo, Sergei
Sergeitch?' she asked her husband.

'For this evening? To be sure I did, ma chere.' (He was under the
strictest orders not to call her 'little mother.') 'To be sure!'

'There are positively no gentlemen,' pursued Nenila Makarievna. 'Nobody
for the girls to dance with.'

Her husband sighed, as though crushed by the absence of partners.

'Mamma,' Masha began all at once, 'is Monsieur Lutchkov asked?'

'What Lutchkov?'

'He's an officer too. They say he's a very interesting person.'

'How's that?'

'Oh, he's not good-looking and he's not young, but every one's afraid of
him. He's a dreadful duellist.' (Mamma frowned a little.) 'I should so
like to see him.'

Sergei Sergeitch interrupted his daughter.

'What is there to see in him, my darling? Do you suppose he must look
like Lord Byron?' (At that time we were only just beginning to talk
about Lord Byron.) 'Nonsense! Why, I declare, my dear, there was a time
when I had a terrible character as a fighting man.'

Masha looked wonderingly at her parent, laughed, then jumped up and
kissed him on the cheek. His wife smiled a little, too... but Sergei
Sergeitch had spoken the truth.

'I don't know if that gentleman is coming,' observed Nenila Makarievna.
'Possibly he may come too.'

The daughter sighed.

'Mind you don't go and fall in love with him,' remarked Sergei
Sergeitch. 'I know you girls are all like that nowadays--so--what shall
I say?--romantic...'

'No,' Masha responded simply.

Nenila Makarievna looked coldly at her husband. Sergei Sergeitch played
with his watch-chain in some embarrassment, then took his wide-brimmed,
English hat from the table, and set off to see after things on the
estate.

His dog timidly and meekly followed him. As an intelligent animal, she
was well aware that her master was not a person of very great authority in
the house, and behaved herself accordingly with modesty and circumspection.

Nenila Makarievna went up to her daughter, gently raised her head, and
looked affectionately into her eyes. 'Will you tell me when you fall in
love?' she asked.

Masha kissed her mother's hand, smiling, and nodded her head several
times in the affirmative.

'Mind you do,' observed Nenila Makarievna, stroking her cheek, and she
went out after her husband. Masha leaned back in her chair, dropped her
head on her bosom, interlaced her fingers, and looked long out of
window, screwing up her eyes... A slight flush passed over her fresh
cheeks; with a sigh she drew herself up, was setting to work again, but
dropped her needle, leaned her face on her hand, and biting the tips of
her nails, fell to dreaming... then glanced at her own shoulder, at her
outstretched hand, got up, went to the window, laughed, put on her hat
and went out into the garden.

That evening at eight o'clock, the guests began to arrive. Madame
Perekatov with great affability received and 'entertained' the ladies,
Mashenka the girls; Sergei Sergeitch talked about the crops with the
gentlemen and continually glanced towards his wife. Soon there arrived
the young dandies, the officers, intentionally a little late; at last
the colonel himself, accompanied by his adjutants, Kister and Lutchkov.
He presented them to the lady of the house. Lutchkov bowed without
speaking, Kister muttered the customary 'extremely delighted'... Mr.
Perekatov went up to the colonel, pressed his hand warmly and looked him
in the face with great cordiality. The colonel promptly looked
forbidding. The dancing began. Kister asked Mashenka for a dance. At
that time the _Ecossaise_ was still flourishing.

'Do tell me, please,' Masha said to him, when, after galloping twenty
times to the end of the room, they stood at last, the first couple, 'why
isn't your friend dancing?'

'Which friend?'

Masha pointed with the tip of her fan at Lutchkov.

'He never dances,' answered Kister.

'Why did he come then?'

Kister was a little disconcerted. 'He wished to have the pleasure...'

Mashenka interrupted him. 'You've not long been transferred into our
regiment, I think?'

'Into your regiment,' observed Kister, with a smile: 'no, not long.'

'Aren't you dull here?'

'Oh no... I find such delightful society here... and the scenery!'...
Kister launched into eulogies of the scenery. Masha listened to him,
without raising her head. Avdey Ivanovitch was standing in a corner,
looking indifferently at the dancers.

'How old is Mr. Lutchkov?' she asked suddenly.

'Oh... thirty-five, I fancy,' answered Kister.

'They say he's a dangerous man... hot-tempered,' Masha added hurriedly.

'He is a little hasty... but still, he's a very fine man.'

'They say every one's afraid of him.'

Kister laughed.

'And you?'

'I'm a friend of his.'

'Really?'

'Your turn, your turn,' was shrieked at them from all sides. They
started and began galloping again right across the room.

'Well, I congratulate you,' Kister said to Lutchkov, going up to him
after the dance; 'the daughter of the house does nothing but ask
questions about you.'

'Really?' Lutchkov responded scornfully.

'On my honour! And you know she's extremely nice-looking; only look at
her.'

'Which of them is she?'

Kister pointed out Masha.

'Ah, not bad.' And Lutchkov yawned.

'Cold-hearted person!' cried Kister, and he ran off to ask another girl
to dance.

Avdey Ivanovitch was extremely delighted at the fact Kister had
mentioned to him, though he did yawn, and even yawned loudly. To arouse
curiosity flattered his vanity intensely: love he despised--in
words--but inwardly he was himself aware that it would be a hard and
difficult task for him to win love.... A hard and difficult task for him
to win love, but easy and simple enough to wear a mask of indifference,
of silent haughtiness. Avdey Ivanovitch was unattractive and no longer
young; but on the other hand he enjoyed a terrible reputation--and
consequently he had every right to pose. He was used to the bitter,
unspoken enjoyment of grim loneliness. It was not the first time he had
attracted the attention of women; some had even tried to get upon more
friendly terms with him, but he repelled their advances with exasperated
obstinacy; he knew that sentiment was not in his line (during tender
interviews, avowals, he first became awkward and vulgar, and, through
anger, rude to the point of grossness, of insult); he remembered that
the two or three women with whom he had at different times been on a
friendly footing had rapidly grown cool to him after the first moment of
closer intimacy, and had of their own impulse made haste to get away
from him... and so he had at last schooled himself to remain an enigma,
and to scorn what destiny had denied him.... This is, I fancy, the only
sort of scorn people in general do feel. No sort of frank, spontaneous,
that is to say good, demonstration of passion suited Lutchkov; he was
bound to keep a continual check on himself, even when he was angry.
Kister was the only person who was not disgusted when Lutchkov broke
into laughter; the kind-hearted German's eyes shone with the generous
delight of sympathy, when he read Avdey his favourite passages from
Schiller, while the bully would sit facing him with lowering looks, like
a wolf.... Kister danced till he was worn out, Lutchkov never left his
corner, scowled, glanced stealthily at Masha, and meeting her eyes, at
once threw an expression of indifference into his own. Masha danced
three times with Kister. The enthusiastic youth inspired her with
confidence. She chatted with him gaily enough, but at heart she was not
at ease. Lutchkov engrossed her thoughts.

A mazurka tune struck up. The officers fell to bounding up and down,
tapping with their heels, and tossing the epaulettes on their shoulders;
the civilians tapped with their heels too. Lutchkov still did not stir
from his place, and slowly followed the couples with his eyes, as they
whirled by. Some one touched his sleeve... he looked round; his
neighbour pointed him out Masha. She was standing before him with
downcast eyes, holding out her hand to him. Lutchkov for the first
moment gazed at her in perplexity, then he carelessly took off his
sword, threw his hat on the floor, picked his way awkwardly among the
arm-chairs, took Masha by the hand, and went round the circle, with no
capering up and down nor stamping, as it were unwillingly performing an
unpleasant duty.... Masha's heart beat violently.

'Why don't you dance?' she asked him at last.

'I don't care for it,' answered Lutchkov.

'Where's your place?'

'Over there.'

Lutchkov conducted Masha to her chair, coolly bowed to her and coolly
returned to his corner... but there was an agreeable stirring of the
spleen within him.

Kister asked Masha for a dance.

'What a strange person your friend is!'

'He does interest you...' said Fyodor Fedoritch, with a sly twinkle of
his blue and kindly eyes.

'Yes... he must be very unhappy.'

'He unhappy? What makes you suppose so?' And Fyodor Fedoritch laughed.

'You don't know... you don't know...' Masha solemnly shook her head with
an important air.

'Me not know? How's that?'...

Masha shook her head again and glanced towards Lutchkov. Avdey
Ivanovitch noticed the glance, shrugged his shoulders imperceptibly,
and walked away into the other room.


III


Several months had passed since that evening. Lutchkov had not once been
at the Perekatovs'. But Kister visited them pretty often. Nenila
Makarievna had taken a fancy to him, but it was not she that attracted
Fyodor Fedoritch. He liked Masha. Being an inexperienced person who had
not yet talked himself out, he derived great pleasure from the
interchange of ideas and feelings, and he had a simple-hearted faith in
the possibility of a calm and exalted friendship between a young man and
a young girl.

One day his three well-fed and skittish horses whirled him rapidly along
to Mr. Perekatov's house. It was a summer day, close and sultry. Not a
cloud anywhere. The blue of the sky was so thick and dark on the horizon
that the eye mistook it for storm-cloud. The house Mr. Perekatov had
erected for a summer residence had been, with the foresight usual in the
steppes, built with every window directly facing the sun. Nenila
Makarievna had every shutter closed from early morning. Kister walked
into the cool, half-dark drawing-room. The light lay in long lines on
the floor and in short, close streaks on the walls. The Perekatov family
gave Fyodor Fedoritch a friendly reception. After dinner Nenila
Makarievna went away to her own room to lie down; Mr. Perekatov settled
himself on the sofa in the drawing-room; Masha sat near the window at
her embroidery frame, Kister facing her. Masha, without opening her
frame, leaned lightly over it, with her head in her hands. Kister began
telling her something; she listened inattentively, as though waiting for
something, looked from time to time towards her father, and all at once
stretched out her hand.

'Listen, Fyodor Fedoritch... only speak a little more softly... papa's
asleep.'

Mr. Perekatov had indeed as usual dropped asleep on the sofa, with his
head hanging and his mouth a little open.

'What is it?' Kister inquired with curiosity.

'You will laugh at me.'

'Oh, no, really!...'

Masha let her head sink till only the upper part of her face remained
uncovered by her hands and in a half whisper, not without hesitation,
asked Kister why it was he never brought Mr. Lutchkov with him. It was
not the first time Masha had mentioned him since the ball.... Kister did
not speak. Masha glanced timorously over her interlaced fingers.

'May I tell you frankly what I think?' Kister asked her.

'Oh, why not? of course.'

'It seems to me that Lutchkov has made a great impression on you.'

'No!' answered Masha, and she bent over, as though wishing to examine
the pattern more closely; a narrow golden streak of light lay on her
hair; 'no... but...'

'Well, but?' said Kister, smiling.

'Well, don't you see,' said Masha, and she suddenly lifted her head, so
that the streak of light fell straight in her eyes; 'don't you see...
he...'

'He interests you....'

'Well... yes...' Masha said slowly; she flushed a little, turned her
head a little away and in that position went on talking. 'There is
something about him so... There, you're laughing at me,' she added
suddenly, glancing swiftly at Fyodor Fedoritch.

Fyodor Fedoritch smiled the gentlest smile imaginable.

'I tell you everything, whatever comes into my head,' Masha went on: 'I
know that you are a very'... (she nearly said great) 'good friend of
mine.'

Kister bowed. Masha ceased speaking, and shyly held out her hand to him;
Fyodor Fedoritch pressed the tips of her fingers respectfully.

'He must be a very queer person!' observed Masha, and again she propped
her elbows on the frame.

'Queer?'

'Of course; he interests me just because he is queer!' Masha added
slily.

'Lutchkov is a noble, a remarkable man,' Kister rejoined solemnly. 'They
don't know him in our regiment, they don't appreciate him, they only see
his external side. He's embittered, of course, and strange and
impatient, but his heart is good.'

Masha listened greedily to Fyodor Fedoritch.

'I will bring him to see you, I'll tell him there's no need to be afraid
of you, that it's absurd for him to be so shy... I'll tell him... Oh!
yes, I know what to say... Only you mustn't suppose, though, that I
would...' (Kister was embarrassed, Masha too was embarrassed.)...
'Besides, after all, of course you only... like him....'

'Of course, just as I like lots of people.'

Kister looked mischievously at her.

'All right, all right,' he said with a satisfied air; 'I'll bring him to
you....'

'Oh, no....'

'All right, I tell you it will be all right.... I'll arrange
everything.'

'You are so...' Masha began with a smile, and she shook her finger at
him. Mr. Perekatov yawned and opened his eyes.

'Why, I almost think I've been asleep,' he muttered with surprise. This
doubt and this surprise were repeated daily. Masha and Kister began
discussing Schiller.

Fyodor Fedoritch was not however quite at ease; he felt something like a
stir of envy within him... and was generously indignant with himself.
Nenila Makarievna came down into the drawing-room. Tea was brought in.
Mr. Perekatov made his dog jump several times over a stick, and then
explained he had taught it everything himself, while the dog wagged its
tail deferentially, licked itself and blinked. When at last the great
heat began to lessen, and an evening breeze blew up, the whole family
went out for a walk in the birch copse. Fyodor Fedoritch was continually
glancing at Masha, as though giving her to understand that he would
carry out her behests; Masha felt at once vexed with herself, and happy
and uncomfortable. Kister suddenly, apropos of nothing, plunged into a
rather high-flown discourse upon love in the abstract, and upon
friendship... but catching Nenila Makarievna's bright and vigilant eye
he, as abruptly, changed the subject. The sunset was brilliant and
glowing. A broad, level meadow lay outstretched before the birch copse.
Masha took it into her head to start a game of 'catch-catch.'
Maid-servants and footmen came out; Mr. Perekatov stood with his wife,
Kister with Masha. The maids ran with deferential little shrieks; Mr.
Perekatov's valet had the temerity to separate Nenila Makarievna from
her spouse; one of the servant-girls respectfully paired off with her
master; Fyodor Fedoritch was not parted from Masha. Every time as he
regained his place, he said two or three words to her; Masha, all
flushed with running, listened to him with a smile, passing her hand
over her hair. After supper, Kister took leave.

It was a still, starlight night. Kister took off his cap. He was
excited; there was a lump in his throat. 'Yes,' he said at last, almost
aloud; 'she loves him: I will bring them together; I will justify her
confidence in me.' Though there was as yet nothing to prove a definite
passion for Lutchkov on Masha's part, though, according to her own
account, he only excited her curiosity, Kister had by this time made up
a complete romance, and worked out his own duty in the matter. He
resolved to sacrifice his feelings--the more readily as 'so far I have
no other sentiment for her but sincere devotion,' thought he. Kister
really was capable of sacrificing himself to friendship, to a recognised
duty. He had read a great deal, and so fancied himself a person of
experience and even of penetration; he had no doubt of the truth of his
suppositions; he did not suspect that life is endlessly varied, and
never repeats itself. Little by little, Fyodor Fedoritch worked himself
into a state of ecstasy. He began musing with emotion on his mission. To
be the mediator between a shy, loving girl and a man possibly embittered
only because he had never once in his life loved and been loved; to
bring them together; to reveal their own feelings to them, and then to
withdraw, letting no one know the greatness of his sacrifice, what a
splendid feat! In spite of the coolness of the night, the simple-hearted
dreamer's face burned....

Next day he went round to Lutchkov early in the morning.

Avdey Ivanovitch was, as usual, lying on the sofa, smoking a pipe.
Kister greeted him.

'I was at the Perekatovs yesterday,' he said with some solemnity.

'Ah!' Lutchkov responded indifferently, and he yawned.

'Yes. They are splendid people.'

'Really?'

'We talked about you.'

'Much obliged; with which of them was that?'

'With the old people... and the daughter too.'

'Ah! that... little fat thing?'

'She's a splendid girl, Lutchkov.'

'To be sure, they're all splendid.'

'No, Lutchkov, you don't know her. I have never met such a clever, sweet
and sensitive girl.'

Lutchkov began humming through his nose:

  'In the Hamburg Gazette,
   You've read, I dare say,
   How the year before last,
   Munich gained the day....'


'But I assure you....'

'You 're in love with her, Fedya,' Lutchkov remarked sarcastically.

'Not at all. I never even thought of it.'

'Fedya, you're in love with her!'

'What nonsense! As if one couldn't...'

'You're in love with her, friend of my heart, beetle on my hearth,'
Avdey Ivanovitch chanted drawling.

'Ah, Avdey, you really ought to be ashamed!' Kister said with vexation.

With any one else Lutchkov would thereupon have kept on more than
before; Kister he did not tease. 'Well, well, sprechen Sie deutsch, Ivan
Andreitch,' he muttered in an undertone, 'don't be angry.'

'Listen, Avdey,' Kister began warmly, and he sat down beside him. 'You
know I care for you.' (Lutchkov made a wry face.) 'But there's one
thing, I'll own, I don't like about you... it's just that you won't make
friends with any one, that you will stick at home, and refuse all
intercourse with nice people. Why, there are nice people in the world,
hang it all! Suppose you have been deceived in life, have been
embittered, what of it; there's no need to rush into people's arms, of
course, but why turn your back on everybody? Why, you'll cast me off
some day, at that rate, I suppose.'

Lutchkov went on smoking coolly.

'That's how it is no one knows you... except me; goodness knows what
some people think of you... Avdey!' added Kister after a brief silence;
'do you disbelieve in virtue, Avdey?'

'Disbelieve... no, I believe in it,'... muttered Lutchkov.

Kister pressed his hand feelingly.

'I want,' he went on in a voice full of emotion, 'to reconcile you with
life. You will grow happier, blossom out... yes, blossom out. How I
shall rejoice then! Only you must let me dispose of you now and then, of
your time. To-day it's--what? Monday... to-morrow's Tuesday... on
Wednesday, yes, on Wednesday we'll go together to the Perekatovs'. They
will be so glad to see you... and we shall have such a jolly time
there... and now let me have a pipe.'

Avdey Ivanovitch lay without budging on the sofa, staring at the
ceiling. Kister lighted a pipe, went to the window, and began drumming
on the panes with his fingers.

'So they've been talking about me?' Avdey asked suddenly.

'They have,' Kister responded with meaning.

'What did they say?'

'Oh, they talked. There're very anxious to make your acquaintance.'

'Which of them's that?'

'I say, what curiosity!'

Avdey called his servant, and ordered his horse to be saddled.

'Where are you off to?'

'The riding-school.'

'Well, good-bye. So we're going to the Perekatovs', eh?'

'All right, if you like,' Lutchkov said lazily, stretching.

'Bravo, old man!' cried Kister, and he went out into the street,
pondered, and sighed deeply.


IV


Masha was just approaching the drawing-room door when the arrival of
Kister and Lutchkov was announced. She promptly returned to her own
room, and went up to the looking-glass.... Her heart was throbbing
violently. A girl came to summon her to the drawing-room. Masha drank a
little water, stopped twice on the stairs, and at last went down. Mr.
Perekatov was not at home. Nenila Makarievna was sitting on the sofa;
Lutchkov was sitting in an easy-chair, wearing his uniform, with his hat
on his knees; Kister was near him. They both got up on Masha's
entrance--Kister with his usual friendly smile, Lutchkov with a solemn
and constrained air. She bowed to them in confusion, and went up to her
mother. The first ten minutes passed off favourably. Masha recovered
herself, and gradually began to watch Lutchkov. To the questions
addressed to him by the lady of the house, he answered briefly, but
uneasily; he was shy, like all egoistic people. Nenila Makarievna
suggested a stroll in the garden to her guests, but did not herself go
beyond the balcony. She did not consider it essential never to lose
sight of her daughter, and to be constantly hobbling after her with a
fat reticule in her hands, after the fashion of many mothers in the
steppes. The stroll lasted rather a long while. Masha talked more with
Kister, but did not dare to look either at him or at Lutchkov. Avdey
Ivanovitch did not address a remark to her; Kister's voice showed
agitation. He laughed and chattered a little over-much.... They reached
the stream. A couple of yards or so from the bank there was a
water-lily, which seemed to rest on the smooth surface of the water,
encircled by its broad, round leaves.

'What a beautiful flower!' observed Masha.

She had hardly uttered these words when Lutchkov pulled out his sword,
clutched with one hand at the frail twigs of a willow, and, bending his
whole body over the water, cut off the head of the flower. 'It's deep
here, take care!' Masha cried in terror. Lutchkov with the tip of his
sword brought the flower to the bank, at her very feet. She bent down,
picked up the flower, and gazed with tender, delighted amazement at
Avdey. 'Bravo!' cried Kister. 'And I can't swim...' Lutchkov observed
abruptly. Masha did not like that remark. 'What made him say that?' she
wondered.

Lutchkov and Kister remained at Mr. Perekatov's till the evening.
Something new and unknown was passing in Masha's soul; a dreamy
perplexity was reflected more than once in her face. She moved somehow
more slowly, she did not flush on meeting her mother's eyes--on the
contrary, she seemed to seek them, as though she would question her.
During the whole evening, Lutchkov paid her a sort of awkward attention;
but even this awkwardness gratified her innocent vanity. When they had
both taken leave, with a promise to come again in a few days, she
quietly went off to her own room, and for a long while, as it were, in
bewilderment she looked about her. Nenila Makarievna came to her, kissed
and embraced her as usual. Masha opened her lips, tried to say
something--and did not utter a word. She wanted to confess---she did not
know what. Her soul was gently wandering in dreams. On the little table
by her bedside the flower Lutchkov had picked lay in water in a clean
glass. Masha, already in bed, sat up cautiously, leaned on her elbow,
and her maiden lips softly touched the fresh white petals....

'Well,' Kister questioned his friend next day, 'do you like the
Perekatovs? Was I right? eh? Tell me.'

Lutchkov did not answer.

'No, do tell me, do tell me!'

'Really, I don't know.'

'Nonsense, come now!'

'That... what's her name... Mashenka's all right; not bad-looking.'

'There, you see...' said Kister--and he said no more.

Five days later Lutchkov of his own accord suggested that they should
call on the Perekatovs.

Alone he would not have gone to see them; in Fyodor Fedoritch's absence
he would have had to keep up a conversation, and that he could not do,
and as far as possible avoided.

On the second visit of the two friends, Masha was much more at her ease.
She was by now secretly glad that she had not disturbed her mamma by an
uninvited avowal. Before dinner, Avdey had offered to try a young horse,
not yet broken in, and, in spite of its frantic rearing, he mastered it
completely. In the evening he thawed, and fell into joking and
laughing--and though he soon pulled himself up, yet he had succeeded in
making a momentary unpleasant impression on Masha. She could not yet be
sure herself what the feeling exactly was that Lutchkov excited in her,
but everything she did not like in him she set down to the influence of
misfortune, of loneliness.


V


The friends began to pay frequent visits to the Perekatovs'. Kister's
position became more and more painful. He did not regret his action...
no, but he desired at least to cut short the time of his trial. His
devotion to Masha increased daily; she too felt warmly towards him; but
to be nothing more than a go-between, a confidant, a friend even--it's a
dreary, thankless business! Coldly idealistic people talk a great deal
about the sacredness of suffering, the bliss of suffering... but to
Kister's warm and simple heart his sufferings were not a source of any
bliss whatever. At last, one day, when Lutchkov, ready dressed, came to
fetch him, and the carriage was waiting at the steps, Fyodor Fedoritch,
to the astonishment of his friend, announced point-blank that he should
stay at home. Lutchkov entreated him, was vexed and angry... Kister
pleaded a headache. Lutchkov set off alone.

The bully had changed in many ways of late. He left his comrades in
peace, did not annoy the novices, and though his spirit had not
'blossomed out,' as Kister had foretold, yet he certainly had toned down
a little. He could not have been called 'disillusioned' before--he had
seen and experienced almost nothing--and so it is not surprising that
Masha engrossed his thoughts. His heart was not touched though; only his
spleen was satisfied. Masha's feelings for him were of a strange kind.
She almost never looked him straight in the face; she could not talk to
him.... When they happened to be left alone together, Masha felt
horribly awkward. She took him for an exceptional man, and felt overawed
by him and agitated in his presence, fancied she did not understand him,
and was unworthy of his confidence; miserably, drearily--but
continually--she thought of him. Kister's society, on the contrary,
soothed her and put her in a good humour, though it neither overjoyed
nor excited her. With him she could chatter away for hours together,
leaning on his arm, as though he were her brother, looking
affectionately into his face, and laughing with his laughter--and she
rarely thought of him. In Lutchkov there was something enigmatic for the
young girl; she felt that his soul was 'dark as a forest,' and strained
every effort to penetrate into that mysterious gloom.... So children
stare a long while into a deep well, till at last they make out at the
very bottom the still, black water.

On Lutchkov's coming into the drawing-room alone, Masha was at first
scared... but then she felt delighted. She had more than once fancied
that there existed some sort of misunderstanding between Lutchkov and
her, that he had not hitherto had a chance of revealing himself.
Lutchkov mentioned the cause of Kister's absence; the parents expressed
their regret, but Masha looked incredulously at Avdey, and felt faint
with expectation. After dinner they were left alone; Masha did not know
what to say, she sat down to the piano; her fingers flitted hurriedly
and tremblingly over the keys; she was continually stopping and waiting
for the first word... Lutchkov did not understand nor care for music.
Masha began talking to him about Rossini (Rossini was at that time just
coming into fashion) and about Mozart.... Avdey Ivanovitch responded:
'Quite so,' 'by no means,' 'beautiful,' 'indeed,' and that was all.
Masha played some brilliant variations on one of Rossini's airs.
Lutchkov listened and listened... and when at last she turned to him,
his face expressed such unfeigned boredom, that Masha jumped up at once
and closed the piano. She went up to the window, and for a long while
stared into the garden; Lutchkov did not stir from his seat, and still
remained silent. Impatience began to take the place of timidity in
Masha's soul. 'What is it?' she wondered, 'won't you... or can't you?'
It was Lutchkov's turn to feel shy. He was conscious again of his
miserable, overwhelming diffidence; already he was raging!... 'It was
the devil's own notion to have anything to do with the wretched girl,'
he muttered to himself.... And all the while how easy it was to touch
Masha's heart at that instant! Whatever had been said by such an
extraordinary though eccentric man, as she imagined Lutchkov, she would
have understood everything, have excused anything, have believed
anything.... But this burdensome, stupid silence! Tears of vexation were
standing in her eyes. 'If he doesn't want to be open, if I am really not
worthy of his confidence, why does he go on coming to see us? Or perhaps
it is that I don't set the right way to work to make him reveal
himself?'... And she turned swiftly round, and glanced so inquiringly,
so searchingly at him, that he could not fail to understand her glance,
and could not keep silence any longer....

'Marya Sergievna,' he pronounced falteringly; 'I... I've... I ought to
tell you something....'

'Speak,' Masha responded rapidly.

Lutchkov looked round him irresolutely.

'I can't now...'

'Why not?'

'I should like to speak to you... alone....'

'Why, we are alone now.'

'Yes... but... here in the house....'

Masha was at her wits' end.... 'If I refuse,' she thought, 'it's all
over.'... Curiosity was the ruin of Eve....

'I agree,' she said at last.

'When then? Where?'

Masha's breathing came quickly and unevenly.

'To-morrow... in the evening. You know the copse above the Long
Meadow?'...

'Behind the mill?'

Masha nodded.

'What time?'

'Wait...'

She could not bring out another word; her voice broke... she turned pale
and went quickly out of the room.

A quarter of an hour later, Mr. Perekatov, with his characteristic
politeness, conducted Lutchkov to the hall, pressed his hand feelingly,
and begged him 'not to forget them'; then, having let out his guest, he
observed with dignity to the footman that it would be as well for him to
shave, and without awaiting a reply, returned with a careworn air to his
own room, with the same careworn air sat down on the sofa, and
guilelessly dropped asleep on the spot.

'You're a little pale to-day,' Nenila Makarievna said to her daughter,
on the evening of the same day. 'Are you quite well?'

'Yes, mamma.'

Nenila Makarievna set straight the kerchief on the girl's neck.

'You are very pale; look at me,' she went on, with that motherly
solicitude in which there is none the less audible a note of parental
authority: 'there, now, your eyes look heavy too. You're not well,
Masha.'

'My head does ache a little,' said Masha, to find some way of escape.

'There, I knew it.' Nenila Makarievna put some scent on Masha's
forehead. 'You're not feverish, though.'

Masha stooped down, and picked a thread off the floor.

Nenila Makarievna's arms lay softly round Masha's slender waist.

'It seems to me you have something you want to tell me,' she said
caressingly, not loosing her hands.

Masha shuddered inwardly.

'I? Oh, no, mamma.'

Masha's momentary confusion did not escape her mother's attention.

'Oh, yes, you do.... Think a little.'

But Masha had had time to regain her self-possession, and instead of
answering, she kissed her mother's hand with a laugh.

'And so you've nothing to tell me?'

'No, really, nothing.'

'I believe you,' responded Nenila Makarievna, after a short silence. 'I
know you keep nothing secret from me.... That's true, isn't it?'

'Of course, mamma.'

Masha could not help blushing a little, though.

'You do quite rightly. It would be wrong of you to keep anything from
me.... You know how I love you, Masha.'

'Oh yes, mamma.'

And Masha hugged her.

'There, there, that's enough.' (Nenila Makarievna walked about the
room.) 'Oh tell me,' she went on in the voice of one who feels that the
question asked is of no special importance; 'what were you talking about
with Avdey Ivanovitch to-day?'

'With Avdey Ivanovitch?' Masha repeated serenely. 'Oh, all sorts of
things....'

'Do you like him?'

'Oh yes, I like him.'

'Do you remember how anxious you were to get to know him, how excited
you were?'

Masha turned away and laughed.

'What a strange person he is!' Nenila Makarievna observed
good-humouredly.

Masha felt an inclination to defend Lutchkov, but she held her tongue.

'Yes, of course,' she said rather carelessly; 'he is a queer fish, but
still he's a nice man!'

'Oh, yes!... Why didn't Fyodor Fedoritch come?'

'He was unwell, I suppose. Ah! by the way, Fyodor Fedoritch wanted to
make me a present of a puppy.... Will you let me?'

'What? Accept his present?'

'Yes.'

'Of course.'

'Oh, thank you!' said Masha, 'thank you, thank you!'

Nenila Makarievna got as far as the door and suddenly turned back again.

'Do you remember your promise, Masha?'

'What promise?'

'You were going to tell me when you fall in love.'

'I remember.'

'Well... hasn't the time come yet?' (Masha laughed musically.) 'Look
into my eyes.'

Masha looked brightly and boldly at her mother.

'It can't be!' thought Nenila Makarievna, and she felt reassured. 'As if
she could deceive me!... How could I think of such a thing!... She's
still a perfect baby....'

She went away....

'But this is really wicked,' thought Masha.


VI


Kister had already gone to bed when Lutchkov came into his room. The
bully's face never expressed _one_ feeling; so it was now: feigned
indifference, coarse delight, consciousness of his own superiority... a
number of different emotions were playing over his features.

'Well, how was it? how was it?' Kister made haste to question him.

'Oh! I went. They sent you greetings.'

'Well? Are they all well?'

'Of course, why not?'

'Did they ask why I didn't come?'

'Yes, I think so.'

Lutchkov stared at the ceiling and hummed out of tune. Kister looked
down and mused.

'But, look here,' Lutchkov brought out in a husky, jarring voice,
'you're a clever fellow, I dare say, you're a cultured fellow, but
you're a good bit out in your ideas sometimes for all that, if I may
venture to say so.'

'How do you mean?'

'Why, look here. About women, for instance. How you're always cracking
them up! You're never tired of singing their praises! To listen to you,
they're all angels.... Nice sort of angels!'

'I like and respect women, but------'

'Oh, of course, of course,' Avdey cut him short. 'I am not going to
argue with you. That's quite beyond me! I'm a plain man.'

'I was going to say that... But why just to-day... just now,... are you
talking about women?'

'Oh, nothing!' Avdey smiled with great meaning. 'Nothing!'

Kister looked searchingly at his friend. He imagined (simple heart!)
that Masha had been treating him badly; had been torturing him, perhaps,
as only women can....

'You are feeling hurt, my poor Avdey; tell me...'

Lutchkov went off into a chuckle.

'Oh, well, I don't fancy I've much to feel hurt about,' he said, in a
drawling tone, complacently stroking his moustaches. 'No, only, look
here, Fedya,' he went on with the manner of a preceptor, 'I was only
going to point out that you're altogether out of it about women, my lad.
You believe me, Fedya, they 're all alike. One's only got to take a
little trouble, hang about them a bit, and you've got things in your own
hands. Look at Masha Perekatov now....'

'Oh!'

Lutchkov tapped his foot on the floor and shook his head.

'Is there anything so specially attractive about me, hey? I shouldn't
have thought there was anything. There isn't anything, is there? And
here, I've a clandestine appointment for to-morrow.'

Kister sat up, leaned on his elbow, and stared in amazement at Lutchkov.

'For the evening, in a wood...' Avdey Ivanovitch continued serenely.
'Only don't you go and imagine it means much. It's only a bit of fun.
It's slow here, don't you know. A pretty little girl,... well, says I,
why not? Marriage, of course, I'm not going in for... but there, I like
to recall my young days. I don't care for hanging about petticoats--but
I may as well humour the baggage. We can listen to the nightingales
together. Of course, it's really more in your line; but the wench has no
eyes, you see. I should have thought I wasn't worth looking at beside
you.'

Lutchkov talked on a long while. But Kister did not hear him. His head
was going round. He turned pale and passed his hand over his face.
Lutchkov swayed up and down in his low chair, screwed up his eyes,
stretched, and putting down Kister's emotion to jealousy, was almost
gasping with delight. But it was not jealousy that was torturing Kister;
he was wounded, not by the fact itself, but by Avdey's coarse
carelessness, his indifferent and contemptuous references to Masha. He
was still staring intently at the bully, and it seemed as if for the
first time he was thoroughly seeing his face. So this it was he had been
scheming for! This for which he had sacrificed his own inclinations!
Here it was, the blessed influence of love.

'Avdey... do you mean to say you don't care for her?' he muttered at
last.

'O innocence! O Arcadia!' responded Avdey, with a malignant chuckle.

Kister in the goodness of his heart did not give in even then; perhaps,
thought he, Avdey is in a bad temper and is 'humbugging' from old
habit... he has not yet found a new language to express new feelings.
And was there not in himself some other feeling lurking under his
indignation? Did not Lutchkov's avowal strike him so unpleasantly simply
because it concerned Masha? How could one tell, perhaps Lutchkov really
was in love with her.... Oh, no! no! a thousand times no! That man in
love?... That man was loathsome with his bilious, yellow face, his
nervous, cat-like movements, crowing with conceit... loathsome! No, not
in such words would Kister have uttered to a devoted friend the secret
of his love.... In overflowing happiness, in dumb rapture, with bright,
blissful tears in his eyes would he have flung himself on his bosom....

'Well, old man,' queried Avdey, 'own up now you didn't expect it, and
now you feel put out. Eh? jealous? Own up, Fedya. Eh? eh?'

Kister was about to speak out, but he turned with his face to the wall.
'Speak openly... to him? Not for anything!' he whispered to himself. 'He
wouldn't understand me... so be it! He supposes none but evil feelings
in me--so be it!...'

Avdey got up.

'I see you're sleepy,' he said with assumed sympathy: 'I don't want to
be in your way. Pleasant dreams, my boy... pleasant dreams!'

And Lutchkov went away, very well satisfied with himself.

Kister could not get to sleep before the morning. With feverish
persistence he turned over and over and thought over and over the same
single idea--an occupation only too well known to unhappy lovers.

'Even if Lutchkov doesn't care for her,' he mused, 'if she has flung
herself at his head, anyway he ought not even with me, with his friend,
to speak so disrespectfully, so offensively of her! In what way is she
to blame? How could any one have no feeling for a poor, inexperienced
girl?

'But can she really have a secret appointment with him? She has--yes,
she certainly has. Avdey's not a liar, he never tells a lie. But perhaps
it means nothing, a mere freak....

'But she does not know him.... He is capable, I dare say, of insulting
her. After to-day, I wouldn't answer for anything.... And wasn't it I
myself that praised him up and exalted him? Wasn't it I who excited her
curiosity?... But who could have known this? Who could have foreseen
it?...

'Foreseen what? Has he so long ceased to be my friend?... But, after
all, was he ever my friend? What a disenchantment! What a lesson!'

All the past turned round and round before Kister's eyes. 'Yes, I did
like him,' he whispered at last. 'Why has my liking cooled so
suddenly?... And do I dislike him? No, why did I ever like him? I
alone?'

Kister's loving heart had attached itself to Avdey for the very reason
that all the rest avoided him. But the good-hearted youth did not know
himself how great his good-heartedness was.

'My duty,' he went on, 'is to warn Marya Sergievna. But how? What right
have I to interfere in other people's affairs, in other people's love?
How do I know the nature of that love? Perhaps even in Lutchkov.... No,
no!' he said aloud, with irritation, almost with tears, smoothing out
his pillow, 'that man's stone....

'It is my own fault... I have lost a friend.... A precious friend,
indeed! And she's not worth much either!... What a sickening egoist I
am! No, no! from the bottom of my soul I wish them happiness....
Happiness! but he is laughing at her!... And why does he dye his
moustaches? I do, really, believe he does.... Ah, how ridiculous I am!'
he repeated, as he fell asleep.


VII


The next morning Kister went to call on the Perekatovs. When they met,
Kister noticed a great change in Masha, and Masha, too, found a change
in him, but neither spoke of it. The whole morning they both, contrary
to their habit, felt uncomfortable. Kister had prepared at home a number
of hints and phrases of double meaning and friendly counsels... but all
this previous pre