ave subsided, it may prove that they will receive the kindest usage from
some of those on whom they have heretofore most closely depended.

But while I have no doubt that now, after the close of the war, it is not
competent for the General Government to extend the elective franchise in
the several States, it is equally clear that good faith requires the
security of the freedmen in their liberty and their property, their right
to labor, and their right to claim the just return of their labor. I can
not too strongly urge a dispassionate treatment of this subject, which
should be carefully kept aloof from all party strife. We must equally avoid
hasty assumptions of any natural impossibility for the two races to live
side by side in a state of mutual benefit and good will. The experiment
involves us in no inconsistency; let us, then, go on and make that
experiment in good faith, and not be too easily disheartened. The country
is in need of labor, and the freedmen are in need of employment, culture,
and protection. While their right of voluntary migration and expatriation
is not to be questioned, I would not advise their forced removal and
colonization. Let us rather encourage them to honorable and useful
industry, where it may be beneficial to themselves and to the country; and,
instead of hasty anticipations of the certainty of failure, let there be
nothing wanting to the fair trial of the experiment. The change in their
condition is the substitution of labor by contract for the status of
slavery. The freedman can not fairly be accused of unwillingness to work so
long as a doubt remains about his freedom of choice in his pursuits and the
certainty of his recovering his stipulated wages. In this the interests of
the employer and the employed coincide. The employer desires in his workmen
spirit and alacrity, and these can be permanently secured in no other way.
And if the one ought to be able to enforce the contract, so ought the
other. The public interest will be best promoted if the several States will
provide adequate protection and remedies for the freedmen. Until this is in
some way accomplished there is no chance for the advantageous use of their
labor, and the blame of ill success will not rest on them.

I know that sincere philanthropy is earnest for the immediate realization
of its remotest aims; but time is always an element in reform. It is one of
the greatest acts on record to have brought 4,000,000 people into freedom.
The career of free industry must be fairly opened to them, and then their
future prosperity and condition must, after all, rest mainly on themselves.
If they fail, and so perish away, let us be careful that the failure shall
not be attributable to any denial of justice. In all that relates to the
destiny of the freedmen we need not be too anxious to read the future; many
incidents which, from a speculative point of view, might raise alarm will
quietly settle themselves. Now that slavery is at an end, or near its end,
the greatness of its evil in the point of view of public economy becomes
more and more apparent. Slavery was essentially a monopoly of labor, and as
such locked the States where it prevailed against the incoming of free
industry. Where labor was the property of the capitalist, the white man was
excluded from employment, or had but the second best chance of finding it;
and the foreign emigrant turned away from the region where his condition
would be so precarious. With the destruction of the monopoly free labor
will hasten from all pans of the civilized world to assist in developing
various and immeasurable resources which have hitherto lain dormant. The
eight or nine States nearest the Gulf of Mexico have a soil of exuberant
fertility, a climate friendly to long life, and can sustain a denser
population than is found as yet in any part of our country. And the future
influx of population to them will be mainly from the North or from the most
cultivated nations in Europe. From the sufferings that have attended them
during our late struggle let us look away to the future, which is sure to
be laden for them with greater prosperity than has ever before been known.
The removal of the monopoly of slave labor is a pledge that those regions
will be peopled by a numerous and enterprising population, which will vie
with any in the Union in compactness, inventive genius, wealth, and
industry.

Our Government springs from and was made for the people--not the people for
the Government. To them it owes allegiance; from them it must derive its
courage, strength, and wisdom. But while the Government is thus bound to
defer to the people, from whom it derives its existence, it should, from
the very consideration of its origin, be strong in its power of resistance
to the establishment of inequalities. Monopolies, perpetuities, and class
legislation are contrary to the genius of free government, and ought not to
be allowed. Here there is no room for favored classes or monopolies; the
principle of our Government is that of equal laws and freedom of industry.
Wherever monopoly attains a foothold, it is sure to be a source of danger,
discord, and trouble. We shall but fulfill our duties as legislators by
according "equal and exact justice to all men," special privileges to none.
The Government is subordinate to the people; but, as the agent and
representative of the people, it must be held superior to monopolies, which
in themselves ought never to be granted, and which, where they exist, must
be subordinate and yield to the Government.

The Constitution confers on Congress the right to regulate commerce among
the several States. It is of the first necessity, for the maintenance of
the Union, that that commerce should be free and unobstructed. No State can
be justified in any device to tax the transit of travel and commerce
between States. The position of many States is such that if they were
allowed to take advantage of it for purposes of local revenue the commerce
between States might be injuriously burdened, or even virtually prohibited.
It is best, while the country is still young and while the tendency to
dangerous monopolies of this kind is still feeble, to use the power of
Congress so as to prevent any selfish impediment to the free circulation of
men and merchandise. A tax on travel and merchandise in their transit
constitutes one of the worst forms of monopoly, and the evil is increased
if coupled with a denial of the choice of route. When the vast extent of
our country is considered, it is plain that every obstacle to the free
circulation of commerce between the States ought to be sternly guarded
against by appropriate legislation within the limits of the Constitution.

The report of the Secretary of the Interior explains the condition of the
public lands, the transactions of the Patent Office and the Pension Bureau,
the management of our Indian affairs, the progress made in the construction
of the Pacific Railroad, and furnishes information in reference to matters
of local interest in the District of Columbia. It also presents evidence of
the successful operation of the homestead act, under the provisions of
which 1,160,533 acres of the public lands were entered during the last
fiscal year--more than one-fourth of the whole number of acres sold or
otherwise disposed of during that period. It is estimated that the receipts
derived from this source are sufficient to cover the expenses incident to
the survey and disposal of the lands entered under this act, and that
payments in cash to the extent of from 40 to 50 per cent will be made by
settlers who may thus at any time acquire title before the expiration of
the period at which it would otherwise vest. The homestead policy was
established only after long and earnest resistance; experience proves its
wisdom. The lands in the hands of industrious settlers, whose labor creates
wealth and contributes to the public resources, are worth more to the
United States than if they had been reserved as a solitude for future
purchasers.

The lamentable events of the last four years and the sacrifices made by the
gallant men of our Army and Navy have swelled the records of the Pension
Bureau to an unprecedented extent. On the 30th day of June last the total
number of pensioners was 85,986, requiring for their annual pay, exclusive
of expenses, the sum of $8,023,445. The number of applications that have
been allowed since that date will require a large increase of this amount
for the next fiscal year. The means for the payment of the stipends due
under existing laws to our disabled soldiers and sailors and to the
families of such as have perished in the service of the country will no
doubt be cheerfully and promptly granted. A grateful people will not
hesitate to sanction any measures having for their object the relief of
soldiers mutilated and families made fatherless in the efforts to preserve
our national existence.

The report of the Postmaster-General presents an encouraging exhibit of the
operations of the Post-Office Department during the year. The revenues of
the past year, from the loyal States alone, exceeded the maximum annual
receipts from all the States previous to the rebellion in the sum of
$6,038,091; and the annual average increase of revenue during the last four
years, compared with the revenues of the four years immediately preceding
the rebellion, was $3,533,845. The revenues of the last fiscal year
amounted to $14,556,158 and the expenditures to $13,694,728, leaving a
surplus of receipts over expenditures of $861,430. Progress has been made
in restoring the postal service in the Southern States. The views presented
by the Postmaster-General against the policy of granting subsidies to the
ocean mail steamship lines upon established routes and in favor of
continuing the present system, which limits the compensation for ocean
service to the postage earnings, are recommended to the careful
consideration of Congress.

It appears from the report of the Secretary of the Navy that while at the
commencement of the present year there were in commission 530 vessels of
all classes and descriptions, armed with 3,000 guns and manned by 51,000
men, the number of vessels at present in commission is 117, with 830 guns
and 12,128 men. By this prompt reduction of the naval forces the expenses
of the Government have been largely diminished, and a number of vessels
purchased for naval purposes from the merchant marine have been returned to
the peaceful pursuits of commerce. Since the suppression of active
hostilities our foreign squadrons have been reestablished, and consist of
vessels much more efficient than those employed on similar service previous
to the rebellion. The suggestion for the enlargement of the navy-yards, and
especially for the establishment of one in fresh water for ironclad
vessels, is deserving of consideration, as is also the recommendation for a
different location and more ample grounds for the Naval Academy.

In the report of the Secretary of War a general summary is given of the
military campaigns of 1864 and 1865, ending in the suppression of armed
resistance to the national authority in the insurgent States. The
operations of the general administrative bureaus of the War Department
during the past year are detailed and an estimate made of the
appropriations that will be required for military purposes in the fiscal
year commencing the 1st day of July, 1866. The national military force on
the 1st of May, 1865, numbered 1,000,516 men. It is proposed to reduce the
military establishment to a peace footing, comprehending 50,000 troops of
all arms, organized so as to admit of an enlargement by filling up the
ranks to 82,600 if the circumstances of the country should require an
augmentation of the Army. The volunteer force has already been reduced by
the discharge from service of over 800,000 troops, and the Department is
proceeding rapidly in the work of further reduction. The war estimates are
reduced from $516,240,131 to $33,814,461, which amount, in the opinion of
the Department, is adequate for a peace establishment. The measures of
retrenchment in each bureau and branch of the service exhibit a diligent
economy worthy of commendation. Reference is also made in the report to the
necessity of providing for a uniform militia system and to the propriety of
making suitable provision for wounded and disabled officers and soldiers.

The revenue system of the country is a subject of vital interest to its
honor and prosperity, and should command the earnest consideration of
Congress. The Secretary of the Treasury will lay before you a full and
detailed report of the receipts and disbursements of the last fiscal year,
of the first quarter of the present fiscal year, of the probable receipts
and expenditures for the other three quarters, and the estimates for the
year following the 30th of June, 1866. I might content myself with a
reference to that report, in which you will find all the information
required for your deliberations and decision, but the paramount importance
of the subject so presses itself on my own mind that I can not but lay
before you my views of the measures which are required for the good
character, and I might almost say for the existence, of this people. The
life of a republic lies certainly in the energy, virtue, and intelligence
of its citizens; but it is equally true that a good revenue system is the
life of an organized government. I meet you at a time when the nation has
voluntarily burdened itself with a debt unprecedented in our annals. Vast
as is its amount, it fades away into nothing when compared with the
countless blessings that will be conferred upon our country and upon man by
the preservation of the nation's life. Now, on the first occasion of the
meeting of Congress since the return of peace, it is of the utmost
importance to inaugurate a just policy, which shall at once be put in
motion, and which shall commend itself to those who come after us for its
continuance. We must aim at nothing less than the complete effacement of
the financial evils that necessarily followed a state of civil war. We must
endeavor to apply the earliest remedy to the deranged state of the
currency, and not shrink from devising a policy which, with-out being
oppressive to the people, shall immediately begin to effect a reduction of
the debt, and, if persisted in, discharge it fully within a definitely
fixed number of years.

It is our first duty to prepare in earnest for our recovery from the
ever-increasing evils of an irredeemable currency without a sudden
revulsion, and yet without untimely procrastination. For that end we must
each, in our respective positions, prepare the way. I hold it the duty of
the Executive to insist upon frugality in the expenditures, and a sparing
economy is itself a great national resource. Of the banks to which
authority has been given to issue notes secured by bonds of the United
States we may require the greatest moderation and prudence, and the law
must be rigidly enforced when its limits are exceeded. We may each one of
us counsel our active and enterprising countrymen to be constantly on their
guard, to liquidate debts contracted in a paper currency, and by conducting
business as nearly as possible on a system of cash payments or short
credits to hold themselves prepared to return to the standard of gold and
silver. To aid our fellow-citizens in the prudent management of their
monetary affairs, the duty devolves on us to diminish by law the amount of
paper money now in circulation. Five years ago the bank-note circulation of
the country amounted to not much more than two hundred millions; now the
circulation, bank and national, exceeds seven hundred millions. The simple
statement of the fact recommends more strongly than any words of mine could
do the necessity of our restraining this expansion. The gradual reduction
of the currency is the only measure that can save the business of the
country from disastrous calamities, and this can be almost imperceptibly
accomplished by gradually funding the national circulation in securities
that may be made redeemable at the pleasure of the Government.

Our debt is doubly secure--first in the actual wealth and still greater
undeveloped resources of the country, and next in the character of our
institutions. The most intelligent observers among political economists
have not failed to remark that the public debt of a country is safe in
proportion as its people are free; that the debt of a republic is the
safest of all. Our history confirms and establishes the theory, and is, I
firmly believe, destined to give it a still more signal illustration. The
secret of this superiority springs not merely from the fact that in a
republic the national obligations are distributed more widely through
countless numbers in all classes of society; it has its root in the
character of our laws. Here all men contribute to the public welfare and
bear their fair share of the public burdens. During the war, under the
impulses of patriotism, the men of the great body of the people, without
regard to their own comparative want of wealth, thronged to our armies and
filled our fleets of war, and held themselves ready to offer their lives
for the public good. Now, in their turn, the property and income of the
country should bear their just proportion of the burden of taxation, while
in our impost system, through means of which increased vitality is
incidentally imparted to all the industrial interests of the nation, the
duties should be so adjusted as to fall most heavily on articles of luxury
leaving the necessaries of life as free from taxation as the absolute wants
of the Government economically administered will justify. No favored class
should demand freedom from assessment, and the taxes should be so
distributed as not to fall unduly on the poor, but rather on the
accumulated wealth of the country. We should look at the national debt just
as it is--not as a national blessing, but as a heavy burden on the industry
of the country, to be discharged without unnecessary delay.

It is estimated by the Secretary of the Treasury that the expenditures for
the fiscal year ending the 30th of June, 1866, will exceed the receipts
$112,194,947. It is gratifying, however, to state that it is also estimated
that the revenue for the year ending the 30th of June, 1867, will exceed
the expenditures in the sum of $111,682,818. This amount, or so much as may
be deemed sufficient for the purpose, may be applied to the reduction of
the public debt, which on the 31st day of October, 1865, was
$2,740,854,750. Every reduction will diminish the total amount of interest
to be paid, and so enlarge the means of still further reductions, until the
whole shall be liquidated; and this, as will be seen from the estimates of
the Secretary of the Treasury, may be accomplished by annual payments even
within a period not exceeding thirty years. I have faith that we shall do
all this within a reasonable time; that as we have amazed the world by the
suppression of a civil war which was thought to be beyond the control of
any government, so we shall equally show the superiority of our
institutions by the prompt and faithful discharge of our national
obligations.

The Department of Agriculture under its present direction is accomplishing
much in developing and utilizing the vast agricultural capabilities of the
country, and for information respecting the details of its management
reference is made to the annual report of the Commissioner.

I have dwelt thus fully on our domestic affairs because of their
transcendent importance. Under any circumstances our great extent of
territory and variety of climate, producing almost everything that is
necessary for the wants and even the comforts of man, make us singularly
independent of the varying policy of foreign powers and protect us against
every temptation to "entangling alliances," while at the present moment the
reestablishment of harmony and the strength that comes from harmony will be
our best security against "nations who feel power and forget right." For
myself, it has been and it will be my constant aim to promote peace and
amity with all foreign nations and powers, and I have every reason to
believe that they all, without exception, are animated by the same
disposition. Our relations with the Emperor of China, so recent in their
origin, are most friendly. Our commerce with his dominions is receiving new
developments, and it is very pleasing to find that the Government of that
great Empire manifests satisfaction with our policy and reposes just
confidence in the fairness which marks our intercourse. The unbroken
harmony between the United States and the Emperor of Russia is receiving a
new support from an enterprise designed to carry telegraphic lines across
the continent of Asia, through his dominions, and so to connect us with all
Europe by a new channel of intercourse. Our commerce with South America is
about to receive encouragement by a direct line of mail steamships to the
rising Empire of Brazil. The distinguished party of men of science who have
recently left our country to make a scientific exploration of the natural
history and rivers and mountain ranges of that region have received from
the Emperor that generous welcome which was to have been expected from his
constant friendship for the United States and his well-known zeal in
promoting the advancement of knowledge. A hope is entertained that our
commerce with the rich and populous countries that border the Mediterranean
Sea may be largely increased. Nothing will be wanting on the part of this
Government to extend the protection of our flag over the enterprise of our
fellow-citizens. We receive from the powers in that region assurances of
good will; and it is worthy of note that a special envoy has brought us
messages of condolence on the death of our late Chief Magistrate from the
Bey of Tunis, whose rule includes the old dominions of Carthage, on the
African coast.

Our domestic contest, now happily ended, has left some traces in our
relations with one at least of the great maritime powers. The formal
accordance of belligerent rights to the insurgent States was unprecedented,
and has not been justified by the issue. But in the systems of neutrality
pursued by the powers which made that concession there was a marked
difference. The materials of war for the insurgent States were furnished,
in a great measure, from the workshops of Great Britain, and British ships,
manned by British subjects and prepared for receiving British armaments,
sallied from the ports of Great Britain to make war on American commerce
under the shelter of a commission from the insurgent States. These ships,
having once escaped from British ports, ever afterwards entered them in
every part of the world to refit, and so to renew their depredations. The
consequences of this conduct were most disastrous to the States then in
rebellion, increasing their desolation and misery by the prolongation of
our civil contest. It had, moreover, the effect, to a great extent, to
drive the American flag from the sea, and to transfer much of our shipping
and our commerce to the very power whose subjects had created the necessity
for such a change. These events took place before I was called to the
administration of the Government. The sincere desire for peace by which I
am animated led me to approve the proposal, already made, to submit the
question which had thus arisen between the countries to arbitration. These
questions are of such moment that they must have commanded the attention of
the great powers, and are so interwoven with the peace and interests of
every one of them as to have insured an impartial decision. I regret to
inform you that Great Britain declined the arbitrament, but, on the other
hand, invited us to the formation of a joint commission to settle mutual
claims between the two countries, from which those for the depredations
before mentioned should be excluded. The proposition, in that very
unsatisfactory form, has been declined.

The United States did not present the subject as an impeachment of the good
faith of a power which was professing the most friendly dispositions, but
as involving questions of public law of which the settlement is essential
to the peace of nations; and though pecuniary reparation to their injured
citizens would have followed incidentally on a decision against Great
Britain, such compensation was not their primary object. They had a higher
motive, and it was in the interests of peace and justice to establish
important principles of international law. The correspondence will be
placed before you. The ground on which the British minister rests his
justification is, substantially, that the municipal law of a nation and the
domestic interpretations of that law are the measure of its duty as a
neutral, and I feel bound to declare my opinion before you and before the
world that that justification can not be sustained before the tribunal of
nations. At the same time; I do not advise to any present attempt at
redress by acts of legislation. For the future, friendship between the two
countries must rest on the basis of mutual justice.

From the moment of the establishment of our free Constitution the civilized
world has been convulsed by revolutions in the interests of democracy or of
monarchy, but through all those revolutions the United States have wisely
and firmly refused to become propagandists of republicanism. It is the only
government suited to our condition; but we have never sought to impose it
on others, and we have consistently followed the advice of Washington to
recommend it only by the careful preservation and prudent use of the
blessing. During all the intervening period the policy of European powers
and of the United States has, on the whole, been harmonious. Twice, indeed,
rumors of the invasion of some parts of America in the interest of monarchy
have prevailed; twice my predecessors have had occasion to announce the
views of this nation in respect to such interference. On both occasions the
remonstrance of the United States was respected from a deep conviction on
the part of European Governments that the system of noninterference and
mutual abstinence from propagandism was the true rule for the two
hemispheres. Since those times we have advanced in wealth and power, but we
retain the same purpose to leave the nations of Europe to choose their own
dynasties and form their own systems of government. This consistent
moderation may justly demand a corresponding moderation. We should regard
it as a great calamity to ourselves, to the cause of good government, and
to the peace of the world should any European power challenge the American
people, as it were, to the defense of republicanism against foreign
interference. We can not foresee and are unwilling to consider what
opportunities might present themselves, what combinations might offer to
protect ourselves against designs inimical to our form of government. The
United States desire to act in the future as they have ever acted
heretofore; they never will be driven from that course but by the
aggression of European powers, and we rely on the wisdom and justice of
those powers to respect the system of noninterference which has so long
been sanctioned by time, and which by its good results has approved itself
to both continents.

The correspondence between the United States and France in reference to
questions which have become subjects of discussion between the two
Governments will at a proper time be laid before Congress.

When, on the organization of our Government under the Constitution, the
President of the United States delivered his inaugural address to the two
Houses of Congress, he said to them, and through them to the country and to
mankind, that-- The preservation of the sacred fire of liberty and the
destiny of the republican model of government are justly

considered, perhaps, as deeply, as finally, staked on the experiment
intrusted to the hands of the American

people. And the House of Representatives answered Washington by the voice
of Madison: We adore the Invisible Hand which has led the American people,
through so many difficulties, to cherish a

conscious responsibility for the destiny of republican liberty. More than
seventy-six years have glided away since these words were spoken; the
United States have passed through severer trials than were foreseen; and
now, at this new epoch in our existence as one nation, with our Union
purified by sorrows and strengthened by conflict and established by the
virtue of the people, the greatness of the occasion invites us once more to
repeat with solemnity the pledges of our fathers to hold ourselves
answerable before our fellow-men for the success of the republican form of
government. Experience has proved its sufficiency in peace and in war; it
has vindicated its authority through dangers and afflictions, and sudden
and terrible emergencies, which would have crushed any system that had been
less firmly fixed in the hearts of the people. At the inauguration of
Washington the foreign relations of the country were few and its trade was
repressed by hostile regulations; now all the civilized nations of the
globe welcome our commerce, and their governments profess toward us amity.
Then our country felt its way hesitatingly along an untried path, with
States so little bound together by rapid means of communication as to be
hardly known to one another, and with historic traditions extending over
very few years; now intercourse between the States is swift and intimate;
the experience of centuries has been crowded into a few generations, and
has created an intense, indestructible nationality. Then our jurisdiction
did not reach beyond the inconvenient boundaries of the territory which had
achieved independence; now, through cessions of lands, first colonized by
Spain and France, the country has acquired a more complex character, and
has for its natural limits the chain of lakes, the Gulf of Mexico, and on
the east and the west the two great oceans. Other nations were wasted by
civil wars for ages before they could establish for themselves the
necessary degree of unity; the latent conviction that our form of
government is the best ever known to the world has enabled us to emerge
from civil war within four years with a complete vindication of the
constitutional authority of the General Government and with our local
liberties and State institutions unimpaired.

The throngs of emigrants that crowd to our shores are witnesses of the
confidence of all peoples in our permanence. Here is the great land of free
labor, where industry is blessed with unexampled rewards and the bread of
the workingman is sweetened by the consciousness that the cause of the
country "is his own cause, his own safety, his own dignity." Here everyone
enjoys the free use of his faculties and the choice of activity as a
natural right. Here, under the combined influence of a fruitful soil,
genial climes, and happy institutions, population has increased
fifteen-fold within a century. Here, through the easy development of
boundless resources, wealth has increased with twofold greater rapidity
than numbers, so that we have become secure against the financial
vicissitudes of other countries and, alike in business and in opinion, are
self-centered and truly independent. Here more and more care is given to
provide education for everyone born on our soil. Here religion, released
from political connection with the civil government, refuses to subserve
the craft of statesmen, and becomes in its independence the spiritual life
of the people. Here toleration is extended to every opinion, in the quiet
certainty that truth needs only a fair field to secure the victory. Here
the human mind goes forth unshackled in the pursuit of science, to collect
stores of knowledge and acquire an ever-increasing mastery over the forces
of nature. Here the national domain is offered and held in millions of
separate freeholds, so that our fellow-citizens, beyond the occupants of
any other part of the earth, constitute in reality a people. Here exists
the democratic form of government; and that form of government, by the
confession of European statesmen," gives a power of which no other form is
capable, because it incorporates every man with the state and arouses
everything that belongs to the soul."

Where in past history. does a parallel exist to the public happiness which
is within the reach of the people of the United States? Where in any part
of the globe can institutions be found so suited to their habits or so
entitled to their love as their own free Constitution? Every one of them,
then, in whatever part of the land he has his home, must wish its
perpetuity. Who of them will not now acknowledge, in the words of
Washington, that "every step by which the people of the United States have
advanced to the character of an independent nation seems to have been
distinguished by some token of providential agency"? Who will not join with
me in the prayer that the Invisible Hand which has led us through the
clouds that gloomed around our path will so guide us onward to a perfect
restoration of fraternal affection that we of this day may be able to
transmit our great inheritance of State governments in all their rights, of
the General Government in its whole constitutional vigor, to our posterity,
and they to theirs through countless generations?

***

State of the Union Address
Andrew Johnson
December 3, 1866

Fellow-Citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives:

After a brief interval the Congress of the United States resumes its annual
legislative labors. An all-wise and merciful Providence has abated the
pestilence which visited our shores, leaving its calamitous traces upon
some portions of our country. Peace, order, tranquillity, and civil
authority have been formally declared to exist throughout the whole of the
United States. In all of the States civil authority has superseded the
coercion of arms, and the people, by their voluntary action, are
maintaining their governments in full activity and complete operation. The
enforcement of the laws is no longer "obstructed in any State by
combinations too powerful to be suppressed by the ordinary course of
judicial proceedings," and the animosities engendered by the war are
rapidly yielding to the beneficent influences of our free institutions and
to the kindly effects of unrestricted social and commercial intercourse. An
entire restoration of fraternal feeling must be the earnest wish of every
patriotic heart; and we will have accomplished our grandest national
achievement when, forgetting the sad events of the past and remembering
only their instructive lessons, we resume our onward career as a free,
prosperous, and united people.

In my message of the 4th of December, 1865, Congress was informed of the
measures which had been instituted by the Executive with a view to the
gradual restoration of the States in which the insurrection occurred to
their relations with the General Government. Provisional governors had been
appointed, conventions called, governors elected, legislatures assembled,
and Senators and Representatives chosen to the Congress of the United
States. Courts had been opened for the enforcement of laws long in
abeyance. The blockade had been removed, custom-houses reestablished, and
the internal-revenue laws put in force, in order that the people might
contribute to the national income. Postal operations had been renewed, and
efforts were being made to restore them to their former condition of
efficiency. The States themselves had been asked to take Dart in the high
function of amending the Constitution, and of thus sanctioning the
extinction of African slavery as one of the legitimate results of our
internecine struggle.

Having progressed thus far, the executive department found that it had
accomplished nearly all that was within the scope of its constitutional
authority. One thing, however, yet remained to be done before the work of
restoration could be completed, and that was the admission to Congress of
loyal Senators and Representatives from the States whose people had
rebelled against the lawful authority of the General Government. This
question devolved upon the respective Houses, which by the Constitution are
made the judges of the elections, returns, and qualifications of their own
members, and its consideration at once engaged the attention of Congress.

In the meantime the executive department--no other plan having been
proposed by Congress--continued its efforts to perfect, as far as was
practicable, the restoration of the proper relations between the citizens
of the respective States, the States, and the Federal Government, extending
from time to time, as the public interests seemed to require, the judicial,
revenue, and postal systems of the country. With the advice and consent of
the Senate, the necessary officers were appointed and appropriations made
by Congress for the payment of their salaries. The proposition to amend the
Federal Constitution, so as to prevent the existence of slavery within the
United States or any place subject to their jurisdiction, was ratified by
the requisite number of States, and on the 18th day of December, 1865, it
was officially declared to have become valid as a part of the Constitution
of the United States. All of the States in which the insurrection had
existed promptly amended their constitutions so as to make them conform to
the great change thus effected in the organic law of the land; declared
null and void all ordinances and laws of secession; repudiated all
pretended debts and obligations created for the revolutionary purposes of
the insurrection, and proceeded in good faith to the enactment of measures
for the protection and amelioration of the condition of the colored race.
Congress, however, yet hesitated to admit any of these States to
representation, and it was not until toward the close of the eighth month
of the session that an exception was made in favor of Tennessee by the
admission of her Senators and Representatives.

I deem it a subject of profound regret that Congress has thus far failed to
admit to seats loyal Senators and Representatives from the other States
whose inhabitants, with those of Tennessee, had engaged in the rebellion.
Ten States--more than one-fourth of the whole number--remain without
representation; the seats of fifty members in the House of Representatives
and of twenty members in the Senate are yet vacant, not by their own
consent, not by a failure of election, but by the refusal of Congress to
accept their credentials. Their admission, it is believed, would have
accomplished much toward the renewal and strengthening of our relations as
one people and removed serious cause for discontent on the part of the
inhabitants of those States. It would have accorded with the great
principle enunciated in the Declaration of American Independence that no
people ought to bear the burden of taxation and yet be denied the right of
representation. It would have been in consonance with the express
provisions of the Constitution that "each State shall have at least one
Representative" and "that no State, without its consent, shall be deprived
of its equal suffrage in the Senate." These provisions were intended to
secure to every State and to the people of every State the right of
representation in each House of Congress; and so important was it deemed by
the framers of the Constitution that the equality of the States in the
Senate should be preserved that not even by an amendment of the
Constitution can any State, without its consent, be denied a voice in that
branch of the National Legislature.

It is true it has been assumed that the existence of the States was
terminated by the rebellious acts of their inhabitants, and that, the
insurrection having been suppressed, they were thenceforward to be
considered merely as conquered territories. The legislative, executive, and
judicial departments of the Government have, however, with Heat
distinctness and uniform consistency, refused to sanction an assumption so
incompatible with the nature of our republican system and with the
professed objects of the war. Throughout the recent legislation of Congress
the undeniable fact makes itself apparent that these ten political
communities are nothing less than States of this Union. At the very
commencement of the rebellion each House declared, with a unanimity as
remarkable as it was significant, that the war was not "waged upon our part
in any spirit of oppression, nor for any purpose of conquest or
subjugation, nor purpose of overthrowing or interfering with the rights or
established institutions of those States, but to defend and maintain the
supremacy of the Constitution and all laws made in pursuance thereof, and
to preserve the Union, with all the dignity, equality, and rights of the
several States unimpaired; and that as soon as these objects" were
"accomplished the war ought to cease." In some instances Senators were
permitted to continue their legislative functions, while in other instances
Representatives were elected and admitted to seats after their States had
formally declared their right to withdraw from the Union and were
endeavoring to maintain that right by force of arms. All of the States
whose people were in insurrection, as States, were included in the
apportionment of the direct tax of $20,000,000 annually laid upon the
United States by the act approved 5th August, 1861. Congress, by the act of
March 4, 1862, and by the apportionment of representation thereunder also
recognized their presence as States in the Union; and they have, for
judicial purposes, been divided into districts, as States alone can be
divided. The same recognition appears in the recent legislation in
reference to Tennessee, which evidently rests upon the fact that the
functions of the State were not destroyed by the rebellion, but merely
suspended; and that principle is of course applicable to those States
which, like Tennessee, attempted to renounce their places in the Union.

The action of the executive department of the Government upon this subject
has been equally definite and uniform, and the purpose of the war was
specifically stated in the proclamation issued by my predecessor on the 22d
day of September, 1862. It was then solemnly proclaimed and declared "that
hereafter, as heretofore, the war will be prosecuted for the object of
practically restoring the constitutional relation between the United States
and each of the States and the people thereof in which States that relation
is or may be suspended or disturbed."

The recognition of the States by the judicial department of the Government
has also been dear and conclusive in all proceedings affecting them as
States had in the Supreme, circuit, and district courts. In the admission
of Senators and Representatives from any and all of the States there can be
no just ground of apprehension that persons who are disloyal will be
clothed with the powers of legislation, for this could not happen when the
Constitution and the laws are enforced by a vigilant and faithful Congress.
Each House is made the "judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications
of its own members," and may, "with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a
member." When a Senator or Representative presents his certificate of
election, he may at once be admitted or rejected; or, should there be any
question as to his eligibility, his credentials may be referred for
investigation to the appropriate committee. If admitted to a seat, it must
be upon evidence satisfactory to the House of which he thus becomes a
member that he possesses the requisite constitutional and legal
qualifications. If refused admission as a member for want of due allegiance
to the Government and returned to his constituents, they are admonished
that none but persons loyal to the United States will be allowed a voice in
the legislative councils of the nation, and the political power and moral
influence of Congress are thus effectively exerted in the interests of
loyalty to the Government and fidelity to the Union. Upon this question, so
vitally affecting the restoration of the Union and the permanency of our
present form of government, my convictions, heretofore expressed, have
undergone no change, but, on the contrary, their correctness has been
confirmed by reflection and time. If the admission of loyal members to
seats in the respective Houses of Congress was wise and expedient a year
ago, it is no less wise and expedient now. If this anomalous condition is
right now--if in the exact condition of these States at the present time it
is lawful to exclude them from representation--I do not see that the
question will be changed by the efflux of time. Ten years hence. if these
States remain as they are, the right of representation will be no stronger,
the right of exclusion will be no weaker.

The Constitution of the United States makes it the duty of the President to
recommend to the consideration of Congress "such measures as he shall judge
necessary and expedient." I know of no measure more imperatively demanded
by every consideration of national interest, sound policy, and equal
justice than the admission of loyal members from the now unrepresented
States. This would consummate the work of restoration and exert a most
salutary influence in the reestablishment of peace, harmony, and fraternal
feeling. It would tend greatly to renew the confidence of the American
people in the vigor and stability of their institutions. It would bind us
more closely together as a nation and enable us to show to the world the
inherent and recuperative power of a government founded upon the will of
the people and established upon the principles of liberty, justice, and
intelligence. Our increased strength and enhanced prosperity would
irrefragably demonstrate the fallacy of the arguments against free
institutions drawn from our recent national disorders by the enemies of
republican government. The admission of loyal members from the States now
excluded from Congress, by allaying doubt and apprehension, would turn
capital now awaiting an opportunity for investment into the channels of
trade and industry. It would alleviate the present troubled condition of
those States, and by inducing emigration aid in the settlement of fertile
regions now uncultivated and lead to an increased production of those
staples which have added so greatly to the wealth of the nation and
commerce of the world. New fields of enterprise would be opened to our
progressive people and soon the devastations of war would be repaired and
all traces of our domestic differences effaced from the minds of our
countrymen.

In our efforts to preserve "the unity of government which constitutes as
one people" by restoring the States to the condition which they held prior
to the rebellion, we should be cautious, lest, having rescued our nation
from perils of threatened disintegration, we resort to consolidation, and
in the end absolute despotism, as a remedy for the recurrence of similar
troubles. The war having terminated, and with it all occasion for the
exercise of powers of doubtful constitutionality, we should hasten to bring
legislation within the boundaries prescribed by the Constitution and to
return to the ancient landmarks established by our fathers for the guidance
of succeeding generations. The constitution which at any time exists till
changed by an explicit and authentic act of the whole people is

sacredly obligatory upon all. If in the opinion of the people the
distribution or modification of the

constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an
amendment in the way which the

Constitution designates; but let there be no change by usurpation, for it
is the customary weapon by which

free governments are destroyed. Washington spoke these words to his
countrymen when, followed by their love and gratitude, he voluntarily
retired from the cares of public life. "To keep in all things within the
pale of our constitutional powers and cherish the Federal Union as the only
rock of safety" were prescribed by Jefferson as rules of action to endear
to his "countrymen the true principles of their Constitution and promote a
union of sentiment and action, equally auspicious to their happiness and
safety." Jackson held that the action of the General Government should
always be strictly confined to the sphere of its appropriate duties, and
justly and forcibly urged that our Government is not to be maintained nor
our Union preserved "by invasions of the rights and powers of the several
States. In thus attempting to make our General Government strong we make it
weak. Its true strength consists in leaving individuals and States as much
as possible to themselves; in making itself felt, not in its power, but in
its beneficence; not in its control, but in its protection; not in binding
the States more closely to the center, but leaving each to move
unobstructed in its proper constitutional orbit." These are the teachings
of men whose deeds and services have made them illustrious, and who, long
since withdrawn from the scenes of life, have left to their country the
rich legacy of their example, their wisdom, and their patriotism. Drawing
fresh inspiration from their lessons, let us emulate them in love of
country and respect for the Constitution and the laws.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury affords much information
respecting the revenue and commerce of the country. His views upon the
currency and with reference to a proper adjustment of our revenue system,
internal as well as impost, are commended to the careful consideration of
Congress. In my last annual message I expressed my general views upon these
subjects. I need now only call attention to the necessity of carrying into
every department of the Government a system of rigid accountability,
thorough retrenchment, and wise economy. With no exceptional nor unusual
expenditures, the oppressive burdens of taxation can be lessened by such a
modification of our revenue laws as will be consistent with the public
faith and the legitimate and necessary wants of the Government.

The report presents a much more satisfactory condition of our finances than
one year ago the most sanguine could have anticipated. During the fiscal
year ending the 30th June, 1865 (the last year of the war), the public debt
was increased $941,902,537, and on the 31st of October, 1865, it amounted
to $2,740,854,750. On the 31st day of October, 1866, it had been reduced to
$2,552,310,006, the diminution during a period of fourteen months,
commencing September 1, 1865, and ending October 31, 1866, having been
$206,379,565. In the last annual report on the state of the finances it was
estimated that during the three quarters of the fiscal year ending the 30th
of June last the debt would be increased $112,194,947. During that period,
however, it was reduced $31,196,387, the receipts of the year having been
$89,905,905 more and the expenditures $200,529,235 less than the estimates.
Nothing could more clearly indicate than these statements the extent and
availability of the national resources and the rapidity and safety with
which under our form of government, great military and naval establishments
can be disbanded and expenses reduced from a war to a peace footing.

During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1866, the receipts were $558,032,620
and the expenditures $520,750,940, leaving an available surplus of
$37,281,680. It is estimated that the receipts for the fiscal year ending
the 30th June, 1867, will be $475,061.386, and that the expenditures will
reach the sum of $316,428,078, leaving in the Treasury a surplus of
$158,633,308. For the fiscal year ending June 30, 1886, it is estimated
that the receipts will amount to $436,000,000 and that the expenditures
will be $350,247,641, showing an excess of $85,752,359 in favor of the
Government. These estimated receipts may be diminished by a reduction of
excise and import duties, but after all necessary reductions shall have
been made the revenue of the present and of following years will doubtless
be sufficient to cover all legitimate charges upon the Treasury and leave a
large annual surplus to be applied to the payment of the principal of the
debt. There seems now to be no good reason why taxes may not be reduced as
the country advances in population and wealth, and yet the debt be
extinguished within the next quarter of a century.

The report of the Secretary of War furnishes valuable and important
information in reference to the operations of his Department during the
past year. Few volunteers now remain in the service, and they are being
discharged as rapidly as they can be replaced by regular troops. The Army
has been promptly paid, carefully provided with medical treatment, well
sheltered and subsisted, and is to be furnished with breech-loading small
arms. The military strength of the nation has been unimpaired by the
discharge of volunteers, the disposition of unserviceable or perishable
stores, and the retrenchment of expenditure. Sufficient war material to
meet any emergency has been retained, and from the disbanded volunteers
standing ready to respond to the national call large armies can be rapidly
organized, equipped, and concentrated. Fortifications on the coast and
frontier have received or are being prepared for more powerful armaments;
lake surveys and harbor and river improvements are in course of energetic
prosecution. Preparations have been made for the payment of the additional
bounties authorized during the recent session of Congress, under such
regulations as will protect the Government from fraud and secure to the
honorably discharged soldier the well-earned reward of his faithfulness and
gallantry. More than 6,000 maimed soldiers have received artificial limbs
or other surgical apparatus. and 41 national cemeteries, containing the
remains of 104,526 Union soldiers, have already been established. The total
estimate of military appropriations is $25,205,669.

It is stated in the report of the Secretary of the Navy that the naval
force at this time consists of 278 vessels, armed with 2,351 guns. Of
these, 115 vessels, carrying 1,029 guns, are in commission, distributed
chiefly among seven squadrons. The number of men in the service is 13,600.
Great activity and vigilance have been displayed by all the squadrons, and
their movements have been judiciously and efficiently arranged in such
manner as would best promote American commerce and protect the rights and
interests of our countrymen abroad. The vessels unemployed are undergoing
repairs or are laid up until their services may be required. Most of the
ironclad fleet is at League Island, in the vicinity of Philadelphia, a
place which, until decisive action should be taken by Congress, was
selected by the Secretary of the Navy as the most eligible location for
that class of vessels. It is important that a suitable public station
should be provided for the ironclad fleet. It is intended that these
vessels shall be in proper condition for any emergency, and it is desirable
that the bill accepting League Island for naval purposes, which passed the
House of Representatives at its last session, should receive final action
at an early period, in order that there may be a suitable public station
for this class of vessels, as well as a navy-yard of area sufficient for
the wants of the service on the Delaware River. The naval pension fund
amounts to $11,750,000, having been increased $2,750,000 during the year.
The expenditures of the Department for the fiscal year ending 30th June
last were $43,324,526, and the estimates for the coming year amount to
$23,568,436. Attention is invited to the condition of our seamen and the
importance of legislative measures for their relief and improvement. The
suggestions in behalf of this deserving class of our fellow-citizens are
earnestly recommended to the favorable attention of Congress.

The report of the Postmaster-General presents a most satisfactory condition
of the postal service and submits recommendations which deserve the
consideration of Congress. The revenues of the Department for the year
ending June 30, 1866, were $14,386,986 and the expenditures $15,352,079,
showing an excess of the latter of $965,093. In anticipation of this
deficiency, however, a special appropriation was made by Congress in the
act approved July 28, 1866. Including the standing appropriation of
$700,000 for free mail matter as a legitimate portion of the revenues, yet
remaining unexpended, the actual deficiency for the past year is only
$265,093--a sum within $51,141 of the amount estimated in the annual report
of 1864. The decrease of revenue compared with the previous year was 1 1/5
per cent, and the increase of expenditures, owing principally to the
enlargement of the mail service in the South, was 12 per cent. On the 30th
of June last there were in operation 6,930 mail routes, with an aggregate
length of 180,921 miles, an aggregate annual transportation of 71,837,914
miles, and an aggregate annual cost, including all expenditures, of
$8,410,184. The length of railroad routes is 32,092 miles and the annual
transportation 30,609,467 miles. The length of steamboat routes is 14,346
miles and the annual transportation 3,411,962 miles. The mail servce is
rapidly increasing throughout the whole country, and its steady extension
in the Southern States indicates their constantly improving condition. The
growing importance of the foreign service also merits attention. The
post-office department of Great Britain and our own have agreed upon a
preliminary basis for a new postal convention, which it is believed will
prove eminently beneficial to the commercial interests of the United
States, inasmuch as it contemplates a reduction of the international letter
postage to one-half the existing rates: a reduction of postage with all
other countries to and from which correspondence is transmitted in the
British mail, or in closed mails through the United Kingdom; the
establishment of uniform and reasonable charges for the sea and territorial
transit of correspondence in closed mails; and an allowance to each
post-office department of the right to use all mail communications
established under the authority of the other for the dispatch of
correspondence, either in open or closed mails, on the same terms as those
applicable to the inhabitants of the country providing the means of
transmission.

The report of the Secretary of the Interior exhibits the condition of those
branches of the public service which are committed to his supervision.
During the last fiscal year 4,629,312 acres of public land were disposed
of, 1,892,516 acres of which were entered under the homestead act. The
policy originally adopted relative to the public lands has undergone
essential modifications. Immediate revenue, and not their rapid settlement,
was the cardinal feature of our land system. Long experience and earnest
discussion have resulted in the conviction that the early development of
our agricultural resources and the diffusion of an energetic population
over our vast territory are objects of far greater importance to the
national growth and prosperity than the proceeds of the sale of the land to
the highest bidder in open market. The preemption laws confer upon the
pioneer who complies with the terms they impose the privilege of purchasing
a limited portion of "unoffered lands" at the minimum price. The homestead
enactments relieve the settler from the payment of purchase money, and
secure him a permanent home upon the condition of residence for a term of
years. This liberal policy invites emigration from the Old and from the
more crowded portions of the New World. Its propitious results are
undoubted, and will be more signally manifested when time shall have given
to it a wider development.

Congress has made liberal grants of public land to corporations in aid of
the construction of railroads and other internal improvements. Should this
policy hereafter prevail, more stringent provisions will be required to
secure a faithful application of the fund. The title to the lands should
not pass, by patent or otherwise, but remain in the Government and subject
to its control until some portion of the road has been actually built.
Portions of them might then from time to time be conveyed to the
corporation, but never in a greater ratio to the whole quantity embraced by
the grant than the completed parts bear to the entire length of the
projected improvement. This restriction would not operate to the prejudice
of any undertaking conceived in good faith and executed with reasonable
energy, as it is the settled practice to withdraw from market the lands
falling within the operation of such grants, and thus to exclude the
inception of a subsequent adverse right. A breach of the conditions which
Congress may deem proper to impose should work a forfeiture of claim to the
lands so withdrawn but unconveyed, and of title to the lands conveyed which
remain unsold.

Operations on the several lines of the Pacific Railroad have been
prosecuted with unexampled vigor and success. Should no unforeseen causes
of delay occur, it is confidently anticipated that this great thoroughfare
will be completed before the expiration of the period designated by
Congress.

During the last fiscal year the amount paid to pensioners, including the
expenses of disbursement, was $13,459,996, and 50,177 names were added to
the pension rolls. The entire number of pensioners June 30, 1866, was
126,722. This fact furnishes melancholy and striking proof of the
sacrifices made to vindicate the constitutional authority of the Federal
Government and to maintain inviolate the integrity of the Union They impose
upon us corresponding obligations. It is estimated that $33,000,000 will be
required to meet the exigencies of this branch of the service during the
next fiscal year.

Treaties have been concluded with the Indians, who, enticed into armed
opposition to our Government at the outbreak of the rebellion, have
unconditionally submitted to our authority and manifested an earnest desire
for a renewal of friendly relations.

During the year ending September 30, 1866, 8,716 patents for useful
inventions and designs were issued, and at that date the balance in the
Treasury to the credit of the patent fund was $228,297.

As a subject upon which depends an immense amount of the production and
commerce of the country, I recommend to Congress such legislation as may be
necessary for the preservation of the levees of the Mississippi River. It
is a matter of national importance that early steps should be taken, not
only to add to the efficiency of these barriers against destructive
inundations, but for the removal of all obstructions to the free and safe
navigation of that great channel of trade and commerce.

The District of Columbia under existing laws is not entitled to that
representation in the national councils which from our earliest history has
been uniformly accorded to each Territory established from time to time
within our limits. It maintains peculiar relations to Congress, to whom the
Constitution has granted the power of exercising exclusive legislation over
the seat of Government. Our fellow-citizens residing in the District, whose
interests are thus confided to the special guardianship of Congress, exceed
in number the population of several of our Territories, and no just reason
is perceived why a Delegate of their choice should not be admitted to a
seat in the House of Representatives. No mode seems so appropriate and
effectual of enabling them to make known their peculiar condition and wants
and of securing the local legislation adapted to them. I therefore
recommend the passage of a law authorizing the electors of the District of
Columbia to choose a Delegate, to be allowed the same rights and privileges
as a Delegate representing a Territory. The increasing enterprise and rapid
progress of improvement in the District are highly gratifying, and I trust
that the efforts of the municipal authorities to promote the prosperity of
the national metropolis will receive the efficient and generous cooperation
of Congress.

The report of the Commissioner of Agriculture reviews the operations of his
Department during the past year, and asks the aid of Congress in its
efforts to encourage those States which, scourged by war, are now earnestly
engaged in the reorganization of domestic industry.

It is a subject of congratulation that no foreign combinations against our
domestic peace and safety or our legitimate influence among the nations
have been formed or attempted. While sentiments of reconciliation, loyalty,
and patriotism have increased at home, a more just consideration of our
national character and rights has been manifested by foreign nations.

The entire success of the Atlantic telegraph between the coast of Ireland
and the Province of Newfoundland is an achievement which has been justly
celebrated in both hemispheres as the opening of an era in the progress of
civilization. There is reason to expect that equal success will attend and
even greater results follow the enterprise for connecting the two
continents through the Pacific Ocean by the projected line of telegraph
between Kamchatka and the Russian possessions in America.

The resolution of Congress protesting against pardons by foreign
governments of persons convicted of infamous offenses on condition of
emigration to our country has been communicated to the states with which we
maintain intercourse, and the practice, so justly the subject of complaint
on our part, has not been renewed.

The congratulations of Congress to the Emperor of Russia upon his escape
from attempted assassination have been presented to that humane and
enlightened ruler and received by him with expressions of grateful
appreciation.

The Executive, warned of an attempt by Spanish American adventurers to
induce the emigration of freedmen of the United States to a foreign
country, protested against the project as one which, if consummated, would
reduce them to a bondage even more oppressive than that from which they
have just been relieved. Assurance has been received from the Government of
the State in which the plan was matured that the proceeding will meet
neither its encouragement nor approval. It is a question worthy of your
consideration whether our laws upon this subject are adequate to the
prevention or punishment of the crime thus meditated.

In the month of April last, as Congress is aware, a friendly arrangement
was made between the Emperor of France and the President of the United
States for the withdrawal from Mexico of the French expeditionary military
forces. This withdrawal was to be effected in three detachments, the first
of which, it was understood, would leave Mexico in November, now past, the
second in March next, and the third and last in November, 1867. Immediately
upon the completion of the evacuation the French Government was to assume
the same attitude of nonintervention in regard to Mexico as is held by the
Government of the United States. Repeated assurances have been given by the
Emperor since that agreement that he would complete the promised evacuation
within the period mentioned, or sooner.

It was reasonably expected that the proceedings thus contemplated would
produce a crisis of great political interest in the Republic of Mexico. The
newly appointed minister of the United States, Mr. Campbell, was therefore
sent forward on the 9th day of November last to assume his proper functions
as minister plenipotentiary of the United States to that Republic. It was
also thought expedient that he should be attended in the vicinity of Mexico
by the Lieutenant-General of the Army of the United States, with the view
of obtaining such information as might be important to determine the course
to be pursued by the United States in reestablishing and maintaining
necessary and proper intercourse with the Republic of Mexico. Deeply
interested in the cause of liberty and humanity, it seemed an obvious duty
on our part to exercise whatever influence we possessed for the restoration
and permanent establishment in that country of a domestic and republican
form of government.

Such was the condition of our affairs in regard to Mexico when, on the 22d
of November last, official information was received from Paris that the
Emperor of France had some time before decided not to withdraw a detachment
of his forces in the month of November past, according to engagement, but
that this decision was made with the purpose of withdrawing the whole of
those forces in the ensuing spring. Of this determination, however, the
United States had not received any notice or intimation, and so soon as the
information was received by the Government care was taken to make known its
dissent to the Emperor of France.

I can not forego the hope that France will reconsider the subject and adopt
some resolution in regard to the evacuation of Mexico which will conform as
nearly as practicable with the existing engagement, and thus meet the just
expectations of the United States. The papers relating to the subject will
be laid before you. It is believed that with the evacuation of Mexico by
the expeditionary forces no subject for serious differences between France
and the United States would remain. The expressions of the Emperor and
people of France warrant a hope that the traditionary friendship between
the two countries might in that case be renewed and permanently restored.

A claim of a citizen of the United States for indemnity for spoliations
committed on the high seas by the French authorities in the exercise of a
belligerent power against Mexico has been met by the Government of France
with a proposition to defer settlement until a mutual convention for the
adjustment of all claims of citizens and subjects of both countries arising
out of the recent wars on this continent shall be agreed upon by the two
countries. The suggestion is not deemed unreasonable. but it belongs to
Congress to direct the manner in which claims for indemnity by foreigners
as well as by citizens of the United States arising out of the late civil
war shall be adjudicated and determined. I have no doubt that the subject
of all such claims will engage your attention at a convenient and proper
time.

It is a matter of regret that no considerable advance has been made toward
an adjustment of the differences between the United States and Great
Britain arising out of the depredations upon our national commerce and
other trespasses committed during our civil war by British subjects, in
violation of international law and treaty obligations. The delay, however,
may be believed to have resulted in no small degree from the domestic
situation of Great Britain. An entire change of ministry occurred in that
country during the last session of Parliament. The attention of the new
ministry was called to the subject at an early day, and there is some
reason to expect that it will now be considered in a becoming and friendly
spirit. The importance of an early disposition of the question can not be
exaggerated. Whatever might be the wishes of the two Governments, it is
manifest that good will and friendship between the two countries can not be
established until a reciprocity in the practice of good faith and
neutrality shall be restored between the respective nations.

On the 6th of June last, in violation of our neutrality laws, a military
expedition and enterprise against the British North American colonies was
projected and attempted to be carried on within the territory and
jurisdiction of the United States. In obedience to the obligation imposed
upon the Executive by the Constitution to see that the laws are faithfully
executed, all citizens were warned by proclamation against taking part in
or aiding such unlawful proceedings, and the proper civil, military, and
naval officers were directed to take all necessary measures for the
enforcement of the laws. The expedition failed, but it has not been without
its painful consequences. Some of our citizens who, it was alleged, were
engaged in the expedition were captured, and have been brought to trial as
for a capital offense in the Province of Canada. Judgment and sentence of
death have been pronounced against some, while others have been acquitted.
Fully believing in the maxim of government that severity of civil
punishment for misguided persons who have engaged in revolutionary attempts
which have disastrously failed is unsound and unwise, such representations
have been made to the British Government in behalf of the convicted persons
as, being sustained by an enlightened and humane judgment, will, it is
hoped, induce in their cases an exercise of clemency and a judicious
amnesty to all who were engaged in the movement. Counsel has been employed
by the Government to defend citizens of the United States on trial for
capital offenses in Canada, and a discontinuance of the prosecutions which
were instituted in the courts of the United States against those who took
part in the expedition has been directed.

I have regarded the expedition as not only political in its nature, but as
also in a great measure foreign from the United States in its causes,
character, and objects. The attempt was understood to be made in sympathy
with an insurgent party in Ireland, and by striking at a British Province
on this continent was designed to aid in obtaining redress for political
grievances which, it was assumed, the people of Ireland had suffered at the
hands of the British Government during a period of several centuries. The
persons engaged in it were chiefly natives of that country, some of whom
had, while others had not, become citizens of the United States under our
general laws of naturalization. Complaints of misgovernment in Ireland
continually engage the attention of the British nation, and so great an
agitation is now prevailing in Ireland that the British Government have
deemed it necessary to suspend the writ of habeas corpus in that country.
These circumstances must necessarily modify the opinion which we might
otherwise have entertained in regard to an expedition expressly prohibited
by our neutrality laws. So long as those laws remain upon our statute books
they should be faithfully executed, and if they operate harshly, unjustly,
or oppressively Congress alone can apply the remedy by their modification
or repeal.

Political and commercial interests of the United States are not unlikely to
be affected in some degree by events which are transpiring in the eastern
regions of Europe, and the time seems to have come when our Government
ought to have a proper diplomatic representation in Greece.

This Government has claimed for all persons not convicted or accused or
suspected of crime an absolute political right of self-expatriation and a
choice of new national allegiance. Most of the European States have
dissented from this principle, and have claimed a right to hold such of
their subjects as have emigrated to and been naturalized in the United
States and afterwards returned on transient visits to their native
countries to the performance of military service in like manner as resident
subjects. Complaints arising from the claim in this respect made by foreign
states have heretofore been matters of controversy between the United
States and some of the European powers, and the irritation consequent upon
the failure to settle this question increased during the war in which
Prussia, Italy, and Austria were recently engaged. While Great Britain has
never acknowledged the right of expatriation, she has not for some years
past practically insisted upon the opposite doctrine. France has been
equally forbearing, and Prussia has proposed a compromise, which, although
evincing increased liberality, has not been accepted by the United States.
Peace is now prevailing everywhere in Europe, and the present seems to be a
favorable time for an assertion by Congress of the principle so long
maintained by the executive department that naturalization by one state
fully exempts the native-born subject of any other state from the
performance of military service under any foreign government, so long as he
does not voluntarily renounce its rights and benefits.

In the performance of a duty imposed upon me by the Constitution I have
thus submitted to the representatives of the States and of the people such
information of our domestic and foreign affairs as the public interests
seem to require. Our Government is now undergoing its most trying ordeal,
and my earnest prayer is that the peril may be successfully and finally
passed without impairing its original strength and symmetry. The interests
of the nation are best to be promoted by the revival of fraternal
relations, the complete obliteration of our past differences, and the
reinauguration of all the pursuits of peace. Directing our efforts to the
early accomplishment of these great ends, let us endeavor to preserve
harmony between the coordinate departments of the Government, that each in
its proper sphere may cordially cooperate with the other in securing the
maintenance of the Constitution, the preservation of the Union, and the
perpetuity of our free institutions.

***

State of the Union Address
Andrew Johnson
December 3, 1867

Fellow-Citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives:

The continued disorganization of the Union, to which the President has so
often called the attention of Congress, is yet a subject of profound and
patriotic concern. We may, however, find some relief from that anxiety in
the reflection that the painful political situation, although before
untried by ourselves, is not new in the experience of nations. Political
science, perhaps as highly perfected in our own time and country as in any
other, has not yet disclosed any means by which civil wars can be
absolutely prevented. An enlightened nation, however, with a wise and
beneficent constitution of free government, may diminish their frequency
and mitigate their severity by directing all its proceedings in accordance
with its fundamental law.

When a civil war has been brought to a close, it is manifestly the first
interest and duty of the state to repair the injuries which the war has
inflicted, and to secure the benefit of the lessons it teaches as fully and
as speedily as possible. This duty was, upon the termination of the
rebellion, promptly accepted not only by the executive department, but by
the insurrectionary States themselves, and restoration in the first moment
of peace was believed to be as easy and certain as it was indispensable.
The expectations, however, then so reasonably and confidently entertained
were disappointed by legislation from which I felt constrained by my
obligations to the Constitution to withhold my assent.

It is therefore a source of profound regret that in complying with the
obligation imposed upon the President by the Constitution to give to
Congress from time to time information of the state of the Union I am
unable to communicate any definitive adjustment satisfactory to the
American people, of the questions which since the close of the rebellion
have agitated the public mind. On the contrary, candor compels me to
declare that at this time there is no Union as our fathers understood the
term, and as they meant it to be understood by us. The Union which they
established can exist only where all the States are represented in both
Houses of Congress; where one State is as free as another to regulate its
internal concerns according to its own will, and where the laws of the
central Government, strictly confined to matters of national jurisdiction,
apply with equal force to all the people of every section. That such is not
the present "state of the Union" is a melancholy fact, and we must all
acknowledge that the restoration of the States to their proper legal
relations with the Federal Government and with one another, according to
the terms of the original compact, would be the greatest temporal blessing
which God, in His kindest providence, could bestow upon this nation. It
becomes our imperative duty to consider whether or not it is impossible to
effect this most desirable consummation.

The Union and the Constitution are inseparable. As long as one is obeyed by
all parties, the other will be preserved; and if one is destroyed, both
must perish together. The destruction of the Constitution will be followed
by other and still greater calamities. It was ordained not only to form a
more perfect union between the States, but to "establish justice, insure
domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the general
welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our
posterity." Nothing but implicit obedience to its requirements in all parts
of the country will accomplish these great ends. Without that obedience we
can look forward only to continual outrages upon individual rights,
incessant breaches of the public peace, national weakness, financial
dishonor, the total loss of our prosperity, the general corruption of
morals, and the final extinction of popular freedom. To save our country
from evils so appalling as these, we should renew our efforts again and
again.

To me the process of restoration seems perfectly plain and simple. It
consists merely in a faithful application of the Constitution and laws. The
execution of the laws is not now obstructed or opposed by physical force.
There is no military or other necessity, real or pretended, which can
prevent obedience to the Constitution, either North or South. All the
rights and all the obligations of States and individuals can be protected
and enforced by means perfectly consistent with the fundamental law. The
courts may be everywhere open, and if open their process would be
unimpeded. Crimes against the United States can be prevented or punished by
the proper judicial authorities in a manner entirely practicable and legal.
There is therefore no reason why the Constitution should not be obeyed,
unless those who exercise its powers have determined that it shall be
disregarded and violated. The mere naked will of this Government, or of
some one or more of its branches, is the only obstacle that can exist to a
perfect union of all the States.

On this momentous question and some of the measures growing out of it I
have had the misfortune to differ from Congress, and have expressed my
convictions without reserve, though with becoming deference to the opinion
of the legislative department. Those convictions are not only unchanged,
but strengthened by subsequent events and further reflection The
transcendent importance of the subject will be a sufficient excuse for
calling your attention to some of the reasons which have so strongly
influenced my own judgment. The hope that we may all finally concur in a
mode of settlement consistent at once with our true interests and with our
sworn duties to the Constitution is too natural and too just to be easily
relinquished.

It is clear to my apprehension that the States lately in rebellion are
still members of the National Union. When did they cease to be so? The
"ordinances of secession" adopted by a portion (in most of them a very
small portion) of their citizens were mere nullities. If we admit now that
they were valid and effectual for the purpose intended by their authors, we
sweep from under our feet the whole ground upon which we justified the war.
Were those States afterwards expelled from the Union by the war? The direct
contrary was averred by this Government to be its purpose, and was so
understood by all those who gave their blood and treasure to aid in its
prosecution. It can not be that a successful war, waged for the
preservation of the Union, had the legal effect of dissolving it. The
victory of the nation's arms was not the disgrace of her policy; the defeat
of secession on the battlefield was not the triumph of its lawless
principle. Nor could Congress, with or without the consent of the
Executive, do anything which would have the effect, directly or indirectly,
of separating the States from each other. To dissolve the Union is to
repeal the Constitution which holds it together, and that is a power which
does not belong to any department of this Government, or to all of them
united.

This is so plain that it has been acknowledged by all branches of the
Federal Government. The Executive (my predecessor as well as myself) and
the heads of all the Departments have uniformly acted upon the principle
that the Union is not only undissolved, but indissoluble. Congress
submitted an amendment of the Constitution to be ratified by the Southern
States, and accepted their acts of ratification as a necessary and lawful
exercise of their highest function. If they were not States, or were States
out of the Union, their consent to a change in the fundamental law of the
Union would have been nugatory, and Congress in asking it committed a
political absurdity. The judiciary has also given the solemn sanction of
its authority to the same view of the case. The judges of the Supreme Court
have included the Southern States in their circuits, and they are
constantly, in banc and elsewhere, exercising jurisdiction which does not
belong to them unless those States are States of the Union.

If the Southern States are component parts of the Union, the Constitution
is the supreme law for them, as it is for all the other States. They are
bound to obey it, and so are we. The right of the Federal Government, which
is clear and unquestionable. to enforce the Constitution upon them implies
the correlative obligation on our part to observe its limitations and
execute its guaranties. Without the Constitution we are nothing; by,
through, and under the Constitution we are what it makes us. We may doubt
the wisdom of the law, we may not approve of its provisions, but we can not
violate it merely because it seems to confine our powers within limits
narrower than we could wish. It is not a question of individual or class or
sectional interest, much less of party predominance, but of duty--of high
and sacred duty--which we are all sworn to perform. If we can not support
the Constitution with the cheerful alacrity of those who love and believe
in it, we must give to it at least the fidelity of public servants who act
under solemn obligations and commands which they dare not disregard.

The constitutional duty is not the only one which requires the States to be
restored. There is another consideration which, though of minor importance,
is yet of great weight. On the 22d day of July, 1861, Congress declared by
an almost unanimous vote of both Houses that the war should be conducted
solely for the purpose of preserving the Union and maintaining the
supremacy of the Federal Constitution and laws, without impairing the
dignity, equality, and rights of the States or of individuals. and that
when this was done the war should cease. I do not say that this declaration
is personally binding on those who joined in making it, any more than
individual members of Congress are personally bound to pay a public debt
created under a law for which they voted. But it was a solemn. public,
official pledge of the national honor, and I can not imagine upon what
grounds the repudiation of it is to be justified. If it be said that we are
not bound to keep faith with rebels, let it be remembered that this promise
was not made to rebels only. Thousands of true men in the South were drawn
to our standard by it, and hundreds of thousands in the North gave their
lives in the belief that it would be carried out. It was made on the day
after the first great battle of the war had been fought and lost. All
patriotic and intelligent men then saw the necessity of giving such an
assurance, and believed that without it the war would end in disaster to
our cause. Having given that assurance in the extremity of our peril, the
violation of it now, in the day of our power, would be a rude rending of
that good faith which holds the moral world together; our country would
cease to have any claim upon the confidence of men; it would make the war
not only a failure, but a fraud.

Being sincerely convinced that these views are correct, I would be
unfaithful to my duty if I did not recommend the repeal of the acts of
Congress which place ten of the Southern States under the domination of
military masters. If calm reflection shall satisfy a majority of your
honorable bodies that the acts referred to are not only a violation of the
national faith, but in direct conflict with the Constitution, I dare not
permit myself to doubt that you will immediately strike them from the
statute book.

To demonstrate the unconstitutional character of those acts I need do no
more than refer to their general provisions. It must be seen at once that
they are not authorized. To dictate what alterations shall be made in the
constitutions of the several States; to control the elections of State
legislators and State officers, members of Congress and electors of
President and Vice-President, by arbitrarily declaring who shall vote and
who shall be excluded from that privilege; to dissolve State legislatures
or prevent them from assembling; to dismiss judges and other civil
functionaries of the State and appoint others without regard to State law;
to organize and operate all the political machinery of the States; to
regulate the whole administration of their domestic and local affairs
according to the mere will of strange and irresponsible agents, sent among
them for that purpose--these are powers not granted to the Federal
Government or to any one of its branches. Not being granted, we violate our
trust by assuming them as palpably as we would by acting in the face of a
positive interdict; for the Constitution forbids us to do whatever it does
not affirmatively authorize, either by express words or by clear
implication. If the authority we desire to use does not come to us through
the Constitution, we can exercise it only by usurpation, and usurpation is
the most dangerous of political crimes. By that crime the enemies of free
government in all ages have worked out their designs against public liberty
and private right. It leads directly and immediately to the establishment
of absolute rule, for undelegated power is always unlimited and
unrestrained.

The acts of Congress in question are not only objectionable for their
assumption of ungranted power, but many of their provisions are in conflict
with the direct prohibitions of the Constitution. The Constitution commands
that a republican form of government shall be guaranteed to all the States;
that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due
process of law, arrested without a judicial warrant, or punished without a
fair trial before an impartial jury; that the privilege of habeas corpus
shall not be denied in time of peace, and that no bill of attainder shall
be passed even against a single individual. Yet the system of measures
established by these acts of Congress does totally subvert and destroy the
form as well as the substance of republican government in the ten States to
which they apply. It binds them hand and foot in absolute slavery, and
subjects them to a strange and hostile power, more unlimited and more
likely to be abused than any other now known among civilized men. It
tramples down all those rights in which the essence of liberty consists,
and which a free government is always most careful to protect. It denies
the habeas corpus and the trial by jury. Personal freedom, property, and
life, if assailed by the passion, the prejudice, or the rapacity of the
ruler, have no security whatever. It has the effect of a bill of attainder
or bill of pains and penalties, not upon a few individuals, but upon whole
masses, including the millions who inhabit the subject States, and even
their unborn children. These wrongs, being expressly forbidden, can not be
constitutionally inflicted upon any portion of our people, no matter how
they may have come within our jurisdiction, and no matter whether they live
in States, Territories, or districts.

I have no desire to save from the proper and just consequences of their
great crime those who engaged in rebellion against the Government, but as a
mode of punishment the measures under consideration are the most
unreasonable that could be invented. Many of those people are perfectly
innocent; many kept their fidelity to the Union untainted to the last; many
were incapable of any legal offense; a large proportion even of the persons
able to bear arms were forced into rebellion against their will, and of
those who are guilty with their own consent the degrees of guilt are as
various as the shades of their character and temper. But these acts of
Congress confound them all together in one common doom. Indiscriminate
vengeance upon classes, sects, and parties, or upon whole communities, for
offenses committed by a portion of them against the governments to which
they owed obedience was common in the barbarous ages of the world; but
Christianity and civilization have made such progress that recourse to a
punishment so cruel and unjust would meet with the condemnation of all
unprejudiced and right-minded men. The punitive justice of this age, and
especially of this country, does not consist in stripping whole States of
their liberties and reducing all their people, without distinction, to the
condition of slavery. It deals separately with each individual, confines
itself to the forms of law, and vindicates its own purity by an impartial
examination of every case before a competent judicial tribunal. If this
does not satisfy all our desires with regard to Southern rebels, let us
console ourselves by reflecting that a free Constitution, triumphant in war
and unbroken in peace, is worth far more to us and our children than the
gratification of any present feeling.

I am aware it is assumed that this system of government for the Southern
States is not to be perpetual. It is true this military government is to be
only provisional, but it is through this temporary evil that a greater evil
is to be made perpetual. If the guaranties of the Constitution can be
broken provisionally to serve a temporary purpose, and in a part only of
the country, we can destroy them everywhere and for all time. Arbitrary
measures often change, but they generally change for the worse. It is the
curse of despotism that it has no halting place. The intermitted exercise
of its power brings no sense of security to its subjects, for they can
never know what more they will be called to endure when its red right hand
is armed to plague them again. Nor is it possible to conjecture how or
where power, unrestrained by law, may seek its next victims. The States
that are still free may be enslaved at any moment; for if the Constitution
does not protect all, it protects none.

It is manifestly and avowedly the object of these laws to confer upon
Negroes the privilege of voting and to disfranchise such a number of white
citizens as will give the former a clear majority at all elections in the
Southern States. This, to the minds of some persons, is so important that a
violation of the Constitution is justified as a means of bringing it about.
The morality is always false which excuses a wrong because it proposes to
accomplish a desirable end. We are not permitted to do evil that good may
come. But in this case the end itself is evil, as well as the means. The
subjugation of the States to Negro domination would be worse than the
military despotism under which they are now suffering. It was believed
beforehand that the people would endure any amount of military oppression
for any length of time rather than degrade themselves by subjection to the
Negro race. Therefore they have been left without a choice. Negro suffrage
was established by act of Congress, and the military officers were
commanded to superintend the process of clothing the Negro race with the
political privileges torn from white men.

The blacks in the South are entitled to be well and humanely governed, and
to have the protection of just laws for all their rights of person and
property. If it were practicable at this time to give them a Government
exclusively their own, under which they might manage their own affairs in
their own way, it would become a grave question whether we ought to do so,
or whether common humanity would not require us to save them from
themselves. But under the circumstances this is only a speculative point.
It is not proposed merely that they shall govern themselves, but that they
shall rule the white race, make and administer State laws, elect Presidents
and members of Congress, and shape to a greater or less extent the future
destiny of the whole country. Would such a trust and power be safe in such
hands?

The peculiar qualities which should characterize any people who are fit to
decide upon the management of public affairs for a great state have seldom
been combined. It is the glory of white men to know that they have had
these qualities in sufficient measure to build upon this continent a great
political fabric and to preserve its stability for more than ninety years,
while in every other part of the world all similar experiments have failed.
But if anything can be proved by known facts, if all reasoning upon
evidence is not abandoned, it must be acknowledged that in the progress of
nations Negroes have shown less capacity for government than any other race
of people. No independent government of any form has ever been successful
in their hands. On the contrary, wherever they have been left to their own
devices they have shown a constant tendency to relapse into barbarism. In
the Southern States, however, Congress has undertaken to confer upon them
the privilege of the ballot. Just released from slavery, it may be doubted
whether as a class they know more than their ancestors how to organize and
regulate civil society. indeed, it is admitted that the blacks of the South
are not only regardless of the rights of property, but so utterly ignorant
of public affairs that their voting can consist in nothing more than
carrying a ballot to the place where they are directed to deposit it. I
need not remind you that the exercise of the elective franchise is the
highest attribute of an American citizen, and that when guided by virtue,
intelligence, patriotism, and a proper appreciation of our free
institutions it constitutes the true basis of a democratic form of
government, in which the sovereign power is lodged in the body of the
people. A trust artificially created, not for its own sake, but solely as a
means of promoting the general welfare, its influence for good must
necessarily depend upon the elevated character and true allegiance of the
elector. It ought, therefore, to be reposed in none except those who are
fitted morally and mentally to administer it well; for if conferred upon
persons who do not justly estimate its value and who are indifferent as to
its results, it will only serve as a means of placing power in the hands of
the unprincipled and ambitious, and must eventuate in the complete
destruction of that liberty of which it should be the most powerful
conservator. I have therefore heretofore urged upon your at