tedly his hope to pass beyond that gloomy tangle, over which
the shadow of death had brooded ever since fatal Chancellorsville. But
Lee, his brilliant and vigilant opponent, rarely lost an advantage;
and Graham's experienced eye, as with the cavalry he was in the
extreme advance, clearly saw that their position would give their foes
enormous advantages. Lee's movements would be completely masked by the
almost impervious growth, He and his lieutenants could approach within
striking distance, whenever they chose, without being seen, and had
little to fear from the Union artillery, which the past had given them
much cause to dread. It was a region also to disgust the very soul of
a cavalryman; for the low, scrubby growth lined the narrow roads
almost as effectually as the most scientifically prepared
_abatis_.

Graham's surmise was correct. Lee would not wait till his antagonist
had reached open and favorable ground, but he made an attack at once,
where, owing to peculiarities of position, one of his thin regiments
had often the strength of a brigade.

On the morning of the 5th of May began one of the most awful and
bloody battles in the annals of warfare. Indeed it was the beginning
of one long and almost continuous struggle which ended only at
Appomattox.

With a hundred thousand more, Graham was swept into the bloody vortex,
and through summer heat, autumn rains, and winter cold, he marched and
fought with little rest. He was eventually given the colonelcy of his
regiment, and at times commanded a brigade. He passed through
unnumbered dangers unscathed; and his invulnerability became a proverb
among his associates. Indeed he was a mystery to them, for his face
grew sadder and sterner every day, and his reticence about himself and
all his affairs was often remarked upon. His men and officers had
unbounded respect for him, that was not wholly unmixed with fear; for
while he was considerate, and asked for no exposure to danger in which
he did not share, his steady discipline was never relaxed, and he kept
himself almost wholly aloof, except as their military relations
required contact. He could not, therefore, be popular among the hard-
swearing, rollicking, and convivial cavalrymen. In a long period of
inaction he might have become very unpopular, but the admirable manner
in which he led them in action, and his sagacious care of them and
their horses on the march and in camp, led them to trust him
implicitly. Chief of all, he had acquired that which with the stern
veterans of that day went further than anything else--a reputation for
dauntless courage. What they objected to were his "glum looks and
unsocial ways," as they termed them.

They little knew that his cold, stern face hid suffering that was
growing almost desperate in its intensity. They little knew that he
was chained to his military duty as to a rock, while a vulture of
anxiety was eating out his very heart. What was a pale, thin, white-
haired woman to them? But what to him? How true it is that often the
heaviest burdens of life are those at which the world would laugh, and
of which the overweighted heart cannot and will not speak!

For a long time after his plunge into the dreary depths of the
Wilderness he had received no letters. Then he had learned of Grace's
return home; and at first he was glad indeed. His aunt had written
nothing more alarming than that Grace had overtaxed her strength in
caring for the throngs of wounded men sent from the Wilderness, that
she needed rest and good tonic treatment. Then came word that she was
"better"; then they "hoped she was gaining"; then they were about to
go to "the seashore, and Grace had always improved in salt air." It
was then intimated that she had found "the summer heat very
enervating, and now that fall winds were blowing she would grow
stronger." At last, at the beginning of winter, it was admitted that
she had not improved as they had hoped; but they thought she was
holding her own very well--that the continued and terrific character
of the war oppressed her--and that every day she dreaded to hear that
he had been stricken among other thousands.

Thus, little by little, ever softened by some excuse or some hope, the
bitter truth grew plain: Grace was failing, fading, threatening to
vanish. He wrote as often as he could, and sought with all his skill
to cheer, sustain, and reconcile her to life. At first she wrote to
him not infrequently, but her letters grew further and further apart,
and at last she wrote, in the early spring of '65.

"I wish I could see you, Alford; but I know it is impossible. You are
strong, you are doing much to end this awful war, and it's your duty
to remain at your post. You must not sully your perfect image in my
mind, or add to my unhappiness by leaving the service now for my sake.
I have learned the one bitter lesson of the times. No matter how much
_personal_ agony, physical or mental, is involved, the war must
go on; and each one must keep his place in the ranks till he falls or
is disabled. I have fallen. I am disabled. My wound will not close,
and drop by drop life and strength are ebbing. I know I disappoint
you, my true, true friend; but I cannot help it. Do not reproach me.
Do not blame me too harshly. Think me weak, as I truly am. Indeed,
when I am gone your chances will be far better. It costs me a great
effort to write this. There is a weight on my hand and brain as well
as on my heart. Hereafter I will send my messages through dear, kind
Mrs. Mayburn, who has been a mother to me in all my sorrow. Do not
fear: I will wait till you can come with honor; for I must see you
once more."

For a long time after receiving this letter a despair fell on Graham.
He was so mechanical in the performance of his duties that his
associates wondered at him, and he grew more gaunt and haggard than
ever. Then in sharp reaction came a feverish eagerness to see the war
ended.

Indeed all saw that the end was near, and none, probably, more clearly
than the gallant and indomitable Lee himself. At last the Confederate
army was outflanked, the lines around Petersburg were broken through,
and the final pursuit began. It was noted that Graham fought and
charged with an almost tiger-like fierceness; and for once his men
said with reason that he had no mercy on them. He was almost counting
the hours until the time when he could sheathe his sword and say with
honor, "I resign."

One morning they struck a large force of the enemy, and he led a
headlong charge. For a time the fortunes of the battle wavered, for
the Confederates fought with the courage of desperation. Graham on his
powerful horse soon became a conspicuous object, and all gave way
before him as if he were a messenger of death, at the same time
wondering at his invulnerability.

The battle surged on and forward until the enemy were driven into a
thick piece of woods. Graham on the right of his line directed his
bugler to give the order to dismount, and a moment later his line of
battle plunged into the forest. In the desperate _melee_ that followed
in the underbrush, he was lost to sight except to a few of his men. It
was here that he found himself confronted by a Confederate officer,
from whose eyes flashed the determination either to slay or to be
slain. Graham had crossed swords with him but a moment when he
recognized that he had no ordinary antagonist; and with his instinct
of fight aroused to its highest pitch he gave himself up wholly to a
personal and mortal combat, shouting meantime to those near, "Leave
this man to me."

Looking his opponent steadily in the eye, like a true swordsman, he
remained first on the defensive; and such was his skill that his long,
straight blade was a shield as well as a weapon. Suddenly the dark
eyes and features of his opponent raised before him the image of Rita
Anderson; and he was so overcome for a second that the Confederate
touched his breast with his sabre and drew blood. That sharp prick and
the thought that Rita's brother might be before him aroused every
faculty and power of his mind and body. His sword was a shield again,
and he shouted, "Is not your name Henry Anderson?"

"My name is our cause," was the defiant answer; "with it I will live
or die."

Then came upon Graham one of those rare moments in his life when no
mortal man could stand before him. Ceasing his wary, rapid fence, his
sword played like lightning; and in less than a moment the
Confederate's sabre flew from his hand, and he stood helpless.

"Strike," he said, sullenly; "I won't surrender."

"I'd sooner cut off my right hand," replied Graham, smiling upon him,
"than strike the brother of Rita Anderson."

"Is your name Graham?" asked his opponent, his aspect changing
instantly.

"Yes; and you are Henry. I saw your sister's eyes in yours. Take up
your sword, and go quietly to the rear as my friend, not prisoner. I
adjure you, by the name of your old and honored father and your noble-
hearted sister, to let me keep my promise to them to save your life,
were it ever in my power."

"I yield," said the young man, in deep despondency. "Our cause
_is_ lost, and you are the only man in the North to whom I should be
willing to surrender. Colonel, I will obey your orders."

Summoning his orderly and another soldier, he said to them, "Escort
this gentleman to the rear. Let him keep his arms. I have too much
confidence in you, Colonel Anderson, even to ask that you promise not
to escape. Treat him with respect. He will share my quarters to-
night." And then he turned and rushed onward to overtake the extreme
advance of his line, wondering at the strange scene which had passed
with almost the rapidity of thought.

That night by Graham's camp-fire began a friendship between himself
and Henry Anderson which would be lifelong. The latter asked, "Have
you heard from my father and sister since you parted with them?"

"No. My duties have carried me far away from that region. But it is a
source of unspeakable gratification that we have met, and that you can
tell me of their welfare."

"It does seem as if destiny, or, as father would say, Providence, had
linked my fortunes and those of my family with you. He and Rita would
actually have suffered with hunger but for you. Since you were there
the region has been tramped and fought over by the forces of both
sides, and swept bare. My father mentioned your name and that of
Colonel Hilland; and a guard was placed over his house, and he and
Rita were saved from any personal annoyance. But all of his slaves,
except the old woman you remember, were either run off or enticed
away, and his means of livelihood practically destroyed. Old Uncle
Jehu and his son Huey have almost supported them. They, simple souls,
could not keep your secret, though they tried to after their clumsy
fashion. My pay, you know, was almost worthless; and indeed there was
little left for them to buy. Colonel Graham, I am indebted to you for
far more than life, which has become wellnigh a burden to me."

"Life has brought far heavier burdens to others than to you, Colonel
Anderson. Those you love are living; and to provide for and protect
such a father and sister as you possess might well give zest to any
life. Your cause is lost; and the time may come sooner than you expect
when you will be right glad of it. I know you cannot think so now, and
we will not dwell on this topic. I can testify from four years'
experience that no cause was ever defended with higher courage or more
heroic self-sacrifice. But your South is not lost; and it will be the
fault of its own people if it does not work out a grander destiny
within the Union than it could ever achieve alone. But don't let us
discuss politics. You have the same right to your views that I have to
mine. I will tell you how much I owe to your father and sister, and
then you will see that the burden of obligation rests upon me;" and he
gave his own version of that memorable day whose consequences
threatened to culminate in Grace Hilland's death.

Under the dominion of this thought he could not hide the anguish of
his mind; and Rita had hinted enough in her letters to enable Anderson
to comprehend his new-found friend. He took Graham's hand, and as he
wrung it he said, "Yes, life has brought to others heavier burdens
than to me."

"You may have thought," resumed Graham, "that I fought savagely to-
day; but I felt that it is best for all to end this useless, bloody
struggle as soon as possible. As for myself, I'm just crazed with
anxiety to get away and return home. Of course we cannot be together
after tonight, for with the dawn I must be in the saddle. Tonight you
shall share my blankets. You must let me treat you as your father and
Rita treated me. I will divide my money with you: don't grieve me by
objecting. Call it a loan if you will. Your currency is now worthless.
You must go with the other prisoners; but I can soon obtain your
release on parole, and then, in the name of all that is sacred, return
home to those who idolize you. Do this, Colonel Anderson, and you will
lift a heavy burden from one already overweighted"'

"As you put the case I cannot do otherwise," was the sad reply.
"Indeed I have no heart for any more useless fighting. My duty now is
clearly to my father and sister."

That night the two men slumbered side by side, and in the dawn parted
more like brothers than like foes.

As Graham had predicted, but a brief time elapsed before Lee
surrendered, and Colonel Anderson's liberty on parole was soon
secured. They parted with the assurance that they would meet again as
soon as circumstances would permit.

At the earliest hour in which he could depart with honor, Graham's
urgent entreaty secured him a leave of absence; and he lost not a
moment in his return, sending to his aunt in advance a telegram to
announce his coming.



CHAPTER XXXV

HIS SOMBRE RIVALS

Never had his noble horse Mayburn seemed to fail him until the hour
that severed the military chain which had so long bound him to
inexorable duty, and yet the faithful beast was carrying him like the
wind. Iss, his servant, soon fell so far behind that Graham paused and
told him to come on more leisurely, that Mayburn would be at the
terminus of the military railroad. And there Iss found him, with
drooping head and white with foam. The steam-engine was driven to City
Point with the reckless speed characteristic of military railroads;
but to Graham the train seemed to crawl. He caught a steamer bound for
Washington, and paced the deck, while in the moonlight the dark shores
of the James looked stationary. From Washington the lightning express
was in his view more dilatory than the most lumbering stage of the old
regime.

When at last he reached the gate to his aunt's cottage and walked
swiftly up the path, the hour and the scene were almost the same as
when he had first come, an indifferent stranger, long years before.
The fruit-trees were as snowy white with blossoms, the air as
fragrant, the birds singing as jubilantly, as when he had stood at the
window and gazed with critical admiration on a sportive girl, a child-
woman, playing with her little Spitz dog. As he passed the spot where
she had stood, beneath his ambush behind the curtains, his excited
mind brought back her image with lifelike realism--the breeze in her
light hair, her dark eyes brimming with mirth, her bosom panting from
her swift advance, and the color of the red rose in her cheeks.

He groaned as he thought of her now.

His aunt saw him from the window, and a moment later was sobbing on
his breast.

"Aunt," he gasped, "I'm not too late?"

"Oh, no," she said, wearily; "Grace is alive; but one can scarcely say
much more. Alford, you must be prepared for a sad change."

He placed her in her chair, and stood before her with heaving breast.
"Now tell me all," he said, hoarsely.

"Oh, Alford, you frighten me. You must be more composed. You cannot
see Grace, looking and feeling as you do. She is weakness itself;" and
she told him how the idol of his heart was slowly, gradually, but
inevitably sinking into the grave.

"Alford, Alford," she cried, entreatingly, "why do you look so stern?
You could not look more terrible in the most desperate battle."

In low, deep utterance, he said, "This is my most desperate battle;
and in it are the issues of life and death."

"You terrify _me_, and can you think that a weak, dying woman can look
upon you as you now appear?"

"She shall not die," he continued, in the same low, stern utterance,
"and she must look upon me, and listen, too. Aunt, you have been
faithful to me all these years. You have been my mother. I must
entreat one more service. You must second me, sustain me, co-work with
me. You must ally all your experienced womanhood with my manhood, and
with my will, which may be broken, but which shall not yield to my
cruel fate."

"What do you propose to do?"

"That will soon be manifest. Go and prepare Grace for my visit. I wish
to see her alone. You will please be near, however;" and he abruptly
turned and went to his room to remove his military suit and the dust
of travel.

He had given his directions as if in the field, and she wonderingly
and tremblingly obeyed, feeling that some crisis was near.

Grace was greatly agitated when she heard of Graham's arrival; and two
or three hours elapsed before she was able to be carried down and
placed on the sofa in the library. He, out in the darkness on the
piazza, watched with eyes that glowed like coals--watched as he had
done in the most desperate emergency of all the bloody years of
battle. He saw her again, and in her wasted, helpless form, her hollow
cheeks, her bloodless face, with its weary, hopeless look, her mortal
weakness, he clearly recognized his _sombre rivals_, _Grief and
Death_; and with a look of indomitable resolution he raised his
hand and vowed that he would enter the lists against them. If it were
within the scope of human will he would drive them from their prey.

His aunt met him in the hall and whispered, "Be gentle."

"Remain here," was his low reply. "I have also sent for Dr. Markham;"
and he entered.

Grace reached out to him both her hands as she said, "Oh, Alford, you
are barely in time. It is a comfort beyond all words to see you
before--before--" She could not finish the sinister sentence.

He gravely and silently took her hands, and sat down beside her.

"I know I disappoint you," she continued. "I've been your evil genius,
I've saddened your whole life; and you have been so true and faithful!
Promise me, Alford, that after I'm gone you will not let my blighted
life cast its shadow over your future years. How strangely stern you
look!"

"So you intend to die, Grace?" were his first, low words.

"Intend to die?"

"Yes. Do you think you are doing right by your father in dying?"

"Dear, dear papa! I have long ceased to be a comfort to him. He, too,
will be better when I am gone. I am now a hopeless grief to him.
Alford, dear Alford, do not look at me in that way."

"How else can I look? Do you not comprehend what your death means to
_me_, if not to others?"

"Alford, can I help it?"

"Certainly you can. It will be sheer, downright selfishness for you to
die. It will be your one unworthy act. You have no disease: you have
only to comply with the conditions of life in order to live."

"You are mistaken," she said, the faintest possible color coming into
her face. "The bullet that caused Warren's death has been equally
fatal to me. Have I not tried to live?"

"I do not ask you to _try_ to live, but to _live_. Nay, more, I demand
it; and I have the right. I ask for nothing more. Although I have
loved you, idolized you, all these years, I ask only that you comply
with the conditions of life and live." The color deepened perceptibly
under his emphatic words, and she said, "Can a woman live whose heart,
and hope, and soul, if she has one, are dead and buried?"

"Yes, as surely as a man whose heart and hope were buried long years
before. There was a time when I weakly purposed to throw off the
burden of life; but I promised to live and do my best, and I am here
to-day. You must make me the same promise. In the name of all the
past, I demand it. Do you imagine that I am going to sit down tamely
and shed a few helpless tears if you do me this immeasurable wrong?"

"Oh, Alford!" she gasped, "what do you mean?"

"I am not here, Grace, to make threats," he said gravely; "but I fear
you have made a merely superficial estimate of my nature. Hilland is
not. You know that I would have died a hundred times in his place. He
committed you to my care with his last breath, and that trust gave
value to my life. What right have you to die and bring to me the
blackness of despair? I am willing to bear my burden patiently to the
end. You should be willing to bear yours."

"I admit your claim," she cried, wringing her hands. "You have made
death, that I welcome, a terror. How can I live? What is there left of
me but a shadow? What am I but a mere semblance of a woman? The snow
is not whiter than my hair, or colder than my heart. Oh, Alford, you
have grown morbid in all these years. You cannot know what is best.
Your true chance is to let me go. I am virtually dead now, and when my
flickering breath ceases, the change will be slight indeed."

"It will be a fatal change for me," he replied, with such calm
emphasis that she shuddered. "You ask how you can live. Again I
repeat, by complying with the conditions of life. You have been
complying with the conditions of death; and I will not yield you to
him. Grief has been a far closer and more cherished friend than I; and
you have permitted it, like a shadow, to stand between us. The time
has now come when you must choose between this fatal shadow, this
useless, selfish grief, and a loyal friend, who only asks that he may
see you at times, that he may know where to find the one life that is
essential to his life. Can you not understand from your own experience
that a word from you is sweeter to me than all the music of the
world?--that smiles from you will give me courage to fight the battle
of life to the last? Had Hilland come back wounded, would you have
listened if he had reasoned, 'I am weak and maimed--not like my old
self: you will be better off without me'?"

"Say no more," she faltered. "If a shadow can live, I will. If a poor,
heartless, hopeless creature can continue to breathe, I will. If I
die, as I believe I must, I will die doing just what you ask. If it is
possible for me to live, I shall disappoint you more bitterly than
ever. Alford, believe me, the woman is dead within me. If I live I
shall become I know not what--a sort of unnatural creature, having
little more than physical life."

"Grace, our mutual belief forbids such a thought. If a plant is deeply
shadowed, and moisture is withdrawn, it begins to die. Bring to it
again light and moisture, the conditions of its life, and it gradually
revives and resumes its normal state. This principle applies equally
to you in your higher order of existence. Will you promise me that, at
the utmost exertion of your will and intelligence, you will try to
live?"

"Yes, Alford; but again I warn you. You will be disappointed."

He kissed both her hands with a manner that evinced profound gratitude
and respect, but nothing more; and then summoned his aunt and Dr.
Markham.

Grace lay back on the sofa, white and faint, with closed eyes.

"Oh, Alford, what have you done?" exclaimed Mrs. Mayburn.

"What is right and rational. Dr. Markham, Mrs. Hilland has promised to
use the utmost exertion of her will and intelligence to live. I ask
that you and my aunt employ your utmost skill and intelligence in co-
operation with her effort. We here--all four of us--enter upon a
battle; and, like all battles, it should be fought with skill and
indomitable courage, not sentimental impulse. I know that Mrs. Hilland
will honestly make the effort, for she is one to keep her word. Am I
not right, Grace?"

"Yes," was the faint reply.

"Why, now I can go to work with hope," said the physician briskly, as
he gave his patient a little stimulant.

"And I also," cried the old lady, tears streaming down her face. "Oh,
darling Grace, you will live and keep all our hearts from breaking."

"I'll try," she said, in almost mortal weariness.

When she had been revived somewhat by his restoratives, Dr. Markham
said, "I now advise that she be carried back to her room, and I
promise to be unwearied in my care."

"No," said Graham to his aunt. "Do not call the servants; I shall
carry her to her room myself;" and he lifted her as gently as he would
take up a child, and bore her strongly and easily to her room.

"Poor, poor Alford!" she whispered--"wasting your rich, full heart on
a shadow."



CHAPTER XXXVI

ALL MATERIALISTS

When Graham returned to the library he found that the major had
tottered in, and was awaiting him with a look of intense anxiety.

"Graham, Graham!" he cried, "do you. think there is any hope?"

"I do, sir. I think there is almost a certainty that your daughter
will live."

"Now God be praised! although I have little right to say it, for I've
put His name to a bad use all my life."

"I don't think any harm has been done," said Graham, smiling.

"Oh, I know, I know how wise you German students are. You can't find
God with a microscope or a telescope, and therefore there is none. But
I'm the last man to criticise. Grace has been my divinity since her
mother died; and if you can give a reasonable hope that she'll live to
close my eyes, I'll thank the God that my wife worshipped, in spite of
all your new-fangled philosophies."

"And I hope I shall never be so wanting in courtesy, to say the least,
as to show anything but respect for your convictions. You shall know
the whole truth about Grace; and I shall look to you also for aid in a
combined effort to rally and strengthen her forces of life. You know,
Major, that I have seen some service."

"Yes, yes; boy that you are, you are a hundred-fold more of a veteran
than I am. At the beginning of the war I felt very superior and
experienced. But the war that I saw was mere child's-play."

"Well, sir, the war that I've been through was child's play to me
compared with the battle begun to-night. I never feared death, except
as it might bring trouble to others, and for long years I coveted it;
but I fear the death of Grace Hilland beyond anything in this world or
any other. As her father, you now shall learn the whole truth;" and he
told his story from the evening of their first game of whist together.

"Strange, strange!" muttered the old man. "It's the story of Philip
Harkness over again. But, by the God who made me, she shall reward you
if she lives."

"No, Major St. John, no. She shall devote herself to you, and live the
life that her own feelings dictate. She understands this, and I
_will_ it. I assure you that whatever else I lack it's not a will."

"You've proved that, Graham, if ever a man did. Well, well, well, your
coming has brought a strange and most welcome state of affairs.
Somehow you've given me a new lease of life and courage. Of late we've
all felt like hauling down the flag, and letting grim death do his
worst. I couldn't have survived Grace, and didn't want to. Only plucky
Mrs. Mayburn held on to your coming as a forlorn hope. You now make me
feel like nailing the flag to the staff, and opening again with every
gun. Grace is like her mother, if I do say it. Grace Brentford never
lacked for suitors, and she had the faculty of waking up _men_.
Forgive an old man's vanity. Phil Harkness was a little wild as a
young fellow, but he had grand mettle in him. He made more of a figure
in the world than I--was sent to Congress, owned a big plantation, and
all that--but sweet Grace Brentford always looked at me reproachfully
when I rallied her on the mistake she had made, and was contentment
itself in my rough soldier's quarters," and the old man took off his
spectacles to wipe his tear-dimmed eyes. "Grace is just like her. She,
too, has waked up men. Hilland was a grand fellow; and, Graham, you
are a soldier every inch of you, and that's the highest praise I can
bestow. You are in command in this battle, and God be with you. Your
unbelief doesn't affect _Him_ any more than a mole's."

Graham laughed--he could laugh in his present hopefulness--as he
replied, "I agree with you fully. If there is a personal Creator of
the universe, I certainly am a small object in it." "That's not what
I've been taught to believe either; nor is it according to my reason.
An infinite God could give as much attention to you as to the solar
system."

"From the present aspect of the world, a great deal would appear
neglected," Graham replied, with a shrug.

"Come, Colonel Graham," said the major, a little sharply, "you and I
have both heard the rank and file grumble over the tactics of their
general. It often turned out that the general knew more than the men.
But it's nice business for me to be talking religion to you or any one
else;" and the idea struck him as so comical that he laughed outright.

Mrs. Mayburn, who entered at that moment, said: "That's a welcome
sound. I can't remember, Major, when I've heard you laugh. Alford, you
are a magician. Grace is sleeping quietly."

"Little wonder! What have I had to laugh about?" said the major. "But
melancholy itself would laugh at my joke to-night. Would you believe
it, I've been talking religion to the colonel,--if I haven't!"

"I think it's time religion was talked to all of us."

"Oh, now, Mrs. Mayburn, don't you begin. You haven't any God any more
than Graham has. You have a jumble of old-fashioned theological
attributes, that are of no more practical use to you than the
doctrines of Aristotle. Please ring for Jinny, and tell her to bring
us a bottle of wine and some cake. I want to drink to Grace's health.
If I could see her smile again I'd fire a _feu de joie_ if I could
find any ordnance larger than a popgun. Don't laugh at me, friends,"
he added, wiping the tears from his dim old eyes; "but the bare
thought that Grace will live to bless my last few days almost turns my
head. Where is Dr. Markham?"

"He had other patients to see, and said he would return by and by,"
Mrs. Mayburn replied.

"It's time we had a little relief," she continued, "whatever the
future may be. The slow, steady pressure of anxiety and fear was
becoming unendurable. I could scarcely have suffered more if Grace had
been my own child; and I feared for you, Alford, quite as much."

"And with good reason," he said, quietly.

She gave him a keen look, and then did as the major had requested.

"Come, friends," cried he, "let us give up this evening to hope and
cheer. Let what will come on the morrow, we'll have at least one more
gleam of wintry sunshine to-day."

Filling the glasses of all with his trembling hand, he added, when
they were alone: "Here's to my darling's health. May the good God
spare her, and spare us all, to see brighter days. Because I'm not
good, is no reason why He isn't."

"Amen!" cried the old lady, with Methodistic fervor.

"What are you saying amen to?--that I'm not good?"

"Oh, I imagine we all average about alike," was her grim reply--"the
more shame to us all!"

"Dear, conscience-stricken old aunty!" said Graham, smiling at her.
"Will nothing ever lay your theological ghosts?"

"No, Alford," she said, gravely. "Let us change the subject."

"I've told Major St. John everything from the day I first came here,"
Graham explained; "and now before we separate let it be understood
that he joins us as a powerful ally. His influence over Grace, after
all, is more potent than that of all the rest of us united. My words
to-night have acted more like a shock than anything else. I have
placed before her clearly and sharply the consequences of yielding
passively, and of drifting further toward darkness. We must possess
ourselves with an almost infinite patience and vigilance. She, after
all, must bear the brunt of this fight with death; but we must be ever
on hand to give her support, and it must be given also unobtrusively,
with all the tact we possess. We can let her see that we are more
cheerful in our renewed hope, but we must be profoundly sympathetic
and considerate."

"Well, Graham, as I said before, you are captain. I learned to obey
orders long ago as well as to give them;" and the major summoned his
valet and bade them goodnight.

Graham, weary in the reaction from his intense feeling and excitement,
threw himself on the sofa, and his aunt came and sat beside him.

"Alford," she said, "what an immense change your coming has made!"

"The beginning of a change, I hope."

"It was time--it was time. A drearier household could scarcely be
imagined. Oh, how dreary life can become! Grace was dying. Every day I
expected tidings of your death. It's a miracle that you are alive
after all these bloody years. All zest in living had departed from the
major. We are all materialists, after our own fashion, wholly
dependent on earthly things, and earthly things were failing us. In
losing Grace, you and the major would have lost everything; so would I
in losing you. Alford, you have become a son to me. Would you break a
mother's heart? Can you not still promise to live and do your best?"

"Dear aunt, we shall all live and do our best."

"Is that the best you can say, Alford?"

"Aunty, there are limitations to the strength of every man. I have
reached the boundary of mine. From the time I began the struggle in
the Vermont woods, and all through my exile, I fought this passion. I
hesitated at no danger, and the wilder and more desolate the region,
the greater were its attractions to me. I sought to occupy my mind
with all that was new and strange; but such was my nature that this
love became an inseparable part of my being. I might just as well have
said I would forget my sad childhood, the studies that have interested
me, your kindness. I might as well have decreed that I should not look
the same and be the same--that all my habits of thought and traits of
character should not be my own. Imagine that a tree in your garden had
will and intelligence. Could it ignore the law of its being, all the
long years which had made it what it is, and decide to be some other
kind of tree, totally different? A man who from childhood has had many
interests, many affections, loses, no doubt, a sort of concentration
when the one supreme love of his life takes possession of him. If
Grace lives, and I can see that she has at last tranquilly and
patiently accepted her lot, you will find that I can be tranquil and
patient. If she dies, I feel that I shall break utterly. I can't look
into the abyss that her grave would open. Do not think that I would
consciously and deliberately become a vulgar suicide--I hope I long
since passed that point, and love and respect for you forbid the
thought--but the long strain that I have been under, and the
dominating influence of my life, would culminate. I should give way
like a man before a cold, deadly avalanche. I have been frank with
you, for in my profound gratitude for your love and kindness I would
not have you misunderstand me, or think for a moment that I proposed
deliberately to forget you in my own trouble. The truth is just this,
aunt: I have not strength enough to endure Grace Hilland's death. It
would be such a lame, dreary, impotent conclusion that I should sink
under it, as truly as a man who found himself in the sea weighted by a
ton of lead. But don't let us dwell on this thought. I truly believe
that Grace will live, if we give her all the aid she requires. If she
honestly makes the effort to live--as she will, I feel sure--she can
scarcely help living when the conditions of life are supplied."

"I think I understand you, Alford," said the old lady, musingly; "and
yet your attitude seems a strange one."

"It's not an unnatural one. I am what I have been growing to be all
these years. I can trace the sequence of cause and effect until this
moment."

"Well, then," said the old lady, grimly, "Grace must live, if it be in
the power of human will and effort to save her. Would that I had the
faith in God that I ought to have! But He is afar off, and He acts in
accordance with an infinite wisdom that I can't understand. The
happiness of His creatures seems a very secondary affair."

"Now, aunty, we are on ground where we differ theoretically, to say
the least; but I accord to you full right to think what you please,
because I know you will employ all the natural and rational expedients
of a skilful nurse."

"Yes, Alford; you and Grace only make me unhappy when you talk in that
way. I know you are wrong, just as certainly as the people who
believed the sun moved round the earth. The trouble is that I know it
only with the same cold mental conviction, and therefore can be of no
help to either of you. Pardon me for my bluntness: do you expect to
marry Grace, should she become strong and well?"

"No, I can scarcely say I have any such hope. It is a thought I do not
even entertain at present, nor does she. I am content to be her friend
through life, and am convinced that she could not think of marriage
again for years, if ever. That is a matter of secondary importance.
All that I ask is that she shall live."

"Well, compared with most men, a very little contents you," said his
aunt dryly. "We shall see, we shall see. But you have given me such an
incentive that, were it possible, I'd open my withered veins and give
her half of my poor blood."

"Dear aunty, how true and stanch your love is! I cannot believe it
will be disappointed."

"I must go back to my post now, nor shall I leave it very often."

"Here is Dr. Markham. He will see that you have it often enough to
maintain your own health, and I will too. I've been a soldier too long
to permit my chief of staff to be disabled. Pardon me, doctor, but it
seems to me that this is more of a case for nursing and nourishment
than for drugs."

"You are right, and yet a drug can also become a useful ally. In my
opinion, it is more a case for change than anything else. When Mrs.
Hilland is strong enough, you must take her from this atmosphere and
these associations. In a certain sense she must begin life over again,
and take root elsewhere."

"There may be truth in what you say;" and Graham was merged in deep
thought when he was left alone. The doctor, in passing out a few
moments later, assured him that all promised well.



CHAPTER XXXVII

THE EFFORT TO LIVE

As Graham had said, it did seem that infinite patience and courage
would be required to defeat the dark adversaries now threatening the
life upon which he felt that his own depended. He had full assurance
that Grace made her promised effort, but it was little more than an
effort of will, dictated by a sense of duty. She had lost her hold on
life, which to her enfeebled mind and body promised little beyond
renewed weariness and disappointment. How she could live again in any
proper sense of the word was beyond her comprehension; and what was
bare existence? It would be burdensome to herself and become wearisome
to others. The mind acts through its own natural medium, and all the
light that came to her was colored by almost despairing memories.

Too little allowance is often made for those in her condition. The
strong man smiles half contemptuously at the efforts of one who is
feeble to lift a trifling weight. Still, he is charitable. He knows
that if the man has not the muscle, all is explained. So material are
the conceptions of many that they have no patience with those who have
been enfeebled in mind, will, and courage. Such persons would say, "Of
course Mrs. Hilland cannot attend to her household as before; but she
ought to have faith, resignation; she ought to make up her mind
cheerfully to submit, and she would soon be well. Great heavens!
haven't other women lost their husbands? Yes, indeed, and they worried
along quite comfortably."

Graham took no such superficial view. "Other women" were not Grace. He
was philosophical, and tried to estimate the effect of her own
peculiar experience on her own nature, and was not guilty of the
absurdity of generalizing. It was his problem to save Grace as she
was, and not as some good people said she ought to be. Still, his firm
belief remained, that she could live if she would comply with what he
believed to be the conditions of life; indeed, that she could scarcely
help living. If the time could come when her brain would be nourished
by an abundance of healthful blood, he might hope for almost anything.
She would then be able to view the past dispassionately, to recognize
that what _was past_ was gone forever, and to see the folly of a
grief which wasted the present and the future. If she never became
strong enough for that--and the prospect was only a faint, half-
acknowledged hope--then he would reverently worship a patient, gentle,
white-haired woman, who should choose her own secluded path, he being
content to make it as smooth and thornless as possible.

Beyond a brief absence at the time his regiment was mustered out of
the service, he was always at home, and the allies against death--with
their several hopes, wishes, and interests--worked faithfully. At last
there was a more decided response in the patient. Her sleep became
prolonged, as if she were making amends for the weariness of years.
Skilful tonic treatment told on the wasted form. New blood was made,
and that, in Graham's creed, was new life.

His materialistic theory, however, was far removed from any gross
conception of the problem. He did not propose to feed a woman into a
new and healthful existence, except as he fed what he deemed to be her
whole nature. In his idea, flowers, beauty in as many forms as he
could command and she enjoy at the time, were essential. He ransacked
nature in his walks for things to interest her. He brought her out
into the sunshine, and taught her to distinguish the different birds
by their notes. He had Mrs. Mayburn talk to her and consult with her
over the homely and wholesome details of housekeeping. Much of the
news of the day was brought to her attention as that which should
naturally interest her, especially the reconstruction of the South, as
represented and made definite by the experience of Henry Anderson and
his sister. He told her that he had bought at a nominal sum a large
plantation in the vicinity of the parsonage, and that Colonel Anderson
should be his agent, with the privilege of buying at no more of an
advance than would satisfy the proud young Southerner's self respect.

Thus from every side he sought to bring natural and healthful
influences to bear upon her mind, to interest her in life at every
point where it touched her, and to reconnect the broken threads which
had bound her to the world.

He was aided earnestly and skilfully on all sides. Their success,
however, was discouragingly slow. In her weakness Grace made pathetic
attempts to respond, but not from much genuine interest. As she grew
stronger her manner toward her father was more like that of her former
self than was the rest of her conduct. Almost as if from the force of
habit, she resumed her thoughtful care for his comfort; but beyond
that there seemed to be an apathy, an indifference, a dreary
preoccupation hard to combat.

In Graham's presence she would make visible effort to do all he
wished, but it was painfully visible, and sometimes she would
recognize his unobtrusive attentions with a smile that was sadder than
any words could be. One day she seemed almost wholly free from the
deep apathy that was becoming characteristic, and she said to him,
"Alas, my friend! as I said to you at first, the woman _is_ dead
within me. My body grows stronger, as the result of the skill and help
you all are bringing to bear on my sad problem, but my heart is dead,
and my hope takes no hold on life. I cannot overcome the feeling that
I am a mere shadow, and have no right to be here among the living. You
are so brave, patient, and faithful that I am ever conscious of a sort
of dull remorse; but there is a weight on my brain and a despairing
numbness at my heart, making everything seem vain and unreal. Please
do not blame me. Asking me to feel is like requiring sight of the
blind. I've lost the faculty. I have suffered so much that I have
become numb, if not dead. The shadows of the past mingle with the
shadows of to-day. Only you seem real in your strong, vain effort, and
as far as I can suffer any more it pains me to see you thus waste
yourself on a hopeless shadow of a woman. I told you I should
disappoint you."

"I am not wasting myself, Grace. Remain a shadow till you can be more.
I will bear my part of the burden, if you will be patient with yours.
Won't you believe that I am infinitely happier in caring for you as
you are than I should be if I could not thus take your hand and
express to you my thought, my sympathy? Dear Grace, the causes which
led to your depression were strong and terrible. Should we expect them
to be counteracted in a few short weeks?"

"Alas, Alford! is there any adequate remedy? Forgive me for saying
this to you, and yet you, of all people, can understand me best. You
cling to me who should be nothing to a man of your power and force.
You say you cannot go on in life without me, even as a weak, dependent
friend--that you would lose all zest, incentive, and interest; for I
cannot think you mean more. If you feel in this way toward me, who in
the eyes of other men would be a dismal burden, think how Warren
dwells in my memory, what he was to me, how his strong sunny nature
was the sun of my life. Do you not see you are asking of me what you
say you could not do yourself, although you would, after your own
brave, manly fashion? But your own belief should teach you the nature
of my task when you ask me to go on and take up life again, from which
I was torn more completely than the vine which falls with the tree to
which it clung."

"Dear Grace, do not think for a moment that I am not always gratefully
conscious of the immense self-sacrifice you are making for me and
others. You long for rest and forgetfulness, and yet you know well
that your absence would leave an abyss of despair. You now add so much
to the comfort of your father! Mrs. Mayburn clings to you with all the
love of a mother. And I, Grace--what else can i do? Even your frail,
sad presence is more to me than the sun in the sky. Is it pure
selfishness on my part to wish to keep you? Time, the healer, will
gradually bring to you rest from pain, and serenity to us all. When
you are stronger I will take you to Hilland's grave--"

"No, no, no!" she cried, almost passionately. "Why should I go there?
Oh, this is the awful part of it! What I so loved has become nothing,
worse than nothing--that from which I shrink as something horrible.
Oh, Alford! why are we endowed with such natures if corruption is to
be the end? It is this thought that paralyzes me. It seems as if pure,
unselfish love is singled out for the most diabolical punishment. To
think that a form which has become sacred to you may be put away at
any moment as a horrible and unsightly thing! and that such should be
the end of the noblest devotion of which man is capable! My whole
being revolts at it; and yet how can I escape from its truth? I am
beset by despairing thoughts on every side when able to think at all,
and my best remedy seems a sort of dreary apathy, in which I do little
more than breathe. I have read that there comes a time when the
tortured cease to feel much pain. There was a time, especially at the
hospital, when I suffered constantly--when almost everything but you
suggested torturing thoughts. I suffered with you and for you, but
there was always something sustaining in your presence. There is
still. I should not live a month in your absence, but it seems as if
it were your strong will that holds me, not my own. You have given me
the power, the incentive, to make such poor effort as I am putting
forth. Moreover, in intent, you gave your life for Warren again and
again, and as long as I have any volition left I will try and do all
you wish, since you so wish it. But my hope is dead. I do not see how
any more good can come to me or through me."

"You are still willing, however, to permit me to think for you, to
guide you? You will still use your utmost effort to live?"

"Yes. I can refuse to the man who went back to my dying husband
nothing within my power to grant. It is indeed little. Besides, I am
in your care, but I fear I shall prove a sad, if not a fatal legacy."

"Of that, dear Grace, you must permit me to be the judge. All that you
have said only adds strength to my purpose. Does not the thought that
you are doing so very much for me and for all who love you bring some
solace?"

"It should. But what have I brought you but pain and deep anxiety? Oh,
Alford, Alford! you will waken some bitter day to the truth that you
love but the wraith of the girl who unconsciously won your heart. You
have idealized her, and the being you now love does not exist. How can
I let you go on thus wronging yourself?"

"Grace," replied he, gravely and almost sternly, "I learned in the
northern woods, among the fiords of Norway, under the shadow of the
Himalayas, and in my long, lonely hours in the war, whom I loved, and
why I loved her. I made every effort at forgetfulness that I, at
least, was capable of exerting, and never forgot for an hour. Am I a
sentimental boy, that you should talk to me in this way? Let us leave
that question as settled for all time. Moreover, never entertain the
thought that I am planning and hoping for the future. I see in your
affection for me only a pale reflection of your love for Hilland."

"No, Alford, I love you for your own sake. How tenderly you have ever
spoken of little Rita Anderson, and yet--"

"And yet, as I have told you more than once, the thought of loving her
never entered my mind. I could plan for her happiness as I would for a
sister, had I one."

"Therefore you can interpret me."

"Therefore I have interpreted you, and, from the first, have asked for
nothing more than that you still make one of our little circle, each
member of which would be sadly missed, you most of all."

"I ought to be able to do so little as that for you. Indeed, I am
trying."

"I know you are, and, as you succeed, you will see that I am content.
Do not feel that when I am present you must struggle and make unwonted
effort. The tide is setting toward life; float gently on with it. Do
not try to force nature. Let time and rest daily bring their
imperceptible healing. The war is over. I now have but one object in
life, and if you improve I shall come and go and do some man's work in
the world. My plantation in Virginia will soon give me plenty of
wholesome out-of-door thoughts."

She gave him one of her sad smiles as she replied wearily, "You set me
a good example."

This frank interchange of thought appeared at first to have a good
effect on Grace, and brought something of the rest which comes from
submission to the inevitable. She found that Graham's purpose was as
immovable as the hills, and at the same time was more absolutely
convinced that he was not looking forward to what seemed an impossible
future. Nor did he ask that her effort should be one of feeble
struggles to manifest an interest before him which she did not feel.
She yielded to her listlessness and apathy to a degree that alarmed
her father and Mrs. Mayburn, but Graham said: "It's the course of
nature. After such prolonged suffering, both body and mind need this
lethargy. Reaction from one extreme to another might be expected."

Dr. Markham agreed in the main with this view, and yet there was a
slight contraction of perplexity on his brows as he added: "I should
not like to see this tendency increase beyond a certain point, or
continue too long. From the first shock of her bereavement Mrs.
Hilland's mind has not been exactly in a normal condition. There are
phases of her trouble difficult to account for and difficult to treat.
The very fineness of her organization made the terrible shock more
serious in its injury. I do not say this to discourage you--far from
it--but in sincerity I must call your attention to the fact that every
new phase of her grief has tended to some extreme manifestation,
showing a disposition toward, not exactly mental weakness, but
certainly an abnormal mental condition. I speak of this that you may
intelligently guard against it. If due precaution is used, the happy
mean between these reactions may be reached, and both mind and body
recover a healthful tone. I advise that you all seek some resort by
the sea, a new one, without any associations with the past."

Within a few days they were at a seaside inn, a large one whose very
size offered seclusion. From their wide and lofty balconies they could
watch the world come and go on the sea and on the land; and the world
was too large and too distant for close scrutiny or petty gossip. They
could have their meals in their rooms, or in the immense dining-hall,
as they chose; and in the latter place the quiet party would scarcely
attract a second glance from the young, gay, and sensation-loving.
Their transient gaze would see two old ladies, one an invalid, an old
and crippled man, and one much younger, who evidently would never take
part in a german.

It was thought and hoped that this nearness to the complex world, with
the consciousness that it could not approach her to annoy and pry,
might tend to awaken in Grace a passing interest in its many phases.
She could see without feeling that she was scanned and surmised about,
as is too often the case in smaller houses wherein the guests are not
content until they have investigated all newcomers.

But Grace disappointed her friends. She was as indifferent to the
world about her as the world was to her. At first she was regarded as
a quiet invalid, and scarcely noticed. The sea seemed to interest her
more than all things else, and, if uninterrupted, she would sit and
gaze at its varying aspects for hours.

According to Graham's plan, she was permitted, with little
interference, to follow her mood. Mrs. Mayburn was like a watchful
mother, the major much his former self, for his habits were too fixed
for radical changes. Grace would quietly do anything he asked, but she
grew more forgetful and inattentive, coming out of her deep
abstraction--if such it could be termed--with increasing effort. With
Graham she seemed more content than with any one else. With him she
took lengthening walks on the beach. He sat quietly beside her while
she watched the billows chasing one another to the shore. Their swift
onset, their defeat, over which they appeared to foam in wrath, their
backward and disheartened retreat, ever seemed to tell her in some dim
way a story of which she never wearied. Often she would turn and look
at him with a vague trouble in her face, as if faintly remembering
something that was a sorrow to them both; but his reassuring smile
quieted her, and she would take his hand as a little child might have
done, and sit for an hour without removing her eyes from the waves. He
waited patiently day after day, week after week, reiterating to
himself, "She will waken, she will remember all, and then will have
strength and calmness to meet it. This is nature's long repose."

It was growing strangely long and deep.

Meanwhile Grace, in her outward appearance, was undergoing a subtle
change. Graham was the first to observe it, and at last it was
apparent to all. As her mind became inert, sleeping on a downy couch
of forgetfulness, closely curtained, the silent forces of physical
life, in her deep tranquillity, were doing an artist's work. The
hollow cheeks were gradually rounded and given the faintest possible
bloom. Her form was gaining a contour that might satisfy a sculptor's
dream.

The major had met old friends, and it was whispered about who they
were--the widow of a millionaire; Colonel Graham, one of the most
dashing cavalry officers in the war which was still in all minds;
Major St. John, a veteran soldier of the regular service, who had been
wounded in the Mexican War and who was well and honorably known to the
chief dignitaries of the former generation. Knowing all this, the
quidnuncs complacently felt at first that they knew all. The next
thing was to know the people. This proved to be difficult indeed. The
major soon found a few veteran cronies at whist, but to others was
more unapproachable than a major-general of the old school. Graham was
far worse, and belles tossed their heads at the idea that he had ever
been a "dashing cavalry officer" or dashing anything else. Before the
summer was over the men began to discover that Mrs. Hilland was the
most beautiful woman in the house--strangely, marvellously,
supernaturally beautiful.

An artist, who had found opportunity to watch the poor unconscious
woman furtively--not so furtively either but that any belle in the
hostelry would know all about it in half a minute--raved about the
combination of charms he had discovered.

"Just imagine," he said, "what a picture she made as she sat alone on
the beach! She was so remarkable in her appearance that one might
think she had arisen from the sea, and was not a creature of the
earth. Her black, close-fitting dress suggested the form of Aphrodite
as she rose from the waves. Her profile was almost faultless in its
exquisite lines. Her complexion, with just a slight warm tinge
imparted by the breeze, had not the cold, dead white of snow, but the
clear transparency which good aristocratic blood imparts. But her eyes
and hair were her crowning features. How shall I describe the deep,
dreamy languor of her large, dark eyes, made a hundred-fold more
effective by the silvery whiteness of her hair, which had partly
escaped from her comb, and fell upon her neck! And then her sublime,
tranquil indifference! That I was near, spellbound with admiration,
did not interest her so much as a sail, no larger than a gull's wing,
far out at sea."

"Strange, strange!" said one of his friends, laughing; "her
unconsciousness of your presence was the strangest part of it all. Why
did you not make a sketch?"

"I did, but that infernal Colonel Graham, who is said to be her
shadow--after her million, you know--suddenly appeared and asked
sternly: 'Have you the lady's permission for this sketch?' I stammered
about being 'so impressed, that in the interests of art,' etc. He then
snatched my sketch and threw it into the waves. Of course I was angry,
and I suppose my words and manner became threatening. He took a step
toward me, looking as I never saw a man look. 'Hush,' he said, in a
low voice. 'Say or do a thing to annoy that lady, and I'll wring your
neck and toss you after your sketch. Do you think I've been through a
hundred battles to fear your insignificance?' By Jove! he looked as if
he could do it as easily as say it. Of course I was not going to brawl
before a lady."

"No; it wouldn't have been prudent--I mean gentlemanly," remarked his
bantering friend.

"Well, laugh at me," replied the young fellow, who was as honest as
light-hearted and vain. 'I'd risk the chance of having my neck wrung
for another glimpse at such marvellous beauty. Would you believe it?
the superb creature never so much as once turned to glance at us. She
left me to her attendant as completely as if he were removing an
annoying insect. Heavens! but it was the perfection of high breeding.
But I shall have my revenge: "I'll paint her yet."

"Right, my friend, right you are; and your revenge will be terrible.
Her supernatural and high-bred nonchalance will be lost forever should
she see her portrait;" and with mutual chaffing, spiced with good-
natured satire, as good-naturedly received, the little party in a
smoking-room separated.

But furtive eyes soon relieved the artist from the charge of
exaggeration. Thus far Grace's manner had been ascribed to high-bred
reserve and the natural desire for seclusion in her widowhood. Now,
however, that attention was concentrated upon her, Graham feared that
more than her beauty would be discovered.

He himself also longed inexpressibly to hide his new phase of trouble
from the chattering throng of people who were curious to know about
them. To know? As if they could know! They might better sit down to
gossip over the secrets of the differential and the integral calculus.

But he saw increasing evidences that they were becoming objects of
"interest," and the beautiful millionaire widow "very interesting," as
it was phrased; and he knew that there is no curiosity so penetrating
as that of the fashionable world when once it is aroused, and the game
deemed worthy of pursuit.

People appeared from Washington who had known Lieutenant-Colonel
Hilland and heard something of Graham, and the past was being ferreted
out. "Her hair had turned white from grief in a night," it was
confidently affirmed.

Poor Jones shrugged his shoulders as he thought: "I shall never be the
cause of my wife's hair turning white, unless I may, in the future,
prevent her from dyeing it."

After all, sympathy was not very deep. It was generally concluded that
Colonel Graham would console her, and one lady of elegant leisure,
proud of her superior research, declared that she had seen the colonel
"holding Mrs. Hilland's hand," as they sat in a secluded angle of the
rocks.

Up to a certain time it was comparatively easy to shield Grace; but
now, except as she would turn her large, dreamy eyes and unresponsive
lips upon those who sought her acquaintance, she was as helpless as a
child. The major and Mrs. Mayburn at once acquiesced in Graham's wish
to depart. Within a day or two the gossips found that their prey had
escaped, and Grace was once more in her cottage home.

At first she recognized familiar surroundings with a sigh of content.
Then a deeply troubled look flitted across her face and she looked at
Graham inquiringly.

"What is it, Grace?" he asked, gently.

She pressed her hand to her brow, glanced around once more, shook her
head sadly, and went to her room to throw off her wraps.

They all looked at one another with consternation. Hitherto they had
tried to be dumb and blind, each hiding the growing and awful
conviction that Grace was drifting away from them almost as surely as
if she had died.

"Something must be done at once," said practical Mrs. Mayburn.

"I have telegraphed for Dr. Markham," replied Graham, gloomily."
Nothing can be done till he returns. He is away on a distant trip."

"Oh!" groaned the old major, "there will be an end of me before there
is to all this trouble."



CHAPTER XXXVIII

GRAHAM'S LAST SACRIFICE

A terrible foreboding oppressed Graham. Would Grace fulfil her
prediction and disappoint him, after all? Would she elude him, escape,
_die_, and yet remain at his side, beautiful as a dream? Oh, the
agony of possessing this perfect casket, remembering the jewel that
had vanished! He had vowed to defeat his gloomy rivals, Grief and
Death, and they were mocking him, giving the semblance of what he
craved beyond even imagined perfection, but carrying away into their
own inscrutable darkness the woman herself.

What was Grace?--what becoming? As he looked he thought of her as a
sculptor's ideal embodied, a dream of beauty only, not a woman--as the
legend of Eve, who might, before becoming a living soul, have
harmonized with the loveliness of her garden without seeing or feeling
it.

He could not think of her mind as blotted out or perverted; he could
not conceive of it otherwise than as corresponding with her outward
symmetry. To his thought it slumbered, as her form might repose upon
her couch, in a death-like trance. She went and came among them like a
somnambulist, guided by unconscious instincts, memories, and habits.

She knew their voices, did, within limitations, as they requested; but
when she waited on her father there was a sad, mechanical repetition
of what she had done since childhood. Mrs. Mayburn found her docile
and easily controlled, and the heart-stricken old lady was vigilance
itself.

Toward Graham, however, her manner had a marked characteristic. He was
her master, and she a dumb, lovely, unreasoning creature, that looked
into his eyes for guidance, and gathered more from his tones than from
his words. Some faint consciousness of the past had grown into an
instinct that to him she must look for care and direction; and she
never thought of resisting his will. If he read to her, she turned to
him her lovely face, across which not a gleam of interest or
intelligence would pass. If he brought her flowers, she would hold
them until they were taken from her. She would pace the garden walks
by his side, with her hand upon his arm, by the hour if he wished it,
sometimes smiling faintly at his gentle tones, but giving no proof
that she understood the import of his words. At Hilland's name only
she would start and tremble as if some deep chord were struck, which
could merely vibrate until its sounds were faint and meaningless.

It was deeply touching also to observe in her sad eclipse how her
ingrained refinement asserted itself. In all her half-conscious action
there was never a coarse look or word. She was a rose without its
perfume. She was a woman without a woman's mind and heart. These had
been subtracted, with all the differences they made; otherwise she was
Grace Hilland.

Graham was profoundly perplexed and distressed. The problem had become
too deep for him. The brain, nourished by good blood, had not brought
life. All his skill and that of those allied with him had failed. The
materialist had matter in the perfection of breathing outline, but
where was the woman he loved? How could he reach her, how make himself
understood by her, except as some timid, docile creature responds to a
caress or a tone? His very power over her was terrifying. It was built
upon the instinct, the allegiance that cannot reason but is
unquestioning. Nothing could so have daunted his hope, courage, and
will as the exquisite being Grace had become, as she looked up to him
with her large, mild, trusting eyes, from which thought, intelligence,
and volition had departed.

At last Dr. Markham came, and for several days watched his patient
closely, she giving little heed to his presence. They all hung on his
perturbed looks with a painful anxiety. For a time he was very
reticent, but one day he followed Graham to his quarters in Mrs.
Mayburn's cottage, where he was now much alone. Grace seemed to miss
him but slightly, although she always gave some sign of welcome on his
return. The mocking semblance of all that he could desire often so
tantalized him that her presence became unendurable. The doctor found
him pacing his room in a manner betokening his half-despairing
perplexity.

"Colonel Graham," he said, "shall I surprise you when I say physicians
are very fallible? I know that it is not the habit of the profession
to admit this, but I have not come here to talk nonsense to you. You
have trusted me in this matter, and admitted me largely into your
confidence, and I shall speak to you in honest, plain English. Mrs.
Hilland's symptoms are very serious. What I feared has taken place.
From her acute and prolonged mental distress and depression, of which
she would have died had you not come, she reacted first into mental
lethargy, and now into almost complete mental inactivity. I cannot
discover that any disturbed physical functions have been an element in
her mental aberration, for more perfect physical life and loveliness I
have never seen. Her white hair, which might have made her look old,
is a foil to a beauty which seems to defy age.

"Pardon me for saying it, but I fear our treatment has been
superficial. We men of the world may believe what we please, but to
many natures, especially to an organization like Mrs. Hilland's, hope
and faith are essential. She has practically been without these from
the first, and, as you know, she was sinking under the struggle
maintained by her own brave, womanly spirit. She was contending with
more than actual bereavement. It was the hopelessness of the struggle
that crushed her, for she is not one of that large class of women who
can find consolation in crape and becoming mourning.

"In response to your appeal, she did make the effort you required, but
it was the effort of a mind still without hope or faith--one that saw
no remedy for the evils that had already overwhelmed her--and I must
bear witness that her efforts were as sincere as they were pathetic.
We all watched to give every assistance in our power. I've lain awake
nights, Colonel Graham, to think of remedies that would meet her
needs; and good Mrs. Mayburn and your old black cook, Aunt Sheba,
prepared food fit for the gods. You were more untiring and effective
than any of us, and the major's very infirmities were among her
strongest allies. Well, we have the result--a woman who might be a
model for a goddess, even to her tranquil face, in which there is no
trace of varying human feeling. Explanation of the evil that crushed
her, hope, and faith were not given--who can give them?--but they were
essential to her from the first. Unbelief, which is a refuge to some,
was an abyss to her. In it she struggled and groped until her mind,
appalled and discouraged and overwhelmed, refused to act at all. In
one sense it is a merciful oblivion, in another a fatal one, from
which she must be aroused if possible. But it's a hard, hard case."

"You make it hard indeed," said Graham, desperately. "What faith can I
instil except the one I have? I can't lie, even for Grace Hilland. She
knew well once that I could easily die for her."

"Well, then," said the physician, "permit a plain, direct question.
Will you marry her?"

"Marry her--as she now is?" cried Graham, in unfeigned astonishment.

"You said you could die for her. This may be going much further.
Indeed I should call it the triumph of human affection, for in honesty
I must tell you that she may never be better, she may become worse.
But I regard it as her only chance. At any rate, she needs a vigilant
caretaker. Old Mrs. Mayburn will not be equal to the task much longer,
and her place will have to be filled by hired service. I know it is
like suggesting an almost impossible sacrifice to broach even the
thought, remembering her condition, but--"

"Dr. Markham," said Graham, pacing the floor in great agitation, "you
wholly misunderstand me. I was thinking of her, not of myself. What
right have I to marry Grace Hilland without her consent? She could
give no intelligent assent at present."

"The right of your love; the right her husband gave when he committed
her to your care; the right of your desire to prevent her from
drifting into hopeless, lifelong imbecility, wherein she would be
almost at the mercy of hired attendants, helpless to shield herself
from any and every wrong; the right of a man to sacrifice himself
absolutely for another if he chooses."

"But she might waken from this mental trance and feel that I had taken
a most dishonorable advantage of her helplessness."

"Yes, you run that risk; but here is one man who will assure her to
the contrary, and you would be sustained by the consciousness of the
purest motives. It is that she may waken that I suggest the step;
mark, I do not advise it. As I said at first, I am simply treating you
with absolute confidence and sincerity. If matters go on as they are,
I have little or no hope. Mrs. Mayburn is giving way under the strain,
and symptoms of her old disorder are returning. She cannot watch Mrs.
Hilland much longer as she has been doing. Whom will you put in her
place? Will you send Mrs. Hilland to an asylum, with its rules and
systems and its unknown attendants? Moreover, her present tranquil
condition may not last. She may become as violent as she now is
gentle. She may gradually regain her intelligence, or it may be
restored to her by some sudden shock. If the mysteries of the physical
nature so baffle us, who can predict the future of a disordered
intellect? I have presented the darkest side of the picture; I still
think it has its bright side. She has no hereditary mental weakness to
contend with. As it developed somewhat gradually, it may pass in the
same manner. If you should marry her and take her at once to Europe,
change of scene, of life, with your vigilant presence ever near, might
become important factors in the problem. The memory that she was
committed to your care has degenerated into a controlling instinct;
but that is far better than nothing. The only real question in my mind
is, Are you willing to make the sacrifice and take the risks? You know
the world will say you married her for her money, and that will be
hard on a man like you."

Graham made a gesture of contempt: "That for the world," he said.
"Have you broached this subject to her father and my aunt?"

"Certainly not before speaking to you."

"You then give me your assurance, as a man, that you believe this
right, and that it is Grace Hilland's best chance--indeed, almost her
only chance--for recovery?"

"I do most unhesitatingly, and I shall do more. I shall bring from New
York an eminent physician who has made mental disease a study all his
life, and he shall either confirm my opinion or advise you better."

"Do so, Dr. Markham," said Graham, very gravely. "I have incurred
risks before in my life, but none like this. If from any cause Mrs.
Hilland should recover memory and full intelligence, and reproach me
for having taken advantage of a condition which, even among savage
tribes, renders the afflicted one sacred, all the fiendish tortures of
the Inquisition would be nothing to what I should suffer. Still, prove
to me, prove to her father, that it is her best chance, and for Grace
Hilland I will take even this risk. Please remember there must be no
professional generalities. I must have your solemn written statement
that it is for Mrs. Hilland's sake I adopt the measure."

"So be it," was the reply. "I shall telegraph to Dr. Armand
immediately to expect me, and shall say that I wish him to be prepared
to come at once."

"Do so, and consider no question of expense. I am no longer poor, and
if I were, I would mortgage my blood at this juncture."

On the following evening Dr. Armand was almost startled by the vision
on the veranda of the St. John cottage. A silvery-haired woman sat
looking placidly at the glowing sunset, with its light and its rose-
hues reflected in her face.

"If ever there was a picture of a glorified saint, there is one," he
muttered, as he advanced and bowed.

She gave him no attention, but with dark eyes, made brilliant by the
level rays, she gazed steadily on the closing day. The physician stole
a step or two nearer, and looked as steadily at her, while his
experienced eye detected in all her illuminated beauty the absence of
the higher, more subtle light of reason. Dr. Markham had told him next
to nothing about the case, and had asked him to go and see for
himself, impressing him only with the fact that it was a question of
vital importance that he was to aid in deciding; that he must give it
his whole professional skill, and all the necessary time, regardless
of expense. The moment he saw Grace, however, the business aspect of
the affair passed from his mind. His ruling passion was aroused, and
he was more than physician--a student--as the great in any calling
ever are.

Graham came to the door and recognized instinctively the intent,
eagle-eyed man, who merely nodded and motioned him to approach his
patient. Graham did so, and Grace turned her eyes to him with a timid,
questioning glance. He offered her his arm; she rose instantly and
took it, and began walking with him.

"Were you looking at the sunset, Grace?"

She turned upon him the same inquiring eyes, but did not answer.

"Do you not think it very beautiful? Does it not remind you of the
sunset you saw on the evening when I returned from my first battle?"

She shook her head, and only looked perplexed,

"Why, Grace," he continued, as if provoked, "you _must_ remember.
I was carried, you know, and you and Mrs. Mayburn acted as if my
scratches were mortal wounds."

She looked frightened at his angry tones, clasped her hands, and with
tears in her eyes looked pleadingly up to him.

"Dear Grace, don't be worried." He now spoke in the gentlest tones,
and lifted her hand to his lips. A quick, evanescent smile illumined
her face. She fawned against his shoulder a moment, placed his hand
against her cheek, and then leaned upon his arm as they resumed their
walk, Dr. Armand keeping near them without in the least attracting her
attention.

"Grace," resumed Graham, "you must remember. Hilland, Warren, you
know."

She dropped his arm, looked wildly around, covered her face with her
hands, and shuddered convulsively.

After a moment he said, kindly but firmly, "Grace, dear Grace."

She sprang to him, seized his hand, and casting a look of suspicion at
Dr. Armand, drew him away.

A few moments later she was again looking tranquilly at the west, but
the light had departed from the sky and from her face. It had the look
of one who saw not, thought and felt not. It was breathing, living
death.

Graham looked at her mournfully for a few moments, and then, with a
gesture that was almost despairing, turned to the physician, who had
not lost a single expression.

"Thank you," was that gentleman's first laconic remark; and he dropped
into a chair, still with his eyes on the motionless figure of Grace.

At last he asked, "How long would she maintain that position?"

"I scarcely know," was the sad response; "many hours certainly."

"Please let her retain it till I request you to interfere. The moon is
rising almost full, the evening is warm, and she can take no harm."

The major tottered out on his crutches, and was given his chair, the
physician meanwhile being introduced. Brief and courteous was Dr.
Armand's acknowledgment, but he never took his eyes from his patient.
The same was true of his greeting to Mrs. Mayburn; but that good
lady's hospitable instincts soon asserted themselves, and she
announced that dinner was ready.

"Take Mrs. Hilland to dinner," said the physician to Graham; "but
first introduce me."

The young man approached and said, "Grace." She rose instantly and
took his arm. "This is Dr. Armand, Grace. He has called to see you."
She made him a courteous inclination, and then turned to Graham to see
what next was expected of her, but he only led her to the dining-room.

"Gracie, darling, bring me my cushion," said her father, speaking as
he had been used to do when she was a little girl.

She brought it mechanically and arranged it, then stood in expectancy.
"That will do, dear;" and she returned to her seat in silence.
Throughout the meal she maintained this silence, although Dr. Armand
broached many topics, avoiding only the name of her husband. Her
manner was that of a little, quiet, well-bred child, who did not
understand what was said, and had no interest in it. The physician's
scrutiny did not embarrass her; she had never remembered, much less
forgotten him.

When the meal was over they all returned to the piazza. At the
physician's request she was placed in her old seat, and they all sat
down to watch. The moon rose higher and higher, made her hair more
silvery, touched her still face with a strange, ethereal beauty, and
threw the swaying shadow of a spray of woodbine across her motionless
figure--so motionless that she seemed a sculptured rather than a
breathing woman.

After a while the old major rose and groaned as he tottered away. Mrs.
Mayburn, in uncontrollable nervous restlessness, soon followed, that
she might find relief in household cares. The two men watched on till
hours had passed, and still the lovely image had not stirred. At last
Dr. Armand approached her and said, "Mrs. Hilland."

She rose, and stood coldly aloof. The name, with her prefix, did not
trouble her. She had long been accustomed to that "Hilland," as Graham
uttered the word, alone affected her, touching some last deep chord of
memory.

"Mrs. Hilland," the doctor continued, "it is getting late. Do you not
think you had better retire?"

She looked at him blankly, and glanced around as if in search of some
one.

"I am here, Grace," said Graham, emerging from the doorway.

She came to him at once, and he led her to Mrs. Mayburn, kissing her
hand, and receiving, in return, her strange, brief, fawning caress.

"I would like to know the history of Mrs. Hilland's malady from the
beginning," said Dr. Armand, when Graham returned.

"I cannot go over it again," replied Graham, hoarsely. "Dr. Markham
can tell you about all, and I will answer any questions. Your room is
ready for you here, where Dr. Markham will join you presently. I must
bid you good-night;" and he strode away.

But as he passed under the apple-tree and recalled all that had
occurred there, he was so overcome that once more he leaned against it
for support.



CHAPTEE XXXIX

MARRIED UNCONSCIOUSLY

There was no sleep for Graham that night, for he knew that two skilful
men were consulting on a question beyond any that had agitated his
heart before. As he paced the little parlor with restless steps, Aunt
Sheba's ample form filled the doorway, and in her hands was a tray
bearing such coffee as only she knew how to brew.

"Thanks, Aunt Sheba," he said, motioning to a table, without pausing
in his distracted walk.

She put down the tray, retreated hesitatingly, and then began: "Dear
Mas'r Graham, my ole heart jes aches for yer. But don't yer be so cast
down, mas'r; de good Lord knows it all, and I'se a-prayin' for yer and
de lubly Miss Grace night and day."

He was so utterly miserable that he was grateful for even this homely
sympathy, and he took the old woman's hand in his as he said kindly,
"Pray on, then, good old aunty, if it's any comfort to you. It
certainly can do no harm."

"Oh, Mas'r Graham, you dunno, you dunno. Wid all yer wise knowin' yer
dunno. You'se all--good Mis' Mayburn, de ole major, an' all--are in de
dark land ob unbelievin', like poor Missy Grace. She doesn't know how
you'se all tink about her an' lub her; needer does you know how de
good Lord tinks about you and lubs you. You guv me my liberty; you guv
what I tinks a sight more on; you'se been kind to de poor old slave
dat los' all her chillen in de weary days dat's gone. I'se a
'memberin' yer all de time. You hab no faith, Mas'r Graham, and poor
ole Aunt Sheba mus' hab faith for yer. An' so I will. I'se a wrastlin'
wid de Lord for yer all de time, an' I'se a-gwine to wrastle on till I
sees yer an' Missy Grace an' all comin' inter de light;" and she threw
her apron over her head, and went sobbing away.

He paused for a moment when she left him, touched deeply by the
strong, homely, human sympathy and gratitude of the kind old soul who
fed him--as he never forgot--when he was a fugitive in a hostile land.
That she had manifested her feeling after what he deemed her own
ignorant, superstitious fashion was nothing. It was the genuine
manifestation of the best human traits that touched him--pure gems
illumining a nature otherwise so clouded and crude.

Late at night footsteps approached, and the two physicians entered. "I
first permitted Dr. Armand to form his own impressions, and since have
told him everything," said Dr. Markham, "and he strongly inclines to
my view. Realizing the gravity of the case, however, he has consented
to remain a day or two longer. We will give you no hasty opinion, and
you shall have time on your part to exercise the most deliberate
judgment."

Dr. Armand confirmed his associate's words, and added, "We will leave
you now to the rest you must need sorely. Let me assure you, however,
that I do not by any means consider Mrs. Hilland's case hopeless, and
that I am strongly impressed with the belief that her recovery must
come through you. A long train of circumstances has given you almost
unbounded influence over her, as you enabled me to see this evening.
It would be sad to place such a glorious creature in the care of
strangers, for it might involve serious risk should she regain her
memory and intelligence with no strong, sympathetic friend, acquainted
with her past, near her. I am inclined to think that what is now
little more than an instinct will again develop into a memory, and
that the fact that she was committed to your care will fully reconcile
her to the marriage--indeed, render her most grateful for it, if
capable of understanding the reasons which led to it. If further
observation confirms my present impressions, I and Dr. Markham will
plainly state our opinions to her father and Mrs. Mayburn. As my
colleague has said, you must comprehend the step in all its bearings.
It is one that I would not ask any man to take. I now think that the
probabilities are that it would restore Mrs. Hilland to health
eventually. A year of foreign travel might bring about a gradual and
happy change."

"Take time to satisfy yourselves, gentlemen, and give me your decision
as requested. Then you have my permission to give your opinions to
Major St. John."

Within a week this was done, and the poor old man bowed his head on
Graham's shoulder and wept aloud in his gratitude. Mrs. Mayburn also,
wiping away her tears, faltered, "You know, Alford, how I schemed for
this marriage years ago; you remember my poor blind strategy on that
June day, do you not? How little I thought it would take place under
circumstances like these! And yet, I've thought of it of late often,
very often. I could not go on much longer, for I am old and feeble,
and it just broke my heart to think of Grace, our Grace, passing into
the hands of some hired and indifferent stranger or strangers. I
believe she will recover and reward your sacrifice."

"It is no sacrifice on my part, aunt, except she wakens only to
reproach me."

"Well, devotion, then; and little sense she'd ever have," concluded
the old lady, after her own brusque fashion, "if she does not fall on
her knees and bless you. You could now take better care of her than I,
for she trusts and obeys you implicitly. She is docile and gentle with
me, but often strangely inattentive. She would be still more so with a
stranger; and the idea of some strong, unfeeling hands forcing her
into the routine of her life!" Thus almost completely was removed from
his mind the unspeakable dread lest he was taking an unfair advantage
of helplessness. He fully recognized also that the ordeal for himself
would be a terrible one--that it would be the fable of Tantalus
repeated for weeks, months, perhaps for years, or for life. The
unfulfilled promise of happiness would ever be before him. His dark-
visaged rivals, Grief and Death, would jeer and mock at him from a
face of perfect beauty. In a blind, vindictive way he felt that his
experience was the very irony of fate. He could clasp the perfect
material form of a woman to his heart, and at the same time his heart
be breaking for what could not be seen or touched.

The question, however, was decided irrevocably. He knew that he could
not leave helpless Grace Hilland to the care of strangers, and that
there was no place for him in the world but at her side; and yet it
was with something of the timidity and hesitation of a lover that he
asked her, as they paced a shady garden-walk, "Grace, dear Grace, will
you marry me?"

His voice was very low and gentle, and yet she turned upon him a
startled, inquiring look. "Marry you?" she repeated slowly.

"Yes, let me take care of you always," he replied, smilingly, and yet
as pale almost as herself.

The word "care" reassured her, and she gave him her wonted smile of
content, as she replied, very slowly, "Yes. I want you to take care of
me always. Who else can?"

"That's what I mean by marrying you--taking care of you always," he
said, raising her hand to his lips.

"You are always to take care of me," she replied, leaning her head on
his shoulder for a moment.

"Mrs. Mayburn is not strong enough to take care of you any longer. She
will take care of your father. Will you let me take care of you as she
does?"

She smiled contentedly, for the word "care" appeared to make all
natural and right.

It was arranged that they should be married in the presence of Dr.
Markham, Aunt Sheba, and Jinny, in addition to those so deeply
interested. The physician prepared the clergyman for the ceremony,
which was exceedingly brief and simple, Grace smiling into Graham's
face when he promised to take care of her always, and she signifying
her consent and pleasure in the manner that was so mute and sad. Then
he told her that he was going to take her away, that she might get
perfectly strong and well; and she went at his request without
hesitancy, although seeming to wonder slightly at the strong emotion
of her father and Mrs. Mayburn when parting from her. Jinny, who had
been her nurse in childhood, accompanied her. Dr. Markham also went
with them as far as the steamer, and they sailed away into a future as
vague and unknown to them as the ocean they were crossing.

The waves seen from the deck of the steamer produced in Grace the same
content with which she had gazed at them from the shore during the
previous summer; only now there were faint signs of wonder in her
expression, and sometimes of perplexity. Her eyes also wandered around
the great vessel with something of the interest of a child, but she
asked no questions. That Graham was with her and smiled reassuringly
seemed sufficient, while the presence of her old colored nurse, who in
some dim way was connected with her past, gave also an additional
sense of security.

As time elapsed and they began their wanderings abroad, it seemed to
Graham that his wife was beginning life over again, as a very little
quiet child would observe the strange and unaccountable phenomena
about it. Instead of her fixed vacancy of gaze, her eyes began to turn
from object to object with a dawning yet uncomprehending interest. He
in simplest words sought to explain and she to listen, though it was
evident that their impression was slight indeed. Still there was
perceptible progress, and when in his tireless experimenting he began
to bring before her those things which would naturally interest a
child, he was encouraged to note that they won a larger and more
pleased attention. A garden full of flowers, a farmyard with its
sleek, quiet cattle, a band of music, a broad, funny pantomime, were
far more to her than Westminster Abbey or St. Paul's. Later, the
variety, color, and movement of a Paris boulevard quite absorbed her
attention, and she followed one object after another with much the
same expression that might be seen on the face of a little girl
scarcely three years old. This infantile expression, in contrast with
her silver hair and upon her mature and perfect features, was pathetic
to the last degree, and yet Graham rejoiced with exceeding joy. With
every conscious glance and inquiring look the dawn of hope brightened.
He was no longer left alone in the awful solitude of living death. The
beautiful form was no longer like a deserted home. It now had a
tenant, even though it seemed but the mind of a little child. The rays
of intelligence sent out were feeble indeed, but how much better than
the blank darkness that had preceded! Something like happiness began
to soften and brighten the husband's face as he took his child-wife
here and there. He made the long galleries of the Louvre and of Italy
her picture-books, and while recognizing that she was pleased with
little more than color, form, and action--that the sublime, equally
with the vicious and superstitious meanings of the great masters, were
hidden--he was nevertheless cheered and made more hopeful by the fact
that she _was_ pleased and observant--that she began to single out
favorites; and before these he would let her stand as long as she
chose, and return to them when so inclined.

She had lost the power of reading a line. She did not know even her
letters; and these he began to teach her with unflagging zeal and
patience. How the mysterious problem would end he could not tell. It
might be that by kindling a little light the whole past would become
illumined; it might be that he would have to educate her over again;
but be the future what it would, the steadfast principle of devotion
to her became more fixed, and to care for her the supreme law of his
being.

From the time of his first message to them he had rarely lost an
opportunity to send a letter to the anxious ones at home, and their
replies abounded in solicitous, grateful words. Dr. Markham often
called, and rubbed his hands with increasing self-gratulation over the
success of his bold measure, especially as encomiums on his sagacity
had been passed by the great Dr. Armand.

Nearly a year had passed, and Graham and his wife, after their
saunterings over the Continent, were spending the summer in the
Scottish Highlands. They sailed on the lochs, fished from their banks,
and climbed the mountain passes on little shaggy ponies that were
Scotch in their stubbornness and unflinching endurance. Grace had
become even companionable in her growing intelligence, and in the
place of her silent, inquiring glances there were sometimes eager,
childlike questionings.

Of late, however, Graham noted the beginnings of another change. With
growing frequency she passed her hand over her brow, that was
contracted in perplexity. Sometimes she would look at him curiously,
at Jinny, and at the unfamiliar scenes of her environment, then shake
her head as if she could not comprehend it all. Speedily, however, she
would return with the zest of a quiet little girl to the pleasures and
tasks that he unweariedly provided. But Graham grew haggard and
sleepless in his vigilance, for he believed that the time of her
awakening was near.

One day, while sailing on a loch, they were overtaken by a heavy storm
and compelled to run before it, and thus to land at no little distance
from their inn. Grace showed much alarm at the dashing waves and
howling tempest. Nor was her fright at the storm wholly that of an
unreasoning child. Its fury seemed to arouse and shock her, and while
she clung to Graham's hand, she persisted in sitting upright and
looking about, as if trying to comprehend it all. After landing they
had a long, fatiguing ride in the darkness, and she was unusually
silent. On reaching her room she glanced around as if all was
unfamiliar and incomprehensible. Graham had a presentiment that the
hour was near, and he left her wholly to the care of her old colored
nurse, but almost immediately, from excessive weariness, she sank into
a deep slumber.

Her lethargy lasted so late in the following day that he was alarmed,
fearing lest her old symptoms were returning. With anxious, hollow
eyes, he watched and waited, and at last she awoke and looked at him
with an expression that he had longed for through many weary months,
and yet now it terrified him.

"Alford--Mr. Graham," she began, in deep surprise.

"Hush, dear Grace. You have been very ill."

"Yes, but where am I? What has happened?"

"Very much; but you are better now. Here is Jinny, your old nurse, who
took care of you as a child."

The old colored woman came in, and, as instructed, said: "Yes, honey,
I'se tooken care ob you since you was a baby, and I'se nebber lef'
you."

"Everything looks very strange. Why, Alford, I had a long, sad talk
with you but a short time since in the library, and you were so kind
and unselfish!"

"Yes, Grace; we spoke frankly to each other, but you have been very
ill since then, worse than ever before. At your father's request and
Dr. Markham's urgent counsel, I brought you to Europe. It was said to
be your only chance."

"But where is Mrs. Mayburn?"

"She is at home taking care of your father. Her old sickness
threatened to return. She could take care of you no longer, and you
needed constant care."

A slow, deep flush overspread her face and even her neck as she
faltered: "And--and--has no one else been with me but Jinny?"

"No one else except myself. Grace, dear Grace, I am your husband. I
was married to you in the presence of your father, Mrs. Mayburn, and
your family physician."

"Now long since?" she asked, in a constrained voice.

"About a year ago."

"Have we been abroad ever since?"

"Yes, and you have been steadily improving. You were intrusted to my
care, and there came a time when I must either be faithful to that
trust, or place you in the hands of strangers. You were helpless, dear
Grace."

"Evidently," in the same low, constrained tone. "Could--could you not
have fulfilled your trust in some other way?"

"Your father, your second mother, and your physician thought not."

"Still--" she began, hesitated, and again came that deep, deep flush.

"For your sake, Grace, I incurred the risk of this awful moment."

She turned, and saw an expression which brought tears to her eyes. "I
cannot misjudge you," she said slowly; "the past forbids that. But I
cannot understand it, I cannot understand it at all."

"Perhaps you never will, dear Grace; I took that risk also to save
your life and mind."

"My mind?"

"Yes, your mind. If, in recalling the past, the memory of which has
returned, you can preserve sufficient confidence in me to wait till
all is clear and explained, I shall be profoundly grateful. I foresaw
the possibility of this hour; I foresaw it as the chief danger and
trial of my life; and I took the risk of its consequences for your
sake because assured by the highest authority that it was your one
chance for escape, not from death, but from a fate worse than death,
which also would have removed you from my care--indeed the care of all
who loved you. I have prepared myself for this emergency as well as I
could. Here are letters from your father, Mrs. Mayburn, Dr. Markham,
and Dr. Armand, one of the most eminent authorities in the world on
brain diseases. But after all I must be judged by your woman's heart,
and so stand or fall. I now have but one request, or entreaty rather,
to make--that you do not let all the efforts we have made in your
behalf be in vain. Can you not calmly and gradually receive the whole
truth? There must be no more relapses, or they will end in black ruin
to us all. Now that you can think for yourself, your slightest wish
shall be my law. Jinny, remain with your mistress."

He lifted her passive hand to his lips, passed into their little
parlor, and closed the door. Grace turned to her nurse, and in low,
almost passionate utterance, said: "Now tell me all."

"Lor' bress you, Missy Grace, it 'ud take a right smart time to tell
yer all. When de big doctors an' all de folks say you'se got to hab
strangers take care ob you or go ter a'sylum, and arter all you'd git
wuss, Mas'r Graham he guv in, and said he'd take care ob you, and dey
all bress 'im and tank 'im, and couldn't say 'nuff. Den he took you
'cross de big ocean--golly I how big it be--jes' as de doctor said;
an' nebber hab I seed sich lub, sich 'votion in a moder as Mas'r
Graham hab had fer you. He had to take care ob you like a little
chile, an' he was teachin' you how to read like a little chile when,
all on a suddint, you wakes up an' knows ebryting you'se forgotten.
But de part you doesn't know is de part mos' wuth knowin'. No woman
eber had sich a husban' as Mas'r Graham, an' no chile sich a moder.
'Clar' ter grashus ef I b'lieve he's ebber slep' a wink wid his
watchin' an' a-tinkin' what he could do fer you."

"But, Jinny, I'm not ill; I never felt stronger in my life."

"Laws, Missy Grace, dar's been a mirackle. You'se strong 'nuff 'cept
your mine's been off wisitin' somewhar. Golly! you jes' git up an' 