as objects unworthy of a serious thought, and the
bare intimation of them afforded the ministry a triumph of laughter.
Short triumph indeed! For everything which has been predicted has
happened, and all that was promised has failed. A long series of
politics so remarkably distinguished by a succession of misfortunes,
without one alleviating turn, must certainly have something in it
systematically wrong. It is sufficient to awaken the most credulous
into suspicion, and the most obstinate into thought. Either the means
in your power are insufficient, or the measures ill planned; either
the execution has been bad, or the thing attempted impracticable; or,
to speak more emphatically, either you are not able or heaven is not
willing. For, why is it that you have not conquered us? Who, or what
has prevented you? You have had every opportunity that you could
desire, and succeeded to your utmost wish in every preparatory means.
Your fleets and armies have arrived in America without an accident.
No uncommon fortune has intervened. No foreign nation has interfered
until the time which you had allotted for victory was passed. The
opposition, either in or out of parliament, neither disconcerted your
measures, retarded or diminished your force. They only foretold your
fate. Every ministerial scheme was carried with as high a hand as if
the whole nation had been unanimous. Every thing wanted was asked
for, and every thing asked for was granted.

A greater force was not within the compass of your abilities to send,
and the time you sent it was of all others the most favorable. You
were then at rest with the whole world beside. You had the range of
every court in Europe uncontradicted by us. You amused us with a tale
of commissioners of peace, and under that disguise collected a
numerous army and came almost unexpectedly upon us. The force was
much greater than we looked for; and that which we had to oppose it
with, was unequal in numbers, badly armed, and poorly disciplined;
beside which, it was embodied only for a short time, and expired
within a few months after your arrival. We had governments to form;
measures to concert; an army to train, and every necessary article to
import or to create. Our non-importation scheme had exhausted our
stores, and your command by sea intercepted our supplies. We were a
people unknown, and unconnected with the political world, and
strangers to the disposition of foreign powers. Could you possibly
wish for a more favorable conjunction of circumstances? Yet all these
have happened and passed away, and, as it were, left you with a
laugh. There are likewise, events of such an original nativity as can
never happen again, unless a new world should arise from the ocean.

If any thing can be a lesson to presumption, surely the circumstances
of this war will have their effect. Had Britain been defeated by any
European power, her pride would have drawn consolation from the
importance of her conquerors; but in the present case, she is
excelled by those that she affected to despise, and her own opinions
retorting upon herself, become an aggravation of her disgrace.
Misfortune and experience are lost upon mankind, when they produce
neither reflection nor reformation. Evils, like poisons, have their
uses, and there are diseases which no other remedy can reach. It has
been the crime and folly of England to suppose herself invincible,
and that, without acknowledging or perceiving that a full third of
her strength was drawn from the country she is now at war with. The
arm of Britain has been spoken of as the arm of the Almighty, and she
has lived of late as if she thought the whole world created for her
diversion. Her politics, instead of civilizing, has tended to
brutalize mankind, and under the vain, unmeaning title of "Defender
of the Faith," she has made war like an Indian against the religion
of humanity. Her cruelties in the East Indies will never be
forgotten, and it is somewhat remarkable that the produce of that
ruined country, transported to America, should there kindle up a war
to punish the destroyer. The chain is continued, though with a
mysterious kind of uniformity both in the crime and the punishment.
The latter runs parallel with the former, and time and fate will give
it a perfect illustration.

When information is withheld, ignorance becomes a reasonable excuse;
and one would charitably hope that the people of England do not
encourage cruelty from choice but from mistake. Their recluse
situation, surrounded by the sea, preserves them from the calamities
of war, and keeps them in the dark as to the conduct of their own
armies. They see not, therefore they feel not. They tell the tale
that is told them and believe it, and accustomed to no other news
than their own, they receive it, stripped of its horrors and prepared
for the palate of the nation, through the channel of the London
Gazette. They are made to believe that their generals and armies
differ from those of other nations, and have nothing of rudeness or
barbarity in them. They suppose them what they wish them to be. They
feel a disgrace in thinking otherwise, and naturally encourage the
belief from a partiality to themselves. There was a time when I felt
the same prejudices, and reasoned from the same errors; but
experience, sad and painful experience, has taught me better. What
the conduct of former armies was, I know not, but what the conduct of
the present is, I well know. It is low, cruel, indolent and
profligate; and had the people of America no other cause for
separation than what the army has occasioned, that alone is cause
sufficient.

The field of politics in England is far more extensive than that of
news. Men have a right to reason for themselves, and though they
cannot contradict the intelligence in the London Gazette, they may
frame upon it what sentiments they please. But the misfortune is,
that a general ignorance has prevailed over the whole nation
respecting America. The ministry and the minority have both been
wrong. The former was always so, the latter only lately so. Politics,
to be executively right, must have a unity of means and time, and a
defect in either overthrows the whole. The ministry rejected the
plans of the minority while they were practicable, and joined in them
when they became impracticable. From wrong measures they got into
wrong time, and have now completed the circle of absurdity by closing
it upon themselves.

I happened to come to America a few months before the breaking out of
hostilities. I found the disposition of the people such, that they
might have been led by a thread and governed by a reed. Their
suspicion was quick and penetrating, but their attachment to Britain
was obstinate, and it was at that time a kind of treason to speak
against it. They disliked the ministry, but they esteemed the nation.
Their idea of grievance operated without resentment, and their single
object was reconciliation. Bad as I believed the ministry to be, I
never conceived them capable of a measure so rash and wicked as the
commencing of hostilities; much less did I imagine the nation would
encourage it. I viewed the dispute as a kind of law-suit, in which I
supposed the parties would find a way either to decide or settle it.
I had no thoughts of independence or of arms. The world could not
then have persuaded me that I should be either a soldier or an
author. If I had any talents for either, they were buried in me, and
might ever have continued so, had not the necessity of the times
dragged and driven them into action. I had formed my plan of life,
and conceiving myself happy, wished every body else so. But when the
country, into which I had just set my foot, was set on fire about my
ears, it was time to stir. It was time for every man to stir. Those
who had been long settled had something to defend; those who had just
come had something to pursue; and the call and the concern was equal
and universal. For in a country where all men were once adventurers,
the difference of a few years in their arrival could make none in
their right.

The breaking out of hostilities opened a new suspicion in the
politics of America, which, though at that time very rare, has since
been proved to be very right. What I allude to is, "a secret and
fixed determination in the British Cabinet to annex America to the
crown of England as a conquered country." If this be taken as the
object, then the whole line of conduct pursued by the ministry,
though rash in its origin and ruinous in its consequences, is
nevertheless uniform and consistent in its parts. It applies to every
case and resolves every difficulty. But if taxation, or any thing
else, be taken in its room, there is no proportion between the object
and the charge. Nothing but the whole soil and property of the
country can be placed as a possible equivalent against the millions
which the ministry expended. No taxes raised in America could
possibly repay it. A revenue of two millions sterling a year would
not discharge the sum and interest accumulated thereon, in twenty
years.

Reconciliation never appears to have been the wish or the object of
the administration; they looked on conquest as certain and
infallible, and, under that persuasion, sought to drive the Americans
into what they might style a general rebellion, and then, crushing
them with arms in their hands, reap the rich harvest of a general
confiscation, and silence them for ever. The dependents at court were
too numerous to be provided for in England. The market for plunder in
the East Indies was over; and the profligacy of government required
that a new mine should be opened, and that mine could be no other
than America, conquered and forfeited. They had no where else to go.
Every other channel was drained; and extravagance, with the thirst of
a drunkard, was gaping for supplies.

If the ministry deny this to have been their plan, it becomes them to
explain what was their plan. For either they have abused us in
coveting property they never labored for, or they have abused you in
expending an amazing sum upon an incompetent object. Taxation, as I
mentioned before, could never be worth the charge of obtaining it by
arms; and any kind of formal obedience which America could have made,
would have weighed with the lightness of a laugh against such a load
of expense. It is therefore most probable that the ministry will at
last justify their policy by their dishonesty, and openly declare,
that their original design was conquest: and, in this case, it well
becomes the people of England to consider how far the nation would
have been benefited by the success.

In a general view, there are few conquests that repay the charge of
making them, and mankind are pretty well convinced that it can never
be worth their while to go to war for profit's sake. If they are made
war upon, their country invaded, or their existence at stake, it is
their duty to defend and preserve themselves, but in every other
light, and from every other cause, is war inglorious and detestable.
But to return to the case in question-

When conquests are made of foreign countries, it is supposed that the
commerce and dominion of the country which made them are extended.
But this could neither be the object nor the consequence of the
present war. You enjoyed the whole commerce before. It could receive
no possible addition by a conquest, but on the contrary, must
diminish as the inhabitants were reduced in numbers and wealth. You
had the same dominion over the country which you used to have, and
had no complaint to make against her for breach of any part of the
contract between you or her, or contending against any established
custom, commercial, political or territorial. The country and
commerce were both your own when you began to conquer, in the same
manner and form as they had been your own a hundred years before.
Nations have sometimes been induced to make conquests for the sake of
reducing the power of their enemies, or bringing it to a balance with
their own. But this could be no part of your plan. No foreign
authority was claimed here, neither was any such authority suspected
by you, or acknowledged or imagined by us. What then, in the name of
heaven, could you go to war for? Or what chance could you possibly
have in the event, but either to hold the same country which you held
before, and that in a much worse condition, or to lose, with an
amazing expense, what you might have retained without a farthing of
charges?

War never can be the interest of a trading nation, any more than
quarrelling can be profitable to a man in business. But to make war
with those who trade with us, is like setting a bull-dog upon a
customer at the shop-door. The least degree of common sense shows the
madness of the latter, and it will apply with the same force of
conviction to the former. Piratical nations, having neither commerce
or commodities of their own to lose, may make war upon all the world,
and lucratively find their account in it; but it is quite otherwise
with Britain: for, besides the stoppage of trade in time of war, she
exposes more of her own property to be lost, than she has the chance
of taking from others. Some ministerial gentlemen in parliament have
mentioned the greatness of her trade as an apology for the greatness
of her loss. This is miserable politics indeed! Because it ought to
have been given as a reason for her not engaging in a war at first.
The coast of America commands the West India trade almost as
effectually as the coast of Africa does that of the Straits; and
England can no more carry on the former without the consent of
America, than she can the latter without a Mediterranean pass.

In whatever light the war with America is considered upon commercial
principles, it is evidently the interest of the people of England not
to support it; and why it has been supported so long, against the
clearest demonstrations of truth and national advantage, is, to me,
and must be to all the reasonable world, a matter of astonishment.
Perhaps it may be said that I live in America, and write this from
interest. To this I reply, that my principle is universal. My
attachment is to all the world, and not to any particular part, and
if what I advance is right, no matter where or who it comes from. We
have given the proclamation of your commissioners a currency in our
newspapers, and I have no doubt you will give this a place in yours.
To oblige and be obliged is fair.

Before I dismiss this part of my address, I shall mention one more
circumstance in which I think the people of England have been equally
mistaken: and then proceed to other matters.

There is such an idea existing in the world, as that of national
honor, and this, falsely understood, is oftentimes the cause of war.
In a Christian and philosophical sense, mankind seem to have stood
still at individual civilization, and to retain as nations all the
original rudeness of nature. Peace by treaty is only a cessation of
violence for a reformation of sentiment. It is a substitute for a
principle that is wanting and ever will be wanting till the idea of
national honor be rightly understood. As individuals we profess
ourselves Christians, but as nations we are heathens, Romans, and
what not. I remember the late Admiral Saunders declaring in the House
of Commons, and that in the time of peace, "That the city of Madrid
laid in ashes was not a sufficient atonement for the Spaniards taking
off the rudder of an English sloop of war." I do not ask whether this
is Christianity or morality, I ask whether it is decency? whether it
is proper language for a nation to use? In private life we call it by
the plain name of bullying, and the elevation of rank cannot alter
its character. It is, I think, exceedingly easy to define what ought
to be understood by national honor; for that which is the best
character for an individual is the best character for a nation; and
wherever the latter exceeds or falls beneath the former, there is a
departure from the line of true greatness.

I have thrown out this observation with a design of applying it to
Great Britain. Her ideas of national honor seem devoid of that
benevolence of heart, that universal expansion of philanthropy, and
that triumph over the rage of vulgar prejudice, without which man is
inferior to himself, and a companion of common animals. To know who
she shall regard or dislike, she asks what country they are of, what
religion they profess, and what property they enjoy. Her idea of
national honor seems to consist in national insult, and that to be a
great people, is to be neither a Christian, a philosopher, or a
gentleman, but to threaten with the rudeness of a bear, and to devour
with the ferocity of a lion. This perhaps may sound harsh and
uncourtly, but it is too true, and the more is the pity.

I mention this only as her general character. But towards America she
has observed no character at all; and destroyed by her conduct what
she assumed in her title. She set out with the title of parent, or
mother country. The association of ideas which naturally accompany
this expression, are filled with everything that is fond, tender and
forbearing. They have an energy peculiar to themselves, and,
overlooking the accidental attachment of common affections, apply
with infinite softness to the first feelings of the heart. It is a
political term which every mother can feel the force of, and every
child can judge of. It needs no painting of mine to set it off, for
nature only can do it justice.

But has any part of your conduct to America corresponded with the
title you set up? If in your general national character you are
unpolished and severe, in this you are inconsistent and unnatural,
and you must have exceeding false notions of national honor to
suppose that the world can admire a want of humanity or that national
honor depends on the violence of resentment, the inflexibility of
temper, or the vengeance of execution.

I would willingly convince you, and that with as much temper as the
times will suffer me to do, that as you opposed your own interest by
quarrelling with us, so likewise your national honor, rightly
conceived and understood, was no ways called upon to enter into a war
with America; had you studied true greatness of heart, the first and
fairest ornament of mankind, you would have acted directly contrary
to all that you have done, and the world would have ascribed it to a
generous cause. Besides which, you had (though with the assistance of
this country) secured a powerful name by the last war. You were known
and dreaded abroad; and it would have been wise in you to have
suffered the world to have slept undisturbed under that idea. It was
to you a force existing without expense. It produced to you all the
advantages of real power; and you were stronger through the
universality of that charm, than any future fleets and armies may
probably make you. Your greatness was so secured and interwoven with
your silence that you ought never to have awakened mankind, and had
nothing to do but to be quiet. Had you been true politicians you
would have seen all this, and continued to draw from the magic of a
name, the force and authority of a nation.

Unwise as you were in breaking the charm, you were still more unwise
in the manner of doing it. Samson only told the secret, but you have
performed the operation; you have shaven your own head, and wantonly
thrown away the locks. America was the hair from which the charm was
drawn that infatuated the world. You ought to have quarrelled with no
power; but with her upon no account. You had nothing to fear from any
condescension you might make. You might have humored her, even if
there had been no justice in her claims, without any risk to your
reputation; for Europe, fascinated by your fame, would have ascribed
it to your benevolence, and America, intoxicated by the grant, would
have slumbered in her fetters.

But this method of studying the progress of the passions, in order to
ascertain the probable conduct of mankind, is a philosophy in
politics which those who preside at St. James's have no conception
of. They know no other influence than corruption and reckon all their
probabilities from precedent. A new case is to them a new world, and
while they are seeking for a parallel they get lost. The talents of
Lord Mansfield can be estimated at best no higher than those of a
sophist. He understands the subtleties but not the elegance of
nature; and by continually viewing mankind through the cold medium of
the law, never thinks of penetrating into the warmer region of the
mind. As for Lord North, it is his happiness to have in him more
philosophy than sentiment, for he bears flogging like a top, and
sleeps the better for it. His punishment becomes his support, for
while he suffers the lash for his sins, he keeps himself up by
twirling about. In politics, he is a good arithmetician, and in every
thing else nothing at all.

There is one circumstance which comes so much within Lord North's
province as a financier, that I am surprised it should escape him,
which is, the different abilities of the two countries in supporting
the expense; for, strange as it may seem, England is not a match for
America in this particular. By a curious kind of revolution in
accounts, the people of England seem to mistake their poverty for
their riches; that is, they reckon their national debt as a part of
their national wealth. They make the same kind of error which a man
would do, who after mortgaging his estate, should add the money
borrowed, to the full value of the estate, in order to count up his
worth, and in this case he would conceive that he got rich by running
into debt. Just thus it is with England. The government owed at the
beginning of this war one hundred and thirty-five millions sterling,
and though the individuals to whom it was due had a right to reckon
their shares as so much private property, yet to the nation
collectively it was so much poverty. There are as effectual limits to
public debts as to private ones, for when once the money borrowed is
so great as to require the whole yearly revenue to discharge the
interest thereon, there is an end to further borrowing; in the same
manner as when the interest of a man's debts amounts to the yearly
income of his estate, there is an end to his credit. This is nearly
the case with England, the interest of her present debt being at
least equal to one half of her yearly revenue, so that out of ten
millions annually collected by taxes, she has but five that she can
call her own.

The very reverse of this was the case with America; she began the war
without any debt upon her, and in order to carry it on, she neither
raised money by taxes, nor borrowed it upon interest, but created it;
and her situation at this time continues so much the reverse of yours
that taxing would make her rich, whereas it would make you poor. When
we shall have sunk the sum which we have created, we shall then be
out of debt, be just as rich as when we began, and all the while we
are doing it shall feel no difference, because the value will rise as
the quantity decreases.

There was not a country in the world so capable of bearing the
expense of a war as America; not only because she was not in debt
when she began, but because the country is young and capable of
infinite improvement, and has an almost boundless tract of new lands
in store; whereas England has got to her extent of age and growth,
and has not unoccupied land or property in reserve. The one is like a
young heir coming to a large improvable estate; the other like an old
man whose chances are over, and his estate mortgaged for half its
worth.

In the second number of the Crisis, which I find has been republished
in England, I endeavored to set forth the impracticability of
conquering America. I stated every case, that I conceived could
possibly happen, and ventured to predict its consequences. As my
conclusions were drawn not artfully, but naturally, they have all
proved to be true. I was upon the spot; knew the politics of America,
her strength and resources, and by a train of services, the best in
my power to render, was honored with the friendship of the congress,
the army and the people. I considered the cause a just one. I know
and feel it a just one, and under that confidence never made my own
profit or loss an object. My endeavor was to have the matter well
understood on both sides, and I conceived myself tendering a general
service, by setting forth to the one the impossibility of being
conquered, and to the other the impossibility of conquering. Most of
the arguments made use of by the ministry for supporting the war, are
the very arguments that ought to have been used against supporting
it; and the plans, by which they thought to conquer, are the very
plans in which they were sure to be defeated. They have taken every
thing up at the wrong end. Their ignorance is astonishing, and were
you in my situation you would see it. They may, perhaps, have your
confidence, but I am persuaded that they would make very indifferent
members of Congress. I know what England is, and what America is, and
from the compound of knowledge, am better enabled to judge of the
issue than what the king or any of his ministers can be.

In this number I have endeavored to show the ill policy and
disadvantages of the war. I believe many of my remarks are new. Those
which are not so, I have studied to improve and place in a manner
that may be clear and striking. Your failure is, I am persuaded, as
certain as fate. America is above your reach. She is at least your
equal in the world, and her independence neither rests upon your
consent, nor can it be prevented by your arms. In short, you spend
your substance in vain, and impoverish yourselves without a hope.

But suppose you had conquered America, what advantages, collectively
or individually, as merchants, manufacturers, or conquerors, could
you have looked for? This is an object you seemed never to have
attended to. Listening for the sound of victory, and led away by the
frenzy of arms, you neglected to reckon either the cost or the
consequences. You must all pay towards the expense; the poorest among
you must bear his share, and it is both your right and your duty to
weigh seriously the matter. Had America been conquered, she might
have been parcelled out in grants to the favorites at court, but no
share of it would have fallen to you. Your taxes would not have been
lessened, because she would have been in no condition to have paid
any towards your relief. We are rich by contrivance of our own, which
would have ceased as soon as you became masters. Our paper money will
be of no use in England, and silver and gold we have none. In the
last war you made many conquests, but were any of your taxes lessened
thereby? On the contrary, were you not taxed to pay for the charge of
making them, and has not the same been the case in every war?

To the Parliament I wish to address myself in a more particular
manner. They appear to have supposed themselves partners in the
chase, and to have hunted with the lion from an expectation of a
right in the booty; but in this it is most probable they would, as
legislators, have been disappointed. The case is quite a new one, and
many unforeseen difficulties would have arisen thereon. The
Parliament claimed a legislative right over America, and the war
originated from that pretence. But the army is supposed to belong to
the crown, and if America had been conquered through their means, the
claim of the legislature would have been suffocated in the conquest.
Ceded, or conquered, countries are supposed to be out of the
authority of Parliament. Taxation is exercised over them by
prerogative and not by law. It was attempted to be done in the
Grenadas a few years ago, and the only reason why it was not done was
because the crown had made a prior relinquishment of its claim.
Therefore, Parliament have been all this while supporting measures
for the establishment of their authority, in the issue of which, they
would have been triumphed over by the prerogative. This might have
opened a new and interesting opposition between the Parliament and
the crown. The crown would have said that it conquered for itself,
and that to conquer for Parliament was an unknown case. The
Parliament might have replied, that America not being a foreign
country, but a country in rebellion, could not be said to be
conquered, but reduced; and thus continued their claim by disowning
the term. The crown might have rejoined, that however America might
be considered at first, she became foreign at last by a declaration
of independence, and a treaty with France; and that her case being,
by that treaty, put within the law of nations, was out of the law of
Parliament, who might have maintained, that as their claim over
America had never been surrendered, so neither could it be taken
away. The crown might have insisted, that though the claim of
Parliament could not be taken away, yet, being an inferior, it might
be superseded; and that, whether the claim was withdrawn from the
object, or the object taken from the claim, the same separation
ensued; and that America being subdued after a treaty with France,
was to all intents and purposes a regal conquest, and of course the
sole property of the king. The Parliament, as the legal delegates of
the people, might have contended against the term "inferior," and
rested the case upon the antiquity of power, and this would have
brought on a set of very interesting and rational questions.

1st, What is the original fountain of power and honor in any country?
2d, Whether the prerogative does not belong to the people?
3d, Whether there is any such thing as the English constitution?
4th, Of what use is the crown to the people?
5th, Whether he who invented a crown was not an enemy to mankind?
6th, Whether it is not a shame for a man to spend a million a year
and do no good for it, and whether the money might not be better
applied? 7th, Whether such a man is not better dead than alive?
8th, Whether a Congress, constituted like that of America, is not the
most happy and consistent form of government in the world?- With a
number of others of the same import.

In short, the contention about the dividend might have distracted the
nation; for nothing is more common than to agree in the conquest and
quarrel for the prize; therefore it is, perhaps, a happy
circumstance, that our successes have prevented the dispute.

If the Parliament had been thrown out in their claim, which it is
most probable they would, the nation likewise would have been thrown
out in their expectation; for as the taxes would have been laid on by
the crown without the Parliament, the revenue arising therefrom, if
any could have arisen, would not have gone into the exchequer, but
into the privy purse, and so far from lessening the taxes, would not
even have been added to them, but served only as pocket money to the
crown. The more I reflect on this matter, the more I am satisfied at
the blindness and ill policy of my countrymen, whose wisdom seems to
operate without discernment, and their strength without an object.

To the great bulwark of the nation, I mean the mercantile and
manufacturing part thereof, I likewise present my address. It is your
interest to see America an independent, and not a conquered country.
If conquered, she is ruined; and if ruined, poor; consequently the
trade will be a trifle, and her credit doubtful. If independent, she
flourishes, and from her flourishing must your profits arise. It
matters nothing to you who governs America, if your manufactures find
a consumption there. Some articles will consequently be obtained from
other places, and it is right that they should; but the demand for
others will increase, by the great influx of inhabitants which a
state of independence and peace will occasion, and in the final event
you may be enriched. The commerce of America is perfectly free, and
ever will be so. She will consign away no part of it to any nation.
She has not to her friends, and certainly will not to her enemies;
though it is probable that your narrow-minded politicians, thinking
to please you thereby, may some time or other unnecessarily make such
a proposal. Trade flourishes best when it is free, and it is weak
policy to attempt to fetter it. Her treaty with France is on the most
liberal and generous principles, and the French, in their conduct
towards her, have proved themselves to be philosophers, politicians,
and gentlemen.

To the ministry I likewise address myself. You, gentlemen, have
studied the ruin of your country, from which it is not within your
abilities to rescue her. Your attempts to recover her are as
ridiculous as your plans which involved her are detestable. The
commissioners, being about to depart, will probably bring you this,
and with it my sixth number, addressed to them; and in so doing they
carry back more Common Sense than they brought, and you likewise will
have more than when you sent them.

Having thus addressed you severally, I conclude by addressing you
collectively. It is a long lane that has no turning. A period of
sixteen years of misconduct and misfortune, is certainly long enough
for any one nation to suffer under; and upon a supposition that war
is not declared between France and you, I beg to place a line of
conduct before you that will easily lead you out of all your
troubles. It has been hinted before, and cannot be too much attended
to.

Suppose America had remained unknown to Europe till the present year,
and that Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, in another voyage round the
world, had made the first discovery of her, in the same condition
that she is now in, of arts, arms, numbers, and civilization. What, I
ask, in that case, would have been your conduct towards her? For that
will point out what it ought to be now. The problems and their
solutions are equal, and the right line of the one is the parallel of
the other. The question takes in every circumstance that can possibly
arise. It reduces politics to a simple thought, and is moreover a
mode of investigation, in which, while you are studying your interest
the simplicity of the case will cheat you into good temper. You have
nothing to do but to suppose that you have found America, and she
appears found to your hand, and while in the joy of your heart you
stand still to admire her, the path of politics rises straight before
you.

Were I disposed to paint a contrast, I could easily set off what you
have done in the present case, against what you would have done in
that case, and by justly opposing them, conclude a picture that would
make you blush. But, as, when any of the prouder passions are hurt,
it is much better philosophy to let a man slip into a good temper
than to attack him in a bad one, for that reason, therefore, I only
state the case, and leave you to reflect upon it.

To go a little back into politics, it will be found that the true
interest of Britain lay in proposing and promoting the independence
of America immediately after the last peace; for the expense which
Britain had then incurred by defending America as her own dominions,
ought to have shown her the policy and necessity of changing the
style of the country, as the best probable method of preventing
future wars and expense, and the only method by which she could hold
the commerce without the charge of sovereignty. Besides which, the
title which she assumed, of parent country, led to, and pointed out
the propriety, wisdom and advantage of a separation; for, as in
private life, children grow into men, and by setting up for
themselves, extend and secure the interest of the whole family, so in
the settlement of colonies large enough to admit of maturity, the
same policy should be pursued, and the same consequences would
follow. Nothing hurts the affections both of parents and children so
much, as living too closely connected, and keeping up the distinction
too long. Domineering will not do over those, who, by a progress in
life, have become equal in rank to their parents, that is, when they
have families of their own; and though they may conceive themselves
the subjects of their advice, will not suppose them the objects of
their government. I do not, by drawing this parallel, mean to admit
the title of parent country, because, if it is due any where, it is
due to Europe collectively, and the first settlers from England were
driven here by persecution. I mean only to introduce the term for the
sake of policy and to show from your title the line of your interest.

When you saw the state of strength and opulence, and that by her own
industry, which America arrived at, you ought to have advised her to
set up for herself, and proposed an alliance of interest with her,
and in so doing you would have drawn, and that at her own expense,
more real advantage, and more military supplies and assistance, both
of ships and men, than from any weak and wrangling government that
you could exercise over her. In short, had you studied only the
domestic politics of a family, you would have learned how to govern
the state; but, instead of this easy and natural line, you flew out
into every thing which was wild and outrageous, till, by following
the passion and stupidity of the pilot, you wrecked the vessel within
sight of the shore.

Having shown what you ought to have done, I now proceed to show why
it was not done. The caterpillar circle of the court had an interest
to pursue, distinct from, and opposed to yours; for though by the
independence of America and an alliance therewith, the trade would
have continued, if not increased, as in many articles neither country
can go to a better market, and though by defending and protecting
herself, she would have been no expense to you, and consequently your
national charges would have decreased, and your taxes might have been
proportionably lessened thereby; yet the striking off so many places
from the court calendar was put in opposition to the interest of the
nation. The loss of thirteen government ships, with their appendages,
here and in England, is a shocking sound in the ear of a hungry
courtier. Your present king and ministry will be the ruin of you; and
you had better risk a revolution and call a Congress, than be thus
led on from madness to despair, and from despair to ruin. America has
set you the example, and you may follow it and be free.

I now come to the last part, a war with France. This is what no man
in his senses will advise you to, and all good men would wish to
prevent. Whether France will declare war against you, is not for me
in this place to mention, or to hint, even if I knew it; but it must
be madness in you to do it first. The matter is come now to a full
crisis, and peace is easy if willingly set about. Whatever you may
think, France has behaved handsomely to you. She would have been
unjust to herself to have acted otherwise than she did; and having
accepted our offer of alliance she gave you genteel notice of it.
There was nothing in her conduct reserved or indelicate, and while
she announced her determination to support her treaty, she left you
to give the first offence. America, on her part, has exhibited a
character of firmness to the world. Unprepared and unarmed, without
form or government, she, singly opposed a nation that domineered over
half the globe. The greatness of the deed demands respect; and though
you may feel resentment, you are compelled both to wonder and admire.

Here I rest my arguments and finish my address. Such as it is, it is
a gift, and you are welcome. It was always my design to dedicate a
Crisis to you, when the time should come that would properly make it
a Crisis; and when, likewise, I should catch myself in a temper to
write it, and suppose you in a condition to read it. That time has
now arrived, and with it the opportunity for conveyance. For the
commissioners- poor commissioners! having proclaimed, that "yet forty
days and Nineveh shall be overthrown," have waited out the date, and,
discontented with their God, are returning to their gourd. And all
the harm I wish them is, that it may not wither about their ears, and
that they may not make their exit in the belly of a whale.

COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA, Nov. 21, 1778.

P.S.- Though in the tranquillity of my mind I have concluded with a
laugh, yet I have something to mention to the commissioners, which,
to them, is serious and worthy their attention. Their authority is
derived from an Act of Parliament, which likewise describes and
limits their official powers. Their commission, therefore, is only a
recital, and personal investiture, of those powers, or a nomination
and description of the persons who are to execute them. Had it
contained any thing contrary to, or gone beyond the line of, the
written law from which it is derived, and by which it is bound, it
would, by the English constitution, have been treason in the crown,
and the king been subject to an impeachment. He dared not, therefore,
put in his commission what you have put in your proclamation, that
is, he dared not have authorised you in that commission to burn and
destroy any thing in America. You are both in the act and in the
commission styled commissioners for restoring peace, and the methods
for doing it are there pointed out. Your last proclamation is signed
by you as commissioners under that act. You make Parliament the
patron of its contents. Yet, in the body of it, you insert matters
contrary both to the spirit and letter of the act, and what likewise
your king dared not have put in his commission to you. The state of
things in England, gentlemen, is too ticklish for you to run hazards.
You are accountable to Parliament for the execution of that act
according to the letter of it. Your heads may pay for breaking it,
for you certainly have broke it by exceeding it. And as a friend, who
would wish you to escape the paw of the lion, as well as the belly of
the whale, I civilly hint to you, to keep within compass.

Sir Harry Clinton, strictly speaking, is as accountable as the rest;
for though a general, he is likewise a commissioner, acting under a
superior authority. His first obedience is due to the act; and his
plea of being a general, will not and cannot clear him as a
commissioner, for that would suppose the crown, in its single
capacity, to have a power of dispensing with an Act of Parliament.
Your situation, gentlemen, is nice and critical, and the more so
because England is unsettled. Take heed! Remember the times of
Charles the First! For Laud and Stafford fell by trusting to a hope
like yours.

Having thus shown you the danger of your proclamation, I now show you
the folly of it. The means contradict your design: you threaten to
lay waste, in order to render America a useless acquisition of
alliance to France. I reply, that the more destruction you commit (if
you could do it) the more valuable to France you make that alliance.
You can destroy only houses and goods; and by so doing you increase
our demand upon her for materials and merchandise; for the wants of
one nation, provided it has freedom and credit, naturally produce
riches to the other; and, as you can neither ruin the land nor
prevent the vegetation, you would increase the exportation of our
produce in payment, which would be to her a new fund of wealth. In
short, had you cast about for a plan on purpose to enrich your
enemies, you could not have hit upon a better.

                                           C. S.

                           The Crisis 

                                VIII.

                  ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.

"TRUSTING (says the king of England in his speech of November last,)
in the divine providence, and in the justice of my cause, I am firmly
resolved to prosecute the war with vigor, and to make every exertion
in order to compel our enemies to equitable terms of peace and
accommodation." To this declaration the United States of America, and
the confederated powers of Europe will reply, if Britain will have
war, she shall have enough of it.

Five years have nearly elapsed since the commencement of hostilities,
and every campaign, by a gradual decay, has lessened your ability to
conquer, without producing a serious thought on your condition or
your fate. Like a prodigal lingering in an habitual consumption, you
feel the relics of life, and mistake them for recovery. New schemes,
like new medicines, have administered fresh hopes, and prolonged the
disease instead of curing it. A change of generals, like a change of
physicians, served only to keep the flattery alive, and furnish new
pretences for new extravagance.

"Can Britain fail?"* has been proudly asked at the undertaking of
every enterprise; and that "whatever she wills is fate,"*(2) has been
given with the solemnity of prophetic confidence; and though the
question has been constantly replied to by disappointment, and the
prediction falsified by misfortune, yet still the insult continued,
and your catalogue of national evils increased therewith. Eager to
persuade the world of her power, she considered destruction as the
minister of greatness, and conceived that the glory of a nation like
that of an [American] Indian, lay in the number of its scalps and the
miseries which it inflicts.

* Whitehead's New Year's ode for 1776.
*(2) Ode at the installation of Lord North, for Chancellor of the
University of Oxford.

Fire, sword and want, as far as the arms of Britain could extend
them, have been spread with wanton cruelty along the coast of
America; and while you, remote from the scene of suffering, had
nothing to lose and as little to dread, the information reached you
like a tale of antiquity, in which the distance of time defaces the
conception, and changes the severest sorrows into conversable
amusement.

This makes the second paper, addressed perhaps in vain, to the people
of England. That advice should be taken wherever example has failed,
or precept be regarded where warning is ridiculed, is like a picture
of hope resting on despair: but when time shall stamp with universal
currency the facts you have long encountered with a laugh, and the
irresistible evidence of accumulated losses, like the handwriting on
the wall, shall add terror to distress, you will then, in a conflict
of suffering, learn to sympathize with others by feeling for
yourselves.

The triumphant appearance of the combined fleets in the channel and
at your harbor's mouth, and the expedition of Captain Paul Jones, on
the western and eastern coasts of England and Scotland, will, by
placing you in the condition of an endangered country, read to you a
stronger lecture on the calamities of invasion, and bring to your
minds a truer picture of promiscuous distress, than the most finished
rhetoric can describe or the keenest imagination conceive.

Hitherto you have experienced the expenses, but nothing of the
miseries of war. Your disappointments have been accompanied with no
immediate suffering, and your losses came to you only by
intelligence. Like fire at a distance you heard not even the cry; you
felt not the danger, you saw not the confusion. To you every thing
has been foreign but the taxes to support it. You knew not what it
was to be alarmed at midnight with an armed enemy in the streets. You
were strangers to the distressing scene of a family in flight, and to
the thousand restless cares and tender sorrows that incessantly
arose. To see women and children wandering in the severity of winter,
with the broken remains of a well furnished house, and seeking
shelter in every crib and hut, were matters that you had no
conception of. You knew not what it was to stand by and see your
goods chopped for fuel, and your beds ripped to pieces to make
packages for plunder. The misery of others, like a tempestuous night,
added to the pleasures of your own security. You even enjoyed the
storm, by contemplating the difference of conditions, and that which
carried sorrow into the breasts of thousands served but to heighten
in you a species of tranquil pride. Yet these are but the fainter
sufferings of war, when compared with carnage and slaughter, the
miseries of a military hospital, or a town in flames.

The people of America, by anticipating distress, had fortified their
minds against every species you could inflict. They had resolved to
abandon their homes, to resign them to destruction, and to seek new
settlements rather than submit. Thus familiarized to misfortune,
before it arrived, they bore their portion with the less regret: the
justness of their cause was a continual source of consolation, and
the hope of final victory, which never left them, served to lighten
the load and sweeten the cup allotted them to drink.

But when their troubles shall become yours, and invasion be
transferred upon the invaders, you will have neither their extended
wilderness to fly to, their cause to comfort you, nor their hope to
rest upon. Distress with them was sharpened by no self-reflection.
They had not brought it on themselves. On the contrary, they had by
every proceeding endeavored to avoid it, and had descended even below
the mark of congressional character, to prevent a war. The national
honor or the advantages of independence were matters which, at the
commencement of the dispute, they had never studied, and it was only
at the last moment that the measure was resolved on. Thus
circumstanced, they naturally and conscientiously felt a dependence
upon providence. They had a clear pretension to it, and had they
failed therein, infidelity had gained a triumph.

But your condition is the reverse of theirs. Every thing you suffer
you have sought: nay, had you created mischiefs on purpose to inherit
them, you could not have secured your title by a firmer deed. The
world awakens with no pity it your complaints. You felt none for
others; you deserve none for yourselves. Nature does not interest
herself in cases like yours, but, on the contrary, turns from them
with dislike, and abandons them to punishment. You may now present
memorials to what court you please, but so far as America is the
object, none will listen. The policy of Europe, and the propensity
there in every mind to curb insulting ambition, and bring cruelty to
judgment, are unitedly against you; and where nature and interest
reinforce with each other, the compact is too intimate to be
dissolved.

Make but the case of others your own, and your own theirs, and you
will then have a clear idea of the whole. Had France acted towards
her colonies as you have done, you would have branded her with every
epithet of abhorrence; and had you, like her, stepped in to succor a
struggling people, all Europe must have echoed with your own
applauses. But entangled in the passion of dispute you see it not as
you ought, and form opinions thereon which suit with no interest but
your own. You wonder that America does not rise in union with you to
impose on herself a portion of your taxes and reduce herself to
unconditional submission. You are amazed that the southern powers of
Europe do not assist you in conquering a country which is afterwards
to be turned against themselves; and that the northern ones do not
contribute to reinstate you in America who already enjoy the market
for naval stores by the separation. You seem surprised that Holland
does not pour in her succors to maintain you mistress of the seas,
when her own commerce is suffering by your act of navigation; or that
any country should study her own interest while yours is on the
carpet.

Such excesses of passionate folly, and unjust as well as unwise
resentment, have driven you on, like Pharaoh, to unpitied miseries,
and while the importance of the quarrel shall perpetuate your
disgrace, the flag of America will carry it round the world. The
natural feelings of every rational being will be against you, and
wherever the story shall be told, you will have neither excuse nor
consolation left. With an unsparing hand, and an insatiable mind, you
have desolated the world, to gain dominion and to lose it; and while,
in a frenzy of avarice and ambition, the east and the west are doomed
to tributary bondage, you rapidly earned destruction as the wages of
a nation.

At the thoughts of a war at home, every man amongst you ought to
tremble. The prospect is far more dreadful there than in America.
Here the party that was against the measures of the continent were in
general composed of a kind of neutrals, who added strength to neither
army. There does not exist a being so devoid of sense and sentiment
as to covet "unconditional submission," and therefore no man in
America could be with you in principle. Several might from a
cowardice of mind, prefer it to the hardships and dangers of opposing
it; but the same disposition that gave them such a choice, unfitted
them to act either for or against us. But England is rent into
parties, with equal shares of resolution. The principle which
produced the war divides the nation. Their animosities are in the
highest state of fermentation, and both sides, by a call of the
militia, are in arms. No human foresight can discern, no conclusion
can be formed, what turn a war might take, if once set on foot by an
invasion. She is not now in a fit disposition to make a common cause
of her own affairs, and having no conquests to hope for abroad, and
nothing but expenses arising at home, her everything is staked upon a
defensive combat, and the further she goes the worse she is off.

There are situations that a nation may be in, in which peace or war,
abstracted from every other consideration, may be politically right
or wrong. When nothing can be lost by a war, but what must be lost
without it, war is then the policy of that country; and such was the
situation of America at the commencement of hostilities: but when no
security can be gained by a war, but what may be accomplished by a
peace, the case becomes reversed, and such now is the situation of
England.

That America is beyond the reach of conquest, is a fact which
experience has shown and time confirmed, and this admitted, what, I
ask, is now the object of contention? If there be any honor in
pursuing self-destruction with inflexible passion- if national
suicide be the perfection of national glory, you may, with all the
pride of criminal happiness, expire unenvied and unrivalled. But when
the tumult of war shall cease, and the tempest of present passions be
succeeded by calm reflection, or when those, who, surviving its fury,
shall inherit from you a legacy of debts and misfortunes, when the
yearly revenue scarcely be able to discharge the interest of the one,
and no possible remedy be left for the other, ideas far different
from the present will arise, and embitter the remembrance of former
follies. A mind disarmed of its rage feels no pleasure in
contemplating a frantic quarrel. Sickness of thought, the sure
consequence of conduct like yours, leaves no ability for enjoyment,
no relish for resentment; and though, like a man in a fit, you feel
not the injury of the struggle, nor distinguish between strength and
disease, the weakness will nevertheless be proportioned to the
violence, and the sense of pain increase with the recovery.

To what persons or to whose system of politics you owe your present
state of wretchedness, is a matter of total indifference to America.
They have contributed, however unwillingly, to set her above
themselves, and she, in the tranquillity of conquest, resigns the
inquiry. The case now is not so properly who began the war, as who
continues it. That there are men in all countries to whom a state of
war is a mine of wealth, is a fact never to be doubted. Characters
like these naturally breed in the putrefaction of distempered times,
and after fattening on the disease, they perish with it, or,
impregnated with the stench, retreat into obscurity.

But there are several erroneous notions to which you likewise owe a
share of your misfortunes, and which, if continued, will only
increase your trouble and your losses. An opinion hangs about the
gentlemen of the minority, that America would relish measures under
their administration, which she would not from the present cabinet.
On this rock Lord Chatham would have split had he gained the helm,
and several of his survivors are steering the same course. Such
distinctions in the infancy of the argument had some degree of
foundation, but they now serve no other purpose than to lengthen out
a war, in which the limits of a dispute, being fixed by the fate of
arms, and guaranteed by treaties, are not to be changed or altered by
trivial circumstances.

The ministry, and many of the minority, sacrifice their time in
disputing on a question with which they have nothing to do, namely,
whether America shall be independent or not. Whereas the only
question that can come under their determination is, whether they
will accede to it or not. They confound a military question with a
political one, and undertake to supply by a vote what they lost by a
battle. Say she shall not be independent, and it will signify as much
as if they voted against a decree of fate, or say that she shall, and
she will be no more independent than before. Questions which, when
determined, cannot be executed, serve only to show the folly of
dispute and the weakness of disputants.

From a long habit of calling America your own, you suppose her
governed by the same prejudices and conceits which govern yourselves.
Because you have set up a particular denomination of religion to the
exclusion of all others, you imagine she must do the same, and
because you, with an unsociable narrowness of mind, have cherished
enmity against France and Spain, you suppose her alliance must be
defective in friendship. Copying her notions of the world from you,
she formerly thought as you instructed, but now feeling herself free,
and the prejudice removed, she thinks and acts upon a different
system. It frequently happens that in proportion as we are taught to
dislike persons and countries, not knowing why, we feel an ardor of
esteem upon the removal of the mistake: it seems as if something was
to be made amends for, and we eagerly give in to every office of
friendship, to atone for the injury of the error. But, perhaps, there
is something in the extent of countries, which, among the generality
of people, insensibly communicates extension of the mind. The soul of
an islander, in its native state, seems bounded by the foggy confines
of the water's edge, and all beyond affords to him matters only for
profit or curiosity, not for friendship. His island is to him his
world, and fixed to that, his every thing centers in it; while those
who are inhabitants of a continent, by casting their eye over a
larger field, take in likewise a larger intellectual circuit, and
thus approaching nearer to an acquaintance with the universe, their
atmosphere of thought is extended, and their liberality fills a wider
space. In short, our minds seem to be measured by countries when we
are men, as they are by places when we are children, and until
something happens to disentangle us from the prejudice, we serve
under it without perceiving it.

In addition to this, it may be remarked, that men who study any
universal science, the principles of which are universally known, or
admitted, and applied without distinction to the common benefit of
all countries, obtain thereby a larger share of philanthropy than
those who only study national arts and improvements. Natural
philosophy, mathematics and astronomy, carry the mind from the
country to the creation, and give it a fitness suited to the extent.
It was not Newton's honor, neither could it be his pride, that he was
an Englishman, but that he was a philosopher, the heavens had
liberated him from the prejudices of an island, and science had
expanded his soul as boundless as his studies.

                                          COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA, March, 1780.


                            The Crisis 

                                  IX.

HAD America pursued her advantages with half the spirit that she
resisted her misfortunes, she would, before now, have been a
conquering and a peaceful people; but lulled in the lap of soft
tranquillity, she rested on her hopes, and adversity only has
convulsed her into action. Whether subtlety or sincerity at the close
of the last year induced the enemy to an appearance for peace, is a
point not material to know; it is sufficient that we see the effects
it has had on our politics, and that we sternly rise to resent the
delusion.

The war, on the part of America, has been a war of natural feelings.
Brave in distress; serene in conquest; drowsy while at rest; and in
every situation generously disposed to peace; a dangerous calm, and a
most heightened zeal have, as circumstances varied, succeeded each
other. Every passion but that of despair has been called to a tour of
duty; and so mistaken has been the enemy, of our abilities and
disposition, that when she supposed us conquered, we rose the
conquerors. The extensiveness of the United States, and the variety
of their resources; the universality of their cause, the quick
operation of their feelings, and the similarity of their sentiments,
have, in every trying situation, produced a something, which, favored
by providence, and pursued with ardor, has accomplished in an instant
the business of a campaign. We have never deliberately sought
victory, but snatched it; and bravely undone in an hour the blotted
operations of a season.

The reported fate of Charleston, like the misfortunes of 1776, has at
last called forth a spirit, and kindled up a flame, which perhaps no
other event could have produced. If the enemy has circulated a
falsehood, they have unwisely aggravated us into life, and if they
have told us the truth, they have unintentionally done us a service.
We were returning with folded arms from the fatigues of war, and
thinking and sitting leisurely down to enjoy repose. The dependence
that has been put upon Charleston threw a drowsiness over America. We
looked on the business done- the conflict over- the matter settled-
or that all which remained unfinished would follow of itself. In this
state of dangerous relaxation, exposed to the poisonous infusions of
the enemy, and having no common danger to attract our attention, we
were extinguishing, by stages, the ardor we began with, and
surrendering by piece-meal the virtue that defended us.

Afflicting as the loss of Charleston may be, yet if it universally
rouse us from the slumber of twelve months past, and renew in us the
spirit of former days, it will produce an advantage more important
than its loss. America ever is what she thinks herself to be.
Governed by sentiment, and acting her own mind, she becomes, as she
pleases, the victor or the victim.

It is not the conquest of towns, nor the accidental capture of
garrisons, that can reduce a country so extensive as this. The
sufferings of one part can never be relieved by the exertions of
another, and there is no situation the enemy can be placed in that
does not afford to us the same advantages which he seeks himself. By
dividing his force, he leaves every post attackable. It is a mode of
war that carries with it a confession of weakness, and goes on the
principle of distress rather than conquest.

The decline of the enemy is visible, not only in their operations,
but in their plans; Charleston originally made but a secondary object
in the system of attack, and it is now become their principal one,
because they have not been able to succeed elsewhere. It would have
carried a cowardly appearance in Europe had they formed their grand
expedition, in 1776, against a part of the continent where there was
no army, or not a sufficient one to oppose them; but failing year
after year in their impressions here, and to the eastward and
northward, they deserted their capital design, and prudently
contenting themselves with what they can get, give a flourish of
honor to conceal disgrace.

But this piece-meal work is not conquering the continent. It is a
discredit in them to attempt it, and in us to suffer it. It is now
full time to put an end to a war of aggravations, which, on one side,
has no possible object, and on the other has every inducement which
honor, interest, safety and happiness can inspire. If we suffer them
much longer to remain among us, we shall become as bad as themselves.
An association of vice will reduce us more than the sword. A nation
hardened in the practice of iniquity knows better how to profit by
it, than a young country newly corrupted. We are not a match for them
in the line of advantageous guilt, nor they for us on the principles
which we bravely set out with. Our first days were our days of honor.
They have marked the character of America wherever the story of her
wars are told; and convinced of this, we have nothing to do but
wisely and unitedly to tread the well known track. The progress of a
war is often as ruinous to individuals, as the issue of it is to a
nation; and it is not only necessary that our forces be such that we
be conquerors in the end, but that by timely exertions we be secure
in the interim. The present campaign will afford an opportunity which
has never presented itself before, and the preparations for it are
equally necessary, whether Charleston stand or fall. Suppose the
first, it is in that case only a failure of the enemy, not a defeat.
All the conquest that a besieged town can hope for, is, not to be
conquered; and compelling an enemy to raise the siege, is to the
besieged a victory. But there must be a probability amounting almost
to a certainty, that would justify a garrison marching out to attack
a retreat. Therefore should Charleston not be taken, and the enemy
abandon the siege, every other part of the continent should prepare
to meet them; and, on the contrary, should it be taken, the same
preparations are necessary to balance the loss, and put ourselves in
a position to co-operate with our allies, immediately on their
arrival.

We are not now fighting our battles alone, as we were in 1776;
England, from a malicious disposition to America, has not only not
declared war against France and Spain, but, the better to prosecute
her passions here, has afforded those powers no military object, and
avoids them, to distress us. She will suffer her West India islands
to be overrun by France, and her southern settlements to be taken by
Spain, rather than quit the object that gratifies her revenge. This
conduct, on the part of Britain, has pointed out the propriety of
France sending a naval and land force to co-operate with America on
the spot. Their arrival cannot be very distant, nor the ravages of
the enemy long. The recruiting the army, and procuring the supplies,
are the two things most necessary to be accomplished, and a capture
of either of the enemy's divisions will restore to America peace and
plenty.

At a crisis, big, like the present, with expectation and events, the
whole country is called to unanimity and exertion. Not an ability
ought now to sleep, that can produce but a mite to the general good,
nor even a whisper to pass that militates against it. The necessity
of the case, and the importance of the consequences, admit no delay
from a friend, no apology from an enemy. To spare now, would be the
height of extravagance, and to consult present ease, would be to
sacrifice it perhaps forever.

America, rich in patriotism and produce, can want neither men nor
supplies, when a serious necessity calls them forth. The slow
operation of taxes, owing to the extensiveness of collection, and
their depreciated value before they arrived in the treasury, have, in
many instances, thrown a burden upon government, which has been
artfully interpreted by the enemy into a general decline throughout
the country. Yet this, inconvenient as it may at first appear, is not
only remediable, but may be turned to an immediate advantage; for it
makes no real difference, whether a certain number of men, or company
of militia (and in this country every man is a militia-man), are
directed by law to send a recruit at their own expense, or whether a
tax is laid on them for that purpose, and the man hired by government
afterwards. The first, if there is any difference, is both cheapest
and best, because it saves the expense which would attend collecting
it as a tax, and brings the man sooner into the field than the modes
of recruiting formerly used; and, on this principle, a law has been
passed in this state, for recruiting two men from each company of
militia, which will add upwards of a thousand to the force of the
country.

But the flame which has broken forth in this city since the report
from New York, of the loss of Charleston, not only does honor to the
place, but, like the blaze of 1776, will kindle into action the
scattered sparks throughout America. The valor of a country may be
learned by the bravery of its soldiery, and the general cast of its
inhabitants, but confidence of success is best discovered by the
active measures pursued by men of property; and when the spirit of
enterprise becomes so universal as to act at once on all ranks of
men, a war may then, and not till then, be styled truly popular.

In 1776, the ardor of the enterprising part was considerably checked
by the real revolt of some, and the coolness of others. But in the
present case, there is a firmness in the substance and property of
the country to the public cause. An association has been entered into
by the merchants, tradesmen, and principal inhabitants of the city
[Philadelphia], to receive and support the new state money at the
value of gold and silver; a measure which, while it does them honor,
will likewise contribute to their interest, by rendering the
operations of the campaign convenient and effectual.

Nor has the spirit of exertion stopped here. A voluntary subscription
is likewise begun, to raise a fund of hard money, to be given as
bounties, to fill up the full quota of the Pennsylvania line. It has
been the remark of the enemy, that every thing in America has been
done by the force of government; but when she sees individuals
throwing in their voluntary aid, and facilitating the public measures
in concert with the established powers of the country, it will
convince her that the cause of America stands not on the will of a
few but on the broad foundation of property and popularity.

Thus aided and thus supported, disaffection will decline, and the
withered head of tyranny expire in America. The ravages of the enemy
will be short and limited, and like all their former ones, will
produce a victory over themselves.

                                       COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA, June 9, 1780.

P. S. At the time of writing this number of the Crisis, the loss of
Charleston, though believed by some, was more confidently disbelieved
by others. But there ought to be no longer a doubt upon the matter.
Charleston is gone, and I believe for the want of a sufficient supply
of provisions. The man that does not now feel for the honor of the
best and noblest cause that ever a country engaged in, and exert
himself accordingly, is no longer worthy of a peaceable residence
among a people determined to be free.

                                             C. S.

                       THE CRISIS EXTRAORDINARY

                      ON THE SUBJECT OF TAXATION.

IT IS impossible to sit down and think seriously on the affairs of
America, but the original principles upon which she resisted, and the
glow and ardor which they inspired, will occur like the undefaced
remembrance of a lovely scene. To trace over in imagination the
purity of the cause, the voluntary sacrifices that were made to
support it, and all the various turnings of the war in its defence,
is at once both paying and receiving respect. The principles deserve
to be remembered, and to remember them rightly is repossessing them.
In this indulgence of generous recollection, we become gainers by
what we seem to give, and the more we bestow the richer we become.

So extensively right was the ground on which America proceeded, that
it not only took in every just and liberal sentiment which could
impress the heart, but made it the direct interest of every class and
order of men to defend the country. The war, on the part of Britain,
was originally a war of covetousness. The sordid and not the splendid
passions gave it being. The fertile fields and prosperous infancy of
America appeared to her as mines for tributary wealth. She viewed the
hive, and disregarding the industry that had enriched it, thirsted
for the honey. But in the present stage of her affairs, the violence
of temper is added to the rage of avarice; and therefore, that which
at the first setting out proceeded from purity of principle and
public interest, is now heightened by all the obligations of
necessity; for it requires but little knowledge of human nature to
discern what would be the consequence, were America again reduced to
the subjection of Britain. Uncontrolled power, in the hands of an
incensed, imperious, and rapacious conqueror, is an engine of
dreadful execution, and woe be to that country over which it can be
exercised. The names of Whig and Tory would then be sunk in the
general term of rebel, and the oppression, whatever it might be,
would, with very few instances of exception, light equally on all.

Britain did not go to war with America for the sake of dominion,
because she was then in possession; neither was it for the extension
of trade and commerce, because she had monopolized the whole, and the
country had yielded to it; neither was it to extinguish what she
might call rebellion, because before she began no resistance existed.
It could then be from no other motive than avarice, or a design of
establishing, in the first instance, the same taxes in America as are
paid in England (which, as I shall presently show, are above eleven
times heavier than the taxes we now pay for the present year, 1780)
or, in the second instance, to confiscate the whole property of
America, in case of resistance and conquest of the latter, of which
she had then no doubt.

I shall now proceed to show what the taxes in England are, and what
the yearly expense of the present war is to her- what the taxes of
this country amount to, and what the annual expense of defending it
effectually will be to us; and shall endeavor concisely to point out
the cause of our difficulties, and the advantages on one side, and
the consequences on the other, in case we do, or do not, put
ourselves in an effectual state of defence. I mean to be open,
candid, and sincere. I see a universal wish to expel the enemy from
the country, a murmuring because the war is not carried on with more
vigor, and my intention is to show, as shortly as possible, both the
reason and the remedy.

The number of souls in England (exclusive of Scotland and Ireland) is
seven millions,* and the number of souls in America is three
millions.

* This is taking the highest number that the people of England have
been, or can be rated at.

The amount of taxes in England (exclusive of Scotland and Ireland)
was, before the present war commenced, eleven millions six hundred
and forty-two thousand six hundred and fifty-three pounds sterling;
which, on an average, is no less a sum than one pound thirteen
shillings and three-pence sterling per head per annum, men, women,
and children; besides county taxes, taxes for the support of the
poor, and a tenth of all the produce of the earth for the support of
the bishops and clergy.* Nearly five millions of this sum went
annually to pay the interest of the national debt, contracted by
former wars, and the remaining sum of six millions six hundred and
forty-two thousand six hundred pounds was applied to defray the
yearly expense of government, the peace establishment of the army and
navy, placemen, pensioners, etc.; consequently the whole of the
enormous taxes being thus appropriated, she had nothing to spare out
of them towards defraying the expenses of the present war or any
other. Yet had she not been in debt at the beginning of the war, as
we were not, and, like us, had only a land and not a naval war to
carry on, her then revenue of eleven millions and a half pounds
sterling would have defrayed all her annual expenses of war and
government within each year.
* The following is taken from Dr. Price's state of the taxes of
England.

An account of the money drawn from the public by taxes, annually,
being the medium of three years before the year 1776.

    Amount of customs in England                         2,528,275 L.
    Amount of the excise in England                      4,649,892
    Land tax at 3s.                                      1,300,000
    Land tax at 1s. in the pound                           450,000
    Salt duties                                            218,739
    Duties on stamps, cards, dice, advertisements,
      bonds, leases, indentures, newspapers,
      almanacks, etc.                                      280,788
    Duties on houses and windows                           385,369
    Post office, seizures, wine licences, hackney
      coaches, etc.                                        250,000
    Annual profits from lotteries                          150,000
    Expense of collecting the excise in England            297,887
    Expense of collecting the customs in England           468,703
    Interest of loans on the land tax at 4s. expenses
      of collection, militia, etc.                         250,000
    Perquisites, etc. to custom-house officers, &c.
      supposed                                             250,000
    Expense of collecting the salt duties in England
      10 1/2 per cent.                                      27,000
    Bounties on fish exported                               18,000
    Expense of collecting the duties on stamps, cards,
      advertisements, etc. at 5 and 1/4 per cent.           18,000

                                                  Total 11,642,653 L.

But this not being the case with her, she is obliged to borrow about
ten millions pounds sterling, yearly, to prosecute the war that she
is now engaged in, (this year she borrowed twelve) and lay on new
taxes to discharge the interest; allowing that the present war has
cost her only fifty millions sterling, the interest thereon, at five
per cent., will be two millions and an half; therefore the amount of
her taxes now must be fourteen millions, which on an average is no
less than forty shillings sterling, per head, men, women and
children, throughout the nation. Now as this expense of fifty
millions was borrowed on the hopes of conquering America, and as it
was avarice which first induced her to commence the war, how truly
wretched and deplorable would the condition of this country be, were
she, by her own remissness, to suffer an enemy of such a disposition,
and so circumstanced, to reduce her to subjection.

I now proceed to the revenues of America.

I have already stated the number of souls in America to be three
millions, and by a calculation that I have made, which I have every
reason to believe is sufficiently correct, the whole expense of the
war, and the support of the several governments, may be defrayed for
two million pounds sterling annually; which, on an average, is
thirteen shillings and four pence per head, men, women, and children,
and the peace establishment at the end of the war will be but three
quarters of a million, or five shillings sterling per head. Now,
throwing out of the question everything of honor, principle,
happiness, freedom, and reputation in the world, and taking it up on
the simple ground of interest, I put the following case:

Suppose Britain was to conquer America, and, as a conqueror, was to
lay her under no other conditions than to pay the same proportion
towards her annual revenue which the people of England pay: our
share, in that case, would be six million pounds sterling yearly. Can
it then be a question, whether it is best to raise two millions to
defend the country, and govern it ourselves, and only three quarters
of a million afterwards, or pay six millions to have it conquered,
and let the enemy govern it?

Can it be supposed that conquerors would choose to put themselves in
a worse condition than what they granted to the conquered? In
England, the tax on rum is five shillings and one penny sterling per
gallon, which is one silver dollar and fourteen coppers. Now would it
not be laughable to imagine, that after the expense they have been
at, they would let either Whig or Tory drink it cheaper than
themselves? Coffee, which is so inconsiderable an article of
consumption and support here, is there loaded with a duty which makes
the price between five and six shillings per pound, and a penalty of
fifty pounds sterling on any person detected in roasting it in his
own house. There is scarcely a necessary of life that you can eat,
drink, wear, or enjoy, that is not there loaded with a tax; even the
light from heaven is only permitted to shine into their dwellings by
paying eighteen pence sterling per window annually; and the humblest
drink of life, small beer, cannot there be purchased without a tax of
nearly two coppers per gallon, besides a heavy tax upon the malt, and
another on the hops before it is brewed, exclusive of a land-tax on
the earth which produces them. In short, the condition of that
country, in point of taxation, is so oppressive, the number of her
poor so great, and the extravagance and rapaciousness of the court so
enormous, that, were they to effect a conquest of America, it is then
only that the distresses of America would begin. Neither would it
signify anything to a man whether he be Whig or Tory. The people of
England, and the ministry of that country, know us by no such
distinctions. What they want is clear, solid revenue, and the modes
which they would take to procure it, would operate alike on all.
Their manner of reasoning would be short, because they would
naturally infer, that if we were able to carry on a war of five or
six years against them, we were able to pay the same taxes which they
do.

I have already stated that the expense of conducting the present war,
and the government of the several states, may be done for two
millions sterling, and the establishment in the time of peace, for
three quarters of a million.*

* I have made the calculations in sterling, because it is a rate
generally known in all the states, and because, likewise, it admits
of an easy comparison between our expenses to support the war, and
those of the enemy. Four silver dollars and a half is one pound
sterling, and three pence over.

As to navy matters, they flourish so well, and are so well attended
to by individuals, that I think it consistent on every principle of
real use and economy, to turn the navy into hard money (keeping only
three or four packets) and apply it to the service of the army. We
shall not have a ship the less; the use of them, and the benefit from
them, will be greatly increased, and their expense saved. We are now
allied with a formidable naval power, from whom we derive the
assistance of a navy. And the line in which we can prosecute the war,
so as to reduce the common enemy and benefit the alliance most
effectually, will be by attending closely to the land service.

I estimate the charge of keeping up and maintaining an army,
officering them, and all expenses included, sufficient for the
defence of the country, to be equal to the expense of forty thousand
men at thirty pounds sterling per head, which is one million two
hundred thousand pounds.

I likewise allow four hundred thousand pounds for continental
expenses at home and abroad.

And four hundred thousand pounds for the support of the several state
governments- the amount will then be:

    For the army                                         1,200,000 L.
    Continental expenses at home and abroad                400,000
    Government of the several states                       400,000

                                                   Total 2,000,000 L.

I take the proportion of this state, Pennsylvania, to be an eighth
part of the thirteen United States; the quota then for us to raise
will be two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling; two hundred
thousand of which will be our share for the support and pay of the
army, and continental expenses at home and abroad, and fifty thousand
pounds for the support of the state government.

In order to gain an idea of the proportion in which the raising such
a sum will fall, I make the following calculation:

Pennsylvania contains three hundred and seventy-five thousand
inhabitants, men, women and children; which is likewise an eighth of
the number of inhabitants of the whole United States: therefore, two
hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling to be raised among three
hundred and seventy-five thousand persons, is, on an average,
thirteen shillings and four pence per head, per annum, or something
more than one shilling sterling per month. And our proportion of
three quarters of a million for the government of the country, in
time of peace, will be ninety-three thousand seven hundred and fifty
pounds sterling; fifty thousand of which will be for the government
expenses of the state, and forty-three thousand seven hundred and
fifty pounds for continental expenses at home and abroad.

The peace establishment then will, on an average, be five shillings
sterling per head. Whereas, was England now to stop, and the war
cease, her peace establishment would continue the same as it is now,
viz. forty shillings per head; therefore was our taxes necessary for
carrying on the war, as much per head as hers now is, and the
difference to be only whether we should, at the end of the war, pay
at the rate of five shillings per head, or forty shillings per head,
the case needs no thinking of. But as we can securely defend and keep
the country for one third less than what our burden would be if it
was conquered, and support the governments afterwards for one eighth
of what Britain would levy on us, and could I find a miser whose
heart never felt the emotion of a spark of principle, even that man,
uninfluenced by every love but the love of money, and capable of no
attachment but to his interest, would and must, from the frugality
which governs him, contribute to the defence of the country, or he
ceases to be a miser and becomes an idiot. But when we take in with
it every thing that can ornament mankind; when the line of our
interest becomes the line of our happiness; when all that can cheer
and animate the heart, when a sense of honor, fame, character, at
home and abroad, are interwoven not only with the security but the
increase of property, there exists not a man in America, unless he be
an hired emissary, who does not see that his good is connected with
keeping up a sufficient defence.

I do not imagine that an instance can be produced in the world, of a
country putting herself to such an amazing charge to conquer and
enslave another, as Britain has done. The sum is too great for her to
think of with any tolerable degree of temper; and when we consider
the burden she sustains, as well as the disposition she has shown, it
would be the height of folly in us to suppose that she would not
reimburse herself by the most rapid means, had she America once more
within her power. With such an oppression of expense, what would an
empty conquest be to her! What relief under such circumstances could
she derive from a victory without a prize? It was money, it was
revenue she first went to war for, and nothing but that would satisfy
her. It is not the nature of avarice to be satisfied with any thing
else. Every passion that acts upon mankind has a peculiar mode of
operation. Many of them are temporary and fluctuating; they admit of
cessation and variety. But avarice is a fixed, uniform passion. It
neither abates of its vigor nor changes its object; and the reason
why it does not, is founded in the nature of things, for wealth has
not a rival where avarice is a ruling passion. One beauty may excel
another, and extinguish from the mind of man the pictured remembrance
of a former one: but wealth is the phoenix of avarice, and therefore
it cannot seek a new object, because there is not another in the
world.

I now pass on to show the value of the present taxes, and compare
them with the annual expense; but this I shall preface with a few
explanatory remarks.

There are two distinct things which make the payment of taxes
difficult; the one is the large and real value of the sum to be paid,
and the other is the scarcity of the thing in which the payment is to
be made; and although these appear to be one and the same, they are
in several instances riot only different, but the difficulty springs
from different causes.

Suppose a tax to be laid equal to one half of what a man's yearly
income is, such a tax could not be paid, because the property could
not be spared; and on the other hand, suppose a very trifling tax was
laid, to be collected in pearls, such a tax likewise could not be
paid, because they could not be had. Now any person may see that
these are distinct cases, and the latter of them is a representation
of our own.

That the difficulty cannot proceed from the former, that is, from the
real value or weight of the tax, is evident at the first view to any
person who will consider it.

The amount of the quota of taxes for this State for the year, 1780,
(and so in proportion for every other State,) is twenty millions of
dollars, which at seventy for one, is but sixty-four thousand two
hundred and eighty pounds three shillings sterling, and on an
average, is no more than three shillings and five pence sterling per
head, per annum, per man, woman and child, or threepence two-fifths
per head per month. Now here is a clear, positive fact, that cannot
be contradicted, and which proves that the difficulty cannot be in
the weight of the tax, for in itself it is a trifle, and far from
being adequate to our quota of the expense of the war. The quit-rents
of one penny sterling per acre on only one half of the state, come to
upwards of fifty thousand pounds, which is almost as much as all the
taxes of the present year, and as those quit-rents made no part of
the taxes then paid, and are now discontinued, the quantity of money
drawn for public-service this year, exclusive of the militia fines,
which I shall take notice of in the process of this work, is less
than what was paid and payable in any year preceding the revolution,
and since the last war; what I mean is, that the quit-rents and taxes
taken together came to a larger sum then, than the present taxes
without the quit-rents do now.

My intention by these arguments and calculations is to place the
difficulty to the right cause, and show that it does not proceed from
the weight or worth of the tax, but from the scarcity of the medium
in which it is paid; and to illustrate this point still further, I
shall now show, that if the tax of twenty millions of dollars was of
four times the real value it now is, or nearly so, which would be
about two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, and would be
our full quota, this sum would have been raised with more ease, and
have been less felt, than the present sum of only sixty-four thousand
two hundred and eighty pounds.

The convenience or inconvenience of paying a tax in money arises from
the quantity of money that can be spared out of trade.

When the emissions stopped, the continent was left in possession of
two hundred millions of dollars, perhaps as equally dispersed as it
was possible for trade to do it. And as no more was to be issued, the
rise or fall of prices could neither increase nor diminish the
quantity. It therefore remained the same through all the fluctuations
of trade and exchange.

Now had the exchange stood at twenty for one, which was the rate
Congress calculated upon when they arranged the quota of the several
states, the latter end of last year, trade would have been carried on
for nearly four times less money than it is now, and consequently the
twenty millions would have been spared with much greater ease, and
when collected would have been of almost four times the value that
they now are. And on the other hand, was the depreciation to be
ninety or one hundred for one, the quantity required for trade would
be more than at sixty or seventy for one, and though the value of
them would be less, the difficulty of sparing the money out of trade
would be greater. And on these facts and arguments I rest the matter,
to prove that it is not the want of property, but the scarcity of the
medium by which the proportion of property for taxation is to be
measured out, that makes the embarrassment which we lie under. There
is not money enough, and, what is equally as true, the people will
not let there be money enough.

While I am on the subject of the currency, I shall offer one remark
which will appear true to everybody, and can be accounted for by
nobody, which is, that the better the times were, the worse the money
grew; and the worse the times were, the better the money stood. It
never depreciated by any advantage obtained by the enemy. The
troubles of 1776, and the loss of Philadelphia in 1777, made no
sensible impression on it, and every one knows that the surrender of
Charleston did not produce the least alteration in the rate of
exchange, which, for long before, and for more than three months
after, stood at sixty for one. It seems as if the certainty of its
being our own, made us careless of its value, and that the most
distant thoughts of losing it made us hug it the closer, like
something we were loth to part with; or that we depreciate it for our
pastime, which, when called to seriousness by the enemy, we leave off
to renew again at our leisure. In short, our good luck seems to break
us, and our bad makes us whole.

Passing on from this digression, I shall now endeavor to bring into
one view the several parts which I have already stated, and form
thereon some propositions, and conclude.

I have placed before the reader, the average tax per head, paid by
the people of England; which is forty shillings sterling.

And I have shown the rate on an average per head, which will defray
all the expenses of the war to us, and support the several
governments without running the country into debt, which is thirteen
shillings and four pence.

I have shown what the peace establishment may be conducted for, viz.,
an eighth part of what it would be, if under the government of
Britain.

And I have likewise shown what the average per head of the present
taxes is, namely, three shillings and fivepence sterling, or
threepence two-fifths per month; and that their whole yearly value,
in sterling, is only sixty-four thousand two hundred and eighty
pounds. Whereas our quota, to keep the payments equal with the
expenses, is two hundred and fifty thousand pounds. Consequently,
there is a deficiency of one hundred and eighty-five thousand seven
hundred and twenty pounds, and the same proportion of defect,
according to the several quotas, happens in every other state. And
this defect is the cause why the army has been so indifferently fed,
clothed and paid. It is the cause, likewise, of the nerveless state
of the campaign, and the insecurity of the country. Now, if a tax
equal to thirteen and fourpence per head, will remove all these
difficulties, and make people secure in their homes, leave them to
follow the business of their stores and farms unmolested, and not
only drive out but keep out the enemy from the country; and if the
neglect of raising this sum will let them in, and produce the evils
which might be prevented- on which side, I ask, does the wisdom,
interest and policy lie? Or, rather, would it not be an insult to
reason, to put the question? The sum, when proportioned out according
to the several abilities of the people, can hurt no one, but an
inroad from the enemy ruins hundreds of families.

Look at the destruction done in this city [Philadelphia]. The many
houses totally destroyed, and others damaged; the waste of fences in
the country round it, besides the plunder of furniture, forage, and
provisions. I do not suppose that half a million sterling would
reinstate the sufferers; and, does this, I ask, bear any proportion
to the expense that would make us secure? The damage, on an average,
is at least ten pounds sterling per head, which is as much as
thirteen shillings and fourpence per head comes to for fifteen years.
The same has happened on the frontiers, and in the Jerseys, New York,
and other places where the enemy has been- Carolina and Georgia are
likewise suffering the same fate.

That the people generally do not understand the insufficiency of the
taxes to carry on the war, is evident, not only from common
observation, but from the construction of several petitions which
were presented to the Assembly of this state, against the
recommendation of Congress of the 18th of March last, for taking up
and funding the present currency at forty to one, and issuing new
money in its stead. The prayer of the petition was, that the currency
might be appreciated by taxes (meaning the present taxes) and that
part of the taxes be applied to the support of the army, if the army
could not be otherwise supported. Now it could not have been possible
for such a petition to have been presented, had the petitioners
known, that so far from part of the taxes being sufficient for the
support of the whole of them falls three-fourths short of the year's
expenses.

Before I proceed to propose methods by which a sufficiency of money
may be raised, I shall take a short view of the general state of the
country.

Notwithstanding the weight of the war, the ravages of the enemy, and
the obstructions she has thrown in the way of trade and commerce, so
soon does a young country outgrow misfortune, that America has
already surmounted many that heavily oppressed her. For the first
year or two of the war, we were shut up within our ports, scarce
venturing to look towards the ocean. Now our rivers are beautified
with large and valuable vessels, our stores filled with merchandise,
and the produce of the country has a ready market, and an
advantageous price. Gold and silver, that for a while seemed to have
retreated again within the bowels of the earth, have once more risen
into circulation, and every day adds new strength to trade, commerce
and agriculture. In a pamphlet, written by Sir John Dalrymple, and
dispersed in America in the year 1775, he asserted that two
twenty-gun ships, nay, says he, tenders of those ships, stationed
between Albermarle sound and Chesapeake bay, would shut up the trade
of America for 600 miles. How little did Sir John Dalrymple know of
the abilities of America!

While under the government of Britain, the trade of this country was
loaded with restrictions. It was only a few foreign ports which we
were allowed to sail to. Now it is otherwise; and allowing that the
quantity of trade is but half what it was before the war, the case
must show the vast advantage of an open trade, because the present
quantity under her restrictions could not support itself; from which
I infer, that if half the quantity without the restrictions can bear
itself up nearly, if not quite, as well as the whole when subject to
them, how prosperous must the condition of America be when the whole
shall return open with all the world. By the trade I do not mean the
employment of a merchant o