 the estates will pass to my
second cousin, Lord George Willoughby, and our branch of the
family will become extinct."

"You fill me with despair," I said.

"My father never can forgive me for being a girl," she said.

"I can," I remarked, "even at the risk of appearing disloyal to
the race."

"Fyles," she said, addressing me straight out by my first name,
and with a little air that told me plainly I had made good my
footing in the fold, "Fyles, what a pity you aren't the rightful
heir, come from overseas with parchments and parish registers, to
make good your claim before the House of Lords."

"Wouldn't that be rather hard on you?" I asked.

"I'd rather give up everything than see the old place pass to
strangers," she said.

"But I'm a stranger," I said.

"You're Fyles ffrench," she exclaimed, "and a man, and you'd hand
the old name down and keep the estate together."

"And guard the little f with the last drop of my blood," I said.

"Ah, well!" she said, with a little sigh, "the world's a
disappointing place at best, and I suppose it serves us right for
centuries of conceit about ourselves."

"That at least will never die," I observed. "The American branch
will see to that part of it."

"It's a pity, though, isn't it?" she said.

"Well," I said, "when a family has been carrying so much dog for a
thousand years, I suppose in common fairness it's time to give way
for another."

"What is carrying dog?" she said.

"It's American," I returned, "for thinking yourself better than
anybody else!"

"Fancy!" she said, and then with a beautiful smile she took my
hand and rubbed it against the hound's muzzle.

"You mustn't growl at him, Olaf," she said. "He's a ffrench; he's
one of us; and he has come from over the sea to make friends."

"You can't turn me out of the park after that," I said, in spite
of a very dubious lick from the noble animal, who, possibly
because he couldn't read and hadn't seen my card, was still a prey
to suspicion.

"I am going to take you back to the castle myself," she said, "and
we'll spend the day going all over it, and I shall introduce you
to my father--Sir Fyles--when he returns at five from Ascot."

"I could ask for nothing better," I said, "though I don't want to
make myself a burden to you. And then," I went on, a little
uncertain how best to express myself, "you are so queer in England
about--about----"

"Proprieties," she said, giving the word which I hesitated to use.
"Oh, yes! I suppose I oughtn't to; indeed, it's awful, and
there'll be lunch too, Fyles, which makes it twice as bad. But to-
day I'm going to be American and do just what I like."

"I thought I ought to mention it," I said.

"Objection overruled," she returned. "That's what they used to say
in court when my father had his famous right-of-way case with Lord
Piffle of Doom; and from what I remember there didn't seem any
repartee to it."

"There certainly isn't one from me," I said.

"Let's go," she said.

There didn't seem any end to that park, and we walked and walked
and rested once or twice under the deep shade, and took in a
mouldy pavilion in white marble with broken windows, and a Temple
of Love that dated back to the sixteenth century, and rowed on an
ornamental water in a real gondola that leaked like sixty, and
landed on a rushy island where there was a sun-dial and a stone
seat that the Druids or somebody had considerately placed there in
the year one, and talked of course, and grew confidential, until
finally I was calling her Verna (which was her pet name) and
telling her how the other fellow had married my best girl, while
she spoke most beautifully and sensibly about love, and the way
the old families were dying out because they had set greater store
on their lands than on their hearts, and altogether with what she
said and what I said, and what was understood, we passed from
acquaintance to friendship, and from friendship to the verge of
something even nearer. Even the Uncle Tom hound fell under the
spell of our new-found intimacy and condescended to lick my hand
of his own volition, which Verna said he had never done before
except to the butcher, and winked a bloodshot eye when I remarked
he was too big for the island and ought to go back with me to a
country nearer his size.

By the time we had reached the cliffs and began to perceive the
high grey walls of the castle in the distance, Verna and I were
faster friends than ever, and anyone seeing us together would have
thought we had known each other all our lives. I felt more and
more happy to think I had met her first in this unconventional
way, for as the castle loomed up closer and we passed gardeners
and keepers and jockeys with a string of race-horses out for
exercise, I felt that my pretty companion was constrained by the
sight of these obsequious faces and changing by gradations into
what she really was, the daughter of the castle and by right of
blood one of the great ladies of the countryside.

The castle itself was a tremendous old pile, built on a rocky
peninsula and surrounded on three sides by the waters of Appledore
Harbour, It lay so as to face the entrance, which Verna told me
was commanded--or rather had been in years past--by the guns of a
half-moon battery that stood planted on a sort of third-story
terrace. It was all towers and donjons and ramparts, and might, in
its mediaeval perfection, have been taken bodily out of one of Sir
Walter Scott's novels. Verna and I had lunch together in a
perfectly gorgeous old hall, with beams and carved panelling and
antlers, and a fireplace you could have roasted an ox in, and rows
of glistening suits of armour which the original ffrenches had
worn when they had first started the family in life--and all this,
if you please, tete-a-tete with a woman who seemed to get more
beautiful every minute I gazed at her, and who smiled back at me
and called me Fyles, to the stupefaction of three noiseless six-
footers in silk stockings. Disapproving six-footers, too, whose
gimlet eyes seemed to pierce my back as they sized up my clothes,
which, as I said before, had suffered not a little by my trip, and
my collar, which I'll admit straight out wasn't up to a castle
standard, and the undeniable stain of machine-oil on my cuffs
which I had got that morning in putting the machine to rights. You
ought to have seen the man that took my hat, which he did with the
air of a person receiving pearls and diamonds on a golden platter,
and smudged his lordly fingers with the grime of my Fourth of
July. And that darling of a girl, who never noticed my
discomfiture, but whose eyes sparkled at times with a hidden
merriment--shall I ever forget her as she sat there and helped me
to mutton-chops from simply priceless old Charles the First plate!

We had black coffee together in a window-seat overlooking the
harbour and the ships, and she asked me a lot of questions about
the war with Spain and my service in the Dixie. She never moved a
muscle when it came out I had been a quartermaster, though I could
feel she was astounded at my being but a shade above a common
seaman, and not, as she had taken it for granted, a commissioned
officer. I was too proud to explain over-much, or to tell her I
had gone in, as so many of my friends had done, from a strong
sense of duty and patriotism at the time of my country's need, and
consequently allowed her to get a very wrong idea, I suppose,
about my state in life and position in the world. Indeed, I was
just childish enough to get a trifle wounded, and let her add
misconception to misconception out of a silly obstinacy.

"But what do you do," she asked, "now that the war is over and
you've taken away everything from the poor Spaniards and left the
Navy?"

"Work," I said.

"What kind of work?" she asked.

"Oh, in an office!" I said. (I didn't tell her I was the Third
Vice President of the Amalgamated Copper Company, with a twenty-
story building on lower Broadway. Wild horses couldn't have wrung
it out of me then.)

"You're too nice for an office," she said, looking at me so
sweetly and sadly. "You ought to be a gentleman!"

"Oh, dear!" I exclaimed, "I hope I am that, even if I do grub
along in an office." I wish my partners could have heard me say
that. Why, I have a private elevator of my own and a squash-court
on the roof!

"Of course, I don't mean that," she went on quickly, "but like us,
I mean, with a castle and a place in society----"

"I have a sort of little picayune place in New York," I
interrupted. "I don't SLEEP in the office, you know. At night I go
out and see my friends and sometimes they invite me to dinner."

She looked at me more sadly than ever. I don't believe humour was
Verna's strong suit anyway,--not American humour, at least,--for
she not only believed what I said, but more too.

"I must speak to Papa about you," she said.

"What will he do?" I asked.

"Oh, help you along, you know," she said; "ffrenches always stand
together; it's a family trait, though it's dying out now for lack
of ffrenches. You know our family motto?" she went on.

"I'm afraid I don't," I said.

"'Ffrenches first!'" she returned.

I had to laugh.

"We've lived up to it in America," I said.

"Papa is quite a power in the City," she said.

"I thought he was a gentleman," I replied.

"Everybody dabbles in business nowadays," she returned, not
perceiving the innuendo. "I am sure Papa ought to know all about
it from the amount of money he has lost."

"Perhaps his was a case of ffrenches last!" I said.

"Still, he knows all the influential people," she continued, "and
it would be so easy for him to get you a position over here."

"That would be charming," I said.

"And then I might see you occasionally," she said, with such a
little ring of kindness in her voice that for a minute I felt a
perfect brute for deceiving her. "You could run down here from
Saturday to Monday, you know, and on Bank Holidays, and in the
season you would have the entree to our London house and the
chance of meeting nice people!"

"How jolly!" I said.

"I can't bear you to go back to America," she said. "Now that I've
found you, I'm going to keep you."

"I hate the thought of going back myself," I said, and so I did--
at the thought of leaving that angel!

"Then, you know," she went on, somewhat shyly and hesitatingly,
"you have such good manners and such a good air, and you're so----
"

"Don't mind saying handsome," I remarked.

"You really are very nice-looking," she said, with a seriousness
that made me acutely uncomfortable, "and what with our friendship
and our house open to you and the people you could invite down
here, because I know Papa is going to go out of his mind about
you--he and I are always crazy about the same people, you know--
not to speak of the little f, there is no reason, Fyles, why in
the end you shouldn't marry an awfully rich girl and set up for
yourself!"

"Thank you," I said, "but if it's all the same to you I don't
think I'd care to."

"I know awfully rich girls who are pretty too," she said, as
though forestalling an objection.

"I do too," I said, looking at her so earnestly that she coloured
up to the eyes.

"Oh, I am poor!" she said. "It's all we can do to keep the place
up. Besides--besides----" And then she stopped and looked out of
the window. I saw I had been a fool to be so personal, and I was
soon punished for my presumption, for she rose to her feet and
said in an altered voice that she would now show me the castle.

As I said before, it was a tremendous old place. It was a two-
hours' job to go through it even as we did, and then Verna said we
had skipped a whole raft of things she would let me see some other
time. There was a private theatre, a chapel with effigies of
cross-legged Crusaders, an armoury with a thousand stand of flint-
locks, a library, magnificent state apartments with wonderful
tapestries, a suite of rooms where they had confined a mad ffrench
in the fifteenth century, with the actual bloodstains on the floor
where he had dashed out his poor silly brains against the wall; a
magazine with a lot of empty powder-casks Cromwell had left there;
a vaulted chamber for the men of the half-moon battery; a well
which was said to have no bottom and which had remained unused for
a hundred years, because a wicked uncle had thrown the rightful
heir into it; and slimy, creepy-crawly dungeons with chains for
your hands and feet; and cachettes where they spilled you through
a hole in the floor, and let it go at that; and--but what wasn't
there, indeed, in that extraordinary old feudal citadel, which had
been in continuous human possession since the era of Hardicanute.
There seemed to be only one thing missing in the whole castle, and
that was a bath--though I dare say there was one in the private
apartments not shown to me. It was a regular dive into the last
five hundred years, and the fact that it wasn't a museum nor
exploited by a sing-song cicerone, helped to make it for me a
memorable and really thrilling experience. I conjured up my
forebears and could see them playing as children, growing to
manhood, passing into old age, and finally dying in the shadow of
those same massive walls. Verna said I was quite pale when we
emerged at last into the open air on the summit of the high square
tower; and no wonder that I was, for in a kind of way I had been
deeply impressed, and it seemed a solemn thing that I, like her,
should be a child of this castle, with roots deep cast in far-off
ages.

"Wouldn't it be horrible," I said, "if I found out I wasn't a
ffrench at all--but had really sprung from a low-down, capital F
family in the next county or somewhere!"

"Oh, but you are a real ffrench," said Verna.

"How do you know?" I asked.

"I can FEEL it," she said. "I never felt that kind of sensation
before towards anybody except my father!"

I hardly knew whether to be pleased or not. And besides, it didn't
seem to me conclusive.

Then she touched a button (for the castle was thoroughly wired and
there was even a miniature telephone system) and servants brought
us up afternoon tea, and a couple of chairs to sit on, and a
folding table set out with flowers, and the best toast and the
best tea and the best strawberry jam and the best chocolate cake
and the best butter that I had as yet tasted in the whole island.
The view itself was good enough to eat, for we were high above
everything and saw the harbour and the country stretched out on
all sides like a map.

"This is where I come for my day-dreams," said Verna. "I usually
have it all to myself, for people hate the stairs so much and the
ladies twitter about the dust and the cobwebs and the shakiness of
the last ladder, and the silly things get dizzy and have to be
held."

"You don't seem to be afraid," I said.

"This has been my favourite spot all my life," she returned. "I
can remember Papa holding me up when I wasn't five years old and
telling me about the Lady Grizzle that threw herself off the
parapet rather than marry somebody she had to and wouldn't!"

"Tell me about your day-dreams, Verna," I said.

"Just a girl's fancies," she returned, smiling. "I dare say men
have them too. Fairy princes, you know, and what he'd say and what
I'd say, and how much I'd love him, and how much he'd love me!"

"I can understand the last part of it," I observed.

"You are really very nice," she returned, "and when Papa has got
you that place in the City, I am going to allow you to come up
here and dream too. And you'll tell me about the Sleeping Beauty
and I'll unbosom myself about the Beast, and we'll exchange heart-
aches and be, oh, so happy together."

"I am that now," I said.

"You're awfully easily pleased, Fyles," she said. "Most of the men
I know I have to rack my head to entertain; talk exploring, you
know, to explorers, and horses to Derby winners, and what it feels
like to be shot--to soldiers--but you entertain ME, and that is
so much pleasanter."

"I wish I dared ask you some questions," I said.

"Oh, but you mustn't!" she broke out, with a quick intuition of
what I meant.

"Why mustn't?" Tasked.

"Oh, because--because----" she returned. "I wouldn't like to fib
to you, and I wouldn't like to tell you the truth--and it would
make me feel hot and uncomfortable----"

"What would?" I asked.

"You see, if I really cared for him, it would be different," she
said. "But I don't--and that's all."

"Lady Grizzle over again?" I ventured.

"Not altogether," she said, "you see she was perfectly mad about
somebody else--which really was hard lines for her, poor thing--
while I----"

"Oh, please go on!" I said, as she hesitated.

"Fyles," she said, with the ghost of a sigh, "this isn't day-
dreaming at all, and I'm going to give you another cup of tea and
change the subject."

"What would you prefer, then?" I asked. "No! No more chocolate
cake, thank you."

"Let's have a fairy story all of our own," she said.

"Well, you begin," I said.

"Once upon a time," she began, "there was a poor young man in New
York--an American, though of course he couldn't help that--and he
came over to England and discovered the home of his ancestors, and
he liked them, and they liked him--ever so much, you know--and he
found that the old place was destined to pass to strangers, and so
he worked and worked in a dark old office, and stayed up at night
working some more, and never accepted any invitations or took a
holiday except at week-ends to the family castle--until finally he
amassed an immense fortune. Then he got into a fairy chariot,
together with a bag of gold and the family lawyer, and ordered the
coachman to drive him to Lord George Willoughby's in Curzon
Street. Then they sent out in hot haste for Sir George's son, an
awfully fast young man in the Guards, and the family lawyer
haggled and haggled, and Lord George hemmed and hawed, and the
Guardsman's eyes sparkled with greed at the sight of the bag of
gold, and finally for two hundred thousand pounds (Papa says he
often thinks he could pull it off for a hundred and ten thousand)
the entail is broken and everybody signs his name to the papers
and the poor young man buys the succession of Fyles and comes down
here, regardless of expense, in a splendid gilt special train, and
is received with open arms by his kinsmen at the castle."

"The open arms appeal to me," I said.

"He was nearly hugged to death," said Verna, "for they were so
pleased the old name was not to die out and be forgotten. And then
the poor young man married a ravishing beauty and had troops of
sunny-haired children, and the daughter of the castle (who by this
time was an old maid and quite plain, though everybody said she
had a heart like hidden treasure) devoted herself to the little
darlings and taught them music-lessons and manners and how to
spell their names with a little f, and as a great treat would
sometimes bring them up here and tell them how she had first met
the poor young man in the 'diamond mornings of long ago'!"

"That's a good fairy story," I said, "but you are all out about
the end!"

"You said you liked it," she protested.

"Yes, where they hugged the poor young man," I returned, "but
after that, Verna, it went off the track altogether."

"Perhaps you'll put it back again," she said.

"I want to correct all that about the daughter of the castle," I
said. "She never became an old maid at all, for, of course, the
poor young man loved her to distraction and married her right off,
and they lived happily together ever afterwards!"

"I believe that is nicer," she said thoughtfully, as though
considering the matter.

"Truer, too," I said, "because really the poor young man adored
her from the first minute of their meeting!"

"I wonder how long it will take him to make his fortune," she
said, which, under the circumstances, struck me as a cruel thing
to say.

"Possibly he has made it already," I said. "How do you know he
hasn't?"

"By his looks for one thing," she said, regarding the machine oil
on my cuff out of the corner of her eye. "Besides, he hasn't any
of the arrogance of a parvenu, and is much too----"

"Too what?" I asked.

"Well bred," she replied simply.

"No doubt that's the ffrench in him," I said, which I think was
rather a neat return.

She didn't answer, but looked absently across to the harbour
mouth.

"I believe there is a steamer coming in," she said. "Yes, a
steamer."

"A yacht, I think," I said, for, sure enough, it was Babcock true
to the minute, heading the Tallahassee straight in. I could have
given him a hundred dollars on the spot I was so delighted, for he
couldn't have timed it better, nor at a moment when it could have
pleased me more. She ran in under easy steam, making a splendid
appearance with her raking masts and razor bow, under which the
water spurted on either side like dividing silver. Except a
beautiful woman, I don't know that there's a sweeter sight than a
powerful, sea-going steam yacht, with the sun glinting on her
bright brass-work, and a uniformed crew jumping to the sound of
the boatswain's whistle.

"The poor young man's ship's come home," I said.

"It must be Lady Gaunt's Sapphire," said Verna.

"With the American colours astern?" I said.

"Why, how strange," she said, "it really is American. And then I
believe it's larger than the Sapphire!"

"Fifteen hundred and four tons register," I said.

"How do you know that?" she demanded, with a shade of surprise in
her voice.

"Because, my dear, it's mine!" I said.

"Yours!" she cried out in astonishment.

"If you doubt me," I said, "I shall tell you what she is going to
do next. She is about to steam in here and lower a boat to take me
aboard."

"She's heading for Dartmouth," said Verna incredulously, and the
words were hardly out of her pretty mouth when Babcock swung round
and pointed the Tallahassee's nose straight at us.

For a moment Verna was too overcome to speak.

"Fyles," she said at last, "you told me you worked in an office!"

"So I do," I said.

"And own a vessel like that!" she exclaimed. "A yacht the size of
a man-of-war!"

"It was you that said I was a poor young man," I observed. "I was
so pleased at being called young that I let the poor pass."

"Fancy!" she exclaimed, looking at me with eyes like stars. And
then, recovering herself, she added in another tone: "Now don't
you think it was very forward to rendezvous at a private castle?"

"Oh, I thought I could make myself solid before she arrived," I
said.

"Fyles," she said, "I am beginning to have a different opinion of
you. You are not as straightforward as a ffrench ought to be--and,
though I'm ashamed to say it of you--but you are positively
conceited."

"Unsay, take back, those angry words," I said; and even as I did
so the anchor went splash and I could hear the telegraph jingle in
the engine-room.

"And so you're rich," said Verna, "awfully, immensely,
disgustingly rich, and you've been masquerading all this afternoon
as a charming pauper!"

"I don't think I said charming," I remarked.

"But I say it," said Verna, "because, really you know, you're
awfully nice, and I like you, and I'm glad from the bottom of my
heart that you are rich!"

"Thank you," I said, "I'm glad, too."

"Now we must go down and meet your boat," said Verna. "See, there
it is, coming in--though I still think it was cheeky of you to
tell them to land uninvited."

"Oh, let them wait!" I said.

"No, no, we must go and meet them," said Verna, "and I'm going to
ask that glorious old fox with the yellow beard whether it's all
true or not!"

"You can't believe it yet?" I said.

"You've only yourself to thank for it," she said. "I got used to
you as one thing--and here you are, under my eyes, turning out
another."

I could not resist saying "Fancy!" though she did not seem to
perceive any humour in my exclamation of it, and took it as a
matter of course. Besides, she had risen now, and bade me follow
her down the stairs.

It was really fine to see the men salute me as we walked down to
the boat, and the darkies' teeth shining at the sight of me (for
I'm a believer in the coloured sailor) and old Neilsen grinning
respectfully in the stern-sheets.

"Neilsen," I said, "tell this young lady my name!"

"Mr. ffrench, sir," he answered, considerably astonished at the
question.

"Little f or big F, Neilsen?"

"Little f, sir," said Neilsen.

"There, doubter!" I said to Verna.

She had her hand on my arm and was smiling down at the men from
the little stone pier on which we stood.

"Fyles," she said, "you must land and dine with us to-night, not
only because I want you to, but because you ought to meet my
father."

"About when?" I asked.

"Seven-thirty," she answered; and then, in a lower voice, so that
the men below might not hear: "Our fairy tale is coming true,
isn't it, Fyles?"

"Right to the end," I said.

"There were two ends," she said. "Mine and yours."

"Oh, mine," I said; "that is, if you'll live up to your part of
it!"

"What do you want me to do?" she asked.

"Throw over the Beast and be my Princess," I said, trying to talk
lightly, though my voice betrayed me.

"Perhaps I will," she answered.

"Perhaps!" I repeated. "That isn't any answer at all."

"Yes, then!" she said quickly, and, disengaging her hand from my
arm, ran back a few steps.

"I hear Papa's wheels," she cried over her shoulder, "and, don't
forget, Fyles, dinner at seven-thirty!"





THE GOLDEN CASTAWAYS


All I did was to pull him out by the seat of the trousers. The fat
old thing had gone out in the dark to the end of the yacht's boat-
boom, and was trying to worry in the dinghy with his toe, when
plump he dropped into a six-knot ebb tide. Of course, if I hadn't
happened along in a launch, he might have drowned, but, as for
anything heroic on my part--why, the very notion is preposterous.
The whole affair only lasted half a minute, and in five he was
aboard his yacht and drinking hot Scotch in a plush dressing-gown.
It was natural that his wife and daughter should be frightened,
and natural, too, I suppose, that when they had finished crying
over him they should cry over me. He had taken a chance with the
East River, and it had been the turn of a hair whether he floated
down the current a dead grocer full of brine, or stood in that
cabin, a live one full of grog. Oh, no! I am not saying a word
against THEM. But as for Grossensteck himself, he ought really to
have known better, and it makes me flush even now to recall his
monstrous perversion of the truth. He called me a hero to my face.
He invented details to which my dry clothes gave the lie direct.
He threw fits of gratitude. His family were theatrically commanded
to regard me well, so that my countenance might be forever
imprinted on their hearts; and they, poor devils, in a seventh
heaven to have him back safe and sound in their midst, regarded
and regarded, and imprinted and imprinted, till I felt like a
perfect ass masquerading as a Hobson.

It was all I could do to tear myself away. Grossensteck clung to
me. Mrs. Grossensteck clung to me. Teresa--that was the daughter--
Teresa, too, clung to me. I had to give my address. I had to take
theirs. Medals were spoken of; gold watches with inscriptions; a
common purse, on which I was requested to confer the favour of
drawing for the term of my natural life. I departed in a blaze of
glory, and though I could not but see the ridiculous side of the
affair (I mean as far as I was concerned), I was moved by so
affecting a family scene, and glad, indeed, to think that the old
fellow had been spared to his wife and daughter. I had even a pang
of envy, for I could not but contrast myself with Grossensteck,
and wondered if there were two human beings in the world who would
have cared a snap whether I lived or died. Of course, that was
just a passing mood, for, as a matter of fact, I am a man with
many friends, and I knew some would feel rather miserable were I
to make a hole in saltwater. But, you see, I had just had a story
refused by Schoonmaker's Magazine, a good story, too, and that
always gives me a sinking feeling--to think that after all these
years I am still on the borderland of failure, and can never be
sure of acceptance, even by the second-class periodicals for which
I write. However, in a day or two, I managed to unload "The Case
against Phillpots" on somebody else, and off I started for the New
Jersey coast with a hundred and fifty dollars in my pocket, and no
end of plans for a long autumn holiday.

I never gave another thought to Grossensteck until one morning, as
I was sitting on the veranda of my boarding-house, the postman
appeared and requested me to sign for a registered package. I
opened it with some trepidation, for I had caught that fateful
name written crosswise in the corner and began at once to
apprehend the worst. I think I have as much assurance as any man,
but it took all I had and more, too, when I unwrapped a gold medal
the thickness and shape of an enormous checker, and deciphered the
following inscription:

    Presented to Hugo Dundonald Esquire for having
    With signal heroism, gallantry and presence of mind
    rescued On the night of June third, 1900
    the life of Hermann Grossensteck from
    The dark and treacherous waters of the East River.

The thing was as thick as two silver dollars, laid the one on the
other, and gold--solid, ringing, massy gold--all the way through;
and it was associated with a blue satin ribbon, besides, which was
to serve for sporting it on my manly bosom. I set it on the rail
and laughed--laughed till the tears ran down my cheeks--while
the other boarders crowded about me; handed it from hand to hand;
grew excited to think that they had a hero in their midst; and put
down my explanation to the proverbial modesty of the brave.
Blended with my amusement were some qualms at the intrinsic value
of the medal, for it could scarcely have cost less than three or
four hundred dollars, and it worried me to think that Grossensteck
must have drawn so lavishly on his savings. It had not occurred to
me, either before or then, that he was rich; somehow, in the bare
cabin of the schooner, I had received no such impression of his
means. I had not even realised that the vessel was his own, taking
it for granted that it had been hired, all standing, for a week or
two with the put-by economies of a year. His home address ought to
have set me right, but I had not taken the trouble to read it,
slipping it into my pocket-book more to oblige him than with any
idea of following up the acquaintance. It was one of the boarders
that enlightened me.

"Grossensteck!" he exclaimed; "why, that's the great cheap grocer
of New York, the Park & Tilford of the lower orders! There are
greenbacks in his rotten tea, you know, and places to leave your
baby while you buy his sanded sugar, and if you save eighty tags
of his syrup you get a silver spoon you wouldn't be found dead
with! Oh, everybody knows Grossensteck!"

"Well, I pulled the great cheap grocer out of the East River," I
said. "There was certainly a greenback in that tea," and I took
another look at my medal, and began to laugh all over again.

"There's no reason why you should ever have another grocery bill,"
said the boarder. "That is, if flavour cuts no figure with you,
and you'd rather eat condemned army stores than not!"

I sat down and wrote a letter of thanks. It was rather a nice
letter, for I could not but feel pleased at the old fellow's
gratitude, even if it were a trifle overdone, and, when all's
said, it was undoubtedly a fault on the right side. I disclaimed
the heroism, and bantered him good-naturedly about the medal,
which, of course, I said I would value tremendously and wear on
appropriate occasions. I wondered at the time what occasion could
be appropriate to decorate one's self with a gold saucer covered
with lies--but, naturally, I didn't go into that to HIM. When you
accept a solid chunk of gold you might as well be handsome about
it, and I piled it on about his being long spared to his family
and to a world that wouldn't know how to get along without him.
Yes, it was a stunning letter, and I've often had the pleasure of
reading it since in a splendid frame below my photograph.

I had been a month or more in New York, and December was already
well advanced before I looked up my Grossenstecks, which I did one
late afternoon as I happened to be passing in their direction. It
was a house of forbidding splendour, on the Fifth Avenue side of
Central Park, and, as I trod its marble halls, I could not but
repeat to myself: "Behold, the grocer's dream!" But I could make
no criticism of my reception by Mrs. Grossensteck and Teresa, whom
I found at home and delighted to see me. Mrs. Grossensteck was a
stout, jolly, motherly woman, common, of course,--but, if you can
understand what I mean,--common in a nice way, and honest and
unpretentious and likable. Teresa, whom I had scarcely noticed on
the night of the accident, was a charmingly pretty girl of
eighteen, very chic and gay, with pleasant manners and a
contagious laugh. She had arrived at obviously the turn of the
Grossensteck fortunes, and might, in refinement and everything
else, have belonged to another clay. How often one sees that in
America, the land above others of social contrast, where, in the
same family, there are often three separate degrees of caste.

Well, to get along with my visit. I liked them and they liked me,
and I returned later the same evening to dine and meet papa. I
found him as impassionedly grateful as before, and with a tale
that trespassed even further on the incredible, and after dinner
we all sat around a log fire and talked ourselves into a sort of
intimacy. They were wonderfully good people, and though we hadn't
a word in common, nor an idea, we somehow managed to hit it off,
as one often can with those who are unaffectedly frank and simple.
I had to cry over the death of little Hermann in the steerage
(when they had first come to America twenty years ago), and how
Grossensteck had sneaked gingersnaps from the slop-baskets of the
saloon.

"The little teffil never knew where they come from," said
Grossensteck, "and so what matters it?"

"That's Papa's name in the slums," said Teresa. "Uncle
Gingersnaps, because at all his stores they give away so many for
nothing."

"By Jove!" I said, "there are some nick-names that are patents of
nobility."

What impressed me as much as anything with these people was their
loneliness. Parvenus are not always pushing and self-seeking, nor
do they invariably throw down the ladder by which they have
climbed. The Grossenstecks would have been so well content to keep
their old friends, but poverty hides its head from the glare of
wealth and takes fright at altered conditions.

"They come--yes," said Mrs. Grossensteck, "but they are scared of
the fine house, of the high-toned help, of everything being gold,
you know, and fashionable. And when Papa sends their son to
college, or gives the girl a little stocking against her marriage
day, they slink away ashamed. Oh, Mr. Dundonald, but it's hard to
thank and be thanked, especially when the favours are all of one
side!"

"The rich have efferyting," said Grossensteck, "but friends--
Nein!"

New ones had apparently never come to take the places of the old;
and the old had melted away. Theirs was a life of solitary
grandeur, varied with dinner parties to their managers and
salesmen. Socially speaking, their house was a desert island, and
they themselves three castaways on a golden rock, scanning the
empty seas for a sail. To carry on a metaphor, I might say I was
the sail and welcomed accordingly. I was everything that they were
not; I was poor; I mixed with people whose names filled them with
awe; my own was often given at first nights and things of that
sort. In New York, the least snobbish of great cities, a man need
have but a dress suit and car-fare--if he be the right kind of a
man, of course--to go anywhere and hold up his head with the best.
In a place so universally rich, there is even a certain piquancy
in being a pauper. The Grossenstecks were overcome to think I
shined my own shoes, and had to calculate my shirts, and the fact
that I was no longer young (that's the modern formula for forty),
and next-door to a failure in the art I had followed for so many
years, served to whet their pity and their regard. My little
trashy love-stories seemed to them the fruits of genius, and they
were convinced, the poor simpletons, that the big magazines were
banded in a conspiracy to block my way to fame.

"My dear poy," said Grossensteck, "you know as much of peeziness
as a child unporne, and I tell you it's the same efferywhere--in
groceries, in hardware, in the alkali trade, in effery branch of
industry, the pig operators stand shoulder to shoulder to
spiflicate the little fellers like you. You must combine with the
other producers; you must line up and break through the ring; you
must scare them out of their poots, and, by Gott, I'll help you do
it!"

In their naive interest in my fortunes, the Grossenstecks rejoiced
at an acceptance, and were correspondingly depressed at my
failures. A fifteen-dollar poem would make them happy for a week;
and when some of my editors were slow to pay-on the literary
frontiers there is a great deal of this sort of procrastination--
Uncle Gingersnaps was always hot to put the matter into the hands
of his collectors, and commence legal proceedings in default.

Little by little I drifted into a curious intimacy with the
Grossenstecks. Their house by degrees became my refuge. I was
given my own suite of rooms, my own latch-key; I came and went
unremarked; and what I valued most of all was that my privacy was
respected, and no one thought to intrude upon me when I closed my
door. In time I managed to alter the whole house to my liking, and
spent their money like water in the process. Gorgeousness gave way
to taste; I won't be so fatuous as to say my taste; but mine was
in conjunction with the best decorators in New York. One was no
longer blinded by magnificence, but found rest and peace and
beauty. Teresa and I bought the pictures. She was a wonderfully
clever girl, full of latent appreciation and understanding which
until then had lain dormant in her breast. I quickened those
unsuspected fires, and, though I do not vaunt my own judgment as
anything extraordinary, it represented at least the conventional
standard and was founded on years of observation and training. We
let the old masters go as something too smudgy and recondite for
any but experts, learning our lesson over one Correggio which
nearly carried us into the courts, and bought modern American
instead, amongst them some fine examples of our best men. We had a
glorious time doing it, too, and showered the studios with golden
rain--in some where it was evidently enough needed.

There was something childlike in the Grossenstecks' confidence in
me; I mean the old people; for it was otherwise with Teresa, with
whom I often quarrelled over my artistic reforms, and who took any
conflict in taste to heart. There were whole days when she would
not speak to me at all, while I, on my side, was equally
obstinate, and all this, if you please, about some miserable
tapestry or a Louise Seize chair or the right light for a picture
of Will Low's. But she was such a sweet girl and so pretty that
one could not be angry with her long, and what with our fights and
our makings up I dare say we made it more interesting to each
other than if we had always agreed. It was only once that our
friendship was put in real jeopardy, and that was when her parents
decided they could not die happy unless we made a match of it.
This was embarrassing for both of us, and for a while she treated
me very coldly. But we had it out together one evening in the
library and decided to let the matter make no difference to us,
going on as before the best of friends. I was the last person to
expect a girl of eighteen to care for a man of forty, particularly
one like myself, ugly and grey-haired, who had long before outworn
the love of women. In fact I had to laugh, one of those sad laughs
that come to us with the years, at the thought of anything so
absurd; and I soon got her to give up her tragic pose and see the
humour of it all as I did. So we treated it as a joke, rallied the
old folks on their sentimental folly, and let it pass.

It set me thinking, however, a great deal about the girl and her
future, and I managed to make interest with several of my friends
and get her invited to some good houses. Of course it was
impossible to carry the old people into this galere. They were
frankly impossible, but fortunately so meek and humble that it
never occurred to them to assert themselves or resent their
daughter going to places where they would have been refused. Uncle
Gingersnaps would have paid money to stay at home, and Mrs.
Grossensteck had too much homely pride to put herself in a false
position. They saw indeed only another reason to be grateful to
me, and another example of my surpassing kindness. Pretty, by no
means a fool, and gowned by the best coutourieres of Paris, Teresa
made quite a hit, and blossomed as girls do in the social
sunshine. The following year, in the whirl of a gay New York
winter, one would scarcely have recognised her as the same person.
She had "made good," as boys say, and had used my stepping-stones
to carry her far beyond my ken. In her widening interests, broader
range, and increased worldly knowledge we became naturally better
friends than ever and met on the common ground of those who led
similar lives. What man would not value the intimacy of a young,
beautiful, and clever woman? in some ways it is better than love
itself, for love is a duel, with wounds given and taken, and its
pleasures dearly paid for. Between Teresa and myself there was no
such disturbing bond, and we were at liberty to be altogether
frank in our intercourse.

One evening when I happened to be dining at the house, the absence
of her father and the indisposition of her mother left us tete-a-
tete in the smoking-room, whither she came to keep me company with
my cigar. I saw that she was restless and with something on her
mind to tell me, but I was too old a stager to force a confidence,
least of all a woman's, and so I waited, said nothing, and blew
smoke rings.

"Hugo," she said, "there is something I wish to speak to you
about."

"I've known that for the last hour, Teresa," I said.

"This is something serious," she said, looking at me strangely.

"Blaze away," I said.

"Hugo," she broke out, "you have been borrowing money from my
father."

I nodded.

"A great deal of money," she went on.

"For him--no," I said. "For me--well, yes."

"Eight or nine hundred dollars," she said.

"Those are about the figures," I returned. "Call it nine hundred."

"Oh, how could you! How could you!" she exclaimed.

I remained silent. In fact I did not know what to say.

"Don't you see the position you're putting yourself in?" she said.

"Position?" I repeated. "What position?"

"It's horrible, it's ignoble," she broke out. "I have always
admired you for the way you kept yourself clear of such an
ambiguous relation--you've known to the fraction of an inch what
to take, what to refuse--to preserve your self-respect--my
respect--unimpaired. And here I see you slipping into degradation.
Oh, Hugo! I can't bear it."

"Is it such a crime to borrow a little money?" I asked.

"Not if you pay it back," she returned. "Not if you mean to pay it
back. But you know you can't. You know you won't!"

"You think it's the thin edge of the wedge?" I said. "The
beginning of the end and all that kind of thing?"

"You will go on," she cried. "You will become a dependent in this
house, a hanger-on, a sponger. I will hate you. You will hate
yourself. It went through me like a knife when I found it out."

I smoked my cigar in silence. I suppose she was quite right--
horribly right, though I didn't like her any better for being so
plain-spoken about it. I felt myself turning red under her gaze.

"What do you want me to do?" I said at length.

"Pay it back," she said.

"I wish to God I could," I said. "But you know how I live, Teresa,
hanging on by the skin of my teeth--hardly able to keep my head
above water, let alone having a dollar to spare."

"Then you can't pay," she said.

"I don't think I can," I returned.

"Then you ought to leave this house," she said.

"You have certainly made it impossible for me to stay, Teresa," I
said.

"I want to make it impossible," she cried. "You--you don't
understand--you think I'm cruel--it's because I like you, Hugo--
it's because you're the one man I admire above anybody in the
world. I'd rather see you starving than dishonoured."

"Thank you for your kind interest," I said ironically. "Under the
circumstances I am almost tempted to wish you admired me less."

"Am I not right?" she demanded.

"Perfectly right," I returned. "Oh, yes! Perfectly right."

"And you'll go," she said.

"Yes, I'll go," I said.

"And earn the money and pay father?" she went on.

"And earn the money and pay father," I repeated.

"And then come back?" she added.

"Never, never, never!" I cried out.

I could see her pale under the lights.

"Oh, Hugo! don't be so ungenerous," she said. "Don't be so--so----"
She hesitated, apparently unable to continue.

"Ungenerous or not," I said, "damn the words, Teresa, this isn't a
time to weigh words. It isn't in flesh and blood to come back. I
can't come back. Put yourself in my place."

"Some day you'll thank me," she said.

"Very possibly," I returned. "Nobody knows what may not happen.
It's conceivable, of course, I might go down on my bended knees,
but really, from the way I feel at this moment, I do not think
it's likely."

"You want to punish me for liking you," she said.

"Teresa," I said, "I have told you already that you are right. You
insist on saving me from a humiliating position. I respect your
courage and your straightforwardness. You remind me of an ancient
Spartan having it out with a silly ass of a stranger who took
advantage of her parents' good-nature. I am as little vain, I
think, as any man, and as free from pettiness and idiotic pride--
but you mustn't ask the impossible. You mustn't expect the whipped
dog to come back. When I go it will be for ever."

"Then go," she said, and looked me straight in the eyes.

"I have only one thing to ask," I said. "Smooth it over to your
father and mother. I am very fond of your father and mother,
Teresa; I don't want them to think I've acted badly, or that I
have ceased to care for them. Tell them the necessary lies, you
know."

"I will tell them," she said.

"Then good-bye," I said, rising. "I suppose I am acting like a
baby to feel so sore. But I am hurt."

"Good-bye, Hugo," she said.

I went to the door and down the stairs. She followed and stood
looking after me the length of the hall as I slowly put on my hat
and coat. That was the last I saw of her, in the shadow of a palm,
her girlish figure outlined against the black behind. I walked
into the street with a heart like lead, and for the first time in
my life I began to feel I was growing old.

I have been from my youth up an easy-going man, a drifter, a
dawdler, always willing to put off work for play. But for once I
pulled myself together, looked things in the face, and put my back
to the wheel. I was determined to repay that nine hundred dollars,
if I had to cut every dinner-party for the rest of the season. I
was determined to repay it, if I had to work as I had never worked
before. My first move was to change my address. I didn't want
Uncle Gingersnaps ferreting me out, and Mrs. Grossensteck weeping
on my shoulder. My next was to cancel my whole engagement book. My
third, to turn over my wares and to rack my head for new ideas.

I had had a long-standing order from Granger's Weekly for a
novelette. I had always hated novelettes, as one had to wait so
long for one's money and then get so little; but in the humour I
then found myself I plunged into the fray, if not with enthusiasm,
at least with a dogged perseverance that was almost as good.
Granger's Weekly liked triviality and dialogue, a lot of fuss
about nothing and a happy ending. I gave it to them in a heaping
measure. Dixie's Monthly, from which I had a short-story order,
set dialect above rubies. I didn't know any dialect, but I
borrowed a year's file and learned it like a lesson. They wrote
and asked me for another on the strength of "The Courting of
Amandar Jane." The Permeator was keen on Kipling and water, and I
gave it to them--especially the water. Like all Southern families
the Dundonalds had once had their day. I had travelled everywhere
when I was a boy, and so I accordingly refreshed my dim memories
with some modern travellers and wrote a short series for The
Little Gentleman; "The Boy in the Carpathians," "The Boy in Old
Louisiana," "A Boy in the Tyrol," "A Boy in London," "A Boy in
Paris," "A Boy at the Louvre," "A Boy in Corsica," "A Boy in the
Reconstruction." I reeled off about twenty of them and sold them
to advantage.

It was a terribly dreary task, and I had moments of revolt when I
stamped up and down my little flat and felt like throwing my
resolution to the winds. But I stuck tight to the ink-bottle and
fought the thing through. My novelette, strange to say, was good.
Written against time and against inclination, it has always been
regarded since as the best thing I ever did, and when published in
book form outran three editions.

I made a thundering lot of money--for me, I mean, and in
comparison to my usual income--seldom under five hundred dollars a
month and often more. In eleven weeks I had repaid Grossensteck
and had a credit in the bank. Nine hundred dollars has always
remained to me as a unit of value, a sum of agonising significance
not lightly to be spoken of, the fruits of hellish industry and
self-denial. All this while I had had never a word from the
Grossenstecks. At least they wrote to me often--telephoned--
telegraphed--and my box at the club was choked with their letters.
But I did not open a single one of them, though I found a pleasure
in turning them over and over, and wondering as to what was within
them. There were several in Teresa's fine hand, and these
interested me most of all and tantalised me unspeakably. There was
one of hers, cunningly addressed to me in a stranger's writing
that I opened inadvertently; but I at once perceived the trick and
had the strength of mind to throw it in the fire unread.

Perhaps you will wonder at my childishness. Sometimes I wondered
at it myself. But the wound still smarted, and something stronger
than I seemed to withhold me from again breaking the ice. Besides,
those long lonely days, and those nights, almost as long in the
retrospect, when I lay sleepless on my bed, had shown me I had
been drifting into another peril no less dangerous than
dependence. I had been thinking too much of the girl for my own
good, and our separation had brought me to a sudden realisation of
how deeply I was beginning to care for her. I hated her, too, the
pitiless wretch, so there was a double reason for me not to go
back.

One night as I had dressed to dine out and stepped into the
street, looking up at the snow that hid the stars and silenced
one's footsteps on the pavement, a woman emerged from the gloom,
and before I knew what she was doing, had caught my arm. I shook
her off, thinking her a beggar or something worse, and would have
passed on my way had she not again struggled to detain me. I
stopped, and was on the point of roughly ordering her to let me
go, when I looked down into her veiled face and saw that it was
Teresa Grossensteck.

"Hugo!" she said. "Hugo!"

I could only repeat her name and regard her helplessly.

"Hugo," she said, "I am cold. Take me upstairs. I am chilled
through and through."

"Oh, but Teresa," I expostulated, "it wouldn't be right. You know
it wouldn't be right. You might be seen."

She laid her hand, her ungloved, icy hand, against my cheek.

"I have been here an hour," she said. "Take me to your rooms. I am
freezing."

I led her up the stairs and to my little apartment. I seated her
before the fire, turned up the lights, and stood and looked at
her.

"What have you come here for?" I said. "I've paid your father--
paid him a month ago."

She made no answer, but spread her hands before the fire and
shivered in the glow. She kept her eyes fixed on the coals in
front of her and put out the tips of her little slippered feet.
Then I perceived that she was in a ball gown and that her arms
were bare under her opera cloak.

At last she broke the silence.

"How cheerless your room is," she said, looking about. "Oh, how
cheerless!"

"Did you come here to tell me that?" I said.

"No," she said. "I don't know why I came. Because I was a fool, I
suppose--a fool to think you'd want to see me. Take me home,
Hugo." She rose as she said this and looked towards the door. I
pressed her to take a little whiskey, for she was still as cold as
death and as white as the snow queen in Hans Andersen's tale, but
she refused to let me give her any.

"Take me home, please," she repeated.

Her carriage was waiting a block away. Hendricks, the footman,
received my order with impassivity and shut us in together with
the unconcern of a good servant. It was dark in the carriage, and
neither of us spoke as we whirled through the snowy streets. Once
the lights of a passing hansom illumined my companion's face and I
saw that she was crying. It pleased me to see her suffer; she had
cost me eleven weeks of misery; why should she escape scot-free!

"Hugo," she said, "are you coming back to us, Hugo?"

"I don't know," I said.

"Why don't you know?" she asked.

"Oh, because!" I said.

"That's no answer," she said.

There was a pause.

"I was beginning to care too much about you," I said. "I think I
was beginning to fall in love with you. I've got out of one false
position. Why should I blunder into another?"

"Would it be a false position to love me?" she said.

"Of course that would a good deal depend on you," I said.

"Suppose I wanted you to," she said.

"Oh, but you couldn't!" I said.

"Why couldn't I?" she said.

"But forty," I objected; "nobody loves anybody who's forty, you
know."

"I do," she said, "though, come to think of it, you were thirty-
nine--when--when it first happened, Hugo."

I put out my arms in the dark and caught her to me. I could not
believe my own good fortune as I felt her trembling and crying
against my breast. I was humbled and ashamed. It was like a dream.
An old fellow like me--forty, you know.

"It was a mighty near thing, Teresa," I said.

"I guess it was--for me!" she said.

"I meant myself, sweetheart," I said.

"For both of us then," she said, in a voice between laughter and
tears, and impulsively put her arms round my neck.





THE AWAKENING OF GEORGE RAYMOND

I


George Raymond's father had been a rich man, rich in those days
before the word millionaire had been invented, and when a modest
hundred thousand, lent out at an interest varying from ten to
fifteen per cent, brought in an income that placed its possessor
on the lower steps of affluence. He was the banker of a small New
Jersey town, a man of portentous respectability, who proffered two
fingers to his poorer clients and spoke about the weather as
though it belonged to him. When the school-children read of
Croesus in their mythology, it was Jacob Raymond they saw in their
mind's eye; such expressions as "rich beyond the dreams of
avarice" suggested him as inevitably as pumpkin did pie; they
wondered doubtfully about him in church when that unfortunate
matter of the camel was brought up with its attendant difficulties
for the wealthy. Even Captain Kidd's treasure, in those times so
actively sought for along the whole stretch of the New England
coast, conjured up a small brick building with "Jacob Raymond,
Banker" in gilt letters above the lintel of the door.

But there came a day when that door stayed locked and a hundred
white faces gathered about it, blocking the village street and
talking in whispers though the noonday sun was shining. Raymond's
bank was insolvent, and the banker himself, a fugitive in tarry
sea clothes, was hauling ropes on a vessel outward bound for
Callao. He might have stayed in Middleborough and braved it out,
for he had robbed no man and his personal honour was untarnished,
having succumbed without dishonesty to primitive methods and lack
of capital. But he chose instead the meaner course of flight. Of
all the reproachful faces he left behind him his wife's was the
one he felt himself the least able to confront; and thus,
abandoning everything, with hardly a dozen dollars in his pocket,
he slipped away to sea, never to be seen or heard of again.

Mrs. Raymond was a woman of forty-five, a New Englander to her
finger-tips, proud, arrogant, and fiercely honest; a woman who
never forgot, never forgave, and who practised her narrow
Christianity with the unrelentingness of an Indian. She lived up
to an austere standard herself, and woe betide those who fell one
whit behind her. She was one of those just persons who would have
cast the first stone at the dictates of conscience and with a sort
of holy joy in her own fitness to do so. For years she had been
the richest woman in Middleborough, the head of everything
charitable and religious, the mainstay of ministers, the court of
final appeal in the case of sinners and backsliders. Now, in a
moment, through no fault of her own, the whole fabric of her life
had crumbled. Again had the mighty fallen.

She had not a spark of pity for her husband. To owe what you could
not pay was to her the height of dishonour. It was theft, and she
had no compunction in giving it the name, however it might be
disguised or palliated. She could see no mitigating circumstances
in Raymond's disgrace, and the fact that she was innocently
involved in his downfall filled her with exasperation. The big old
corner house was her own. She had been born in it. It had been her
marriage portion from her father. She put it straightway under the
hammer; her canal stock with it; her furniture and linen; a row of
five little cottages on the outskirts of the town where five poor
families had found not only that their bodies, but the welfare of
their souls, had been confided to her grim keeping. She stripped
herself of everything, and when all had been made over to the
creditors there still remained a deficit of seventeen hundred
dollars. This debt which was not a debt, for she was under no
legal compulsion to pay a penny of it, would willingly have been
condoned by men already grateful for her generosity; but she would
hear of no such compromise, not even that her notes be free of
interest, and she gave them at five per cent, resolute that in
time she would redeem them to the uttermost farthing.

Under these sudden changes of fortune it is seldom that the
sufferer remains amid the ruins of past prosperity. The human
instinct is to fly and hide. The wound heals more readily amongst
strangers. The material evils of life are never so intolerable as
the public loss of caste. It may be said that it is people, not
things, which cause most of the world's unhappiness. Mrs. Raymond
came to New York, where she had not a friend except the son she
brought with her, there to set herself with an undaunted heart to
earn the seventeen hundred dollars she had voluntarily taken on
her shoulders to repay.

George Raymond, her son, was then a boy of fifteen. High-strung,
high-spirited, with all the seriousness of a youngster who had
prematurely learned to think for himself, he had arrived at the
age when ineffaceable impressions are made and the tendencies of a
lifetime decided. Passionately attached to his father, he had lost
him in a way that would have made death seem preferable. He saw
his mother, so shortly before the great lady of a little town,
working out like a servant in other people's houses. The tragedy
of it all ate into his soul and overcame him with a sense of
hopelessness and despair. It would not have been so hard could he
have helped, even in a small way, towards the recovery of their
fortunes; but his mother, faithful even in direst poverty to her
New England blood, sent him to school, determined that at any
sacrifice he should finish his education. But by degrees Mrs.
Raymond drifted into another class of work. She became a nurse,
and, in a situation where her conscientiousness was invaluable,
slowly established a connection that in time kept her constantly
busy. She won the regard of an important physician, and not only
won it but kept it, and thus little by little found her way into
good houses, where she was highly paid and treated with
consideration.

Had it not been for the seventeen hundred dollars and the five per
cent interest upon it, she could have earned enough to keep
herself and her son very comfortable in the three rooms they
occupied on Seventh Street. But this debt, ever present in the
minds of both mother and son, hung over them like a cloud and took
every penny there was to spare. Those two years from fifteen to
seventeen were the most terrible in Raymond's life. At an age when
he possessed neither philosophy nor knowledge and yet the fullest
capacity to suffer, he had to bear, with what courage he could
muster, the crudest buffets of an adverse fate.

Raymond drudged at his books, passed from class to class and
returned at night to the empty rooms he called home, where he
cooked his own meals and sat solitary beside the candle until it
was the hour for bed. His mother was seldom there to greet him. As
a nurse she was kept prisoner, for weeks at a time, in the houses
where she was engaged. It meant much to the boy to find a note
from her lying on the table when he returned at night; more still
to wait at street corners in his shabby overcoat for those
appointments she often made with him. When she took infectious
cases and dared neither write nor speak to him, they had an hour
planned beforehand when she would smile at him from an open window
and wave her hand.

But she was not invariably busy. There were intervals between her
engagements when she remained at home; when those rooms,
ordinarily so lonely and still, took on a wonderful brightness
with her presence; when Raymond, coming back from school late in
the afternoon, ran along the streets singing, as he thought of his
mother awaiting him. This stern woman, the harsh daughter of a
harsh race, had but a single streak of tenderness in her withered
heart. To her son she gave transcendent love, and the whole of her
starved nature went out to him in immeasurable devotion. Their
poverty, the absence of all friends, the burden of debt, the
unacknowledged disgrace, and (harder still to bear) the long and
enforced separations from each other, all served to draw the pair
into the closest intimacy. Raymond grew towards manhood without
ever having met a girl of his own age; without ever having had a
chum; without knowing the least thing of youth save much of its
green-sickness and longing.

When the great debt had been paid off and the last of the notes
cancelled there came no corresponding alleviation of their
straitened circumstances. Raymond had graduated from the High
School and was taking the medical course at Columbia University.
Every penny was put by for the unavoidable expenses of his
tuition. The mother, shrewd, ambitious, and far-seeing, was
staking everything against the future, and was wise enough to
sacrifice the present in order to launch her son into a
profession. In those days fresh air had not been discovered.
Athletics, then in their infancy, were regarded much as we now do
prize-fighting. The ideal student was a pale individual who wore
out the night with cold towels around his head, and who had a
bigger appetite for books than for meat. Docile, unquestioning,
knowing no law but his mother's wish; eager to earn her
commendation and to repay with usury the immense sacrifices she
had made for him, Raymond worked himself to a shadow with study,
and at nineteen was a tall, thin, narrow-shouldered young man with
sunken cheeks and a preternatural whiteness of complexion.

He was far from being a bad-looking fellow, however. He had
beautiful blue eyes, more like a girl's than a man's, and there
was something earnest and winning in his face that often got him a
shy glance on the street from passing women. His acquaintance in
this direction went no further. Many times when a college
acquaintance would have included him in some little party, his
mother had peremptorily refused to let him go. Her face would
darken with jealousy and anger, nor was she backward with a string
of reasons for her refusal. It would unsettle him; he had no money
to waste on girls; he would be shamed by his shabby clothes and
ungloved hands; they would laugh at him behind his back; was he
tired, then, of his old mother who had worked so hard to bring him
up decently? And so on and so on, until, without knowing exactly
why, Raymond would feel himself terribly in the wrong, and was
glad enough at last to be forgiven on the understanding that he
would never propose such a reprehensible thing again.

In any other young man, brought up in the ordinary way, with the
ordinary advantages, such submission would have seemed mean-
spirited; but the bond between these two was riveted with memories
of penury and privation; any appeal to those black days brought
Raymond on his knees; it was intolerable to him that he should
ever cause a pang in his dear mother's breast. Thus, at the age
when the heart is hungriest for companionship; when for the first
time a young man seems to discover the existence of a hitherto
unknown and unimportant sex; when an inner voice urges him to take
his place in the ranks and keep step with the mighty army of his
generation, Raymond was doomed to walk alone, a wistful outcast,
regarding his enviable companions from afar.

He was in his second year at college when his studies were broken
off by his mother's illness. He was suddenly called home to find
her delirious in bed, struck down in the full tide of strength by
the disease she had taken from a patient. It was scarlet fever,
and when it had run its course the doctor took him to one side and
told him that his mother's nursing days were over. During her
tedious convalescence, as Raymond would sit beside her bed and
read aloud to her, their eyes were constantly meeting in unspoken
apprehension. They saw the ground, so solid a month before, now
crumbling beneath their feet; their struggles, their makeshifts,
their starved and meagre life had all been in vain. Their little
savings were gone; the breadwinner, tempting fate once too often,
had received what was to her worse than a mortal wound, for the
means of livelihood had been taken from her.

"Could I have but died," she repeated to herself. "Oh, could I
have but died!"

Raymond laid his head against the coverlet and sobbed. He needed
no words to tell him what was in her mind; that her illness had
used up the little money there was to spare; that she, so long the
support of both, was now a helpless burden on his hands. Pity for
her outweighed every other consideration. His own loss seemed but
little in comparison to hers. It was the concluding tragedy of
those five tragic years. The battle, through no fault of theirs,
had gone against them. The dream of a professional career was
over.

His mother grew better. The doctor ceased his visits. She was able
to get on her feet again. She took over their pinched
housekeeping. But her step was heavy; the gaunt, grim straight-
backed woman, with her thin grey hair and set mouth, was no more
than a spectre of her former self. The doctor was right. There was
nothing before her but lifelong invalidism.

Raymond found work; a place in the auditing department of a
railroad, with a salary to begin with of sixty dollars a month; in
ten years he might hope to get a hundred. But he was one of those
whose back bent easily to misfortune. Heaven knew, he had been
schooled long enough to take its blows with fortitude. His mother
and he could manage comfortably on sixty dollars a month; and when
he laid his first earnings in her hand he even smiled with
satisfaction. She took the money in silence, her heart too full to
ask him whence it came. She had hoped against hope until that
moment; and the bills, as she looked at them, seemed to sting her
shrivelled hand.

One day, as she was cleaning her son's room, she opened a box that
stood in the corner, and was surprised to find it contain a
package done up in wrapping paper. She opened it with curiosity
and the tears sprang to her eyes as she saw the second-hand
medical books George had used at college. Here they were, in neat
wrappers, laid by for ever. Too precious to throw away, too
articulate of unfulfilled ambitions to stand exposed on shelves,
they had been laid away in the grave of her son's hopes. She did
them up again with trembling fingers, and that night when George
returned to supper, he found his mother in the dark, crying.

II

In the years from nineteen to forty-two most men have fulfilled
their destiny; those who have had within them the ability to rise
have risen; the weak, the wastrels, the mediocrities have shaken
down into their appointed places. Even the bummer has his own
particular bit of wall in front of the saloon and his own
particular chair within. Those who have something to do are busy
doing it, whatever it may be. In the human comedy everyone in time
finds his role and must play it to the end, happy indeed if he be
cast in a part that at all suits him.

George Raymond at forty-two was still in the auditor's department
of the New York Central. Time had wrinkled his cheek, had turned
his brown hair to a crisp grey, had bowed his shoulders to the
desk he had used for twenty-two years. His eyes alone retained
their boyish brightness, and a sort of appealing look as of one
who his whole life long had been a dependent on other people. As
an automaton, a mere cog in a vast machine, he had won the praise
of his superiors by his complete self-effacement. He was never
ill, never absent, never had trouble with his subordinates, never
talked back, never made complaints, and, in the flattering
language of the superintendent, "he knew what he knew!"

In the office, as in every other aggregation of human beings,
there were coteries, cliques, friendships and hatreds, jealousies,
heart-burnings and vendettas. There was scarcely a man there
without friends or foes. Raymond alone had neither. To the others
he was a strange, silent, unknown creature whose very address was
a matter of conjecture; a man who did not drink, did not smoke,
did not talk; who ate four bananas for his lunch and invariably
carried a book in the pocket of his shabby coat. It was said of
him that once, during a terrible blizzard, he had been the only
clerk to reach the office; that he had worked there stark alone
until one o'clock, when at the stroke of the hour he had taken out
his four bananas and his book! There were other stories about him
of the same kind, not all of them true to fate, but essentially
true of the man's nature and of his rigid adherence to routine. He
had risen, place by place, to a position that gave him a hundred
and fifty dollars a month, and one so responsible that his death
or absence would have dislocated the office for half a day.

"A first-class man and an authority on pro ratas!"

Such might have been the inscription on George Raymond's tomb!

His mother was still alive. She had never entirely regained her
health or her strength, and it took all the little she had of
either to do the necessary housekeeping for herself and her son.
Thin to emaciation, sharp-tongued, a tyrant to her finger-tips,
her indomitable spirit remained as uncowed as ever and she ruled
her son with a rod of iron. To her, Georgie, as she always called
him, was still a child. As far as she was concerned he had never
grown up. She took his month's salary, told him when to buy new
shirts, ordered his clothes herself, doled out warningly the few
dollars for his necessaries, and saved, saved, continually saved.
The old woman dreaded poverty with a horror not to be expressed in
words. It had ruined her own life; it had crushed her son under
its merciless wheels; in the words of the proverb, she was the
coward who died a thousand deaths in the agonies of apprehension.
She was one of those not uncommon misers, who hoard, not for love
of money, but through fear. She had managed, with penurious thrift
and a self-denial almost sublime in its austerity, to set aside
eight thousand dollars. Eight thousand dollars from an income that
began at sixty and rose to a little under three times that amount!
Eight thousand dollars, wrung from their lives at the price of
every joy, every alleviation, everything that could make the world
barely tolerable.

Every summer Raymond had a two-weeks' holiday, which he spent at
Middleborough with some relatives of his father's. He had the
pronounced love of the sea that is usual with those born and bred
in seaport towns. His earliest memories went back to great deep-
water ships, their jib-booms poking into the second-story windows
of the city front, their decks hoarsely melodious with the yo-
heave-yo of straining seamen. The smell of tar, the sight of
enormous anchors impending above the narrow street, the lofty
masts piercing the sky in a tangle of ropes and blocks, the exotic
cargoes mountains high--all moved him like a poem. He knew no
pleasure like that of sailing his cousin's sloop; he loved every
plank of her dainty hull; it was to him a privilege to lay his
hand to any task appertaining to her, however humble or hard. To
calk, to paint, to polish brasswork; to pump out bilge; to set up
the rigging; to sit cross-legged and patch sails; and, best of
all, to put her lee rail under in a spanking breeze and race her
seaward against the mimic fleet--Ah, how swiftly those bright
days passed, how bitter was the parting and the return, all too
soon, to the dingy offices of the railroad.

It never occurred to him to think his own lot hard, or to contrast
himself with other men of his age, who at forty-two were mostly
substantial members of society, with interests, obligations,
responsibilities, to which he himself was an utter stranger. Under
the iron bondage of his mother he had remained a child. To
displease her seemed the worst thing that could befall him; to win
her commendation filled him with content. But there were times,
guiltily remembered and put by with shame, when he longed for
something more from life; when the sight of a beautiful woman on
the street reminded him of his own loneliness and isolation; when
he was overcome with a sudden surging sense that he was an
outsider in the midst of these teeming thousands, unloved and old,
without friends or hope or future to look forward to. He would
reproach himself for such lawless repining, for such disloyalty to
his mother. Was not her case worse than his? Did she not lecture
him on the duty of cheerfulness, she the invalid, racked with
pains, with nerves, who practised so pitifully what she preached?
The tears would come to his eyes. No, he would not ask the
impossible; he would go his way, brave and uncomplaining, and let
the empty years roll over his head without a murmur against fate.

But the years, apparently so void, were screening a strange and
undreamed-of part for him to play. The Spaniards, a vague, almost
legendary people, as remote from Raymond's life as the Assamese or
the cliff-dwellers of New Mexico, began to take on a concrete
character, and were suddenly discovered to be the enemies of the
human race. Raymond grew accustomed to the sight of Cuban flags,
at first so unfamiliar, and then, later, so touching in their
significance. Newspaper pictures of Gomez and Garcia were tacked
on the homely walls of barber-shops, in railroad shops, in grubby
offices and cargo elevators, and with them savage caricatures of a
person called Weyler, and referring bitterly to other persons (who
seemed in a bad way) called the reconcentrados. Raymond wondered
what it was all about; bought books to elucidate the matter; took
fire with indignation and resentment. Then came the Maine affair;
the suspense of seventy million people eager to avenge their dead;
the decision of the court of inquiry; the emergency vote; the
preparation for war. Raymond watched it all with a curious
detachment. He never realised that it could have anything
personally to do with him. The long days in the auditor's
department went on undisturbed for all that the country was arming
and the State governors were calling out their quotas of men. Two
of his associates quitted their desks and changed their black
coats for army blue. Raymond admired them; envied them; but it
never occurred to him to ask why they should go and he should
stay. It was natural for him to stay; it was inevitable; he was as
much a part of the office as the office floor.

One afternoon, going home on the Elevated, he overheard two men
talking.

"I don't know what we'll do," said one.

"Oh, there are lots of men," said the other.

"Men, yes--but no sailors," said the first.

"That's right," said the other.

"We are at our wits' end to man the new ships," said the first.

"What did you total up to-day?" said the other.

His companion shrugged his shoulders.

"Eighty applicants, and seven taken," he said.

"And those foreigners?"

"All but two!"

"There's danger in that kind of thing!"

"Yes, indeed, but what can you do?"

The words rang in Raymond's head. That night he hardly slept. He
was in the throes of making a tremendous resolution, he who, for
forty years, had been tied to his mother's apron string. Making it
of his own volition, unprompted, at the behest of no one save,
perhaps, the man in the car, asserting at last his manhood in
defiance of the subjection that had never come home to him until
that moment. He rose in the morning, pale and determined. He felt
a hypocrite through and through as his mother commented on his
looks and grew anxious as he pushed away his untasted breakfast.
It came over him afresh how good she was, how tender. He did not
love her less because his great purpose had been taken. He knew
how she would suffer, and the thought of it racked his heart; he
was tempted to take her into his confidence, but dared not,
distrusting his own powers of resistance were she to say no. So he
kissed her instead, with greater warmth than usual, and left the
house with misty eyes.

He got an extension of the noon hour and hurried down to the naval
recruiting office. It was doing a brisk business in turning away
applicants, and from the bottom of the line Raymond was not kept
waiting long before he attained the top; and from thence in his
turn was led into an inner office. He was briefly examined as to
his sea experience. Could he box the compass? He could. Could he
make a long splice? He could. What was meant by the monkey-gaff of
a full-rigged ship? He told them. What was his reason in wanting
to join the Navy? Because he thought he'd like to do something for
his country. Very good; turn him over to the doctor; next! Then
the doctor weighed him, looked at his teeth, hit him in the chest,
listened to his heart, thumped and questioned him, and then passed
him on to a third person to be enrolled.

When George Raymond emerged into the open air it was as a full A B
in the service of the United States

This announcement at the office made an extraordinary sensation.
Men he hardly knew shook hands with him and clapped him on the
back. He was taken upstairs to be impressively informed that his
position would be held open for him. On every side he saw kindling
faces, smiling glances of approbation, the quick passing of the
news in whispers. He had suddenly risen from obscurity to become
part of the War; the heir of a wonderful and possibly tragic
future; a patriot; a hero! It was a bewildering experience and not
without its charm. He was surprised to find himself still the same
man.

The scene at home was less enthusiastic. It was even mortifying,
and Georgie, as his mother invariably called him, had to endure a
storm of sarcasm and reproaches. The old woman's ardent patriotism
stopped short at giving up her son. It was the duty of others to
fight, Georgie's to stay at home with his mother. He let her talk
herself out, saying little, but regarding her with a grave, kind
obstinacy. Then she broke down, weeping and clinging to him.
Somehow, though he could hardly explain it to himself, the
relation between the two underwent a change. He left that house
the unquestioned master of himself, the acknowledged head of that
tiny household; he had won, and his victory instead of abating by
a hair's-breadth his mother's love for him had drawn the pair
closer to each other than ever before. Though she had no
articulate conception of it Georgie had risen enormously in his
mother's respect. The woman had given way to the man, and the
eternal fitness of things had been vindicated.

Her tenderness and devotion were redoubled. Never had there been
such a son in the history of the world. She relaxed her economies
in order to buy him little delicacies, such as sardines and
pickles; and when soon after his enlistment his uniform came home
she spread it on her bed and cried, and then sank on her knees,
passionately kissing the coarse serge. In the limitation of her
horizon she could see but a single figure. It was Georgie's
country, Georgie's President, Georgie's fleet, Georgie's righteous
quarrel in the cause of stifled freedom. To her, it was Georgie's
war with Spain.

He was drafted aboard the Dixie, where, within a week of his
joining, he was promoted to be one of the four quartermasters. So
much older than the majority of his comrades, quick, alert,
obedient, and responsible, he was naturally amongst the first
chosen for what are called leading seamen. Never was a man more in
his element than George Raymond. He shook down into naval life
like one born to it. The sea was in his blood, and his translation
from the auditor's department to the deck of a fighting ship
seemed to him like one of those happy dreams when one pinches
himself to try and confirm the impossible. Metaphorically
speaking, he was always pinching himself and contrasting the
monotonous past with the glorious and animated present. The change
told in his manner, in the tilt of his head, in his fearless eyes
and straighter back. It comes natural to heroes to protrude their
chests and walk upon air; and it is pardonable, indeed, in war
time, when each feels himself responsible for a fraction of his
country's honour.

"Georgie, you are positively becoming handsome," said his mother.

Amongst Raymond's comrades on the Dixie was a youngster of twenty-
one, named Howard Quintan. Something attracted him in the boy, and
he went out of his way to make things smooth for him aboard. The
liking was no less cordially returned, and the two became fast
friends. One day, when they were both given liberty together,
Howard insisted on taking him to his own home.

"The folks want to know you," he said. "They naturally think a
heap of you because I do, and I've told them how good you've been
and all that."

"Oh, rubbish!" said Raymond, though he was inwardly pleased. At
the time they were walking up Fifth Avenue, both in uniform, with
their caps on one side, sailor fashion, and their wide trousers
flapping about their ankles. People looked at them kindly as they
passed, for the shadow of the war lay on everyone and all hearts
went out to the men who were to uphold the flag. Raymond was
flattered and yet somewhat overcome by the attention his companion
and he excited.

"Let's get out of this, Quint," he said. "I can't walk straight
when people look at me like that. Don't you feel kind of givey-
givey at the knees with all those pretty girls loving us in
advance?"

"Oh, that's what I like!" said Quintan. "I never got a glance when
I used to sport a silk hat. Besides, here we are at the old
stand!"

Raymond regarded him with blank surprise as they turned aside and
up the steps of one of the houses.

"Land's sake!" he exclaimed; "you don't mean to say you live in a
place like this? Here?" he added, with an intonation that caused
Howard to burst out laughing.

The young fellow pushed by the footman that admitted them and ran
up the stairs three steps at a time. Raymond followed more slowly,
dazed by the splendour he saw about him, and feeling horribly
embarrassed and deserted. He halted on the stairs as he saw
Quintan throw his arms about a tall, stately, magnificently
dressed woman and kiss her boisterously; and he was in two minds
whether or not to slink down again and disappear, when his
companion called out to him to hurry up.

"Mother, this is Mr. Raymond," he said. "He's the best friend I
have on the Dixie, and you're to be awfully good to him!"

Mrs. Quintan graciously gave him her hand and said something about
his kindness to her boy. Raymond was too stricken to speak and was
thankful for the semi-darkness that hid his face. Mrs. Quintan
continued softly, in the same sweet and overpowering manner, to
purr her gratitude and try to put him at his ease. Raymond would
have been a happy man could he have sunk though the parquetry
floor. He trembled as he was led into the drawing-room, where
another gracious and overpowering creature rose to receive them.

"My aunt, Miss Christine Latimer," said Howard.

She was younger than Mrs. Quintan; a tall, fair woman of middle
age, with a fine figure, hair streaked with grey, and the remains
of what had once been extreme beauty. Her voice was the sweetest
Raymond had ever listened to, and his shyness and agitation wore
off as she began to speak to him. He was left a long while alone
with her, for Howard and his mother withdrew, excusing themselves
on the score of private matters. Christine Latimer was touched by
the forlorn quartermaster, who, in his nervousness, gripped his
chair with clenched hands and started when he was asked a
question. She soon got him past this stage of their acquaintance,
and, leading him on by gentle gradations to talk about himself,
even learned his whole story, and that in so unobtrusive a fashion
that he was hardly aware of his having told it to her.

"I am speaking to you as though I had known you all my life," he
said in an artless compliment. "I hope it is not very forward of
me. It is your fault for being so kind and good."

He was ecstatic when he left the house with Quintan.

"I didn't know there were such women in the world," he said. "So
noble, so winning and high-bred. It makes you understand history
to meet people like that. Mary Queen of Scots, Marie Antoinette
and all those, you know--they must have been like that. I--I could
understand a man dying for Miss Latimer!"

"Oh, she's all right, my aunt!" said Quintan. "She was a
tremendous beauty once, and even now she's what I'd call a
devilish handsome woman. And the grand manner, it isn't everybody
that likes it, but I do. It's a little old-fashioned nowadays,
but, by Jove, it still tells."

"I wonder that such a splendid woman should have remained
unmarried," said Raymond. He stuck an instant on the word
unmarried. It seemed almost common to apply to such a princess.

"She had an early love affair that turned out badly," said
Quintan. "I don't know what went wrong, but anyway it didn't work.
Then, when my father died, she came to live with us and help bring
us up--you see there are two more of us in the family--and I am
told she refused some good matches just on account of us kids. It
makes me feel guilty sometimes to think of it."

"Why guilty?" asked Raymond.

"Because none of us were worth it, old chap," said Quintan.

"I'm sure she never thought so," observed Raymond.

"My aunt's rather an unusual woman," said Quintan. "She has
voluntarily played second fiddle all her life; and, between you
and me, you know, my mother's a bit of a tyrant, and not always
easy to get along with--so it wasn't so simple a game as it looks."

Raymond was shocked at this way of putting the matter.

"You mean she sacrificed the best years of her life for you," he
said stiffly.

"Women are like that--good women," said Quintan. "Catch a man being
such a fool--looking at it generally, you know--me apart. She had
a tidy little fortune from her father, and might have had a yard
of her own to play in, but our little baby hands held her tight."

Raymond regarded his companion's hands. They were large and red,
and rough with the hard work on board the Dixie; regarded them
respectfully, almost with awe, for had they not restrained that
glorious being in the full tide of her youth and beauty!

"Now it's too late," said Quintan.

"What do you mean by too late?" asked the quartermaster.

"Well, she's passed forty," said Quintan. "The babies have grown
up, and the selfish beasts are striking out for themselves. Her
occupation's gone, and she's left plante la. Worse than that, my
mother, who never bothered two cents about us then, now loves us
to distraction. And, when all's said, you know, it's natural to
like your mother best!"

"Too bad!" ejaculated Raymond.

"I call it deuced hard luck," said Quintan. "My mother really
neglected us shamefully, and it was Aunt Christine who brought us
up and blew our noses and rubbed us with goose-grease when we had
croup, and all that kind of thing. Then, when we grew up, my
mother suddenly discovered her long-lost children and began to
think a heap of us--after having scamped the whole business for
fifteen years--and my aunt, who was the real nigger in the hedge,
got kind of let out, you see."

Raymond did not see, and he was indignant, besides, at the
coarseness of his companion's expressions. So he walked along and
said nothing.

"And, as I said before, it's now too late," said Quintan.

"Too late for what?" demanded Raymond, who was deeply interested.

"For her to take up with anybody else," said Quintan. "To marry,
you know. She sacrificed all her opportunities for us; and now, in
the inevitable course of things, we are kind of abandoning her
when she is old and faded and lonely."

"I consider your aunt one of the most beautiful women in the
world," protested Raymond.

"But you can't put back the clock, old fellow," said Quintan.
"What has the world to offer to an old maid of forty-two? There
she is in the empty nest, and not her own nest at that, with all
her little nestlings flying over the hills and far away, and the
genuine mother-bird varying the monotony by occasionally pecking
her eyes out."

Raymond did not know what to answer. He could not be so rude as to
make any reflection on Mrs. Quintan, though he was stirred with
resentment against her. This noble, angelic, saintly woman, who in
every gesture reminded him of dead queens and historic personages!
It went to his heart to think of her, bereft and lonely, in that
splendid house he had so lately quitted. He recognised, in the
unmistakable accord between him and her, the fellowship of a pair
who, in different ways and in different stations, had yet fought
and suffered and endured for what they judged their duty. Forty-
two years old! Singular coincidence, in itself almost a bond
between them, that he, too, was of an identical age. Forty-two!
Why, it was called the prime of life. He inhaled a deep breath of
air; it was the prime of life; until then no one had really begun
to live!

"Why don't you say something?" said Quintan.

"I was just thinking how mistaken you were," returned Raymond.
"There must be hundreds of men who would be proud to win her
slightest regard; who, instead of considering her faded or old,
would choose her out of a thousand of younger women and would be
happy for ever if she would take--" He was going to say them, but
that sounded improper, and he changed it, at the cost of grammar,
to "him."

Quintan laughed at his companion's vehemence, and the subject
passed and gave way to another about shrapnel. But he did not
fail, later on, to carry a humorous report of the conversation to
his aunt.

"What have you been doing to my old quartermaster?" he said.
"Hasn't the poor fellow enough troubles as it is, without falling
in love with you! He can't talk of anything else, and blushes like
a girl when he mentions your name. He told me yesterday he was
willing to die for a woman like you."

"I think he's a dear, nice fellow," said Miss Latimer, "and if he
wants to love me he can. It will keep him out of mischief!"

Raymond saw a great deal of Miss Latimer in the month before they
sailed south. Quintan took him constantly to the house, where, in
his capacity of humble and devoted comrade, the tall quartermaster
was always welcome and made much of. Mrs. Quintan was alive to the
value of this attached follower, who might be trusted to guard her
son in the perils that lay before him. She treated him as a sort
of combination of valet, nurse, and poor relation, asking him all
sorts of intimate questions about Howard's socks and
underclothing, and holding him altogether responsible for the
boy's welfare. Her tone was one of anxious patronage, touching at
times on a deeper emotion when she often broke down and cried. The
quartermaster was greatly moved by her trust in him. The tears
would come to his own eyes, and he would try in his clumsy way to
comfort her, promising that, so far as it lay with him, Howard
should return safe and sound. In his self-abnegation it never
occurred to him that his own life was as valuable as Howard
Quintan's. He acquiesced in the understanding that it was his
business to get Howard through the war unscratched, at whatever
risk or jeopardy to himself.

Those were wonderful days for him. To be an intimate of that
splendid household, to drive behind spanking bays with Miss
Latimer by his side, to take tea at the Waldorf with her and other
semi-divine beings--what a dazzling experience for the ex-clerk,
whose lines so recently had lain in such different places.
Innately a gentleman, he bore himself with dignity in this new
position, with a fine simplicity and self-effacement that was not
lost on some of his friends. His respect for them all was
unbounded. For the mother, so majestic, so awe-inspiring; for
Howard, that handsome boy whose exuberant Americanism was
untouched by any feeling of caste; for Melton and Hubert Henry,
his brothers, those lordly striplings of a lordly race; for Miss
Latimer, who in his heart of hearts he dared not call Christine,
and who to him was the embodiment of everything adorable in women.
Yes, he loved her; confessed to himself that he loved her; humbly
and without hope, with no anticipation of anything more between
them, overcome indeed that his presumption should go thus far.

He did not attempt to hide his feelings for her, and though too
shy for any expression of it, and withheld besides by the utter
impossibility of such a suit, he betrayed himself to her in a
thousand artless ways. He asked for no higher happiness than to
sit by her side, looking into her face and listening to her mellow
voice. He was thrice happy were he privileged to touch her hand in
passing a teacup. Her gentleness and courtesy, her evident
consideration, the little peeps she gave him into a nature
gracious and refined beyond anything he had ever known, all
transported him with unreasoning delight. She, on her part, so
accustomed to play a minor role herself in her sister's
household, was yet too much a woman not to like an admirer of her
own. She took more pains with her dress, looked at herself more
often in the glass than she had done in years. It was laughable;
it was absurd; and she joined as readily as anyone in the mirth
that Raymond's devotion excited in the family, but, deep down
within her, she was pleased. At the least it showed she had not
grown too old to make men love her; it was the vindication of the
mounting years; the time, then, had not yet come when she had
ceased altogether to count. She had lost her nephews, who were
growing to be men; the love she put by so readily when it was in
her reach seemed now more precious as she beheld her faded and
diminished beauty, the crow's-feet about her eyes, her hair
turning from brown to grey. A smothered voice within her said:
"Why not?"

She analysed Raymond narrowly in the long tete-a-tetes they had
together. She drew him out, encouraging and pressing him to tell
her everything about himself. She was always apprehending a
jarring note, the inevitable sign of the man's coarser clay, of
his commoner upbringing, the clash of his caste on hers. But she
was struck instead by his inherent refinement, by his unformulated
instincts of well-doing and honour. He was hazy about the use of
oyster-forks, had never seen a finger-bowl, committed to her eyes
a dozen little solecisms which he hastened to correct by frankly
asking her assistance; but in the true essentials she never had to
feel any shame for him. Clumsy, grotesquely ignorant of the social
amenities, he was yet a gentleman.

The night before they were to sail, he came to say good-bye. The
war had at last begun in earnest; men were falling, and the
Spaniards were expected to make a desperate and bloody resistance.
It was a sobering moment for everyone, and, in all voices, however
hard they tried to make them brave and gay, there ran an
undercurrent of solemnity. Howard and Raymond were to be actors in
that terrible drama not yet played; stripped and powder-blackened
at their guns, they were perhaps doomed to go down with their ship
and find their graves in the Caribbean. Before them lay untold
possibilities of wounds and mutilation, of disease, suffering, and
horror. What woman that knew them could look on unmoved at the
sight of these men, so grave and earnest, so quietly resolute, so
deprecatory of anything like braggadocio or over-confidence? It
filled Christine Latimer with a fierce pride in herself and them;
in a race that could breed men so gentle and so brave; in a
country that was founded so surely on the devoted hearts of its
citizens.

She was crying as Raymond came to her later on the same evening,
and found her sitting in the far end of the drawing-room with the
lights turned low. They were alone together, for the quartermaster
had left Howard with his mother and his brothers gathered in a
farewell group about the library fire. Miss Latimer took both of
Raymond's hands, and, with no attempt to disguise her sorrow, drew
him close beside her on the divan. She was overflowing with pity
for this poor fellow, whose life had been so hard, in which until
now there had neither been love nor friends, whose only human tie
was to his mother and to her. Had he known it, he might have put
his arms about her and kissed her tear-swollen eyes and drawn her
head against his breast. She was filled with a pent-up tenderness
for him; a word, and she would have discovered what was until then
inarticulate in her bosom. But the tall quartermaster was withheld
from such incredible presumption. Her beautiful gown against his
common serge typified, as it were, the gulf between them. Her
distress, her agitation, were in his mind due to her concern for
Howard Quintan; and he told her again and again, with manly
sincerity, that he would take good care of her boy.

She knew he loved her. It had been plain to her for weeks past.
She knew every thought in his head as he sat there beside her,
thrilled with the touch of her hands, and in the throes of a
respectful rapture. Again and again the avowal was on his lips; he
longed to tell her how dear she was to him; it would be hard to
die with that unsaid, were he to be amongst those who never
returned. It never occurred to him that she might return his love.
A woman like her! A queen!

She could easily have helped him out. More than once she was on
the point of doing so. But the woman in her rebelled at the
thought of taking what was the man's place. She had something of
the exaggerated delicacy of an old maid. It was for him to ask,
for her to answer; and the precious moments slipped away. At last,
greatly daring, he managed to blurt out the fact that he wanted to
ask a favour.

"A favour?" she said.

"Won't you give me something," he said timidly, "some little thing
to take with me to remember you by?"

She replied she would with pleasure. She wanted him to remember
her. What was it that he would like?

"There is nothing I could refuse you," she said, smiling.

Raymond was overcome with embarrassment. She saw him looking at
her hair; her hair which was her greatest beauty, and which when
undone was luxuriant enough to reach below her waist. He had often
expressed his admiration for it.

"What would you like?" she asked again.

"Oh, anything," he faltered. "A--a book!"

She could not restrain her laughter. A book! She laughed and
laughed. She seemed carried away by an extraordinary merriment.
Raymond thought he had never heard a woman laugh like that before.
It made him feel very badly. He wondered what it was that had made
his request so ridiculous. He thanked his stars that he had held
his tongue about the other thing. Ah, what a fool he had been! He
could not have borne it, had the other been received with the same
derision.

"I shall give you my prayer-book," she said at last, wiping her
eyes and looking less amused than he had expected. "I've had it
many years and value it dearly. It is prettily bound in Russia,
and if you carry it on the proper place romance will see that it
stops a bullet--though a Bible, I believe, is the more correct."

Somehow her tone sounded less cordial. She had withdrawn her
hands, and her humour, at such a moment, jarred on him. In spite
of his good resolutions he had managed to put his foot into it
after all. Perhaps she had begun to suspect his secret and was
displeased. He departed feeling utterly wretched and out of heart,
and got very scant comfort from his book, for it only reminded him
of how seriously he had compromised himself. He was in two minds
whether or not to send it back, but decided not to do so in fear
lest he might give fresh offence. The next day at dawn the Dixie
sailed for the scene of war.

III

Then followed the historic days of the blockade; the first landing
on Cuba; the suspense and triumph attending Cervera's capture; El
Caney; San Juan Hill; Santiago; and the end of the war. Howard
Quintan fell ill with fever and was early invalided home; but
Raymond stayed to the finish, an obscure spectator, often an
obscure actor, in that world-drama of fleets and armies. Tried in
the fire, his character underwent some noted changes. He developed
unexpected aptitudes, became a marksman of big guns, showed
resource and skill in boat-work, earned the repeated commendations
of his superiors. He put his resolutions to the test, and emerged,
surprised, thankful, and satisfied, to find that he was a brave
man. He rose in his own esteem; it was borne in on him that he had
qualities that others often lacked; it was inspiriting to win a
reputation for daring, fearlessness, and responsibility.

He wrote when he could to his mother and Miss Latimer, and at rare
intervals was sometimes fortunate enough to hear in turn from
them. His mother was ill; the strain of his absence and danger was
telling on her enfeebled constitution; she said she could not have
got along at all had it not been for Miss Latimer's great
kindness. It seemed that the old maid was her constant visitor,
bringing her flowers, taking her drives, comforting her in the
dark hours when her courage was nigh spent. "A good and noble
woman," wrote the old lady, "and very much in love with my boy."

That line rang in Raymond's head long afterwards. He read it
again and again, bewildered, tempted and yet afraid to believe it
true, moved to the depths of his nature, at once happy and unhappy
in the gamut of his doubts. It could not be possible. No, it could
not be possible. Standing at the breech of his gun, his eyes on a
Spanish gunboat they had driven under the shelter of a fort, he
found himself repeating: "And very much in love with my boy. And
very much in love with my boy." And then, suddenly becoming intent
again on the matter in hand, he slammed the breech-mechanism shut
and gave the enemy a six-inch shell.

Then there came the news of his mother's death. As much a victim
of the war as any stricken soldier or sailor at the front, she was
numbered on the roll of the fallen. The war had killed her as
certainly, as surely, as any Mauser bullet sped from a tropic
thicket. Raymond had only the consolation of knowing that Miss
Latimer had been with her at the last and that she had followed
his mother to the grave. Her letter, tender and pitiful, filled
him with an inexpressible emotion. His little world now held but
her.

This was the last letter he was destined to receive from her. The
others, if there were others, all went astray in the chaotic
confusion attendant on active service. The poor quartermaster,
when the ship was so lucky as to take a mail aboard, grew
accustomed to be told that there was nothing for him. He lost
heart and stopped writing himself. What was the use, he asked
himself? Had she not abandoned him? The critical days of the war
were over; peace was assured; the victory won, the country was
already growing forgetful of the victors. Such were his moody
reflections as he paced the deck, hungry for the word that never
came. Yes, he was forgotten. There could be no other explanation
of that long silence. He was forgotten!

He returned in due course to New York and was paid off and
mustered out of the service. It was dusk when he boarded an uptown
car and stood holding to a strap, jostled and pushed about by the
unheeding crowd. Already jealous of his uniform, he felt a little
bitterness to see it regarded with such scant respect. He looked
out of the windows at the lighted streets and wondered whether any
of those hurrying thousands cared a jot for the men that had
fought and died for them. The air, so sharp and chill after the
tropics, served still further to dispirit him and add the
concluding note of depression to his home-coming. He got off the
car and walked down to Fifth Avenue, holding his breath as he drew
near the Quintans' house. He rang the bell: waited and rang again.
Then at last the door was unlocked and opened by an old woman.

"Is Miss--Mrs. Quintan at home?" he asked.

"Gone to Europe," said the old woman.

"But Miss Latimer?" he persisted.

"Gone to Europe," said the old woman.

"Mr. Howard Quintan?"

"Gone to Europe!"

He walked slowly down the steps, not even waiting to ask for their
address abroad nor when they might be expected to return. They had
faded into the immeasurable distance. What more was there to be
said or hoped, and his dejected heart gave back the answer:
nothing. He slept that night in a cheap hotel. The next day he
bought a suit of civilian clothes and sought the office of the
auditor's department. Here he received something more like a
welcome. Many of the clerks, with whom he had scarcely been on
nodding terms, now came up and shook him warmly by the hand. The
superintendent sent for him and told him that his place had been
held open, hinting, in the exuberance of the moment, at a slight
increase of salary. The assistant superintendent made much of him
and invited him out to lunch. The old darkey door-keeper greeted
him like a long-lost parent. Raymond went back to his desk, and
resumed with a sort of melancholy satisfaction the interrupted
routine of twenty years. In a week he could hardly believe he had
ever quitted his desk. He would shut his eyes and wonder whether
the war had not been all a dream. He looked at his hands and asked
himself whether they indeed had pulled the lanyards of cannon,
lifted loaded projectiles, had held the spokes of the leaping
wheel. His eyes, now intent on figures, had they in truth ever
searched the manned decks of the enemy or trained the sights that
had blown Spanish blockhouses to the four winds of heaven? Had it
been he or his ghost who had stood behind the Nordenfeldt shields
with the bullets pattering against the steel and stinging the air
overhead? He or his ghost, barefoot in the sand that sopped the
blood of fallen comrades, the ship shaking with the detonation of
her guns, the hoarse cheering of her crew re-echoing in his half-
deafened ears? A dream, yes; tragic and wonderful in the
retrospect, filled with wild, bright pictures; incredible, yet
true!

He was restless and lonely. He dreaded his evenings, which he knew
not how to spend; dreaded the recurring Sunday, interminable in
duration, whose leaden hours seemed never to reach their end. His
only solace was in his work, which took him out of himself and
prevented him from thinking. He made a weekly pilgrimage past the
Quintans' house. The blinds were always drawn. It was as dead as
one of those Cuban mills, standing in the desolation of burned
fields. Once, greatly daring, and impelled by a sudden impulse, he
went to the door and requested the address of his vanished
friends:

"Grand Hotel, Vevey, Switzerland." He repeated the words to
himself as he went back to his boarding-house, repeated them again
and again like a child going on an errand, "Grand Hotel, Vevey,
Switzerland," in a sort of panic lest he might forget them. He
tossed that night in his bed in a torment of indecision. Ought he
to write? Ought he to take the risk of a reply, courteous and
cold, that he felt himself without the courage to endure? Or was
it not better to put an end to it altogether and accept like a man
the inevitable "no" of her decision.

He rose at dawn, and, lighting the gas, went back to bed with what
paper he could lay his hands on. He had no pen, no ink, only the
stub of a pencil he carried in his pocket. How it flew over the
ragged sheets under the fierce spell of his determination! All the
misery and longing of months went out in that letter. Inarticulate
no longer, he found the expression of a passionate and despairing
eloquence. He could not live without her; he loved her; he had
always loved her; before he had been daunted by the inequality
between them, but now he must speak or die. At the end he asked
her, in set old-fashioned terms, whether or not she would marry
him.

He mailed it as it was, in odd sheets and under the cover of an
official envelope of the railroad company. He dropped it into the
box and walked away, wondering whether he wasn't the biggest fool
on earth and the most audacious, and yet stirred and trembling
with a strange satisfaction. After all he was a man; he had lived
as a man should, honorably and straightforwardly; he had the
right to ask such a question of any woman and the right to an
honest and considerate answer. Be it yes or no, he could reproach
himself no longer with perhaps having let his happiness slip past
him. The matter would be put beyond a doubt for ever, and if it
went against him, as in the bottom of his heart he felt assured it
would, he would try to bear it with what fortitude he might. She
would know that he loved her. There was always that to comfort
him. She would know that he loved her.

He got a postal guide and studied out the mails. He learned the
names of the various steamers, the date of their sailing and
arriving, the distance of Vevey from the sea. Were she to write on
the same day she received his letter, he might hear from her by
the Touraine. Were she to wait a day, her answer would be delayed
for the Normandie. All this, if the schedule was followed to the
letter and bad weather or accident did not intervene. The shipping
page of the New York Herald became the only part of it he read. He
scanned it daily with anxiety. Did it not tell him of his letter
speeding over seas? For him no news was good news, telling him
that all was well. He kept himself informed of the temperature of
Paris, the temperature of Nice, and worried over the floods in
Belgium. From the gloomy offices of the railroad he held all
Europe under the closest scrutiny.

Then came the time when his letter was calculated to arrive. In
his mind's eye he saw the Grand Hotel at Vevey, a Waldorf-Astoria
set in snowy mountains with attendant Swiss yodelling on
inaccessible summits, or getting marvels of melody out of little
hand-bells, or making cuckoo clocks in top-swollen chalets. The
letter would be brought to her on a silver salver, exciting
perhaps the stately curiosity of Mrs. Quintan and questions
embarrassing to answer. It was a pity he used that railroad
envelope! Or would it lie beside her plate at breakfast, as clumsy
and unrefined as himself, amid a heap of scented notes from
members of the nobility? Ah, if he could but see her face and read
his fate in her blue eyes!

When he returned home that night there was a singular-looking
telegram awaiting him on the hall table. His hands shook as he
took it up for it suddenly came over him that it was a cable. It
had never occurred to him that she might do that; that there was
anything more expeditious than the mail.

"Sailing by Touraine arriving sixth Christine Latimer."

He read and re-read it until the type grew blurred. What did it
mean? He asked himself that a thousand times. What did it mean? He
sought his room and locked the door, striding up and down with
agitation, the cablegram clenched in his hand. He was beside
himself, triumphant and yet in a fever of misgiving. Was it not
perhaps a coincidence--not an answer to his own letter, but one of
those extraordinary instances of what is called telepathy? Her
words would bear either interpretation. Possibly the whole family
was returning with her. Possibly she had never seen his letter at
all. Possibly it was following her back to America, unopened and
undelivered.

"Sailing by Touraine arriving sixth." Was that an answer? Perhaps
indeed it was. Perhaps it was a woman's way of saying "yes"; it
might even be, in her surpassing kindness, that she was coming to
break her refusal as gently as she might, too considerate of his
feelings to write it baldly on paper. At least, amid all these
doubts, it assured him of one thing, her regard; that he was not
forgotten; that he had been mistaken in thinking himself ignored.

He spent the next eight days in a cruel and heart-breaking
suspense. He could hardly eat or sleep. He grew thin and started
at a sound. He paid a dollar to have the Touraine's arrival
telegraphed to the office; another dollar to have it telegraphed
to the boarding-house; he was fearful that one or the other might
miscarry, and repeatedly warned the landlady of a possible message
for him in the middle of the night.

"It means a great deal to me," he said. "It means everything to
me. I don't know what I'd do if I missed the Touraine!"

Of course he did not miss the Touraine. He was on the wharf hours
before her coming. He exasperated everyone with his questions. He
was turned out of all kinds of barriers; he earned the distrust of
the detectives; he became a marked man. He was certainly there for
no good, that tall guy in the slouch hat, his lean hands fidgeting
for a surreptitious pearl-necklace or an innocent-looking
umbrella full of diamonds--one who, in their language, was a guy
that would bear watching.

The steamer came alongside, and Raymond gazed up at the tier upon
tier of faces. At length, with a catch in his heart, he caught
sight of Miss Latimer, who smiled and waved her hand to him. He
scanned her narrowly for an answer to his doubts; and these
increased the more he gazed at her. It seemed a bad sign to see
her so calm, so composed; worse still to see her occasionally in
animated conversation with some of her fellow-passengers. He
thought her smiles had even a perfunctory friendliness, and he had
to share them besides with others. It was plain she had never
received his letter. No woman could bear herself like that who had
received such a letter. Then too she appeared so handsome, so
high-bred, so charming and noticeable a figure in the little
company about her that Raymond felt a peremptory sense of his own
humbleness and of the impassable void between them. How had he
ever dared aspire to this beautiful woman, and the thought of his
effrontery took him by the throat.

He stood by the gangway as the passengers came off, an
interminable throng, slow moving, teetering on the slats, a gush
of funnelled humanity, hampered with bags, hat-boxes, rolls of
rugs, dressing-cases, golf-sticks, and children. At last Miss
Latimer was carried into the eddy, her maid behind her carrying
her things, lost to view save by the bright feather in her
travelling bonnet. The seconds were like hours as Raymond waited.
He had a peep of her, smiling and patient, talking over her
shoulder to a big Englishman behind her. Then, as the slow stream
brought her down, she stepped lightly on the wharf, turned to
Raymond, and, before he could so much as stammer out a word, flung
her arms round his neck and kissed him.

"Did you really want me?" she said; and then, "You gave me but two
hours to catch the old Touraine!"





THE MASCOT OF BATTERY B


Battery A had a mascot goat, and Battery C a Filipino kid, and
Battery D a parrot that could swear in five languages, but I guess
we were the only battery in the brigade that carried an old lady!
Filipino, nothing! But white as yourself and from Oakland,
California, and I don't suppose I'd be here talking to you now, if
it hadn't been for her.

I had known Benny a long time--Benny was her son, you know, the
only one she had--and when I enlisted at the beginning of the war
Benny wished to do it, too, only he was scared to death, not of
the Spaniards, but his old Ma! So he hung off and on, while I
drilled at the Presidio and rode free on the street cars, and did
the little hero act, and ate pie the whole day long. My! How they
used to bring us pies in them times and boxes of see-gars--and
flowers! Flowers to burn! Well I remember a Wisconsin regiment
marching along Market Street, big splendid men from the up-North
woods, every one of them with a Calla lily stuck in his gun! Oh,
it was fine, with the troops pouring in, and the whole city afire
to receive them, and the girls almost cutting the clothes off your
back for souvenirs--and it made Benny sick to see it all, him
clerking in a hardware store and eating his heart out to go with
the boys. He hung back as long as he could, but at last he
couldn't stand it no longer, and the day before we sailed he went
and enlisted in my battery.

He knew there was going to be a rumpus at home and I suppose that
was why he put it off to the very end, not wanting to be plagued
to death or cried over. But when he got into his uniform and had
done a spell of goose-step with the first sergeant, he was so
blamed rattled about going home that he had to take me along too.
He lived away off somewheres in a poorish sort of neighbourhood,
all little frame houses and little front yards about that big,
where you could see commuters watering Calla lilies in their city
clothes. Benny's house seemed the smallest and poorest of the lot,
though it had Calla lilies too and other sorts of flowers, and a
mat with "welcome" on it, and some kind of a dog that licked our
hands as we walked up the front steps and answered to the name of
Dook.

Benny pushed open the door and went in, me at his heels, and both
of us nervous as cats. His mother was sitting in a rocker, reading
the evening paper with gold spectacles, and I never saw such a
straight-backed old lady in my life, nor any so tall and thin and
commanding. She looked up at us, kind of startled to see two
soldiers walking into her kitchen, and Benny smiled a silly smile
and said:

"Mommer, I'm off to help Dooey in the Fillypines!"

I guess he thought she'd jump at him or something, for he had
always been a mother's boy and minded everything she said, though
he was twenty-eight years old and rising-nine--but all she did was
to draw in her breath sharp and sudden, so you could hear the
whistle of it, and then two big tears rolled out under her specs.

"Don't feel bad about it, Mommer," said Benny in a snuffly voice.

She never said a word, but got up from the chair and came over to
where Benny was, very white and trembly, and looking at his army
coat like it was a shroud.

"Oh, my son, my son!" she said, kind of choking over the words.

"I couldn't stay behind when all the boys was going," he said.

I saw he was holding back all he could to keep from crying, and I
didn't blame him either, as we was to sail the next day and the
old lady was his Ma. It's them good-byes that break a soldier all
up. So I lit out and played with the dog and made him jump through
my hands and fetch sticks and give his paw (he was quite a
RE-markable dog, that dog, though his breeding wasn't much), while I
could hear them inside, talking and talking, and the old lady's
voice running on about the danger of drink and how he mustn't
sleep in wet clothes or give back-talk to his officers--it was
wonderful the horse-sense that old lady had--and how he must
respeck the uniform he wore and be cheerful and willing and brave,
like his sainted father who was dead--all that mothers say and
sometimes what soldiers do--and through it all there was a pleasant
rattle of dishes and the sound of the fire being poked up, and
Benny asking where's the table-cloth, and was there another pie?
By and by I was called in, and there, sure enough, the table was
spread, and we were both made to sit down while the old lady
skirmished around and wiped her eyes when we weren't looking.

We had beefsteak, warmed-over pigs' feet, coffee, potato cakes,
fresh lettuce, Graham gems, and two kinds of pie, and the next day
we sailed for Manila.

Them early days in the Fillypines was the toughest proposition I
was ever up against. Things hadn't settled down as they did
afterward, nobody knowing where he was at, and all of us shoved up
to the front higgeldy-piggeldy; and, being Regulars, they gave us
the heavy end of it, having to do all the fighting while the
Volunteers was being taught the difference between a Krag-
Jorgensen and a Moro Castle. It was all front in them days--for
the Regulars! But we were lucky in our commissary sergeant, a
splendid young man named Orr, and we lived well from the start and
never came down to rations. The battery got quite a name for
having griddle-cakes for breakfast and carrying a lot of dog
generally in the eating line, and someone wrote a song, to the
toon of Chickamauga, called "The Fried Chicken of Battery B." But
I tell you, it wasn't all fried chicken either, for the fighting
was heavy and hot, and a good many of the boys pegged out. If ever
there was a battery that looked for trouble and got it--it was
Battery B! But we took good care of our commissary sergeant--did I
mention he was a splendid young man named Orr?--and though we
dropped a good many numbers, wounded, dead, sick, and missing--we
kep' up the good name of the battery and had canned butter and
pop-overs nearly every day.

Benny and I were chums, but nobody knows what that word means till
you've kept warm under the same blanket and kneeled side by side
in the firing-line. It brings men together like nothing else in
the world, and it's queer the unlikely sorts that take to one
another. I was so common and uneddicated that I wonder what Benny
ever saw to like in me, for, as I said, he was a regular Mommer's
boy and splendidly brought up and an electrician. Religious, too,
and a church member! But he was powerful fond of me, and never
went into action but what he'd let off a little prayer to himself
that I might come out all right and go to heaven if bolo-ed. Pity
he hadn't taken as much trouble for himself, for one day while we
were lying in a trench, and firing for all we were worth, I
suddenly saw that look in his face that a soldier gets to know so
well.

"Benny, you're shot!" I yelled out, dropping my Krag and all
struck of a heap.

"Shot, nothing!" he answered, and then he keeled over in the dirt
and his legs began to kick.

He took a powerful long time to die, and there was even some talk
of sending him down to the base hospital, the field one being that
full and constantly needed at our heels. But he pleaded with the
doctors and was allowed as a favour to stay on and die where he
was minded--with the battery. I was with him all I could, and I'll
never forget how good that commissary sergeant was, a splendid
young man named Orr, who always had a little pot of chicken broth
for Benny and cornstarch, and what he fancied most of all--a sort
of thick dough cakes we called sinkers. As luck would have it I
got into trouble about this time--a little matter of two silver
candle-sticks and a Virgin's crown--and Benny sent for Captain
Howard (it was him that commanded the battery), and weak as he
was, dying, he begged me off, and the captain swore awful to hide
how bad he felt, and struck my name off the sheet to please him.
There was little enough to do in this line, for it was plain as
day where Benny was bound for, and he knew himself he would never
see that little home in Oakland again.

Well, he got worse and worse, and sometimes when I went there he
didn't know me, being out of his head or kind of dopy with the
doctor's stuff, the shadow being over him, as Irish people say.
One night he was that low that I got scared, and I waylaid the
contract surgeon as he came out.

"Doctor," I said, "it's all up with Benny, ain't it?"

"He'll never hear reveille no more," he says.

I got my blanket and lay outside the door, it being against
regulations for any of us to be in the field-hospital after taps.
But the orderly said he'd call me if Benny was to wake up before
the end, and the doctor promised me I might go in. Sure enough, I
was called somewheres along of four o'clock and the orderly led me
inside the tent to Benny's cot. There was no light but a candle in
a bottle, and I held it in my hand and bent over and looked in
Benny's face. He was himself all right, and he put his cold,
sweaty hand in mine and pressed it.

"Do you know me, old man?" I said. "Do you know me?"

"Good-bye, Bill," he said, and then, as I leaned over him, his
voice being that low and faint--he whispered: "Billy, I guess
you'll have to rustle for another chum!"

Them was his last words and he said them with a kind of a smile,
like he was happy and didn't give a damn to live. Then the little
life he had left went out. The orderly looked at his watch, and
then wrote the time on a slate after Benny's regimental number and
the word: "died." This was about all the epitaph he got, though we
buried him properly in the morning and gave him the usual send-
off. Then his effects was auctioned off in front of the captain's
tent, a nickel for this, ten cents for that--a soldier hasn't much
at any time, you know, and on the march less than a little--and
five-sixty about covered the lot. There was quite a rush for the
picture of his best girl, but I bought it in, along with one of
his Ma and a one-pound Hotchkiss shell and the hilt of a Spanish
officer's sword; and when I had laid them away in my haversack and
had borrowed a sheet of paper and an envelope from the commissary
sergeant to write to Benny's mother, it came over me what a little
place a man fills in the world and how things go on much the same
without him.

I was setting down to write that letter and was about midway
through, having got to "the pride of the battery and regretted by
all who noo him," when I looked up, and what in thunder do you
suppose I saw? The old lady herself, by God! walking into camp
with an umberella and a valise, and looking like she always did--
powerful grim and commanding. Someone must have told her the news
and which was my tent, for she walked straight up to where I was
and said: "William, William!" like that. She didn't cry or
nothing, and anybody at a distance might have thought she was just
talking to a stranger; but there was a whole funeral march in the
sound of her voice, and you could read Benny's death like print in
her wrinkled old face. I took her out to where we had buried him,
and she plumped down on her knees and prayed, with the umberella
and the valise beside her, while I held my hat in one hand and my
pistol in the other, ready for any bolo business that might come
out of the high grass.

Then we went back to the field-hospital and had a look in, she
explaining on the way how she had mortgaged her home, so as to
come and look after Benny. I guess the hospital must have appeared
kind of cheerless, for lots of the wounded were lying on the bare
ground, and it was a caution the way some of them groaned and
groaned. You see Battery K had just come in, having had an
engagement by the way at Dagupan, and Wilson's cavalry, besides,
had dumped a sight of their men on us.

"And it was in a place like this that my boy died?" said the old
lady, her mouth quivering and then closing on the words like a
steel trap.

"There's the very cot, Ma'am," I said.

She said something like "Oh, oh, oh!" under her breath, and,
taking out her handkerchief, wiped the face and lips of the man in
the cot, who was lying there with his uniform still on him. I
suppose he had got it because he was a bad case,--the cot, I
mean,--and certainly he was far from spry.

"He's dead!" said the old lady, shuddering. "He's dead!"

"Orderly," I said, "number fifty-six is dead!"

The orderly bent over to make sure and then ran for his slate--the
same old slate--and began to write down the same old thing. I
suppose there was some sense to that slate racket, for with a
little spit one slate would do for a brigade, but it seemed a
cheap way to die. Then, as we stood there, another orderly came
gallumphing in with something steaming in a tin can. The old lady
took it out of his hand and smelled it, supercilious.

"What do you call this?" she said.

"It's chicken broth, Ma'am," he said. "That's what it is, Ma'am."

"Faugh!" said the old lady, "faugh!" and handed it back to him,
like she was going to throw it away, but didn't. Then we watched
him dip it out in tin cups and carry it around, while some other
fellers came in and carried out the body of the man in the cot, a
trooper by his legs. We went out with them, and, I tell you, it
was good to stand in the open air again and breathe. The old lady
took a little spell of rest on a packing-case; then she gave me
her umberella and valise to take back to quarters, and, rolling up
her sleeves, made like she was going into the hospital again.

I didn't know what to say, but I guess I looked it.

"William," she said, with a glitter of her gold specs.

"Ma'am," said I.

"Those boys aren't getting proper CON-sideration," she said. "If
it was dogs," she said, "they couldn't be treated worse. William,
I'm going to see what one old woman can do."

"You ought to ask Captain Howard first," I said. "You don't belong
to the Army Medical Corps."

"It's them that let Benny die," she said, with her eyes snapping,
"and, as for asking, they'd say 'No,' for they don't allow any
women except at the base hospitals."

I knew this for a fack, but I'd rather she'd find it out from the
captain than from me. I didn't want to seem to make trouble for
her. So, while I was wondering what to do about it, she headed
right in, leaving me with the valise and the umberella, and a kind
of qualmy feeling that the old lady might strike a snag.

I didn't have no chance to come back till along sundown, but, my
stars I even in that time there had been a change. Benny's mother
had been getting in her deadly work, and the orderlies were
bursting mad, not that any of them dared say anything outright or
show it except in their faces, which were that long; for, you see,
the contract surgeon had taken her side, and had backed her up.
But they moved around like mules with their ears down, powerful
unwilling, and yet scared to say a word. The hospital had been
made a new place, with another tent up that had been laid away and
forgotten (you wouldn't think it possible, but it was), and the
sick and wounded had been sorted over and washed and made
comfortable; and, where before there was no room to turn around,
you could walk through wide lanes and wonder what had become of
the crowd. She had peeked into the cooking, too, and had found out
more things going wrong in five hours than the contract surgeon
had in five months. Blest if there wasn't a court-martial laying
for every one of the orderlies if they said "boo!" for the swine
had been making away scandalous with butter and chocolate and
beef--tea and canned table peaches and sparrow-grass and sardines,
and all the like of that, belly-robbing the boys right and left
perfectly awful.

It was a mighty good account of the contract surgeon that he took
it all so well, and was willing to admit how badly he had been
done. But he was a splendid young fellow, named Marcus, and what
the old lady said, went! He was right sorry he couldn't put her on
the strength of the battery, but the regulations kept women nurses
at the base-hospitals, and anyway (for we broke everything them
days, and there wasn't enough red-tape left to play cat-and-my-
cradle with) Captain Howard hated the sight of a petticoat, and
was dead set against women anywheres. I don't know what they had
ever done to him, but I'm just saying it for a fack. But, however
it was, Marcus said the old lady had to be kept out of sight, or
else the captain would surely send her to the rear under arrest.

Now, this made it a pretty hard game for the old lady to play, and
you can reckon how much dodging she had to do to keep out of the
captain's sight. It was hard about her sleeping, too, for she had
to do that where she could, not to speak of the pay she might have
drawn and didn't, and which, sakes alive! she earned twenty times
over. By and by everybody got onto it except the captain, but
there wasn't such a skunk in the battery as to tell him, partly
because of the joke, but, most of all, on account of the
convalescents, who naturally thought a heap of her. Then it got
whispered around that she was our mascot, and carried the luck of
the battery; and it was certainly RE-markable how it began to
change, getting fresh beef quite regular and maple syrup to burn,
and nine kegs of Navy pickles by mistake.

You would have thought she was too old to stand it, for we was
always on the move, and I have seen her sleeping on what was
nothing else but mud, with the rain coming down tremenjous. But
she was a tough old customer, and always came to time, outlasting
men that could have tossed her in the air, or run with her a block
and never taken breath. But, of course, it couldn't be kept up for
ever--I mean about the captain--and, sure enough, one day he
caught her riding on a gun-carriage, while he was passing along
the line on a Filipino pony.

"Good God!" he said, like that, reining in his horse and looking
at her campaign hat and the old gingham dress she wore. I wonder
she didn't correct him for his profanity, but I allow for once she
was scared stiff, and hadn't no answer ready. My! But she kind of
shrunk in and looked a million years old.

"Madam," said he, "do you belong to this column?"

"Unofficially, I do," she said, perking up a little.

"Might I inquire where you came from?" said he, doing the ironical
perlite.

"Oakland, California," said she.

"And is this your usual mode of locomotion?" said he. "Riding on a
gun?" said he. "Like the Goddess of War," said he. "Perching on
the belcherous cannon's back," said he.

The old lady, now as bold as brass, allowed that it was.

"Scandalous!" roared the captain. "Scandalous!"

The old lady always had a kind of nattified air, and even on a
gun-carriage she sported that look of dropping in on the
neighbours for a visit. She ran up her little parasol, settled her
feet, give a tilt to her specs, and looked the captain in the eye.

"Yes," she said, "I do belong to this column, and I guess it would
be a smaller column by a dozen, if it hadn't been for me in your
field-hospital. Or twenty," said she. "Or maybe more," said she.

This kind of staggered the captain. It was plain he didn't know
just what to do. We were hundreds of miles from anywheres, and
there were Aguinaldoes all around us. He was as good as married to
that old lady, for any means he had of getting rid of her. He
began to look quite old himself, as he stared and stared at the
mascot of Battery B, the cannon lumping along, and the old lady
bouncing up and down, as the wheels sank to the axles in the rutty
road.

"When we strike the railroad, home you go," said he.

"We'll see about that," said the old lady.

"It's disgraceful," said he. "Pigging with a whole battery," said
he. "Oh, the shame of it!" said he.

"Shoulder-straps don't always make a gentleman," said she.

"Holy Smoke!" said he, galloping off very fierce and grand on his
little horse, to haul Dr. Marcus over the coals. They say the
contract surgeon got it in the neck, but we were short-handed in
that department already, Dr. Fenelly having been killed in action,
so the captain could do nothing worse nor reprimand him. It was
bad enough as it was--for Marcus--for HE wasn't no old lady, and
the captain could let himself rip. And, I tell you, it was a
caution any time to be up against Captain Howard, for, though he
could be nice as pie and perlite to beat the band, it only needed
the occasion for him to unloose on you like a thirteen-inch gun.

Well, it was perfectly lovely what happened next, for, with all
her sassiness, the old lady felt pretty blue, and talked about
Benny for hours, like she always did when she was down-hearted;
and, by this time, you know, she had got to love Battery B, and
every boy in it; and it naturally went against her to think of
starting out all over again with strangers, and them maybe
Volunteers. So you can guess what her feelings was that night when
the captain went down with fever. It was like getting money from
home!

The captain had never been sick in his life, and he took it hard
to be laid by and keep off the flies, while another feller ran the
battery and jumped his place. I guess it came over him that he
wasn't the main guy after all, and that it wouldn't matter a hill
of beans whether he lived or quit. Them's one of the things you
learn in hospital, and the most are the better for it; but the
captain, you see, was getting his lesson a bit late. So he was
layed off, with amigos to carry him or bolo him (like what amigos
are when they get a chance), and the old lady give a whoop and
took him in charge. My! If she wasn't good to that man. and, as
for coals of fire, she regularly slung them at him! The doctor,
too, got his little axe in, and was everlastingly praising the old
lady, and telling the captain he would have been a goner, if it
hadn't been for her! And, when the captain grew better--which he
did after a few days--he was that meek he'd eat out of your hand.
The old lady was not only a champion nurse, but she was a buster
to cook. Give her a ham-bone and a box of matches and she could
turn out a French dinner of five courses, with oofs-sur-le-plate,
and veal-cutlets in paper pants! It was then, I reckon, she
settled the captain for good; and, when he picked up and was able
to walk about camp, leaning pretty heavy on her arm, she called
him "George" and "My boy"--like that--and you might have taken him
for Benny and she his Ma.

There was nothing too good for the old lady after that, and the
captain wouldn't hear of her living anywheres but at the officers'
mess, where she sat at his right hand, and always spoke first. The
Queen of England couldn't have been treated with more respeck, and
the captain put her on the strength of the battery, and she drew
back-pay from the day she first blew into camp. My, but it was
changed times! and you ought to have seen the way the old lady
cocked her head in the air and made a splendid black silk dress of
loot, which she wore every evening with the officers and rattled
all over with jet. But it didn't turn her head the least bit, like
for a time the boys feared it might, and she was twice as good to
us as she had been before. We had a pull at headquarters now, and
she had a heart that big that it could hold the officers and us,
too--and more in the draw.

The tide had turned her way when she needed it most, for, tough as
she was, she could not have long gone on like she had been. She
had worn down very thin, and was like a shadow of the old lady I
remembered in Oakland, California, and kind of sunk in around the
eyes, and I don't believe Benny would have known her, had he risen
from the grave; and, when anybody joked with her about it, and
said: "Take it easy, Ma'am, you owe it to the battery to be
keerful," she'd answer she had enlisted for the term of the war,
and looked to peg out the day peace was proclaimed.

"Then I'll be off to join Benny," she'd say, "and the rest of the
battery, in heaven!"

There was getting to be a good deal of a crowd up there--that is,
if the other place hadn't yanked them in--and some of the boys
found a lot of comfort in her way of thinking.

"A boy as dies for his country isn't going to be bothered about
passing in," she would say, with a click of her teeth and that
sure way of hers like she KNEW. And I, reckon perhaps she DID.

One afternoon she was suddenly taken very bad; and, instead of
better, she grew worse and worse, being tied to the bed and
raving; and the captain, who wouldn't hear of her being sent to
hospital, give up his own quarters to her and almost went crazy,
he was that frightened she was dying.

"It's just grit that's kep' her alive," I heard the doctor saying
to him.

"You must save her, Marcus," said the captain, holding to him,
like he was pleading with the doctor for her life. "You must save
her, Marcus. You must do everything in the world you can, Marcus."

The contract surgeon looked mighty glum. "She's like a ship that's
been burning up her fittings for lack of coal," said he. "There
ain't nothing left," he said. "Not a damn thing," said he, and then
he piled in a lot of medical words that seemed to settle the
matter.

As for the captain, he sat down and regularly cried. I'm sorry now
I said anything against the captain, for he was a splendid man,
and the pride of the battery. And, I tell you, he wasn't the only
one that cried neither, for the boys idolised the old lady, and
there wasn't no singing that night or cards or anything. I was on
picket, and it was a heavy heart I took with me into the dark;
and, when they left me laying in the grass, and nobody nearer nor
a hundred yards and that behind me, I felt mortal blue and
lonesome and homesick, and like I didn't care whether I was killed
or not. It was midnight when I went out,--mind, I say MIDNIGHT--
and I don't know what ailed me that night, for, after thinking of
the old lady and Benny and my own mother that was dead, and all
the rest of the boys that had marched out so fine and ended so
miserable--I couldn't keep the sleep away; and I'd go off and off,
though I tried my damnedest not to; and my eyes would shut in
spite of me and just glue together; and I would kind of drown,
drown, drown in sleep. If ever a man knew what he was doing, and
the risk, and what I owed to the boys, and me a Regular, and all
that--it was ME; yet--yet--And you must remember it had been a hard
day, and the guns had stuck again and again in the mud, and it was
pull, mule, pull, soldier, till you thought you'd drop in your
tracks. Oh, I am not excusing myself! I've seen men shot for
sleeping on guard, and I know it's right; and, even in my dreams,
I seemed to be reproaching myself and calling myself a stinker.

Then, just as I was no better nor a log, laying there with my head
on my arm, a coward and a traitor, and a black disgrace to the
uniform I wore, I suddenly waked up with somebody shaking me hard,
real rough, like that--and I jumped perfectly terrible to think it
might be the captain on his rounds. Oh, the relief when I saw it
was nothing else than the old lady, she kneeling beside me all
alone, and her specs shining in the starlight.

"William, William!" she said, sorrowful and warning, her voice
kind of strange, like she didn't want to say out loud that I had
been asleep at my post; and, as she drew away her hand, it touched
mine, and it was ice-cold. And, just as I was going to tell her to
lope back and be keerful of herself, the grass rustled in front of
me, and I saw, rising like a wall, rows on rows of Filipino heads!
My, but didn't I shoot and didn't I run, and the bugles rang out
and the whole line was rushed, me pelting in and the column
spitting fire along a length of three miles! We stood them off all
right, and my name was mentioned in orders, and I was promoted
sergeant, the brigadier shaking my hand and telling the boys I was
a pattern to go by and everything a Regular ought to be. But it
wasn't THAT I was going to tell. It was about the old lady, though
I didn't learn it till the next day.

She had died at a quarter of midnight, and had lain all night on
the captain's bed with a towel over her poor old face.

Now, what do you make of that?

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Love, The Fiddler, by Lloyd Osbourne





Transcribed by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk, from the
1891 Cassell and Co. edition.



LIVES OF THE ENGLISH POETS:  WALLER, MILTON, COWLEY




Contents:
   Introduction
   Waller
   Milton
   Cowley



INTRODUCTION.



Samuel Johnson, born at Lichfield in the year 1709, on the 7th of
September Old Style, 18th New Style, was sixty-eight years old when
he agreed with the booksellers to write his "Lives of the English
Poets."  "I am engaged," he said, "to write little Lives, and little
Prefaces, to a little edition of the English Poets."  His conscience
was also a little hurt by the fact that the bargain was made on
Easter Eve.  In 1777 his memorandum, set down among prayers and
meditations, was "29 March, Easter Eve, I treated with booksellers
on a bargain, but the time was not long."

The history of the book as told to Boswell by Edward Dilly, one of
the contracting booksellers, was this.  An edition of Poets printed
by the Martins in Edinburgh, and sold by Bell in London, was
regarded by the London publishers as an interference with the
honorary copyright which booksellers then respected among
themselves.  They said also that it was inaccurately printed and its
type was small.  A few booksellers agreed, therefore, among
themselves to call a meeting of proprietors of honorary or actual
copyright in the various Poets.  In Poets who had died before 1660
they had no trade interest at all.  About forty of the most
respectable booksellers in London accepted the invitation to this
meeting.  They determined to proceed immediately with an elegant and
uniform edition of Poets in whose works they were interested, and
they deputed three of their number, William Strahan, Thomas Davies,
and Cadell, to wait on Johnson, asking him to write the series of
prefatory Lives, and name his own terms.  Johnson agreed at once,
and suggested as his price two hundred guineas, when, as Malone
says, the booksellers would readily have given him a thousand.  He
then contemplated only "little Lives."  His energetic pleasure in
the work expanded his Preface beyond the limits of the first design;
but when it was observed to Johnson that he was underpaid by the
booksellers, his reply was, "No, sir; it was not that they gave me
too little, but that I gave them too much."  He gave them, in fact,
his masterpiece.  His keen interest in Literature as the soul of
life, his sympathetic insight into human nature, enabled him to put
all that was best in himself into these studies of the lives of men
for whom he cared, and of the books that he was glad to speak his
mind about in his own shrewd independent way.  Boswell was somewhat
disappointed at finding that the selection of the Poets in this
series would not be Johnson's, but that he was to furnish a Preface
and Life to any Poet the booksellers pleased.  "I asked him," writes
Boswell, "if he would do this to any dunce's works, if they should
ask him.  JOHNSON.  "Yes, sir; and SAY he was a dunce."

The meeting of booksellers, happy in the support of Johnson's
intellectual power, appointed also a committee to engage the best
engravers, and another committee to give directions about paper and
printing.  They made out at once a list of the Poets they meant to
give, "many of which," said Dilly, "are within the time of the Act
of Queen Anne, which Martin and Bell cannot give, as they have no
property in them.  The proprietors are almost all the booksellers in
London, of consequence."

In 1780 the booksellers published, in separate form, four volumes of
Johnson's "Prefaces, Biographical and Critical, to the most Eminent
of the English Poets."  The completion followed in 1781.  "Sometime
in March," Johnson writes in that year, "I finished the Lives of the
Poets."  The series of books to which they actually served as
prefaces extended to sixty volumes.  When his work was done, Johnson
then being in his seventy-second year, the booksellers added 100
pounds to the price first asked.  Johnson's own life was then near
its close.  He died on the 13th of December, 1784, aged seventy-
five.

Of the Lives in this collection, Johnson himself liked best his Life
of Cowley, for the thoroughness with which he had examined in it the
style of what he called the metaphysical Poets.  In his Life of
Milton, the sense of Milton's genius is not less evident than the
difference in point of view which made it difficult for Johnson to
know Milton thoroughly.  They know each other now.  For Johnson
sought as steadily as Milton to do all as "in his great Taskmaster's
eye."

H. M.



WALLER.



Edmund Waller was born on the third of March, 1605, at Coleshill, in
Hertfordshire.  His father was Robert Waller, Esquire, of
Agmondesham, in Buckinghamshire, whose family was originally a
branch of the Kentish Wallers; and his mother was the daughter of
John Hampden, of Hampden, in the same county, and sister to Hampden,
the zealot of rebellion.

His father died while he was yet an infant, but left him a yearly
income of three thousand five hundred pounds; which, rating together
the value of money and the customs of life, we may reckon more than
equivalent to ten thousand at the present time.

He was educated, by the care of his mother, at Eton; and removed
afterwards to King's College, in Cambridge.  He was sent to
Parliament in his eighteenth, if not in his sixteenth year, and
frequented the court of James the First, where he heard a very
remarkable conversation, which the writer of the Life prefixed to
his Works, who seems to have been well informed of facts, though he
may sometimes err in chronology, has delivered as indubitably
certain:

"He found Dr. Andrews, Bishop of Winchester, and Dr. Neale, Bishop
of Durham, standing behind his Majesty's chair; and there happened
something extraordinary," continues this writer, "in the
conversation those prelates had with the king, on which Mr. Waller
did often reflect.  His Majesty asked the bishops, 'My Lords, cannot
I take my subject's money, when I want it, without all this
formality of Parliament?'  The Bishop of Durham readily answered,
'God forbid, Sir, but you should:  you are the breath of our
nostrils.'  Whereupon the king turned and said to the Bishop of
Winchester, 'Well, my Lord, what say you?'  'Sir,' replied the
bishop, 'I have no skill to judge of Parliamentary cases.  The king
answered, 'No put-offs, my Lord; answer me presently.'  'Then, Sir,'
said he, 'I think it is lawful for you to take my brother Neale's
money; for he offers it.'  Mr. Waller said the company was pleased
with this answer, and the wit of it seemed to affect the king; for a
certain lord coming in soon after, his Majesty cried out, 'Oh, my
lord, they say you lig with my Lady.'  'No, Sir,' says his lordship
in confusion; 'but I like her company, because she has so much wit.'
'Why, then,' says the king, 'do you not lig with my Lord of
Winchester there?'"

Waller's political and poetical life began nearly together.  In his
eighteenth year he wrote the poem that appears first in his works,
on "The Prince's Escape at St. Andero:" a piece which justifies the
observation made by one of his editors, that he attained, by a
felicity like instinct, a style which perhaps will never be
obsolete; and that "were we to judge only by the wording, we could
not know what was wrote at twenty, and what at' fourscore."  His
versification was, in his first essay, such as it appears in his
last performance.  By the perusal of Fairfax's translation of Tasso,
to which, as Dryden relates, he confessed himself indebted for the
smoothness of his numbers, and by his own nicety of observation, he
had already formed such a system of metrical harmony as he never
afterwards much needed, or much endeavoured, to improve.  Denham
corrected his numbers by experience, and gained ground gradually
upon the ruggedness of his age; but what was acquired by Denham was
inherited by Waller.

The next poem, of which the subject seems to fix the time, is
supposed by Mr. Fenton to be the "Address to the Queen," which he
considers as congratulating her arrival, in Waller's twentieth year.
He is apparently mistaken; for the mention of the nation's
obligations to her frequent pregnancy proves that it was written
when she had brought many children.  We have therefore no date of
any other poetical production before that which the murder of the
Duke of Buckingham occasioned; the steadiness with which the king
received the news in the chapel deserved indeed to be rescued from
oblivion.

Neither of these pieces that seem to carry their own dates could
have been the sudden effusion of fancy.  In the verses on the
prince's escape, the prediction of his marriage with the Princess of
France must have been written after the event; in the other, the
promises of the king's kindness to the descendants of Buckingham,
which could not be properly praised till it had appeared by its
effects, show that time was taken for revision and improvement.  It
is not known that they were published till they appeared long
afterwards with other poems.

Waller was not one of those idolaters of praise who cultivate their
minds at the expense of their fortunes.  Rich as he was by
inheritance, he took care early to grow richer, by marrying Mrs.
Banks, a great heiress in the city, whom the interest of the court
was employed to obtain for Mr. Crofts.  Having brought him a son,
who died young, and a daughter, who was afterwards married to Mr.
Dormer, of Oxfordshire, she died in childbed, and left him a widower
of about five-and-twenty, gay and wealthy, to please himself with
another marriage.

Being too young to resist beauty, and probably too vain to think
himself resistible, he fixed his heart, perhaps half-fondly and
half-ambitiously, upon the Lady Dorothea Sidney, eldest daughter of
the Earl of Leicester, whom he courted by all the poetry in which
Sacharissa is celebrated; the name is derived from the Latin
appellation of "sugar," and implies, if it means anything, a
spiritless mildness, and dull good-nature, such as excites rather
tenderness and esteem, and such as, though always treated with
kindness, is never honoured or admired.

Yet he describes Sacharissa as a sublime predominating beauty, of
lofty charms, and imperious influence, on whom he looks with
amazement rather than fondness, whose chains he wishes, though in
vain, to break, and whose presence is "wine" that "inflames to
madness."

His acquaintance with this high-born dame gave wit no opportunity of
boasting its influence; she was not to be subdued by the powers of
verse, but rejected his addresses, it is said, with disdain, and
drove him away to solace his disappointment with Amoret or Phillis.
She married in 1639 the Earl of Sunderland, who died at Newbury in
the king's cause; and, in her old age, meeting somewhere with
Waller, asked him, when he would again write such verses upon her;
"When you are as young, Madam," said he, "and as handsome as you
were then."

In this part of his life it was that he was known to Clarendon,
among the rest of the men who were eminent in that age for genius
and literature; but known so little to his advantage, that they who
read his character will not much condemn Sacharissa, that she did
not descend from her rank to his embraces, nor think every
excellence comprised in wit.

The lady was, indeed, inexorable; but his uncommon comprised in wit,
qualifications, though they had no power upon her, recommended him
to the scholars and statesmen; and undoubtedly many beauties of that
time, however they might receive his love, were proud of his
praises.  Who they were, whom he dignifies with poetical names,
cannot now be known.  Amoret, according to Mr. Fenton, was the Lady
Sophia Murray.  Perhaps by traditions preserved in families more may
be discovered.

From the verses written at Penshurst, it has been collected that he
diverted his disappointment by a voyage; and his biographers, from
his poem on the Whales, think it not improbable that he visited the
Bermudas; but it seems much more likely that he should amuse himself
with forming an imaginary scene, than that so important an incident,
as a visit to America, should have been left floating in conjectural
probability.

From his twenty-eighth to his thirty-fifth year, he wrote his pieces
on the Reduction of Sallee; on the Reparation of St. Paul's; to the
King on his Navy; the Panegyric on the Queen Mother; the two poems
to the Earl of Northumberland; and perhaps others, of which the time
cannot be discovered.

When he had lost all hopes of Sacharissa, he looked round him for an
easier conquest, and gained a lady of the family of Bresse, or
Breaux.  The time of his marriage is not exactly known.  It has not
been discovered that his wife was won by his poetry; nor is anything
told of her, but that she brought him many children.  He doubtless
praised some whom he would have been afraid to marry, and perhaps
married one whom he would have been ashamed to praise.  Many
qualities contribute to domestic happiness, upon which poetry has no
colours to bestow; and many airs and sallies may delight
imagination, which he who flatters them never can approve.  There
are charms made only for distant admiration.  No spectacle is nobler
than a blaze.

Of this wife, his biographers have recorded that she gave him five
sons and eight daughters.

During the long interval of Parliament, he is represented as living
among those with whom it was most honourable to converse, and
enjoying an exuberant fortune with that independence and liberty of
speech and conduct which wealth ought always to produce.  He was,
however, considered as the kinsman of Hampden, and was therefore
supposed by the courtiers not to favour them.

When the Parliament was called in 1640, it appeared that Waller's
political character had not been mistaken.  The king's demand of a
supply produced one of those noisy speeches which disaffection and
discontent regularly dictate; a speech filled with hyperbolical
complaints of imaginary grievances:  "They," says he, "who think
themselves already undone, can never apprehend themselves in danger;
and they who have nothing left can never give freely."  Political
truth is equally in danger from the praises of courtiers, and the
exclamations of patriots.

He then proceeds to rail at the clergy, being sure at that time of a
favourable audience.  His topic is such as will always serve its
purpose; an accusation of acting and preaching only for preferment:
and he exhorts the Commons "carefully" to "provide" for their
"protection against Pulpit Law."

It always gratifies curiosity to trace a sentiment.  Waller has in
his speech quoted Hooker in one passage; and in another has copied
him, without quoting.  "Religion," says Waller, "ought to be the
first thing in our purpose and desires; but that which is first in
dignity is not always to precede in order of time; for well-being
supposes a being; and the first impediment which men naturally
endeavour to remove, is the want of those things without which they
cannot subsist.  God first assigned unto Adam maintenance of life,
and gave him a title to the rest of the creatures before he
appointed a law to observe."

"God first assigned Adam," says Hooker, "maintenance of life, and
then appointed him a law to observe.  True it is, that the kingdom
of God must be the first thing in our purpose and desires; but
inasmuch as a righteous life presupposeth life, inasmuch as to live
virtuously it is impossible, except we live; therefore the first
impediment which naturally we endeavour to remove is penury, and
want of things without which we cannot live."

The speech is vehement; but the great position, that grievances
ought to be redressed before supplies are granted, is agreeable
enough to law and reason:  nor was Waller, if his biographer may be
credited, such an enemy to the king, as not to wish his distresses
lightened; for he relates, "that the king sent particularly to
Waller, to second his demand of some subsidies to pay off the army,
and Sir Henry Vane objecting against first voting a supply, because
the king would not accept unless it came up to his proportion, Mr.
Waller spoke earnestly to Sir Thomas Jermyn, comptroller of the
household, to save his master from the effects of so bold a falsity;
'for,' he said, 'I am but a country gentleman, and cannot pretend to
know the king's mind:' but Sir Thomas durst not contradict the
secretary; and his son, the Earl of St. Albans, afterwards told Mr.
Waller, that his father's cowardice ruined the king."

In the Long Parliament, which, unhappily for the nation, met Nov. 3,
1640, Waller represented Agmondesham the third time; and was
considered by the discontented party as a man sufficiently trusty
and acrimonious to be employed in managing the prosecution of Judge
Crawley, for his opinion in favour of ship-money; and his speech
shows that he did not disappoint their expectations.  He was
probably the more ardent, as his uncle Hampden had been particularly
engaged in the dispute, and, by a sentence which seems generally to
be thought unconstitutional, particularly injured.

He was not, however, a bigot to his party, nor adopted all their
opinions.  When the great question, whether Episcopacy ought to be
abolished, was debated, he spoke against the innovation so coolly,
so reasonably, and so firmly, that it is not without great injury to
his name that his speech, which was as follows, has been hitherto
omitted in his works:

"There is no doubt but the sense of what this nation had suffered
from the present bishops hath produced these complaints; and the
apprehensions men have of suffering the like, in time to come, make
so many desire the taking away of Episcopacy:  but I conceive it is
possible that we may not, now, take a right measure of the minds of
the people by their petitions; for, when they subscribed them, the
bishops were armed with a dangerous commission of making new canons,
imposing new oaths, and the like; but now we have disarmed them of
that power.  These petitioners lately did look upon Episcopacy as a
beast armed with horns and claws; but now that we have cut and pared
them (and may, if we see cause, yet reduce it into narrower bounds),
it may, perhaps, be more agreeable.  Howsoever, if they be still in
passion, it becomes us soberly to consider the right use and
antiquity thereof; and not to comply further with a general desire,
than may stand with a general good.

"We have already showed that Episcopacy and the evils thereof are
mingled like water and oil; we have also, in part, severed them; but
I believe you will find, that our laws and the present government of
the Church are mingled like wine and water; so inseparable, that the
abrogation of, at least, a hundred of our laws is desired in these
petitions.  I have often heard a noble answer of the Lords,
commended in this House, to a proposition of like nature, but of
less consequence; they gave no other reason of their refusal but
this, 'Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae:' it was the bishops who so
answered them; and it would become the dignity and wisdom of this
House to answer the people, now, with a 'Nolumus mutare.'

"I see some are moved with a number of hands against the bishops;
which, I confess, rather inclines me to their defence; for I look
upon Episcopacy as a counterscarp, or outwork; which, if it be taken
by this assault of the people, and, withal, this mystery once
revealed, 'that we must deny them nothing when they ask it thus in
troops,' we may, in the next place, have as hard a task to defend
our property, as we have lately had to recover it from the
Prerogative.  If, by multiplying hands and petitions, they prevail
for an equality in things ecclesiastical, the next demand perhaps
may be Lex Agraria, the like equality in things temporal.

"The Roman story tells us, that when the people began to flock about
the Senate, and were more curious to direct and know what was done,
than to obey, that Commonwealth soon came to ruin; their Legem
regare grew quickly to be a Legem ferre:  and after, when their
legions had found that they could make a Dictator, they never
suffered the Senate to have a voice any more in such election.

"If these great innovations proceed, I shall expect a flat and level
in learning too, as well as in Church preferments:  Hones alit
Artes.  And though it be true, that grave and pious men do study for
learning-sake, and embrace virtue for itself; yet it is true, that
youth, which is the season when learning is gotten, is not without
ambition; nor will ever take pains to excel in anything, when there
is not some hope of excelling others in reward and dignity.

"There are two reasons chiefly alleged against our Church
government.

"First, Scripture, which, as some men think, points out another
form.

"Second, the abuses of the present superiors.

"For Scripture, I will not dispute it in this place; but I am
confident that, whenever an equal division of lands and goods shall
be desired, there will be as many places in Scripture found out,
which seem to favour that, as there are now alleged against the
prelacy or preferment of the Church.  And, as for abuses, when you
are now in the remonstrance told what this and that poor man hath
suffered by the bishops, you may be presented with a thousand
instances of poor men that have received hard measure from their
landlords; and of worldly goods abused, to the injury of others, and
disadvantage of the owners.

"And therefore, Mr. Speaker, my humble motion is that we may settle
men's minds herein; and by a question, declare our resolution, 'to
reform,' that is, 'not to abolish, Episcopacy.'"

It cannot but be wished that he, who could speak in this manner, had
been able to act with spirit and uniformity.

When the Commons begun to set the royal authority at open defiance,
Waller is said to have withdrawn from the House, and to have
returned with the king's permission; and, when the king set up his
standard, he sent him a thousand broad-pieces.  He continued,
however, to sit in the rebellious conventicle; but "spoke," says
Clarendon, "with great sharpness and freedom, which, now there was
no danger of being out-voted, was not restrained; and therefore used
as an argument against those who were gone upon pretence that they
were not suffered to deliver their opinion freely in the House,
which could not be believed, when all men knew what liberty Mr.
Waller took, and spoke every day with impunity against the sense and
proceedings of the House."

Waller, as he continued to sit, was one of the commissioners
nominated by the Parliament to treat with the king at Oxford; and
when they were presented, the king said to him, "Though you are the
last, you are not the lowest nor the least in my favour."
Whitelock, who, being another of the commissioners, was witness of
this kindness, imputes it to the king's knowledge of the plot, in
which Waller appeared afterwards to have been engaged against the
Parliament.  Fenton, with equal probability, believes that his
attempt to promote the royal cause arose from his sensibility of the
king's tenderness.  Whitelock says nothing of his behaviour at
Oxford:  he was sent with several others to add pomp to the
commission, but was not one of those to whom the trust of treating
was imparted.

The engagement, known by the name of Waller's plot, was soon
afterwards discovered.  Waller had a brother-in-law, Tomkyns, who
was clerk of the queen's council, and at the same time had a very
numerous acquaintance, and great influence, in the city.  Waller and
he, conversing with great confidence, told both their own secrets
and those of their friends; and, surveying the wide extent of their
conversation, imagined that they found in the majority of all ranks
great disapprobation of the violence of the Commons, and
unwillingness to continue the war.  They knew that many favoured the
king, whose fear concealed their loyalty; and many desired peace,
though they durst not oppose the clamour for war; and they imagined
that, if those who had these good intentions should be informed of
their own strength, and enabled by intelligence to act together,
they might overpower the fury of sedition, by refusing to comply
with the ordinance for the twentieth part, and the other taxes
levied for the support of the rebel army, and by uniting great
numbers in a petition for peace.  They proceeded with great caution.
Three only met in one place, and no man was allowed to impart the
plot to more than two others; so that, if any should be suspected or
seized, more than three could not be endangered.

Lord Conway joined in the design, and, Clarendon imagines,
incidentally mingled, as he was a soldier, some martial hopes or
projects, which however were only mentioned, the main design being
to bring the loyal inhabitants to the knowledge of each other; for
which purpose there was to be appointed one in every district, to
distinguish the friends of the king, the adherents to the
Parliament, and the neutrals.  How far they proceeded does not
appear; the result of their inquiry, as Pym declared, was, that
within the walls, for one that was for the Royalists, there were
three against them; but that without the walls, for one that was
against them, there were five for them.  Whether this was said from
knowledge or guess, was perhaps never inquired.

It is the opinion of Clarendon, that in Waller's plan no violence or
sanguinary resistance was comprised; that he intended only to abate
the confidence of the rebels by public declarations, and to weaken
their powers by an opposition to new supplies.  This, in calmer
times, and more than this, is done without fear; but such was the
acrimony of the Commons, that no method of obstructing them was
safe.

About this time another design was formed by Sir Nicholas Crispe, a
man of loyalty, that deserves perpetual remembrance; when he was a
merchant in the city, he gave and procured the king, in his
exigencies, a hundred thousand pounds; and, when he was driven from
the Exchange, raised a regiment, and commanded it.

Sir Nicholas flattered himself with an opinion, that some
provocation would so much exasperate, or some opportunity so much
encourage, the king's friends in the city, that they would break out
in open resistance, and would then want only a lawful standard, and
an authorised commander; and extorted from the king, whose judgment
too frequently yielded to importunity, a commission of array,
directed to such as he thought proper to nominate, which was sent to
London by the Lady Aubigny.  She knew not what she carried, but was
to deliver it on the communication of a certain token which Sir
Nicholas imparted.

This commission could be only intended to lie ready till the time
should require it.  To have attempted to raise any forces would have
been certain destruction; it could be of use only when the forces
should appear.  This was, however, an act preparatory to martial
hostility.

Crispe would undoubtedly have put an end to the session of
Parliament, had his strength been equal to his zeal; and out of the
design of Crispe, which involved very little danger, and that of
Waller, which was an act purely civil, they compounded a horrid and
dreadful plot.

The discovery of Waller's design is variously related.

In "Clarendon's History" it is told, that a servant of Tomkyns,
lurking behind the hangings when his master was in conference with
Waller, heard enough to qualify him for an informer, and carried his
intelligence to Pym.

A manuscript, quoted in the "Life of Waller," relates, that "he was
betrayed by his sister Price, and her Presbyterian chaplain Mr.
Goode, who stole some of his papers; and if he had not strangely
dreamed the night before, that his sister had betrayed him, and
thereupon burnt the rest of his papers by the fire that was in his
chimney, he had certainly lost his life by it."  The question cannot
be decided.  It is not unreasonable to believe that the men in
power, receiving intelligence from the sister, would employ the
servant of Tomkyns to listen at the conference, that they might
avoid an act so offensive as that of destroying the brother by the
sister's testimony.

The plot was published in the most terrific manner.

On the 31st of May (1643), at a solemn fast, when they were
listening to the sermon, a messenger entered the church, and
communicated his errand to Pym, who whispered it to others that were
placed near him, and then went with them out of the church, leaving
the rest in solicitude and amazement.  They immediately sent guards
to proper places, and that night apprehended Tomkyns and Waller;
having yet traced nothing but that letters had been intercepted,
from which it appears that the Parliament and the city were soon to
be delivered into the hands of the cavaliers.

They perhaps yet knew little themselves, beyond some general and
indistinct notices.  "But Waller," says Clarendon, "was so
confounded with fear, that he confessed whatever he had heard, said,
thought, or seen; all that he knew of himself, and all that he
suspected of others, without concealing any person of what degree or
quality soever, or any discourse which he had ever upon any occasion
entertained with them; what such and such ladies of great honour, to
whom, upon the credit of his wit and great reputation, he had been
admitted, had spoken to him in their chambers upon the proceedings
in the Houses, and how they had encouraged him to oppose them; what
correspondence and intercourse they had with some Ministers of State
at Oxford, and how they had conveyed all intelligence thither."  He
accused the Earl of Portland and Lord Conway as co-operating in the
transaction; and testified that the Earl of Northumberland had
declared himself disposed in favour of any attempt that might check
the violence of the Parliament, and reconcile them to the king.

He undoubtedly confessed much which they could never have
discovered, and perhaps somewhat which they would wish to have been
suppressed; for it is inconvenient in the conflict of factions, to
have that disaffection known which cannot safely be punished.

Tomkyns was seized on the same night with Waller, and appears
likewise to have partaken of his cowardice; for he gave notice of
Crispe's commission of array, of which Clarendon never knew how it
was discovered.  Tomkyns had been sent with the token appointed, to
demand it from Lady Aubigny, and had buried it in his garden, where,
by his direction, it was dug up; and thus the rebels obtained, what
Clarendon confesses them to have had, the original copy.

It can raise no wonder that they formed one plot out of these two
designs, however remote from each other, when they saw the same
agent employed in both, and found the commission of array in the
hands of him who was employed in collecting the opinions and
affections of the people.

Of the plot, thus combined, they took care to make the most.  They
sent Pym among the citizens, to tell them of their imminent danger
and happy escape; and inform them, that the design was, "to seize
the Lord Mayor and all the Committee of Militia, and would not spare
one of them."  They drew up a vow and covenant, to be taken by every
member of either House, by which he declared his detestation of all
conspiracies against the Parliament, and his resolution to detect
and oppose them.  They then appointed a day of thanksgiving for this
wonderful delivery; which shut out, says Clarendon, all doubts
whether there had been such a deliverance, and whether the plot was
real or fictitious.

On June 11, the Earl of Portland and Lord Conway were committed, one
to the custody of the mayor, and the other of the sheriff; but their
lands and goods were not seized.

Waller was still to immerse himself deeper in ignominy.  The Earl of
Portland and Lord Conway denied the charge; and there was no
evidence against them but the confession of Waller, of which
undoubtedly many would be inclined to question the veracity.  With
these doubts he was so much terrified, that he endeavoured to
persuade Portland to a declaration like his own, by a letter extant
in Fenton's edition.  "But for me," says he, "you had never known
anything of this business, which was prepared for another; and
therefore I cannot imagine why you should hide it so far as to
contract your own ruin by concealing it, and persisting unreasonably
to hide that truth, which, without you, already is, and will every
day be made more manifest.  Can you imagine yourself bound in honour
to keep that secret, which is already revealed by another? or
possible it should still be a secret, which is known to one of the
other sex?--If you persist to be cruel to yourself for their sakes
who deserve it not, it will nevertheless be made appear, ere long, I
fear, to your ruin.  Surely, if I had the happiness to wait on you,
I could move you to compassionate both yourself and me, who,
desperate as my case is, am desirous to die with the honour of being
known to have declared the truth.  You have no reason to contend to
hide what is already revealed--inconsiderately to throw away
yourself, for the interest of others, to whom you are less obliged
than you are aware of."

This persuasion seems to have had little effect.  Portland sent
(June 29) a letter to the Lords, to tell them that he "is in
custody, as he conceives, without any charge; and that, by what Mr.
Waller hath threatened him with since he was imprisoned, he doth
apprehend a very cruel, long, and ruinous restraint:- He therefore
prays, that he may not find the effects of Mr. Waller's threats, a
long and close imprisonment; but may be speedily brought to a legal
trial, and then he is confident the vanity and falsehood of those
informations which have been given against him will appear."

In consequence of this letter, the Lords ordered Portland and Waller
to be confronted; when the one repeated his charge, and the other
his denial.  The examination of the plot being continued (July 1),
Thinn, usher of the House of Lords, deposed, that Mr. Waller having
had a conference with the Lord Portland in an upper room, Lord
Portland said, when he came down, "Do me the favour to tell my Lord
Northumberland, that Mr. Waller has extremely pressed me to save my
own life and his, by throwing the blame upon the Lord Conway and the
Earl of Northumberland."

Waller, in his letter to Portland, tells him of the reasons which he
could urge with resistless efficacy in a personal conference; but he
overrated his own oratory; his vehemence, whether of persuasion or
entreaty, was returned with contempt.

One of his arguments with Portland is, that the plot is already
known to a woman.  This woman was doubtless Lady Aubigny, who, upon
this occasion, was committed to custody; but who, in reality, when
she delivered the commission, knew not what it was.

The Parliament then proceeded against the conspirators, and
committed their trial to a council of war.  Tomkyns and Chaloner
were hanged near their own doors.  Tomkyns, when he came to die,
said it was a "foolish business;" and indeed there seems to have
been no hope that it should escape discovery; for, though never more
than three met at a time, yet a design so extensive must by
necessity be communicated to many who could not be expected to be
all faithful and all prudent.  Chaloner was attended at his
execution by Hugh Peters.  His crime was, that he had commission to
raise money for the king; but it appears not that the money was to
be expended upon the advancement of either Crispe's or Waller's
plot.

The Earl of Northumberland, being too great for prosecution, was
only once examined before the Lords.  The Earl of Portland and Lord
Conway persisting to deny the charge, and no testimony but Waller's
yet appearing against them, were, after a long imprisonment,
admitted to bail.  Hassel, the king's messenger, who carried the
letters to Oxford, died the night before his trial.  Hampden
[Alexander] escaped death, perhaps by the interest of his family;
but was kept in prison to the end of his life.  They whose names
were inserted in the commission of array were not capitally
punished, as it could not be proved that they had consented to their
own nomination; but they were considered as malignants, and their
estates were seized.

"Waller, though confessedly," says Clarendon, "the most guilty, with
incredible dissimulation affected such a remorse of conscience, that
his trial was put off, out of Christian compassion, till he might
recover his understanding."  What use he made of this interval, with
what liberality and success he distributed flattery and money, and
how, when he was brought (July 4) before the House, he confessed and
lamented, and submitted and implored, may be read in the "History of
the Rebellion" (B. vii.).  The speech, to which Clarendon ascribes
the preservation of his "dear-bought life," is inserted in his
works.  The great historian, however, seems to have been mistaken in
relating that "he prevailed" in the principal part of his
supplication, "not to be tried by a council of war;" for, according
to Whitelock, he was by expulsion from the House abandoned to the
tribunal which he so much dreaded, and, being tried and condemned,
was reprieved by Essex; but after a year's imprisonment, in which
time resentment grew less acrimonious, paying a fine of ten thousand
pounds, he was permitted to "recollect himself in another country."

Of his behaviour in this part of life, it is not necessary to direct
the reader's opinion.  "Let us not," says his last ingenious
biographer, "condemn him with untempered severity, because he was
not a prodigy which the world hath seldom seen, because his
character included not the poet, the orator, and the hero."

For the place of his exile he chose France, and stayed some time at
Roan, where his daughter Margaret was born, who was afterwards his
favourite, and his amanuensis.  He then removed to Paris, where he
lived with great splendour and hospitality; and from time to time
amused himself with poetry, in which he sometimes speaks of the
rebels, and their usurpation, in the natural language of an honest
man.

At last it became necessary, for his support, to sell his wife's
jewels; and being reduced, as he said, at last "to the rump-jewel,"
he solicited from Cromwell permission to return, and obtained it by
the interest of Colonel Scroop, to whom his sister was married.
Upon the remains of a fortune, which the danger of his life had very
much diminished, he lived at Hallbarn, a house built by himself very
near to Beaconsfield, where his mother resided.  His mother, though
related to Cromwell and Hampden, was zealous for the royal cause,
and, when Cromwell visited her, used to reproach him; he, in return,
would throw a napkin at her, and say he would not dispute with his
aunt; but finding in time that she acted for the king, as well as
talked, he made her a prisoner to her own daughter, in her own
house.  If he would do anything, he could not do less.

Cromwell, now Protector, received Waller, as his kinsman, to
familiar conversation.  Waller, as he used to relate, found him
sufficiently versed in ancient history; and, when any of his
enthusiastic friends came to advise or consult him, could sometimes
overhear him discoursing in the cant of the times:  but, when he
returned, he would say, "Cousin Waller, I must talk to these men in
their own way;" and resumed the common style of conversation.

He repaid the Protector for his favours (1654) by the famous
Panegyric, which has been always considered as the first of his
poetical productions.  His choice of encomiastic topics is very
judicious; for he considers Cromwell in his exaltation, without
inquiring how he attained it; there is consequently no mention of
the rebel or the regicide.  All the former part of his hero's life
is veiled with shades; and nothing is brought to view but the chief,
the governor, the defender of England's honour, and the enlarger of
her dominion.  The act of violence by which he obtained the supreme
power is lightly treated, and decently justified.  It was certainly
to be desired that the detestable band should be dissolved, which
had destroyed the Church, murdered the king, and filled the nation
with tumult and oppression; yet Cromwell had not the right of
dissolving them, for all that he had before done could be justified
only by supposing them invested with lawful authority.  But
combinations of wickedness would overwhelm the world by the
advantage which licentious principles afford, did not those, who
have long practised perfidy, grow faithless to each other.

In the poem on the War with Spain are some passages at least equal
to the best parts of the Panegyric; and, in the conclusion, the poet
ventures yet a higher flight of flattery, by recommending royalty to
Cromwell and the nation.  Cromwell was very desirous, as appears
from his conversation, related by Whitelock, of adding the title to
the power of monarchy, and is supposed to have been withheld from it
partly by fear of the army, and partly by fear of the laws, which,
when he should govern by the name of king, would have restrained his
authority.  When, therefore, a deputation was solemnly sent to
invite him to the crown, he, after a long conference, refused it,
but is said to have fainted in his coach when he parted from them.

The poem on the death of the Protector seems to have been dictated
by real veneration for his memory.  Dryden and Sprat wrote on the
same occasion; but they were young men, struggling into notice, and
hoping for some favour from the ruling party.  Waller had little to
expect; he had received nothing but his pardon from Cromwell, and
was not likely to ask anything from those who should succeed him.

Soon afterwards, the Restoration supplied him with another subject;
and he exerted his imagination, his elegance, and his melody, with
equal alacrity, for Charles the Second.  It is not possible to read,
without some contempt and indignation, poems of the same author,
ascribing the highest degree of "power and piety" to Charles the
First, then transferring the same "power and piety" to Oliver
Cromwell; now inviting Oliver to take the Crown, and then
congratulating Charles the Second on his recovered right.  Neither
Cromwell nor Charles could value his testimony as the effect of
conviction, or receive his praises as effusions of reverence; they
could consider them but as the labour of invention, and the tribute
of dependence.

Poets, indeed, profess fiction; but the legitimate end of fiction is
the conveyance of truth, and he that has flattery ready for all whom
the vicissitudes of the world happen to exalt must be scorned as a
prostituted mind, that may retain the glitter of wit, but has lost
the dignity of virtue.

The Congratulation was considered as inferior in poetical merit to
the Panegyric; and it is reported that, when the king told Waller of
the disparity, he answered, "Poets, Sir, succeed better in fiction
than in truth."

The Congratulation is indeed not inferior to the Panegyric, either
by decay of genius, or for want of diligence, but because Cromwell
had done much and Charles had done little.  Cromwell wanted nothing
to raise him to heroic excellence but virtue, and virtue his poet
thought himself at liberty to supply.  Charles had yet only the
merit of struggling without success, and suffering without despair.
A life of escapes and indigence could supply poetry with no splendid
images.

In the first Parliament summoned by Charles the Second (March 8,
1661), Waller sat for Hastings, in Sussex, and served for different
places in all the Parliaments of that reign.  In a time when fancy
and gaiety were the most powerful recommendations to regard, it is
not likely that Waller was forgotten.  He passed his time in the
company that was highest, both in rank and wit, from which even his
obstinate sobriety did not exclude him.  Though he drank water, he
was enabled by his fertility of mind to heighten the mirth of
Bacchanalian assemblies; and Mr. Saville said, that "no man in
England should keep him company without drinking but Ned Waller."

The praise given him by St. Evremond is a proof of his reputation;
for it was only by his reputation that he could be known, as a
writer, to a man who, though he lived a great part of a long life
upon an English pension, never consented to understand the language
of the nation that maintained him.

In Parliament, "he was," says Burnet, "the delight of the House, and
though old, said the liveliest things of any among them."  This,
however, is said in his account of the year seventy-five, when
Waller was only seventy.  His name as a speaker occurs often in
Grey's Collections, but I have found no extracts that can be more
quoted as exhibiting sallies of gaiety than cogency of argument.

He was of such consideration, that his remarks were circulated and
recorded.  When the Duke of York's influence was high, both in
Scotland and England, it drew, says Burnet, a lively reflection from
Waller, the celebrated wit.  He said, "The House of Commons had
resolved that the duke should not reign after the king's death:  but
the king, in opposition to them, had resolved that he should reign
even in his life."  If there appear no extraordinary "liveliness" in
this "remark," yet its reception proves its speaker to have been a
"celebrated wit," to have had a name which men of wit were proud of
mentioning.

He did not suffer his reputation to die gradually away, which may
easily happen in a long life, but renewed his claim to poetical
distinction from time to time, as occasions were offered, either by
public events or private incidents; and, contenting himself with the
influence of his Muse, or loving quiet better than influence, he
never accepted any office of magistracy.

He was not, however, without some attention to his fortune, for he
asked from the king (in 1665) the provostship of Eton College, and
obtained it; but Clarendon refused to put the seal to the grant,
alleging that it could be held only by a clergyman.  It is known
that Sir Henry Wotton qualified himself for it by deacon's orders.

To this opposition, the Biographia imputes the violence and acrimony
with which Waller joined Buckingham's faction in the prosecution of
Clarendon.  The motive was illiberal and dishonest, and showed that
more than sixty years had not been able to teach him morality.  His
accusation is such as conscience can hardly be supposed to dictate
without the help of malice.  "We were to be governed by Janizaries
instead of Parliaments, and are in danger from a worse plot than
that of the fifth of November; then, if the Lords and Commons had
been destroyed, there had been a succession; but here both had been
destroyed for ever."  This is the language of a man who is glad of
an opportunity to rail, and ready to sacrifice truth to interest at
one time, and to anger at another.

A year after the chancellor's banishment, another vacancy gave him
encouragement for another petition, which the king referred to the
Council, who, after hearing the question argued by lawyers for three
days, determined that the office could be held only by a clergyman,
according to the Act of Uniformity, since the provosts had always
received institution as for a parsonage from the Bishops of Lincoln.
The king then said he could not break the law which he had made; and
Dr. Zachary Cradock, famous for a single sermon, at most for two
sermons, was chosen by the Fellows.

That he asked anything else is not known; it is certain that he
obtained nothing, though he continued obsequious to the court
through the rest of Charles's reign.

At the accession of King James (in 1685) he was chosen for
Parliament, being then fourscore, at Saltash, in Cornwall; and wrote
a Presage of the Downfall of the Turkish Empire, which he presented
to the king on his birthday.  It is remarked, by his commentator
Fenton, that in reading Tasso he had early imbibed a veneration for
the heroes of the Holy War, and a zealous enmity to the Turks, which
never left him.  James, however, having soon after begun what he
thought a holy war at home, made haste to put all molestation of the
Turks out of his power.

James treated him with kindness and familiarity, of which instances
are given by the writer of his life.  One day, taking him into the
closet, the king asked him how he liked one of the pictures:  "My
eyes," said Waller, "are dim, and I do not know it."  The king said
it was the Princess of Orange.  "She is," said Waller, "like the
greatest woman in the world."  The king asked who was that; and was
answered, Queen Elizabeth.  "I wonder," said the king, "you should
think so; but I must confess she had a wise council."  "And, Sir,"
said Waller, "did you ever know a fool choose a wise one?"  Such is
the story, which I once heard of some other man.  Pointed axioms,
and acute replies, fly loose about the world, and are assigned
successively to those whom it may be the fashion to celebrate.

When the king knew that he was about to marry his daughter to Dr.
Birch, a clergyman, he ordered a French gentleman to tell him that
"the king wondered he could think of marrying his daughter to a
falling church."  "The king," said Waller, "does me great honour in
taking notice of my domestic affairs; but I have lived long enough
to observe that this falling church has got a trick of rising
again."

He took notice to his friends of the king's conduct; and said that
"he would be left like a whale upon the strand."  Whether he was
privy to any of the transactions that ended in the revolution is not
known.  His heir joined the Prince of Orange.

Having now attained an age beyond which the laws of nature seldom
suffer life to be extended, otherwise than by a future state, he
seems to have turned his mind upon preparation for the decisive
hour, and therefore consecrated his poetry to devotion.  It is
pleasing to discover that his piety was without weakness; that his
intellectual powers continued vigorous; and that the lines which he
composed when "he, for age, could neither read nor write," are not
inferior to the effusions of his youth.

Towards the decline of life he bought a small house, with a little
land, at Coleshill; and said "he should be glad to die, like the
stag, where he was roused."  This, however, did not happen.  When he
was at Beaconsfield, he found his legs grow tumid:  he went to
Windsor, where Sir Charles Scarborough then attended the king, and
requested him, as both a friend and physician, to tell him "what
that swelling meant."  "Sir," answered Scarborough, "your blood will
run no longer."  Waller repeated some lines of Virgil, and went home
to die.

As the disease increased upon him, he composed himself for his
departure; and calling upon Dr. Birch to give him the holy
sacrament, he desired his children to take it with him, and made an
earnest declaration of his faith in Christianity.  It now appeared
what part of his conversation with the great could be remembered
with delight.  He related, that being present when the Duke of
Buckingham talked profanely before King Charles, he said to him, "My
lord, I am a great deal older than your grace and have, I believe,
heard more arguments for atheism than ever your grace did; but I
have lived long enough to see there is nothing in them; and so, I
hope, your grace will."

He died October 21, 1687, and was buried at Beaconsfield, with a
monument erected by his son's executors, for which Rymer wrote the
inscription, and which I hope is now rescued from dilapidation.

He left several children by his second wife, of whom his daughter
was married to Dr. Birch.  Benjamin, the eldest son, was
disinherited, and sent to New Jersey as wanting common
understanding.  Edmund, the second son, inherited the estate, and
represented Agmondesham in parliament, but at last turned quaker.
William, the third son, was a merchant in London.  Stephen, the
fourth, was an eminent doctor of laws, and one of the commissioners
for the union.  There is said to have been a fifth, of whom no
account has descended.

The character of Waller, both moral and intellectual, has been drawn
by Clarendon, to whom he was familiarly known, with nicety, which
certainly none to whom he was not known can presume to emulate.  It
is therefore inserted here, with such remarks as others have
supplied; after which, nothing remains but a critical examination of
his poetry.

"Edmund Waller," says Clarendon, "was born to a very fair estate, by
the parsimony, or frugality, of a wise father and mother; and he
thought it so commendable an advantage, that he resolved to improve
it with his utmost care, upon which in his nature he was too much
intent; and in order to that, he was so much reserved and retired,
that he was scarcely ever heard of, till by his address and
dexterity he had gotten a very rich wife in the city, against all
the recommendation and countenance and authority of the court, which
was thoroughly engaged on the behalf of Mr. Crofts, and which used
to be successful, in that age, against any opposition.  He had the
good fortune to have an alliance and friendship with Dr. Morley, who
had assisted and instructed him in the reading many good books, to
which his natural parts and promptitude inclined him, especially the
poets; and at the age when other men used to give over writing
verses (for he was near thirty years when he first engaged himself
in that exercise, at least that he was known to do so), he surprised
the town with two or three pieces of that kind; as if a tenth Muse
had been newly born to cherish drooping poetry.  The doctor at that
time brought him into that company which was most celebrated for
good conversation, where he was received and esteemed with great
applause and respect.  He was a very pleasant discourser in earnest
and in jest, and therefore very grateful to all kind of company,
where he was not the less esteemed for being very rich.

He had been even nursed in parliaments, where he sat when he was
very young; and so, when they were resumed again (after a long
intermission) he appeared in those assemblies with great advantage;
having a graceful way of speaking, and by thinking much on several
arguments (which his temper and complexion, that had much of
melancholic, inclined him to), he seemed often to speak upon the
sudden, when the occasion had only administered the opportunity of
saying what he had thoroughly considered, which gave a great lustre
to all he said; which yet was rather of delight than weight.  There
needs no more be said to extol the excellence and power of his wit,
and pleasantness of his conversation, than that it was of magnitude
enough to cover a world of very great faults; that is, so to cover
them, that they were not taken notice of to his reproach, viz., a
narrowness in his nature to the lowest degree; an abjectness and
want of courage to support him in any virtuous undertaking; an
insinuation and servile flattery to the height, the vainest and most
imperious nature could be contented with; that it preserved and won
his life from those who most resolved to take it, and in an occasion
in which he ought to have been ambitious to have lost it; and then
preserved him again from the reproach and the contempt that was due
to him for so preserving it, and for vindicating it at such a price
that it had power to reconcile him to those whom he had most
offended and provoked; and continued to his age with that rare
felicity, that his company was acceptable where his spirit was
odious; and he was at least pitied where he was most detested."

Such is the account of Clarendon; on which it may not be improper to
make some remarks.

"He was very little known till he had obtained a rich wife in the
city."

He obtained a rich wife about the age of three-and-twenty; an age,
before which few men are conspicuous much to their advantage.  He
was now, however, in parliament and at court; and, if he spent part
of his time in privacy, it is not unreasonable to suppose that he
endeavoured the improvement of his mind as well as his fortune.

That Clarendon might misjudge the motive of his retirement is the
more probable, because he has evidently mistaken the commencement of
his poetry, which he supposes him not to have attempted before
thirty.  As his first pieces were perhaps not printed, the
succession of his compositions was not known; and Clarendon, who
cannot be imagined to have been very studious of poetry, did not
rectify his first opinion by consulting Waller's book.

Clarendon observes, that he was introduced to the wits of the age by
Dr. Morley; but the writer of his life relates that he was already
among them, when, hearing a noise in the street, and inquiring the
cause, they found a son of Ben Jonson under an arrest.  This was
Morley, whom Waller set free at the expense of one hundred pounds,
took him into the country as director of his studies, and then
procured him admission into the company of the friends of
literature.  Of this fact Clarendon had a nearer knowledge than the
biographer, and is therefore more to be credited.

The account of Waller's parliamentary eloquence is seconded by
Burnet, who, though he calls him "the delight of the House," adds,
that "he was only concerned to say that which should make him be
applauded, he never laid the business of the House to heart, being a
vain and empty, though a witty man."

Of his insinuation and flattery it is not unreasonable to believe
that the truth is told.  Ascham, in his elegant description of those
whom in modern language we term wits, says, that they are "open
flatterers, and private mockers."  Waller showed a little of both,
when, upon sight of the Duchess of Newcastle's verses on the Death
of a Stag, he declared that he would give all his own compositions
to have written them, and being charged with the exorbitance of his
adulation, answered, that "nothing was too much to be given, that a
lady might be saved from the disgrace of such a vile performance."
This, however, was no very mischievous or very unusual deviation
from truth; had his hypocrisy been confined to such transactions, he
might have been forgiven, though not praised:  for who forbears to
flatter an author or a lady?

Of the laxity of his political principles, and the weakness of his
resolution, he experienced the natural effect, by losing the esteem
of every party.  From Cromwell he had only his recall; and from
Charles the Second, who delighted in his company, he obtained only
the pardon of his relation Hampden, and the safety of Hampden's son.

As far as conjecture can be made from the whole of his writing, and
his conduct, he was habitually and deliberately a friend to
monarchy.  His deviation towards democracy proceeded from his
connexion with Hampden, for whose sake he prosecuted Crawley with
great bitterness; and the invective which he pronounced on that
occasion was so popular, that twenty thousand copies are said by his
biographer to have been sold in one day.

It is confessed that his faults still left him many friends, at
least many companions.  His convivial power of pleasing is
universally acknowledged; but those who conversed with him
intimately, found him not only passionate, especially in his old
age, but resentful; so that the interposition of friends was
sometimes necessary.

His wit and his poetry naturally connected him with the polite
writers of his time:  he was joined with Lord Buckhurst in the
translation of Corneille's Pompey; and is said to have added his
help to that of Cowley in the original draft of the Rehearsal.

The care of his fortune, which Clarendon imputes to him in a degree
little less than criminal, was either not constant or not
successful; for having inherited a patrimony of three thousand five
hundred pounds a year in the time of James the First, and augmented
at least by one wealthy marriage, he left, about the time of the
Revolution, an income of not more than twelve or thirteen hundred;
which, when the different value of money is reckoned, will be found
perhaps not more than a fourth part of what he once possessed.

Of this diminution, part was the consequence of the gifts which he
was forced to scatter, and the fine which he was condemned to pay at
the detection of his plot; and if his estate, as is related in his
life, was sequestered, he had probably contracted debts when he
lived in exile; for we are told, that at Paris he lived in
splendour, and was the only Englishman, except the Lord St. Albans,
that kept a table.

His unlucky plot compelled him to sell a thousand a year; of the
waste of the rest there is no account, except that he is confessed
by his biographer to have been a bad economist.  He seems to have
deviated from the common practice; to have been a hoarder in his
first years, and a squanderer in his last.

Of his course of studies, or choice of books, nothing is known more
than that he professed himself unable to read Chapman's translation
of Homer without rapture.  His opinion concerning the duty of a poet
is contained in his declaration, that "he would blot from his works
any line that did not contain some motive to virtue."

The characters by which Waller intended to distinguish his writing
are sprightliness and dignity; in his smallest pieces, he endeavours
to be gay; in the larger to be great.  Of his airy and light
productions, the chief source is gallantry, that attentive reverence
of female excellence which has descended to us from the Gothic ages.
As his poems are commonly occasional, and his addresses personal, he
was not so liberally supplied with grand as with soft images; for
beauty is more easily found than magnanimity.

The delicacy, which he cultivated, restrains him to a certain nicety
and caution, even when he writes upon the slightest matter.  He has,
therefore, in his whole volume, nothing burlesque, and seldom
anything ludicrous or familiar.  He seems always to do his best;
though his subjects are often unworthy of his care.

It is not easy to think without some contempt on an author, who is
growing illustrious in his own opinion by verses, at one time, "To a
Lady, who can do anything but sleep, when she pleases;" at another,
"To a Lady who can sleep when she pleases;" now, "To a Lady, on her
passing through a crowd of people;" then, "On a braid of divers
colours woven by four Ladies;" "On a tree cut in paper;" or, "To a
Lady, from whom he received the copy of verses on the paper-tree,
which, for many years, had been missing."

Genius now and then produces a lucky trifle.  We still read the Dove
of Anacreon, and Sparrow of Catullus:  and a writer naturally
pleases himself with a performance, which owes nothing to the
subject.  But compositions merely pretty have the fate of other
pretty things, and are quitted in time for something useful; they
are flowers fragrant and fair, but of short duration; or they are
blossoms to be valued only as they foretell fruits.

Among Waller's little poems are some, which their excellency ought
to secure from oblivion; as, To Amoret, comparing the different
modes of regard with which he looks on her and Sacharissa; and the
verses on Love, that begin, "Anger in hasty words or blows."

In others he is not equally successful; sometimes his thoughts are
deficient, and sometimes his expression.

The numbers are not always musical; as,


Fair Venus, in thy soft arms
   The god of rage confine:
For thy whispers are the charms
   Which only can divert his fierce design.
What though he frown, and to tumult do incline;
   Thou the flame
Kindled in his breast canst tame
With that snow which unmelted lies on thine.


He seldom indeed fetches an amorous sentiment from the depths of
science; his thoughts are for the most part easily understood, and
his images such as the superfices of nature readily supplies; he has
a just claim to popularity, because he writes to common degrees of
knowledge; and is free at least from philosophical pedantry, unless
perhaps the end of a song to the Sun may be excepted, in which he is
too much a Copernican.  To which may be added the simile of the
"palm" in the verses "on her passing through a crowd;" and a line in
a more serious poem on the Restoration, about vipers and treacle,
which can only be understood by those who happen to know the
composition of the Theriaca.

His thoughts are sometimes hyperbolical and his images unnatural


   The plants admire,
No less than those of old did Orpheus' lyre;
If she sit down, with tops all tow'rds her bow'd,
They round about her into arbours crowd;
Or if she walks, in even ranks they stand,
Like some well-marshall'd and obsequious band.


In another place:


While in the park I sing, the listening deer
Attend my passion, and forget to fear:
When to the beeches I report my flame,
They bow their heads, as if they felt the same.
To gods appealing, when I reach their bowers
With loud complaints they answer me in showers.
To thee a wild and cruel soul is given,
More deaf than trees, and prouder than the Heaven!


On the head of a stag:


O fertile head! which every year
Could such a crop of wonder bear!
The teeming earth did never bring,
So soon, so hard, so large a thing:
Which might it never have been cast,
Each year's growth added to the last,
These lofty branches had supplied
The earth's bold sons' prodigious pride:
Heaven with these engines had been scaled,
When mountains heap'd on mountains fail'd.


Sometimes having succeeded in the first part, he makes a feeble
conclusion.  In the song of "Sacharissa's and Amoret's Friendship,"
the two last stanzas ought to have been omitted.

His images of gallantry are not always in the highest degree
delicate.


Then shall my love this doubt displace
   And gain such trust that I may come
And banquet sometimes on thy face,
   But make my constant meals at home.


Some applications may be thought too remote and unconsequential; as
in the verses on the Lady Dancing:


   The sun in figures such as these
Joys with the moon to play:
   To the sweet strains they advance,
Which do result from their own spheres;
   As this nymph's dance
Moves with the numbers which she hears.


Sometimes a thought, which might perhaps fill a distich, is expanded
and attenuated till it grows weak and almost evanescent.


Chloris! since first our calm of peace
   Was frighted hence, this good we find,
Your favours with your fears increase,
   And growing mischiefs make you kind.
So the fair tree, which still preserves
   Her fruit, and state, while no wind blows,
In storms from that uprightness swerves;
   And the glad earth about her strows
   With treasure from her yielding boughs.


His images are not always distinct; as in the following passage, he
confounds LOVE as a person with LOVE as a passion:


Some other nymphs, with colours faint,
And pencil slow, may Cupid paint,
And a weak heart in time destroy;
She has a stamp, and prints the boy;
Can, with a single look, inflame
The coldest breast, the rudest tame.


His sallies of casual flattery are sometimes elegant and happy, as
that in return for the Silver Pen; and sometimes empty and trifling,
as that upon the Card torn by the Queen.  There are a few lines
written in the Duchess's Tasso, which he is said by Fenton to have
kept a summer under correction.  It happened to Waller, as to
others, that his success was not always in proportion to his labour.

Of these pretty compositions, neither the beauties nor the faults
deserve much attention.  The amorous verses have this to recommend
them, that they are less hyperbolical than those of some other
poets.  Waller is not always at the last gasp; he does not die of a
frown, nor live upon a smile.  There is, however, too much love, and
too many trifles.  Little things are made too important:  and the
Empire of Beauty is represented as exerting its influence further
than can be allowed by the multiplicity of human passions, and the
variety of human wants.  Such books, therefore, may be considered as
showing the world under a false appearance, and, so far as they
obtain credit from the young and unexperienced, as misleading
expectation, and misguiding practice.

Of his nobler and more weighty performances, the greater part is
panegyrical:  for of praise he was very lavish, as is observed by
his imitator, Lord Lansdowne:


No satyr stalks within the hallow'd ground,
But queens and heroines, kings and gods abound;
Glory and arms and love are all the sound.


In the first poem, on the danger of the prince on the coast of
Spain, there is a puerile and ridiculous mention of Arion at the
beginning; and the last paragraph, on the cable, is in part
ridiculously mean, and in part ridiculously tumid.  The poem,
however, is such as may be justly praised, without much allowance
for the state of our poetry and language at that time.

The two next poems are upon the king's behaviour at the death of
Buckingham, and upon his Navy.

He has, in the first, used the pagan deities with great propriety:


'Twas want of such a precedent as this
Made the old heathens frame their gods amiss.


In the poem on the Navy, those lines are very noble which suppose
the king's power secure against a second deluge; so noble, that it
were almost criminal to remark the mistake of "centre" for
"surface," or to say that the empire of the sea would be worth
little if it were not that the waters terminate in land.

The poem upon Sallee has forcible sentiments; but the conclusion is
feeble.  That on the Repairs of St. Paul's has something vulgar and
obvious; such as the mention of Amphion; and something violent and
harsh:  as,


So all our minds with his conspire to grace
The Gentiles' great apostle and deface
Those state obscuring sheds, that like a chain
Seem'd to confine, and fetter him again:
Which the glad saint shakes off at his command,
As once the viper from his sacred hand.
So joys the aged oak, when we divide
The creeping ivy from his injured side.


Of the two last couplets, the first is extravagant, and the second
mean.

His praise of the Queen is too much exaggerated; and the thought,
that he "saves lovers, by cutting off hope, as gangrenes are cured
by lopping the limb," presents nothing to the mind but disgust and
horror.

Of the Battle of the Summer Islands, it seems not easy to say
whether it is intended to raise terror or merriment.  The beginning
is too splendid for jest, and the conclusion too light for
seriousness.  The versification is studied, the scenes are
diligently displayed, and the images artfully amplified; but as it
ends neither in joy nor sorrow, it will scarcely be read a second
time.

The panegyric upon Cromwell has obtained from the public a very
liberal dividend of praise, which, however, cannot be said to have
been unjustly lavished; for such a series of verses had rarely
appeared before in the English language.  Of the lines some are
grand, some are graceful, and all are musical.  There is now and
then a feeble verse; or a trifling thought; but its great fault is
the choice of its hero.

The poem of the War with Spain begins with lines more vigorous and
striking than Waller is accustomed to produce.  The succeeding parts
are variegated with better passages and worse.  There is something
too farfetched in the comparison of the Spaniards drawing the
English on by saluting St. Lucar with cannon, "to lambs awakening
the lion by bleating."  The fate of the Marquis and his Lady, who
were burnt in their ship, would have moved more, had the poet not
made him die like the Phoenix, because he had spices about him, nor
expressed their affection and their end by a conceit at once false
and vulgar:


Alive, in equal flames of love they burn'd,
And now together are to ashes turn'd.


The verses to Charles, on his return, were doubtless intended to
counterbalance the panegyric on Cromwell.  If it has been thought
inferior to that with which it is naturally compared, the cause of
its deficience has been already remarked.

The remaining pieces it is not necessary to examine singly.  They
must be supposed to have faults and beauties of the same kind with
the rest.  The Sacred Poems, however, deserve particular regard;
they were the work of Waller's declining life, of those hours in
which he looked upon the fame and the folly of the time past with
the sentiments which his great predecessor Petrarch bequeathed to
posterity, upon his review of that love and poetry which have given
him immortality.

That natural jealousy which makes every man unwilling to allow much
excellence in another, always produces a disposition to believe that
the mind grows old with the body; and that he, whom we are now
forced to confess superior, is hastening daily to a level with
ourselves.  By delighting to think this of the living, we learn to
think it of the dead; and Fenton, with all his kindness for Waller,
has the luck to mark the exact time when his genius passed the
zenith, which he places at his fifty-fifth year.  This is to allot
the mind but a small portion.  Intellectual decay is doubtless not
uncommon; but it seems not to be universal.  Newton was in his
eighty-fifth year improving his chronology, a few days before his
death; and Waller appears not, in my opinion, to have lost at
eighty-two any part of his poetical power.

His Sacred Poems do not please like some of his other works; but
before the fatal fifty-five, had he written on the same subjects,
his success would hardly have been better.

It has been the frequent lamentation of good men that verse has been
too little applied to the purposes of worship, and many attempts
have been made to animate devotion by pious poetry.  That they have
very seldom attained their end is sufficiently known, and it may not
be improper to inquire why they have miscarried.

Let no pious ear be offended if I advance, in opposition to many
authorities, that poetical devotion cannot often please.  The
doctrines of religion may indeed be defended in a didactic poem; and
he, who has the happy power of arguing in verse, will not lose it
because his subject is sacred.  A poet may describe the beauty and
the grandeur of nature, the flowers of the spring, and the harvests
of autumn, the vicissitudes of the tide, and the revolutions of the
sky, and praise the Maker for his works, in lines which no reader
shall lay aside.  The subject of the disputation is not piety, but
the motives to piety; that of the description is not God, but the
works of God.

Contemplative piety, or the intercourse between God and the human
soul, cannot be poetical.  Man, admitted to implore the mercy of his
Creator, and plead the merits of his Redeemer, is already in a
higher state than poetry can confer.

The essence of poetry is invention; such invention as by producing
something unexpected, surprises and delights.  The topics of
devotion are few, and being few are universally known; but, few as
they are, they can be made no more; they can receive no grace from
novelty of sentiment, and very little from novelty of expression.

Poetry pleases by exhibiting an idea more grateful to the mind than
things themselves afford.  This effect proceeds from the display of
those parts of nature which attract, and the concealment of those
which repel, the imagination:  but religion must be shown as it is;
suppression and addition equally corrupt it; and such as it is, it
is known already.

From poetry the reader justly expects, and from good poetry always
obtains, the enlargement of his comprehension and elevation of his
fancy:  but this is rarely to be hoped by Christians from metrical
devotion.  Whatever is great, desirable, or tremendous, is comprised
in the name of the Supreme Being.  Omnipotence cannot be exalted;
Infinity cannot be amplified; Perfection cannot be improved.

The employments of pious meditation are Faith, Thanksgiving,
Repentance, and Supplication.  Faith, invariably uniform, cannot be
invested by fancy with decorations.  Thanksgiving, the most joyful
of all holy effusions, yet addressed to a Being without passions, is
confined to a few modes, and is to be felt rather then expressed.
Repentance, trembling in the presence of the judge, is not at
leisure for cadences and epithets.  Supplication of man to man may
diffuse itself through many topics of persuasion; but supplication
to God can only cry for mercy.

Of sentiments purely religious, it will be found that the most
simple expression is the most sublime.  Poetry loses its lustre and
its power, because it is applied to the decoration of something more
excellent than itself.  All that pious verse can do is to help the
memory and delight the ear, and for these purposes it may be very
useful; but it supplies nothing to the mind.  The ideas of Christian
Theology are too simple for eloquence, too sacred for fiction, and
too majestic for ornament; to recommend them by tropes and figures,
is to magnify by a concave mirror the sidereal hemisphere.

As much of Waller's reputation was owing to the softness and
smoothness of his numbers, it is proper to consider those minute
particulars to which a versifier must attend.

He certainly very much excelled in smoothness most of the writers
who were living when his poetry commenced.  The poets of Elizabeth
had attained an art of modulation, which was afterwards neglected or
forgotten.  Fairfax was acknowledged by him as his model; and he
might have studied with advantage the poem of Davies, which, though
merely philosophical, yet seldom leaves the ear ungratified.

But he was rather smooth than strong; of "the full resounding line,"
which Pope attributes to Dryden, he has given very few examples.
The critical decision has given the praise of strength to Denham,
and of sweetness to Waller.

His excellence of versification has some abatements.  He uses the
expletive "do" very frequently; and, though he lived to see it
almost universally ejected, was not more careful to avoid it in his
last compositions than in his first.  Praise had given him
confidence; and finding the world satisfied, he satisfied himself.

His rhymes are sometimes weak words:  "so" is found to make the
rhyme twice in ten lines, and occurs often as a rhyme through his
book.

His double rhymes, in heroic verse, have been censured by Mrs.
Phillips, who was his rival in the translation of Corneille's
"Pompey;" and more faults might be found were not the inquiry below
attention.

He sometimes uses the obsolete termination of verbs, as "waxeth,"
"affecteth;" and sometimes retains the final syllable of the
preterite, as "amazed," "supposed," of which I know not whether it
is not to the detriment of our language that we have totally
rejected them.

Of triplets he is sparing; but he did not wholly forbear them:  of
an Alexandrine he has given no example.

The general character of his poetry is elegance and gaiety.  He is
never pathetic, and very rarely sublime.  He seems neither to have
had a mind much elevated by nature nor amplified by learning.  His
thoughts are such as a liberal conversation and large acquaintance
with life would easily supply.  They had however then, perhaps, that
grace of novelty which they are now often supposed to want by those
who, having already found them in later books, do not know or
inquire who produced them first.  This treatment is unjust.  Let not
the original author lose by his imitators.

Praise, however, should be due before it is given.  The author of
Waller's Life ascribes to him the first practice of what Erythraeus
and some late critics call "Alliteration," of using in the same
verse many words beginning with the same letter.  But this knack,
whatever be its value, was so frequent among early writers, that
Gascoigne, a writer of the sixteenth century, warns the young poet
against affecting it; Shakespeare, in the "Midsummer Night's Dream,"
is supposed to ridicule it; and in another play the sonnet of
Holofernes fully displays it.

He borrows too many of his sentiments and illustrations from the old
mythology, for which it is vain to plead the example of ancient
poets; the deities, which they introduced so frequently, were
considered as realities, so far as to be received by the
imagination, whatever sober reason might even then determine.  But
of these images time has tarnished the splendour.  A fiction, not
only detected but despised, can never afford a solid basis to any
position, though sometimes it may furnish a transient allusion, or
slight illustration.  No modern monarch can be much exalted by
hearing that, as Hercules had his "club" he has his "navy."

But of the praise of Waller, though much may be taken away, much
will remain; for it cannot be denied that he added something to our
elegance of diction, and something to our propriety of thought; and
to him may be applied what Tasso said, with equal spirit and
justice, of himself and Guarini, when, having perused the Pastor
Fido, he cried out, "If he had not read Aminta, he had not excelled
it."

As Waller professed himself to have learned the art of versification
from Fairfax, it has been thought proper to subjoin a specimen of
his work, which, after Mr. Hoole's translation, will perhaps not be
soon reprinted.  By knowing the state in which Waller found our
poetry, the reader may judge how much he improved it.

1.

   Erminia's steed (this while) his mistresse bore
Through forrests thicke among the shadie treene,
Her feeble hand the bridle raines forelore,
Halfe in a swoune she was for fear I weene;
But her flit courser spared nere the more,
To beare her through the desart woods unseene
   Of her strong foes, that chas'd her through the plaine
   And still pursu'd, but still pursu'd in vaine.

2.

Like as the wearie hounds at last retire,
Windlesse, displeased, from the fruitlesse chace,
When the slie beast Tapisht in bush and brire,
No art nor paines can rowse out of his place:
The Christian knights so full of shame and ire
Returned backe, with faint and wearie pace!
Yet still the fearfull Dame fled, swift as winde
Nor euer staid, nor euer lookt behinde.

3.

Through thicke and thinne, all night, all day, she driued,
Withouten comfort, companie, or guide,
Her plaints and teares with euery thought reuiued,
She heard and saw her greefes, but nought beside.
But when the sunne his burning chariot diued
In Thetis wane, and wearie teame vntide,
   On Iordans sandie banks her course she staid,
   At last, there downe she light, and downe she laid

4

Her teares, her drinke; her food, her sorrowings,
This was her diet that vnhappie night;
But sleepe (that sweet repose and quiet brings)
To ease the greefes of discontented wight,
Spred forth his tender, soft, and nimble wings,
In his dull armes foulding the virgin bright;
   And loue, his mother, and the graces kept
   Strong watch and warde, while this faire Ladie slept

5.

The birds awakte her with their morning song,
Their warbling musicke pearst her tender eare,
The murmuring brookes and whistling windes among
The rattling boughes, and leaues, their parts did beare;
Her eies vnclos'd beheld the groues along
Of swaines and shepherd groomes, that dwellings weare;
   And that sweet noise, birds, winds, and waters sent,
   Prouokt again the virgin to lament.

6.

Her plaints were interrupted with a sound,
That seem'd from thickest bushes to proceed,
Some iolly shepherd sung a lustie round,
And to his voice had tun'd his oaten reed;
Thither she went, an old man there she found,
(At whose right hand his little flock did feed)
   Sat making baskets, his three sonnes among
   That learn'd their father's art, and learn'd his song.

7.

Beholding one in shining armes appeare
The seelie man and his were sore dismaid;
But sweet Erminia comforted their feare,
Her ventall vp, her visage open laid
You happie folke, of heau'n beloued deare,
Work on (quoth she) upon your harmless traid,
   These dreadfull armes I beare no warfare bring
   To your sweet toile, nor those sweet tunes yon sing.

8.

But father, since this land, these townes and towres,
Destroied are with sword, with fire and spoile,
How may it be unhurt, that you and yours
In safetie thus, applie your harmlesse toile?
My sonne (quoth he) this pore estate of ours
Is euer safe from storm of warlike broile;
   This wilderneese doth vs in safetie keepe,
   No thundering drum, no trumpet breakes our sleepe.

9.

Haply iust heau'ns defence and shield of right,
Doth loue the innocence of simple swains,
The thunderbolts on highest mountains light,
And seld or neuer strike the lower plaines;
So kings have cause to feare Bellonaes might,
Not they whose sweat and toile their dinner gaines,
   Nor ever greedie soldier was entised
   By pouertie, neglected and despised.

10.

O Pouertie, chefe of the heau'nly brood,
Dearer to me than wealth or kingly crowne!
No wish for honour, thirst of others good,
Can moue my hart, contented with mine owne:
We quench our thirst with water of this flood,
Nor fear we poison should therein be throwne;
   These little flocks of sheepe and tender goates
   Giue milke for food, and wool to make us coates.

11.

We little wish, we need but little wealth,
From cold and hunger vs to cloath and feed;
These are my sonnes, their care preserues from stealth
Their fathers flocks, nor servants moe I need:
Amid these groues I walks oft for my health,
And to the fishes, birds, and beastes give heed,
   How they are fed, in forrest, spring and lake,
   And their contentment for ensample take.

12.

Time was (for each one hath his doting time,
These siluer locks were golden tresses than)
That countrie life I hated as a crime,
And from the forrests sweet contentment ran,
To Memphis' stately pallace would I clime,
And there became the mightie Caliphes man
   And though I but a simple gardner weare,
   Yet could I marke abuses, see and heare.

13.

Entised on with hope of future gaine,
I suffred long what did my soule displease;
But when my youth was spent, my hope was vaine,
I felt my native strength at last decrease;
I gan my losse of lustie yeeres complaine,
And wisht I had enjoy'd the countries peace;
   I bod the court farewell, and with content
   My later age here have I quiet spent.

14.

While thus he spake, Erminia husht and still
His wise discourses heard, with great attention,
His speeches graue those idle fancies kill,
Which in her troubled soule bred such dissention;
After much thought reformed was her will,
Within those woods to dwell was her intention,
   Till fortune should occasion new afford,
   To turne her home to her desired Lord.

15.

She said therefore, O shepherd fortunate!
That troubles some didst whilom feele and proue.
Yet liuest now in this contented state,
Let my mishap thy thoughts to pitie moue,
To entertaine me as a willing mate
In shepherds life, which I admire and loue;
   Within these plessant groues perchance my hart,
   Of her discomforts, may vnload some part.

16.

If gold or wealth of most esteemed deare,
If iewels rich, thou diddest hold in prise,
Such store thereof, such plentie haue I seen,
As to a greedie minde might well suffice:
With that downe trickled many a siluer teare,
Two christall streames fell from her watrie eies;
   Part of her sad misfortunes then she told,
   And wept, and with her wept that shepherd old.

17.

With speeches kinde, he gan the virgin deare
Towards his cottage gently home to guide;
His aged wife there made her homely cheare,
Yet welcomde her, and plast her by her side.
The Princesse dond a poor pastoraes geare,
A kerchiefe course vpon her head she tide;
   But yet her gestures and her lookes (I gesse)
   Were such, as ill beseem'd a shepherdesse.

18.

Not those rude garments could obscure, and hide
The heau'nly beautie of her angels face,
Nor was her princely ofspring damnifide,
Or ought disparag'de, by those labours bace;
Her little flocks to pasture would she guide,
And milke her goates, and in their folds them place,
   Both cheese and butter could she make, and frame
   Her selfe to please the shepherd and his dame.



MILTON.



The life of Milton has been already written in so many forms, and
with such minute inquiry, that I might perhaps more properly have
contented myself with the addition of a few notes on Mr. Fenton's
elegant abridgment, but that a new narrative was thought necessary
to the uniformity of this edition.

John Milton was by birth a gentleman, descended from the proprietors
of Milton, near Thame, in Oxfordshire, one of whom forfeited his
estate in the times of York and Lancaster.  Which side he took I
know not; his descendant inherited no veneration for the White Rose.

His grandfather, John, was keeper of the forest of Shotover, a
zealous Papist, who disinherited his son because he had forsaken the
religion of his ancestors.

His father, John, who was the son disinherited, had recourse for his
support to the profession of a scrivener.  He was a man eminent for
his skill in music, many of his compositions being still to be
found; and his reputation in his profession was such, that he grew
rich, and retired to an estate.  He had probably more than common
literature, as his son addresses him in one of his most elaborate
Latin poems.  He married a gentlewoman of the name of Caston, a
Welsh family, by whom he had two sons, John, the poet, and
Christopher, who studied the law and adhered, as the law taught him,
to the king's party, for which he was a while persecuted; but having
by his brother's interest obtained permission to live in quiet, he
supported himself so honourably by chamber-practice, that, soon
after the accession of King James, he was knighted and made a judge;
but, his constitution being too weak for business, he retired before
any disreputable compliances became necessary.

He had likewise a daughter Anne, whom he married with a considerable
fortune to Edward Philips, who came from Shrewsbury, and rose in the
Crown-office to be secondary:  by him she had two sons, John and
Edward, who were educated by the poet, and from whom is derived the
only authentic account of his domestic manners.

John the poet, was born in his father's house, at the Spread Eagle,
in Bread Street, Dec. 9, 1608, between six and seven in the morning.
His father appears to have been very solicitous about his education;
for he was instructed at first by private tuition under the care of
Thomas Young, who was afterwards chaplain to the English merchants
at Hamburgh, and of whom we have reason to think well, since his
scholar considered him as worthy of an epistolary elegy.

He was then sent to St. Paul's school, under the care of Mr. Gill;
and removed, in the beginning of his sixteenth year, to Christ's
College, in Cambridge, where he entered a sizar, Feb. 12, 1624.

He was at this time eminently skilled in the Latin tongue; and he
himself, by annexing the dates to his first compositions, a boast of
which the learned Politian has given him an example, seems to
commend the earliness of his own proficiency to the notice of
posterity.

But the products of his vernal fertility have been surpassed by
many, and particularly by his contemporary Cowley.  Of the powers of
the mind it is difficult to form an estimate:  many have excelled
Milton in their first essays, who never rose to works like "Paradise
Lost."

At fifteen, a date which he uses till he is sixteen, he translated
or versified two Psalms, 114 and 136, which he thought worthy of the
public eye; but they raise no great expectations:  they would in any
numerous school have obtained praise, but not excited wonder.

Many of his elegies appear to have been written in his eighteenth
year, by which it appears that he had then read the Roman authors
with very nice discernment.  I once heard Mr. Hampton, the
translator of Polybius, remark, what I think is true, that Milton
was the first Englishman who, after the revival of letters, wrote
Latin verses with classic elegance.  If any exceptions can be made,
they are very few:  Haddon and Ascham, the pride of Elizabeth's
reign, however they may have succeeded in prose, no sooner attempt
verse than they provoke derision.  If we produced anything worthy of
notice before the elegies of Milton, it was perhaps Alabaster's
"Roxana."

Of these exercises, which the rules of the University required, some
were published by him in his maturer years.  They had been
undoubtedly applauded; for they were such as few can form:  yet
there is reason to suspect that he was regarded in his college with
no great fondness.  That he obtained no fellowship is certain; but
the unkindness with which he was treated was not merely negative.  I
am ashamed to relate what I fear is true, that Milton was one of the
last students in either University that suffered the public
indignity of corporal correction.

It was, in the violence of controversial hostility, objected to him,
that he was expelled:  this he steadily denies, and it was
apparently not true; but it seems plain, from his own verses to
"Diodati", that he had incurred "rustication," a temporary
dismission into the country, with perhaps the loss of a term.


Me tenet urbs reflua quam Thamesis alluit unda,
   Meque nec invitum patria dulcis habet.
Jam nec arundiferum mihi cura revisere Camum
   Nec dudum vetiti me laris angit amor. -
Nec duri libet usque minas preferre magistri,
   Caeteraque ingenio non subeunda meo.
Si sit hoc exilium patrias adiisse penates,
   Et vacuum curis otia greta sequi,
Non ego vel profugi nomen sortemve recuso,
   Laetus et exilii conditione fruor.


I cannot find any meaning but this, which even kindness and
reverence can give to the term, "vetiti laris," "a habitation from
which he is excluded;" or how "exile" can be otherwise interpreted.
He declares yet more, that he is weary of enduring "the threats of a
rigorous master, and something else which a temper like his cannot
undergo."  What was more than threat was probably punishment.  This
poem, which mentions his "exile," proves likewise that it was not
perpetual; for it concludes with a resolution of returning some time
to Cambridge.  And it may be conjectured, from the willingness with
which he has perpetuated the memory of his exile, that its cause was
such as gave him no shame.

He took both the usual degrees:  that of bachelor in 1628, and that
of master in 1632; but he left the University with no kindness for
its institution, alienated either by the injudicious severity of his
governors, or his own captious perverseness.  The cause cannot now
be known, but the effect appears in his writings.  His scheme of
education, inscribed to Hartlib, supersedes all academical
instruction, being intended to comprise the whole time which men
usually spend in literature, from their entrance upon grammar, till
they proceed, as it is called Masters of Art.  And in his discourse
"on the likeliest Way to remove Hirelings out of the Church," he
ingeniously proposes that the profits of the lands forfeited by the
act for superstitious uses should be applied to such academies all
over the land where languages and arts may be taught together that
youth may be at once brought up to a competency of learning and an
honest trade, by which means such of them as had the gift, being
enabled to support themselves (without tithes) by the latter, may,
by the help of the former, become worthy preachers.

One of his objections to academical education, as it was then
conducted, is, that men designed for orders in the church were
permitted to act plays, writhing and unboning their clergy limbs to
all the antic and dishonest gestures of Trincalos, buffoons, and
bawds, prostituting the shame of that ministry which they had, or
were near having, to the eyes of courtiers and court-ladies, their
grooms and mademoiselles.

This is sufficiently peevish in a man, who, when he mentions his
exile from the college, relates, with great luxuriance, the
compensation which the pleasures of the theatre afford him.  Plays
were therefore only criminal when they were acted by academics.

He went to the university with a design of entering into the church,
but in time altered his mind; for he declared, that whoever became a
clergyman, must "subscribe slave, and take an oath withal, which,
unless he took with a conscience that could retch, he must straight
perjure himself.  He thought it better to prefer a blameless silence
before the office of speaking, bought and begun with servitude and
forswearing."

These expressions are, I find, applied to the subscription of the
Articles; but it seems more probable that they relate to canonical
obedience.  I know not any of the Articles which seem to thwart his
opinions:  but the thoughts of obedience, whether canonical or
civil, raise his indignation.

His unwillingness to engage in the ministry, perhaps not yet
advanced to a settled resolution of declining it, appears in a
letter to one of his friends, who had reproved his suspended and
dilatory life, which he seems to have imputed to an insatiable
curiosity, and fantastic luxury of various knowledge.  To this he
writes a cool and plausible answer, in which he endeavours to
persuade him, that the delay proceeds not from the delights of
desultory study, but from the desire of obtaining more fitness for
his task; and that he goes on, "not taking thought of being late, so
it gives advantage to be more fit."

When he left the University, he returned to his father, then
residing at Horton, in Buckinghamshire, with whom he lived five
years, in which time he is said to have read all the Greek and Latin
writers.  With what limitations this universality is to be
understood, who shall inform us?

It might be supposed, that he who read so much should have done
nothing else; but Milton found time to write the "Masque of Comus,"
which was presented at Ludlow, then the residence of the Lord
President of Wales, in 1634; and had the honour of being acted by
the Earl of Bridgewater's sons and daughter.  The fiction is derived
from Homer's "Circe;" but we never can refuse to any modern the
liberty of borrowing from Homer:


  --a quo ceu fonte perenni
Vatum Pieriis ora rigantur aquis.


His next production was Lycidas, an elegy, written in 1637, on the
death of Mr. King, the son of Sir John King, Secretary for Ireland
in the time of Elizabeth, James, and Charles.  King was much a
favourite at Cambridge, and many of the wits joined to do honour to
his memory.  Milton's acquaintance with the Italian writers may be
discovered by a mixture of longer and shorter verses, according to
the rules of Tuscan poetry, and his malignity to the church by some
lines which are interpreted as threatening its extermination.

He is supposed about this time to have written his Arcades; for
while he lived at Horton he used sometimes to steal from his studies
a few days, which he spent at Harefield, the house of the Countess
Dowager of Derby, where the Arcades made part of a dramatic
entertainment.

He began now to grow weary of the country, and had some purpose of
taking chambers in the Inns of Court, when the death of his mother
set him at liberty to travel, for which he obtained his father's
consent, and Sir Henry Wotton's directions; with the celebrated
precept of prudence, i pensieri stretti, ed il viso sciolto;
"thoughts close, and looks loose."

In 1638 he left England, and went first to Paris; where, by the
favour of Lord Scudamore, he had the opportunity of visiting
Grotius, then residing at the French court as ambassador from
Christina of Sweden.  From Paris he hasted into Italy, of which he
had with particular diligence studied the language and literature;
and, though he seems to have intended a very quick perambulation of
the country, stayed two months at Florence; where he found his way
into the academies, and produced his compositions with such applause
as appears to have exalted him in his own opinion, and confirmed him
in the hope, that, "by labour and intense study, which," says he, "I
take to be my portion in this life, joined with a strong propensity
of nature," he might "leave something so written to after-times, as
they should not willingly let it die."

It appears, in all his writings, that he had the usual concomitant
of great abilities, a lofty and steady confidence in himself,
perhaps not without some contempt of others, for scarcely any man
ever wrote so much, and praised so few.  Of his praise he was very
frugal; as he set its value high, and considered his mention of a
name as a security against the waste of time, and a certain
preservative from oblivion.

At Florence he could not indeed complain that his merit wanted
distinction.  Carlo Dati presented him with an encomiastic
inscription, in the tumid lapidary style; and Francini wrote him an
ode, of which the first stanza is only empty noise; the rest are
perhaps too diffuse on common topics:  but the last is natural and
beautiful.

From Florence he went to Sienna, and from Sienna to Rome, where he
was again received with kindness by the learned and the great.
Holstenius, the keeper of the Vatican library, who had resided three
years at Oxford, introduced him to Cardinal Barberini:  and he, at a
musical entertainment, waited for him at the door, and led him by
the hand into the assembly.  Here Selvaggi praised him in a distich,
and Salsilli in a tetrastich:  neither of them of much value.  The
Italians were gainers by this literary commerce; for the encomiums
with which Milton repaid Salsilli, though not secure against a stern
grammarian, turn the balance indisputably in Milton's favour.

Of these Italian testimonies, poor as they are, he was proud enough
to publish them before his poems; though he says, he cannot be
suspected but to have known that they were said non tam de se, quam
supra se.

At Rome, as at Florence, he stayed only two months:  a time indeed
sufficient, if he desired only to ramble with an explainer of its
antiquities, or to view palaces and count pictures; but certainly
too short for the contemplation of learning, policy, or manners.

From Rome he passed on to Naples, in company of a hermit, a
companion from whom little could be expected; yet to him Milton owed
his introduction to Manso, Marquis of Villa, who had been before the
patron of Tasso.  Manso was enough delighted with his
accomplishments to honour him with a sorry distich, in which he
commends him for everything but his religion:  and Milton, in
return, addressed him in a Latin poem, which must have raised a high
opinion of English elegance and literature.

His purpose was now to have visited Sicily and Greece; but hearing
of the differences between the king and parliament, he thought it
proper to hasten home, rather than pass his life in foreign
amusements while his countrymen were contending for their rights.
He therefore came back to Rome, though the merchants informed him of
plots laid against him by the Jesuits, for the liberty of his
conversations on religion.  He had sense enough to judge that there
was no danger, and therefore kept on his way, and acted as before,
neither obtruding nor shunning controversy.  He had perhaps given
some offence by visiting Galileo, then a prisoner in the Inquisition
for philosophical heresy; and at Naples he was told by Manse, that,
by his declarations on religious questions, he had excluded himself
from some distinctions which he should otherwise have paid him.  But
such conduct, though it did not please, was yet sufficiently safe;
and Milton stayed two months more at Rome, and went on to Florence
without molestation.

From Florence he visited Lucca.  He afterwards went to Venice; and,
having sent away a collection of music and other books, travelled to
Geneva, which he probably considered as the metropolis of orthodoxy.

Here he reposed as in a congenial element, and became acquainted
with John Diodati and Frederick Spanheim, two learned professors of
divinity.  From Geneva he passed through France; and came home,
after an absence of a year and three months.

At his return he heard of the death of his friend, Charles Diodati;
a man whom it is reasonable to suppose of great merit, since he was
thought by Milton worthy of a poem, entitled "Epitaphium Damonis,"
written with the common but childish imitation of pastoral life.

 He now hired a lodging at the house of one Russel a tailor in St.
Bride's Churchyard, and undertook the education of John and Edward
Philips, his sister's sons.  Finding his rooms too little, he took a
house and garden in Aldersgate Street, which was not then so much
out of the world as it is now; and chose his dwelling at the upper
end of a passage, that he might avoid the noise of the street.  Here
he received more boys, to be boarded and instructed.

Let not our veneration for Milton forbid us to look with some degree
of merriment on great promises and small performance, on the man who
hastens home, because his countrymen are contending for their
liberty, and, when he reaches the scene of action, vapours away his
patriotism in a private boarding-school.  This is the period of his
life from which all his biographers seem inclined to shrink.  They
are unwilling that Milton should be degraded to a schoolmaster; but
since it cannot be denied that he taught boys, one finds out that he
taught for nothing, and another that his motive was only zeal for
the propagation of learning and virtue; and all tell what they do
not know to be true, only to excuse an act which no wise man will
consider as in itself disgraceful.  His father was alive; his
allowance was not ample; and he supplied its deficiencies by an
honest and useful employment

It is told, that in the art of education he performed wonders; and a
formidable list is given of the authors, Greek and Latin, that were
read in Aldersgate Street by youth between ten and fifteen or
sixteen years of age.  Those who tell or receive these stories
should consider, that nobody can be taught faster than he can learn.
The speed of the horseman must be limited by the power of his horse.
Every man that has ever undertaken to instruct others can tell what
slow advances he has been able to make, and how much patience it
requires to recall vagrant inattention, to stimulate sluggish
indifference, and to rectify absurd misapprehension.

The purpose of Milton, as it seems, was to teach something more
solid than the common literature of schools, by reading those
authors that treat of physical subjects, such as the Georgic, and
astronomical treatises of the ancients.  This was a scheme of
improvement which seems to have busied many literary projectors of
that age.  Cowley, who had more means than Milton of knowing what
was wanting to the embellishments of life, formed the same plan of
education in his imaginary college.

But the truth is, that the knowledge of external nature, and the
sciences which that knowledge requires or includes, are not the
great or the frequent business of the human mind.  Whether we
provide for action or conversation, whether we wish to be useful or
pleasing, the first requisite is the religious and moral knowledge
of right and wrong; the next is an acquaintance with the history of
mankind, and with those examples which may be said to embody truth,
and prove by events the reasonableness of opinions.  Prudence and
justice are virtues and excellences of all times and of all places;
we are perpetually moralists, but we are geometricians only by
chance.  Our intercourse with intellectual nature is necessary; our
speculations upon matter are voluntary, and at leisure.
Physiological learning is of such rare emergence, that one may know
another half his life without being able to estimate his skill in
hydrostatics or astronomy; but his moral and prudential character
immediately appears.

Those authors, therefore, are to be read at schools that supply most
axioms of prudence, most principles of moral truth, and most
materials for conversation; and these purposes are best served by
poets, orators, and historians.

Let me not be censured for this digression as pedantic or
paradoxical; for, if I have Milton against me, I have Socrates on my
side.  It was his labour to turn philosophy from the study of Nature
to speculations upon life; but the innovators whom I oppose are
turning off attention from life to nature.  They seem to think that
we are placed here to watch the growth of plants, or the motions of
the stars.  Socrates was rather of opinion that what we had to learn
was how to do good and avoid evil.


[Greek text]


Of institutions we may judge by their effects.  From this wonder-
working academy I do not know that there ever proceeded any man very
eminent for knowledge:  its only genuine product, I believe, is a
small History of Poetry, written in Latin by his nephew Philips, of
which perhaps none of my readers has ever heard.

That in his school, as in everything else which he undertook, he
laboured with great diligence, there is no reason for doubting.  One
part of his method deserves general imitation.  He was careful to
instruct his scholars in religion.  Every Sunday was spent upon
theology, of which he dictated a short system, gathered from the
writers that were then fashionable in the Dutch universities.

He set his pupils an example of hard study and spare diet; only now
and then he allowed himself to pass a day of festivity and
indulgence with some gay gentlemen of Gray's Inn.

He now began to engage in the controversies of the times, and lent
his breath to blow the flames of contention.  In 1641 he published a
treatise of Reformation in two books, against the Established
Church, being willing to help the Puritans, who were, he says,
"inferior to the Prelates in learning."

Hall, Bishop of Norwich, had published an Humble Remonstrance, in
defence of Episcopacy; to which, in 1641, five ministers, of whose
names the first letters made the celebrated word Smectymnuus, gave
their answer.  Of this answer a confutation was attempted by the
learned Usher; and to the confutation Milton published a reply,
entitled, "Of Prelatical Episcopacy, and whether it may be deduced
from the Apostolical Times, by virtue of those Testimonies which are
alleged to that purpose in some late Treatises, one whereof goes
under the Name of James, Lord Bishop of Armagh."

I have transcribed this title to show, by his contemptuous mention
of Usher, that he had now adopted the Puritanical savageness of
manners.  His next work was, "The Reason of Church Government urged
against Prelacy," by Mr. John Milton, 1642.  In this book he
discovers, not with ostentatious exultation, but with calm
confidence, his high opinion of his own powers, and promises to
undertake something, he yet knows not what, that may be of use and
honour to his country.  "This," says he, "is not to be obtained but
by devout prayer to that Eternal Spirit that can enrich with all
utterance and knowledge, and sends out His seraphim, with the
hallowed fire of His altar, to touch and purify the lips of whom He
pleases.  To this must be added, industrious and select reading,
steady observation, and insight into all seemly and generous arts
and affairs till which in some measure be compassed, I refuse not to
sustain this expectation."  From a promise like this, at once
fervid, pious, and rational, might be expected the "Paradise Lost."

He published the same year two more pamphlets, upon the same
question.  To one of his antagonists, who affirms that he was
"vomited out of the university," he answers in general terms:  "The
fellows of the college wherein I spent some years, at my parting,
after I had taken two degrees, as the manner is, signified many
times how much better it would content them that I should stay.--As
for the common approbation or dislike of that place, as now it is,
that I should esteem or disesteem myself the more for that, too
simple is the answerer, if he think to obtain with me.  Of small
practice were the physician who could not judge by what she and her
sister have of long time vomited, that the worser stuff she strongly
keeps in her stomach, but the better she is ever kecking at, and is
queasy; she vomits now out of sickness; but before it will be well
with her, she must vomit with strong physic.  The university, in the
time of her better health, and my younger judgment, I never greatly
admired, but now much less."

This is surely the language of a man who thinks that he has been
injured.  He proceeds to describe the course of his conduct, and the
train of his thoughts; and, because he has been suspected of
incontinence, gives an account of his own purity:  "That if I be
justly charged," says he, "with this crime, it may come upon me with
tenfold shame."

The style of his piece is rough, and such perhaps was that of his
antagonist.  This roughness he justifies by great examples, in a
long digression.  Sometimes he tries to be humorous:  "Lest I should
take him for some chaplain in hand, some squire of the body to his
prelate, one who serves not at the altar only, but at the court-
cupboard, he will bestow on us a pretty model of himself; and sets
me out half-a-dozen phthisical mottoes, wherever he had them,
hopping short in the measure of convulsion fits; in which labour the
agony of his wit having escaped narrowly, instead of well-sized
periods, he greets us with a quantity of thumb-ring posies.--And
thus ends this section, or rather dissection, of himself."  Such is
the controversial merriment of Milton; his gloomy seriousness is yet
more offensive.  Such is his malignity, "that hell grows darker at
his frown."

His father, after Reading was taken by Essex, came to reside in his
house, and his school increased.  At Whitsuntide, in his thirty-
fifth year, he married Mary, the daughter of Mr. Powel, a justice of
the peace in Oxfordshire.  He brought her to town with him, and
expected all the advantages of a conjugal life.  The lady, however,
seems not much to have delighted in the pleasures of spare diet and
hard study; for, as Philips relates, "having for a month led a
philosophic life, after having been used at home to a great house,
and much company and joviality, her friends, possibly by her own
desire, made earnest suit to have her company the remaining part of
the summer, which was granted, upon a promise of her return at
Michaelmas."

Milton was too busy to much miss his wife; he pursued his studies,
and now and then visited the Lady Margaret Leigh, whom he has
mentioned in one of his sonnets.  At last Michaelmas arrived; but
the lady had no inclination to return to the sullen gloom of her
husband's habitation, and therefore very willingly forgot her
promise.  He sent her a letter, but had no answer; he sent more with
the same success.  It could be alleged that letters miscarry; he
therefore despatched a messenger, being by this time too angry to go
himself.  His messenger was sent back with some contempt.  The
family of the lady were Cavaliers.

In a man whose opinion of his own merit was like Milton's, less
provocation than this might have raised violent resentment.  Milton
soon determined to repudiate her for disobedience; and, being one of
those who could easily find arguments to justify inclination,
published (in 1644) "The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce," which
was followed by the "Judgment of Martin Bucer concerning Divorce,"
and the next year his "Tetrachordon, Expositions upon the four chief
Places of Scripture which treat of Marriage."

This innovation was opposed, as might be expected, by the clergy,
who, then holding their famous assembly at Westminster, procured
that the author should be called before the Lords; "but that house,"
says Wood, "whether approving the doctrine, or not favouring his
accusers, did soon dismiss him."

There seems not to have been much written against him, nor anything
by any writer of eminence.  The antagonist that appeared is styled
by him, "A Serving Man turned Solicitor."  Howel, in his Letters,
mentions the new doctrine with contempt; and it was, I suppose,
thought more worthy of derision than of confutation.  He complains
of this neglect in two sonnets, of which the first is contemptible,
and the second not excellent.

From this time it is observed that he became an enemy to the
Presbyterians, whom he had favoured before.  He that changes his
party by his humour is not more virtuous than he that changes it by
his interest; he loves himself rather than truth.

His wife and her relations now found that Milton was not an
unresisting sufferer of injuries; and perceiving that he had begun
to put his doctrine in practice, by courting a young woman of great
accomplishments, the daughter of one Doctor Davis, who was, however,
not ready to comply, they resolved to endeavour a reunion.  He went
sometimes to the house of one Blackborough, his relation, in the
lane of St. Martin's-le-Grand, and at one of his usual visits was
surprised to see his wife come from another room, and implore
forgiveness on her knees.  He resisted her entreaties for a while;
"but partly," says Philips, "his own generous nature, more
inclinable to reconciliation than to perseverance in anger or
revenge, and partly the strong intercession of friends on both
sides, soon brought him to an act of oblivion and a fair league of
peace."  It were injurious to omit that Milton afterwards received
her father and her brothers in his own house, when they were
distressed, with other Royalists.

He published about the same time his "Areopagitica, a speech of Mr.
John Milton for the liberty of unlicensed Printing."  The danger of
such unbounded liberty, and the danger of bounding it, have produced
a problem in the science of government, which human understanding
seems hitherto unable to solve.  If nothing may be published but
what civil authority shall have previously approved, power must
always be the standard of truth; if every dreamer of innovations may
propagate his prospects, there can be no settlement; if every
murmurer at government may diffuse discontent, there can be no
peace; and if every sceptic in theology may teach his follies, there
can be no religion.  The remedy against these evils is to punish the
authors; for it is yet allowed that every society may punish, though
not prevent, the publication of opinions which that society shall
think pernicious; but this punishment, though it may crush the
author, promotes the book; and it seems not more reasonable to leave
the right of printing unrestrained because writers may be afterwards
censured, than it would be to sleep with doors unbolted, because by
our laws we can hang a thief.

But whatever were his engagements, civil or domestic poetry was
never long out of his thoughts.

About this time (1645) a collection of his Latin and English poems
appeared, in which the "Allegro," and "Penseroso," with some others,
were first published.

He had taken a larger house in Barbican for the reception of
scholars; but the numerous relations of his wife, to whom he
generously granted refuge for a while, occupied his rooms.  In time,
however, they went away; "and the house again," says Philips, "now
looked like a house of the Muses only, though the accession of
scholars was not great.  Possibly his having proceeded so far in the
education of youth may have been the occasion of his adversaries
calling him pedagogue and schoolmaster; whereas it is well known he
never set up for a public school, to teach all the young fry of a
parish, but only was willing to impart his learning and knowledge to
his relations, and the sons of gentlemen who were his intimate
friends, and that neither his writings nor his way of teaching
savoured in the least of pedantry."

Thus laboriously does his nephew extenuate what cannot be denied,
and what might be confessed without disgrace.  Milton was not a man
who could become mean by a mean employment.  This, however, his
warmest friends seem not to have found; they therefore shift and
palliate.  He did not sell literature to all comers at an open shop;
he was a chamber-milliner, and measured his commodities only to his
friends.

Philips, evidently impatient of viewing him in this state of
degradation, tells us that it was not long continued; and, to raise
his character again, has a mind to invest him with military
splendour:  "He is much mistaken," he says, "if there was not about
this time a design of making him an adjutant-general in Sir William
Waller's army.  But the new-modelling of the army proved an
obstruction to the design."  An event cannot be set at a much
greater distance than by having been only "designed, about some
time," if a man "be not much mistaken."  Milton shall be a pedagogue
no longer; for, if Philips be not much mistaken, somebody at some
time designed him for a soldier.

About the time that the army was new-modelled (1645), he removed to
a smaller house in Holborn, which opened backward into Lincoln's Inn
Fields.  He is not known to have published anything afterwards till
the king's death, when, finding his murderers condemned by the
Presbyterians, he wrote a treatise to justify it, "and to compose
the minds of the people."

He made some remarks on the Articles of Peace between Ormond and the
Irish rebels.  While he contented himself to write, he perhaps did
only what his conscience dictated; and if he did not very vigilantly
watch the influence of his own passions, and the gradual prevalence
of opinions, first willingly admitted, and then habitually indulged;
if objections, by being overlooked, were forgotten, and desire
superinduced conviction, he yet shared--only the common weakness of
mankind, and might be no less sincere than his opponents.  But, as
faction seldom leaves a man honest, however it might find him,
Milton is suspected of having interpolated the book called "Icon
Basilike," which the council of state, to whom he was now made Latin
Secretary, employed him to censure, by inserting a prayer taken from
Sidney's "Arcadia," and imputing it to the king, whom he charges, in
his "Iconoclastes," with the use of this prayer, as with a heavy
come, in the indecent language with which prosperity had emboldened
the advocates for rebellion to insult all that is venerable or
great:  "Who would have imagined so little fear in him of the true
all-seeing deity--as, immediately before his death, to pop into the
hands of the grave bishop that attended him, as a special relic of
his saintly exercises, a prayer stolen word for word from the mouth
of a heathen woman praying to a heathen god?"

The papers which the king gave to Dr. Juxon on the scaffold the
regicides took away; so that they were at least the publishers of
this prayer; and Dr. Birch, who had examined the question with great
care, was inclined to think them the forgers.  The use of it by
adaptation was innocent, and they who could so noisily censure it,
with a little extension of their malice could contrive what they
wanted to accuse.

King Charles the Second, being now sheltered in Holland, employed
Salmasius, professor of polite learning at Leyden, to write a
defence of his father and of monarchy; and, to excite his industry,
gave him, as was reported, a hundred Jacobuses.  Salmasius was a man
of skill in languages, knowledge of antiquity, and sagacity of
emendatory criticism, almost exceeding all hope of human attainment;
and having, by excessive praises, been confirmed in great confidence
of himself, though he probably had not much considered the
principles of society or the right of government, undertook the
employment without distrust of his own qualifications; and, as his
expedition in writing was wonderful, in 1649 published "Defensio
Regis."

To this Milton was required to write a sufficient answer; which he
performed (1651) in such a manner, that Hobbes declared himself
unable to decide whose language was best, or whose arguments were
worst.  In my opinion, Milton's periods are smoother, neater, and
more pointed; but he delights himself with teasing his adversary as
much as with confuting him.  He makes a foolish allusion of
Salmasius, whose doctrine he considers as servile and unmanly, to
the stream of Salmasius, which, whoever entered, left half his
virility behind him.  Salmasius was a Frenchman, and was unhappily
married to a scold.  Tu es Gallus, says Milton, et, ut aiunt, nimium
gallinaceus.  But his supreme pleasure is to tax his adversary, so
renowned for criticism, with vicious Latin.  He opens his book with
telling that he has used Persona, which, according to Milton,
signifies only a MASK, in a sense not known to the Romans, by
applying it as we apply PERSON.  But as Nemesis is always on the
watch, it is memorable that he has enforced the charge of a solecism
by an expression in itself grossly solecistical, when for one of
those supposed blunders, he says, as Ker, and I think some one
before him, has remarked, propino te grammatistis tuis vapulandum."
From vapulo, which has a passive sense, vapulandus can never be
derived.  No man forgets his original trade:  the rights of nations,
and of kings, sink into questions of grammar, if grammarians discuss
them.

Milton, when he undertook this answer, was weak of body and dim of
sight; but his will was forward, and what was wanting of health was
supplied by zeal.  He was rewarded with a thousand pounds, and his
book was much read; for paradox, recommended by spirit and elegance,
easily gains attention; and he, who told every man that he was equal
to his king, could hardly want an audience.

That the performance of Salmasius was not dispersed with equal
rapidity, or read with equal eagerness, is very credible.  He taught
only the stale doctrine of authority, and the unpleasing duty of
submission; and he had been so long not only the monarch, but the
tyrant of literature, that almost all mankind were delighted to find
him defied and insulted by a new name, not yet considered as any
one's rival.  If Christina, as is said, commended the defence of the
people, her purpose must be to torment Salmasius, who was then at
court; for neither her civil station, nor her natural character,
could dispose her to favour the doctrine, who was by birth a queen,
and by temper despotic.

That Salmasius was, from the appearance of Milton's book, treated
with neglect, there is not much proof; but to a man, so long
accustomed to admiration, a little praise of his antagonist would be
sufficiently offensive, and might incline him to leave Sweden, from
which however he was dismissed, not with any mark of contempt, but
with a train of attendants scarce less than regal.

He prepared a reply, which, left as it was imperfect, was published
by his son in the year of the Restoration.  In the beginning, being
probably most in pain for his Latinity, he endeavours to defend his
use of the word persona; but, if I remember right, he misses a
better authority than any that he has found, that of Juvenal in his
fourth satire:


- Quid agis cum dira et foedior omni
Crimine persona est?


As Salmasius reproached Milton with losing his eyes in the quarrel,
Milton delighted himself with the belief that he had shortened
Salmasius's life, and both perhaps with more malignity than reason.
Salmasius died at the Spa, Sept. 3, 1653; and, as controvertists are
commonly said to be killed by their last dispute, Milton was
flattered with the credit of destroying him.

Cromwell had now dismissed the parliament by the authority of which
he had destroyed monarchy, and commenced monarch himself, under the
title of Protector, but with kingly and more than kingly power.
That his authority was lawful, never was pretended; he himself
founded his right only in necessity; but Milton, having now tasted
the honey of public employment, would not return to hunger and
philosophy, but, continuing to exercise his office under a manifest
usurpation, betrayed to his power that liberty which he had
defended.  Nothing can be more just than that rebellion should end
in slavery; that he, who had justified the murder of his king, for
some acts which seemed to him unlawful, should now sell his
services, and his flatteries, to a tyrant, of whom it was evident
that he could do nothing lawful.

He had now been blind for some years; but his vigour of intellect
was such, that he was not disabled to discharge his office of Latin
secretary, or continue his controversies.  His mind was too eager to
be diverted, and too strong to be subdued.

About this time his first wife died in childbed, having left him
three daughters.  As he probably did not much love her, he did not
long continue the appearance of lamenting her; but after a short
time married Catharine, the daughter of one Captain Woodcock, of
Hackney, a woman doubtless educated in opinions like his own.  She
died, within a year, of childbirth, or some distemper that followed
it; and her husband honoured her memory with a poor sonnet.

The first reply to Milton's "Defensio Populi" was published in 1651,
called "Apologia pro Rege et Populo Anglicano, contra Johannis
Polypragmatici (alias Miltoni) defensionem destructivam Regis et
Populi."  Of this the author was not known; but Milton and his
nephew Philips, under whose name he published an answer so much
corrected by him, that it might be called his own, imputed it to
Bramhal; and, knowing him no friend to regicides, thought themselves
at liberty to treat him as if they had known what they only
suspected.

Next year appeared "Regii Sanguinis clamor ad Coelum."  Of this the
author was Peter du Moulin, who was afterwards prebendary of
Canterbury; but Morus, or More, a French minister, having the care
of its publication, was treated as the writer by Milton, in his
"Defensio Secunda," and overwhelmed by such violence of invective,
that he began to shrink under the tempest, and gave his persecutors
the means of knowing the true author.  Du Moulin was now in great
danger; but Milton's pride operated against his malignity; and both
he and his friends were more willing that Du Moulin should escape
than that he should be convicted of mistake.

In this second Defence he shows that his eloquence is not merely
satirical; the rudeness of his invective is equalled by the
grossness of his flattery, Deserimur, Cromuelle tu solus superes, ad
te summa nostrarum rerum, rediit, in te solo consistit, insuperabili
tuae virtuti cedimus cuncti, nemine vel obloquente, nisi qui
aequales inaequalis ipse honores sibi quaerit, aut digniori
concessos invidet, aut non intelligit nihil esse in societate
hominum magis vel Deo gratum, vel rationi consentaneum, esse in
civitate nihil aequius, nihil utilius, quam potiri rerum
dignissimum.   Eum te agnoscunt omnes, Cromuelle, ea tu civis
maximus, et gloriosissimus, dux publici consilii, exercituum
fortissimorum imperator, pater patriae gessisti.  Sic tu spontanea
bonorum omnium et animitus missa voce salutaris.

Caesar, when he assumed the perpetual dictatorship, had not more
servile or more elegant flattery.  A translation may show its
servility; but its elegance is less attainable.  Having exposed the
unskilfulness or selfishness of the former government, "We were
left," says Milton, "to ourselves:  the whole national interest fell
into our hands, and subsists only in your abilities.  To your
virtue, overpowering and resistless, every man gives way, except
some who, without equal qualifications, aspire to equal honours, who
envy the distinctions of merit greater than their own, or who have
yet to learn, that in the coalition of human society nothing is more
pleasing to God, or more agreeable to reason, than that the highest
mind should have the sovereign power.  Such, sir, are you by general
confession; such are the things achieved by you, the greatest and
most glorious of our countrymen, the director of our public
councils, the leader of unconquered armies, the father of your
country; for by that title doss every good man hail you with sincere
and voluntary praise."

Next year, having defended all that wanted defence, he found leisure
to defend himself.  He undertook his own vindication against More,
whom he declares in his title to be justly called the author of the
"Regii Sanguinis Clamor."  In this there is no want of vehemence nor
eloquence, nor does he forget his wonted wit.  Morus es? an Momus?
an uterque idem est?  He then remembers that Morus is Latin for a
mulberry-tree, and hints at the known transformation:


- Poma alba ferebat
Quae post nigra tulit Morus.


With this piece ended his controversies; and he from this time gave
himself up to his private studies and his civil employment.

As secretary to the Protector he is supposed to have written the
Declaration of the reasons for a war with Spain.  His agency was
considered as of great importance; for, when a treaty with Sweden
was artfully suspended, the delay was publicly imputed to Mr.
Milton's indisposition; and the Swedish agent was provoked to
express his wonder that only one man in England could write Latin,
and that man blind.

Being now forty-seven years old, and seeing himself disencumbered
from external interruptions, he seems to have recollected his former
purposes, and to have resumed three great works which he had planned
for his future employment--an epic poem, the history of his country,
and a dictionary of the Latin tongue.

To collect a dictionary seems a work of all others least practicable
in a state of blindness, because it depends upon perpetual and
minute inspection and collation.  Nor would Milton probably have
begun it, after he had lost his eyes; but, having had it always
before him, he continued it, says Philips, "almost to his dying day;
but the papers were so discomposed and deficient, that they could
not be fitted for the press."  The compilers of the Latin
dictionary, printed at Cambridge, had the use of those collections
in three folios; but what was their fate afterwards is not known.

To compile a history from various authors, when they can only be
consulted by other eyes, is not easy, nor possible, but with more
skilful and attentive help than can be commonly obtained; and it was
probably the difficulty of consulting and comparing that stopped
Milton's narrative at the Conquest--a period at which affairs were
not very intricate, nor authors very numerous.

For the subject of his epic poem, after much deliberation, long
choosing, and beginning late, he fixed upon "Paradise Lost," a
design so comprehensive, that it could be justified only by success.
He had once designed to celebrate King Arthur, as he hints in his
verses to Mansus; but "Arthur was reserved," says Fenton, "to
another destiny."

It appears, by some sketches of poetical projects left in
manuscript, and to be seen in a library at Cambridge, that he had
digested his thoughts on this subject into one of those wild dramas
which were anciently called Mysteries; and Philips had seen what he
terms part of a tragedy, beginning with the first ten lines of
Satan's address to the Sun.  These mysteries consist of allegorical
persons, such as Justice, Mercy, Faith.  Of the tragedy or mystery
of "Paradise Lost" there are two plans


The Persons.                 The Persons.
Michael.                     Moses.
Chorus of Angels.            Divine Justice, Wisdom
Heavenly Love.                  Heavenly Love.
Lucifer.                     The Evening Star, Hesperus.
Adam, } with the Serpent     Chorus of Angels.
Eve,  }                      Lucifer.
Conscience.                  Adam.
Death.                       Eve.
Labour,     }                Conscience.
Sickness,   }                Labour,     }
Discontent, } Mutes.         Sickness,   }
Ignorance,  }                Discontent, } Mutes
with others;}                Ignorance,  }
Faith.                       Fear,       }
Hope.                        Death,      }
Charity.                     Faith.
                             Hope.
                             Charity.

PARADISE LOST.

The Persons.

Moses, [Greek text], recounting how he assumed his true body; that
it corrupts not, because it is with God in the mount; declares the
like of Enoch and Elijah; besides the purity of the place, that
certain pure winds, dews, and clouds, preserve it from corruption;
whence exhorts to the sight of God; tells they cannot see Adam in
the state of innocence, by reason of their sin.

Justice, }
Mercy,   } debating what should become of man, if he fall.
Wisdom,  }
Chorus of Angels singing a hymn of the Creation.

ACT II.

Heavenly Love.
Evening Star.
Chorus sing the marriage-song, and describe Paradise.

ACT III.

Lucifer contriving Adam's ruin.
Chorus fears for Adam, and relates Lucifer's rebellion and fall.

ACT IV.

Adam, }
Eve,  } fallen.
Conscience cites them to God's examination.
Chorus bewails, and tells the good Adam has lost.

ACT V.

Adam and Eve driven out of Paradise.
-- -- presented by an angel with Labour, Grief, Hatred, }
Envy, War, Famine, Pestilence, Sickness, Discontent,    }
Ignorance, Fear, Death                                  } Mutes.
To whom he gives their names.  Likewise Winter, Heat, Tempest, etc.
Faith,   }
Hope,    } comfort him and instruct him.
Charity, }
Chorus briefly concludes.


Such was his first design, which could have produced only an
allegory or mystery.  The following sketch seems to have attained
more maturity.


ADAM UNPARADISED.

The angel Gabriel, either descending or entering; showing, since
this globe was created, his frequency as much on earth as in heaven;
describes Paradise.  Next the Chorus, showing the reason of his
coming to keep his watch in Paradise, after Lucifer's rebellion, by
command from God; and withal expressing his desire to see and know
more concerning this excellent new creature, man.  The angel
Gabriel, as by his name signifying a prince of power, tracing
Paradise with a more free office, passes by the station of the
Chorus, and, desired by them, relates what he knew of man; as the
creation of Eve, with their love and marriage.  After this, Lucifer
appears; after his overthrow, bemoans himself, seeks revenge on man.
The Chorus prepare resistance on his first approach.  At last, after
discourse of enmity on either side, he departs:  whereat the Chorus
sings of the battle and victory in Heaven, against him and his
accomplices:  as before, after the first act, was sung a hymn of the
creation.  Here again may appear Lucifer, relating and exulting in
what he had done to the destruction of man.  Man next, and Eve,
having by this time been seduced by the serpent, appears confusedly
covered with leaves.  Conscience in a shape accuses him; Justice
cites him to the place whither Jehovah called for him.  In the
meanwhile, the Chorus entertains the stage, and is informed by some
angel the manner of the fall.  Here the Chorus bewails Adam's fall;
Adam then and Eve return; accuse one another; but especially Adam
lays the blame to his wife; is stubborn in his offence.  Justice
appears, reasons with him, convinces him.  The Chorus admonishes
Adam, and bids him beware of Lucifer's example of impenitence.  The
angel is sent to banish them out of Paradise; but before causes to
pass before his eyes, in shapes, a mask of all the evils of this
life and world.  He is humbled, relents, despairs; at last appears
Mercy, comforts him, promises the Messiah; then calls in Faith,
Hope, and Charity;--instructs him; he repents, gives God the glory,
submits to his penalty.  The Chorus briefly concludes.  Compare this
with the former draft.

These are very imperfect rudiments of "Paradise Lost;" but it is
pleasant to see great works in their seminal state, pregnant with
latent possibilities of excellence; nor could there be any more
delightful entertainment than to trace their gradual growth and
expansion, and to observe how they are sometimes suddenly advanced
by accidental hints, and sometimes slowly improved by steady
meditation.

Invention is almost the only literary labour which blindness cannot
obstruct, and therefore he naturally solaced his solitude by the
indulgence of his fancy, and the melody of his numbers.  He had done
what he knew to be necessarily previous to poetical excellence; he
had made himself acquainted with "seemly arts and affairs;" his
comprehension was extended by various knowledge, and his memory
stored with intellectual treasures.  He was skilful in many
languages, and had, by reading and composition, attained the full
mastery of his own.  He would have wanted little help from books,
had he retained the power of perusing them.

But while his greater designs were advancing, having now, like many
other authors, caught the love of publication, he amused himself, as
he could, with little productions.  He sent to the press (1658) a
manuscript of Raleigh, called "The Cabinet Council;" and next year
gratified his malevolence to the clergy, by a "Treatise of Civil
Power in Ecclesiastical Cases, and the Means of removing Hirelings
out of the Church."

Oliver was now dead; Richard constrained to resign; the system of
extemporary government, which had been held together only by force,
naturally fell into fragments when that force was taken away; and
Milton saw himself and his cause in equal danger.  But he had still
hope of doing something.  He wrote letters, which Toland has
published, to such men as he thought friends to the new
commonwealth; and even in the year of the Restoration he "bated no
jot of heart or hope," but was fantastical enough to think that the
nation, agitated as it was, might be settled by a pamphlet, called
"A Ready and Easy Way to Establish a Free Commonwealth;" which was,
however, enough considered to be both seriously and ludicrously
answered.

The obstinate enthusiasm of the commonwealth-men was very
remarkable.  When the king was apparently returning, Harrington,
with a few associates as fantastical as himself, used to meet, with
all the gravity of political importance, to settle an equal
government by rotation; and Milton, kicking when he could strike no
longer, was foolish enough to publish, a few weeks before the
Restoration, Notes upon a Sermon preached by one Griffiths,
entitled, "The Fear of God and the King."  To these notes an answer
was written by L'Estrange, in a pamphlet petulantly called "No Blind
Guides."

But whatever Milton could write, or men of greater activity could
do, the king was now about to be restored with the irresistible
approbation of the people, he was therefore no longer secretary, and
was consequently obliged to quit the house which he held by his
office; the importance of his writings, thought it convenient to
seek some shelter, and hid himself for a time in Bartholomew Close,
by West Smithfield.

I cannot but remark a kind of respect, perhaps unconsciously paid to
this great man by his biographers:  every house in which he resided
is historically mentioned, as if it were an injury to neglect naming
any place that he honoured by his presence.

The king, with lenity of which the world has had perhaps no other
example, declined to be the judge or avenger of his own or his
father's wrongs; and promised to admit into the Act of Oblivion all
except those whom the Parliament should except; and the Parliament
doomed none to capital punishment but the wretches who had
immediately co-operated in the murder of the king.  Milton was
certainly not one of them; he had only justified what they had done.

This justification was indeed sufficiently offensive; and (June 16)
an order was issued to seize Milton's "Defence," and Goodwin's
"Obstructors of Justice," another book of the same tendency, and
burn them by the common hangman.  The attorney-general was ordered
to prosecute the authors; but Milton was not seized, nor perhaps
very diligently pursued.

Not long after (August 19) the flutter of innumerable bosoms was
stilled by an Act, which the king, that his mercy might want no
recommendation of elegance, rather called an Act of Oblivion than of
Grace.  Goodwin was named, with nineteen more, as incapacitated for
any public trust; but of Milton there was no exception.

Of this tenderness shown to Milton the curiosity of mankind has not
forborne to inquire the reason.  Burnet thinks he was forgotten; but
this is another instance which may confirm Dalrymple's observation,
who says, "that whenever Burnet's narrations are examined, he
appears to be mistaken."

Forgotten he was not; for his prosecution was ordered; it must be
therefore by design that he was included in the general oblivion.
He is said to have had friends in the House, such as Marvel,
Morrice, and Sir Thomas Clarges:  and undoubtedly a man like him
must have had influence.  A very particular story of his escape is
told by Richardson in his Memoirs, which he received from Pope, as
delivered by Betterton, who might have heard it from Davenant.  In
the war between the King and Parliament, Davenant was made prisoner
and condemned to die; but was spared at the request of Milton.  When
the turn of success brought Milton into the like danger, Davenant
repaid the benefit by appearing in his favour.  Here is a
reciprocation of generosity and gratitude so pleasing, that the tale
makes its own way to credit.  But if help were wanted, I know not
where to find it.  The danger of Davenant is certain from his own
relation; but of his escape there is no account.  Betterton's
narration can be traced no higher; it is not known that he hid it
from Davenant.  We are told that the benefit exchanged was life for
life; but it seems not certain that Milton's life ever was in
danger.  Goodwin, who had committed the same kind of crime, escaped
with incapacitation; and, as exclusion from public trust is a
punishment which the power of Government can commonly inflict
without the help of a particular law, it required no great interest
to exempt Milton from a censure little more than verbal.  Something
may be reasonably ascribed to veneration and compassion; to
veneration of his abilities, and compassion for his distresses,
which made it fit to forgive his malice for his learning.  He was
now poor and blind; and who would pursue with violence an
illustrious enemy, depressed by fortune and disarmed by nature?

The publication of the "Act of Oblivion" put him in the same
condition with his fellow-subjects.  He was, however, upon some
pretence now not known, in the custody of the serjeant in December;
and when he was released, upon his refusal of the fees demanded, he
and the serjeant were called before the House.  He was now safe
within the shade of oblivion, and knew himself to be as much out of
the power of a griping officer as any other man.  How the question
was determined is not known.  Milton would hardly have contended but
that he knew himself to have right on his side.

He then removed to Jewin Street, near Aldersgate Street, and, being
blind and by no means wealthy, wanted a domestic companion and
attendant; and therefore, by the recommendation of Dr. Paget,
married Elizabeth Minshul, of a gentleman's family in Cheshire,
probably without a fortune.  All his wives were virgins; for he has
declared that he thought it gross and indelicate to be a second
husband:  upon what other principles his choice was made cannot now
be known; but marriage afforded not much of his happiness.  The
first wife left him in disgust, and was brought back only by terror;
the second, indeed, seems to have been more a favourite, but her
life was short.  The third, as Philips relates, oppressed his
children in his lifetime, and cheated them at his death.

Soon after his marriage, according to an obscure story, he was
offered the continuance of his employment, and, being pressed by his
wife to accept it, answered, "You, like other women, want to ride in
your coach; my wish is to live and die an honest man."  If he
considered the Latin secretary as exercising any of the powers of
government, he that had shared authority, either with the Parliament
or Cromwell, might have forborne to talk very loudly of his honesty;
and if he thought the office purely ministerial, he certainly might
have honestly retained it under the King.  But this tale has too
little evidence to deserve a disquisition; large offers and sturdy
rejections are among the most common topics of falsehood.

He had so much either of prudence or gratitude, that he forbore to
disturb the new settlement with any of his political or
ecclesiastical opinions, and from this time devoted himself to
poetry and literature.  Of his zeal for learning in all its parts,
he gave a proof by publishing, the next year (1661), "Accidence
commenced Grammar;" a little book which has nothing remarkable, but
that its author, who had been lately defending the supreme powers of
his country, and was then writing "Paradise Lost," could descend
from his elevation to rescue children from the perplexity of
grammatical confusion, and the trouble of lessons unnecessarily
repeated.

About this time, Elwood the Quaker, being recommended to him as one
who would read Latin to him for the advantage of his conversation,
attended him every afternoon except on Sundays.  Milton, who, in his
letter to Hartlib, had declared, that "to read Latin with an English
mouth is as ill a hearing as Law French," required that Elwood
should learn and practise the Italian pronunciation, which, he said,
was necessary, if he would talk with foreigners.  This seems to have
been a task troublesome without use.  There is little reason for
preferring the Italian pronunciation to our own, except that it is
more general; and to teach it to an Englishman is only to make him a
foreigner at home.  He who travels, if he speaks Latin, may so soon
learn the sounds which every native gives it, that he need make no
provision before his journey; and if strangers visit us, it is their
business to practise such conformity to our modes as they expect
from us in their own countries.  Elwood complied with the
directions, and improved himself by his attendance; for he relates,
that Milton, having a curious ear, knew by his voice when he read
what he did not understand, and would stop him, and "open the most
difficult passages."

In a short time he took a house in the Artillery Walk, leading to
Bunhill Fields; the mention of which concludes the register of
Milton's removals and habitations.  He lived longer in this place
than any other.

He was now busied by "Paradise Lost."  Whence he drew the original
design has been variously conjectured by men who cannot bear to
think themselves ignorant of that which, at last, neither diligence
nor sagacity can discover.  Some find the hint in an Italian
tragedy.  Voltaire tells a wild and unauthorised story of a farce
seen by Milton in Italy which opened thus:  "Let the Rainbow be the
Fiddlestick of the Fiddle of Heaven."  It has been already shown,
that the first conception was a tragedy or mystery, not of a
narrative, but a dramatic work which he is supposed to have began to
reduce to its present form about the time (1655) when he finished
his dispute with the defenders of the king.

He long had promised to adorn his native country by some great
performance, while he had yet perhaps no settled design, and was
stimulated only by such expectations as naturally arose from the
survey of his attainments, and the consciousness of his powers.
What he should undertake it was difficult to determine.  He was
"long choosing, and began late."

While he was obliged to divide his time between his private studies
and affairs of state, his poetical labour must have been often
interrupted; and perhaps he did little more in that busy time than
construct the narrative, adjust the episodes, proportion the parts,
accumulate images and sentiments, and treasure in his memory, or
preserve in writing, such hints as books or meditation would supply.
Nothing particular is known of his intellectual operations while he
was a statesman; for, having every help and accommodation at hand,
he had no need of uncommon expedients.

Being driven from all public stations, he is yet too great not to be
traced by curiosity to his retirement; where he has been found by
Mr. Richardson, the fondest of his admirers, sitting before his door
in a grey coat of coarse cloth, in warm sultry weather, to enjoy the
fresh air; and so, as in his own room, receiving the visits of
people of distinguished parts as well as quality.  His visitors of
high quality must now be imagined to be few; but men of parts might
reasonably court the conversation of a man so generally illustrious,
that foreigners are reported, by Wood, to have visited the house in
Bread Street where he was born.

According to another account, he was seen in a small house, neatly
enough dressed in black clothes, sitting in a room hung with rusty
green; pale but not cadaverous, with chalkstones in his hands.  He
said that, if it were not for the gout, his blindness would be
tolerable.

In the intervals of his pain, being made unable to use the common
exercises, he used to swing in a chair, and sometimes played upon an
organ.

He was now confessedly and visibly employed upon his poem, of which
the progress might be noted by those with whom he was familiar; for
he was obliged, when he had composed as many lines as his memory
would conveniently retain, to employ some friend in writing them,
having, at least for part of the time, no regular attendant.  This
gave opportunity to observations and reports.

Mr. Philips observes, that there was a very remarkable circumstance
in the composure of "Paradise Lost," "which I have a particular
reason," says he, "to remember; for whereas I had the perusal of it
from the very beginning, for some years, as I went from time to time
to visit him, in parcels of ten, twenty, or thirty verses at a time
(which, being written by whatever hand came next, might possibly
want correction as to the orthography and pointing), having, as the
Summer came on, not been showed any for a considerable while, and
desiring the reason thereof, was answered, that his vein never
happily flowed but from the autumnal equinox to the vernal; and that
whatever he attempted at other times was never to his satisfaction,
though he courted his fancy never so much; so that, in all the years
he was about this poem, he may be said to have spent half his time
therein."

Upon this relation Toland remarks, that in his opinion Philips has
mistaken the time of the year; for Milton, in his Elegies, declares,
that with the advance of the spring he feels the increase of his
poetical force, redeunt in carmina vires.  To this it is answered,
that Philips could hardly mistake time so well marked; and it may be
added, that Milton might find different times of the year favourable
to different parts of life.  Mr. Richardson conceives it impossible
that "such a work should be suspended for six months, or for one.
It may go on faster or slower, but it must go on."  By what
necessity it must continually go on, or why it might not be laid
aside and resumed, it is not easy to discover.

This dependence of the soul upon the seasons, those temporary and
periodical ebbs and flows of intellect, may, I suppose, justly be
derided as the fumes of vain imagination.  Sapiens dominabitur
astris.  The author that thinks himself weather-bound will find,
with a little help from hellebore, that he is only idle or
exhausted.  But while this notion has possession of the head, it
produces the inability which it supposes.  Our powers owe much of
their energy to our hopes; possunt quia posse videntur.  When
success seems attainable, diligence is enforced; but when it is
admitted that the faculties are suppressed by a cross wind, or a
cloudy sky, the day is given up without resistance; for who can
contend with the course of nature?

From such prepossessions Milton seems not to have been free.  There
prevailed in his time an opinion, that the world was in its decay,
and that we have had the misfortune to be produced in the
decrepitude of nature.  It was suspected that the whole creation
languished, that neither trees nor animals had the height or bulk of
their predecessors, and that everything was daily sinking by gradual
diminution.  Milton appears to suspect that souls partake of the
general degeneracy, and is not without some fear that his book is to
be written in "an age too late" for heroic poesy.

Another opinion wanders about the world, and sometimes finds
reception among wise men; an opinion that restrains the operations
of the mind to particular regions, and supposes that a luckless
mortal may be born in a degree of latitude too high or too low for
wisdom or for wit.  From this fancy, wild as it is, he had not
wholly cleared his head, when he feared lest the CLIMATE of his
country might be TOO COLD for flights of imagination.

Into a mind already occupied by such fancies, another, not more
reasonable, might easily find its way.  He that could fear lest his
genius had fallen upon too old a world, or too chill a climate,
might consistently magnify to himself the influence of the seasons,
and believe his faculties to be vigorous only half the year.

His submission to the seasons was at least more reasonable than his
dread of decaying nature, or a frigid zone; for general causes must
operate uniformly in a general abatement of mental power; if less
could be performed by the writer, less likewise would content the
judges of his work.  Among this lagging race of frosty grovellers he
might still have risen into eminence by producing something which
"they should not willingly let die."  However inferior to the heroes
who were born in better ages, he might still be great among his
contemporaries, with the hope of growing every day greater in the
dwindle of posterity.  He might still be the giant of the pigmies,
the one-eyed monarch of the blind.

Of his artifices of study, or particular hours of composition, we
have little account, and there was perhaps little to be told.
Richardson, who seems to have been very diligent in his inquiries,
but discovers always a wish to find Milton discriminated from other
men, relates that "he would sometimes lie awake whole nights, but
not a verse could he make; and on a sudden his poetical faculty
would rush upon him with an impetus or aestrum, and his daughter was
immediately called to secure what came.  At other times he would
dictate perhaps forty lines in a breath, and then reduce them to
half the number."

These bursts of light, and involutions of darkness, these transient
and involuntary excursions and retrocessions of invention, having
some appearance of deviation from the common train of nature, are
eagerly caught by the lovers of a wonder.  Yet something of this
inequality happens to every man in every mode of exertion, manual or
mental.  The mechanic cannot handle his hammer and his file at all
times with equal dexterity; there are hours, he knows not why, when
HIS HAND IS OUT.  By Mr. Richardson's relation, casually conveyed,
much regard cannot be claimed.  That, in his intellectual hour,
Milton called for his daughter "to secure what came," may be
questioned; for unluckily it happens to be known that his daughters
were never taught to write; nor would he have been obliged, as it is
universally confessed, to have employed any casual visitor in
disburdening his memory, if his daughter could have performed the
office.

The story of reducing his exuberance has been told of other authors;
and, though doubtless true of every fertile and copious mind, seems
to have been gratuitously transferred to Milton.

What he has told us, and we cannot now know more, is, that he
composed much of this poem in the night and morning, I suppose
before his mind was disturbed with common business; and that he
poured out with great fluency his "unpremeditated verse."
Versification, free, like this, from the distresses of rhyme, must,
by a work so long, be made prompt and habitual; and, when his
thoughts were once adjusted, the words would come at his command.

At what particular times of his life the parts of his work were
written, cannot often be known.  The beginning of the third book
shows that he had lost his sight, and the introduction to the
seventh, that the return of the king had clouded him with
discountenance; and that he was offended by the licentious festivity
of the Restoration.  There are no other internal notes of time.
Milton, being now cleared from all effects of his disloyalty, had
nothing required from him but the common duty of living in quiet, to
be rewarded with the common right of protection; but this, which,
when he skulked from the approach of his king, was perhaps more than
he hoped, seems not to have satisfied him; for no sooner is he safe,
than he finds himself in danger, "fallen on evil days and evil
tongues, and with darkness and with danger compassed round."  This
darkness, had his eyes been better employed, had undoubtedly
deserved compassion; but to add the mention of danger was ungrateful
and unjust.  He was fallen indeed on "evil days;" the time was come
in which regicides could no longer boast their wickedness.  But of
"evil tongues" for Milton to complain, required impudence at least
equal to his other powers; Milton, whose warmest advocates must
allow that he never spared any asperity of reproach or brutality of
insolence.

But the charge itself seems to be false; for it would be hard to
recollect any reproach cast upon him, either serious or ludicrous,
through the whole remaining part of his life.  He pursued his
studies or his amusements, without persecution, molestation, or
insult.  Such is the reverence paid to great abilities, however
misused; they, who contemplated in Milton the scholar and the wit,
were contented to forget the reviler of his king.

When the plague (1665) raged in London, Milton took refuge at
Chalfont, in Bucks; where Elwood, who had taken the house for him,
first saw a complete copy of "Paradise Lost," and, having perused
it, said to him, "Thou hast said a great deal upon Paradise Lost;
what hast thou to say upon Paradise Found?"

Next year, when the danger of infection had ceased, he returned to
Bunhill Fields, and designed the publication of his poem.  A licence
was necessary, and he could expect no great kindness from a chaplain
of the Archbishop of Canterbury.  He seems, however, to have been
treated with tenderness; for, though objections were made to
particular passages, and among them to the simile of the sun
eclipsed in the first book, yet the licence was granted; and he sold
his copy, April 27, 1667, to Samuel Simmons, for an immediate
payment of five pounds, with a stipulation to receive five pounds
more when thirteen hundred should be sold of the first edition; and
again, five pounds after the sale of the same number of the second
edition; and another five pounds after the same sale of the third.
None of the three editions were to be extended beyond fifteen
hundred copies.

The first edition was ten books, in a small quarto.  The titles were
varied from year to year; and an advertisement and the arguments of
the books were omitted in some copies, and inserted in others.

The sale gave him in two years a right to his second payment, for
which the receipt was signed April 26, 1669.  The second edition was
not given till 1674; it was printed in small octave; and the number
of books was increased to twelve, by a division of the seventh and
twelfth; and some other small improvements were made.  The third
edition was published in 1678; and the widow, to whom the copy was
then to devolve, sold all her claims to Simmons for eight pounds,
according to her receipt given December 21, 1680.  Simmons had
already agreed to transfer the whole right to Brabazon Aylmer for 25
pounds; and Aylmer sold to Jacob Tonson half, August 17, 1683, and
half, March 24, 1690, at a price considerably enlarged.  In the
history of "Paradise Lost" a deduction thus minute will rather
gratify than fatigue.

The slow sale and tardy reputation of this poem have been always
mentioned as evidences of neglected merit, and of the uncertainty of
literary fame; and inquiries have been made, and conjectures
offered, about the causes of its long obscurity and late reception.
But has the case been truly stated?  Have not lamentation and wonder
been lavished on an evil that was never felt?

That in the reigns of Charles and James the "Paradise Lost "
received no public acclamations is readily confessed.  Wit and
literature were on the side of the court:  and who that solicited
favour or fashion would venture to praise the defender of the
regicides?  All that he himself could think his due, from "evil
tongues" in "evil days," was that reverential silence which was
generously preserved.  But it cannot be inferred that his poem was
not read, or not, however unwillingly, admired.

The sale, if it be considered, will justify the public.  Those who
have no power to judge of past times but by their own, should always
doubt their conclusions.  The call for books was not, in Milton's
age, what it is at present.  To read was not then a general
amusement; neither traders, nor often gentlemen, thought themselves
disgraced by ignorance.  The women had not then aspired to
literature, nor was every house supplied with a closet of knowledge.
Those, indeed, who professed learning, were not less learned than at
any other time; but of that middle race of students who read for
pleasure or accomplishment, and who buy the numerous products of
modern typography, the number was then comparatively small.  To
prove the paucity of readers, it may be sufficient to remark, that
the nation had been satisfied from 1623 to 1664--that is, forty-one
years--with only two editions of the works of Shakespeare, which
probably did not together make one thousand copies.

The sale of thirteen hundred copies in two years, in opposition to
so much recent enmity, and to a style of versification new to all
and disgusting to many, was an uncommon example of the prevalence of
genius.  The demand did not immediately increase; for many more
readers than were supplied at first the nation did not afford.  Only
three thousand were sold in eleven years; for it forced its way
without assistance; its admirers did not dare to publish their
opinion; and the opportunities now given of attracting notice by
advertisements were then very few; the means of proclaiming the
publication of new books have been produced by that general
literature which now pervades the nation through all its ranks.  But
the reputation and price of the copy still advanced, till the
Revolution put an end to the secrecy of love, and "Paradise Lost"
broke into open view with sufficient security of kind reception.

Fancy can hardly forbear to conjecture with what temper Milton
surveyed the silent progress of his work, and marked its reputation
stealing its way in a kind of subterraneous current through fear and
silence.  I cannot but conceive him calm and confident, little
disappointed, not at all dejected, relying on his own merit with
steady consciousness, and waiting without impatience the
vicissitudes of opinion, and the impartiality of a future
generation.

In the meantime he continued his studies, and supplied the want of
sight by a very odd expedient, of which Phillips gives the following
account:-

Mr. Philips tells us, "that though our author had daily about him
one or other to read, some persons of man's estate, who, of their
own accord, greedily catched at the opportunity of being his
readers, that they might as well reap the benefit of what they read
to him, as oblige him by the benefit of their reading; and others of
younger years were sent by their parents to the same end; yet
excusing only the eldest daughter by reason of her bodily infirmity
and difficult utterance of speech (which, to say truth, I doubt was
the principal cause of excusing her), the other two were condemned
to the performance of reading and exactly pronouncing of all the
languages of whatever book he should, at one time or other, think
fit to peruse, viz., the Hebrew (and I think the Syriac), the Greek,
the Latin, the Italian, Spanish, and French.  All which sorts of
books to be confined to read, without understanding one word, must
needs be a trial of patience almost beyond endurance.  Yet it was
endured by both for a long time, though the irksomeness of this
employment could not be always concealed, but broke out more and
more into expressions of uneasiness; so that at length they were
all, even the eldest also, sent out to learn some curious and
ingenious sorts of manufacture, that are proper for women to learn,
particularly embroideries in gold or silver."

In the scene of misery which this mode of intellectual labour sets
before our eyes, it is hard to determine whether the daughters or
the father are most to be lamented.  A language not understood can
never be so read as to give pleasure, and very seldom so as to
convey meaning.  If few men would have had resolution, to write
books with such embarrassments, few likewise would have wanted
ability to find some better expedient.

Three years after his "Paradise Lost" (1667) he published his
"History of England," comprising the whole fable of Geoffrey of
Monmouth, and continued to the Norman Invasion.  Why he should have
given the first part, which he seems not to believe, and which is
universally rejected, it is difficult to conjecture.  The style is
harsh; but it has something of rough vigour, which perhaps may often
strike, though it cannot please.

On this history the licenser again fixed his claws, and before he
could transmit it to the press tore out several parts.  Some
censures of the Saxon monks were taken away, lest they should be
applied to the modern clergy; and a character of the Long
Parliament, and Assembly of Divines, was excluded; of which the
author gave a copy to the Earl of Anglesea, and which, being
afterwards published, has been since inserted in its proper place.

The same year were printed "Paradise Regained;" and "Samson
Agonistes," a tragedy written in imitation of the ancients, and
never designed by the author for the stage.  As these poems were
published by another bookseller, it has been asked whether Simmons
was discouraged from receiving them by the slow sale of the former.
Why a writer changed his bookseller a hundred years ago, I am far
from hoping to discover.  Certainly, he who in two years sells
thirteen hundred copies of a volume in quarto, bought for two
payments of five pounds each, has no reason to repent his purchase.

When Milton showed "Paradise Regained" to Elwood, "This," said he,
"is owing to you; for you put it in my head by the question you put
to me at Chalfont, which otherwise I had not thought of."

His last poetical offspring was his favourite.  He could not, as
Elwood relates, endure to hear "Paradise Lost" preferred to
"Paradise Regained."  Many causes may vitiate a writer's judgment of
his own works.  On that which has cost him much labour he sets a
high value, because he is unwilling to think that he has been
diligent in vain; what has been produced without toilsome efforts is
considered with delight, as a proof of vigorous faculties and
fertile invention; and the last work, whatever it be, has
necessarily most of the grace of novelty.  Milton, however it
happened, had this prejudice, and had it to himself.

To that multiplicity of attainments, and extent of comprehension,
that entitled this great author to our veneration, may be added a
kind of humble dignity, which did not disdain the meanest services
to literature.  The epic poet, the controvertist, the politician,
having already descended to accommodate children with a book of
rudiments, now, in the last years of his life, composed a book of
logic for the initiation of students in philosophy; and published
(1672) "Artis Logicae plenior Institutio ad Petri Rami Methodum
concinnata;" that is, "A new Scheme of Logic, according to the
method of Ramus."  I know not whether, even in this book, he did not
intend an act of hostility against the universities; for Ramus was
one of the first oppugners of the old philosophy, who disturbed with
innovations the quiet of the schools.

His polemical disposition again revived.  He had now been safe so
long that he forgot his fears, and published a "Treatise of True
Religion, Heresy, Schism, Toleration, and the Best Means to Prevent
the Growth of Popery."

But this little tract is modestly written, with respectful mention
of the Church of England and an appeal to the Thirty-nine Articles.
His principle of toleration is, agreement in the sufficiency of the
Scriptures; and he extends it to all who, whatever their opinions
are, profess to derive them from the sacred books.  The Papists
appeal to other testimonies, and are therefore, in his opinion, not
to be permitted the liberty of either public or private worship; for
though they plead conscience, "we have no warrant," he says, "to
regard conscience which is not grounded in Scripture."

Those who are not convinced by his reasons, may perhaps be delighted
with his wit.  The term "Roman Catholic is," he says, "one of the
Pope's Bulls; it is particular universal, or Catholic schismatic."

He has, however, something better.  As the best preservative against
Popery, he recommends the diligent perusal of the Scriptures, a duty
from which he warns the busy part of mankind not to think themselves
excused.

He now reprinted his juvenile poems, with some additions.

In the last year of his life he sent to the press, seeming to take
delight in publication, a collection of "Familiar Epistles in
Latin;" to which, being too few to make a volume, he added some
academical exercises, which perhaps he perused with pleasure, as
they recalled to his memory the days of youth; but for which nothing
but veneration for his name could now procure a reader.

When he had attained his sixty-sixth year, the gout, with which he
had been long tormented, prevailed over the enfeebled powers of
nature.  He died by a quiet and silent expiration, about the 10th of
November, 1674, at his house in Bunhill Fields; and was buried next
his father in the chancel of St. Giles at Cripplegate.  His funeral
was very splendidly and numerously attended.

Upon his grave there is supposed to have been no memorial; but in
our time a monument has been erected in Westminster Abbey "To the
Author of 'Paradise Lost,'" by Mr. Benson, who has in the
inscription bestowed more words upon himself than upon Milton.

When the inscription for the monument of Philips, in which he was
said to be soli Miltono secundus, was exhibited to Dr. Sprat, then
Dean of Westminster, he refused to admit it; the name of Milton was,
in his opinion, too detestable to be read on the wall of a building
dedicated to devotion.  Atterbury, who succeeded him, being author
of the inscription, permitted its reception.  "And such has been the
change of public opinion," said Dr. Gregory, from whom I heard this
account, "that I have seen erected in the church a statue of that
man, whose name I once knew considered as a pollution of its walls."

Milton has the reputation of having been in his youth eminently
beautiful, so as to have been called the lady of his college.  His
hair, which was of a light brown, parted at the fore-top, and hung
down upon his shoulders, according to the picture which he has given
of Adam.  He was, however, not of the heroic stature, but rather
below the middle size, according to Mr. Richardson, who mentions him
as having narrowly escaped from being "short and thick."  He was
vigorous and active, and delighted in the exercise of the sword, in
which he is related to have been eminently skilful.  His weapon was,
I believe, not the rapier, but the back-sword, of which he
recommends the use in his book on education.

His eyes are said never to have been bright; but, if he was a
dexterous fencer, they must have been once quick.

His domestic habits, so far as they are known, were those of a
severe student.  He drank little strong drink of any kind, and fed
without excess in quantity, and in his earlier years without
delicacy of choice.  In his youth he studied late at night; but
afterwards changed his hours, and rested in bed from nine to four in
the summer and five in the winter.  The course of his day was best
known after he was blind.  When he first rose, he heard a chapter in
the Hebrew Bible, and then studied till twelve; then took some
exercise for an hour; then dined, then played on the organ, and
sang, or heard another sing, then studied till six; then entertained
his visitors till eight; then supped, and, after a pipe of tobacco
and a glass of water, went to bed.

So is his life described; but this even tenour appears attainable
only in colleges.  He that lives in the world will sometimes have
the succession of his practice broken and confused.  Visitors, of
whom Milton is represented to have had great numbers, will come and
stay unseasonably; business, of which every man has some, must be
done when others will do it.

When he did not care to rise early, he had something read to him by
his bedside; perhaps at this time his daughters were employed.  He
composed much in the morning, and dictated in the day, sitting
obliquely in an elbow-chair, with his leg thrown over the arm.
Fortune appears not to have had much of his care.  In the civil
wars, he lent his personal estate to the Parliament; but when, after
the contest was decided, he solicited repayment, he met not only
with neglect, but "sharp rebuke;" and, having tired both himself and
his friends, was given up to poverty and hopeless indignation, till
he showed how able he was to do greater service.  He was then made
Latin Secretary, with two hundred pounds a year; and had a thousand
pounds for his "Defence of the People."  His widow, who, after his
death, retired to Nantwich, in Cheshire, and died about 1729, is
said to have reported that he lost two thousand pounds by entrusting
it to a scrivener; and that, in the general depredation upon the
Church, he had grasped an estate of about sixty pounds a year
belonging to Westminster Abbey, which, like other sharers of the
plunder of rebellion, he was afterwards obliged to return.  Two
thousand pounds which he had placed in the Excise Office were also
lost.  There is yet no reason to believe that he was ever reduced to
indigence.  His wants, being few, were competently supplied.  He
sold his library before his death, and left his family fifteen
hundred pounds, on which his widow laid hold, and only gave one
hundred to each of his daughters.

His literature was unquestionably great.  He read all the languages
which are considered either as learned or polite:  Hebrew, with its
two dialects, Greek, Latin, Italian, French, and Spanish.  In Latin
his skill was such as places him in the first rank of writers and
critics; and he appears to have cultivated Italian with uncommon
diligence.  The books in which his daughter, who used to read to
him, represented him as most delighting, after Homer, which he could
almost repeat, were Ovid's "Metamorphoses" and Euripides.  His
Euripides is, by Mr. Cradock's kindness, now in my hands:  the
margin is sometimes noted; but I have found nothing remarkable.

Of the English poets he set most value upon Spenser, Shakespeare,
and Cowley.  Spenser was apparently his favourite; Shakespeare he
may easily be supposed to like, with every other skilful reader; but
I should not have expected that Cowley, whose ideas of excellence
were different from his own, would have had much of his approbation.
His character of Dryden, who sometimes visited him, was, that he was
a good rhymist, but no poet.

His theological opinions are said to have been first Calvinistical;
and afterwards, perhaps when he began to hate the Presbyterians, to
have tended towards Arminianism.  In the mixed questions of theology
and government, he never thinks that he can recede far enough from
Popery, or Prelacy; but what Baudius says of Erasmus seems
applicable to him, "Magis habuit quod fugeret, quam quod
sequeretur."  He had determined rather what to condemn, than what to
approve.  He has not associated himself with any denomination of
Protestants:  we know rather what he was not than what he was.  He
was not of the Church of Rome; he was not of the Church of England.

To be of no Church is dangerous.  Religion, of which the rewards are
distant, and which is animated only by faith and hope, will glide by
degrees out of the mind, unless it be invigorated and reimpressed by
external ordinances, by stated calls to worship, and the salutary
influence of example.  Milton, who appears to have had a full
conviction of the truth of Christianity, and to have regarded the
Holy Scriptures with the profoundest veneration, to have been
untainted by any heretical peculiarity of opinion, and to have lived
in a confirmed belief of the immediate and occasional agency of
Providence, yet grew old without any visible worship.  In the
distribution of his hours, there was no hour of prayer, either
solitary or with his household; omitting public prayers, he omitted
all.

Of this omission the reason has been sought upon a supposition which
ought never to be made, that men live with their own approbation,
and justify their conduct to themselves.  Prayer certainly was not
thought superfluous by him, who represents our first parents as
praying acceptably in the state of innocence, and efficaciously
after their fall.  That he lived without prayer can hardly be
affirmed; his studies and meditations were an habitual prayer.  The
neglect of it in his family was probably a fault for which he
condemned himself, and which he intended to correct; but that death,
as too often happens, intercepted his reformation.

His political notions were those of an acrimonious and surly
Republican; for which it is not known that he gave any better reason
than that "a popular government was the most frugal; for the
trappings of a monarchy would set up an ordinary commonwealth."  It
is surely very shallow policy that supposes money to be the chief
good; and even this, without considering that the support and
expense of a court is, for the most part, only a particular kind of
traffic, for which money is circulated, without any national
impoverishment.

Milton's Republicanism was, I am afraid, founded in an envious
hatred of greatness, and a sullen desire of independence; in
petulance impatient of control, and pride disdainful of superiority.
He hated monarchs in the State, and prelates in the Church; for he
hated all whom he was required to obey.  It is to be suspected that
his predominant desire was to destroy rather than establish, and
that he felt not so much the love of liberty as repugnance to
authority.

It has been observed that they who most loudly clamour for liberty
do not most liberally grant it.  What we know of Milton's character,
in domestic relations, is, that he was severe and arbitrary.  His
family consisted of women; and there appears in his books something
like a Turkish contempt of females, as subordinate and inferior
beings.  That his own daughters might not break the ranks, he
suffered them to be depressed by a mean and penurious education.  He
thought woman made only for obedience, and man only for rebellion.

Of his family some account may be expected.  His sister, first
married to Mr. Philips, afterwards married Mr. Agar, a friend of her
first husband, who succeeded him in the Crown office.  She had, by
her first husband, Edward and John, the two nephews whom Milton
educated; and by her second, two daughters.

His brother, Sir Christopher, had two daughters, Mary and Catharine,
and a son, Thomas, who succeeded Agar in the Crown office, and left
a daughter living in 1749 in Grosvenor Street.

Milton had children only by his first wife:  Anne, Mary, and
Deborah.  Anne, though deformed, married a master-builder, and died
of her first child.  Mary died single.  Deborah married Abraham
Clark, a weaver in Spitalfields, and lived seventy-six years, to
August, 1727.  This is the daughter of whom public mention has been
made.  She could repeat the first lines of Homer, the
"Metamorphoses," and some of Euripides, by having often read them.
Yet here incredulity is ready to make a stand.  Many repetitions are
necessary to fix in memory lines not understood; and why should
Milton wish or want to hear them so often?  These lines were at the
beginning of the poems.  Of a book written in a language not
understood, the beginning raises no more attention than the end; and
as those that understand it know commonly the beginning best, its
rehearsal will seldom be necessary.  It is not likely that Milton
required any passage to be so much repeated as that his daughter
could learn it; nor likely that he desired the initial lines to be
read at all; nor that the daughter, weary of the drudgery of
pronouncing unideal sounds, would voluntarily commit them to memory.

To this gentlewoman Addison made a present, and promised some
establishment, but died soon after.  Queen Caroline sent her fifty
guineas.  She had seven sons and three daughters; but none of them
had any children, except her son Caleb and her daughter Elizabeth.
Caleb went to Fort St. George, in the East Indies, and had two sons,
of whom nothing now is known.  Elizabeth married Thomas Foster, a
weaver in Spitalfields, and had seven children, who all died.  She
kept a petty grocer's or chandler's shop, first at Holloway, and
afterwards in Cock Lane, near Shoreditch Church.  She knew little of
her grandfather, and that little was not good.  She told of his
harshness to his daughters, and his refusal to have them taught to
write; and, in opposition to other accounts, represented him as
delicate, though temperate, in his diet.

In 1750, April 5th, Comus was played for her benefit.  She had so
little acquaintance with diversion or gaiety, that she did not know
what was intended when a benefit was offered her.  The profits of
the night were only one hundred and thirty pounds, though Dr. Newton
brought a large contribution; and twenty pounds were given by
Tonson, a man who is to be praised as often as he is named.  Of this
sum one hundred pounds were placed in the stocks, after some debate
between her and her husband in whose name it should be entered; and
the rest augmented their little stock, with which they removed to
Islington.  This was the greatest benefaction that "Paradise Lost"
ever procured the author's descendants; and to this he who has now
attempted to relate his Life, had the honour of contributing a
Prologue.

In the examination of Milton's poetical works, I shall pay so much
regard to time as to begin with his juvenile productions.  For his
early pieces he seems to have had a degree of fondness not very
laudable; what he has once written he resolves to preserve, and
gives to the public an unfinished poem which he broke off because he
was "nothing satisfied with what he had done," supposing his readers
less nice than himself.  These preludes to his future labours are in
Italian, Latin, and English.  Of the Italian I cannot pretend to
speak as a critic; but I have heard them commended by a man well
qualified to decide their merit.  The Latin pieces are lusciously
elegant:  but the delight which they afford is rather by the
exquisite imitation of the ancient writers, by the purity of the
diction, and the harmony of the numbers, than by any power of
invention or vigour of sentiment.  They are not all of equal value;
the elegies excel the odes; and some of the exercises on Gunpowder
Treason might have been spared.

The English poems, though they make no promises of "Paradise Lost,"
have this evidence of genius--that they have a cast original and
unborrowed.  But their peculiarity is not excellence; if they differ
from the verses of others, they differ for the worse; for they are
too often distinguished by repulsive harshness; the combinations of
words are new, but they are not pleasing; the rhymes and epithets
seem to be laboriously sought, and violently applied.

That in the early parts of his life he wrote with much care appears
from his manuscripts, happily preserved at Cambridge, in which many
of his smaller works are found as they were first written, with the
subsequent corrections.  Such relics show how excellence is
acquired; what we hope ever to do with ease, we must learn first to
do with diligence.

Those who admire the beauties of this great poet sometimes force
their own judgment into false approbation of his little pieces, and
prevail upon themselves to think that admirable which is only
singular.  All that short compositions can commonly attain is
neatness and elegance.  Milton never learned the art of doing little
things with grace; he overlooked the milder excellence of suavity
and softness; he was a "Lion" that had no skill in "dandling the
Kid."

One of the poems on which much praise has been bestowed is
"Lycidas;" of which the diction is harsh, the rhymes uncertain, and
the numbers unpleasing.  What beauty there is we must therefore seek
in the sentiments and images.  It is not to be considered as the
effusion of real passion; for passion runs not after remote
allusions and obscure opinions.  Passion plucks no berries from the
myrtle and ivy, nor calls upon Arethuse and Mincius, nor tells of
rough "satyrs" and "fauns with cloven heel."  Where there is leisure
for fiction, there is little grief.

In this poem there is no nature, for there is no truth; there is no
art, for there is nothing new.  Its form is that of a pastoral;
easy, vulgar, and therefore disgusting; whatever images it can
supply are long ago exhausted; and its inherent improbability always
forces dissatisfaction on the mind.  When Cowley tells of Hervey,
that they studied together, it is easy to suppose how much he must
miss the companion of his labours, and the partner of his
discoveries; but what image of tenderness can be excited by these
lines? -


We drove afield, and both together heard
What time the grey fly winds her sultry horn,
Battening our flocks with the fresh dews of night.


We know that they never drove afield, and that they had no flocks to
batten; and though it be allowed that the representation may be
allegorical, the true meaning is so uncertain and remote, that it is
never sought, because it cannot be known when it is found.

Among the flocks, and copses, and flowers, appear the heathen
deities; Jove and Phoebus, Neptune and AEolus, with a long train of
mythological imagery, such as a college easily supplies.  Nothing
can less display knowledge, or less exercise invention, than to tell
how a shepherd has lost his companion, and must now feed his flocks
alone, without any judge of his skill in piping; and how one god
asks another god what is become of Lycidas, and how neither god can
tell.  He who thus grieves will excite no sympathy; he who thus
praises will confer no honour.

This poem has yet a grosser fault.  With these trifling fictions are
mingled the most awful and sacred truths, such as ought never to be
polluted with such irreverent combinations.  The shepherd likewise
is now a feeder of sheep, and afterwards an ecclesiastical pastor, a
superintendent of a Christian flock.  Such equivocations are always
unskilful; but here they are indecent, and at least approach to
impiety, of which, however, I believe the writer not to have been
conscious.

Such is the power of reputation justly acquired, that its blaze
drives away the eye from nice examination.  Surely no man could have
fancied that he read Lycidas with pleasure, had he not known the
author.

Of the two pieces, "L'Allegro" and "il Penseroso," I believe,
opinion is uniform; every man that reads them, reads them with
pleasure.  The author's design is not, what Theobald has remarked,
merely to show how objects derive their colours from the mind, by
representing the operation of the same things upon the gay and the
melancholy temper, or upon the same man as he is differently
disposed; but rather how, among the successive variety of
appearances, every disposition of mind takes hold on those by which
it may be gratified.

The CHEERFUL man hears the lark in the morning; the PENSIVE man
hears the nightingale in the evening.  The CHEERFUL man sees the
cock strut, and hears the horn and hounds echo in the wood; then
walks, NOT UNSEEN, to observe the glory of the rising sun, or listen
to the singing milkmaid, and view the labours of the ploughman and
the mower; then casts his eyes about him over scenes of smiling
plenty, and looks up to the distant tower, the residence of some
fair inhabitant; thus he pursues real gaiety through a day of labour
or of play, and delights himself at night with the fanciful
narratives of superstitious ignorance.

The PENSIVE man at one time walks UNSEEN to muse at midnight, and at
another hears the sullen curfew.  If the weather drives him home, he
sits in a room lighted only by "glowing embers;" or by a lonely lamp
outwatches the North Star, to discover the habitation of separate
souls, and varies the Shades of meditation by contemplating the
magnificent or pathetic scenes of tragic and epic poetry.  When the
morning comes--a morning gloomy with rain and wind--he walks into
the dark, trackless woods, falls asleep by some murmuring water, and
with melancholy enthusiasm expects some dream of prognostication, or
some music played by aerial performers.

Both mirth and melancholy are solitary, silent inhabitants of the
breast, that neither receive nor transmit communication; no mention
is therefore made of a philosophical friend, or a pleasant
companion.  The seriousness does not arise from any participation of
calamity, nor the gaiety from the pleasures of the bottle.

The man of CHEERFULNESS, having exhausted the country, tries what
"towered cities" will afford, and mingles with scenes of splendour,
gay assemblies, and nuptial festivities; but he mingles a mere
spectator, as, when the learned comedies of Jonson, or the wild
dramas of Shakespeare, are exhibited, he attends the theatre.

The PENSIVE man never loses himself in crowds, but walks the
cloister, or frequents the cathedral.  Milton probably had not yet
forsaken the Church.

Both his characters delight in music; but he seems to think that
cheerful notes would have obtained from Pluto a complete dismission
of Eurydice, of whom solemn sounds procured only a conditional
release.

For the old age of Cheerfulness he makes no provision:  but
Melancholy he conducts with great dignity to the close of life.  His
Cheerfulness is without levity, and his Pensiveness without
asperity.

Through these two poems the images are properly selected and nicely
distinguished; but the colours of the diction seem not sufficiently
discriminated.  I know not whether the characters are kept
sufficiently apart.  No mirth can, indeed, be found in his
melancholy; but I am afraid that I always meet some melancholy in
his mirth.  They are two noble efforts of imagination.

The greatest of his juvenile performances is the "Mask of Comus," in
which may very plainly be discovered the dawn or twilight of
"Paradise Lost."  Milton appears to have formed very early that
system of diction, and mode of verse, which his maturer judgment
approved, and from which he never endeavoured nor desired to
deviate.

Nor does Comus afford only a specimen of his language; it exhibits
likewise his power of description and his vigour of sentiment,
employed in the praise and defence of virtue.  A work more truly
poetical is rarely found; allusions, images, and descriptive
epithets, embellish almost every period with lavish decoration.  As
a series of lines, therefore, it may be considered as worthy of all
the admiration with which the votaries have received it.

As a drama it is deficient.  The action is not probable.  A mask, in
those parts where supernatural intervention is admitted, must indeed
be given up to all the freaks of imagination, but so far as the
action is merely human, it ought to be reasonable, which can hardly
be said of the conduct of the two brothers; who, when their sister
sinks with fatigue in a pathless wilderness, wander both away
together in search of berries too far to find their way back, and
leave a helpless lady to all the sadness and danger of solitude.
This, however, is a defect over-balanced by its convenience.

What deserves more reprehension is, that the prologue spoken in the
wild wood by the attendant Spirit is addressed to the audience; a
mode of communication so contrary to the nature of dramatic
representation, that no precedents can support it.

The discourse of the Spirit is too long; an objection that may be
made to almost all the following speeches; they have not the
sprightliness of a dialogue animated by reciprocal contention, but
seem rather declamations deliberately composed, and formally
repeated, on a moral question.  The auditor therefore listens as to
a lecture, without passion, without anxiety.

The song of Comus has airiness and jollity; but, what may recommend
Milton's morals as well as his poetry, the invitations to pleasure
are so general, that they excite no distinct images of corrupt
enjoyment, and take no dangerous hold on the fancy.

The following soliloquies of Comus and the Lady are elegant but
tedious.  The song must owe much to the voice if it ever can
delight.  At last the Brothers enter with too much tranquillity;
and, when they have feared lest their Sister should be in danger,
and hoped that she is not in danger, the elder makes a speech in
praise of chastity, and the younger finds how fine it is to be a
philosopher.

Then descends the Spirit in form of a shepherd; and the Brother,
instead of being in haste to ask his help, praises his singing, and
inquires his business in that place.  It is remarkable, that at this
interview the Brother is taken with a short fit of rhyming, The
Spirit relates that the Lady is in the power of Comus; the Brother
moralises again; and the Spirit makes a long narration, of no use
because it is false, and therefore unsuitable to a good being.

In all these parts the language is poetical, and the sentiments are
generous; but there is something wanting to allure attention.

The dispute between the Lady and Comus is the most animated and
affecting scene of the drama, and wants nothing but a brisker
reciprocation of objections and replies to invite attention, and
detain it.

The songs are vigorous and full of imagery; but they are harsh in
their diction, and not very musical in their numbers.

Throughout the whole the figures are too bold, and the language too
luxuriant for dialogue.  It is a drama in the epic style,
inelegantly splendid, and tediously instructive.

The sonnets were written in different parts of Milton's life, upon
different occasions.  They deserve not any particular criticism; for
of the best it can only be said, that they are not bad; and perhaps
only the eighth and twenty-first are truly entitled to this slender
commendation.  The fabric of a sonnet, however adapted to the
Italian language, has never succeeded in ours, which, having greater
variety of termination, requires the rhymes to be often changed.

Those little pieces may be despatched without much anxiety; a
greater work calls for greater care.  I am now to examine "Paradise
Lost;" a poem which, considered with respect to design, may claim
the first place, and with respect to performance, the second, among
the productions of the human mind.

By the general consent of critics the first praise of genius is due
to the writer of an epic poem, as it requires an assemblage of all
the powers which are singly sufficient for other compositions.
Poetry is the art of uniting pleasure with truth, by calling
imagination to the help of reason.  Epic poetry undertakes to teach
the most important truths by the most pleasing precepts, and
therefore relates some great event in the most affecting manner.
History must supply the writer with the rudiments of narration,
which he must improve and exalt by a nobler art, must animate by
dramatic energy, and diversify by retrospection and anticipation;
morality must teach him the exact bounds, and different shades, of
vice and virtue; from policy, and the practice of life, he has to
learn the discriminations of character, and the tendency of the
passions, either single or combined; and physiology must supply him
with illustrations and images.  To put those materials to poetical
use, is required an imagination capable of painting nature and
realising fiction.  Nor is he yet a poet till he has attained the
whole extension of his language, distinguished all the delicacies of
phrase, and all the colours of words, and learned to adjust their
different sounds to all the varieties of metrical modulation.

Bossu is of opinion, that the poet's first work is to find a MORAL,
which his fable is afterwards to illustrate and establish.  This
seems to have been the process only of Milton; the moral of other
poems is incidental and consequent; in Milton's only it is essential
and intrinsic.  His purpose was the most useful and the most
arduous:  "to vindicate the ways of God to man;" to show the
reasonableness of religion, and the necessity of obedience to the
Divine Law.

To convey this moral there must be a FABLE, a narration artfully
constructed, so as to excite curiosity and surprise expectation.  In
this part of his work Milton must be confessed to have equalled
every other poet.  He has involved in his account of the Fall of Man
the events which preceded and those that were to follow it:  he has
interwoven the whole system of theology with such propriety, that
every part appears to be necessary; and scarcely any recital is
wished shorter for the sake of quickening the progress of the main
action.

The subject of an epic poem is naturally an event of great
importance.  That of Milton is not the destruction of a city, the
conduct of a colony, or the foundation of an empire.  His subject is
the fate of worlds, the revolutions of heaven and of earth;
rebellion against the Supreme King, raised by the highest order of
created beings; the overthrow of their host, and the punishment of
their crime; the creation of a new race of reasonable creatures;
their original happiness and innocence, their forfeiture of
immortality, and their restoration to hope and peace.

Great events can be hastened or retarded only by persons of elevated
dignity.  Before the greatness displayed in Milton's poem, all other
greatness shrinks away.  The weakest of his agents are the highest
and noblest of human beings, the original parents of mankind; with
whose actions the elements consented; on whose rectitude or
deviation of will, depended the state of terrestrial nature, and the
condition of all the future inhabitants of the globe.

Of the other agents in the poem, the chief are such as it is
irreverence to name on slight occasions.  The rest were lower powers
-


   Of which the least could wield
Those elements, and arm him with the force
Of all their regions;


powers, which only the control of Omnipotence restrains from laying
creation waste, and filling the vast expanse of space with ruin and
confusion.  To display the motives and actions of beings thus
superior, so far as human reason can examine them, or human
imagination represent them, is the task which this mighty poet has
undertaken and performed.

In the examination of epic poems much speculation is commonly
employed upon the CHARACTERS.  The characters in the "Paradise
Lost," which admit of examination, are those of angels and of man;
of angels good and evil; of man in his innocent and sinful state.

Among the angels, the virtue of Raphael is mild and placid, of easy
condescension and free communication; that of Michael is regal and
lofty, and, as may seem, attentive to the dignity of his own nature.
Abdiel and Gabriel appear occasionally, and act as every incident
requires; the solitary fidelity of Abdiel is very amiably painted.

Of the evil angels the characters are more diversified.  To Satan,
as Addison observes, such sentiments are given as suit "the most
exalted and most depraved being."  Milton has been censured by
Clarke, for the impiety which sometimes breaks from Satan's mouth;
for there are thoughts, as he justly remarks, which no observation
of character can justify, because no good man would willingly permit
them to pass, however transiently, through his own mind.  To make
Satan speak as a rebel, without any such expression as might taint
the reader's imagination, was indeed one of the great difficulties
in Milton's undertaking; and I cannot but think that he has
extricated himself with great happiness.  There is in Satan's
speeches little that can give pain to a pious ear.  The language of
rebellion cannot be the same with that of obedience.  The malignity
of Satan foams in haughtiness and obstinacy; but his expressions are
commonly general, and no otherwise offensive than as they are
wicked.

The other chiefs of the celestial rebellion are very judiciously
discriminated in the first and second books; and the ferocious
character of Moloch appears, both in the battle and the council,
with exact consistency.

To Adam and to Eve are given, during their innocence, such
sentiments as innocence can generate and utter.  Their love is pure
benevolence and mutual veneration; their repasts are without luxury,
and their diligence without toil.  Their addresses to their Maker
have little more than the voice of admiration and gratitude.
Fruition left them nothing to ask; and innocence left them nothing
to fear.

But with guilt enter distrust and discord, mutual accusation, and
stubborn self-defence; they regard each other with alienated minds,
and dread their Creator as the avenger of their transgression.  At
last they seek shelter in His mercy, soften to repentance, and melt
in supplication.  Both before and after the fall, the superiority of
Adam is diligently sustained.

Of the PROBABLE and the MARVELLOUS, two parts of a vulgar epic poem
which immerge the critic in deep consideration, the "Paradise Lost"
requires little to be said.  It contains the history of a miracle,
of creation and redemption; it displays the power and the mercy of
the Supreme Being; the probable therefore is marvellous, and the
marvellous is probable.  The substance of the narrative is truth;
and, as truth allows no choice, it is, like necessity, superior to
rule.  To the accidental or adventitious parts, as to everything
human, some slight exceptions may be made; but the main fabric is
immovably supported.

It is justly remarked by Addison, that this poem has, by the nature
of its subject, the advantage above all others, that it is
universally and perpetually interesting.  All mankind will, through
all ages, bear the same relation to Adam and to Eve, and must
partake of that good and evil which extend to themselves.

Of the MACHINERY, so called from [Greek text], by which is meant the
occasional interposition of supernatural power, another fertile
topic of critical remarks, here is no room to speak, because
everything is done under the immediate and visible direction of
Heaven; but the rule is so far observed, that no part of the action
could have been accomplished by any other means.

Of EPISODES, I think there are only two--contained in Raphael's
relation of the war in Heaven, and Michael's prophetic account of
the changes to happen in this world.  Both are closely connected
with the great action; one was necessary to Adam as a warning, the
other as a consolation.

To the completeness or INTEGRITY of the design nothing can be
objected; it has distinctly and clearly what Aristotle requires--a
beginning, a middle, and an end.  There is perhaps no poem, of the
same length, from which so little can be taken without apparent
mutilation.  Here are no funeral games, nor is there any long
description of a shield.  The short digressions at the beginning of
the third, seventh, and ninth books, might doubtless be spared, but
superfluities so beautiful who would take away? or who does not wish
that the author of the "Iliad" had gratified succeeding ages with a
little knowledge of himself?  Perhaps no passages are more
attentively read than those extrinsic paragraphs; and, since the end
of poetry is pleasure, that cannot be unpoetical with which all are
pleased.

The questions, whether the action of the poem be strictly ONE,
whether the poem can be properly termed HEROIC, and who is the hero,
are raised by such readers as draw their principles of judgment
rather from books than from reason.  Milton, though he entitled
"Paradise Lost" only a "poem," yet calls it himself "heroic song."
Dryden petulantly and indecently denies the heroism of Adam, because
he was overcome; but there is no reason why the hero should not be
unfortunate, except established practice, since success and virtue
do not go necessarily together.  Cato is the hero of Lucan; but
Lucan's authority will not be suffered by Quintilian to decide.
However, if success be necessary, Adam's deceiver was at last
crushed; Adam was restored to his Maker's favour, and therefore may
securely resume his human rank.

After the scheme and fabric of the poem, must be considered its
component parts, the sentiments and the diction.

The SENTIMENTS, as expressive of manners, or appropriated to
characters, are, for the greater part, unexceptionably just.

Splendid passages, containing lessons of morality, or precepts of
prudence, occur seldom.  Such is the original formation of this
poem, that, as it admits no human manners till the Fall, it can give
little assistance to human conduct.  Its end is to raise the
thoughts above sublunary cares or pleasures.  Yet the praise of that
fortitude, with which Abdiel maintained his singularity of virtue
against the scorn of multitudes, may be accommodated to all times;
and Raphael's reproof of Adam's curiosity after the planetary
motions, with the answer returned by Adam, may be confidently
opposed to any rule of life which any poet has delivered.

The thoughts which are occasionally called forth in the progress are
such as could only be produced by an imagination in the highest
degree fervid and active, to which materials were supplied by
incessant study and unlimited curiosity.  The heat of Milton's mind
may be said to sublimate his learning, to throw off into his work
the spirit of science, unmingled with its grosser parts.

He had considered creation in its whole extent, and his descriptions
are therefore learned.  He had accustomed his imagination to
unrestrained indulgence, and his conceptions therefore were
extensive.  The characteristic quality of his poem is sublimity.  He
sometimes descends to the elegant, but his element is the great.  He
can occasionally invest himself with grace; but his natural port is
gigantic loftiness.  He can please when pleasure is required; but it
is his peculiar power to astonish.

He seems to have been well acquainted with his own genius, and to
know what it was that Nature had bestowed upon him more bountifully
than upon others--the power of displaying the vast, illuminating the
splendid, enforcing the awful, darkening the gloomy, and aggravating
the dreadful; he therefore chose a subject on which too much could
not be said, on which he might tire his fancy without the censure of
extravagance.

The appearances of nature, and the occurrences of life, did not
satiate his appetite of greatness.  To paint things as they are
requires a minute attention, and employs the memory rather than the
fancy.  Milton's delight was to sport in the wide regions of
possibility; reality was a scene too narrow for his mind.  He sent
his faculties out upon discovery, into worlds where only imagination
can travel, and delighted to form new modes of existence, and
furnish sentiment and action to superior beings; to trace the
counsels of hell, or accompany the choirs of heaven.

But he could not be always in other worlds; he must sometimes
revisit earth, and tell of things visible and known.  When he cannot
raise wonder by the sublimity of his mind, he gives delight by its
fertility.

Whatever be his subject, he never fails to fill the imagination.
But his images and descriptions of the scenes or operations of
nature do not seem to be always copied from original form, nor to
have the freshness, raciness, and energy of immediate observation.
He saw nature, as Dryden expresses it, "through the spectacles of
books;" and on most occasions calls learning to his assistance.  The
garden of Eden brings to his mind the vale of Enna, where Proserpine
was gathering flowers.  Satan makes his way through fighting
elements, like Argo between the Cyanean rocks, or Ulysses between
the two Sicilian whirlpools, when he shunned Charybdis on the
larboard.  The mythological allusions have been justly censured, as
not being always used with notice of their vanity; but they
contribute variety to the narration, and produce an alternate
exercise of the memory and the fancy.

His similes are less numerous, and more various, than those of his
predecessors.  But he does not confine himself within the limits of
rigorous comparison:  his great excellence is amplitude; and he
expands the adventitious image beyond the dimensions which the
occasion required.  Thus, comparing the shield of Satan to the orb
of the moon, he crowds the imagination with the discovery of the
telescope, and all the wonders which the telescope discovers.

Of his moral sentiments it is hardly praise to affirm that they
excel those of all other poets; for this superiority he was indebted
to his acquaintance with the sacred writings.  The ancient epic
poets, wanting the light of Revelation, were very unskilful teachers
of virtue; their principal characters may be great, but they are not
amiable.  The reader may rise from their works with a greater degree
of active or passive fortitude, and sometimes of prudence; but he
will be able to carry away few precepts of justice, and none of
mercy.

From the Italian writers it appears that the advantages of even
Christian knowledge may be possessed in vain.  Ariosto's pravity is
generally known; and, though the "Deliverance of Jerusalem" may be
considered as a sacred subject, the poet has been very sparing of
moral instruction.

In Milton every line breathes sanctity of thought, and purity of
manners, except when the train of the narration requires the
introduction of the rebellious spirits; and even they are compelled
to acknowledge their subjection to God, in such a manner as excites
reverence and confirms piety.

Of human beings there are but two; but those two are the parents of
mankind, venerable before their fall for dignity and innocence, and
amiable after it for repentance and submission.  In the first state
their affection is tender without weakness, and their piety sublime
without presumption.  When they have sinned, they show how discord
begins in mutual frailty, and how it ought to cease in mutual
forbearance; how confidence of the Divine favour is forfeited by
sin, and how hope of pardon may be obtained by penitence and prayer.
A state of innocence we can only conceive, if indeed, in our present
misery, it be possible to conceive it; but the sentiments and
worship proper to a fallen and offending being, we have all to
learn, as we have all to practise.

The poet, whatever be done, is always great.  Our progenitors in
their first state conversed with angels; even when folly and sin had
degraded them, they had not in their humiliation "the port of mean
suitors;" and they rise again to reverential regard, when we find
that their prayers were heard.

As human passions did not enter the world before the Fall, there is
in the "Paradise Lost" little opportunity for the pathetic; but what
little there is has not been lost.  That passion, which is peculiar
to rational nature, the anguish arising from the consciousness of
transgression, and the horrors attending the sense of the Divine
displeasure, are very justly described and forcibly impressed.  But
the passions are moved only on one occasion; sublimity is the
general and prevailing quality in this poem; sublimity variously
modified--sometimes descriptive, sometimes argumentative.

The defects and faults of "Paradise Lost"--for faults and defects
every work of man must have--it is the business of impartial
criticism to discover.  As, in displaying the excellence of Milton,
I have not made long quotations, because of selecting beauties there
had been no end, I shall in the same general manner mention that
which seems to deserve censure; for what Englishman can take delight
in transcribing passages, which, if they lessen the reputation of
Milton, diminish in some degree the honour of our country?

The generality of my scheme does not admit the frequent notice of
verbal inaccuracies; which Bentley, perhaps better skilled in
grammar and poetry, has often found, though he sometimes made them,
and which he imputed to the obtrusions of a reviser, whom the
author's blindness obliged him to employ; a supposition rash and
groundless, if he thought it true; and vile and pernicious, if, as
is said, he in private allowed it to be false.

The plan of "Paradise Lost" has this inconvenience, that it
comprises neither human actions nor human manners.  The man and
woman who act and suffer are in a state which no other man or woman
can ever know.  The reader finds no transaction in which he can be
engaged--beholds no condition in which he can by any effort of
imagination place himself; he has, therefore, little natural
curiosity or sympathy.

We all, indeed, feel the effects of Adam's disobedience; we all sin
like Adam, and like him must all bewail our offences; we have
restless and insidious enemies in the fallen angels, and in the
blessed spirits we have guardians and friends; in the redemption of
mankind we hope to be included; in the description of heaven and
hell we are surely interested, as we are all to reside hereafter
either in the regions of horror or bliss.

But these truths are too important to be new; they have been taught
to our infancy; they have mingled with our solitary thoughts and
familiar conversations, and are habitually interwoven with the whole
texture of life.  Being therefore not new, they raise no
unaccustomed emotion in the mind; what we knew before, we cannot
learn; what is not unexpected, cannot surprise.

Of the ideas suggested by these awful scenes, from some we recede
with reverence, except when stated hours require their association;
and from others we shrink with horror, or admit them only as
salutary inflictions, as counterpoises to our interests and
passions.  Such images rather obstruct the career of fancy than
incite it.

Pleasure and terror are indeed the genuine sources of poetry; but
poetical pleasure must be such as human imagination can at least
conceive, and poetical terrors such as human strength and fortitude
may combat.  The good and evil of eternity are too ponderous for the
wings of wit; the mind sinks under them in passive helplessness,
content with calm belief and humble adoration.

Known truths, however, may take a different appearance, and be
conveyed to the mind by a new train of intermediate images.  This
Milton has undertaken and performed with pregnancy and vigour of
mind peculiar to himself.  Whoever considers the few radical
positions which the Scriptures afforded him, will wonder by what
energetic operation he expanded them to such extent, and ramified
them to so much variety, restrained as he was by religious reverence
from licentiousness of fiction.

Here is a full display of the united force of study and genius--of a
great accumulation of materials, with judgment to digest and fancy
to combine them:  Milton was able to select from nature or from
story, from an ancient fable or from modern science, whatever could
illustrate or adorn his thoughts.  An accumulation of knowledge
impregnated his mind, fermented by study and exalted by imagination.

It has been therefore said, without an indecent hyperbole, by one of
his encomiasts, that in reading "Paradise Lost" we read a book of
universal knowledge.

But original deficiency cannot be supplied.  The want of human
interest is always felt.  "Paradise Lost" is one of the books which
the reader admires and lays down, and forgets to take up again.
None ever wished it longer than it is.  Its perusal is a duty rather
than a pleasure.  We read Milton for instruction, retire harassed
and overburdened, and look elsewhere for recreation; we desert our
master, and seek for companions.

Another inconvenience of Milton's design is, that it requires the
description of what cannot be described, the agency of spirits.  He
saw that immateriality supplied no images, and that he could not
show angels acting but by instruments of action; he therefore
invested them with form and matter.  This, being necessary, was
therefore defensible; and he should have secured the consistency of
his system, by keeping immateriality out of sight, and enticing his
reader to drop it from his thoughts.  But he has unhappily perplexed
his poetry with his philosophy.  His infernal and celestial powers
are sometimes pure spirit, and sometimes animated body.  When Satan
walks with his lance upon the "burning marl," he has a body; when,
in his passage between hell and the new world, he is in danger of
sinking in the vacuity, and is supported by a gust of rising
vapours, he has a body; when he animates the toad, he seems to be
more spirit, that can penetrate matter at pleasure; when he "starts
up in his own shape," he has at least a determined form; and when he
is brought before Gabriel, he has "a spear and a shield," which he
had the power of hiding in the toad, though the arms of the
contending angels are evidently material.

The vulgar inhabitants of Pandaemonium, being "incorporeal spirits,"
are "at large, though without number," in a limited space:  yet in
the battle, when they were overwhelmed by mountains, their armour
hurt them, "crushed in upon their substance, now grown gross by
sinning."  This likewise happened to the uncorrupted angels, who
were overthrown the "sooner for their arms, for unarmed they might
easily as spirits have evaded by contraction or remove."  Even as
spirits they are hardly spiritual:  for "contraction" and "remove"
are images of matter; but if they could have escaped without their
armour, they might have escaped from it, and left only the empty
cover to be battered.  Uriel, when he rides on a sunbeam, is
material; Satan is material when he is afraid of the prowess of
Adam.

The confusion of spirit and matter, which pervades the whole
narration of the war of heaven, fills it with incongruity; and the
book in which it is related is, I believe, the favourite of
children, and gradually neglected as knowledge is increased.

After the operation of immaterial agents, which cannot be explained,
may be considered that of allegorical persons which have no real
existence.  To exalt causes into agents, to invest abstract ideas
with form, and animate them with activity, has always been the right
of poetry.  But such airy beings are, for the most part, suffered
only to do their natural office, and retire.  Thus Fame tells a
tale, and Victory hovers over a general, or perches on a standard;
but Fame and Victory can do no more.  To give them any real
employment, or ascribe to them any material agency, is to make them
allegorical no longer, but to shock the mind by ascribing effects to
nonentity.  In the "Prometheus" of AEschylus, we see Violence and
Strength, and in the "Alcestis" of Euripides we see Death, brought
upon the stage, all as active persons of the drama; but no
precedents can justify absurdity.

Milton's allegory of Sin and Death is undoubtedly faulty.  Sin is
indeed the mother of Death, and may be allowed to be the portress of
hell; but when they stop the journey of Satan, a journey described
as real, and when Death offers him battle, the allegory is broken.
That Sin and Death should have shown the way to hell, might have
been allowed; but they cannot facilitate the passage by building a
bridge, because the difficulty of Satan's passage is described as
real and sensible, and the bridge ought to be only figurative.  The
hell assigned to the rebellious spirits is described as not less
local than the residence of man.  It is placed in some distant part
of space, separated from the regions of harmony and order by a
chaotic waste and an unoccupied vacuity; but Sin and Death worked up
a "mole of aggravated soil" cemented with asphaltus, a work too
bulky for ideal architects.

This unskilful allegory appears to me one of the greatest faults of
the poem; and to this there was no temptation but the author's
opinion of its beauty.

To the conduct of the narrative some objections may be made.  Satan
is with great expectation brought before Gabriel in Paradise, and is
suffered to go away unmolested.  The creation of man is represented
as the consequence of the vacuity left in heaven by the expulsion of
the rebels; yet Satan mentions it as a report "rife in Heaven"
before his departure.

To find sentiments for the state of innocence was very difficult;
and something of anticipation perhaps is now and then discovered.
Adam's discourse of dreams seems not to be the speculation of a new-
created being.  I know not whether his answer to the angel's reproof
for curiosity does not want something of propriety; it is the speech
of a man acquainted with many other men.  Some philosophical
notions, especially when the philosophy is false, might have been
better omitted.  The angel, in a comparison, speaks of "timorous
deer," before deer were yet timorous, and before Adam could
understand the comparison.

Dryden remarks, that Milton has some flats among his elevations.
This is only to say, that all the parts are not equal.  In every
work, one part must be for the sake of others; a palace must have
passages; a poem must have transitions.  It is no more to be
required that wit should always be blazing, than that the sun should
always stand at noon.  In a great work there is a vicissitude of
luminous and opaque parts, as there is in the world a succession of
day and night.  Milton, when he has expatiated in the sky, may be
allowed sometimes to revisit earth; for what other author ever
soared so high, or sustained his flight so long?

Milton, being well versed in the Italian poets, appears to have
borrowed often from them; and, as every man catches something from
his companions, his desire of imitating Ariosto's levity has
disgraced his work with the Paradise of Fools; a fiction not in
itself ill-imagined, but too ludicrous for its place.

His play on words, in which he delights too often; his
equivocations, which Bentley endeavours to defend by the example of
the ancients; his unnecessary and ungraceful use of terms of art; it
is not necessary to mention, because they are easily remarked, and
generally censured; and at last bear so little proportion to the
whole, that they scarcely deserve the attention of a critic.

Such are the faults of that wonderful performance "Paradise Lost;"
which he who can put in balance with its beauties must be considered
not as nice but as dull, as less to be censured for want of candour
than pitied for want of sensibility.

Of "Paradise Regained," the general judgment seems now to be right,
that it is in many parts elegant, and everywhere instructive.  It
was not to be supposed that the writer of "Paradise Lost" could ever
write without great effusions of fancy, and exalted precepts of
wisdom.  The basis of "Paradise Regained" is narrow; a dialogue
without action can never please like a union of the narrative and
dramatic powers.  Had this poem been written not by Milton, but by
some imitator, it would have claimed and received universal praise.

If "Paradise Regained" has been too much depreciated, "Samson
Agonistes" has, in requital, been too much admired.  It could only
be by long prejudice, and the bigotry of learning, that Milton could
prefer the ancient tragedies, with their encumbrance of a chorus, to
the exhibitions of the French and English stages; and it is only by
a blind confidence in the reputation of Milton that a drama can be
praised in which the intermediate parts have neither cause nor
consequence, neither hasten nor retard the catastrophe.

In this tragedy are, however, many particular beauties, many just
sentiments and striking lines; but it wants that power of attracting
the attention which a well connected plan produces.

Milton would not have excelled in dramatic writing; he knew human
nature only in the gross, and had never studied the shades of
character, nor the combinations of concurring, or the perplexity of
contending passions.  He had read much, and knew what books could
teach; but had mingled little in the world, and was deficient in the
knowledge which experience must confer.

Through all his greater works there prevails a uniform peculiarity
of DICTION, a mode and cast of expression which bears little
resemblance to that of any former writer; and which is so far
removed from common use, that an unlearned reader, when he first
opens his book, finds himself surprised by a new language.

This novelty has been, by those who can find nothing wrong in
Milton, imputed to his laborious endeavours after words suitable to
the grandeur of his ideas.  "Our language," says Addison, "sank
under him."  But the truth is, that, both in prose and verse, he had
formed his style by a perverse and pedantic principle.  He was
desirous to use English words with a foreign idiom.  This, in all
his prose, is discovered and condemned; for there judgment operates
freely, neither softened by the beauty, nor awed by the dignity of
his thoughts; but such is the power of his poetry, that his call is
obeyed without resistance, the reader feels himself in captivity to
a higher and a nobler mind, and criticism sinks in admiration.

Milton's style was not modified by his subject; what is shown with
greater extent in "Paradise Lost" may be found in "Comus."  One
source of his peculiarity was his familiarity with the Tuscan poets;
the disposition of his words is, I think, frequently Italian;
perhaps sometimes combined with other tongues.  Of him, at last, may
be said what Jonson says of Spenser, that "he wrote no language,"
but has formed what Butler calls a "Babylonish dialect," in itself
harsh and barbarous, but made by exalted genius and extensive
learning the vehicle of so much instruction and so much pleasure,
that, like other lovers, we find grace in its deformity.

Whatever be the faults of his diction, he cannot want the praise of
copiousness and variety.  He was master of his language in its full
extent; and has selected the melodious words with such diligence,
that from his book alone the Art of English Poetry might be learned.

After his diction something must be said of his VERSIFICATION.  The
MEASURE, he says, "is the English heroic verse without rhyme."  Of
this mode he had many examples among the Italians, and some in his
own country.  The Earl of Surrey is said to have translated one of
Virgil's books without rhyme; and, beside our tragedies, a few short
poems had appeared in blank verse, particularly one tending to
reconcile the nation to Raleigh's wild attempt upon Guiana, and
probably written by Raleigh himself.  These petty performances
cannot be supposed to have much influenced Milton, who more probably
took his hint from Trissino's "Italia Liberata;" and, finding blank
verse easier than rhyme, was desirous of persuading himself that it
is better.

"Rhyme," he says, and says truly, "is no necessary adjunct of true
poetry."  But, perhaps, of poetry, as a mental operation, metre or
music is no necessary adjunct:  it is, however, by the music of
metre that poetry has been discriminated in all languages; and, in
languages melodiously constructed with a due proportion of long and
short syllables, metre is sufficient.  But one language cannot
communicate its rules to another; where metre is scanty and
imperfect, some help is necessary.  The music of the English heroic
lines strikes the ear so faintly, that it is easily lost, unless all
the syllables of every line co-operate together; this co-operation
can only be obtained by the preservation of every verse unmingled
with another as a distinct system of sounds; and this distinctness
is obtained and preserved by the artifice of rhyme.  The variety of
pauses, so much boasted by the lovers of blank verse, changes the
measures of an English poet to the periods of a declaimer; and there
are only a few skilful and happy readers of Milton, who enable their
audience to perceive where the lines end or begin.  "Blank verse,"
said an ingenious critic, "seems to be verse only to the eye."

Poetry may subsist without rhyme, but English poetry will not often
please; nor can rhyme ever be safely spared but where the subject is
able to support itself.  Blank verse makes some approach to that
which is called the "lapidary style;" has neither the easiness of
prose, nor the melody of numbers, and therefore tires by long
continuance.  Of the Italian writers without rhyme, whom Milton
alleges as precedents, not one is popular; what reason could urge in
its defence has been confuted by the ear.

But, whatever be the advantages of rhyme, I cannot prevail on myself
to wish that Milton had been a rhymer; for I cannot wish his work to
be other than it is; yet like other heroes, he is to be admired
rather than imitated.  He that thinks himself capable of astonishing
may write blank verse; but those that hope only to please must
condescend to rhyme.

The highest praise of genius is original invention.  Milton cannot
be said to have contrived the structure of an epic poem, and
therefore owes reverence to that vigour and amplitude of mind to
which all generations must be indebted for the art of poetical
narration, for the texture of the fable, the variation of incidents,
the interposition of dialogue, and all the stratagems that surprise
and enchain attention.  But, of all the borrowers from Homer, Milton
is perhaps the least indebted.  He was naturally a thinker for
himself, confident of his own abilities, and disdainful of help or
hindrance:  he did not refuse admission to the thoughts or images of
his predecessors, but he did not seek them.  From his contemporaries
he neither courted nor received support; there is in his writings
nothing by which the pride of other authors might be gratified, or
favour gained; no exchange of praise, nor solicitation of support.
His great works were performed under discountenance and in
blindness; but difficulties vanished at his touch; he was born for
whatever is arduous; and his work is not the greatest of heroic
poems, only because it is not the first.



COWLEY.



The Life of Cowley, notwithstanding the penury of English biography,
has been written by Dr. Sprat, an author whose pregnancy of
imagination and elegance of language have deservedly set him high in
the ranks of literature; but his zeal of friendship, or ambition of
eloquence, has produced a funeral oration rather than a history:  he
has given the character, not the life, of Cowley; for he writes with
so little detail, that scarcely anything is distinctly known, but
all is shown confused and enlarged through the mist of panegyric.


Abraham Cowley was born in the year one thousand sir hundred and
eighteen.  His father was a grocer, whose condition Dr. Sprat
conceals under the general appellation of a citizen; and, what would
probably not have been less carefully suppressed, the omission of
his name in the register of St. Dunstan's parish gives reason to
suspect that his father was a sectary.  Whoever he was, he died
before the birth of his son, and consequently left him to the care
of his mother:  whom Wood represents as struggling earnestly to
procure him a literary education, and who, as she lived to the age
of eighty, had her solicitude rewarded by seeing her son eminent,
and, I hope, by seeing him fortunate, and partaking his prosperity.
We know at least, from Sprat's account, that he always acknowledged
her care, and justly paid the dues of filial gratitude.

In the window of his mother's apartment lay Spenser's "Fairy Queen,"
in which he very early took delight to read, till by feeling the
charms of verse, he became, as he relates, irrecoverably a poet.
Such are the accidents which, sometimes remembered, and perhaps
sometimes forgotten, produce that particular designation of mind,
and propensity for some certain science or employment, which is
commonly called Genius.  The true Genius is a mind of large general
powers, accidentally determined to some particular direction.  Sir
Joshua Reynolds, the great painter of the present age, had the first
fondness for his art excited by the perusal of Richardson's
treatise.

By his mother's solicitation he was admitted into Westminster
school, where he was soon distinguished.  He was wont, says Sprat,
to relate, "that he had this defect in his memory at that time, that
his teachers never could bring it to retain the ordinary rules of
grammar."

This is an instance of the natural desire of man to propagate a
wonder.  It is surely very difficult to tell anything as it was
heard, when Sprat could not refrain from amplifying a commodious
incident, though the book to which he prefixed his narrative
contained its confutation.  A memory admitting some things, and
rejecting others, an intellectual digestion that concocted the pulp
of learning, but refused the husks, had the appearance of an
instinctive elegance, of a particular provision made by nature for
literary politeness.  But in the author's own honest relation, the
marvel vanishes:  he was, he says, such "an enemy to all constraint,
that his master never could prevail on him to learn the rules
without book."  He does not tell that he could not learn the rules;
but that, being able to perform his exercises without them, and
being an "enemy to constraint," he spared himself the labour.

Among the English poets, Cowley, Milton, and Pope might be said "to
lisp in numbers;" and have given such early proofs, not only of
powers of language, but of comprehension of things, as to more tardy
minds seems scarcely credible.  But of the learned puerilities of
Cowley there is no doubt, since a volume of his poems was not only
written, but printed in his thirteenth year; containing, with other
poetical compositions, "The tragical History of Pyramus and Thisbe,"
written when he was ten years old; and "Constantia and Philetus,"
written two years after.

While he was yet at school he produced a comedy called "Love's
Riddle," though it was not published till he had been some time at
Cambridge.  This comedy is of the pastoral kind, which requires no
acquaintance with the living world, and therefore the time at which
it was composed adds little to the wonders of Cowley's minority.

In 1636 he was removed to Cambridge, where he continued his studies
with great intenseness; for he is said to have written, while he was
yet a young student, the greater part of his "Davideis;" a work of
which the materials could not have been collected without the study
of many years, but by a mind of the greatest vigour and activity.

Two years after his settlement at Cambridge, he published "Love's
Riddle," with a poetical dedication to Sir Kenelm Digby, of whose
acquaintance all his contemporaries seem to have been ambitious; and
"Naufragium Joculare," a comedy written in Latin, but without due
attention to the ancient models; for it is not loose verse, but mere
prose.  It was printed, with a dedication in verse to Dr. Comber,
master of the college; but having neither the facility of a popular,
nor the accuracy of a learned work, it seems to be now universally
neglected.

At the beginning of the civil war, as the prince passed through
Cambridge in his way to York, he was entertained with the
representation of "The Guardian," a comedy which Cowley says was
neither written nor acted, but rough-drawn by him, and repeated by
the scholars.  That this comedy was printed during his absence from
his country he appears to have considered as injurious to his
reputation; though, during the suppression of the theatres, it was
sometimes privately acted with sufficient approbation.

In 1643, being now master of arts, he was, by the prevalence of the
Parliament, ejected from Cambridge, and sheltered himself at St.
John's College in Oxford; where, as is said by Wood, he published a
satire, called "The Puritan and Papist," which was only inserted in
the last collection of his works; and so distinguished himself by
the warmth of his loyalty, and the elegance of his conversation,
that he gained the kindness and confidence of those who attended the
king, and amongst others of Lord Falkland, whose notice cast a
lustre on all to whom it was extended.

About the time when Oxford was surrendered to the Parliament, he
followed the Queen to Paris, where he became secretary to the Lord
Jermyn, afterwards Earl of St. Albans, and was employed in such
correspondence as the royal cause required, and particularly in
ciphering and deciphering the letters that passed between the king
and queen; an employment of the highest confidence and honour.  So
wide was his province of intelligence, that for several years it
filled all his days and two or three nights in the week.

In the year 1647, his "Mistress" was published; for he imagined, as
he declared in his preface to a subsequent edition, that "poets are
scarcely thought freemen of their company, without paying some
duties, or obliging themselves to be true to love."

This obligation to amorous ditties owes, I believe, its original to
the fame of Petrarch, who, in an age rude and uncultivated, by his
tuneful homage to his Laura refined the manners of the lettered
world, and filled Europe with love and poetry.  But the basis of all
excellence is truth:  he that professes love ought to feel its
power.  Petrarch was a real lover, and Laura doubtless deserved his
tenderness.  Of Cowley, we are told by Barnes, who had means enough
of information, that, whatever he may talk of his own
inflammability, and the variety of characters by which his heart was
divided, he in reality was in love but once, and then never had
resolution to tell his passion.

This consideration cannot but abate in some measure the reader's
esteem for the works and the author.  To love excellence is natural;
it is natural likewise for the lover to solicit reciprocal regard by
an elaborate display of his own qualifications.  The desire of
pleasing has in different men produced actions of heroism, and
effusions of wit; but it seems as reasonable to appear the champion
as the poet of an airy "nothing," and to quarrel as to write for
what Cowley might have learned from his master Pindar to call "the
dream of a shadow."

It is surely not difficult, in the solitude of a college, or in the
bustle of the world, to find useful studies and serious employment.
No man needs to be so burdened with life as to squander it in
voluntary dreams of fictitious occurrences.  The man that sits down
to suppose himself charged with treason or peculation, and heats his
mind to an elaborate purgation of his character from crimes which he
was never within the possibility of committing, differs only by the
infrequency of his folly from him who praises beauty which he never
saw; complains of jealousy which he never felt; supposes himself
sometimes invited, and sometimes forsaken; fatigues his fancy, and
ransacks his memory for images which may exhibit the gaiety of hope
or the gloominess of despair; and dresses his imaginary Chloris or
Phyllis sometimes in flowers fading as her beauty, and sometimes in
gems lasting as her virtues.

At Paris, as secretary to Lord Jermyn, he was engaged in transacting
things of real importance with real men and real women, and at that
time did not much employ his thoughts upon phantoms of gallantry.
Some of his letters to Mr. Bennet, afterwards Earl of Arlington,
from April to December, in 1650, are preserved in "Miscellanea
Aulica," a collection of papers published by Brown.  These letters,
being written like those of other men whose minds are more on things
than words, contribute no otherwise to his reputation, than as they
show him to have been above the affectation of unseasonable
elegance, and to have known that the business of a statesman can be
little forwarded by flowers of rhetoric.

One passage, however, seems not unworthy of some notice.  Speaking
of the Scotch treaty then in agitation:

"The Scotch treaty," says he, "is the only thing now in which we are
vitally concerned; I am one of the last hopers, and yet cannot now
abstain from believing that an agreement will be made; all people
upon the place incline to that opinion.  The Scotch will moderate
something of the rigour of their demands; the mutual necessity of an
accord is visible; the king is persuaded of it.  And to tell you the
truth (which I take to be an argument above all the rest), Virgil
has told me something to that purpose."

This expression, from a secretary of the present time, would be
considered as merely ludicrous, or at most as an ostentatious
display of scholarship; but the manners of that time were so tinged
with superstition, that I cannot but suspect Cowley of having
consulted on this great occasion the Virgilian lots, and to have
given some credit to the answer of his oracle.

Some years afterwards, "business," says Sprat, "passed of course
into other hands;" and Cowley, being no longer useful at Paris, was
in 1656 sent back into England, that, "under pretence of privacy and
retirement, he might take occasion of giving notice of the posture
of things in this nation."

Soon after his return to London, he was seized by some messengers of
the usurping powers, who were sent out in quest of another man; and
being examined, was put into confinement, from which he was not
dismissed without the security of a thousand pounds given by Dr.
Scarborough.

This year he published his poems, with a preface, in which he seems
to have inserted something suppressed in subsequent editions, which
was interpreted to denote some relaxation of his loyalty.  In this
preface he declares, that "his desire had been for some days past,
and did still very vehemently continue, to retire himself to some of
the American plantations, and to forsake this world for ever."

From the obloquy which the appearance of submission to the usurpers
brought upon him, his biographer has been very diligent to clear
him, and indeed it does not seem to have lessened his reputation.
His wish for retirement we can easily believe to be undissembled; a
man harassed in one kingdom, and persecuted in another, who, after a
course of business that employed all his days and half his nights,
in ciphering and deciphering, comes to his own country and steps
into a prison, will be willing enough to retire to some place of
quiet and of safety.  Yet let neither our reverence for a genius,
nor our pity for a sufferer, dispose us to forget, that, if his
activity was virtue, his retreat was cowardice.

He then took upon him the character of physician, still, according
to Sprat, with intention "to dissemble the main design of his coming
over;" and, as Mr. Wood relates, "complying with the men then in
power (which was much taken notice of by the royal party), he
obtained an order to be created doctor of physic; which being done
to his mind (whereby he gained the ill-will of some of his friends),
he went into France again, having made a copy of verses on Oliver's
death."

This is no favourable representation; yet even in this not much
wrong can be discovered.  How far he complied with the men in power
is to be inquired before he can be blamed.  It is not said that he
told them any secrets, or assisted them by intelligence or any other
act.  If he only promised to be quiet, that they in whose hands he
was might free him from confinement, he did what no law of society
prohibits.

The man whose miscarriage in a just cause has put him in the power
of his enemy, may, without any breach of his integrity, regain his
liberty, or preserve his life, by a promise of neutrality:  for the
stipulation gives the enemy nothing which he had not before.  The
neutrality of a captive may be always secured by his imprisonment or
death.  He that is at the disposal of another may not promise to aid
him in any injurious act, because no power can compel active
obedience.  He may engage to do nothing, but not to do ill.

There is reason to think that Cowley promised little.  It does not
appear that his compliance gained him confidence enough to be
trusted without security, for the bond of his bail was never
cancelled; nor that it made him think himself secure, for, at that
dissolution of government which followed the death of Oliver, he
returned into France, where he resumed his former station, and
stayed till the restoration.

"He continued," says his biographer, "under these bonds till the
general deliverance;" it is therefore to be supposed that he did not
go to France, and act again for the king, without the consent of his
bondsman:  that he did not show his loyalty at the hazard of his
friend, but by his friend's permission.

Of the verses on Oliver's death, in which Wood's narrative seems to
imply something encomiastic, there has been no appearance.  There is
a discourse concerning his government, indeed, with verses
intermixed, but such as certainly gained its author no friends among
the abettors of usurpation.

A doctor of physic, however, he was made at Oxford in December,
1657; and in the commencement of the Royal Society, of which an
account has been published by Dr. Birch, he appears busy among the
experimental philosophers with the title of Doctor Cowley.

There is no reason for supposing that he ever attempted practice:
but his preparatory studies have contributed something to the honour
of his country.  Considering botany as necessary to a physician, he
retired into Kent to gather plants; and as the predominance of a
favourite study affects all subordinate operations of the intellect,
botany in the mind of Cowley turned into poetry.  He composed, in
Latin, several books on plants, of which the first and second
display the qualities of herbs, in elegiac verse; the third and
fourth, the beauties of flowers, in various measures; and the fifth
and sixth, the use of trees, in heroic numbers.

At the same time were produced, from the same university, the two
great poets, Cowley and Milton, of dissimilar genius, of opposite
principles, but concurring in the cultivation of Latin poetry; in
which the English, till their works and May's poem appeared, seemed
unable to contest the palm with any other of the lettered nations.

If the Latin performances of Cowley and Milton be compared (for May
I hold to be superior to both), the advantage seems to lie on the
side of Cowley.  Milton is generally content to express the thoughts
of the ancients in their language; Cowley, without much loss of
purity or elegance, accommodates the diction of Rome to his own
conceptions.

At the Restoration, after all the diligence of his long service, and
with consciousness, not only of the merit of fidelity, but of the
dignity of great abilities, he naturally expected ample preferments;
and, that he might not be forgotten by his own fault, wrote a song
of triumph.  But this was a time of such general hope, that great
numbers were inevitably disappointed; and Cowley found his reward
very tediously delayed.  He had been promised, by both Charles the
First and Second, the mastership of the Savoy; "but he lost it,"
says Wood, "by certain persons, enemies to the Muses."

The neglect of the court was not his only mortification; having by
such alteration as he thought proper, fitted his old comedy of "The
Guardian" for the stage, he produced it under the title of "The
Cutter of Coleman Street."  It was treated on the stage with great
severity, and was afterwards censured as a satire on the king's
party.

Mr. Dryden, who went with Mr. Sprat to the first exhibition, related
to Mr. Dennis, "that, when they told Cowley how little favour had
been shown him, he received the news of his ill success, not with so
much firmness as might have been expected from so great a man."

What firmness they expected, or what weakness Cowley discovered,
cannot be known.  He that misses his end will never be as much
pleased as he that attains it, even when he can impute no part of
his failure to himself; and when the end is to please the multitude,
no man perhaps has a right, in things admitting of gradation and
comparison, to throw the whole blame upon his judges, and totally to
exclude diffidence and shame, by a haughty consciousness of his own
excellence.

For the rejection of this play it is difficult now to find the
reason:  it certainly has, in a very great degree, the power of
fixing attention and exciting merriment.  From the charge of
disaffection he exculpates himself in his preface, by observing how
unlikely it is, that, having followed the royal family through all
their distresses, "he should choose the time of their restoration to
begin a quarrel with them."  It appears, however, from the
theatrical register of Downes the prompter, to have been popularly
considered as a satire on the royalists.

That he might shorten this tedious suspense, he published his
pretensions and his discontent in an ode called "The Complaint;" in
which he styles himself the MELANCHOLY Cowley.  This met with the
usual fortune of complaints, and seems to have excited more contempt
than pity.

These unlucky incidents are brought, maliciously enough, together in
some stanzas, written about that time on the choice of a laureate; a
mode of satire, by which, since it was first introduced by Suckling,
perhaps every generation of poets has been teased.


Savoy-missing Cowley came into the court,
   Making apologies for his bad play;
Every one gave him so good a report,
   That Apollo gave heed to all he could say:

Nor would he have had, 'tis thought, a rebuke,
   Unless he had done some notable folly;
Writ verses unjustly in praise of Sam Tuke,
   Or printed his pitiful Melancholy.


His vehement desire of retirement now came again upon him.  "Not
finding," says the morose Wood, "that preferment conferred upon him
which he expected, while others for their money carried away most
places, he retired discontented into Surrey."

"He was now," says the courtly Sprat, "weary of the vexations and
formalities of an active condition.  He had been perplexed with a
long compliance to foreign manners.  He was satiated with the arts
of a court; which sort of life, though his virtue made it innocent
to him, yet nothing could make it quiet.  Those were the reasons
that moved him to follow the violent inclination of his own mind,
which, in the greatest throng of his former business, had still
called upon him, and represented to him the true delights of
solitary studies, of temperate pleasures, and a moderate revenue
below the malice and flatteries of fortune."

So differently are things seen! and so differently are they shown!
But actions are visible, though motives are secret.  Cowley
certainly retired; first to Barn Elms, and afterwards to Chertsey,
in Surrey.  He seems, however, to have lost part of his dread of the
HUM OF MEN.  He thought himself now safe enough from intrusion,
without the defence of mountains and oceans; and, instead of seeking
shelter in America, wisely went only so far from the bustle of life
as that he might easily find his way back when solitude should grow
tedious.  His retreat was at first but slenderly accommodated; yet
he soon obtained, by the interest of the Earl of St. Alban's, and
the Duke of Buckingham, such lease of the queen's lands as afforded
him an ample income.

By the lovers of virtue and of wit it will be solicitously asked, if
he now was happy.  Let them peruse one of his letters accidentally
preserved by Peck, which I recommend to the consideration of all
that may hereafter pant for solitude.


"TO DR. THOMAS SPRAT,
"Chertsey, May 21, 1665.

"The first night that I came hither I caught so great a cold, with a
defluxion of rheum, as made me keep my chamber ten days.  And, two
after, had such a bruise on my ribs with a fall, that I am yet
unable to move or turn myself in my bed.  This is my personal
fortune here to begin with.  And, besides, I can get no money from
my tenants, and have my meadows eaten up every night by cattle put
in by my neighbours.  What this signifies, or may come to in time,
God knows; if it be ominous, it can end in nothing less than
hanging.  Another misfortune has been, and stranger than all the
rest, that you have broke your word with me and failed to come, even
though you told Mr. Bois that you would.  This is what they call
monstri simile.  I do hope to recover my late hurt so far within
five or six days (though it be uncertain yet whether I shall ever
recover it) as to walk about again.  And then, methinks, you and I
and the dean might be very merry upon St. Ann's Hill.  You might
very conveniently come hither the way of Hampton Town, lying there
one night.  I write this in pain, and can say no more:  verbum
sapienti."


He did not long enjoy the pleasure or suffer the uneasiness of
solitude; for he died at the Porch-house in Chertsey, in 1667 [28th
July], in the forty-ninth year of his age.

He was buried with great pomp near Chaucer and Spenser; and King
Charles pronounced, "That Mr. Cowley had not left behind him a
better man in England."  He is represented by Dr. Sprat as the most
amiable of mankind; and this posthumous praise may safely be
credited, as it has never been contradicted by envy or by faction.

Such are the remarks and memorials which I have been able to add to
the narrative of Dr. Sprat; who, writing when the feuds of civil war
were yet recent, and the minds of either party were easily
irritated, was obliged to pass over many transactions in general
expressions, and to leave curiosity often unsatisfied.  What he did
not tell cannot, however, now be known; I must therefore recommend
the perusal of his work, to which my narration can be considered
only as a slender supplement.

Cowley, like other poets who have written with narrow views, and,
instead of tracing intellectual pleasure to its natural sources in
the minds of men, paid their court to temporary prejudices, has been
at one time too much praised, and too much neglected at another.

Wit, like all other things subject by their nature to the choice of
man, has its changes and fashions, and at different times takes
different forms.  About the beginning of the seventeenth century
appeared a race of writers that may be termed the metaphysical
poets; of whom, in a criticism on the works of Cowley, it is not
improper to give some account.

The metaphysical poets were men of learning, and to show their
learning was their whole endeavour; but, unluckily resolving to show
it in rhyme, instead of writing poetry they only wrote verses, and
very often such verses as stood the trial of the finger better than
of the ear; for the modulation was so imperfect, that they were only
found to be verses by counting the syllables.

If the father of criticism had rightly denominated poetry [Greek
text], AN IMITATIVE ART, these writers will, without great wrong,
lose their right to the name of poets; for they cannot be said to
have imitated anything; they neither copied nature nor life; neither
painted the forms of matter, nor represented the operations of
intellect.

Those, however, who deny them to be poets, allow them to be wits.
Dryden confesses of himself and his contemporaries, that they fall
below Donne in wit; but maintains that they surpass him in poetry.

If wit be well described by Pope, as being "that which has been
often thought, but was never before so well expressed," they
certainly never attained, nor ever sought it; for they endeavoured
to be singular in their thoughts, and were careless of their
diction.  But Pope's account of wit is undoubtedly erroneous; he
depresses it below its natural dignity, and reduces it from strength
of thought to happiness of language.

If by a more noble and more adequate conception, that be considered
as wit which is at once natural and new, that which, though not
obvious, is, upon its first production, acknowledged to be just; if
it be that which he that never found it, wonders how he missed; to
wit of this kind the metaphysical poets have seldom risen.  Their
thoughts are often new, but seldom natural; they are not obvious,
but neither are they just; and the reader, far from wondering that
he missed them, wonders more frequently by what perverseness of
industry they were ever found.

But wit, abstracted from its effects upon the hearer, may be more
rigorously and philosophically considered as a kind of discordia
concors; a combination of dissimilar images, or discovery of occult
resemblances in things apparently unlike.  Of wit, thus defined,
they have more than enough.  The most heterogeneous ideas are yoked
by violence together; nature and art are ransacked for
illustrations, comparisons, and allusions; their learning instructs,
and their subtlety surprises; but the reader commonly thinks his
improvement dearly bought, and though he sometimes admires, is
seldom pleased.

From this account of their compositions it will be readily inferred
that they were not successful in representing or moving the
affections.  As they were wholly employed on something unexpected
and surprising, they had no regard to that uniformity of sentiment
which enables us to conceive and to excite the pains and the
pleasure of other minds:  they never inquired what, on any occasion,
they should have said or done; but wrote rather as beholders than
partakers of human nature; as beings looking upon good and evil,
impassive and at leisure; as epicurean deities, making remarks on
the actions of men, and the vicissitudes of life, without interest
and without emotion.  Their courtship was void of fondness, and
their lamentation of sorrow.  Their wish was only to say what they
hoped had been never said before.

Nor was the sublime more within their reach than the pathetic; for
they never attempted that comprehension and expanse of thought which
at once fills the whole mind, and of which the first effect is
sudden astonishment, and the second rational admiration.  Sublimity
is produced by aggregation, and littleness by dispersion.  Great
thoughts are always general, and consist in positions not limited by
exceptions, and in descriptions not descending to minuteness.  It is
with great propriety that subtlety, which in its original import
means exility of particles, is taken in its metaphorical meaning for
nicety of distinction.  Those writers who lay on the watch for
novelty, could have little hope of greatness; for great things
cannot have escaped former observation.  Their attempts were always
analytic; they broke every image into fragments; and could no more
represent, by their slender conceits and laboured particularities,
the prospects of nature, or the scenes of life, than he who dissects
a sunbeam with a prism can exhibit the wide effulgence of a summer
noon.

What they wanted, however, of the sublime they endeavoured to supply
by hyperbole; their amplifications had no limits; they left not only
reason but fancy behind them; and produced combinations of confused
magnificence, that not only could not be credited, but could not be
imagined.

Yet great labour, directed by great abilities, is never wholly lost;
if they frequently threw away their wit upon false conceits, they
likewise sometimes struck out unexpected truth; if their conceits
were far fetched, they were often worth the carriage.  To write on
their plan, it was at least necessary to read and think.  No man
could be born a metaphysical poet, nor assume the dignity of a
writer, by descriptions copied from descriptions, by imitations
borrowed from imitations, by traditional imagery, and hereditary
similes, by readiness of rhyme, and volubility of syllables.

In perusing the works of this race of authors, the mind is exercised
either by recollection or inquiry; something already learned is to
be retrieved, or something new is to be examined.  If their
greatness seldom elevates, their acuteness often surprises; if the
imagination is not always gratified, at least the powers of
reflection and comparison are employed; and in the mass of materials
which ingenious absurdity has thrown together, genuine wit and
useful knowledge may be sometimes found buried perhaps in grossness
of expression, but useful to those who know their value; and such
as, when they are expanded to perspicuity and polished to elegance,
may give lustre to works which have more propriety though less
copiousness of sentiment.

This kind of writing, which was, I believe, borrowed from Marino and
his followers, had been recommended by the example of Donne, a man
of very extensive and various knowledge, and by Jonson, whose manner
resembled that of Donne more in the ruggedness of his lines than in
the cast of his sentiments.

When their reputation was high, they had undoubtedly more imitators
than time has left behind.  Their immediate successors, of whom any
remembrance can be said to remain, were Suckling, Waller, Denham,
Cowley, Clieveland, and Milton.  Denham and Waller sought another
way to fame, by improving the harmony of our members.  Milton tried
the metaphysic style only in his lines upon Hobson the carrier.
Cowley adopted it, and excelled his predecessors, having as much
sentiment and more music.  Suckling neither improved versification
nor abounded in conceits.  The fashionable style remained chiefly
with Cowley; Suckling could not reach it, and Milton disdained it.

Critical remarks are not easily understood without examples; and I
have therefore collected instances of the modes of writing by which
this species of poets (for poets they were called by themselves and
their admirers) was eminently distinguished.

As the authors of this race were perhaps more desirous of being
admired than understood, they sometimes drew their conceits from
recesses of learning not very much frequented by common readers of
poetry.  Thus, Cowley on Knowledge:


The sacred tree 'midst the fair orchard grew;
   The phoenix truth did on it rest,
   And built his perfumed nest,
That right Porphyrian tree which did true logic show.
   Each leaf did learned notions give,
   And the apples were demonstrative;
So clear their colour and divine,
The very shads they cast did other lights outshine.


On Anacreon continuing a lover in his old age:


Love was with thy life entwined,
Close as heat with fire is join'd;
A powerful brand prescribed the date
Of thine, like Meleager's fate.
Th' antiperistasis of age
More enflam'd thy amorous rage.


In the following verses we have an allusion to a rabbinical opinion
concerning manna:


Variety I ask not:  give me one
To live perpetually upon.
The person Love does to us fit,
Like manna, has the taste of all in it.


Thus Donne shows his medicinal knowledge in some encomiastic verses:


   In everything there naturally grows
A balsamum to keep it fresh and new,
   If 'twere not injured by extrinsic blows:
Your youth and beauty are this balm in you.
   But you, of learning and religion,
And virtue and such ingredients, have made
   A mithridate, whose operation
Keeps off, or cures what can be done or said.


Though the following lines of Donne, on the last night of the year,
have something in them too scholastic, they are not inelegant:


This twilight of two years, not past nor next,
   Some emblem is of me, or I of this,
Who, meteor-like, of stuff and form perplext,
   Whose what and where in disputation is,
   If I should call me anything, should miss.
I sum the years and me, and find me not
   Debtor to th' old, nor creditor to th' new.
That cannot say, my thanks I have forget,
   Nor trust I this with hopes; and yet scarce true
   This bravery is, since these times show'd me you--DONNE.


Yet more abstruse and profound is Donne's reflection upon man as a
microcosm:


If men be worlds, there is in every one
Something to answer in some proportion;
All the world's riches; and in good men, this
Virtue, our form's form, and our soul's soul, is


Of thoughts so far-fetched, as to be not only unexpected, but
unnatural, all their books are full.

To a lady, who wrote posies for rings:


They, who above do various circles find,
Say, like a ring, th' equator Heaven does bind
When Heaven shall be adorned by thee,
(Which then more Heaven than 'tis will be)
'Tis thou must write the poesy there,
   For it wanteth one as yet,
Then the sun pass through't twice a year,
   The sun, which is esteem'd the god of wit.--COWLEY.


The difficulties which have been raised about identity in philosophy
are by Cowley, with still more perplexity applied to love:


Five years ago (says story) I loved you,
For which you call me most inconstant now;
Pardon me, madam, you mistake the man;
For I am not the same that I was then:
No flesh is now the same 'twas then in me,
And that my mind is changed yourself may see.
The same thoughts to retain still, and intents
Were more inconstant far; for accidents
Must of all things most strangely inconstant prove,
If from one subject they t' another move;
My members then the father members were,
From whence these take their birth, which now are here
If then this body love what th' other did,
'Twere incest, which by nature is forbid.


The love of different women is, in geographical poetry, compared to
travels through different countries:


Hast thou not found each woman's breast
   (The land where thou hast travelled)
Either by savages possest,
   Or wild, and uninhabited?
What joy could'st take, or what repose,
In countries so uncivilis'd as those?
Lust, the scorching dog-star, here
   Rages with immoderate heat;
Whilst Pride, the ragged northern bear,
   In others makes the cold too great.
And where these are temperate known,
The soil's all barren sand, or rocky stone.--COWLEY.


A lover, burnt up by his affection, is compared to Egypt:


The fate of Egypt I sustain,
And never feel the dew of rain,
From clouds which in the head appear;
But all my too-much moisture ewe
To overflowings of the heart below.--COWLEY.


The lover supposes his lady acquainted with the ancient laws of
augury and rites of sacrifice:


And yet this death of mine, I fear,
Will ominous to her appear:
   When, sound in every other part,
Her sacrifice is found without an heart.
   For the last tempest of my death
Shall sigh out that too, with my breath.


That the chaos was harmonised, has been recited of old; but whence
the different sounds arose remained for a modern to discover:


Th' ungovern'd parts no correspondence knew;
An artless war from thwarting motions grew;
Till they to number and fixed rules were brought.
Water and air he for the tenor chose,
Earth made the base; the treble flame arose.--COWLEY.


The tears of lovers are always of great poetical account; but Donne
has extended them into worlds.  If the lines are not easily
understood, they may be read again:


         On a round ball
   A workman, that bath copies by, can lay
   An Europe, Afric, and an Asia,
And quickly make that which was nothing, all.
      So doth each tear,
      Which thee doth wear,
A globe, yea world, by that impression grow,
Till thy tears mixed with mine do overflow
This world, by waters sent from thee my heaven dissolved so.


On reading the following lines, the reader may perhaps cry out
"Confusion worse confounded."


Hers lies a she sun, and a he moon here,
   She gives the best light to his sphere,
   Or each is both, and all, and so,
They unto one another nothing owe.--DONNE.


Who but Donne would have thought that a good man is a telescope?


Though God be our true glass through which we see
All, since the being of all things is He,
Yet are the trunks, which do to us derive
Things in proportion fit, by perspective
Deeds of good men; for by their living here,
Virtues, indeed remote, seem to be near.


Who would imagine it possible that in a very few lines so many
remote ideas could be brought together?


Since 'tis my doom, love's undershrieve,
      Why this reprieve?
Why doth my she advowson fly
      Incumbency?
To sell thyself dust thou intend
      By candles end,
And hold the contract thus in doubt,
      Life's taper out?
Think but how soon the market fails,
Your sex lives faster than the males;
And if to measure age's span,
The sober Julian were th' account of man,
Whilst you live by the fleet Gregorian.--CLEVELAND.


Of enormous and disgusting hyperboles, these may be examples:


By every wind that comes this way,
   Send me at least a sigh or two,
Such and so many I'll repay
   As shall themselves make winds to get to you.--COWLEY.

In tears I'll waste these eyes,
By love so vainly fed:
So lust of old the deluge punished.--COWLEY.

All arm'd in brass, the richest dress of war,
(A dismal glorious sight!) he shone afar.
The sun himself started with sudden fright,
To see his beams return so dismal bright.--COWLEY.


A universal consternation:


His bloody eyes he hurls round, his sharp paws
Tear up the ground; then runs he wild about,
Lashing his angry tail and roaring out.
Beasts creep into their dens, and tremble there;
Trees, though no wind is stirring, shake with fear;
Silence and horror fill the place around;
Echo itself dares scarce repeat the sound.--COWLEY.


Their fictions were often violent and unnatural.

Of his mistress bathing:


The fish around her crowded, as they do
To the false light that treacherous fishers show,
And all with as much ease might taken be,
   As she at first took me;
   For ne'er did light so clear
   Among the waves appear,
Though every night the sun himself set there.--COWLEY.


The poetical effect of a lover's name upon glass:


   My name engraved herein
Both contribute my firmness to this glass:
   Which, ever since that charm, hath been
As hard as that which graved it was.--DONNE.


Their conceits were sometimes slight and trifling.  On an inconstant
woman:


He enjoys the calmy sunshine now,
   And no breath stirring hears,
In the clear heaven of thy brow
   No smallest cloud appears.
He sees thee gentle, fair and gay,
   And trusts the faithless April of thy May.--COWLEY.


Upon a paper written with the juice of lemon, and read by the fire:


   Nothing yet in thee is seen,
   But when a genial heat warms thee within,
   A new-born wood of various lines there grows;
   Hers buds an L, and there a B,
   Here sprouts a V, and there a T,
And all the flourishing letters stand in rows.--COWLEY.


As they sought only for novelty, they did not much inquire whether
their allusions were to things high or low, elegant or gross;
whether they compared the little to the great, or the great to the
little.

Physic and chirurgery for a lover:


   Gently, ah gently, madam, touch
The wound, which you yourself have made;
   That pain must needs be very much
Which makes me of your hand afraid.
   Cordials of pity give me now,
For I too weak of purgings grow.--COWLEY.


The world and a clock


Mahol th' inferior world's fantastic face
Through all the turns of matter's maze did trace;
Great Nature's well-set clock in pieces took;
On all the springs and smallest wheels did look
Of life and motion, and with equal art
Made up the whole again of every part.--COWLEY.


A coal-pit has not often found its poet; but, that it may not want
its due honour, Cleveland has paralleled it with the sun:


The moderate value of our guiltless ore
Makes no man atheist, and no woman whore;
Yet why should hallow'd vestal's sacred shrine
Deserve more honour than a flaming mine?
These pregnant wombs of heat would fitter be,
Than a few embers, for a deity.
Had he our pits, the Persian would admire
No sun, but warm's devotion at our fire:
He'd leave the trotting whipster, and prefer
Our profound Vulcan 'bove that waggoner.
For wants he heat, or light? or would have store
Of both? 'tis here:  and what can suns give more?
Nay, what's the sun but, in a different name,
A coal-pit rampant, or a mine on flame?
Then let this truth reciprocally run,
The sun's heaven's coalery, and coals our sun.


Death, a voyage:


      No family
E'er rigg'd a soul for Heaven's discovery,
With whom more venturers might boldly dare
Venture their stakes with him in joy to share.--DONNE.


Their thoughts and expressions were sometimes grossly absurd, and
such as no figures or licence can reconcile to the understanding.

A lover neither dead nor alive:


Then down I laid my head
Down on cold earth; and for a while was dead,
And my freed soul to a strange somewhere fled.

   Ah, sottish soul, said I,
   When back to its cage again I saw it fly;
   Fool to resume her broken chain,
   And row her galley here again!
   Fool, to that body to return
Where it condemned and destined is to burn!
Once dead, how can it be,
Death should a thing so pleasant seem to thee,
That thou should'st come to live it o'er again in me?--COWLEY.


A lover's heart, a hand grenado:

Woe to her stubborn heart, if once mine come
   Into the self same room;
   'Twill tear and blow up all within,
Like a grenade shot into a magazine.
Then shall Love keep the ashes and torn parts,
   Of both our broken hearts;
   Shalt out of both one new one make;
From hers th' allay, from mine the metal take.--COWLEY


The poetical propagation of light:


The prince's favour is diffused o'er all,
From which all fortunes names, and natures fall:
Then from those wombs of stars, the Bride's bright eyes,
   At every glance a constellation flies,
And sows the court with stars, and doth prevent
   In light and power, the all-ey'd firmament:
First her eye kindles other ladies' eyes,
   Then from their beams their jewels' lustres rise;
And from their jewels torches do take fire,
And all is warmth, and light, and good desire.--DONNE.


They were in very little care to clothe their notions with elegance
of dress, and therefore miss the notice and the praise which are
often gained by those who think less, but are more diligent to adorn
their thoughts.

That a mistress beloved is fairer in idea than in reality is by
Cowley thus expressed:


Thou in my fancy dost much higher stand
Than woman can be placed by Nature's hand;
And I must needs, I'm sure, a loser be,
To change thee as thou'rt there, for very thee.


That prayer and labour should co-operate are thus taught by Donne:


In none but us are such mix'd engines found,
As hands of double office; for the ground
We till with them; and them to heaven we raise
Who prayerless labours, or, without this, prays,
Doth but one half, that's none.


By the same author, a common topic, the danger of procrastination,
is thus illustrated:


   That which I should have begun
In my youth's morning, now late must be done;
And I, as giddy travellers must do,
Which stray or sleep all day, and having lost
Light and strength, dark and tired, must then ride post.


All that man has to do is to live and die; the sum of humanity is
comprehended by Donne in the following lines:


Think in how poor a prison thou didst lie
After enabled but to suck and cry.
Think, when 'twas grown to most, 'twas a poor inn,
A province pack'd up in two yards of skin,
And that usurp'd, or threaten'd with a rage
Of sicknesses or their true mother, age.
But think that death hath now enfranchised thee;
Thou hast thy expansion now, and liberty;
Think, that a rusty piece discharged is flown
In pieces, and the bullet is his own,
And freely flies:  this to thy soul allow,
Think thy shell broke, think thy soul hatch'd but now.


They were sometimes indelicate and disgusting.  Cowley thus
apostrophises beauty:


   Thou tyrant which leav'st no man free!
Thou subtle thief, from whom nought safe can be!
Thou murtherer, which has kill'd, and devil, which would'st damn me!


Thus he addresses his mistress:


Thou who, in many a propriety,
So truly art the sun to me,
Add one more likeness, which I'm sure you can,
And let me and my sun beget a man.


Thus he represents the meditations of a lover:


Though in thy thoughts scarce any tracts have been
So much as of original sin,
Such charms thy beauty wears, as might
Desires in dying confest saints excite.
   Thou with strange adultery
Dost in each breast a brothel keep;
   Awake all men do lust for thee,
And some enjoy thee when they sleep.


The true taste of tears:


Hither with crystal vials, lovers, come,
   And take my tears, which are love's wine,
And try your mistress' tears at home;
   For all are false, that taste not just like mine.--DONNE.


This is yet more indelicate:


As the sweet sweat of roses in a still,
As that which from chas'd musk-cat's pores doth trill,
As th' almighty balm of th' early east;
Such are the sweet drops of my mistress' breast.
And on her neck her skin such lustre sets,
They seem no sweat drops, but pearl coronets:
Rank, sweaty froth thy mistress' brow defiles.--DONNE.


Their expressions sometimes raise horror, when they intend perhaps
to be pathetic:


As men in hell are from diseases free,
So from all other ills am I,
Free from their known formality:
But all pains eminently lie in thee.--COWLEY.


They were not always strictly curious, whether the opinions from
which they drew their illustrations were true; it was enough that
they were popular.  Bacon remarks, that some falsehoods are
continued by tradition, because they supply commodious allusions.


It gave a piteous groan, and so it broke:
In vain it something would have spoke;
The love within too strong for't was,
Like poison put into a Venice-glass.--COWLEY.


In forming descriptions, they looked out not for images, but for
conceits.  Night has been a common subject, which poets have
contended to adorn.  Dryden's Night is well known; Donne's is as
follows:


Thou seest me here at midnight, now all rest:
Time's dead low-water; when all minds divest
To-morrow's business; when the labourers have
Such rest in bed, that their last church-yard grave,
Subject to change, will scarce be a type of this;
Now when the client, whose last hearing is
To-morrow, sleeps; when the condemned man,
Who, when he opes his eyes, must shut them the
Again by death, although sad watch he keep;
Doth practise dying by a little sleep:
Thou at this midnight seest me.


It must be, however, confessed of these writers, that if they are
upon common subjects often unnecessarily and unpoetically subtle;
yet, where scholastic speculation can be properly admitted, their
copiousness and acuteness may justly be admired.  What Cowley has
written upon Hope shows an unequalled fertility of invention:


   Hops, whose weak being mind is,
   Alike if it succeed and if it miss;
Whom good or ill does equally confound,
And both the horns of fate's dilemma wound;
   Vain shadow! which dust vanish quite,
   Both at full noon and perfect night!
   The stars have not a possibility
   Of blessing thee;
If things then from their end we happy call
'Tis Hope is the most hopeless thing of all.
   Hope, thou bold tester of delight,
   Who, whilst thou shouldst but taste, devour'st it quite!
   Thou bring'st us an estate, yet leav'st us poor
   By clogging it with legacies before!
   The joys, which we entire should wed,
   Come deflowr'd virgins to our bed;
Good fortunes without gain imported be,
   Such mighty custom's paid to thee:
For joy, like wine kept close, does better taste
If it take air before its spirits waste.


To the following comparison of a man that travels, and his wife that
stays at home, with a pair of compasses, it may be doubted whether
absurdity or ingenuity has the better claim:


Our two souls, therefore, which are one,
   Though I must go, endure not yet
A breach, but an expansion,
   Like gold to airy thinness beat.
If they be two, they are two so
   As stiff twin compasses are two;
Thy soul, the fix'd foot, makes no show
   To move, but doth if th' other do.
And, though it in the centre sit,
   Yet, when the other far doth roam,
It leans and hearkens after it,
   And grows erect as that comes home.
Such wilt thou be to me, who must
   Like th' other foot obliquely run.
Thy firmness makes my circle just,
   And makes me end where I begun.--DONNE.


In all these examples it is apparent, that whatever is improper or
vicious, is produced by a voluntary deviation from nature in pursuit
of something new and strange; and that the writers fail to give
delight, by their desire of exciting admiration.

Having thus endeavoured to exhibit a general representation of the
style and sentiments of the metaphysical poets, it is now proper to
examine particularly the works of Cowley, who was almost the last of
that race, and undoubtedly the best.

His Miscellanies contain a collection of short compositions, written
some as they were dictated by a mind at leisure, and some as they
were called forth by different occasions; with great variety of
style and sentiment, from burlesque levity to awful grandeur.  Such
an assemblage of diversified excellence no other poet has hitherto
afforded.  To choose the best, among many good, is one of the most
hazardous attempts of criticism.  I know not whether Scaliger
himself has persuaded many readers to join with him in his
preference of the two favourite odes, which he estimates in his
raptures at the value of a kingdom.  I will, however, venture to
recommend Cowley's first piece, which ought to be inscribed "To my
Muse," for want of which the second couplet is without reference.
When the title is added, there wills till remain a defect; for every
piece ought to contain in itself whatever is necessary to make it
intelligible.  Pope has some epitaphs without names; which are
therefore epitaphs to be let, occupied indeed for the present, but
hardly appropriated.

The "Ode on Wit" is almost without a rival.  It was about the time
of Cowley that WIT, which had been till then used for INTELLECTION,
in contradistinction to WILL, took the meaning, whatever it be,
which it now bears.

Of all the passages in which poets have exemplified their own
precepts, none will easily be found of greater excellence than that
in which Cowley condemns exuberance of wit:-


Yet 'tis not to adorn and gild each part,
   That shows more cost than art.
Jewels at nose and lips but ill appear;
   Rather than all things wit, let none be there.
Several lights will not be seen,
   If there be nothing else between.
Men doubt, because they stand so thick i' th' sky,
If those be stars which paint the galaxy.


In his verses to Lord Falkland, whom every man of his time was proud
to praise, there are, as there must be in all Cowley's compositions,
some striking thoughts, but they are not well wrought.  His "Elegy
on Sir Henry Wotton" is vigorous and happy; the series of thoughts
is easy and natural; and the conclusion, though a little weakened by
the intrusion of Alexander, is elegant and forcible.

It may be remarked, that in this elegy, and in most of his
encomiastic poems, he has forgotten or neglected to name his heroes.

In his poem on the death of Hervey, there is much praise, but little
passion; a very just and ample delineation of such virtues as a
studious privacy admits, and such intellectual excellence as a mind
not yet called forth to action can display.  He knew how to
distinguish, and how to commend, the qualities of his companion;
but, when he wishes to make us weep, he forgets to weep himself, and
diverts his sorrow by imagining how his crown of bays, if he had it,
would crackle in the fire.  It is the odd fate of this thought to be
the worse for being true.  The bay-leaf crackles remarkably as it
burns; as therefore this property was not assigned it by chance, the
mind must be thought sufficiently at ease that could attend to such
minuteness of physiology.  But the power of Cowley is not so much to
move the affections, as to exercise the understanding.

The "Chronicle" is a composition unrivalled and alone:  such gaiety
of fancy, such facility of expression, such varied similitude, such
a succession of images, and such a dance of words, it is in vain to
expect except from Cowley.  His strength always appears in his
agility; his volatility is not the flutter of a light, but the bound
of an elastic mind.  His levity never leaves his learning behind it;
the moralist, the politician, and the critic, mingle their influence
even in this airy frolic of genius.  To such a performance Suckling
could have brought the gaiety, but not the knowledge; Dryden could
have supplied the knowledge, but not the gaiety.

The verses to Davenant, which are vigorously begun, and happily
concluded, contain some hints of criticism very justly conceived and
happily expressed.  Cowley's critical abilities have not been
sufficiently observed:  the few decisions and remarks, which his
prefaces and his notes on the "Davideis" supply, were at that time
accessions to English literature, and show such skill as raises our
wish for more examples.

The lines from Jersey are a very curious and pleasing specimen of
the familiar descending to the burlesque.

His two metrical disquisitions FOR and AGAINST Reason are no mean
specimens of metaphysical poetry.  The stanzas against knowledge
produce little conviction.  In those which are intended to exalt the
human faculties, Reason has its proper task assigned it; that of
judging, not of things revealed, but of the reality of revelation.
In the verses FOR Reason is a passage which Bentley, in the only
English verses which he is known to have written, seems to have
copied, though with the inferiority of an imitator.


The Holy Book like the eighth sphere doth shine
   With thousand lights of truth divine,
So numberless the stars, that to our eye
   It makes all but one galaxy.
Yet Reason must assist too; for, in seas
   So vast and dangerous as these,
Our course by stars above we cannot know
   Without the compass too below.


After this says Bentley:


Who travels in religious jars,
   Truth mix'd with error, shade with rays
Like Whiston wanting pyx or stars,
   In ocean wide or sinks or strays.


Cowley seems to have had what Milton is believed to have wanted, the
skill to rate his own performances by their just value, and has
therefore closed his Miscellanies with the verses upon Crashaw,
which apparently excel all that have gone before them, and in which
there are beauties which common authors may justly think not only
above their attainment, but above their ambition.

To the Miscellanies succeed the Anacreontics, or paraphrastical
translations of some little poems, which pass, however justly, under
the name of Anacreon.  Of those songs dedicated to festivity and
gaiety, in which even the morality is voluptuous, and which teach
nothing but the enjoyment of the present day, he has given rather a
pleasing than a faithful representation, having retained their
sprightliness, but lost their simplicity.  The Anacreon of Cowley,
like the Homer of Pope, has admitted the decoration of some modern
graces, by which he is undoubtedly made more amiable to common
readers, and perhaps, if they would honestly declare their own
perceptions, to far the greater part of those whom courtesy and
ignorance are content to style the learned.

These little pieces will be found more finished in their kind than
any other of Cowley's works.  The diction shows nothing of the mould
of time, and the sentiments are at no great distance from our
present habitudes of thought.  Real mirth must always be natural,
and nature is uniform.  Men have been wise in very different modes;
but they have always laughed the same way.

Levity of thought naturally produces familiarity of language, and
the familiar part of language continues long the same; the dialogue
of comedy when it is transcribed from popular manners and real life,
is read from age to age with equal pleasure.  The artifices of
inversion by which the established order of words is changed, or of
innovation, by which new words, or new meanings of words, are
introduced, is practised, not by those who talk to be understood,
but by those who write to be admired.

The Anacreontics, therefore, of Cowley, give now all the pleasure
which they ever gave.  If he was formed by nature for one kind of
writing more than for another, his power seems to have been greatest
in the familiar and the festive.

The next class of his poems is called "The Mistress," of which it is
not necessary to select any particular pieces for praise or censure.
They have all the same beauties and faults, and nearly in the same
proportion.  They are written with exuberance of wit, and with
copiousness of learning; and it is truly asserted by Sprat, that the
plenitude of the writer's knowledge flows in upon his page, so that
the reader is commonly surprised into some improvement.  But,
considered as the verses of a lover, no man that has ever loved will
much commend them.  They are neither courtly nor pathetic, have
neither gallantry nor fondness.  His praises are too far sought, and
too hyperbolical, either to express love, or to excite it; every
stanza is crowded with darts and flames, with wounds and death, with
mingled souls and with broken hearts.

The principal artifice by which "The Mistress" is filled with
conceits is very copiously displayed by Addison.  Love is by Cowley,
as by other poets, expressed metaphorically by flame and fire; and
that which is true of real fire is said of love, or figurative fire,
the same word in the same sentence retaining both significations.
Thus "observing the cold regard of his mistress's eyes, and at the
same time their power of producing love in him, he considers them as
burning-glasses made of ice.  Finding himself able to live in the
greatest extremities of love, he concludes the torrid zone to be
habitable.  Upon the dying of a tree, on which he had cut his loves,
he observes that his flames had burnt up and withered the tree."

These conceits Addison calls mixed wit; that is, wit which consists
of thoughts true in one sense of the expression, and false in the
other.  Addison's representation is sufficiently indulgent:  that
confusion of images may entertain for a moment; but being unnatural
it soon grows wearisome.  Cowley delighted in it, as much as if he
had invented it; but, not to mention the ancients, he might have
found it full-blown in modern Italy.  Thus Sannazaro:


Aspice quam variis distringar Lesbia curis!
   Uror, et heu! nostro manat ab igne liquor:
Sum Nilus, sumque AEtna simul; restringite flammas
   O lacrimae, aut lacrimas ebibe flamma meas.


One of the severe theologians of that time censured him as having
published a book of profane and lascivious verses.  From the charge
of profaneness, the constant tenor of his life, which seems to have
been eminently virtuous, and the general tendency of his opinions,
which discover no irreverence of religion, must defend him; but that
the accusation of lasciviousness is unjust, the perusal of his works
will sufficiently evince.

Cowley's "Mistress" has no power of seduction:  she "plays round the
head, but comes not at the heart."  Her beauty and absence, her
kindness and cruelty, her disdain and inconstancy, produce no
correspondence of emotion.  His poetical accounts of the virtues of
plants, and colours of flowers, is not perused with more sluggish
frigidity.  The compositions are such as might have been written for
penance by a hermit, or for hire by a philosophical rhymer who had
only heard of another sex; for they turn the mind only on the
writer, whom, without thinking on a woman but as the subject for his
task, we sometimes esteem as learned, and sometimes despise as
trifling, always admire as ingenious, and always condemn as
unnatural.

The Pindaric Odes are now to be considered; a species of
composition, which Cowley thinks Pancirolus might have counted in
his list of the lost inventions of antiquity, and which he has made
a bold and vigorous attempt to recover.

The purpose with which he has paraphrased an Olympic and Nemaean Ode
is by himself sufficiently explained.  His endeavour was, not to
show precisely what Pindar spoke, but his manner of speaking.  He
was therefore not at all restrained to his expressions, nor much to
his sentiments; nothing was required of him, but not to write as
Pindar would not have written.

Of the Olympic Ode the beginning is, I think, above the original in
elegance, and the conclusion below it in strength.  The connection
is supplied with great perspicuity; and the thoughts, which to a
reader of less skill seem thrown together by chance, are
concatenated without any abruption.  Though the English ode cannot
be called a translation, it may be very properly consulted as a
commentary.

The spirit of Pindar is indeed not everywhere equally preserved.
The following pretty lines are not such as his "deep mouth" was used
to pour:


   Great Rhea's son,
If in Olympus' top, where thou
Sitt'st to behold thy sacred show,
If in Alpheus' silver flight,
If in my verse thou take delight,
My verse, great Rhea's son, which is
Lofty as that and smooth as this.


In the Nemaean Ode, the reader must, in mere justice to Pindar,
observe, whatever is said of the original new moon, her tender
forehead and her horns, is superadded by his paraphrast, who has
many other plays of words and fancy unsuitable to the original, as,


   The table, free for ev'ry guest,
   No doubt will thee admit,
And feast more upon thee, than thou on it


He sometimes extends his author's thoughts without improving them.
In the Olympionic an oath is mentioned in a single word, and Cowley
spends three lines in swearing by the Castalian Stream.  We are told
of Theron's bounty, with a hint that he had enemies, which Cowley
thus enlarges in rhyming prose:


But in this thankless world the giver
Is envied even by the receiver;
'Tis now the cheap and frugal fashion
Rather to hide than own the obligation:
Nay, 'tis much worse than so;
It now an artifice does grow
Wrongs and injuries to do,
Lest men should think we owe.


It is hard to conceive that a man of the first rank in learning and
wit, when he was dealing out such minute morality in such feeble
diction, could imagine, either waking or dreaming, that he imitated
Pindar.

In the following odes, where Cowley chooses his own subjects, he
sometimes rises to dignity truly Pindaric; and, if some deficiencies
of language be forgiven, his strains are such as those of the Theban
bard were to his contemporaries:


   Begin the song, and strike the living lyre:
Lo how the years to come, a numerous and well-fitted quire,
   All hand in hand do decently advance,
And to my song with smooth and equal measure dance;
While the dance lasts, how long soe'er it be,
My music's voice shall bear it company;
   Till all gentle notes be drown'd
In the last trumpet's dreadful sound.


After such enthusiasm, who will not lament to find the poet conclude
with lines like these:


   But stop, my Muse -
Hold thy Pindaric Pegasus closely in,
Which does to rage begin -
- 'Tis an unruly and hard-mouth'd horse -
'Twill no unskilful touch endure,
But flings writer and reader too that sits not sure.


The fault of Cowley, and perhaps of all the writers of the
metaphysical race, is that of pursuing his thoughts to their last
ramifications, by which he loses the grandeur of generality; for of
the greatest things the parts are little; what is little can be but
pretty, and by claiming dignity becomes ridiculous.  Thus all the
power of description is destroyed by a scrupulous enumeration, and
the force of metaphors is lost, when the mind by the mention of
particulars is turned more upon the original than the secondary
sense, more upon that from which the illustration is drawn than that
to which it is applied.

Of this we have a very eminent example in the ode entitled the
"Muse," who goes to "take the air" in an intellectual chariot, to
which he harnesses Fancy and Judgment, Wit and Eloquence, Memory and
Invention; how he distinguished Wit from Fancy, or how Memory could
properly contribute to Motion, he has not explained:  we are however
content to suppose that he could have justified his own fiction, and
wish to see the Muse begin her career; but there is yet more to be
done.


Let the POSTILLION Nature mount, and let
The COACHMAN Art be set;
And let the airy FOOTMEN, running all beside,
Make a long row of goodly pride;
Figures, conceits, raptures, and sentences,
In a well-worded dress,
And innocent loves, and pleasant truths, and useful lies,
In all their gaudy LIVERIES.


Every mind is now disgusted with this cumber of magnificence; yet I
cannot refuse myself the four next lines:


Mount, glorious queen, thy travelling throne,
   And bid it to put on;
   For long though cheerful is the way,
And life, alas! allows but one ill winter's day.


In the same ode, celebrating the power of the Muse, he gives her
prescience, or, in poetical language, the foresight of events
hatching in futurity; but, once having an egg in his mind, he cannot
forbear to show us that he knows what an egg contains:


Thou into the close nests of Time dost peep,
   And there with piercing eye
Through the firm shell and the thick white float spy
   Years to come a-forming lie,
Close in their sacred fecundine asleep.


The same thought is more generally, and therefore more poetically
expressed by Casimir, a writer who has many of the beauties and
faults of Cowley:


Omnibus mundi Dominator horis
Aptat urgendas psr inane pennas,
Pars adhuc nido latet, et futuros
      Crescit in annos.


Cowley, whatever was his subject, seems to have been carried, by a
kind of destiny, to the light and the familiar, or to conceits which
require still more ignoble epithets.  A slaughter in the Red Sea
"new dyes the water's name;" and England, during the Civil War, was
"Albion no more, nor to be named from white."  It is surely by some
fascination not easily surmounted, that a writer, professing to
revive "the noblest and highest writing in verse," makes this
address to the new year:


Nay, if thou lov'st me, gentle year,
Let not so much as love be there,
Vain, fruitless love I mean; for, gentle year,
   Although I fear
There's of this caution little need,
   Yet, gentle year, take heed
   How thou dost make
   Such a mistake;
Such love I mean alone
As by thy cruel predecessors has been shown:
For, though I have too much cause to doubt it,
I fain would try, for once, if life can live without it.


The reader of this will be inclined to cry out with Prior -


   Ye critics, say,
How poor to this was Pindar's style!


Even those who cannot perhaps find in the Isthmian or Nemaean songs
what Antiquity what disposed them to expect, will at least see that
they are ill represented by such puny poetry; and all will determine
that, if this be the old Theban strain, it is not worthy of revival.

To the disproportion and incongruity of Cowley's sentiments must be
added the uncertainty and looseness of his measures.  He takes the
liberty of using in any place a verse of any length, from two
syllables to twelve.  The verses of Pindar have, as he observes,
very little harmony to a modern ear; yet by examining the syllables
we perceive them to be regular, and have reason enough for supposing
that the ancient audiences were delighted with the sound.  The
imitator ought therefore to have adopted what he found, and to have
added what was wanting; to have preserved a constant return of the
same numbers, and to have supplied smoothness of transition and
continuity of thought.

It is urged by Dr. Sprat, that the "irregularity of numbers is the
very thing" which makes "that kind of poesy fit for all manner of
subjects."  But he should have remembered, that what is fit for
everything can fit nothing well.  The great pleasure of verse arises
from the known measure of the lines, and uniform structure of the
stanzas, by which the voice is regulated, and the memory relieved.

If the Pindaric style be, what Cowley thinks it, "the highest and
noblest kind of writing in verse," it can be adapted only to high
and noble subjects; and it will not be easy to reconcile the poet
with the critic, or to conceive how that can be the highest kind of
writing in verse which, according to Sprat, "is chiefly to be
preferred for its near affinity to prose."

This lax and lawless versification so much concealed the
deficiencies of the barren, and flattered the laziness of the idle,
that it immediately overspread our books of poetry; all the boys and
girls caught the pleasing fashion, and they that could do nothing
else could write like Pindar.  The rights of antiquity were invaded,
and disorder tried to break into the Latin:  a poem on the
Sheldonian Theatre, in which all kinds of verse are shaken together,
is unhappily inserted in the "Musae Anglicanae."  Pindarism
prevailed about half a century; but at last died gradually away, and
other imitations supply its place.

The Pindaric Odes have so long enjoyed the highest degree of
poetical reputation, that I am not willing to dismiss them with
unabated censure; and surely though the mode of their composition be
erroneous, yet many parts deserve at least that admiration which is
due to great comprehension of knowledge, and great fertility of
fancy.  The thoughts are often new, and often striking; but the
greatness of one part is disgraced by the littleness of another; and
total negligence of language gives the noblest conceptions the
appearance of a fabric august in the plan, but mean in the
materials.  Yet surely those verses are not without a just claim to
praise; of which it may be said with truth, that no man but Cowley
could have written them.

The "Davideis" now remains to be considered; a poem which the author
designed to have extended to twelve books, merely, as he makes no
scruple of declaring, because the "AEneid" had that number; but he
had leisure or perseverance only to write the third part.  Epic
poems have been left unfinished by Virgil, Statius, Spenser, and
Cowley.  That we have not the whole "Davideis" is, however, not much
to be regretted; for in this undertaking Cowley is, tacitly at
least, confessed to have miscarried.  There are not many examples of
so great a work produced by an author generally read, and generally
praised, that has crept through a century with so little regard.
Whatever is said of Cowley, is meant of his other works.  Of the
"Davideis" no mention is made; it never appears in books, nor
emerges in conversation.  By the "Spectator" it has been once
quoted; by Rymer it has once been praised; and by Dryden, in "Mac
Flecknoe," it has once been imitated; nor do I recollect much other
notice from its publication till now in the whole succession of
English literature.

Of this silence and neglect, if the reason be inquired, it will be
found partly in the choice of the subject, and partly in the
performance of the work.

Sacred history has been always read with submissive reverence, and
an imagination overawed and controlled.  We have been accustomed to
acquiesce in the nakedness and simplicity of the authentic
narrative, and to repose on its veracity with such humble confidence
as suppresses curiosity.  We go with the historian as he goes, and
stop with him when he stops.  All amplification is frivolous and
vain; all addition to that which is already sufficient for the
purposes of religion seems not only useless, but in some degree
profane.

Such events as were produced by the visible interposition of Divine
Power are above the power of human genius to dignify.  The miracle
of creation, however it may teem with images, is best described with
little diffusion of language:  "He spake the word, and they were
made."

We are told that Saul "was troubled with an evil spirit;" from this
Cowley takes an opportunity of describing hell, and telling the
history of Lucifer, who was, he says,


Once general of a gilded host of sprites,
Like Hesper leading forth the spangled nights;
But down like lightning, which him struck, he came
And roar'd at his first plunge into the flame.


Lucifer makes a speech to the inferior agents of mischief, in which
there is something of heathenism, and therefore of impropriety; and,
to give efficacy to his words, concludes by lashing his breast with
his long tail:  Envy, after a pause, steps out, and among other
declarations of her zeal utters these lines:


Do thou but threat, loud storms shall make reply,
And thunder echo to the trembling sky;
Whilst raging seas swell to so bold an height,
As shall the fire's proud element affright,
Th' old drudging sun, from his long-beaten way,
Shall at thy voice start, and misguide the day.
The jocund orbs shall break their measured pace,
And stubborn poles change their allotted place.
Heaven's gilded troops shall flutter here and there,
Leaving their boasting songs tuned to a sphere.


Every reader feels himself weary with this useless talk of an
allegorical being.

It is not only when the events are confessedly miraculous, that
fancy and fiction lose their effect; the whole system of life, while
the theocracy was yet visible, has an appearance so different from
all other scenes of human action, that the reader of the sacred
volume habitually considers it as the peculiar mode of existence of
a distinct species of mankind, that lived and acted with manners
uncommunicable; so that it is difficult even for imagination to
place us in the state of them whose story is related, and by
consequence their joys and griefs are not easily adopted, nor can
the attention be often interested in anything that befalls them.

To the subject thus originally indisposed to the reception of
poetical embellishments, the writer brought little that could
reconcile impatience, or attract curiosity.  Nothing can be more
disgusting than a narrative spangled with conceits; and conceits are
all that the "Davideis" supplies.

One of the great sources of poetical delight is description, or the
power of presenting pictures to the mind.  Cowley gives inferences
instead of images, and shows not what may be supposed to have been
seen, but what thoughts the sight might have suggested.  When Virgil
describes the stone which Turnus lifted against AEneas, he fixes the
attention on its bulk and weight:


Saxum circumspicit ingens,
Saxum antiquum, ingens, campo quod forte jacebat
Limes agro positus, litem ut discerneret arvis.


Cowley says of the stone with which Cain slew his brother,


I saw him fling the stone, as if he meant
At once his murther and his monument.


Of the sword taken from Goliath, he says,


A sword so great, that it was only fit
To cut off his great head that came with it.


Other poets describe Death by some of its common appearances.
Cowley says, with a learned allusion to sepulchral lamps real or
fabulous,


'Twixt his right ribs deep pierced the furious blade,
And open'd wide those secret vessels where
Life's light goes out, when first they let in air.


But he has allusions vulgar as well as learned in a visionary
succession of kings:


Joas at first does bright and glorious show,
In life's fresh morn his fame does early crow.


Describing an undisciplined army, after having said with elegance,


His forces seem'd no army, but a crowd
Heartless, unarm'd, disorderly, and loud,


he gives them a fit of the ague.

The allusions, however, are not always to vulgar things; he offends
by exaggeration as much as by diminution:


The king was placed alone, and o'er his head
A well-wrought heaven of silk and gold was spread.


Whatever he writes is always polluted with some conceit:


Where the sun's fruitful beams give metals birth,
Where he the growth of fatal gold does see,
Gold, which alone more influence has than he.


In one passage he starts a sudden question to the confusion of
philosophy:


Ye learned heads, whom ivy garlands grace,
Why does that twining plant the oak embrace;
The oak for courtship most of all unfit,
And rough as are the winds that fight with it?


His expressions have sometimes a degree of meanness that surpasses
expectation;


Nay, gentle guests, he cries, since now you're in,
The story of your gallant friend begin.


In a simile descriptive of the morning:


As glimmering stars just at th' approach of day,
Cashier'd by troops, at last all drop away.


The dress of Gabriel deserves attention:


He took for skin a cloud most soft and bright,
That e'er the mid-day sun pierced through with light;
Upon his cheeks a lively blush he spread,
Wash'd from the morning beauties' deepest red:
An harmless flatt'ring meteor shone for hair,
And fell adown his shoulders with loose care;
He cuts out a silk mantle from the skies,
Where the most sprightly azure pleased the eyes;
This he with starry vapours sprinkles all,
Took in their prime ere they grow ripe and fall;
Of a new rainbow ere it fret or fade,
The choicest piece cut out, a scarf is made.


This is a just specimen of Cowley's imagery; what might in general
expressions be great and forcible, he weakens and makes ridiculous
by branching it into small parts.  That Gabriel was invested with
the softest or brightest colours of the sky, we might have been
told, and been dismissed to improve the idea in our different
proportions of conception; but Cowley could not let us go till he
had related where Gabriel got first his skin, and then his mantle,
then his lace, and then his scarf, and related it in the terms of
the mercer and tailor.

Sometimes he indulges himself in a digression, always conceived with
his natural exuberance, and commonly, even where it is not long,
continued till it is tedious:


I' th' library a few choice authors stood,
Yet 'twas well stored, for that small store was good;
Writing, man's spiritual physic, was not then
Itself, as now, grown a disease of men.
Learning (young virgin) but few suitors knew;
The common prostitute she lately grew,
And with the spurious brood loads now the press;
Laborious effects of idleness.


As the "Davideis" affords only four books, though intended to
consist of twelve, there is no opportunity for such criticism as
Epic poems commonly supply.  The plan of the whole work is very
imperfectly shown by the third part.  The duration of an unfinished
action cannot be known.  Of characters either not yet introduced, or
shown but upon few occasions, the full extent and the nice
discriminations cannot be ascertained.  The fable is plainly implex,
formed rather from the "Odyssey" than the "Iliad;" and many
artifices of diversification are employed, with the skill of a man
acquainted with the beet models.  The past is recalled by narration,
and the future anticipated by vision:  but he has been so lavish of
his poetical art, that it is difficult to imagine how he could fill
eight books more without practising again the same modes of
disposing his matter; and perhaps the perception of this growing
incumbrance inclined him to stop.  By this abruption, posterity lost
more instruction than delight.  If the continuation of the
"Davideis" can be missed, it is for the learning that had been
diffused over it, and the notes in which it had been explained.

Had not his characters been depraved like every other part by
improper decorations, they would have deserved uncommon praise.  He
gives Saul both the body and mind of a hero:


His way once chose, he forward threat outright.
Nor turned aside for danger or delight.


And the different beauties of the lofty Merah and the gentle Michal
are very justly conceived and strongly painted.

Rymer has declared the "Davideis" superior to the "Jerusalem" of
Tasso, "which," says he, "the poet, with all his care, has not
totally purged from pedantry."  If by pedantry is meant that minute
knowledge which is derived from particular sciences and studies, in
opposition to the general notions supplied by a wide survey of life
and nature, Cowley certainly errs, by introducing pedantry, far more
frequently than Tasso.  I know not, indeed, why they should be
compared; for the resemblance of Cowley's work to Tasso's is only
that they both exhibit the agency of celestial and infernal spirits,
in which, however, they differ widely; for Cowley supposes them
commonly to operate upon the mind by suggestion; Tasso represents
them as promoting or obstructing events by external agency.

Of particular passages that can be properly compared, I remember
only the description of Heaven, in which the different manner of the
two writers is sufficiently discernible.  Cowley's is scarcely
description, unless it be possible to describe by negatives; for he
tells us only what there is not in heaven.  Tasso endeavours to
represent the splendours and pleasures of the regions of happiness.
Tasso affords images, and Cowley sentiments.  It happens, however,
that Tasso's description affords some reason for Rymer's censure.
He says of the Supreme Being:


Ha sotto i piedi e fato e la natura
Ministri humili, e'l moto, e ch'il misura.


The second line has in it more of pedantry than perhaps can be found
in any other stanza of the poem.

In the perusal of the "Davideis," as of all Cowley's works, we find
wit and learning unprofitably squandered.  Attention has no relief;
the affections are never moved; we are sometimes surprised, but
never delighted; and find much to admire, but little to approve.
Still, however, it is the work of Cowley, of a mind capacious by
nature, and replenished by study.

In the general review of Cowley's poetry it will be found that he
wrote with abundant fertility, but negligent or unskilful selection;
with much thought, but with little imagery; that he is never
pathetic, and rarely sublime; but always either ingenious or
learned, either acute or profound.

It is said by Denham in his elegy,


To him no author was unknown,
Yet what he writ was all his own.


This wide position requires less limitation, when it is affirmed of
Cowley, than perhaps of any other poet.--He read much, and yet
borrowed little.

His character of writing was indeed not his own; he unhappily
adopted that which was predominant.  He saw a certain way to present
praise; and, not sufficiently inquiring by what means the ancients
have continued to delight through all the changes of human manners,
he contented himself with a deciduous laurel, of which the verdure
in its spring was bright and gay, but which time has been
continually stealing from his brows.

He was in his own time considered as of unrivalled excellence.
Clarendon represents him as having taken a flight beyond all that
went before him; and Milton is said to have declared that the three
greatest English poets were Spenser, Shakespeare, and Cowley.

His manner he had in common with others; but his sentiments were his
own.  Upon every subject he thought for himself; and such was his
copiousness of knowledge, that something at once remote and
applicable rushed into his mind; yet it is not likely that he always
rejected a commodious idea merely because another had used it:  his
known wealth was so great that be might have borrowed without loss
of credit, in his elegy on Sir Henry Wotton, the last lines have
such resemblance to the noble epigram of Grotius on the death of
Scaliger, that I cannot but think them copied from it, though they
are copied by no servile hand.

One passage in his "Mistress" is so apparently borrowed from Donne,
that he probably would not have written it had it not mingled with
his own thoughts, so as that he did not perceive himself taking it
from another:


Although I think thou never found wilt be,
   Yet I'm resolved to search for thee;
   The search itself rewards the pains.
So, though the chymic his great secret miss
(For neither it in Art or Nature is),
   Yet things well worth his toil he gains:
   And does his charge and labour pay
With good unsought experiments by the way.--COWLEY.

Some that have deeper digg'd Love's mine than I,
Say, where his centric happiness doth lie:
   I have loved, and got, and told;
But should I love, get, tell, till I were old,
I should not find that hidden mystery;
   Oh, 'tis imposture all!
And as no chymic yet th' elixir got,
   But glorifies his pregnant pot,
   If by the way to him befal
Some odoriferous thing, or medicinal,
   So lovers dream a rich and long delight,
   But get a winter-seeming summer's night.


Jonson and Donne, as Dr. Hurd remarks, were then in the highest
esteem.

It is related by Clarendon, that Cowley always acknowledged his
obligation to the learning and industry of Jonson:  but I have found
no traces of Jonson in his works:  to emulate Donne appears to have
been his purpose.; and from Donne ~he may have learnt that
familiarity with religious images, and that light allusion to sacred
things, by which readers far short of sanctity are frequently
offended; and which would not be borne in the present age, when
devotion, perhaps not more fervent, is more delicate.

Having produced one passage taken by Cowley from Donne, I will
recompense him by another which Milton seems to have borrowed from
him.  He says of Goliath:


His spear, the trunk was of a lofty tree,
Which Nature meant some tall ship's mast should be.


Milton of Satan:


His spear, to equal which the tallest pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the mast
Of some great ammiral, were but a wand,
He walked with.


His diction was in his own time censured as negligent.  He seems not
to have known, or not to have considered, that words being arbitrary
must owe their power to association, and have the influence, and
that only, which custom has given them.  Language is the dress of
thought; and as the noblest mien, or most graceful action, would be
degraded and obscured by a garb appropriated to the gross
employments of rustics or mechanics; so the most heroic sentiments
will lose their efficacy, and the most splendid ideas drop their
magnificence, if they are conveyed by words used commonly upon low
and trivial occasions, debased by vulgar mouths, and contaminated by
inelegant applications.

Truth indeed is always truth, and reason is always reason; they have
an intrinsic and unalterable value, and constitute that intellectual
gold which defies destruction; but gold may be so concealed in baser
matter, that only a chemist can recover it; sense may be so hidden
in unrefined and plebeian words, that none but philosophers can
distinguish it; and both may be so buried in impurities, as not to
pay the cost of their extraction.

The diction, being the vehicle of the thoughts, first presents
itself to the intellectual eye; and if the first appearance offends,
a further knowledge is not often sought.  Whatever professes to
benefit by pleasing, must please at once.  The pleasures of the mind
imply something sudden and unexpected; that which elevates must
always surprise.  What is perceived by slow degrees may gratify us
with the consciousness of improvement, but will never strike with
the sense of pleasure.

Of all this, Cowley appears to have been without knowledge, or
without care.  He makes no selection of words, nor seeks any
neatness of phrase:  he has no elegance either lucky or elaborate;
as his endeavours were rather to impress sentences upon the
understanding, than images on the fancy:  he has few epithets, and
those scattered without peculiar propriety of nice adaptation.

It seems to follow from the necessity of the subject, rather than
the care of the writer, that the diction of his heroic poem is less
familiar than that of his slightest writings.  He has given not the
same numbers, but the same diction, to the gentle Anacreon and the
tempestuous Pindar.

His versification seems to have had very little of his care; and if
what he thinks be true, that his numbers are unmusical only when
they are ill-read, the art of reading them is at present lost; for
they are commonly harsh to modern ears.  He has indeed many noble
lines, such as the feeble care of Waller never could produce.  The
bulk of his thoughts sometimes swelled his verse to unexpected and
inevitable grandeur; but his excellence of this kind is merely
fortuitous:  he sinks willingly down to his general carelessness,
and avoids with very little care either meanness or asperity.

His contractions are often rugged and harsh:


One flings a mountain, and its rivers too
Torn up with 't.


His rhymes are very often made by pronouns, or particles, or the
like unimportant words, which disappoint the ear, and destroy the
energy of the line.

His combination of different measures is sometimes dissonant and
unpleasing; he joins verses together, of which the former does not
slide easily into the latter.

The words "do" and "did," which so much degrade in present
estimation the line that admits them, were in the time of Cowley
little censured or avoided; how often he used them, and with how bad
an effect, at least to our ears, will appear by a passage, in which
every reader will lament to see just and noble thoughts defrauded of
their praise by inelegance of language:


Where honour or where conscience DOES not bind
   No other law shall shackle me;
   Slave to myself I ne'er will be;
Nor shall my future actions be confined
   By my own present mind.
Who by resolves and vows engaged DOES stand
   For days, that yet belong to fate,
DOES like an unthrift mortgage his estate,
   Before it falls into his hand;
   The bondman of the cloister so,
All that he DOES receive DOES always owe.
And still as Time comes in, it goes away,
   Not to enjoy, but debts to pay!
   Unhappy slave, and pupil to a bell!
Which his hour's work as well as hours DOES tell:
Unhappy till the last, the kind releasing knell.


His heroic lines are often formed of monosyllables; but yet they are
sometimes sweet and sonorous.

He says of the Messiah,


Round the whole earth his dreaded name shall sound,
AND REACH TO WORLDS THAT MUST NOT YET BE FOUND.


In another place, of David,


Yet bid him go securely, when he sends;
'TIS SAUL THAT IS HIS FOE, AND WE HIS FRIENDS.
THE MAN WHO HAS HIS GOD, NO AID CAN LACK;
AND WE WHO BID HIM GO, WILL BRING HIM BACK.


Yet amidst his negligence he sometimes attempted an improved and
scientific versification; of which it will be best to give his own
account subjoined to this line:


Nor can the glory contain itself in th' endless space.


"I am sorry that it is necessary to admonish the most part of
readers, that it is not by negligence that this verse is so loose,
long, and, as it were, vast; it is to paint in the number the nature
of the thing which it describes, which I would have observed in
divers other places of this poem, that else will pass as very
careless verses:  as before,

AND OVER-RUNS THE NEIGHB'RING FIELDS WITH VIOLENT COURSE.

"In the second book:

DOWN A PRECIPICE DEEP, DOWSE HE CASTS THEM ALL -

"And,

AND FELL A-DOWN HIS SHOULDERS WITH LOOSE CARE.

"In the third,

BRASS WAS HIS HELMET, HIS BOOTS BRASS, AND O'ER
HIS BREAST A THICK PLATE STRONG BRASS HE WORE.

"In the fourth,

LIKE SOME FAIR PINE O'ER-LOOKING ALL THE IGNOBLER WOOD.

"And,

SOME FROM THE ROCKS CAST THEMSELVES DOWN HEADLONG.

"And many more:  but it is enough to instance in a few.  The thing
is, that the disposition of words and numbers should be such, as
that, out of the order and sound of them, the things themselves may
be represented.  This the Greeks were not so accurate as to bind
themselves to; neither have our English poets observed it, for aught
I can find.  The Latins (qui musas colunt severiores) sometimes did
it; and their prince, Virgil, always:  in whom the examples are
innumerable, and taken notice of by all judicious men, so that it is
superfluous to collect them."


I know not whether he has, in many of these instances, attained the
representation or resemblance that he purposes.  Verse can imitate
only sound and motion.  A "boundless" verse, a "headlong" verse, and
a verse of "brass" or of "strong brass," seem to comprise very
incongruous and unsociable ideas.  What there is peculiar in the
sound of the line expressing "loose care," I cannot discover; nor
why the "pine" is "taller" in an Alexandrine than in ten syllables.

But, not to defraud him of his due praise, he has given one example
of representative versification, which perhaps no other English line
can equal:


Begin, be bold, and venture to be wise:
He, who defers this work from day to day,
Does on a river's bank expecting stay
Till the whole stream that stopp'd him shall be gone,
WHICH RUNS, AND, AS IT RUNS, FOR EVER SHALL RUN ON.


Cowley was, I believe, the first poet that mingled Alexandrines at
pleasure with the common heroic of ten syllables, and from him
Dryden borrowed the practice, whether ornamental or licentious.  He
considered the verse of twelve syllables as elevated and majestic,
and has therefore deviated into that measure when he supposes the
voice heard of the Supreme Being.

The author of the "Davideis" is commended by Dryden for having
written it in couplets, because he discovered that any staff was too
lyrical for an heroic poem; but this seems to have been known before
by May and Sandys, the translators of the "Pharsalia" and the
"Metamorphoses."

In the "Davideis" are some hemistichs, or verses left imperfect by
the author, in imitation of Virgil, whom he supposes not to have
intended to complete them; that this opinion is erroneous, may be
probably concluded, because this truncation is imitated by no
subsequent Roman poet; because Virgil himself filled up one broken
line in the heat of recitation; because in one the sense is now
unfinished; and because all that can be done by a broken verse, a
line intersected by a coesura, and a full stop, will equally effect.

Of triplets in his "Davideis" he makes no use, and perhaps did not
at first think them allowable; but he appears afterwards to have
changed his mind, for in the verses on the government of Cromwell he
inserts them liberally with great happiness.

After so much criticism on his poems, the essays which accompany
them must not be forgotten.  What is said by Sprat of his
conversation, that no man could draw from it any suspicion of his
excellence in poetry, may be applied to these compositions.  No
author ever kept his verse and his prose at a greater distance from
each other.  His thoughts are natural, and his style has a smooth
and placid equability, which has never yet obtained its due
commendation.  Nothing is far-sought, or hard-laboured; but all is
easy without feebleness, and familiar without grossness.

It has been observed by Felton, in his Essay on the Classics, that
Cowley was beloved by every Muse that he courted; and that he has
rivalled the ancients in every kind of poetry but tragedy.

It may be affirmed, without any encomiastic fervour, that he brought
to his poetic labours a mind replete with learning, and that his
pages are embellished with all the ornaments which books could
supply; that he was the first who imparted to English numbers the
enthusiasm of the greater ode, and the gaiety of the less; that he
was equally qualified for sprightly sallies, and for lofty flights;
that he was among those who freed translation from servility, and,
instead of following his author at a distance, walked by his side;
and that, if he left versification yet improvable, he left likewise
from time to time such specimens of excellence as enabled succeeding
poets to improve it.








Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





LOVEY MARY

BY

ALICE HEGAN RICE

AUTHOR OF
"Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch"


1903



TO

CALE YOUNG RICE
WHO TAUGHT ME THE SECRET
OF PLUCKING ROSES FROM
A CABBAGE PATCH




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

   I  A CACTUS-PLANT
  II  A RUNAWAY COUPLE
 III  THE HAZY HOUSEHOLD
  IV  AN ACCIDENT AND AN INCIDENT
   V  THE DAWN OF A ROMANCE
  VI  THE LOSING OF MR. STUBBINS
 VII  NEIGHBORLY ADVICE
VIII  A DENOMINATIONAL GARDEN
  IX  LABOR DAY
   X  A TIMELY VISIT
  XI  THE CHRISTMAS PLAY
 XII  REACTION
XIII  AN HONORABLE RETREAT
 XIV  THE CACTUS BLOOMS




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"They met at the pump." ..... Frontispiece

"'Now the Lord meant you to be plain.'"

"'Come here, Tom, and kiss your mother.'"

"''T ain't no street...; this here is the Cabbage Patch.'"

"She puffed her hair at the top and sides."

"'She took on mighty few airs fer a person in mournin'.'"

"She sat on the door-step, white and miserable." 67

"Mrs. Wiggs took pictures from her walls and chairs from her parlor to
beautify the house of Hazy."

"Mr. Stubbins, sitting in Mrs. Wiggs's most comfortable chair, with a
large slice of pumpkin-pie in his hand."

"'Stick out yer tongue.'"

"Asia held out her hands, which were covered with warm red mitts."

"Master Robert Redding was right side up again, sobbing himself quiet
in Lovey Mary's arms."

"'Have you ever acted any?' he asked."

"Europena stepped forward."

"Sang in a high, sweet voice, 'I Need Thee Every Hour.'"

"'Haven't you got any place you could go to?'"

Susie Smithers at the keyhole

"Lovey Mary waved until she rounded a curve."




LOVEY MARY

CHAPTER I

A CACTUS-PLANT


    For life, with all it yields of joy and woe,
    And hope and fear,...
    Is just our chance o' the prize of learning love,--
    How love might be, hath been indeed, and is.
             BROWNING'S "A Death in the Desert."

Everything about Lovey Mary was a contradiction, from her hands and
feet, which seemed to have been meant for a big girl, to her high
ideals and aspirations, that ought to have belonged to an amiable one.
The only ingredient which might have reconciled all the conflicting
elements in her chaotic little bosom was one which no one had ever
taken the trouble to supply.

When Miss Bell, the matron of the home, came to receive Lovey Mary's
confession of repentance, she found her at an up-stairs window making
hideous faces and kicking the furniture. The depth of her repentance
could always be gaged by the violence of her conduct. Miss Bell looked
at her as she would have looked at one of the hieroglyphs on the
Obelisk. She had been trying to decipher her for thirteen years.

Miss Bell was stout and prim, a combination which was surely never
intended by nature. Her gray dress and tight linen collar and cuffs
gave the uncomfortable impression of being sewed on, while her rigid
black water-waves seemed irrevocably painted upon her high forehead.
She was a routinist; she believed in system, she believed in order,
and she believed that godliness was akin to cleanliness. When she
found an exception to a rule she regarded the exception in the light
of an error. As she stood, brush in hand, before Lovey Mary, she
thought for the hundredth time that the child was an exception.

"Stand up," she said firmly but not unkindly. "I thought you had too
much sense to do your hair that way. Come back to the bath-room, and I
will arrange it properly."

Lovey Mary gave a farewell kick at the wall before she followed Miss
Bell. One side of her head was covered with tight black ringlets, and
the other bristled with curl-papers.

"When I was a little girl," said Miss Bell, running the wet comb
ruthlessly through the treasured curls, "the smoother my hair was the
better I liked it. I used to brush it down with soap and water to make
it stay."

Lovey Mary looked at the water-waves and sighed.

"If you're ugly you never can get married with anybody, can you, Miss
Bell?" she asked in a spirit of earnest inquiry.

Miss Bell's back became stiffer, if possible, than before.

"Marriage isn't the only thing in the world. The homelier you are the
better chance you have of being good. Now the Lord meant you to be
plain"--assisting Providence by drawing the braids so tight that the
girl's eyebrows were elevated with the strain. "If he had meant you to
have curls he would have given them to you."

[Illustration: "'Now the Lord meant you to be plain'"]

"Well, didn't he want me to have a mother and father?" burst forth
Lovey Mary, indignantly, "or clothes, or money, or nothing? Can't I
ever get nothing at all 'cause I wasn't started out with nothing?"

Miss Bell was too shocked to reply. She gave a final brush to the
sleek, wet head and turned sorrowfully away. Lovey Mary ran after her
and caught her hand.

"I'm sorry," she cried impulsively. "I want to be good. Please--
please--"

Miss Bell drew her hand away coldly. "You needn't go to Sabbath-school
this morning," she said in an injured tone; "you can stay here and
think over what you have said. I am not angry with you. I never allow
myself to get angry. I don't understand, that's all. You are such a
good girl about some things and so unreasonable about others. With a
good home, good clothes, and kind treatment, what else could a girl
want?"

Receiving no answer to this inquiry, Miss Bell adjusted her cuffs and
departed with the conviction that she had done all that was possible
to throw light upon a dark subject.

Lovey Mary, left alone, shed bitter tears on her clean gingham dress.
Thirteen years ought to reconcile a person even to gingham dresses
with white china buttons down the back, and round straw hats bought at
wholesale. But Lovey Mary's rebellion of spirit was something that
time only served to increase. It had started with Kate Rider, who used
to pinch her, and laugh at her, and tell the other girls to "get on to
her curves." Curves had signified something dreadful to Lovey Mary;
she would have experienced real relief could she have known that she
did not possess any. It was not Kate Rider, however, who was causing
the present tears; she had left the home two years before, and her
name was not allowed to be mentioned even in whispers. Neither was it
rebellion against the work that had cast Lovey Mary into such depths
of gloom; fourteen beds had been made, fourteen heads had been combed,
and fourteen wriggling little bodies had been cheerfully buttoned into
starchy blue ginghams exactly like her own.

Something deeper and more mysterious was fermenting in her soul--
something that made her long passionately for the beautiful things of
life, for love and sympathy and happiness; something that made her
want to be good, yet tempted her constantly to rebel against her
environs. It was just the world-old spirit that makes the veriest
little weed struggle through a chink in the rock and reach upward
toward the sun.

"What's the matter with your hair, Lovey Mary? It looks so funny,"
asked a small girl, coming up the steps.

"If anybody asts you, tell 'em you don't know," snapped Lovey Mary.

"Well, Miss Bell says for you to come down to the office," said the
other, unabashed. "There's a lady down there--a lady and a baby. Me
and Susie peeked in. Miss Bell made the lady cry; she made her wipe
the powders off her compleshun."

"And she sent for me?" asked Lovey Mary, incredulously. Such a ripple
in the still waters of the home was sufficient to interest the most
disconsolate.

"Yes; and me and Susie's going to peek some more."

Lovey Mary dried her tears and hurried down to the office. As she
stood at the door she heard a girl's excited voice protesting and
begging, and Miss Bell's placid tones attempting to calm her. They
paused as she entered.

"Mary," said Miss Bell, "you remember Kate Rider. She has brought her
child for us to take care of for a while. Have you room for him in
your division?"

As Lovey Mary looked at the gaily dressed girl on the sofa, her
animosity rekindled. It was not Kate's bold black eyes that stirred
her wrath, nor the hard red lips that recalled the taunts of other
days: it was the sight of the auburn curls gathered in tantalizing
profusion under the brim of the showy hat.

"Mary, answer my question!" said Miss Bell, sharply.

With an involuntary shudder of repugnance Lovey Mary drew her gaze
from Kate and murmured, "Yes, 'm."

"Then you can take the baby with you," continued Miss Bell, motioning
to the sleeping child. "But wait a moment. I think I will put Jennie
at the head of your division and let you have entire charge of this
little boy. He is only a year old, Kate tells me, so will need
constant attention."

Lovey Mary was about to protest, when Kate broke in:

"Oh, say, Miss Bell, please get some other girl! Tommy never would
like Lovey. He's just like me: if people ain't pretty, he don't have
no use for 'em."

"That will do, Kate," said Miss Bell, coldly. "It is only pity for the
child that makes me take him at all. You have forfeited all claim upon
our sympathy or patience. Mary, take the baby up-stairs and care for
him until I come."

Lovey Mary, hot with rebellion, picked him up and went out of the
room. At the door she stumbled against two little girls who were
listening at the keyhole.

Up-stairs in the long dormitory it was very quiet. The children had
been marched away to Sunday-school, and only Lovey Mary and the
sleeping baby were on the second floor. The girl sat beside the little
white bed and hated the world as far as she knew it: she hated Kate
for adding this last insult to the old score; she hated Miss Bell for
putting this new burden on her unwilling shoulders; she hated the
burden itself, lying there before her so serene and unconcerned; and
most of all she hated herself.

"I wisht I was dead!" she cried passionately. "The harder I try to be
good the meaner I get. Ever'body blames me, and ever'body makes fun of
me. Ugly old face, and ugly old hands, and straight old rat-tail hair!
It ain't no wonder that nobody loves me. I just wisht I was dead!"

The sunshine came through the window and made a big white patch on the
bare floor, but Lovey Mary sat in the shadow and disturbed the Sunday
quiet by her heavy sobbing.

At noon, when the children returned, the noise of their arrival woke
Tommy. He opened his round eyes on a strange world, and began to cry
lustily. One child after another tried to pacify him, but each
friendly advance increased his terror.

"Leave him be!" cried Lovey Mary. "Them hats is enough to skeer him
into fits." She picked him up, and with the knack born of experience
soothed and comforted him. The baby hid his face on her shoulder and
held her tight. She could feel the sobs that still shook the small
body, and his tears were on her cheek.

"Never mind," she said. "I ain't a-going to let 'em hurt you. I'm
going to take care of you. Don't cry any more. Look!"

She stretched forth her long, unshapely hand and made grotesque
snatches at the sunshine that poured in through the window. Tommy
hesitated and was lost; a smile struggled to the surface, then broke
through the tears.

"Look! He's laughing!" cried Lovey Mary, gleefully. "He's laughing
'cause I ketched a sunbeam for him!"

Then she bent impulsively and kissed the little red lips so close to
her own.




CHAPTER II

A RUNAWAY COUPLE


"Courage mounteth with occasion."

For two years Lovey Mary cared for Tommy: she bathed him and dressed
him, taught him to walk, and kissed his bumps to make them well; she
sewed for him and nursed him by day, and slept with him in her tired
arms at night. And Tommy, with the inscrutable philosophy of
childhood, accepted his little foster-mother and gave her his all.

One bright June afternoon the two were romping in the home yard under
the beech-trees. Lovey Mary lay in the grass, while Tommy threw
handfuls of leaves in her face, laughing with delight at her grimaces.
Presently the gate clicked, and some one came toward them.

"Good land! is that my kid?" said a woman's voice. "Come here, Tom,
and kiss your mother."

Lovey Mary, sitting up, found Kate Rider, in frills and ribbons,
looking with surprise at the sturdy child before her.

Tommy objected violently to this sudden overture and declined
positively to acknowledge the relationship. In fact, when Kate
attempted to pull him to her, he fled for protection to Lovey Mary and
cast belligerent glances at the intruder.

Kate laughed.

"Oh, you needn't be so scary; you might as well get used to me, for I
am going to take you home with me. I bet he's a corker, ain't he,
Lovey? He used to bawl all night. Sometimes I'd have to spank him two
or three times."

Lovey Mary clasped the child closer and looked up in dumb terror. Was
Tommy to be taken from her? Tommy to go away with Kate?

"Great Scott!" exclaimed Kate, exasperated at the girl's manner. "You
are just as ugly and foolish as you used to be. I'm going in to see
Miss Bell."

Lovey Mary waited until she was in the house, then she stole
noiselessly around to the office window. The curtain blew out across
her cheek, and the swaying lilacs seemed to be trying to count the
china buttons on her back; but she stood there with staring eyes and
parted lips, and held her breath to listen.

[Illustration with caption: "'Come here, Tom, and kiss your mother.'"]

"Of course," Miss Bell was saying, measuring her words with due
precision, "if you feel that you can now support your child and that
it is your duty to take him, we cannot object. There are many other
children waiting to come into the home. And yet--" Miss Bell's voice
sounded human and unnatural--"yet I wish he could stay. Have you
thought, Kate, of your responsibility toward him, of--"

"Oh! Ough!" shrieked Tommy from the playground, in tones of distress.

Lovey Mary left her point of vantage and rushed to the rescue. She
found him emitting frenzied yells, while a tiny stream of blood
trickled down his chin.

"It was my little duck," he gasped as soon as he was able to speak. "I
was tissin' him, an' he bited me."

At thought of the base ingratitude on the part of the duck, Tommy
wailed anew. Lovey Mary led him to the hydrant and bathed the injured
lip, while she soothed his feelings. Suddenly a wave of tenderness
swept over her. She held his chubby face up to hers and said
fervently:

"Tommy, do you love me?"

"Yes," said Tommy, with a reproachful eye on the duck. "Yes; I yuv to
yuv. I don't yuv to tiss, though!"

"But me, Tommy, me. Do you love me?"

"Yes," he answered gravely, "dollar an' a half."

"Whose little boy are you?"

"Yuvey's 'e boy."

Satisfied with this catechism, she put Tommy in care of another girl
and went back to her post at the window. Miss Bell was talking again.

"I will have him ready to-morrow afternoon when you come. His clothes
are all in good condition. I only hope, Kate, that you will care for
him as tenderly as Mary has. I am afraid he will miss her sadly."

"If he's like me, he'll forget about her in two or three days,"
answered the other voice. "It always was 'out of sight, out of mind'
with me."

Miss Bell's answer was indistinct, and in a few minutes Lovey Mary
heard the hall door close behind them. She shook her fists until the
lilacs trembled. "She sha'n't have him!" she whispered fiercely. "She
sha'n't let him grow up wicked like she is. I won't let him go. I'll
hide him, I'll--"

Suddenly she grew very still, and for a long time crouched motionless
behind the bushes. The problem that faced her had but one solution,
and Lovey Mary had found it.

The next morning when the sun climbed over the tree-tops and peered
into the dormitory windows he found that somebody else had made an
early rise. Lovey Mary was sitting by a wardrobe making her last will
and testament. From the neatly folded pile of linen she selected a few
garments and tied them into a bundle. Then she took out a cigar-box
and gravely contemplated the contents. There were two narrow hair-
ribbons which had evidently been one wide ribbon, a bit of rock
crystal, four paper dolls, a soiled picture-book with some other
little girl's name scratched out on the cover, and two shining silver
dollars. These composed Lovey Mary's worldly possessions. She tied the
money in her handkerchief and put it in her pocket, then got up softly
and slipped about among the little white beds, distributing her
treasures.

"I'm mad at Susie," she whispered, pausing before a tousled head; "I
hate to give her the nicest thing I've got. But she's just crazy 'bout
picture-books."

The curious sun climbed yet a little higher and saw Lovey Mary go back
to her own bed, and, rolling Tommy's clothes around her own bundle,
gather the sleeping child in her arms and steal quietly out of the
room. Then the sun got too high up in the heavens to watch little
runaway orphan girls. Nobody saw her steal through the deserted
playroom, down the clean bare steps, which she had helped to wear
away, and out through the yard to the coal-shed. Here she got the
reluctant Tommy into his clothes, and tied on his little round straw
hat, so absurdly like her own.

"Is we playin' hie-spy, Yuvey?" asked the mystified youngster.

"Yes, Tommy," she whispered, "and we are going a long way to hide. You
are my little boy now, and you must love me better than anything in
the world. Say it, Tommy; say, 'I love you better 'n anybody in the
whole world.'"

"Will I det on de rollin' honor?" asked Tommy, thinking he was
learning his golden text.

But Lovey Mary had forgotten her question. She was taking a farewell
look at the home, every nook and corner of which had suddenly grown
dear. Already she seemed a thing apart, one having no right to its
shelter and protection. She turned to where Tommy was playing with
some sticks in the corner, and bidding him not to stir or speak until
her return, she slipped back up the walk and into the kitchen. Swiftly
and quietly she made a fire in the stove and filled the kettle with
water. Then she looked about for something more she might do. On the
table lay the grocery book with a pencil attached. She thought a
moment, then wrote laboriously under the last order: "Miss Bell I will
take kere Tommy pleas don't be mad." Then she softly closed the door
behind her.

A few minutes later she lifted Tommy out of the low shed window, and
hurried him down the alley and out into the early morning streets. At
the corner they took a car, and Tommy knelt by the window and absorbed
the sights with rapt attention; to him the adventure was beginning
brilliantly. Even Lovey Mary experienced a sense of exhilaration when
she paid their fare out of one of the silver dollars. She knew the
conductor was impressed, because he said, "You better watch Buddy's
hat, ma'am." That "ma'am" pleased her profoundly; it caused her
unconsciously to assume Miss Bell's tone and manner as she conversed
with the back of Tommy's head.

"We'll go out on the avenue," she said. "We'll go from house to house
till I get work. 'Most anybody would be glad to get a handy girl that
can cook and wash and sew, only--I ain't very big, and then there's
you."

"Ain't that a big house?" shouted Tommy, half way out of the window.

"Yes; don't talk so loud. That's the court-house."

"Where they make court-plaster at?" inquired Tommy shrilly.

Lovey Mary glanced around uneasily. She hoped the old man in the
corner had not heard this benighted remark. All went well until the
car reached the terminal station. Here Tommy refused to get off. In
vain Lovey Mary coaxed and threatened.

"It'll take us right back to the home," she pleaded. "Be a good boy
and come with Lovey. I'll buy you something nice."

Tommy remained obdurate. He believed in letting well enough alone. The
joys of a street-car ride were present and tangible; "something nice"
was vague, unsatisfying.

"Don't yer little brother want to git off?" asked the conductor,
sympathetically.

"No, sir," said Lovey Mary, trying to maintain her dignity while she
struggled with her charge. "If you please, sir, would you mind holding
his feet while I loosen his hands?"

Tommy, shrieking indignant protests, was borne from the car and
deposited on the sidewalk.

"Don't you dare get limber!" threatened Lovey Mary. "If you do I'll
spank you right here on the street. Stand up! Straighten out your
legs! Tommy! do you hear me?"

Tommy might have remained limp indefinitely had not a hurdy-gurdy
opportunely arrived on the scene. It is true that he would go only in
the direction of the music, but Lovey Mary was delighted to have him
go at all. When at last they were headed for the avenue, Tommy caused
another delay.

"I want my ducky," he announced.

The words brought consternation to Lovey Mary. She had fearfully
anticipated them from the moment of leaving the home.

"I'll buy you a 'tend-like duck," she said.

"No; I want a sure-'nough ducky; I want mine."

Lovey Mary was exasperated. "Well, you can't have yours. I can't get
it for you, and you might as well hush."

His lips trembled, and two large tears rolled down his round cheeks.
When he was injured he was irresistible. Lovey Mary promptly
surrendered.

"Don't cry, baby boy! Lovey'll get you one someway."

For some time the quest of the duck was fruitless. The stores they
entered were wholesale houses for the most part, where men were
rolling barrels about or stacking skins and hides on the sidewalk.

"Do you know what sort of a store they sell ducks at?" asked Lovey
Mary of a colored man who was sweeping out an office.

"Ducks!" repeated the negro, grinning at the queerly dressed children
in their round straw hats. "Name o' de Lawd! What do you all want wif
ducks?"

Lovey Mary explained.

"Wouldn't a kitten do jes as well?" he asked kindly.

"I want my ducky," whined Tommy, showing signs of returning storm.

"I don' see no way 'cept'n' gwine to de mahket. Efen you tek de cah
you kin ride plumb down dere."

Recent experience had taught Lovey Mary to be wary of street-cars, so
they walked. At the market they found some ducks. The desired objects
were hanging in a bunch with their limp heads tied together. Further
inquiry, however, discovered some live ones in a coop.

"They're all mama ducks," objected Tommy. "I want a baby ducky. I want
my little ducky!"

When he found he could do no better, he decided to take one of the
large ones. Then he said he was hungry, so he and Mary took turn about
holding it while the other ate "po' man's pickle" and wienerwurst.

It was two o'clock by the time they reached the avenue, and by four
they were foot-sore and weary, but they trudged bravely along from
house to house asking for work. As dusk came on, the houses, which a
few squares back had been tall and imposing, seemed to be getting
smaller and more insignificant. Lovey Mary felt secure as long as she
was on the avenue. She did not know that the avenue extended for many
miles and that she had reached the frayed and ragged end of it. She
and Tommy passed under a bridge, and after that the houses all seemed
to behave queerly. Some faced one way, some another, and crisscross
between them, in front of them, and behind them ran a network of
railroad tracks.

"What's the name of this street?" asked Lovey Mary of a small, bare-
footed girl.

"'T ain't no street," answered the little girl, gazing with
undisguised amazement at the strange-looking couple; "this here is the
Cabbage Patch."

[Illustration: "'T ain't no street...; this here is the Cabbage
Patch.'"]




CHAPTER III

THE HAZY HOUSEHOLD


    "Here sovereign Dirt erects her sable throne,
     The house, the host, the hostess all her own."

Miss Hazy was the submerged tenth of the Cabbage Patch. The submersion
was mainly one of dirt and disorder, but Miss Hazy was such a meek,
inefficient little body that the Cabbage Patch withheld its blame and
patiently tried to furnish a prop for the clinging vine. Miss Hazy, it
is true, had Chris; but Chris was unstable, not only because he had
lost one leg, but also because he was the wildest, noisiest, most
thoughtless youngster that ever shied a rock at a lamp-post. Miss Hazy
had "raised" Chris, and the neighbors had raised Miss Hazy.

When Lovey Mary stumbled over the Hazy threshold with the sleeping
Tommy and the duck in her arms, Miss Hazy fluttered about in dismay.
She pushed the flour-sifter farther over on the bed and made a place
for Tommy, then she got a chair for the exhausted girl and hovered
about her with little chirps of consternation.

"Dear sakes! You're done tuckered out, ain't you? You an' the baby got
losted? Ain't that too bad! Must I make you some tea? Only there ain't
no fire in the stove. Dear me! what ever will I do? Jes wait a minute;
I'll have to go ast Mis' Wiggs."

In a few minutes Miss Hazy returned. With her was a bright-faced
little woman whose smile seemed to thaw out the frozen places in Lovey
Mary's heart and make her burst into tears on the motherly bosom.

"There now, there," said Mrs. Wiggs, hugging the girl up close and
patting her on the back; "there ain't no hole so deep can't somebody
pull you out. An' here's me an' Miss Hazy jes waitin' to give you a
h'ist."

There was something so heartsome in her manner that Lovey Mary dried
her eyes and attempted to explain. "I'm tryin' to get a place," she
began, "but nobody wants to take Tommy too. I can't carry him any
further, and I don't know where to go, and it's 'most night--" again
the sobs choked her.

"Lawsee!" said Mrs. Wiggs, "don't you let that worry you! I can't take
you home, 'cause Asia an' Australia an' Europeny are sleepin' in one
bed as it is; but you kin git right in here with Miss Hazy, can't she,
Miss Hazy?"

The hostess, to whom Mrs. Wiggs was an oracle, acquiesced heartily.

"All right: that's fixed. Now I'll go home an' send you all over some
nice, hot supper by Billy, an' to-morrow mornin' will be time enough
to think things out."

Lovey Mary, too exhausted to mind the dirt, ate her supper off a
broken plate, then climbed over behind Tommy and the flour-sifter, and
was soon fast asleep.

The business meeting next morning "to think things out" resulted
satisfactorily. At first Mrs. Wiggs was inclined to ask questions and
find out where the children came from, but when she saw Lovey Mary's
evident distress and embarrassment, she accepted the statement that
they were orphans and that the girl was seeking work in order to take
care of herself and the boy. It had come to be an unwritten law in the
Cabbage Patch that as few questions as possible should be asked of
strangers. People had come there before who could not give clear
accounts of themselves.

"Now I'll tell you what I think'll be best," said Mrs. Wiggs, who
enjoyed untangling snarls. "Asia kin take Mary up to the fact'ry with
her to-morrow, an' see if she kin git her a job. I 'spect she kin,
'cause she stands right in with the lady boss. Miss Hazy, me an' you
kin keep a' eye on the baby between us. If Mary gits a place she kin
pay you so much a week, an' that'll help us all out, 'cause then we
won't have to send in so many outside victuals. If she could make
three dollars an' Chris three, you all could git along right peart."

Lovey Mary stayed in the house most of the day. She was almost afraid
to look out of the little window, for fear she should see Miss Bell or
Kate Rider coming. She sat in the only chair that had a bottom and
diligently worked buttonholes for Miss Hazy.

"Looks like there ain't never no time to clean up," said Miss Hazy,
apologetically, as she shoved Chris's Sunday clothes and a can of
coal-oil behind the door.

Lovey Mary looked about her and sighed deeply. The room was brimful
and spilling over: trash, tin cans, and bottles overflowed the window-
sills; a crippled rocking-chair, with a faded quilt over it, stood
before the stove, in the open oven of which Chris's shoe was drying;
an old sewing-machine stood in the middle of the floor, with Miss
Hazy's sewing on one end of it and the uncleared dinner-dishes on the
other.

Mary could not see under the bed, but she knew from the day's
experience that it was used as a combination store-room and wardrobe.
She thought of the home with its bare, clean rooms and its spotless
floors. She rose abruptly and went out to the rear of the house, where
Tommy was playing with Europena Wiggs. They were absorbed in trying to
hitch the duck to a spool-box, and paid little attention to her.

"Tommy," she said, clutching his arm, "don't you want to go back?"

But Tommy had tasted freedom; he had had one blissful day unwashed,
uncombed, and uncorrected.

"No," he declared stoutly; "I'm doin' to stay to this house and play
wiv You're-a-peanut."

"Then," said Mary, with deep resignation, "the only thing for me to do
is to try to clean things up."

When she went back into the house she untied her bundle and took out
the remaining dollar.

"I'll be back soon," she said to Miss Hazy as she stepped over a
basket of potatoes. "I'm just going over to Mrs. Wiggs's a minute."

She found her neighbor alone, getting supper. "Please, ma'am,"--she
plunged into her subject at once,--"have any of your girls a dress for
sale? I've got a dollar to buy it."

Mrs. Wiggs turned the girl around and surveyed her critically. "Well,
I don't know as I blame you fer wantin' to git shut of that one. There
ain't more 'n room enough fer one leg in that skirt, let alone two.
An' what was the sense in them big shiny buttons?"

"I don't know as it makes much difference," said Lovey Mary,
disconsolately; "I'm so ugly, nothing could make me look nice."

Mrs. Wiggs shook her by the shoulders good-naturedly. "Now, here," she
said, "don't you go an' git sorry fer yerself! That's one thing I
can't stand in nobody. There's always lots of other folks you kin be
sorry fer 'stid of yerself. Ain't you proud you ain't got a harelip?
Why, that one thought is enough to keep me from ever gittin' sorry fer
myself."

Mary laughed, and Mrs. Wiggs clapped her hands. "That's what yer face
needs--smiles! I never see anything make such a difference. But now
about the dress. Yes, indeed, Asia has got dresses to give 'way. She
gits 'em from Mrs. Reddin'; her husband is Mr. Bob, Billy's boss. He's
a newspaper editress an' rich as cream. Mrs. Reddin' is a fallen
angel, if there ever was one on this earth. She sends all sorts of
clothes to Asia, an' I warm 'em over an' boil 'em down till they're
her size.

"Asia Minor!" she called to a girl who was coming in the door, "this
here is Mary--Lovey Mary she calls herself, Miss Hazy's boarder. Have
you got a dress you could give her?"

"I'm going to buy it," said Mary, immediately on the defensive. She
did not want them to think for a moment that she was begging. She
would show them that she had money, that she was just as good as they
were.

"Well, maw," the other girl was saying in a drawling voice as she
looked earnestly at Lovey Mary, "seems to me she'd look purtiest in my
red dress. Her hair's so nice an' black an' her teeth so white, I 'low
the red would look best."

Mrs. Wiggs gazed at her daughter with adoring eyes. "Ain't that the
artis' stickin' out through her? Couldn't you tell she handles paints?
Up at the fact'ry she's got a fine job, paints flowers an' wreaths on
to bath-tubs. Yes, indeed, this here red one is what you must have.
Keep your dollar, child; the dress never cost us a cent. Here's a
nubia, too, you kin have; it'll look better than that little hat you
had on last night. That little hat worried me; it looked like the
stopper was too little fer the bottle. There now, take the things
right home with you, an' tomorrow you an' Asia kin start off in
style."

Lovey Mary, flushed with the intoxication of her first compliment,
went back and tried on the dress. Miss Hazy got so interested that she
forgot to get supper.

"You look so nice I never would 'a' knowed you in the world!" she
declared. "You don't look picked, like you did in that other dress."

"That Wiggs girl said I looked nice in red," said Lovey Mary
tentatively.

"You do, too," said Miss Hazy; "it keeps you from lookin' so corpsey.
I wisht you'd do somethin' with yer hair, though; it puts me in mind
of snakes in them long black plaits."

All Lovey Mary needed was encouragement. She puffed her hair at the
top and sides and tucked it up in the latest fashion. Tommy, coming in
at the door, did not recognize her. She laughed delightedly.

"Do I look so different?"

"I should say you do," said Miss Hazy, admiringly, as she spread a
newspaper for a table-cloth. "I never seen no one answer to primpin'
like you do."

[Illustration: "She puffed her hair at the top and sides."]

When it was quite dark Lovey Mary rolled something in a bundle and
crept out of the house. After glancing cautiously up and down the
tracks she made her way to the pond on the commons and dropped her
bundle into the shallow water.

Next day, when Mrs. Schultz's goat died of convulsions, nobody knew it
was due to the china buttons on Lovey Mary's gingham dress.




CHAPTER IV

AN ACCIDENT AND AN INCIDENT


    "Our deeds still travel with us from afar,
     And what we have been makes us what we are."

Through the assistance of Asia Wiggs, Lovey Mary secured pleasant and
profitable work at the factory; but her mind was not at peace. Of
course it was a joy to wear the red dress and arrange her hair a
different way each morning, but there was a queer, restless little
feeling in her heart that spoiled even the satisfaction of looking
like other girls and earning three dollars a week. The very fact that
nobody took her to task, that nobody scolded or blamed her, caused her
to ask herself disturbing questions. Secret perplexity had the same
effect upon her that it has upon many who are older and wiser: it made
her cross.

Two days after she started to work, Asia, coming down from the
decorating-room for lunch, found her in fiery dispute with a red-
haired girl. There had been an accident in front of the factory, and
the details were under discussion.

"Well, I know all about it," declared the red-haired girl, excitedly,
"'cause my sister was the first one that got to her."

"Is your sister a nigger named Jim Brown?" asked Lovey Mary,
derisively. "Ever'body says he was the first one got there."

"Was there blood on her head?" asked Asia, trying to stem the tide of
argument.

"Yes, indeed," said the first speaker; "on her head an' on her hands,
too. I hanged on the steps when they was puttin' her in the ambalance-
wagon, an' she never knowed a bloomin' thing!"

"Why didn't you go on with them to the hospital!" asked Lovey Mary. "I
don't see how the doctors could get along without you."

"Oh, you're just mad 'cause you didn't see her. She was awful pretty!
Had on a black hat with a white feather in it, but it got in the mud.
They say she had a letter in her pocket with her name on it."

"I thought maybe she come to long enough to tell you her name," teased
her tormentor.

"Well, I do know it, Smarty," retorted the other, sharply: "it's Miss
Kate Rider."

Meanwhile in the Cabbage Patch Miss Hazy and Mrs. Wiggs were holding a
consultation over the fence.

"She come over to my house first," Mrs. Wiggs was saying, dramatically
illustrating her remarks with two tin cans. "This is me here, an' I
looks up an' seen the old lady standin' over there. She put me in mind
of a graven image. She had on a sorter gray mournin', didn't she, Miss
Hazy?"

"Yes, 'm; that was the way it struck me. Bein' gray, I 'lowed it was
fer some one she didn't keer fer pertickler."

"An' gent's cuffs," continued Mrs. Wiggs; "I noticed them right off.
''Scuse me,' says she, snappin' her mouth open an' shut like a trap--
''scuse me, but have you seen anything of two strange children in this
neighborhood?' I th'owed my apron over Lovey Mary's hat, that I was
trimmin'. I wasn't goin' to tell till I found out what that widder
woman was after. But before I was called upon to answer, Tommy come
tearin' round the house chasin' Cusmoodle."

"Who?"

"Cusmoodle, the duck. I named it this mornin'. Well, when the lady
seen Tommy she started up, then she set down ag'in, holdin' her skirts
up all the time to keep 'em from techin' the floor. 'How'd they git
here?' she ast, so relieved-like that I thought she must be kin to
'em. So I up an' told her all I knew. I told her if she wanted to find
out anything about us she could ast Mrs. Reddin' over at Terrace Park.
'Mrs. Robert Reddin'?' says she, lookin' dumfounded. 'Yes,' says I,
'the finest lady, rich or poor, in Kentucky, unless it's her husband.'
Then she went on an' ast me goin' on a hunderd questions 'bout all of
us an' all of you all, an' 'bout the factory. She even ast me where we
got our water at, an' if you kept yer house healthy. I told her Lovey
Mary had made Chris carry out more 'n a wheelbarrow full of dirt ever'
night since she had been here, an' I guess it would be healthy by the
time she got through."

[Illustration: "'She took on mighty few airs fer a person in
mournin'.'"]

Miss Hazy moved uneasily. "I told her I couldn't clean up much 'count
of the rheumatism, an' phthisic, an' these here dizzy spells--"

"I bet she didn't git a chance to talk much if you got started on your
symptims," interrupted Mrs. Wiggs.

"Didn't you think she was a' awful haughty talker?"

'No, indeed. She took on mighty few airs fer a person in mournin'.
When she riz to go, she says, real kind fer such a stern-faced woman,
'Do the childern seem well an' happy?' 'Yes, 'm; they're well, all
right,' says I. 'Tommy he's like a colt what's been stabled up all
winter an' is let out fer the first time. As fer Mary,' I says, 'she
seems kinder low in her mind, looks awful pestered most of the time.'
'It won't hurt her,' says the lady. 'Keep a' eye on 'em,' says she,
puttin' some money in my hand,' an' if you need any more, I'll leave
it with Mrs. Reddin'.' Then she cautioned me pertickler not to say
nothin' 'bout her havin' been here."

"She told me not to tell, too," said Miss Hazy; "but I don't know what
we're goin' to say to Mrs. Schultz. She 'most sprained her back tryin'
to see who it was, an' Mrs. Eichorn come over twicet pertendin'-like
she wanted to borrow a corkscrew driver."

"Tell 'em she was a newfangled agent," said Mrs. Wiggs, with
unblushing mendacity--"a' agent fer shoestrings."




CHAPTER V

THE DAWN OF A ROMANCE


     "There is in the worst of fortunes
      The best of chances for a happy change."

"Good land! you all're so clean in here I'm feared of ketchin' the
pneumony."

Mrs. Wiggs stood in Miss Hazy's kitchen and smiled approval at the
marvelous transformation.

"Well, now, I don't think it's right healthy," complained Miss Hazy,
who was sitting at the machine, with her feet on a soap-box; "so much
water sloppin' round is mighty apt to give a person a cold. But Lovey
Mary says she can't stand it no other way. She's mighty set, Mis'
Wiggs."

"Yes, an' that's jes what you need, Miss Hazy. You never was set 'bout
nothin' in yer life. Lovey Mary's jes took you an' the house an'
ever'thing in hand, an' in four weeks got you all to livin' like white
folks. I ain't claimin' she ain't sharp-tongued; I 'low she's sassed
'bout ever'body in the Patch but me by now. But she's good, an' she's
smart, an' some of her sharp corners'll git pecked off afore her hair
grows much longer."

"Oh, mercy me! here she comes now to git her lunch," said Miss Hazy,
with chagrin. "I ain't got a thing fixed."

"You go on an' sew; I'll mess up a little somethin' fer her. She'll
stop, anyway, to talk to Tommy. Did you ever see anything to equal the
way she takes on 'bout that child? She jes natchally analyzes him."

Lovey Mary, however, did not stop as usual to play with Tommy. She
came straight to the kitchen and sat down on the door-step, looking
worried and preoccupied.

"How comes it you ain't singin'?" asked Mrs. Wiggs. "If I had a voice
like yourn, folks would have to stop up their years with cotton. I jes
find myself watchin' fer you to come home, so's I can hear you singin'
them pretty duets round the house."

Lovey Mary smiled faintly; for a month past she had been unconsciously
striving to live up to Mrs. Wiggs's opinion of her, and the constant
praise and commendation of that "courageous captain of compliment" had
moved her to herculean effort.

But a sudden catastrophe threatened her. She sat on the door-step,
white and miserable. Held tight in the hand that was thrust in her
pocket was a letter; it was a blue letter addressed to Miss Hazy in
large, dashing characters. Lovey Mary had got it from the postman as
she went out in the morning; for five hours she had been racked with
doubt concerning it. She felt that it could refer but to one subject,
and that was herself. Perhaps Miss Bell had discovered her hiding-
place, or, worse still, perhaps Kate Rider had seen her at the factory
and was writing for Tommy. Lovey Mary crushed the letter in her hand;
she would not give it to Miss Hazy. She would outwit Kate again.

"All right, honey," called Mrs. Wiggs; "here you are. 'T ain't much of
a lunch, but it'll fill up the gaps. Me an' Miss Hazy jes been talkin'
'bout you."

Lovey Mary glanced up furtively. Could they have suspected anything?

[Illustration: "She sat on the door-step, white and miserable."]

"Didn't yer years sorter burn! We was speakin' of the way you'd
slicked things up round here. I was a-sayin' even if you was a sorter
repeatin'-rifle when it come to answerin' back, you was a good, nice
girl."

Lovey Mary smoothed out the crumpled letter in her pocket. "I'm 'fraid
I ain't as good as you make me out," she said despondently.

"Oh, yes, she is," said Miss Hazy, with unusual animation; "she's a
rale good girl, when she ain't sassy."

This unexpected praise was too much for Lovey Mary. She snatched the
letter from her pocket and threw it on the table, not daring to trust
her good impulse to last beyond the minute.

"'Miss Marietta Hazy, South Avenue and Railroad Crossing,'" read Mrs.
Wiggs, in amazement.

"Oh, surely it ain't got me on the back of it!" cried Miss Hazy,
rising hurriedly from the machine and peering over her glasses. "You
open it, Mis' Wiggs; I ain't got the nerve to."

With chattering teeth and trembling hands Lovey Mary sat before her
untasted food. She could hear Tommy's laughter through the open
window, and the sound brought tears to her eyes. But Mrs. Wiggs's
voice recalled her, and she nerved herself for the worst.

_"Miss Hazy._

"DEAR MISS [Mrs. Wiggs read from the large type-written sheet before
her]: Why not study the planets and the heavens therein? In casting
your future, I find that thou wilt have an active and succesful year
for business, but beware of the law. You are prudent and amiable and
have a lively emagination. You will have many ennemies; but fear not,
for in love you will be faitful and sincer, and are fitted well fer
married life."

"They surely ain't meanin' me?" asked Miss Hazy, in great
perturbation.

"_Yes, ma'am_," said Mrs. Wiggs, emphatically; "it's you, plain
as day. Let's go on:

"Your star fortells you a great many lucky events. You are destined to
a brilliant success, but you will have to earn it by good conduct. Let
wise men lead you. Your mildness against the wretched will bring you
the friendship of everbody. Enclosed you will find a spirit picture of
your future pardner. If you will send twenty-five cents with the
enclosed card, which you will fill out, we will put you in direct
correspondance with the gentleman, and the degree ordained by the
planets will thus be fulfilled. Please show this circuler to your
friends, and oblige

_"Astrologer."_

As the reading proceeded, Lovey Mary's fears gradually diminished, and
with a sigh of relief she applied herself to her lunch. But if the
letter had proved of no consequence to her, such was not the case with
the two women standing at the window. Miss Hazy was re-reading the
letter, vainly trying to master the contents.

"Mary," she said, "git up an' see if you can find my other pair of
lookin'-glasses. Seems like I can't git the sense of it."

Mrs. Wiggs meanwhile was excitedly commenting on the charms of the
"spirit picture":

"My, but he's siylish! Looks fer all the world like a' insurance
agent. Looks like he might be a little tall to his size, but I like
statute men better 'n dumpy ones. I bet he's got a lot of nice
manners. Ain't his smile pleasant!"

Miss Hazy seized the small picture with trembling fingers. "I don't
seem to git on to what it's all about, Mis' Wiggs. Ain't they made a
mistake or somethin'?"

"No, indeed; there's no mistake at all," declared Mrs. Wiggs. "Yer
name's on the back, an' it's meant fer you. Someway yer name's got out
as bein' single an' needin' takin' keer of, an' I reckon this here
'strologer, or conjurer, or whatever he is, seen yer good fortune in
the stars an' jes wanted to let you know 'bout it."

"Does he want to get married with her?" asked Lovey Mary, beginning to
realize the grave importance of the subject under discussion.

"Well, it may lead to that," answered Mrs. Wiggs, hopefully. Surely
only a beneficent Providence could have offered such an unexpected
solution to the problem of Miss Hazy's future.

Miss Hazy herself uttered faint protests and expostulations, but in
spite of herself she was becoming influenced by Mrs. Wiggs's
enthusiasm.

"Oh, shoo!" she repeated again and again. "I ain't never had no
thought of marryin'."

"Course you ain't," said Mrs. Wiggs. "Good enough reason: you ain't
had a show before. Seems to me you'd be flyin' straight in the face of
Providence to refuse a stylish, sweet-smilin' man like that."

"He is fine-lookin'," acknowledged Miss Hazy, trying not to appear too
pleased; "only I wisht his years didn't stick out so much."

Mrs. Wiggs was exasperated.

"Lawsee! Miss Hazy, what do you think he'll think of yer figger? Have
you got so much to brag on, that you kin go to pickin' him to pieces?
Do you suppose I'd 'a' dared to judge Mr. Wiggs that away? Why, Mr.
Wiggs's nose was as long as a clothespin; but I would no more 'a'
thought of his nose without him than I would 'a' thought of him
without the nose."

"Well, what do you think I'd orter do 'bout it?" asked Miss Hazy.

"I ain't quite made up my mind," said her mentor. "I'll talk it over
with the neighbors. But I 'spect, if we kin skeer up a quarter, that
you'll answer by the mornin's mail."

That night Lovey Mary sat in her little attic room and held Tommy
close to her hungry heart. All day she worked with the thought of
coming back to him at night; but with night came the dustman, and in
spite of her games and stories Tommy's blue eyes would get full of the
sleep-dust. Tonight, however, he was awake and talkative.

"Ain't I dot no muvver?" he asked.

"No," said Lovey Mary, after a pause.

"Didn't I never had no muvver?"

Lovey Mary sat him up in her lap and looked into his round, inquiring
eyes. Her very love for him hardened her heart against the one who had
wronged him.

"Yes, darling, you had a mother once, but she was a bad mother, a
mean, bad, wicked mother. I hate her--hate her!" Lovey Mary's voice
broke in a sob.

"Ma--ry; aw, Ma--ry!" called Miss Hazy up the stairs. "You'll have to
come down here to Chris. He's went to sleep with all his clothes on
'crost my bed, an' I can't git him up."

Lovey Mary tucked Tommy under the cover and went to Miss Hazy's
assistance.

"One night I had to set up all night 'cause he wouldn't git up,"
complained Miss Hazy, in hopelessly injured tones.

Lovey Mary wasted no time in idle coaxing. She seized a broom and
rapped the sleeper sharply on the legs. His peg-stick was insensible
to this insult, but one leg kicked a feeble protest. In vain Lovey
Mary tried violent measures; Chris simply shifted his position and
slumbered on. Finally she resorted to strategy:

"Listen, Miss Hazy! Ain't that the fire-engine?"

In a moment Chris was hanging half out of the window, demanding,
"Where at?"

"You great big lazy boy!" scolded Lovey Mary, as she put Miss Hazy's
bed in order. "I'll get you to behaving mighty different if I stay
here long enough. What's this?" she added, pulling something from
under Miss Hazy's pillow.

"Oh, it ain't nothin'," cried Miss Hazy, reaching for it eagerly. But
Lovey Mary had recognized the "spirit picture."




CHAPTER VI

THE LOSING OF MR. STUBBINS


    "Love is not love
     Which alters when it alteration finds,
     Or bends with the remover to remove."

If the Cabbage Patch had pinned its faith upon the efficiency of the
matrimonial agency in regard to the disposal of Miss Hazy, it was
doomed to disappointment. The events that led up to the final
catastrophe were unique in that they cast no shadows before.

[Illustration: "Mrs. Wiggs took pictures from her walls and chairs
from her parlor to beautify the house of Hazy."]

Miss Hazy's letters, dictated by Mrs. Wiggs and penned by Lovey Mary,
were promptly and satisfactorily answered. The original of the spirit
picture proved to be one Mr. Stubbins, "a prominent citizen of Bagdad
Junction who desired to marry some one in the city. The lady must be
of good character and without incumbrances." "That's all right," Mrs.
Wiggs had declared; "you needn't have no incumbrances. If he'll take
keer of you, we'll all look after Chris."

The wooing had been ideally simple. Mr. Stubbins, with the impetuosity
of a new lover, demanded an early meeting. It was a critical time, and
the Cabbage Patch realized the necessity of making the first
impression a favorable one. Mrs. Wiggs took pictures from her walls
and chairs from her parlor to beautify the house of Hazy. Old Mrs.
Schultz, who was confined to her bed, sent over her black silk dress
for Miss Hazy to wear. Mrs. Eichorn, with deep insight into the nature
of man, gave a pound-cake and a pumpkin-pie. Lovey Mary scrubbed, and
dusted, and cleaned, and superintended the toilet of the bride elect.

The important day had arrived, and with it Mr. Stubbins. To the many
eyes that surveyed him from behind shutters and half-open doors he was
something of a disappointment. Mrs. Wiggs's rosy anticipations had
invested him with the charms of an Apollo, while Mr. Stubbins, in
reality, was far from godlike. "My land! he's lanker 'n a bean-pole,"
exclaimed Mrs. Eichorn, in disgust. But then Mrs. Eichorn weighed two
hundred, and her judgment was warped. Taking everything into
consideration, the prospects had been most flattering. Mr. Stubbins,
sitting in Mrs. Wiggs's most comfortable chair, with a large slice of
pumpkin-pie in his hand, and with Miss Hazy opposite arrayed in Mrs.
Schultz's black silk, had declared himself ready to marry at once. And
Mrs. Wiggs, believing that a groom in the hand is worth two in the
bush, promptly precipitated the courtship into a wedding.

[Illustration: "Mr. Stubbins, sitting in Mrs. Wiggs's most comfortable
chair, with a large slice of pumpkin-pie in his hand"]

The affair proved the sensation of the hour, and "Miss Hazy's husband"
was the cynosure of all eyes. For one brief week the honeymoon shed
its beguiling light on the neighborhood, then it suffered a sudden and
ignominious eclipse.

The groom got drunk.

Mary was clearing away the supper-dishes when she was startled by a
cry from Miss Hazy:

"My sakes! Lovey Mary! Look at Mr. Stubbins a-comin' up the street! Do
you s'pose he's had a stroke?"

Lovey Mary ran to the window and beheld the "prominent citizen of
Bagdad Junction" in a state of unmistakable intoxication. He was
bareheaded and hilarious, and used the fence as a life-preserver. Miss
Hazy wrung her hands and wept.

"Oh, what'll I do?" she wailed. "I do b'lieve he's had somethin' to
drink. I ain't goin' to stay an' meet him, Mary; I'm goin' to hide. I
always was skeered of drunken men."

"I'm not," said Mary, stoutly. "You go on up in my room and lock the
door; I'm going to stay here and keep him from messing up this
kitchen. I want to tell him what I think of him, anyhow. I just hate
that man! I believe you do, too, Miss Hazy."

Miss Hazy wept afresh. "Well, he ain't my kind, Mary. I know I'd
hadn't orter marry him, but it 'pears like ever' woman sorter wants to
try gittin' married oncet anyways. I never would 'a' done it, though,
if Mrs. Wiggs hadn't 'a' sicked me on."

By this time Mr. Stubbins had reached the yard, and Miss Hazy fled.
Lovey Mary barricaded Tommy in a corner with his playthings and met
the delinquent at the door. Her eyes blazed and her cheeks were
aflame. This modern David had no stones and sling to slay her Goliath;
she had only a vocabulary full of stinging words which she hurled
forth with indignation and scorn. Mr. Stubbins had evidently been
abused before, for he paid no attention to the girl's wrath. He passed
jauntily to the stove and tried to pour a cup of coffee; the hot
liquid missed the cup and streamed over his wrist and hand. Howling
with pain and swearing vociferously, he flung the coffee-pot out of
the window, kicked a chair across the room, then turned upon Tommy,
who was adding shrieks of terror to the general uproar. "Stop that
infernal yelling!" he cried savagely, as he struck the child full in
the face with his heavy hand.

Lovey Mary sprang forward and seized the poker. All the passion of her
wild little nature was roused. She stole up behind him as he knelt
before Tommy, and lifted the poker to strike. A pair of terrified blue
eyes arrested her. Tommy forgot to cry, in sheer amazement at what she
was about to do. Ashamed of herself, she threw the poker aside, and
taking advantage of Mr. Stubbins's crouching position, she thrust him
suddenly backward into the closet. The manoeuver was a brilliant one,
for while Mr. Stubbins was unsteadily separating himself from the
debris into which he had been cast, Lovey Mary slammed the door and
locked it. Then she picked up Tommy and fled out of the house and
across the yard.

Mrs. Wiggs was sitting on her back porch pretending to knit, but in
truth absorbed in a wild game of tag which the children were having on
the commons. "That's right," she was calling excitedly--"that's right,
Chris Hazy! You kin ketch as good as any of 'em, even if you have got
a peg-stick." But when she caught sight of Mary's white, distressed
face and Tommy's streaming eyes, she dropped her work and held out her
arms. When Mary had finished her story Mrs. Wiggs burst forth:

"An' to think I run her up ag'in' this! Ain't men deceivin'? Now I'd
'a' risked Mr. Stubbins myself fer the askin'. It's true he was a
widower, an' ma uster allays say, 'Don't fool with widowers, grass nor
sod.' But Mr. Stubbins was so slick-tongued! He told me yesterday he
had to take liquor sometime fer his war enjury."

"But, Mrs. Wiggs, what must we do?" asked Lovey Mary, too absorbed in
the present to be interested in the past.

"Do? Why, we got to git Miss Hazy out of this here hole. It ain't no
use consultin' her; I allays have said talkin' to Miss Hazy was like
pullin' out bastin'-threads: you jes take out what you put in. Me an'
you has got to think out a plan right here an' now, then go to work
an' carry it out."

"Couldn't we get the agency to take him back?" suggested Mary.

"No, indeed; they couldn't afford to do that. Lemme see, lemme see--"
For five minutes Mrs. Wiggs rocked meditatively, soothing Tommy to
sleep as she rocked. When she again spoke it was with inspiration:

"I've got it! It looks sometime, Lovey Mary, 's if I'd sorter caught
some of Mr. Wiggs's brains in thinkin' things out. They ain't but one
thing to do with Miss Hazy's husband, an' we'll do it this very
night."

"What, Mrs. Wiggs? What is it?" asked Lovey Mary, eagerly.

"Why, to lose him, of course! We'll wait till Mr. Stubbins is dead
asleep; you know men allays have to sleep off a jag like this. I've
seen Mr. Wiggs--I mean I've heared 'em say so many a time. Well, when
Mr. Stubbins is sound asleep, you an' me an' Billy will drag him out
to the railroad."

Mrs. Wiggs's voice had sunk to a hoarse whisper, and her eyes looked
fierce in the twilight.

Lovey Mary shuddered.

"You ain't going to let the train run over him, are you?" she asked.

"Lor', child, I ain't a 'sassinator! No; we'll wait till the midnight
freight comes along, an' when it stops fer water, we'll h'ist Mr.
Stubbins into one of them empty cars. The train goes 'way out West
somewheres, an' by the time Mr. Stubbins wakes up, he'll be so far
away from home he won't have no money to git back."

"What'll Miss Hazy say?" asked Mary, giggling in nervous excitement.

"Miss Hazy ain't got a thing to do with it," replied Mrs. Wiggs
conclusively.

At midnight, by the dark of the moon, the unconscious groom was borne
out of the Hazy cottage. Mrs. Wiggs carried his head, while Billy
Wiggs and Mary and Asia and Chris officiated at his arms and legs. The
bride surveyed the scene from the chinks of the upstairs shutters.

Silently the little group waited until the lumbering freight train
slowed up to take water, then with a concerted effort they lifted the
heavy burden into an empty car. As they shrank back into the shadow,
Billy whispered to Lovey Mary:

"Say, what was that you put 'longside of him?"

Mary looked shamefaced.

"It was just a little lunch-dinner," she said apologetically; "it
seemed sorter mean to send him off without anything to eat."

"Gee!" said Billy. "You're a cur'us girl!"

The engine whistled, and the train moved thunderously away, bearing an
unconscious passenger, who, as far as the Cabbage Patch was concerned,
was henceforth submerged in the darkness of oblivion.




CHAPTER VII

NEIGHBORLY ADVICE


"It's a poor business looking at the sun with a cloudy face."

The long, hot summer days that followed were full of trials for Lovey
Mary. Day after day the great unwinking sun glared savagely down upon
the Cabbage Patch, upon the stagnant pond, upon the gleaming rails,
upon the puffing trains that pounded by hour after hour. Each morning
found Lovey Mary trudging away to the factory, where she stood all day
counting and sorting and packing tiles. At night she climbed wearily
to her little room under the roof, and tried to sleep with a wet cloth
over her face to keep her from smelling the stifling car smoke.

But it was not the heat and discomfort alone that made her cheeks thin
and her eyes sad and listless: it was the burden on her conscience,
which seemed to be growing heavier all the time. One morning Mrs.
Wiggs took her to task for her gloomy countenance. They met at the
pump, and, while the former's bucket was being filled, Lovey Mary
leaned against a lamp-post and waited in a dejected attitude.

"What's the matter with you?" asked Mrs. Wiggs. "What you lookin' so
wilted about?"

Lovey Mary dug her shoe into the ground and said nothing. Many a time
had she been tempted to pour forth her story to this friendly mentor,
but the fear of discovery and her hatred of Kate deterred her.

Mrs. Wiggs eyed her keenly. "Pesterin' about somethin'?" she asked.

"Yes, 'm," said Lovey Mary, in a low tone.

"Somethin' that's already did?"

"Yes, 'm"--still lower.

"Did you think you was actin' fer the best?"

The girl lifted a pair of honest gray eyes. "Yes, ma'am, I did."

"I bet you did!" said Mrs. Wiggs, heartily. "You ain't got a deceivin'
bone in yer body. Now what you want to do is to brace up yer sperrits.
The decidin'-time was the time fer worryin'. You've did what you
thought was best; now you want to stop thinkin' 'bout it. You don't
want to go round turnin' folks' thoughts sour jes to look at you. Most
girls that had white teeth like you would be smilin' to show 'em, if
fer nothin' else."

"I wisht I was like you," said Lovey Mary.

"Don't take it out in wishin'. If you want to be cheerful, jes set yer
mind on it an' do it. Can't none of us help what traits we start out
in life with, but we kin help what we end up with. When things first
got to goin' wrong with me, I says: 'O Lord, whatever comes, keep me
from gittin' sour!' It wasn't fer my own sake I ast it,--some people
'pears to enjoy bein' low-sperrited,--it was fer the childern an' Mr.
Wiggs. Since then I've made it a practice to put all my worries down
in the bottom of my heart, then set on the lid an' smile."

"But you think ever'body's nice and good," complained Lovey Mary. "You
never see all the meanness I do."

"Don't I? I been watchin' old man Rothchild fer goin' on eleven year',
tryin' to see some good in him, an' I never found it till the other
day when I seen him puttin' a splint on Cusmoodle's broken leg. He's
the savagest man I know, yit he keered fer that duck as tender as a
woman. But it ain't jes seein' the good in folks an' sayin' nice
things when you're feelin' good. The way to git cheerful is to smile
when you feel bad, to think about somebody else's headache when yer
own is 'most bustin', to keep on believin' the sun is a-shinin' when
the clouds is thick enough to cut. Nothin' helps you to it like
thinkin' more 'bout other folks than about yerself."

"I think 'bout Tommy first," said Lovey Mary.

"Yes, you certainly do yer part by him. If my childern wore stockin's
an' got as many holes in 'em as he does, I'd work buttonholes in 'em
at the start fer the toes to come through. But even Tommy wants
somethin' besides darns. Why don't you let him go barefoot on Sundays,
too, an' take the time you been mendin' fer him to play with him? I
want to see them pretty smiles come back in yer face ag'in."

In a subsequent conversation with Miss Hazy, Mrs. Wiggs took a more
serious view of Lovey Mary's depression.

"She jes makes me wanter cry, she's so subdued-like. I never see
anybody change so in my life. It 'u'd jes be a relief to hear her sass
some of us like she uster. She told me she never had nobody make over
her like we all did, an' it sorter made her 'shamed. Lawsee! if
kindness is goin' to kill her, I think we'd better fuss at her some."

"'Pears to me like she's got nervous sensations," said Miss Hazy; "she
jumps up in her sleep, an' talks 'bout folks an' things I never heared
tell of."

"That's exactly what ails her," agreed Mrs. Wiggs: "it's nerves, Miss
Hazy. To my way of thinkin', nerves is worser than tumors an' cancers.
Look at old Mrs. Schultz. She's got the dropsy so bad you can't tell
whether she's settin' down or standin' up, yet she ain't got a nerve
in her body, an' has 'most as good a time as other folks. We can't let
Lovey Mary go on with these here nerves; no tellin' where they'll land
her at. If it was jes springtime, I'd give her sulphur an' molasses
an' jes a leetle cream of tartar; that, used along with egg-shell tea,
is the outbeatenest tonic I ever seen. But I never would run ag'in'
the seasons. Seems to me I've heared yallerroot spoke of fer killin'
nerves."

"I don't 'spect we could git no yallerroot round here."

"What's the matter with Miss Viny? I bet it grows in her garden thick
as hairs on a dog's back. Let's send Lovey Mary out there to git some,
an' we'll jes repeat the dose on her till it takes some hold."

"I ain't puttin' much stock in Miss Viny," demurred Miss Hazy. "I've
heared she was a novelist reader, an' she ain't even a church-member."

"An' do you set up to jedge her?" asked Mrs. Wiggs, in fine scorn.
"Miss Viny's got more sense in her little finger than me an' you has
got in our whole heads. She can doctor better with them yarbs of hers
than any physicianner I know. As to her not bein' a member, she lives
right an' helps other folks, an' that's more than lots of members
does. Besides," she added conclusively, "Mr. Wiggs himself wasn't no
church-member."




CHAPTER VIII

A DENOMINATIONAL GARDBN


    "Oh, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
     In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities;
     For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
     But to the earth some special good doth give."

The following Sunday being decidedly cooler, Lovey Mary was started
off to Miss Viny's in quest of yellowroot. She had protested that she
was not sick, but Miss Hazy, backed by Mrs. Wiggs, had insisted.

"If you git down sick, it would be a' orful drain on me," was Miss
Hazy's final argument, and the point was effective.

As Lovey Mary trudged along the railroad-tracks, she was unconscious
of the pleasant changes of scenery. The cottages became less frequent,
and the bare, dusty commons gave place to green fields. Here and there
a tree spread its branches to the breezes, and now and then a snatch
of bird song broke the stillness. But Lovey Mary kept gloomily on her
way, her eyes fixed on the cross-ties. The thoughts surging through
her brain were dark enough to obscure even the sunshine. For three
nights she had cried herself to sleep, and the "nervous sensations"
were getting worse instead of better.

"Just two months since Kate was hurt," she said to herself. "Soon as
she gets out the hospital she'll be trying to find us again. I believe
she was coming to the factory looking for me when she got run over.
She'd just like to take Tommy away and send me to jail. Oh, I hate her
worse all the time! I wish she was--"

The wish died on her lips, for she suddenly realized that it might
already have been fulfilled. Some one coughed near by, and she started
guiltily.

"You seem to be in a right deep steddy," said a voice on the other
side of the fence.

Lovey Mary glanced up and saw a queer-looking old woman smiling at her
quizzically. A pair of keen eyes twinkled under bushy brows, and a
fierce little beard bristled from her chin. When she smiled it made
Lovey Mary think of a pebble dropped in a pool, for the wrinkles went
rippling off from her mouth in ever-widening circles until they were
lost in the gray hair under her broad-brimmed hat.

"Are you Miss Viny?" asked Lovey Mary, glancing at the old-fashioned
flower-garden beyond.

"Well, I been that fer sixty year'; I ain't heared of no change,"
answered the old lady.

"Miss Hazy sent me after some yellowroot," said Lovey Mary,
listlessly.

"Who fer?"

"Me."

Miss Viny took a pair of large spectacles from her pocket, put them on
the tip of her nose, and looked over them critically at Lovey Mary.

"Stick out yer tongue."

Lovey Mary obeyed.

"Uh-huh. It's a good thing I looked. You don't no more need yallerroot
than a bumblebee. You come in here on the porch an' tell me what's
ailin' you, an' I'll do my own prescriptin'."

Lovey Mary followed her up the narrow path, that ran between a mass of
flowers. Snowy oleanders, yellow asters, and purple phlox crowded
together in a space no larger than Miss Hazy's front yard. Lovey Mary
forgot her troubles in sheer delight in seeing so many flowers
together.

"Do you love 'em, too?" asked Miss Viny, jerking her thumb over her
shoulder.

"I guess I would if I had a chance. I never saw them growing out of
doors like this. I always had to look at them through the store
windows."

"Oh, law, don't talk to me 'bout caged-up flowers! I don't b'lieve in
shuttin' a flower up in a greenhouse any more 'n I b'lieve in shuttin'
myself up in one church."

Lovey Mary remembered what Miss Hazy had told her of Miss Viny's
pernicious religious views, and she tried to change the subject. But
Miss Viny was started upon a favorite theme and was not to be
diverted.

"This here is a denominational garden, an' I got every congregation I
ever heared of planted in it. I ain't got no faverite bed. I keer fer
'em all jes alike. When you come to think of it, the same rule holds
good in startin' a garden as does in startin' a church. You first got
to steddy what sort of soil you goin' to work with, then you have to
sum up all the things you have to fight ag'inst. Next you choose what
flowers are goin' to hold the best places. That's a mighty important
question in churches, too, ain't it? Then you go to plantin', the
thicker the better, fer in both you got to allow fer a mighty fallin'
off. After that you must take good keer of what you got, an' be sure
to plant something new each year. Once in a while some of the old
growths has to be thinned out, and the new upstarts an' suckers has to
be pulled up. Now, if you'll come out here I'll show you round."

She started down the path, and Lovey Mary, somewhat overwhelmed by
this oration, followed obediently.

"These here are the Baptists," said Miss Viny, waving her hand toward
a bed of heliotrope and flags. "They want lots of water; like to be
wet clean through. They sorter set off to theyselves an' tend to their
own business; don't keer much 'bout minglin' with the other flowers."

Lovey Mary did not understand very clearly what Miss Viny was talking
about, but she was glad to follow her in the winding paths, where new
beauties were waiting at every turn.

"These is geraniums, ain't they? One of the girls had one, once, in a
flower-pot when she was sick."

"Yes," said Miss Viny; "they're Methodist. They fall from grace an'
has to be revived; they like lots of encouragement in the way of sun
an' water. These phlox are Methodist, too; no set color, easy to grow,
hardy an' vigorous. Pinchin' an' cuttin' back the shoots makes it
flower all the better; needs new soil every few years; now ain't that
Methodist down to the ground?"

"Are there any Presbyterians?" asked Lovey Mary, beginning to grasp
Miss Viny's meaning.

"Yes, indeed; they are a good, old, reliable bed. Look at all these
roses an' tiger-lilies an' dahlias; they all knew what they was goin'
to be afore they started to grow. They was elected to it, an' they'll
keep on bein' what they started out to be clean to the very end."

"I know about predestination," cried Lovey Mary, eagerly. "Miss Bell
used to tell us all those things."

"Who did?"

Lovey Mary flushed crimson. "A lady I used to know," she said
evasively.

Miss Viny crossed the garden, and stopped before a bed of stately
lilies and azaleas. "These are 'Piscopals," she explained. "Ain't they
tony? Jes look like they thought their bed was the only one in the
garden. Somebody said that a lily didn't have no pore kin among the
flowers. It ain't no wonder they 'most die of dignity. They're like
the 'Piscopals in more ways 'n one; both hates to be disturbed, both
likes some shade, an'"--confidentially--"both air pretty pernickity.
But to tell you the truth, ain't nothin' kin touch 'em when it comes
to beauty! I think all the other beds is proud of 'em, if you'd come
to look into it. Why, look at weddin's an' funerals! Don't all the
churches call in the 'Piscopals an' the lilies on both them
occasions?"

Lovey Mary nodded vaguely.

"An' here," continued Miss Viny, "are the Unitarians. You may be
s'prised at me fer havin' 'em in here, 'long with the orthodox
churches; but if the sun an' the rain don't make no distinction, I
don't see what right I got to put 'em on the other side of the fence.
These first is sweet-william, as rich in bloom as the Unitarian is in
good works, a-sowin' theyselves constant, an' every little plant a-
puttin' out a flower."

"Ain't there any Catholics?" asked Lovey Mary.

"Don't you see them hollyhawks an' snowballs an' laylacs? All of them
are Catholics, takin' up lots of room an' needin' the prunin'-knife
pretty often, but bringin' cheer and brightness to the whole garden
when it needs it most. Yes, I guess you'd have trouble thinkin' of any
sect I ain't got planted. Them ferns over in the corner is Quakers. I
ain't never seen no Quakers, but they tell me that they don't b'lieve
in flowerin' out; that they like coolness an' shade an' quiet, an' are
jes the same the year round. These colea plants are the apes; they are
all things to all men, take on any color that's round 'em, kin be the
worst kind of Baptists or Presbyterians, but if left to theyselves
they run back to good-fer-nothin's. This here everlastin' is one of
these here Christians that's so busy thinkin' 'bout dyin' that he
fergits to live."

Miss Viny chuckled as she crumbled the dry flower in her fingers.

"See how different this is," she said, plucking a sprig of lemon-
verbena. "This an' the mint an' the sage an' the lavender is all true
Christians; jes by bein' touched they give out a' influence that makes
the whole world a sweeter place to live in. But, after all, they can't
all be alike! There's all sorts of Christians: some stands fer
sunshine, some fer shade; some fer beauty, some fer use; some up high,
some down low. There's jes one thing all the flowers has to unite in
fightin' ag'inst--that's the canker-worm, Hate. If it once gits in a
plant, no matter how good an' strong that plant may be, it eats right
down to its heart."

"How do you get it out, Miss Viny?" asked Lovey Mary, earnestly.

"Prayer an' perseverance. If the Christian'll do his part, God'll do
his'n. You see, I'm tryin' to be to these flowers what God is to his
churches. The sun, which answers to the Sperrit, has to shine on 'em
all, an' the rain, which answers to God's mercy, has to fall on 'em
all. I jes watch 'em, an' plan fer 'em, an' shelter 'em, an' love 'em,
an' if they do their part they're bound to grow. Now I'm goin' to cut
you a nice bo'quet to carry back to the Cabbage Patch."

So engrossed were the two in selecting and arranging the flowers that
neither thought of the yellowroot or its substitute. Nevertheless, as
Lovey Mary tramped briskly back over the railroad-ties with her burden
of blossoms, she bore a new thought in her heart which was destined to
bring about a surer cure than any of Miss Viny's most efficient herbs.




CHAPTER IX

LABOR DAY


     "And cloudy the day, or stormy the night,
      The sky of her heart was always bright."

"It wouldn't s'prise me none if we had cyclones an' tornadoes by
evenin', it looks so thundery outdoors."

It was inconsiderate of Miss Hazy to make the above observation in the
very face of the most elaborate preparations for a picnic, but Miss
Hazy's evil predictions were too frequent to be effective.

"I'll scurry round an' git another loaf of bread," said Mrs. Wiggs,
briskly, as she put a tin pail into the corner of the basket. "Lovey
Mary, you put in the eggs an' git them cookies outen the stove. I
promised them boys a picnic on Labor Day, an' we are goin' if it
snows."

"Awful dangerous in the woods when it storms," continued Miss Hazy. "I
heared of a man oncet that would go to a picnic in the rain, and he
got struck so bad it burned his shoes plump off."

"Must have been the same man that got drownded, when he was little,
fer goin' in swimmin' on Sunday," answered Mrs. Wiggs, wiping her
hands on her apron.

"Mebbe 't was," said Miss Hazy.

Lovey Mary vibrated between the door and the window, alternating
between hope and despair. She had set her heart on the picnic with the
same intensity of desire that had characterized her yearning for
goodness and affection and curly hair.

"I believe there is a tiny speck more blue," she said, scanning the
heavens for the hundredth time.

"Course there is!" cried Mrs. Wiggs, "an' even if there ain't, we'll
have the picnic anyway. I b'lieve in havin' a good time when you start
out to have it. If you git knocked out of one plan, you want to git
yerself another right quick, before yer sperrits has a chance to fall.
Here comes Jake an' Chris with their baskets. Suppose you rench off
yer hands an' go gether up the rest of the childern. I 'spect Billy's
done hitched up by this time."

At the last moment Miss Hazy was still trying to make up her mind
whether or not she would go. "Them wheels don't look none too stiddy
fer sich a big load," she said cautiously.

"Them wheels is a heap sight stiddier than your legs," declared Mrs.
Wiggs.

"An' there ain't a meeker hoss in Kentucky than Cuby. He looks like he
might 'a' belonged to a preacher 'stid of bein' a broken-down engine-
hoss."

An unforeseen delay was occasioned by a heated controversy between
Lovey Mary and Tommy concerning the advisability of taking Cusmoodle.

"There ain't more than room enough to squeeze you in, Tommy," she
said, "let alone that fat old duck."

"'T ain't a fat old duck."

"'T is, too! He sha'n't go. You'll have to stay at home yourself if
you can't be good."

"I feel like I was doin' to det limber," threatened Tommy.

Mrs. Wiggs recognized a real danger. She also knew that discretion was
the better part of valor. "Here's a nice little place up here by me,
jes big enough fer you an' Cusmoodle. You kin set on the basket; it
won't mash nothin'. If we're packed in good an' tight, can't none of
us fall out."

When the last basket was stored away, the party started off in glee,
leaving Miss Hazy still irresolute in the doorway, declaring that "she
almost wisht she had 'a' went."

The destination had not been decided upon, so it was discussed as the
wagon jolted along over the cobblestones.

"Let's go out past Miss Viny's," suggested Jake; "there's a bully
woods out there."

"Aw, no! Let's go to Tick Creek an' go in wadin'."

Mrs. Wiggs, seated high above the party and slapping the reins on
Cuba's back, allowed the lively debate to continue until trouble
threatened, then she interfered:

"I think it would be nice to go over to the cemetery. We'd have to
cross the city, but when you git out there there's plenty of grass an'
trees, an' it runs right 'longside the river."

The proximity of the river decided the matter.

"I won't hardly take a swim!" said Jake, going through the motions, to
the discomfort of the two little girls who were hanging their feet
from the back of the wagon.

"I'm afraid it's going to rain so hard that you can take your swim
before you get there," said Lovey Mary, as the big drops began to
fall.

The picnic party huddled on the floor of the wagon in a state of great
merriment, while Mrs. Wiggs spread an old quilt over as many of them
as it would cover.

"'T ain't nothin' but a summer shower," she said, holding her head on
one side to keep the rain from driving in her face. "I 'spect the sun
is shinin' at the cemetery right now."

As the rickety wagon, with its drenched and shivering load, rattled
across Main street, an ominous sound fell upon the air:

_One--two--three! One--two!_

Mrs. Wiggs wrapped the lines about her wrists and braced herself for
the struggle. But Cuba had heard the summons, his heart had responded
to the old call, and with one joyous bound he started for the fire.

"Hold on tight!" yelled Mrs. Wiggs. "Don't none of you fall out. Whoa,
Cuby! Whoa! I'll stop him in a minute. Hold tight!"

Cuba kicked the stiffness out of his legs, and laying his ears back,
raced valiantly for five squares neck and neck with the engine-horses.
But the odds were against him; Mrs. Wiggs and Chris sawing on one
line, and Billy and Jake pulling on the other, proved too heavy a
handicap. Within sight of the fire he came to a sudden halt.

"It's the lumber-yards!" called Chris, climbing over the wheels.
"Looks like the whole town's on fire."

"Let's unhitch Cuby an' tie him, an' stand in the wagon an' watch it,"
cried Mrs. Wiggs, in great excitement.

The boys were not content to be stationary, so they rushed away,
leaving Mrs. Wiggs and the girls, with Tommy and the duck, to view the
conflagration at a safe distance.

For two hours the fire raged, leaping from one stack of lumber to
another, and threatening the adjacent buildings. Every fire-engine in
the department was called out, the commons were black with people, and
the excitement was intense.

"Ain't you glad we come!" cried Lovey Mary, dancing up and down in the
wagon.

"We never come. We was brought," said Asia.

Long before the fire was under control the sun had come through the
clouds and was shining brightly. Picnics, however, were not to be
considered when an attraction like this was to be had. When the boys
finally came straggling back the fire was nearly out, the crowd had
dispersed, and only the picnic party was left on the commons.

"It's too late to start to the cemetery," said Mrs. Wiggs,
thoughtfully. "What do you all think of havin' the picnic right here
an' now?"

The suggestion was regarded as nothing short of an inspiration.

"The only trouble," continued Mrs. Wiggs, "is 'bout the water. Where
we goin' to git any to drink? I know one of the firemen, Pete Jenkins;
if I could see him I'd ast him to pour us some outen the hose."

"Gimme the pail; I'll go after him," cried Jake.

"Naw, you don't; I'm a-goin'. It's my maw that knows him," said Billy.

"That ain't nothin'. My uncle knows the chief of police! Can't I go,
Mrs. Wiggs?"

Meanwhile Chris had seized the hint and the bucket, and was off in
search of Mr. Peter Jenkins, whose name would prove an open sesame to
that small boy's paradise--the engine side of the rope.

The old quilt, still damp, was spread on the ground, and around it sat
the picnic party, partaking ravenously of dry sandwiches and cheese
and cheer. Such laughing and crowding and romping as there was! Jake
gave correct imitations of everybody in the Cabbage Patch, Chris did
some marvelous stunts with his wooden leg, and Lovey Mary sang every
funny song that she knew. Mrs. Wiggs stood in the wagon above them,
and dispensed hospitality as long as it lasted. Cuba, hitched to a
fence near by, needed no material nourishment. He was contentedly
sniffing the smoke-filled air, and living over again the days of his
youth.

When the party reached home, tired and grimy, they were still
enthusiastic over the fine time they had had.

"It's jes the way I said," proclaimed Mrs. Wiggs, as she drove up with
a flourish; "you never kin tell which way pleasure is a-comin'. Who
ever would 'a' thought, when we aimed at the cemetery, that we'd land
up at a first-class fire?"




CHAPTER X

A TIMELY VISIT


     "The love of praise, howe'er concealed by art,
      Reigns more or less, and glows in ev'ry heart."

Weeks and months slipped by, and the Cabbage Patch ate breakfast and
supper by lamplight. Those who could afford it were laying in their
winter coal, and those who could not were providently pasting brown
paper over broken window-panes, and preparing to keep Jack Frost at
bay as long as possible.

One Saturday, as Lovey Mary came home from the factory, she saw a
well-dressed figure disappearing in the distance.

"Who is that lady?" she demanded suspiciously of Europena Wiggs, who
was swinging violently on the gate.

"'T ain't no lady," said Europena. "It's my Sunday-school teacher."

"Mrs. Redding?"

"Uh-huh. She wants Asia to come over to her house this evenin'."

"Wisht I could go," said Lovey Mary.

"Why can't you?" asked Mrs. Wiggs, coming to the open door. "Asia
would jes love to show Mrs. Reddin' how stylish you look in that red
dress. I'll curl yer hair on the poker if you want me to."

Any diversion from the routine of work was acceptable, so late that
afternoon the two girls, arrayed in their best garments, started forth
to call on the Reddings.

"I wisht I had some gloves," said Lovey Mary, rubbing her blue
fingers.

"If I'd 'a' thought about it I'd 'a' made you some before we started.
It don't take no time." Asia held out her hands, which were covered
with warm red mitts. "I make 'em outen Billy's old socks after the
feet's wore off."

"I don't see how you know how to do so many things!" said Lovey Mary,
admiringly.

[Illustration: "Asia held out her hands, which were covered with warm
red mitts."]

"'T ain't nothin'," disclaimed Asia, modestly. "It's jes the way maw
brought us up. Whenever we started out to do a thing she made us
finish it someway or 'nother. Oncet when we was all little we lived in
the country. She sent Billy out on the hoss to git two watermelon, an'
told him fer him not to come home without 'em. When Billy got out to
the field he found all the watermelon so big he couldn't carry one,
let alone two. What do you think he done?"

"Come home without 'em?"

"No, sir, he never! He jes set on the fence an' thought awhile, then
he took off en his jeans pants an' put a watermelon in each leg an'
hanged 'em 'crost old Rollie's back an' come ridin' home barelegged."

"I think he's the nicest boy in the Cabbage Patch," said Lovey Mary,
laughing over the incident. "He never does tease Tommy."

"That's 'cause he likes you. He says you've got grit. He likes the way
you cleaned up Miss Hazy an' stood up to Mr. Stubbins."

A deeper color than even the fresh air warranted came into Lovey
Mary's cheeks, and she walked on for a few minutes in pleased silence.

"Don't you want to wear my gloves awhile?" asked Asia.

"No; my hands ain't cold any more," said Lovey Mary.

As they turned into Terrace Park, with its beautiful grounds, its
fountains and statuary, Asia stopped to explain.

"Jes rich folks live over here. That there is the Reddin's' house, the
big white one where them curbstone ladies are in the yard. I wisht you
could git a peek in the parlor; they've got chairs made outer real
gold, an' strandaliers that look like icicles all hitched together."

"Do they set on the gold chairs?"

"No, indeed; the legs is too wabbly fer that. I reckon they're jes to
show how rich they are. This here is where the carriage drives in.
Their hired man wears a high-style hat, an' a fur cape jes like Mrs.
Reddin's."

"I 'spect they have turkey every day, don't they, Asia?"

Before Asia's veracity was tested to the limit, the girls were
startled by the sudden appearance of an excited housemaid at the side
door.

"Simmons! Simmons!" she screamed. "Oh, where is that man? I'll have to
go for somebody myself." And without noticing the girls, she ran
hastily down the driveway.

Asia, whose calmness was seldom ruffled, led the way into the entry.
"That's the butter's pantry," she said, jerking her thumb over her
shoulder.

"Don't they keep nothing in it but butter?" gasped Lovey Mary.

"Reckon not. They've got a great big box jes fer ice; not another
thing goes in it."

Another maid ran down the steps, calling Simmons.

Asia, a frequent visitor at the house, made her way unconcernedly up
to the nursery. On the second floor there was great confusion; the
telephone was ringing, servants were hurrying to and fro.

"He'll choke to death before the doctor gets here!" they heard the
nurse say as she ran through the hall. From the open nursery door they
could hear the painful gasps and coughs of a child in great distress.

Asia paused on the landing, but Lovey Mary darted forward. The mother
instinct, ever strong within her, had responded instantly to the need
of the child. In the long, dainty room full of beautiful things, she
only saw the terrified baby on his mother's lap, his face purple, his
eyes distended, as he fought for his breath.

[Illustration: "Master Robert Redding was right side up again, sobbing
himself quiet in Lovey Mary's arms."]

Without a word she sprang forward, and grasping the child by his feet,
held him at arm's-length and shook him violently. Mrs. Redding
screamed, and the nurse, who was rushing in with hot milk, dropped the
cup in horror. But a tiny piece of hard candy lay on the floor, and
Master Robert Redding was right side up again, sobbing himself quiet
in Lovey Mary's arms.

After the excitement had subsided, and two doctors and Mr. Redding had
arrived breathless upon the scene, Mrs. Redding, for the dozenth time,
lavished her gratitude upon Lovey Mary:

"And to think you saved my precious baby! The doctor said it was the
only thing that could have saved him, yet we four helpless women had
no idea what to do. How did you know, dear? Where did you ever see it
done!"

Lovey Mary, greatly abashed, faced the radiant parents, the two portly
doctors, and the servants in the background.

"I learned on Tommy," she said in a low voice. "He swallered a penny
once that we was going to buy candy with. I didn't have another, so I
had to shake it out."

During the laugh that followed, she and Asia escaped, but not before
Mr. Redding had slipped a bill into her hand, and the beautiful Mrs.
Redding had actually given her a kiss!




CHAPTER XI

THE CHRISTMAS PLAY


     "Not failure, but low aim, is crime."

As the holiday season approached, a rumor began to be circulated that
the Cabbage Patch Sunday-school would have an entertainment as well as
a Christmas tree. The instigator of this new movement was Jake
Schultz, whose histrionic ambition had been fired during his
apprenticeship as "super" at the opera-house.

"I know a man what rents costumes, an' the promp'-books to go with
'em," he said to several of the boys one Sunday afternoon. "If we all
chip in we kin raise the price, an' git it back easy by chargin'
admittance."

"Aw, shucks!" said Chris. "We don't know nothin' 'bout play-actin'."

"We kin learn all right," said Billy Wiggs. "I bid to be the feller
that acts on the trapeze."

The other boys approving of the plan, it was agreed that Jake should
call on the costumer at his earliest convenience.

One night a week later Lovey Mary was getting supper when she heard an
imperative rap on the door. It was Jake Schultz. He mysteriously
beckoned her out on the steps, and closed the door behind them.

"Have you ever acted any?" he asked.

"I used to say pieces at the home," said Lovey Mary, forgetting
herself.

"Well, do you think you could take leadin' lady in the entertainment?"

[Illustration: "'Have you ever acted any?' he asked."]

Lovey Mary had no idea what the lady was expected to lead, but she
knew that she was being honored, and she was thrilled at the prospect.

"I know some arm-exercises, and I could sing for them," she offered.

"Oh, no," explained Jake; "it's a play, a reg'lar theayter play. I got
the book and the costumes down on Market street. The man didn't have
but this one set of costumes on hand, so I didn't have no choice. It's
a bully play, all right, though! I seen it oncet, an' I know how it
all ought to go. It's named 'Forst,' er somethin' like that. I'm goin'
to be the devil, an' wear a red suit, an' have my face all streaked
up. Billy he's goin' to be the other feller what's stuck on the girl.
He tole me to ast you to be her. Your dress is white with cords an'
tassels on it, an' the sleeves ain't sewed up. Reckon you could learn
the part? We ain't goin' to give it all."

"I can learn anything!" cried Lovey Mary, recklessly. "Already know
the alphabet and the Lord's Prayer backward. Is the dress short-
sleeve? And does it drag in the back when you walk?"

"Yep," said Jake, "an' the man said you was to plait your hair in two
parts an' let 'em hang over your shoulders. I don't see why it
wouldn't be pretty for you to sing somethin', too. Ever'body is so
stuck on yer singin'."

"All right," said Lovey Mary, enthusiastically; "you bring the book
over and show me where my part's at. And, Jake," she called as he
started off, "you tell Billy I'll be glad to."

For the next ten days Lovey Mary dwelt in Elysium. The prompt-book,
the rehearsals, the consultations, filled the spare moments and threw
a glamour over the busy ones. Jake, with his vast experience and
unlimited knowledge of stage-craft, appealed to her in everything. He
sat on a barrel and told how they did things "up to the opery-house,"
and Lovey Mary, seizing his suggestions with burning zeal, refitted
the costumes, constructed scenery, hammered her own nails as well as
the iron ones, and finally succeeded in putting into practice his
rather vague theories. For the first time in her life she was a person
of importance.

Besides her numerous other duties she prepared an elaborate costume
for Tommy. This had caused her some trouble, for Miss Hazy, who was
sent to buy the goods for the trousers, exercised unwise economy in
buying two remnants which did not match in color or pattern.

"Why didn't you put your mind on it, Miss Hazy?" asked Lovey Mary,
making a heroic effort to keep her temper. "You might have known I
couldn't take Tommy to the show with one blue leg and one brown one.
What must I do?"

Miss Hazy sat dejectedly in the corner, wiping her eyes on her apron.
"You might go ast Mis' Wiggs," she suggested as a forlorn hope.

When Mrs. Wiggs was told the trouble she smiled reassuringly.
Emergencies were to her the spice of life; they furnished
opportunities for the expression of her genius.

"Hush cryin', Miss Hazy; there ain't a speck of harm did. Mary kin
make the front outen one piece an' the back outen the other. Nobody
won't never know the difference, 'cause Tommy can't be goin' an'
comin' at the same time."

The result was highly satisfactory, that is, to everybody but Tommy.
He complained that there "wasn't no room to set down."

On Christmas night the aristocracy of the Cabbage Patch assembled in
the school-house to enjoy the double attraction of a Christmas tree
and an entertainment. Mr. Rothchild, who had arranged the tree for the
last ten years, refused to have it moved from its accustomed place,
which was almost in the center of the platform. He had been earnestly
remonstrated with, but he and the tree remained firm. Mrs. Rothchild
and all the little Rothchildren had climbed in by the window before
the doors were open in order to secure the front seats. Immediately
behind them sat the Hazys and the Wiggses.

"That there is the seminary student gittin' up now," whispered Mrs.
Wiggs. "He's goin' to call out the pieces. My land! ain't he washed
out? Looks like he'd go into a trance fer fifty cents. Hush,
Australia! don't you see he is goin' to pray?"

After the opening prayer, the young preacher suggested that, as long
as the speakers were not quite ready, the audience should "raise a
hymn."

"He's got a fine voice," whispered Miss Hazy; "I heared 'em say he was
the gentleman soprano at a down-town church."

When the religious exercises were completed, the audience settled into
a state of pleasurable anticipation.

"The first feature of the entertainment," announced the preacher,
"will be a song by Miss Europena Wiggs."

[Illustration: "Europena stepped forward."]

Europena stepped forward and, with hands close to her sides and
anguished eyes on the ceiling, gasped forth the agonized query:

      "Can she make a cheery-pie,
         Billy boy, Billy boy?
       Can she make a cheery-pie,
         Charming Billy?"

Notwithstanding the fact that there were eight verses, an encore was
demanded. Mrs. Wiggs rose in her seat and beckoned vehemently to
Europena. "Come on back!" she motioned violently with her lips. "They
want you to come back."

Europena, in a state of utter bewilderment, returned to the stage.

"Say another speech!" whispered Mrs. Wiggs, leaning over so far that
she knocked Mrs. Rothchild's bonnet awry. Still Europena stood there,
an evident victim of lockjaw.

"'I have a little finger,'" prompted her mother frantically from the
second row front.

A single ray of intelligence flickered for a moment over the child's
face, and with a supreme effort she said:

     "I have a little finger,
        An' I have a little beau;
     When I get a little bigger
        I'll have a little toe."

"Well, she got it all in," said Mrs. Wiggs, in a relieved tone, as
Europena was lifted down.

After this, other little girls came forward and made some
unintelligible remarks concerning Santa Claus. It was with some
difficulty that they went through their parts, for Mr. Rothchild kept
getting in the way as he calmly and uncompromisingly continued to hang
cornucopias on the tree. Songs and recitations followed, but even the
youngest spectator realized that these were only preliminary
skirmishes.

At last a bell rang. Two bedspreads. which served as curtains were
majestically withdrawn. A sigh of admiration swept the room. "Ain't he
cute!" whispered a girl in the rear, as Billy rose resplendent in pink
tights and crimson doublet, and folding his arms high on his breast,
recited in a deep voice:

    "I have, alas! philosophy,
        Medicine, jurisprudence too,
     And, to my cost, theology
        With ardent labor studied through."

"I don't see no sense in what he's sayin' at all," whispered Miss
Hazy.

"It's jes what was in the book," answered Mrs. Wiggs, "'cause I heared
him repeat it off before supper."

The entrance of Jake awakened the flagging interest. Nobody understood
what he said either, but he made horrible faces, and waved his red
arms, and caused a pleasant diversion.

"Maw, what's John Bagby a-handin' round in that little saucer?" asked
Australia.

"Fer the mercy sake! I don't know," answered her mother, craning her
neck to see.

John, with creaking footsteps, tiptoed to the front of the stage, and
stooping down, began to mix a concoction in a plate. Many stood up to
see what he was doing, and conjecture was rife. _Mephisto_ and _Faust_
were forgotten until Jake struck a heroic pose, and grasping Billy's
arm, said hoarsely:

"Gaze, Faustis, gaze into pairdition!"

John put a match to the powder, a bright red light filled the room,
and the audience, following the index-finger of the impassioned
_Mephisto_, gazed into the placid, stupid faces of four meek little
boys on the mourners' bench.

[Illustration: "Sang in a high, sweet voice, 'I Need Thee Every
Hour'"]

Before the violent coughing caused by the calcium fumes had ceased, a
vision in white squeezed past Mr. Rothchild and came slowly down to
the edge of the platform. It was Lovey Mary as _Marguerite_. Her long
dress swept about her feet, her heavy hair hung in thick braids over
both shoulders, and a burning red spot glowed on each cheek. For a
moment she stood as Jake had directed, with head thrown back and eyes
cast heavenward, then she began to recite. The words poured from her
lips with a volubility that would have shamed an auctioneer. It was a
long part, full of hard words, but she knew it perfectly and was
determined to show how fast she could say it without making a mistake.
It was only when she finished that she paused for breath. Then she
turned slowly, and stretching forth appealing arms to _Faust_, sang in
a high, sweet voice, "I Need Thee Every Hour."

The effect was electrical. At last the Cabbage Patch understood what
was going on. The roof rang with applause. Even Mr. Rothchild held
aside his strings of pop-corn to let _Marguerite_ pass out.

"S' more! S' more!" was the cry. "Sing it ag'in!"

Jake stepped before the curtain. "If our friends is willin'," he said,
"we'll repeat over the last ak."

Again Lovey Mary scored a triumph. John Bagby burned the rest of the
calcium powder during the last verse, and the entertainment concluded
in a prolonged cheer.




CHAPTER XII

REACTION


"Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie."

When the paint and powder had been washed off, and Tommy had with
difficulty been extracted from his new trousers and put to bed, Lovey
Mary sat before the little stove and thought it all over. It had been
the very happiest time of her whole life. How nice it was to be
praised and made much of! Mrs. Wiggs had started it by calling
everybody's attention to her good points; then Mrs. Redding had sought
her out and shown her continued attention; to-night was the great
climax. Her name had been on every tongue, her praises sung on every
side, and Billy Wiggs had given her everything he got off the
Christmas tree.

"I wisht I deserved it all," she said, as she got up to pull the
blanket closer about Tommy. "I've tried to be good. I guess I am
better in some ways, but not in all--not in all." She knelt by the bed
and held Tommy's hand to her cheek. "Sometimes he looks like Kate when
he's asleep like this. I wonder if she's got well? I wonder if she
ever misses him?"

For a long time she knelt there, holding the warm little hand in hers.
The play, the success, the applause, were all forgotten, and in their
place was a shame, a humiliation, that brought the hot tears to her
eyes.

"I ain't what they think I am," she whispered brokenly. "I'm a mean,
bad girl after all. The canker-worm's there. Miss Viny said there
never would be a sure-'nough beautiful flower till the canker-worm was
killed. But I want to be good; I want to be what they think I am!"

Again and again the old thoughts of Kate rose to taunt and madden her.
But a new power was at work; it brought new thoughts of Kate, of Kate
sick and helpless, of Kate without friends and lonely, calling for her
baby. Through the night the battle raged within her. When the first
gray streaks showed through the shutters, Lovey Mary cleaned her room
and put on her Sunday dress. "I'll be a little late to the factory,"
she explained to Miss Hazy at breakfast, "for I've got to go on a'
errand."

It was an early hour for visitors at the city hospital, but when Lovey
Mary stated her business she was shown to Kate's ward. At the far end
of the long room, with her bandaged head turned to the wall, lay Kate.
When the nurse spoke to her she turned her head painfully, and looked
at them listlessly with great black eyes that stared forth from a face
wasted and wan from suffering.

"Kate!" said Lovey Mary, leaning across the bed and touching her hand.
"Kate, don't you know me?"

The pale lips tightened over the prominent white teeth. "Well, I swan,
Lovey Mary, where'd you come from?" Not waiting for an answer, she
continued querulously: "Say, can't you get me out of this hole
someway? But even if I had the strength to crawl, I wouldn't have no
place to go. Can't you take me away? Anywhere would do."

Lovey Mary's spirits fell; she had nerved herself for a great
sacrifice, had decided to do her duty at any cost; but thinking of it
beforehand in her little garret room, with Tommy's hand in hers, and
Kate Rider a mere abstraction, was very different from facing the real
issue, with the old, selfish, heartless Kate in flesh and blood before
her. She let go of Kate's hand.

"Don't you want to know about Tommy?" she asked. "I've come to say I
was sorry I run off with him."

"It was mighty nervy in you. I knew you'd take good care of him,
though. But say! you can get me away from this, can't you? I ain't got
a friend in the world nor a cent of money. But I ain't going to stay
here, where there ain't nothing to do, and I get so lonesome I 'most
die. I'd rather set on a street corner and run a hand-organ. Where are
you and Tommy at?"

"We are in the Cabbage Patch," said Lovey Mary, with the old repulsion
strong upon her.

"Where?"

"The Cabbage Patch. It ain't your sort of a place, Kate. The folks are
good and honest, but they are poor and plain. You'd laugh at 'em."

Kate turned her eyes to the window and was silent a moment before she
said slowly:

"I ain't got much right to laugh at nobody. I'd be sorter glad to get
with good people again. The other sort's all right when you're out for
fun, but when you're down on your luck they ain't there."

Lovey Mary, perplexed and troubled, looked at her gravely.

"Haven't you got any place you could go to?"

[Illustration: "'Haven't you got any place you could go to?'"]

Kate shook her head. "Nobody would be willing to look after me and
nurse me. Lovey,"--she stretched her thin hand across to her
entreatingly,--"take me home with you! I heard the doctor tell the
nurse he couldn't do nothing more for me. I can't die here shut up
with all these sick people. Take me wherever you are at. I'll try not
to be no trouble, and--I want to keep straight."

Tears were in her eyes, and her lips trembled. There was a queer
little spasm at Lovey Mary's heart. The canker-worm was dead.

When a carriage drove up to Miss Hazy's door and the driver carried in
a pale girl with a bandaged head, it caused untold commotion.

"Do you s'pose Mary's a-bringin' home a smallpox patient?" asked Miss
Hazy, who was ever prone to look upon the tragic side.

"Naw!" said Chris, who was peeping under the window-curtain; "it looks
more like she's busted her crust."

In less than an hour every neighbor had been in to find out what was
going on. Mrs. Wiggs constituted herself mistress of ceremonies. She
had heard the whole story from the overburdened Mary, and was now
prepared to direct public opinion in the way it should go.

"Jes another boarder for Miss Hazy," she explained airily to Mrs.
Eichorn. "Lovey Mary was so well pleased with her boardin'-house, she
drummed it up among her friends. This here lady has been at the
hospittal. She got knocked over by a wagon out there near the factory,
an' it run into celebrated concussion. The nurse told Lovey Mary this
mornin' it was somethin' like information of the brain. What we're all
goin' to do is to try to get her well. I'm a-goin' home now to git her
a nice dinner, an' I jes bet some of you'll see to it that she gits a
good supper. You kin jes bank on us knowin' how to give a stranger a
welcome!"

It was easy to establish a precedent in the Cabbage Patch. When a
certain course of action was once understood to be the proper thing,
every resident promptly fell in line. The victim of "celebrated
concussion" was overwhelmed with attention. She lay in a pink wrapper
in Miss Hazy's kitchen, and received the homage of the neighborhood.
Meanwhile Lovey Mary worked extra hours at the factory and did sewing
at night to pay for Kate's board.

In spite, however, of the kind treatment and the regular
administration of Miss Viny's herbs and Mrs. Wiggs's yellowroot, Kate
grew weaker day by day. One stormy night when Lovey Mary came home
from the factory she found her burning with fever and talking
excitedly. Miss Hazy had gotten her up-stairs, and now stood
helplessly wringing her hands in the doorway.

"Lor', Lovey Mary! she's cuttin' up scandalous," complained the old
lady. "I done ever'thing I knowed how; I ironed the sheets to make 'em
warm, an' I tried my best to git her to swallow a mustard cocktail. I
wanted her to lemme put a fly-blister on to her head, too, but she
won't do nothin'."

"All right, Miss Hazy," said Lovey Mary, hanging her dripping coat on
a nail. "I'll stay with her now. Don't talk, Kate! Try to be still."

"But I can't, Lovey. I'm going to die, and I ain't fit to die. I've
been so bad and wicked, I'm 'fraid to go, Lovey. What'll I do? What'll
I do?"

In vain the girl tried to soothe her. Her hysteria increased; she
cried and raved and threw herself from side to side.

"Kate! Kate!" pleaded Lovey Mary, trying to hold her arms, "don't cry
so. God'll forgive you. He will, if you are sorry."

"But I'm afraid," shuddered Kate. "I've been so bad. Heaven knows I'm
sorry, but it's too late! Too late!" Another paroxysm seized her, and
her cries burst forth afresh.

Mary, in desperation, rushed from the room. "Tommy!" she called softly
down the steps.

The small boy was sitting on the stairs, in round-eyed wonder at what
was going on.

"Tommy," said Lovey Mary, picking him up, "the sick lady feels so bad!
Go in and give her a love, darling. Pet her cheeks and hug her like
you do me. Tell her she's a pretty mama. Tell her you love her."

Tommy trotted obediently into the low room and climbed on the bed. He
put his plump cheek against the thin one, and whispered words of baby-
love. Kate's muscles relaxed as her arms folded about him. Gradually
her sobs ceased and her pulse grew faint and fainter. Outside, the
rain and sleet beat on the cracked window-pane, but a peace had
entered the dingy little room. Kate received the great summons with a
smile, for in one fleeting moment she had felt for the first and last
time the blessed sanctity of motherhood.




CHAPTER XIII

AN HONORABLE RETREAT


    "For I will ease my heart
     Although, it be with hazard
     Of my head."

Miss Bell sat in her neat little office, with the evening paper in her
hand. The hour before tea was the one time of the day she reserved for
herself. Susie Smithers declared that she sat before the fire at such
times and took naps, but Susie's knowledge was not always trustworthy
--it depended entirely on the position of the keyhole.

At any rate, Miss Bell was not sleeping to-night; she moved about
restlessly, brushing imaginary ashes from the spotless hearth, staring
absently into the fire, then recurring again and again to an item in
the paper which she held:

DIED. Kate Rider, in her twenty-fourth year, from injuries received in
an accident.

Miss Bell seemed to cringe before the words. Her face looked old and
drawn. "And to think I kept her from having her child!" she said to
herself as she paced up and down the narrow room. "No matter what else
Kate was, she was his mother and had the first right to him. But I
acted for the best; I could see no other way. If I had only known!"

[Illustration: "Susie Smithers at the keyhole."]

There were steps on the pavement without; she went to the window, and
shading her eyes with her hands, gazed into the gathering dusk. Some
one was coming up the walk, some one very short and fat. No; it was a
girl carrying a child. Miss Bell reached the door just in time to
catch Tommy in her arms as Lovey Mary staggered into the hall. They
were covered with sleet and almost numb from the cold.

"Kate's dead!" cried Lovey Mary, as Miss Bell hurried them into the
office. "I didn't know she was going to die. Oh, I've been so wicked
to you and to Kate and to God! I want to be arrested! I don't care
what they do to me."

She threw herself on the floor, and beat her fists on the carpet.
Tommy stood near and wept in sympathy; he wore his remnant trousers,
and his little straw hat, round which Mrs. Wiggs had sewn a broad band
of black.

Miss Bell hovered over Lovey Mary and patted her nervously on the
back. "Don't, my dear, don't cry so. It's very sad--dear me, yes, very
sad. You aren't alone to blame, though; I have been at fault, too. I--
I--feel dreadfully about it."

Miss Bell's face was undergoing such painful contortions that Lovey
Mary stopped crying in alarm, and Tommy got behind a chair.

"Of course," continued Miss Bell, gaining control of herself, "it was
very wrong of you to run away, Mary. When I discovered that you had
gone I never stopped until I found you."

"Till you found me?" gasped Lovey Mary.

"Yes, child; I knew where you were all the time."

Again Miss Bell's features were convulsed, and Mary and Tommy looked
on in awed silence. "You see," she went on presently, "I am just as
much at fault as you. I was worried and distressed over having to let
Tommy go with Kate, yet there seemed no way out of it. When I found
you had hidden him away in a safe place, that you were both well and
happy, I determined to keep your secret. But oh, Mary, we hadn't the
right to keep him from her! Perhaps the child would have been her
salvation; perhaps she would have died a good girl."

"But she did, Miss Bell," said Lovey Mary, earnestly. "She said she
was sorry again and again, and when she went to sleep Tommy's arms was
round her neck."

"Mary!" cried Miss Bell, seizing the girl's hand eagerly, "did you
find her and take him to her?"

"No, ma'am. I brought her to him. She didn't have no place to go, and
I wanted to make up to her for hating her so. I did ever'thing I could
to make her well. We all did. I never thought she was going to die."

Then, at Miss Bell's request, Lovey Mary told her story, with many
sobs and tears, but some smiles in between, over the good times in the
Cabbage Patch; and when she had finished, Miss Bell led her over to
the sofa and put her arms about her. They had lived under the same
roof for fifteen years, and she had never before given her a caress.

"Mary," she said, "you did for Kate what nobody else could have done.
I thank God that it all happened as it did."

"But you'd orter scold me and punish me," said Lovey Mary. "I'd feel
better if you did."

Tommy, realizing in some vague way that a love-feast was in progress,
and always ready to echo Lovey Mary's sentiments, laid his chubby hand
on Miss Bell's knee.

"When my little sled drows up I'm doin' to take you ridin'," he said
confidingly.

Miss Bell laughed a hearty laugh, for the first time in many months.
The knotty problem which had caused her many sleepless nights had at
last found its own solution.




CHAPTER XIV

THE CACTUS BLOOMS


    "I tell thee love is nature's second sun,
     Causing a spring of virtues where he shines."

It was June again, and once more Lovey Mary stood at an up-stairs
window at the home. On the ledge grew a row of bright flowers, brought
from Miss Viny's garden, but they were no brighter than the face that
smiled across them at the small boy in the playground below. Lovey
Mary's sleeves were rolled above her elbows, and a dust-cloth was tied
about her head. As she returned to her sweeping she sang joyfully,
contentedly:

      "Can she sweep a kitchen floor,
         Billy boy, Billy boy?
       Can she sweep a kitchen floor,
         Charming Billy?"

"Miss Bell says for you to come down to the office," announced a
little girl, coming up the steps. "There's a lady there and a baby."

Lovey Mary paused in her work, and a shadow passed over her face. Just
three years ago the same summons had come, and with it such heartaches
and anxiety. She pulled down her sleeves and went thoughtfully down
the steps. At the office door she found Mrs. Redding talking to Miss
Bell.

"We leave Saturday afternoon," she was saying. "It's rather sooner
than we expected, but we want to get the baby to Canada before the hot
weather overtakes us. Last summer I asked two children from the
Toronto home to spend two weeks with me at our summer place, but this
year I have set my heart on taking Lovey Mary and Tommy. They will see
Niagara Falls and Buffalo, where we stop over a day, besides the
little outing at the lake. Will you come, Mary? You know Robert might
get choked again!"

Lovey Mary leaned against the door for support. A half-hour visit to
Mrs. Redding was excitement for a week, and only to think of going
away with her, and riding on a steam-car, and seeing a lake, and
taking Tommy, and being ever so small a part of that gorgeous Redding
household! She could not speak; she just looked up and smiled, but the
smile seemed to mean more than words, for it brought the sudden tears
to Mrs. Redding's eyes. She gave Mary's hand a quick, understanding
little squeeze, then hurried out to her carriage.

That very afternoon Lovey Mary went to the Cabbage Patch. As she
hurried along over the familiar ground, she felt as if she must sing
aloud the happy song that was humming in her heart. She wanted to stop
at each cottage and tell the good news; but her time was limited, so
she kept on her way to Miss Hazy's, merely calling out a greeting as
she passed. When she reached the door she heard Mrs. Wiggs's voice in
animated conversation.

"Well, I wish you'd look! There she is, this very minute! I never was
so glad to see anybody in my life! My goodness, child, you don't know
how we miss you down here! We talk 'bout you all the time, jes like a
person puts their tongue in the empty place after a tooth's done
pulled out."

"I'm awful glad to be back," said Lovey Mary, too happy to be cast
down by the reversion to the original state of the Hazy household.

"Me an' Chris ain't had a comfortable day sence you left," complained
Miss Hazy. "I'd 'a' almost rather you wouldn't 'a' came than to have
went away ag'in."

"But listen!" cried Lovey Mary, unable to keep her news another
minute. "I'm a-going on a railroad trip with Mrs. Redding, and she's
going to take Tommy, too, and we are going to see Niag'ra and a lake
and a buffalo!"

"Ain't that the grandest thing fer her to go and do!" exclaimed Mrs.
Wiggs. "I told you she was a' angel!"

"I'm right skeered of these here long trips," said Miss Hazy, "so many
accidents these days."

"My sakes!" answered Mrs. Wiggs, "I'd think you'd be 'fraid to step
over a crack in the floor fer fear you'd fall through. Why, Lovey
Mary, it's the nicest thing I ever heared tell of! An' Niag'ry Fall,
too. I went on a trip once when I was little. Maw took me through the
mountains. I never had seen mountains before, an' I cried at first an'
begged her to make 'em sit down. A trip is something you never will
fergit in all yer life. It was jes like Mrs. Reddin' to think about
it; but I don't wonder she feels good to you. Asia says she never
expects to see anything like the way you shook that candy outen little
Robert. But see here, if you go 'way off there you mustn't fergit us."

"I never could forget you all, wherever I went," said Lovey Mary. "I
was awful mean when I come to the Cabbage Patch; somehow you all just
bluffed me into being better. I wasn't used to being bragged on, and
it made me want to be good more than anything in the world."

"That's so," said Mrs. Wiggs. "You can coax a' elephant with a little
sugar. The worser Mr. Wiggs used to act, the harder I'd pat him on the
back. When he'd git bilin' mad, I'd say: 'Now, Mr. Wiggs, why don't
you go right out in the woodshed an' swear off that cuss? I hate to
think of it rampantin' round inside of a good-lookin' man like you.'
He'd often take my advice, an' it always done him good an' never hurt
the woodshed. As fer the childern, I always did use compelments on
them 'stid of switches."

Lovey Mary untied the bundle which she carried, and spread the
contents on the kitchen table. "I've been saving up to get you all
some presents," she said. "I wanted to get something for every one
that had been good to me, but that took in the whole Patch! These are
some new kind of seed for Miss Viny; she learned me a lot out of her
garden. This is goods for a waist for you, Miss Hazy."

"It's rale pretty," said Miss Hazy, measuring its length. "If you'd
'a' brought me enough fer a skirt, too, I'd never 'a' got through
prayin' fer you."

Mrs. Wiggs was indignant. "I declare, Miss Hazy! You ain't got a
manner in the world, sometimes. It's beautiful goods, Lovey Mary. I'm
goin' to make it up fer her by a fancy new pattern Asia bought; it's
got a sailor collar."

"This here is for Chris," continued Lovey Mary, slightly depressed by
Miss Hazy's lack of appreciation, "and this is for Mrs. Schultz. I
bought you a book, Mrs. Wiggs. I don't know what it's about, but it's
an awful pretty cover. I knew you'd like to have it on the parlor
table."

It was the "Iliad"!

Mrs. Wiggs held it at arm's-length and, squinting her eyes, read:
"Home of an Island."

"That ain't what the man called it," said Lovey Mary.

"Oh, it don't matter 'bout the name. It's a beautiful book, jes
matches my new tidy. You couldn't 'a' pleased me better."

"I didn't have money enough to go round," explained Lovey Mary,
apologetically, "but I bought a dozen lead-pencils and thought I'd
give them round among the children."

"Ever'thing'll be terrible wrote over," said Miss Hazy.

The last bundle was done up in tissue-paper and tied with a silver
string. Lovey Mary gave it to Mrs. Wiggs when Miss Hazy was not
looking.

"It's a red necktie," she whispered, "for Billy."

When the train for the North pulled out of the station one Saturday
afternoon it bore an excited passenger. Lovey Mary, in a new dress and
hat, sat on the edge of a seat, with little Robert on one side and
Tommy on the other. When her nervousness grew unbearable she leaned
forward and touched Mrs. Redding on the shoulder:

"Will you please, ma'am, tell me when we get there?"

Mrs. Redding laughed. "Get there, dear? Why, we have just started!"

"I mean to the Cabbage Patch. They're all going to be watching for me
as we go through."

"Is that it?" said Mr. Redding. "Well, I will take the boys, and you
can go out and stand on the platform and watch for your friends."

Lovey Mary hesitated. "Please, sir, can't I take Tommy, too? If it
hadn't 'a' been for him I never would have been here."

So Mr. Redding took them to the rear car, and attaching Lovey Mary
firmly to the railing, and Tommy firmly to Mary, returned to his
family.

"There's Miss Viny's!" cried Lovey Mary, excitedly, as the train
whizzed past. "We're getting there. Hold on to your hat, Tommy, and
get your pocket-handkerchief ready to wave."

The bell began to ring, and the train slowed up at the great water-
tank.

"There they are! All of 'em. Hello, Miss Hazy! And there's Asia and
Chris and ever'body!"

Mrs. Wiggs pushed through the little group and held an empty bottle
toward Lovey Mary. "I want you to fill it fer me," she cried
breathlessly. "Fill it full of Niag'ry water. I want to see how them
falls look."

[Illustration: "Lovey Mary waved until she rounded a curve."]

The train began to move. Miss Hazy threw her apron over her head and
wept. Mrs. Wiggs and Mrs. Eichorn waved their arms and smiled. The
Cabbage Patch, with its crowd of friendly faces, became a blur to the
girl on the platform. Suddenly a figure on a telegraph pole attracted
her attention; it wore a red necktie and it was throwing kisses. Lovey
Mary waved until the train rounded a curve, then she gave Tommy an
impulsive hug.

"It ain't hard to be good when folks love you," she said, with a
little catch in her voice. "I'll make 'em all proud of me yet!"







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lovey Mary, by Alice Hegan Rice





Produced by John Mamoun <mamounjo@umdnj.edu>, Charles Franks and 
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




THE LETTERS OF WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART. (1769-1791.)
TRANSLATED, FROM THE COLLECTION OP LUDWIG NOHL, BY LADY WALLACE.
WITH A PORTRAIT AND FACSIMILE
IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.
New York and Philadelphia: 1866.



TABLE OF CONTENTS

   PREFACE
   THE LETTERS OF W.A. MOZART, VOLUME I

      FIRST PART: ITALY/VIENNA/MUNICH 1770-1776
      SECOND PART: MUNICH/AUGSBURG/MANNHEIM SEPT. 1777-MARCH 1778
      THIRD PART: PARIS MARCH 1778-JANUARY 1779
      FOURTH PART: MUNICH/IDOMENEO NOVEMBER 1780-JANUARY 1781

   CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. [LETTERS LISTED BY DATE]



PREFACE



A full and authentic edition of Mozart's Letters ought to require
no special apology; for, though their essential substance has
already been made known by quotations from biographies by Nissen,
Jahn, and myself, taken from the originals, still in these three
works the letters are necessarily not only very imperfectly
given, but in some parts so fragmentary, that the peculiar charm
of this correspondence--namely, the familiar and confidential
mood in which it was written at the time--is entirely destroyed.
It was only possible to restore, and to enable others to enjoy
this charm--a charm so novel, even to those already conversant
with Mozart's life, that the most familiar incidents acquire
fresh zest from it--by an ungarbled edition of these letters.
This is what I now offer, feeling convinced that it will be
welcome not only to the mass of Mozart's admirers, but also to
professional musicians; for in them alone is strikingly set forth
how Mozart lived and labored, enjoyed and suffered, and this with
a degree of vivid and graphic reality which no biography, however
complete, could ever succeed in giving. Who does not know the
varied riches of Mozart's life? All that agitated the minds of
men in that day--nay, all that now moves, and ever will move, the
heart of man--vibrated with fresh pulsation, and under the most
manifold forms, in his sensitive soul, and mirrored itself in a
series of letters, which indeed rather resemble a journal than a
correspondence.

This artist, Nature had gifted in all respects with the most
clear and vigorous intellect that ever man possessed. Even in a
language which he had not so fully mastered as to acquire the
facility of giving expression to his ideas, he contrived to
relate to others all that he saw and heard, and felt and thought,
with surprising clearness and the most charming sprightliness,
combined with talent and good feeling. Above all, in his letters
to his father when travelling, we meet with the most minute
delineations of countries and people, of the progress of the fine
arts, especially in the theatres and in music; we also see the
impulses of his own heart and a hundred other things which, in
fascination, and universal as well as artistic interest, have
scarcely a parallel in our literature. The style may fail to a
certain degree in polish, that is, in definite purpose in
expressing what he wished to say in an attractive or congenial
form,--an art, however, which Mozart so thoroughly understood in
his music. His mode of writing, especially in the later letters
from Vienna, is often very slovenly, evidencing how averse the
Maestro was to the task. Still these letters are manifestly the
unconstrained, natural, and simple outpourings of his heart,
delightfully recalling to our minds all the sweetness and pathos,
the spirit and grace, which have a thousand times enchanted us in
the music of Mozart. The accounts of his visit to Paris may,
indeed, lay claim to a certain aesthetic value, for they are
written throughout with visible zest in his own descriptions, and
also with wit, and charm, and characteristic energy. As these
combined merits can only become apparent by an ungarbled series
of the letters, I have resolved, after many long years of zealous
research in collecting them, to undertake the work,--that is, to
publish the letters entire that have come to my knowledge.

It now only remains for me to give some words of explanation as
to the method I have pursued in editing them.

In the first place, this edition, (being transcribed closely from
the originals,) if compared with the letters already published,
will prove that the latter are open to many corrections, both in
trivial and more important respects. I have forborne, however,
attracting attention to the deviations from the original text,
either in Nissen or Jahn. I have no wish to he punctilious about
trifles, where, as in the case of Jahn, the principal points are
correct. Further, by this faithful production of the letters,
(nothing being omitted but the constant repetition of forms of
greeting and subscription,) we find many an additional feature in
the Maestro's life, and chiefly various facts with regard to the
creation and publication of his works, which may serve to
complete and to amend various statements in Dr. Ludwig Ritter von
Kochel's "Chronological Thematic Catalogue of the Musical
Compositions of W. A. Mozart," (Leipzig, Breitkopf and Hartel).
This will be effected not only by the hitherto unpublished
letters, though comparatively few in number, but also by passages
being given in full, which have been hitherto suppressed as of no
consequence. I have referred to Nissen and Jahn only when, in
spite of all my inquiries, I could not discover the proprietor of
the original, or procure a correct copy.

I must also remark that all letters without a special address are
written to his father. I have only adhered to Mozart's defective
orthography in his few letters of early date, and in the rest
adopted the more modern fashion. I did so for this simple reason,
that these defects form a charm in his juvenile letters, from
being in accordance with their boyish contents, while, with
regard to the others, they only tend to distract the attention
from the substance of the letters, instead of imparting
additional interest to them. Biographers can, and ought always to
render faithfully the original writing, because quotations
alternate with the text of the biographer; but in a regular and
uninterrupted series of letters this attraction must be very
sparingly used, or it will have a pernicious effect.

The explanatory remarks, and also the supplementary Lexicon, in
which I have availed myself of Jahn's catalogue, will make the
letters more intelligible to the world at large. The Index, too,
has been most carefully prepared to facilitate references.

Lastly, I return my best thanks to the keeper of the Archives of
the Mozarteum in Salzburg, to Herr Jellinck, and to all the
librarians and collectors of autographs who have assisted me in
my task, either by furnishing me with copies of their Mozart
letters, or by letting me know where I could procure them. I
would also earnestly request all who may possess any Mozart
letters to send me an exact transcript of them in the interest of
Art; for those here given allude to many still unknown, which are
no doubt scattered about here and there, waiting to be brought to
light.

With respect to myself, the best reward I aspire to in return for
the many sacrifices this collection has cost me, is, that my
readers may do justice to the purpose which chiefly guided me
throughout this publication,--my desire being not merely to
benefit science, and to give a graphic description of the
amiability and purity of heart which so distinguished this
attractive man, (for such was my aim in my "Life of Mozart,") but
above all to draw attention afresh to the unremitting zeal with
which Mozart did homage to every advance in Art, striving to make
music more and more the interpreter of man's innermost being. I
also wished to show how much his course was impeded by the
sluggishness and stupidity of the multitude, though partly
sustained by the sympathy of kindred souls, till the glorious
victory was won over routine and imbecility. Amidst all the
fatiguing process of copying and collating letters already so
familiar to me, these considerations moved me more vividly than
ever; and no work on the Maestro can ever bring them with such
force before the intelligent reader as this connected succession
of letters, containing his own details of his unwearied artistic
struggles and productions. May these letters, then, kindle fresh
zeal in our artists of the present day, both in youthful genius
and in laurel-crowned Maestri!--especially may they have the
happiest influence on those who devote themselves to that phase
of Art in which Mozart attained the highest renown!--may they
impart that energetic courage which is derived from the
experience that incessant efforts for the progress of Art and its
appliances enlarge the limits of human intellect, and can alone
insure an immortal crown!

LUDWIG NOHL.

MUNICH, October 1, 1864.



FIRST PART
ITALY, VIENNA, MUNICH.
1770 TO 1776.



PART I.



Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was born in Salzburg on the l7th January,
1756. His father, Leopold Mozart, belonged to a respectable
tradesman's family in the free city of Augsburg. Conscious of
being gifted with no small portion of intellectual endowments, he
followed the impulse that led him to aim at a higher position in
life, and went to the then celebrated University of Salzburg in
order to study jurisprudence. As he did not, however, at once
succeed in procuring employment in this profession, he was
forced, from his straitened means, to enter the service of Canon
Count Thun as valet. Subsequently, however, his talents, and that
thorough knowledge of music by which he had already (according to
the custom of many students) gained some part of his livelihood,
obtained for him a better position. In the year 1743 he was
received into the band (Kapelle) of the Salzburg cathedral by
Archbishop Sigismund; and as his capabilities and fame as a
violinist increased, the same Prince shortly afterwards promoted
him to the situation of Hof-Componist (Court Composer) and leader
of the orchestra, and in 1762 he was appointed Hof-Kapellmeister
(conductor of the Court music).

In 1747 Leopold Mozart married Anna Maria Pertlin, a foster-child
of the Convent of St. Gilgen. The fruits of this marriage were
seven children, two of whom alone survived,--Maria Anna, (the
fourth), called Nannerl, born in 1751; and the youngest, Wolfgang
Amadeus Johannes Chrysostomus. The daughter at a very early age
displayed a most remarkable talent for music, and when her father
began to give her instructions in it, an inborn and passionate
love of this art was soon evident in her little brother of three
years old, who at once gave tokens of a degree of genius far
surpassing all experience, and really bordering on the
marvellous. In his fourth year he could play all sorts of little
pieces on the piano. He only required half an hour to learn a
minuet, and one hour for a longer movement; and in his fifth year
he actually composed some pretty short pieces, several of which
are still extant.

[Footnote: The Grand Duchess Helene Paulowna, a few weeks ago,
made a present to the Mozarteum of the music-book from which
Mozart learned music, and in which he wrote down his first
compositions.]

The wonderful acquirements of both these children, to which
Wolfgang soon added skilful playing on the violin and organ,
induced their father to travel with them. In January, 1702, when
the boy was just six years old, they went first to Munich, and in
the autumn to Vienna, the children everywhere on their journey
exciting the greatest sensation, and being handsomely
remunerated. Leopold Mozart, therefore, soon afterwards resolved
to undertake a longer journey, accompanied by his whole family.
This lasted more than three years, extending from the smaller
towns in West Germany to Paris and London, while they visited, on
their way back, Holland, France, and Switzerland. The careful
musical instruction which the father perseveringly bestowed on
his son, went hand in hand with the most admirable education, and
the boy was soon as universally beloved for his amiable
disposition and natural simplicity and candor, as admired for his
rare gifts and acquirements.

After nearly a year passed at home in unremitting musical
instruction, and practice of various instruments as well as
composition, the father once more set off with all his family to
Vienna,--on this occasion with a view to Wolfgang paving the way
to Italy by the composition of an opera, (Italy, at that time,
being the Eldorado of music.) He succeeded in procuring the
scrittura of an opera buffa, "La Finta semplice;" but, when
finished, although the Emperor himself had intrusted the
composition to the boy, the cabals of envious singers effectually
prevented its being performed. But a German operetta which the
lad of twelve also wrote at that time, "Bastien und Bastienne,"
was given in private, at the summer residence of the Mesmer
family, in the suburb called Landstrasse. The father, too, had
some compensation by the Emperor commissioning his son to compose
a solemn mass for the consecration of the new Waisenhaus church,
which Wolfgang himself directed with the conductor's baton, in
presence of the Imperial Family, on the 7th December, 1768.

Immediately on their return home, the young virtuoso was
appointed archiepiscopal Concertmeister. He passed almost the
whole of the year 1769 in Salzburg, chiefly engaged in the
composition of masses. We also see him at that time eagerly
occupied in improving his knowledge of Latin, although two years
previously he had composed a comedy in that language,--"Apollo et
Hyacinthus." From this study proceeds the first letter which is
still extant from his hand:--



1.

Salzburg, 1769.

MY DEAR YOUNG LADY,--

I beg you will pardon the liberty I take in plaguing you with
these few lines, but as you said yesterday that there was nothing
you could not understand in Latin, and I might write what I chose
in that language, I could not resist the bold impulse to write
you a few Latin lines. When you have deciphered these, be so good
as to send me the answer by one of Hagenauer's servants, for my
messenger cannot wait; remember, you must answer this by a
letter.

[Footnote: By a messenger of the Hagenauer family, in whose
house, opposite the inn of "Den drei Allurten," Mozart was born,
and with whom his family were on the most intimate terms.]

"Cuperem scire, de qua causa, a quam plurimis adolescentibus
ottium usque adeo oestimetur, ut ipsi se nec verbis, nec
verberibus ad hoc sinant abduci."

[Footnote: "I should like to know the reason why indolence is so
highly prized by very many young men, that neither by words nor
blows will they suffer themselves to be roused from it."]

WOLFGANG MOZART.



The father's plan to go to Italy, there to lay the foundation of
a European reputation for his son, was realized in the beginning
of December, 1769, and during the journey, the boy, who was at
that time just entering his fifteenth year, subjoined to his
father's reports scraps of his own writing, in which, in true
boyish fashion, he had recourse to all kinds of languages and
witticisms, but always exhibiting in his opinions on music the
closest observation, the gravest thought, and the most acute
judgment.



2.

Verona, Jan. 1770.

MY VERY DEAREST SISTER,--

I have at last got a letter a span long after hoping so much for
an answer that I lost patience; and I had good cause to do so
before receiving yours at last. The German blockhead having said
his say, now the Italian one begins. Lei e piu franca nella
lingua italiana di quel che mi ho immaginato. Lei mi dica la
cagione perche lei non fu nella commedia che hanno giocata i
Cavalieri. Adesso sentiamo sempre una opera titolata Il Ruggiero.
Oronte, il padre di Bradamante, e un principe (il Signor Afferi)
bravo cantante, un baritono,

[Footnote: "You are more versed in the Italian language than I
believed. Tell me why you were not one of the actors in the
comedy performed by the Cavaliers. We are now hearing an opera
called 'Il Ruggiero.' Oronte, the father of Bradamante, is a
Prince (acted by Afferi, a good singer, a baritone)."]

but very affected when he speaks out a falsetto, but not quite so
much so as Tibaldi in Vienna. Bradamante innamorata di Ruggiero
(ma [Footnote: "Bradamante is enamored of Ruggiero, but"]--she is
to marry Leone, but will not) fa una povera Baronessa, che ha
avuto una gran disgrazia, ma non so la quale; recita [Footnote:
"Pretends to be a poor Baroness who has met with some great
misfortune, but what it is I don't know, she performs"] under an
assumed name, but the name I forget; ha una voce passabile, e la
statura non sarebbe male, ma distuona come il diavolo. Ruggiero,
un ricco principe innamorato di Bradamante, e un musico; canta un
poco Manzuolisch [Footnote: Manzuoli was a celebrated soprano,
from whom Mozart had lessons in singing when in London.] ed ha
una bellissima voce forte ed e gia vecchio; ha 55 anni, ed ha una
[Footnote: "She has a tolerable voice, and her appearance is in
her favor, but she sings out of tune like a devil Ruggiero, a
rich Prince enamored of Bradamante, is a musico, and sings rather
in Manzuoli's style, and has a fine powerful voice, though quite
old; he is fifty-five, and has a"] flexible voice. Leone is to
marry Bradamante--richississimo e, [Footnote: "Immensely rich."]
but whether he is rich off the stage I can't say. La moglie di
Afferi, che ha una bellissima voce, ma e tanto susurro nel teatro
che non si sente niente. Irene fa una sorella di Lolli, del gran
violinista che habbiamo sentito a Vienna, a una [Footnote:
"Afferi's wife has a most beautiful voice, but sings so softly on
the stage that you really hear nothing at all. A sister of Lolli,
the great violinist whom we heard at Vienna, acts Irene; she has
a"] very harsh voce, e canta sempre [Footnote: "Voice, and always
sings"] a quaver too tardi o troppo a buon' ora. Granno fa un
signore, che non so come si chiame; e la prima volta che lui
recita. [Footnote: "Slow or too fast. Ganno is acted by a
gentleman whose name I never heard. It is his first appearance on
the stage."] There is a ballet between each act. We have a good
dancer here called Roessler. He is a German, and dances right
well. The very last time we were at the opera (but not, I hope,
the very last time we ever shall be there) we got M. Roessler to
come up to our palco, (for M. Carlotti gives us his box, of which
we have the key,) and conversed with him. Apropos, every one is
now in maschera, and one great convenience is, that if you fasten
your mask on your hat you have the privilege of not taking off
your hat when any one speaks to you; and you never address them
by name, but always as "Servitore umilissimo, Signora Maschera."
Cospetto di Bacco! that is fun! The most strange of all is that
we go to bed at half-past seven! Se lei indovinasse questo, io
diro certamente che lei sia la madre di tutti gli indovini.
[Footnote: "If you guess this, I shall say that you are the
mother of all guessers."] Kiss mamma's hand for me, and to
yourself I send a thousand kisses, and assure you that I shall
always be your affectionate brother.

Portez-vous bien, et aimez-moi toujours.



3.

Milan, Jan. 26, 1770.

I REJOICE in my heart that you were so well amused at the
sledging party you write to me about, and I wish you a thousand
opportunities of pleasure, so that you may pass your life
merrily. But one thing vexes me, which is, that you allowed Herr
von Molk [an admirer of this pretty young girl of eighteen] to
sigh and sentimentalize, and that you did not go with him in his
sledge, that he might have upset you. What a lot of pocket-
handkerchiefs he must have used that day to dry the tears he shed
for you! He no doubt, too, swallowed at least three ounces of
cream of tartar to drive away the horrid evil humors in his body.
I know nothing new except that Herr Gellert, the Leipzig poet,
[Footnote: Old Mozart prized Gellert's poems so highly, that on
one occasion he wrote to him expressing his admiration.] is dead,
and has written no more poetry since his death. Just before
beginning this letter I composed an air from the "Demetrio" of
Metastasio, which begins thus, "Misero tu non sei."

The opera at Mantua was very good. They gave "Demetrio." The
prima donna sings well, but is inanimate, and if you did not see
her acting, but only singing, you might suppose she was not
singing at all, for she can't open her mouth, and whines out
everything; but this is nothing new to us. The seconda donna
looks like a grenadier, and has a very powerful voice; she really
does not sing badly, considering that this is her first
appearance. Il primo uomo, il musico, sings beautifully, but his
voice is uneven; his name is Caselli. Il secondo uomo is quite
old, and does not at all please me. The tenor's name is Ottini;
he does not sing unpleasingly, but with effort, like all Italian
tenors. We know him very well. The name of the second I don't
know; he is still young, but nothing at all remarkable. Primo
ballerino good; prima ballerina good, and people say pretty, but
I have not seen her near. There is a grotesco who jumps cleverly,
but cannot write as I do--just as pigs grunt. The orchestra is
tolerable. In Cremona, the orchestra is good, and Spagnoletta is
the name of the first violinist there. Prima donna very passable-
-rather ancient, I fancy, and as ugly as sin. She does not sing
as well as she acts, and is the wife of a violin-player at the
opera. Her name is Masci. The opera was the "Clemenza di Tito."
Seconda donna not ugly on the stage, young, but nothing superior.
Primo uomo, un musico, Cicognani, a fine voice, and a beautiful
cantabile. The other two musici young and passable. The tenor's
name is non lo so [I don't know what]. He has a pleasing
exterior, and resembles Le Roi at Vienna. Ballerino primo good,
but an ugly dog. There was a ballerina who danced far from badly,
and, what is a capo d'opera, she is anything but plain, either on
the stage or off it. The rest were the usual average. I cannot
write much about the Milan opera, for we did not go there, but we
heard that it was not successful. Primo uomo, Aprile, who sings
well, and has a fine even voice; we heard him at a grand church
festival. Madame Piccinelli, from Paris, who sang at one of our
concerts, acts at the opera. Herr Pick, who danced at Vienna, is
now dancing here. The opera is "Didone abbandonata," but it is
not to be given much longer. Signer Piccini, who is writing the
next opera, is here. I am told that the title is to be "Cesare in
Egitto."

WOLFGANG DE MOZART,

Noble of Hohenthal and attached to the Exchequer.



4.

Milan, Feb. 10, 1770.

SPEAK of the wolf, and you see his ears! I am quite well, and
impatiently expecting an answer from you. I kiss mamma's hand,
and send you a little note and a little kiss; and remain, as
before, your----What? Your aforesaid merry-andrew brother,
Wolfgang in Germany, Amadeo in Italy.

DE MORZANTINI.



5.

Milan, Feb. 17, 1770.

Now I am in for it! My Mariandel! I am so glad that you were so
tremendously merry. Say to nurse Urserl that I still think I sent
back all her songs, but if, engrossed by high and mighty thoughts
of Italy, I carried one off with me, I shall not fail, if I find
it, to enclose it in one of my letters. Addio, my children,
farewell! I kiss mamma's hands a thousand times, and send you a
thousand kisses and salutes on your queer monkey face. Per fare
il fine, I am yours, &c.



6.

Milan, Carnival, Erchtag.

MANY kisses to mamma and to you. I am fairly crazed with so much
business, [Footnote: Concerts and compositions of every kind
occupied Mozart. The principal result of his stay in Milan was,
that the young maestro got the scrittura of an opera for the
ensuing season. As the libretto was to be sent to them, they
could first make a journey through Italy with easy minds. The
opera was "Mitridate, Re di Ponto."] so I can't possibly write
any more.



7.

Milan, March 3, 1770.

CARA SORELLA MIA,--

I am heartily glad that you have had so much amusement. Perhaps
you may think that I have not been as merry as you; but, indeed,
I cannot sum up all we have done. I think we have been at least
six or seven times at the opera and the feste di ballo, which, as
in Vienna, begin after the opera, but with this difference, that
at Vienna the dancing is more orderly. We also saw the facchinata
and chiccherata. The first is a masquerade, an amusing sight,
because the men go as facchini, or porters; there was also a
barca filled with people, and a great number on foot besides; and
five or six sets of trumpets and kettledrums, besides several
bands of violins and other instruments. The chiccherata is also a
masquerade. What the people of Milan call chicchere, we call
petits maitres, or fops. They were all on horseback, which was a
pretty sight. I am as happy now to hear that Herr von Aman
[Footnote: The father had written in a previous letter, "Herr von
Aman's accident, of which you wrote to us, not only distressed us
very much, but cost Wolfgang many tears. You know how sensitive
he is"] is better, as I was grieved when you mentioned that he
had met with an accident. What kind of mask did Madame Rosa wear,
and Herr von Molk, and Herr von Schiedenhofen? Pray write this to
me, if you know it; your doing so will oblige me very much. Kiss
mamma's hands for me a thousand million times, and a thousand to
yourself from "Catch him who can!" Why, here he is!



8.

Bologna, March 24, 1770.

Oh, you busy creature!

Having been so long idle, I thought it would do me no harm to set
to work again for a short time. On the post-days, when the German
letters come, all that I eat and drink tastes better than usual.
I beg you will let me know who are to sing in the oratorio, and
also its title. Let me hear how you like the Haydn minuets, and
whether they are better than the first. From my heart I rejoice
to hear that Herr von Aman is now quite recovered; pray say to
him that he must take great care of himself and beware of any
unusual exertion. Be sure you tell him this. I intend shortly to
send you a minuet that Herr Pick danced on the stage, and which
every one in Milan was dancing at the feste di ballo, only that
you may see by it how slowly people dance. The minuet itself is
beautiful. Of course it comes from Vienna, so no doubt it is
either Teller's or Starzer's. It has a great many notes. Why?
Because it is a theatrical minuet, which is in slow time. The
Milan and Italian minuets, however, have a vast number of notes,
and are slow and with a quantity of bars; for instance, the first
part has sixteen, the second twenty, and even twenty-four.

We made the acquaintance of a singer in Parma, and also heard her
to great advantage in her own house--I mean the far-famed
Bastardella. She has, first, a fine voice; second, a flexible
organ; third, an incredibly high compass. She sang the following
notes and passages in my presence.

[Here, Mozart illustrates with about 20 measures of music]



9.

Rome, April 14, 1770.

I AM thankful to say that my stupid pen and I are all right, so
we send a thousand kisses to you both. I wish that my sister were
in Rome, for this city would assuredly delight her, because St.
Peter's is symmetrical, and many other things in Rome are also
symmetrical. Papa has just told me that the loveliest flowers are
being carried past at this moment. That I am no wiseacre is
pretty well known.

Oh! I have one annoyance--there is only a single bed in our
lodgings, so mamma may easily imagine that I get no rest beside
papa. I rejoice at the thoughts of a new lodging. I have just
finished sketching St. Peter with his keys, St. Paul with his
sword, and St. Luke with--my sister, &c., &c. I had the honor of
kissing St. Peter's foot at San Pietro, and as I have the
misfortune to be so short, your good old

WOLFGANG MOZART

was lifted up!



10.

Rome, April 2l,l770.

CARA SORELLA MIA,--

Pray try to find the "Art of Ciphering" which you copied out, but
I have lost it, and know nothing about it. So pray do write it
out again for me, with some other copies of sums, and send them
to me here.

Manzuoli has entered into a contract with the Milanese to sing in
my opera [see Nos. 2-6]. For this reason he sang four or five
arias to me in Florence, and also some of my own, which I was
obliged to compose in Milan (none of my theatrical things having
been heard there) to prove that I was capable of writing an
opera. Manzuoli asks 1000 ducats. It is not yet quite certain
whether Gabrielli will come. Some say Madame de' Amicis will sing
in it; we shall see her in Naples. I wish that she and Manzuoli
could act together; we should then be sure of two good friends.
The libretto is not yet chosen. I recommended one of Metastasio's
to Don Ferdinando [Count Firmiani's steward, in Milan] and to
Herr von Troyer. I am at this moment at work on the aria "Se
ardore e speranza."



11.

Rome, April 25, 1770.

CARA SORELLA MIA,--

Io vi accerto che io aspetto con una incredibile premura tutte le
giornate di posta qualche lettere di Salisburgo. Jeri fummo a S.
Lorenzo e sentimmo il Vespero, e oggi matina la messa cantata, e
la sera poi il secondo vespero, perche era la festa della Madonna
del Buonconsiglio. Questi giorni fummi nel Campidoglio e viddemmo
varie belle cose. Se io volessi scrivere tutto quel che viddi,
non bastarebbe questo foglietto. In due Accademie suonai, e
domani suonero anche in una.--Subito dopo pranzo giuochiamo a
Potsch [Boccia]. Questo e un giuoco che imparai qui, quando verro
a casa, ve l'imparero. Finita questa lettera finiro una sinfonia
mia, che comminciai. L'aria e finita, una sinfonia e dal copista
(il quale e il mio padre) perche noi non la vogliamo dar via per
copiarla; altrimente ella sarebbe rubata.

WOLFGANGO in Germania. AMADEO MOZART in Italia.

Roma caput mundi il 25 Aprile anno 1770
    nell' anno venture 1771.

[Footnote: "DEAREST SISTER,--"I assure you that I always expect
with intense eagerness my letters from Salzburg on post-days.
Yesterday we were at S. Lorenzo and heard vespers, and to-day at
the chanted mass, and in the evening at the second vespers,
because it was the Feast of the Madonna del Buonconsiglio. A few
days ago we were at the Campidoglio, where we saw a great many
fine things. If I tried to write you an account of all I saw,
this sheet would not suffice. I played at two concerts, and to-
morrow I am to play at another. After dinner we played at Potsch
[Boccia]. This is a game I have learnt, and when I come home, I
will teach it to you. When I have finished this letter, I am
going to complete a symphony that I have begun. The aria is
finished. The copyist (who is my father) has the symphony,
because we do not choose it to be copied by any one else, or it
might be stolen.

"WOLFGANGO in Germany.

"AMADKEO MOZAKT in Italy.

"Rome, mistress of the world: April 25,1770."]



12.

Naples, May 19, 1770.

CARA SORELLA MIA,--

Vi prego di scrivermi presto e tutti i giorni di posta. Io vi
ringrazio di avermi mandata questi "Art of Ciphering," [FOOTNOTE:
"I beg you will write to me soon, indeed every post-day. I thank
you for having sent me the 'Art of Ciphering.'"] e vi prego, se
mai volete avere mal di testa, di mandarmi ancora un poco di
questi "books." [FOOTNOTE: "And I beg if you ever want to have a
headache, that you will send me some more."] Perdonate mi che
scrivo si malamente, ma la razione e perche anche io ebbi un poco
mal di testa. [FOOTNOTE: "of the same kind. Excuse my writing so
badly, but the reason is that I have a bit of a headache
myself."]

Haydn's twelfth minuet, which you sent me, pleases me very much;
you have composed an inimitable bass for it, and without the
slightest fault. I do beg that you will often exercise yourself
in such things. Mamma must not forget to see that the guns are
both polished up. Tell me how Master Canary is? Does he still
sing? and still whistle? Do you know why I am thinking about the
canary? Because we have one in our ante-room that chirps out a G
sharp just like ours. [Footnote: Mozart was extremely fond of
animals, and later in life had always birds in his room.] A
propos, Herr Johannes [Hagenauer], no doubt, received the letter
of congratulation which we intended to write to him? But if he
has not got it, I will tell him myself, when we meet in Salzburg,
what ought to have been in it. Yesterday we wore our new clothes;
we were as handsome as angels. My kind regards to Nandl; she must
not fail to pray diligently for me.

Jomelli's opera is to be given on the 30th. We saw the king and
queen at mass in the court chapel at Portici, and we also saw
Vesuvius. Naples is beautiful, but as crowded with people as
Vienna or Paris. As for London and Naples, I think that in point
of insolence on the part of the people Naples almost surpasses
London; because here the lazzaroni have their regular head or
leader, who receives twenty-five ducati d'argento monthly from
the king for keeping the lazzaroni in order.

Madame de' Amicis sings in the opera--we were there. Caffaro is
to compose the second opera, Ciccio di Majo the third, but who is
to compose the fourth is not yet known. Be sure you go regularly
to Mirabell, to hear the Litanies, and listen to the "Regina
Coeli" or the "Salve Regina," and sleep sound, and take care to
have no evil dreams. My most transcendent regards to Herr von
Schiedenhofen--tralaliera! tralaliera! Tell him to learn the
repetition minuet on the piano, to be sure to DO so, and DO not
let him forget it. He must DO this in order to DO me the favor to
let me accompany him some day or other. DO give my best
compliments to all my friends, and DO continue to live happily,
and DO not die, but DO live on, that you may be able to DO
another letter for me, and I DO one for you, and thus we shall go
on DOING till we can DO something worth DOING; but I am one of
those who will go on DOING till all DOINGS are at an end. In the
mean time I DO subscribe myself

Your W. M.



13.

Naples, May 29, 1770.

Jeri l'altro fummo nella prova dell' opera del Sign. Jomelli, la
quale e una opera che e ben scritta e che me piace veramente. Il
Sign. Jomelli ci ha parlato ed era molto civile. E fummo anche in
una chiesa a sentir una Musica la quale fu del Sign. Ciccio di
Majo, ed era una bellissima Musica. Anche lui ci parlci ed era
molto compito. La Signora de' Amicis canto a meraviglia. Stiamo
Dio grazia assai bene di salute, particolarmente io, quando viene
una lettera di Salisburgo. Vi prego di scrivermi tutti giorni di
posta, e se anche non avete niente da scrivermi, solamente vorrei
averlo per aver qualche lettera tutti giorni di posta. Egli non
sarebbe mal fatto, se voi mi scriveste qualche volta una
letterina italiana.

[FOOTNOTE: "The other day we attended the rehearsal of Signer
Jomelli's opera, which is well written and pleases me
exceedingly. Signor Jomelli spoke to us and was very civil. We
also went to a church to hear a mass by Signor Ciccio di Majo,
and it was most beautiful music. Signora de' Amicus sang
incomparably. We are, thank God, very well, and I feel
particularly so when a letter from Salzburg arrives. I beg you
will write to me every post-day, even if you have nothing to
write about, for I should like to have a letter by every post. It
would not be a bad idea to write me a little letter in Italian."]



14.

Naples, June 5, 1770.

Vesuvius is smoking fiercely! Thunder and lightning and blazes!
Haid homa gfresa beim Herr Doll. Das is a deutscha Compositor,
und a browa Mo. [Footnote: "Today we dined with Herr Doll, he is
a good composer and a worthy man" [Vienna Patois]] Now I begin to
describe my course of life.--Alle 9 ore, qualche volta anche alle
dieci mi svelgio, e poi andiamo fuor di casa, e poi pranziamo da
un trattore, e dopo pranzo scriviamo, e poi sortiamo, e indi
ceniamo, ma che cosa? Al giorno di grasso, un mezzo pollo ovvero
un piccolo boccone d'arrosto; al giorno di magro un piccolo
pesce; e di poi andiamo a dormire. Est-ce que vous avez compris?-
-Redma dafir Soisburgarisch, don as is gschaida. Wir sand Gottlob
gesund da Voda und i. [Footnote: "I rise generally every morning
at 9 o'clock, but sometimes not till 10, when we go out. We dine
at a restaurateur's, after dinner I write, and then we go out
again, and afterwards sup, but on what? on jours gras, half a
fowl, or a small slice of roast meat, on jours maigres a little
fish, and then we go to sleep. Do you understand? Let us talk
Salzburgisch, for that is more sensible. Thank God, my father and
I are well" [Patois]] I hope you and mamma are so also. Naples
and Rome are two drowsy cities. A scheni Schrift!

 net wor? [Footnote: "Fine writing, is it not?" [Patois.]] Write
to me, and do not be so lazy. Altrimente avrete qualche bastonate
di me. Quel plaisir! Je te casserai la tete. [Footnote:
"Otherwise I will cudgel you soundly. What a pleasure--to break
your head!"] I am delighted with the thoughts of the portraits
[of his mother and sister, wno had promised to have their
likenesses taken], und i bi korios wias da gleich sieht; wons ma
gfoin, so los i mi und den Vodan a so macho. Maidli, lass Da
saga, wo list dan gwesa he? [Footnote: "And I am anxious to see
what they are like, and then I will have my father and myself
also taken. Fair maiden, say, where have you been, eh?"
[Patois.]] The opera here is Jomelli's; it is fine, but too grave
and old-fashioned for this stage. Madame de' Amicis sings
incomparably, and so does Aprile, who used to sing at Milan. The
dancing is miserably pretentious. The theatre beautiful. The King
has been brought up in the rough Neapolitan fashion, and at the
opera always stands on a stool, so that he may look a little
taller than the Queen, who is beautiful and so gracious, for she
bowed to me in the most condescending manner no less than six
times on the Molo.



15.

Naples, June 16, 1770.

I AM well and lively and happy as ever, and as glad to travel. I
made an excursion on the Mediterranean. I kiss mamma's hand and
Nannerl's a thousand times, and am your son, Steffl, and your
brother, Hansl.



16.

Rome, July 7, 1770.

CARA SORELLA MIA,--

I am really surprised that you can compose so charmingly. In a
word, the song is beautiful. Often try something similar. Send me
soon the other six minuets of Haydn. Mademoiselle, j'ai l'honneur
d'etre votre tres-humble serviteur et frere,

CHEVALIER DE MOZART.

[He had received from the Pope the cross of the Order of the
Golden Spur.]



17.

Bologna, July 21, 1770.

I WISH mamma joy of her name-day, and hope that she may live for
many hundred years to come and retain good health, which I always
ask of God, and pray to Him for you both every day. I cannot do
honor to the occasion except with some Loretto bells, and wax
tapers, and caps, and gauze when I return. In the mean time,
good-bye, mamma. I kiss your hand a thousand times, and remain,
till death, your attached son.



18.

Io vi auguro d'Iddio, vi dia sempre salute, e vi lasci vivere
ancora cent' anni e vi faccia morire quando avrete mille anni.
Spero che voi impararete meglio conoscermi ni avvenire e che poi
ne giudicherete come ch' egli vi piace. Il tempo non mi permette
di scriver motto. La penna non vale un corno, ne pure quello che
la dirigge. Il titolo dell' opera che ho da comporre a Milano,
non si sa ancora.

[Footnote: "My prayer to God is, that He may grant you health,
and allow you to live to be a hundred, and not to die till you
are a thousand years old. I hope that you will learn to know me
better in future, and that you will then judge of me as you
please. Time does not permit me to write much. My pen is not
worth a pin, nor the hand that guides it. I don't yet know the
title of the opera that I am to compose at Milan."]

My landlady at Rome made me a present of the "Thousand and One
Nights" in Italian; it is most amusing to read.



19.

Bologna, August 4, 1770.

I GRIEVE from my heart to hear that Jungfrau Marthe is still so
ill, and I pray every day that she may recover. Tell her from me
that she must beware of much fatigue and eat only what is
strongly salted [she was consumptive]. A propos, did you give my
letter to Robinsiegerl? [Sigismund Robinig, a friend of his]. You
did not mention it when you wrote. I beg that when you see him
you will tell him he is not quite to forget me. I can't possibly
write better, for my pen is only fit to write music and not a
letter. My violin has been newly strung, and I play every day. I
only mention this because mamma wished to know whether I still
played the violin. I have had the honor to go at least six times
by myself into the churches to attend their splendid ceremonies.
In the mean time I have composed four Italian symphonies
[overtures], besides five or six arias, and also a motett.

Does Herr Deibl often come to see you? Does he still honor you by
his amusing conversation? And the noble Herr Carl von Vogt, does
he still deign to listen to your tiresome voices? Herr von
Schiedenhofen must assist you often in writing minuets, otherwise
he shall have no sugar-plums.

If time permitted, it would be my duty to trouble Herr von Molk
and Herr von Schiedenhofen with a few lines; but as that most
indispensable of all things is wanting, I hope they will forgive
my neglect, and consider me henceforth absolved from this honor.
I have begun various cassations [a kind of divertimento], so I
have thus responded to your desire. I don't think the piece in
question can be one of mine, for who would venture to publish as
his own composition what is, in reality, written by the son of
the Capellmeister, and whose mother and sister are in the same
town? Addio--farewell! My sole recreations consist in dancing
English hornpipes and cutting capers. Italy is a land of sleep; I
am always drowsy here. Addio--good-bye!



20.

Bologna, August 21, 1770.

I AM not only still alive, but in capital spirits. To-day I took
a fancy to ride a donkey, for such is the custom in Italy, so I
thought that I too must give it a trial. We have the honor to
associate with a certain Dominican who is considered a very pious
ascetic. I somehow don't quite think so, for he constantly takes
a cup of chocolate for breakfast, and immediately afterwards a
large glass of strong Spanish wine; and I have myself had the
privilege of dining with this holy man, when he drank a lot of
wine at dinner and a full glass of very strong wine afterwards,
two large slices of melons, some peaches and pears for dessert,
five cups of coffee, a whole plateful of nuts, and two dishes of
milk and lemons. This he may perhaps do out of bravado, but I
don't think so--at all events, it is far too much; and he eats a
great deal also at his afternoon collation.



21.

Bologna, Sept. 8, 1770.

NOT to fail in my duty, I must write a few words. I wish you
would tell me in your next letter to what brotherhoods I belong,
and also let me know the prayers I am bound to offer up for them.
I am now reading "Telemachus," and am already in the second
volume. Good-bye for the present! Love to mamma.



22.

I HOPE that mamma and you are both well, but I wish you would
answer my letters more punctually in time to come; indeed, it is
far easier to answer than to originate. I like these six minuets
far better than the first twelve; we often played them to the
Countess [Pallivicini, at whose country-seat, near Bologna,
father and son spent some months]. We only wish we could succeed
in introducing a taste for German minuets into Italy, as their
minuets last nearly as long as entire symphonies. Forgive my bad
writing; I could write better, but I am in such a hurry.



23.

Bologna, Sept. 29, 1770.

IN order to fill up papa's letter, I intend to add a few words. I
grieve deeply to hear of Jungfrau Marthe's long-continued
illness, which the poor girl bears, too, with such patience. I
hope, please God, she may still recover. If not, we must not
grieve too much, for the will of God is always best, and God
certainly knows better than we do whether it is most for our good
to be in this world or in the next. But it will cheer her to
enjoy this fine weather once more after all the rain.



24.

Bologna, Oct. 6, 1770.

I AM heartily glad that you have been so gay; I only wish I had
been with you. I hope Jungfrau Marthe is better. To-day I played
the organ at the Dominicans. Congratulate the .... from me, and
say that I sincerely wish they may live to see the fiftieth
anniversary of Father Dominikus's saying mass, and that we may
all once more have a happy meeting.

[Footnote: Jahn observes that he probably alludes to their
intimate friends, the merchant Hagenauer's family, with whom old
Mozart had many pecuniary transactions for the purpose of his
travels, and whose son entered the church in 1764.]

My best wishes to all Thereserls, and compliments to all my
friends in the house and out of the house. I wish I were likely
soon to hear the Berchtesgadner symphonies, and perhaps blow a
trumpet or play a fife in one myself. I saw and heard the great
festival of St. Petronius in Bologna. It was fine, but long. The
trumpeters came from Lucca to make the proper flourish of honor,
but their trumpeting was detestable.



25.

Milan, Oct. 20, 1770.

MY DEAR MAMMA,--

I cannot write much, for my fingers ache from writing out such a
quantity of recitative. I hope you will pray for me that my opera
["Mitridate Re di Ponto"] may go off well, and that we soon may
have a joyful meeting. I kiss your hands a thousand times, and
have a great deal to say to my sister; but what? That is known
only to God and myself. Please God, I hope soon to be able to
confide it to her verbally; in the mean time, I send her a
thousand kisses. My compliments to all kind friends. We have lost
our good Martherl, but we hope that by the mercy of God she is
now in a state of blessedness.



26.

Milan, Oct. 27, 1770.

MY VERY DEAREST SISTER,--

You know that I am a great talker, and was so when I left you. At
present I replace this very much by signs, for the son of this
family is deaf and dumb. I must now set to work at my opera. I
regret very much that I cannot send you the minuet you wish to
have, but, God willing, perhaps about Easter you may see both it
and me. I can write no more.--Farewell! and pray for me.



27.

Milan, Nov. 3, 1770.

MY VERY DEARLY LOVED SlSTER,--

I thank you and mamma for your sincere good wishes; my most
ardent desire is to see you both soon in Salzburg. In reference
to your congratulations, I may say that I believe Herr Martinelli
suggested your Italian project. My dear sister, you are always so
very clever, and contrived it all so charmingly that, just
underneath your congratulations in Italian, followed M. Martini's
compliments in the same style of penmanship, so that I could not
possibly find you out; nor did I do so, and I immediately said to
papa, "Oh! how I do wish I were as clever and witty as she is!"
Then papa answered, "Indeed, that is true enough." On which I
rejoined, "Oh! I am so sleepy;" so he merely replied, "Then stop
writing." Addio! Pray to God that my opera may be successful. I
am your brother,

W. M.,

whose fingers are weary from writing.



28.

Milan, Dec. 1, 1770.

DEAREST SISTER,--

As it is so long since I wrote to you, I thought that I might
perhaps pacify your just wrath and indignation by these lines. I
have now a great deal to work at, and to write for my opera. I
trust all will go well, with the help of God. Addio! As ever,
your faithful brother,

WOLFGANG MOZART.



29.

MY DARLING SISTER,--

It is long since I have written to you, having been so much
occupied with my opera. As I have now more time, I shall attend
better to my duty. My opera, thank God, is popular, as the
theatre is full every evening, which causes great surprise, for
many say that during all the time they have lived in Milan they
never saw any first opera so crowded as on this occasion. I am
thankful to say that both papa and I are quite well, and I hope
at Easter to have an opportunity of relating everything to mamma
and you. Addio! A propos, the copyist was with us yesterday, and
said that he was at that moment engaged in transcribing my opera
for the Lisbon court. Good-bye, my dear Madlle. sister,

Always and ever your attached brother.



30.

Venice, Feb 15, 1771

MY VERY DEAR SISTER,--

You have, no doubt, heard from papa that I am well. I have
nothing to write about, except my love and kisses to mamma. Give
the enclosed--Al sig. Giovanni. La signora perla ricono la
riverisce tanto come anche tutte le altre perle, e li assicuro
che tutte sono inamorata di lei, e che sperano che lei prendera
per moglie tutte, come i Turchi per contenar tutte sei. Questo
scrivo in casa di Sign. Wider, il quale e un galant' uomo come
lei melo scrisse, ed jeri abbiamo finito il carnavale da lui,
cenardo da lui e poi ballammo ed andammo colle perle in compagnie
nel ridotto nuovo, che mi piacque assai. Quando sto dal Sign.
Wider e guardando fuori della finestra vedo la casa dove lei
abito quando lei fu in Venezia. Il nuovo non so niente. Venezia
mi piace assai. Il mio complimento al Sign., suo padre e madre,
sorelle, fratelli, e a tutti i miei amici ed amiche. Addio!

[Footnote: "To Herr Johannes [Hagenauer] The fair 'pearl' has the
same high opinion of you that all the other 'pearls' here have. I
assure you that they are all in love with you, and their hope is
that you will marry them all (like the Turks), and so please them
every one. I write this in the house of Signor Wider, who is an
excellent man and exactly what you wrote to me, yesterday we
finished the Carnival in his house. We supped there and then
danced, and went afterwards, in company with the 'pearls,' to the
new masquerade, which amused me immensely. When I look out of the
window at Signor Wider's, I see the house that you inhabited in
Venice. I have no news. I like Venice very well. My compliments
to your father and mother, brothers and sisters, and all my
friends. Adieu!"]



31.

Venice, Feb. 20, 1771.

I AM still well, and, thank God, in the land of the living.
Madame de' Amicis has been singing at S. Benedetto. Say to Herr
Johannes that the Widerischen Berlein family are constantly
speaking of him (particularly Madlle. Catherine), so he must soon
return to Vienna to encounter the attacca--that is, in order to
become a true Venetian, you must allow yourself to be bumped down
on the ground. They wished to do this to me also, but though
seven women tried it, the whole seven together did not succeed in
throwing me down. Addio!

The travellers arrived again at home towards the end of March,
1771. The marriage of the Archduke Ferdinand with the Princess of
Modena, which took place in the October of that year, was
attended with great festivities, and recalled the father and son
to Italy in the course of a few months, Wolfgang having received
a command from the Empress Maria Theresa to compose a dramatic
serenata in honor of these nuptials.



32.

Verona, August 18, 1771.

DEAREST SISTER,--

I have not slept more than half an hour, for I don't like to
sleep after eating. You may hope, believe, think, be of opinion,
cherish the expectation, desire, imagine, conceive, and
confidently suppose, that we are in good health; but I can tell
you so to a certainty. Wish Herr von Heffner a happy journey from
me, and ask him if he has seen Annamindl?

[Wolfgang, who was then fifteen, had taken advantage of his
leisure during their short stay in Salzburg to fall in love for
the first time. We shall find frequent allusions to this subject.
See also No. 25.]



33.

Milan, August 23, 1771.

MY VERY DEAR SISTER,--

We suffered much from heat in the course of our journey, and the
dust constantly dried us up so impertinently that we should have
been choked, or died of thirst, if we had not been too sensible
for that. For a whole month past (say the Milanese) there has
been no rain here; to-day a slight drizzle began, but the sun has
now come out again, and it is once more very warm. What you
promised me (you well know my meaning, you kind creature!) don't
fail to perform, I entreat. I shall be indeed very grateful to
you. I am at this moment actually panting from the heat--I tear
open my waistcoat! Addio--good-bye!

WOLFGANG.

Above us we have a violinist, below us is another, next to us a
singing-master, who gives lessons, and, in the room opposite, a
hautboy-player. This is famous for a composer--it inspires so
many fine thoughts.



34.

Milan, August 31, 1771.

MY DEAREST SISTER,--

We are quite well, thank God! I have been eating quantities of
fine pears, peaches, and melons in your place. My greatest
amusement is to talk by signs to the dumb, which I can do to
perfection. Herr Hasse [the celebrated opera composer] arrived
here yesterday, and to-day we are going to pay him a visit. We
only received the book of the Serenata last Thursday. [Footnote:
It was "Ascanio in Alba" that Wolfgang got to compose for Milan;
and it was this music which made Hasse exclaim, "This boy will
cause us all to be forgotten."] I have very little to write
about. Do not, I entreat, forget about THE ONE OTHER, where no
other can ever be. You understand me, I know.



35.

Milan, Sept. 13, 1771.

DEAR SISTER,--

I write only for writing's sake. It is indeed very inconvenient,
because I have a severe cold. Say to Fraulein W. von Molk that I
rejoice at the thoughts of Salzburg, in the hope that I may again
receive the same kind of present for the minuets which was
bestowed on me at a similar concert. She knows all about it.



36.

Milan, Sept. 21, 1771.

I AM well, God be praised! I can't write much. lst, I have
nothing to say. 2d, my fingers ache from writing. I often whistle
an air, but no one responds. Only two arias of the Serenata are
still wanting, and then it will be finished. I have no longer any
fancy for Salzburg; I am afraid I might go mad too. [He had heard
that several persons there had lost their reason.]



37.

Milan, Oct. 5, 1771.

I AM in good health, but always sleepy. Papa has snatched from my
pen all that I had to write about, which is, that he has already
written everything. Signora Gabrielli is here, and we are soon
going to see her, as we wish to become acquainted with all
distinguished singers.



38.

Milan, Oct. 26, 1771.

MY work being now completed, I have more time to write, but have
nothing to say, as papa has written you all I could have said. I
am well, thank God! but have no news, except that in the lottery
the numbers 35, 59, 60, 61, and 62 have turned up prizes, so if
we had selected these we should have won; but as we did not put
in at all we neither won nor lost, but only laughed at those who
did the latter. The two arias encored in the Serenata were those
of Manzuoli, and Girelli, the prima donna, I hope you may be well
amused in Triebenbach with shooting, and (weather permitting)
with walking.



39.

Milan, Nov. 2, 1771.

Papa says that Herr Kerschbaumer travels with profit and
observation, and we can testify that he conducts himself very
judiciously; at all events he can give a more satisfactory
account of his journey than some of his friends, one of whom said
that he could not see Paris properly because the houses there
were too high. To-day Hasse's opera is to be given; as papa,
however, is not going, I can't go either. [FOOTNOTE: Hasse had
also a festal opera to compose, but Leopold Mozart writes, "I am
sorry to say that Wolfgang's Serenata has totally eclipsed
Hasse's opera."] Fortunately I know all the airs thoroughly by
heart, so I can see and hear them in my own thoughts at home.



40.

Milan, Nov. 24,1771.

DEAREST SISTER,--

Herr Manzuoli, the musico, who has always been considered and
esteemed as the best of his class, has in his old age given a
proof of his folly and arrogance. He was engaged at the opera for
the sum of 500 gigliati (ducats), but as no mention was made in
the contract of the Serenata, he demanded 500 ducats more for
singing in it, making 1000. The court only sent him 700 and a
gold box, (and enough too, I think,) but he returned the 700
ducats and the box, and went away without anything. I don't know
what the result of this history will be--a bad one, I fear!



41.

Milan, Nov. 30, 1771.

That you may not suppose I am ill, I write you a few lines. I saw
four fellows hanged in the Dom Platz. They hang here just as they
do in Lyons.

We now find the father and son once more in Salzburg, in the
middle of December, 1771. Archbishop Sigismund died, and on the
l4th of March, 1772, Archbishop Hieronymus was elected, who was
destined to cause much sorrow to Mozart. Soon after, in honor of
the procession and homage of the new prince, he composed the
allegorical azione teatrale "Il sogno di Scipione." In October he
resumed his travels, having undertaken the scrittura for the
approaching Carnivals both at Milan and at Venice.



42.

Bologna, Oct. 28, 1772.

We have got to Botzen already. Already? rather not till now. I am
hungry, thirsty, sleepy, and lazy, but I am quite well. We saw
the monastery in Hall, and I played the organ there. When you see
Nadernannerl, tell her I spoke to Herr Brindl (her lover), and he
charged me to give her his regards. I hope that you kept your
promise and went last Sunday to D----N----[in cipher]. Farewell!
write me some news. Botzen--a pig-sty!



43.

Milan, Nov. 7,1772.

Don't be startled at seeing my writing instead of papa's. These
are the reasons: first, we are at Herr von Oste's, and the Herr
Baron Christiani is also here, and they have so much to talk
about, that papa cannot possibly find time to write; and,
secondly, he is too lazy. We arrived here at 4 o'clock this
afternoon, and are both well. All our good friends are in the
country or at Mantua, except Herr von Taste and his wife, who
send you and my sister their compliments. Herr Misliweczeck [a
young composer of operas from Paris] is still here. There is not
a word of truth either in the Italian war, which is so eagerly
discussed in Germany, or in the castles here being fortified.
Forgive my bad writing.

Address your letters direct to us, for it is not the custom here,
as in Germany, to carry the letters round; we are obliged to go
ourselves to fetch them on post-days. There is nothing new here;
we expect news from Salzburg.

Not having a word more to say, I must conclude. Our kind regards
to all our friends. We kiss mamma 1,000,000,000 times (I have no
room for more noughts); and as for my sister, I would rather
embrace her in persona than in imagination.



44.

CARISSIMA SOREILA,--

Spero che voi sarete stata dalla Signora, che voi gia sapete. Vi
prego, se la videte di farla un Complimento da parte mia. Spero e
non dubito punto che voi starete bene di salute. Mi son scordato
di darvi nuova, che abbiamo qui trovato quel Sign. Belardo,
ballerina, che abbiamo conosciuto in Haye ed in Amsterdam, quello
che attaco colla spada il ballerino, il Sign. Neri, perche
credeva che lui fosse cagione che non ebbe la permission di
ballar in teatro. Addio, non scordarvi di me, io sono sempre il
vostro fidele fratello.

[FOOTNOTE: "DEAREST SISTFR,--"I hope you have been to see the
lady--you know who. I beg that when you see her you will give her
my compliments. I hope, and do not doubt, that you are in good
health. I forgot to tell you that we found Signor Belardo here, a
dancer whom we knew at the Hague and at Amsterdam--the same
person who attacked Signor Neri with a sword, because he thought
he was the cause of his not obtaining permission to dance in the
theatre. Adieu! Do not forget me, always your faithful brother."]



45.

Milan, Nov. 21, 1772.

I thank you exceedingly--you know for what. I cannot possibly
write to Herr von Heffner. When you see him, make him read aloud
what follows. I hope he will be satisfied with it:--

"I am not to take it amiss that my unworthy friend has not
answered my letter; as soon as he has more leisure, he will
certainly, beyond all doubt, positively and punctually send me a
reply."



46.

Milan, Nov. 28,1772.

We both send our congratulations to Herr von Aman; tell him from
me that, owing to his having all along made a mystery of the
affair, I feel much annoyed, for I fear I may have said more than
I ought about his bride. I thought he had been more
straightforward. One thing more. Say to Herr von Aman that, if he
wishes to have a right merry wedding, he must be so kind as to
wait till we return, so that what he promised me may come to
pass, namely, that I was to dance at his wedding. Tell Herr
Leitgeb [a horn-player in the Archbishop's orchestra] that he
must come straight to Milan, for he is sure to succeed well here;
but he must come soon. Pray let him know this, for I am anxious
about it.



47.

Milan, Dec. 5,1772.

I have now about fourteen pieces to write, and then I shall have
finished. [Footnote: He alludes to his Milan opera, "Lucio
Silla."] Indeed, the trio and the duet may be considered as four.
I cannot possibly write much, for I have no news, and in the next
place I scarcely know what I am writing, as all my thoughts are
absorbed in my opera, so there is some danger of my writing you a
whole aria instead of a letter. I have learned a new game here,
called mercanti in fiera. As soon as I come home we can play at
it together. I have also learned a new language from Frau von
Taste, which is easy to speak, though troublesome to write, but
still useful. It is, I own, rather a little childish, but will do
capitally for Salzburg. My kind regards to pretty Nandl and to
the canary, for these two and yourself are the most innocent
creatures in our house. Fischietti [the Archbishop's
Capellmeister] will no doubt soon begin to work at his opera
buffa (translated into German, his CRAZY opera!). Addio!

The following letter of Wolfgang's shows the sparkling state of
his spirits, caused by the completion of his opera. At each line
he turns the page, so that one line stands, as it were, on the
head of the other. The father, too, in the joy of his heart that
the arduous work was drawing to a close, and with it his long
journey, writes four lines, one above another, round the edge of
the page, so that the whole forms a framework for a sketch of a
burning heart and four triangles (symbols of fidelity), and a
bird on the wing from whose beak a distich is streaming:--

Oh! fly to seek my child so fair Here, and there, and everywhere!

Wolfgang adds:--



48.

Milan, Dec. 18,1772.

I HOPE, dear sister, that you are well, dear sister. When this
letter reaches you, dear sister, my opera will be in scena, dear
sister. Think of me, dear sister, and try, dear sister, to
imagine with all your might that my dear sister sees and hears it
also. In truth, it is hard to say, as it is now eleven o'clock at
night, but I do believe, and don't at all doubt, that in the
daytime it is brighter than at Easter. My dear sister, to-morrow
we dine with Herr von Mayer; and do you know why? Guess! Because
he invited us. The rehearsal to-morrow is to be in the theatre.
The impresario, Signor Cassiglioni, has entreated me not to say a
word of this to a soul, as all kinds of people would come
crowding in, and that we don't wish. So, my child, I beg, my
child, that you won't say one syllable to any one on the subject,
or too many people would come crowding in, my child. Approposito,
do you know the history that occurred here? Well, I will relate
it to you. We were going home straight from Count Firmiani's, and
when we came into our street we opened our door, and what do you
think happened? We went in. Good-bye, my pet. Your unworthy
brother (frater),

WOLFGANG.



On the 26th of December "an incomparable performance" of "Lucio
Silla" took place; it was eminently successful, and continued to
fill the house night after night in the most surprising way. The
father writes home regularly, and Wolfgang subjoins the usual
postscripts, which, however, at this time contain nothing worth
quoting. We give only part of an Italian letter which he writes
for practice:--



49.

.... Vi prego di dire al Sig. Giovanni Hagenauer da parte mia,
che non dubiti, che andro a veder sicuramente in quella bottega
delle armi, se ci sono quei nomi [?] che lui desidera, e che
senza dubbio doppo averlo trovato le portero meco a Salisburgo.
Mi dispiace che il Sig. Leitgeb e partito tanto tardi da
Salisburgo [see No. 46] che non trovera piu in scena la mia opera
e forte non ci trovera nemeno, se non in viaggio.

Hieri sera era la prima prova coi stromenti della seconda opera,
ma ho sentito solamente il primo atto, perche a secondo mene
andiedi essendo gia tardi. In quest' opera saranno sopra il balco
24 cavalli e . . . mondo di gente, che saro miracolo se non
succede qualche disgrazia. La musica mi piace; se piace al
replico non so, perche alle prime prove non e lecito l' andarci
che alle personne che sono del Teatro. Io spero che domani il mio
padre potra uscir di casa. Sta sera fa cativissimo tempo. La
Signora Teyber e adesso a Bologna e il carnevale venturo recitera
a Turino e l'anno sussiquente poi va a cantare a Napoli.

[Footnote: "Pray say from me to Johannes Hagenauer, that he may
entirely rely on my going to the armorer's shop, to see if I can
procure what he desires, and after getting it I will not fail to
bring it with me to Salzburg. I regret that Herr Leitgeb delayed
so long leaving Salzburg [see No. 46], for he will no longer find
my opera in scena, nor will he find us either unless we meet on
our travels. Yesterday evening was our first rehearsal of the
second opera with instruments, but I only heard the first act,
for I went away at the second, because it was so very late. In
this opera there are to be twenty-four horses and a crowd of
people on the stage at the same time, so it will be surprising if
no accident happens. The music pleases me; whether it will please
others I cannot tell, for no persons but those belonging to the
theatre are permitted to attend the first rehearsals. I hope that
papa will be able to leave the house to-morrow. The weather is
detestable this evening. Madame Teyber is now at Bologna; she is
to act at Turin in the ensuing Carnival, and the year following
she is to sing at Naples."]

After enjoying some more of the amusements of the Carnival, they
arrived again in Salzburg about the middle of March. This place,
or rather their position at court there, was in the highest
degree repugnant to both; so the father, in the course of his
travels, applied to the Grand-Duke of Tuscany for an appointment
for his son. As, however, nothing was to be got in that quarter,
he directed his views to the Imperial capital itself; and thus,
at the end of three months, we find him again with his son in
Vienna. From thence Wolfgang often wrote to his loved ones at
home.



50.

Vienna, August 14,1773.

I HOPE that your Majesty [Footnote 1: O. Jahn remarks that this
epithet is a reminiscence of a fantastic game that often amused
the boy on his journeys. He imagined a kingdom, the inhabitants
of which were endowed with every gift that could make them good
and happy.] enjoys the best state of health; and yet that now and
then--or rather sometimes--or, better still, from time to time--
or, still better, qualche volta, as the Italians say--your
Majesty will impart to me some of your grave and important
thoughts (emanating from that most admirable and solid judgment
which, in addition to beauty, your Majesty so eminently
possesses; and thus, although in such tender years, my Queen
casts into the shade not only the generality of men but even the
gray-haired).

P. S. This is a most sensible production.



51.

Vienna, August 21,1773.

When we contemplate the benefit of time, and yet are not entirely
oblivious of the estimation in which we ought to hold the sun,
then it is quite certain, Heaven be praised! that I am quite
well. My second proposition is of a very different character.
Instead of sun, let us put moon, and instead of benefit, science;
then any one, gifted with a certain amount of reasoning powers,
will at once draw the conclusion that--I am a fool because you
are my sister. How is Miss Bimbles? [the dog.] I beg you will
convey all sorts of amiable messages from me to her. I also send
my kind remembrances to M. Kreibich [conductor of the Imperial
chamber-music], whom we knew at Presburg and also at Vienna; and
very best regards from Her Majesty the Empress, Frau Fischerin,
and Prince Kaunitz. Oidda!

GNAGFLOW TRAZOM.



52.

Vienna, Sept. 15,1773.

WE are quite well, thank God; on this occasion we have contrived
to make time to write to you, although we have so much business
to do. We hope you also are well. Dr. Niderl's death grieved us
very much. I assure you we cried a good deal, and moaned and
groaned. Our kind regards to "Alle gute Geister loben Gott den
Herrn" [to all good spirits who praise the Lord], and to all our
friends. We graciously remain

Yours, WOLFGANG.

Given from our capital of Vienna.



The travellers returned home the end of September, for no
situation was to be found in Vienna either; indeed, they did not
even give a public concert there. Wolfgang remained in his native
town during the whole of the ensuing year, writing instrumental
and church music. At length he received a commission from the
Elector of Bavaria, Maximilian III., to write an opera buffa for
the Carnival of 1775,--"La finta Giardiniera."



53.

Munich, Dec. 28,1774.

My Dearest Sister,

I entreat you not to forget, before your journey, [FOOTNOTE:
Nannerl had also the most eager desire to see the new opera, and
the father at last succeeded in getting a lodging for her in the
large market place, in the house of a widow, "a black-eyed
brunette," Frau von Durst.] to perform your promise,that is, to
make a certain visit. I have my reasons for this. Pray present my
kind regards in that quarter, but in the most impressive and
tender manner--the most tender; and, oh!----but I need not be in
such anxiety on the subject, for I know my sister and her
peculiarly loving nature, and I feel quite convinced that she
will do all she can to give me pleasure--and from self-interest,
too--rather a spiteful hit that! [Nannerl was considered a little
selfish by her family.]



54.

Munich, Dec. 30, 1774.

I BEG my compliments to Roxalana, who is to drink tea this
evening with the Sultan, All sorts of pretty speeches to Madlle.
Mizerl; she must not doubt my love. I have her constantly before
my eyes in her fascinating neglige. I have seen many pretty girls
here, but not one whose beauty can be compared with hers. Do not
forget to bring the variations on Ekart's menuet d'exaude, and
also those on Fischer's minuet. I was at the theatre last night.
The play was "Der Mode nach der Haushaltung," which was admirably
acted. My kind regards to all my friends. I trust that you will
not fail to--Farewell! I hope to see you soon in Munich. Frau von
Durst sends you her remembrances. Is it true that Hagenauer is
become a professor of sculpture in Vienna? Kiss mamma's hand for
me, and now I stop for to-day. Wrap yourself up warmly on your
journey, I entreat, or else you may chance to pass the fourteen
days of your visit in the house, stifling beside a stove, unable
once to move. I see the vivid lightning flash, and fear there
soon will be a crash!

Your brother.



55.

To HIS MOTHER.

Munich, Jan. 11,1775.

WE are all three well, Heaven be praised! I cannot possibly write
much, for I must go forthwith to the rehearsal. Tomorrow the
grand rehearsal takes place, and on the l3th my opera is to be in
scena. I am much vexed that you should cast any slight on Count
Seeau [Intendant of the Munich Theatre], for no one can be more
kind or courteous, and he has more good breeding than many of his
degree in Munich. Herr von Molk was in such a state of wonder and
admiration at the opera seria when he heard it, that we felt
quite ashamed of him, for it clearly showed every one that he had
never in his life seen anything but Salzburg and Innspruck.
Addio!



56.

To HIS MOTHER.

Munich, Jan. 14,1775.

GOD be praised! My opera was given yesterday, the l3th, and
proved so successful that I cannot possibly describe all the
tumult. In the first place, the whole theatre was so crammed that
many people were obliged to go away. After each aria there was
invariably a tremendous uproar and clapping of hands, and cries
of Viva Maestro! Her Serene Highness the Electress and the
Dowager (who were opposite me) also called out Bravo! When the
opera was over, during the interval when all is usually quiet
till the ballet begins, the applause and shouts of Bravo! were
renewed; sometimes there was a lull, but only to recommence
afresh, and so forth. I afterwards went with papa to a room
through which the Elector and the whole court were to pass. I
kissed the hands of the Elector and the Electress and the other
royalties, who were all very gracious. At an early hour this
morning the Prince Bishop of Chiemsee [who had most probably
procured the scrittura for his young friend Wolfgang] sent to
congratulate me that the opera had proved such a brilliant
success in every respect. As to our return home, it is not likely
to be soon, nor should mamma wish it, for she must know well what
a good thing it is to have a little breathing time. We shall come
quite soon enough to----. One most just and undeniable reason is,
that my opera is to be given again on Friday next, and I am very
necessary at the performance, or it might be difficult to
recognize it again. There are very odd ways here. 1000 kisses to
Miss Bimberl [the dog].

The Archbishop of Salzburg, who was very reluctant to admit the
merits of his Concertmeister, was an involuntary witness of the
universal approbation bestowed on Wolfgang's opera, although he
would not go to hear it himself. On the l8th of January, 1775,
Wolfgang added the following lines to his father's letter:--



57.

MY DEAB SlSTER,

[FOOTNOTE: Nannerl had not yet gone home, but was enjoying the
Carnival in various masks.]

How can I help the clock choosing at this moment to strike a
quarter after seven o'clock? It is not papa's fault either. Mamma
will hear all the rest from you. At present there is no fair
sailing for me, as the Archbishop is staying here, though not for
long. It is currently reported that he is to remain till he sets
off again! I only regret that he is not to see the first masked
ball.

Your faithful FRANZ v. NASENBLUT.

Milan, May 5,1756.


Immediately after Ash Wednesday the trio returned to Salzburg,
where Mozart remained uninterruptedly for another year and a
half, actively engaged in the duties of his situation. He wrote
the following letter on the 4th of September, 1776, to the
celebrated Pater Martini in Bologna:--



58.

MOLTO REVDO PADE MAESTRO, PADRONE MIO STIMATISSIMO,-

La venerazione, la stima e il rispetto, che porto verso la di lei
degnissima persona mi spinse di incommodarla colle presente e di
mandargli un debole pezzo di mia musica, rimmettendola alla di
lei maestrale giudicatura. Scrissi l'anno scorso il Carnevale una
opera buffa ("La finta Giardiniera") a Monaco in Baviera. Pochi
giorni avanti la mia partenza di la desiderava S. A. Elletorale
di sentire qualche mia musica in contrapunto: era adunque
obligato di scriver questo Motetto in fretta per dar tempo a
copiar il spartito per Sua Altezza ed a cavar le parti per poter
produrlo la prossima domenica sotto la Messa grande in tempo del
Offertorio. Carissimo e stimatissimo Sigr. P. Maestro! Lei e
ardentemente pregato di dirmi francamente e senza riserva il di
lei parere. Viviamo in questo mondo per imparare sempre
industriosamente, e per mezzo dei raggionamenti di illuminarsi
l'un l'altro e d'affatigarsi di portar via sempre avanti le
scienze e le belle arti. Oh quante e quante volte desidero
d'esser piu vicino per poter parlar e raggionar con Vostra
Paternita molto Revda. Vivo in una paese dove la musica fa
pocchissimo fortuna, benche oltre di quelli che ci hanno
abandonati, ne abbiamo ancora bravissimi professori e
particolarmente compositori di gran fondo, sapere e gusto. Per il
teatro stiamo male per mancanza dei recitanti. Non abbiamo Musici
e non gli averemo si facilmente, giache vogliono esser ben
pagati: e la generosita, non e il nostro difetto. Io mi diverto
intanto a scrivere per la camera e per la chiesa: e ne son quivi
altri due bravissimi contrapuntisti, cioe il Sgr. Haydn e
Adlgasser. Il mio padre e maestro della chiesa Metropolitana, che
mi da l'occasione di scrivere per la chiesa, quanto che ne
voglio. Per altro il mio padre gia 36 anni in servizio di questa
Corte e sapendo, che questo Arcivescovo non puo e non vuol vedere
gente avanzata in eta, non lo se ne prende a core, si e messo
alla letteratura per altro gia suo studio favorito. La nostra
musica di chiesa e assai differente di quella d'Italia e sempre
piu, che una Messa con tutto il Kyrie, Gloria, Credo, la Sonata
all' Epistola, l'Offertorio osia Motetto, Sanctus ed Agnus Dei,
ed anche la piu solenne, quando dice la Messa il Principe stesso,
non ha da durare che al piu longo 3 quarti d'ora. Ci vuole un
studio particolare per queste sorte di compositione, e che deve
pero essere una Messa con tutti stromenti--Trombe di guerra,
Tympani ecc. Ah! che siamo si lontani Carissmo Sgr. P. Maestro,
quante cose che avrai a dirgli!--Reverisco devotamente tutti i
Sgri. Filarmonici: mi raccommando via sempre nelle grazie di lei
e non cesso d'affligermi nel vedermi lontano dalla persona del
mondo che maggiormente amo, venero e stimo, e di cui
inviolabilmente mi protesto di V. Pta molto Rda

umilissmo e devotssmo servitore,

WOLFGANGO AMADEO MOZART.

Salisburgo, 4 Settembre, 1776.

[FOOTNOTE:

To Father Martini.

"Salzburg, Sept. 4,1776.

"MOST REVEREND AND ESTEEMED FATHER AND MAESTRO,--

"The veneration, the esteem, and the respect I feel for your
illustrious person, induce me to intrude on you with this letter,
and also to send you a small portion of my music, which I venture
to submit to your masterly judgment. Last year, at Monaco, in
Bavaria, I wrote an opera buffa ("La finta Giardiniera") for the
Carnival. A few days previous to my departure from thence, his
Electoral Highness wished to hear some of my contrapuntal music;
I was therefore obliged to write this motett in haste, to allow
time for the score to be copied for his Highness, and to arrange
the parts so that it might be produced on the following Sunday at
grand mass at the offertory. Most dear and highly esteemed
Maestro, I do entreat you to give me unreservedly your candid
opinion of the motett. We live in this world in order always to
learn industriously, and to enlighten each other by means of
discussion, and to strive vigorously to promote the progress of
science and the fine arts. Oh, how many and many a time have I
desired to be nearer you, that I might converse and discuss with
your Reverence! I live in a country where music has very little
success, though, exclusive of those who have forsaken us, we have
still admirable professors, and more particularly composers of
great solidity, knowledge, and taste. We are rather badly off at
the theatre from the want of actors. We have no MUSICI, nor shall
we find it very easy to get any, because they insist upon being
well paid, and generosity is not a failing of ours. I amuse
myself in the mean time by writing church and chamber music, and
we have two excellent contrapuntists here, Haydn and Adlgasser.
My father is maestro at the Metropolitan church, which gives me
an opportunity to write for the church as much as I please.
Moreover, my father has been thirty-six years in the service of
this court, and knowing that our present Archbishop neither can
nor will endure the sight of elderly people, he does not take it
to heart, but devotes himself to literature, which was always his
favorite pursuit Our church music is rather different from that
of Italy, and the more so, as a mass including the Kyne, Gloria,
Credo, the Sonata all Epistola, the Offertory or Motett, Sanctus,
and Agnus Dei, and even a solemn mass, when the Prince himself
officiates, must never last more than three-quarters of an hour.
A particular course of study is required for this class of
composition. And what must such a mass be, scored with all the
instruments, war-drums, cymbals, &c, &c! Oh! why are we so far
apart, dearest Signor Maestro? for how many things I have to say
to you! I devoutly revere all the Signori Filarmonici. I venture
to recommend myself to your good opinion, I shall never cease
regretting being so distant from the person in the world whom I
most love, venerate, and esteem. I beg to subscribe myself,
reverend Father, always your most humble and devoted servant,

"WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART"



SECOND PART.
MUNICH, AUGSBURG, MANNHEIM.
SEPTEMBER 1771 TO MAECH 1778.



PART II.



On the 22d of December, 1777, Mozart's father wrote as follows to
Padre Martini in Bologna:--"My son has been now five years in the
service of our Prince, at a mere nominal salary, hoping that by
degrees his earnest endeavors and any talents he may possess,
combined with the utmost industry and most unremitting study,
would be rewarded; but in this hope we find ourselves deceived. I
forbear all allusion to our Prince's mode of thinking and acting;
but he was not ashamed to declare that my son knew nothing, and
that he ought to go to the musical training school in Naples to
learn music. And why did he say all this? In order to intimate
that a young man should not be so absurd as to believe that he
deserved a rather higher salary after such a decisive verdict had
issued from the lips of a prince. This has induced me to sanction
my son giving up his present situation. He therefore left
Salzburg on the 23d of September" [with his mother].



59.

Wasserburg, Sept. 23, l777.

Mon Tres-Cher Pere,--

God be praised! we reached Waging, Stain, Ferbertshaim, and
Wasserburg safely. Now for a brief report of our journey. When we
arrived at the city gates, we were kept waiting for nearly a
quarter of an hour till they could be thrown open for us, as they
were under repair. Near Schinn we met a drove of cows, and one of
these very remarkable, for each side was a different color, which
we never before saw. When at last we got to Schinn, we met a
carriage, which stopped, and ecce, our postilion called out we
must change. "I don't care," said I. Mamma and I were parleying,
when a portly gentleman came up, whose physiognomy I at once
recognized; he was a Memmingen merchant. He stared at me for some
time, and at last said, "You surely are Herr Mozart?" "At your
service," said I; "I know you, too, by sight, but not your name.
I saw you, a year ago, at Mirabell's [the palace garden in
Salzburg] at a concert." He then told me his name, which, thank
God! I have forgotten; but I retained one of probably more
importance to me. When I saw this gentleman in Salzburg, he was
accompanied by a young man whose brother was now with him, and
who lives in Memmingen. His name is Herr Unhold, and he pressed
me very much to come to Memmingen if possible. We sent a hundred
thousand loves to papa by them, and to my sister, the madcap,
which they promised to deliver without fail. This change of
carriages was a great bore to me, for I wished to send a letter
back from Waging by the postilion. We then (after a slight meal)
had the honor of being conveyed as far as Stain, by the aforesaid
post-horses, in an hour and a half. At Waging I was alone for a
few minutes with the clergyman, who looked quite amazed, knowing
nothing of our history. From Stain we were driven by a most
tiresome phlegmatic postilion--N. B., in driving I mean; we
thought we never were to arrive at the next stage. At last we did
arrive, as you may see from my writing this letter. (Mamma is
half asleep.) From Ferbertshaim to Wasserburg all went on well.
Viviamo come i principi; we want nothing except you, dear papa.
Well, this is the will of God; no doubt all will go on right. I
hope to hear that papa is as well as I am and as happy. Nothing
comes amiss to me; I am quite a second papa, and look after
everything.[Footnote: The father had been very uneasy at the idea
of allowing the inexperienced youth, whose unsuspicious good-
nature exposed him still more to danger, to travel alone; for the
mother also was not very expert in travelling.] I settled from
the first to pay the postilions, for I can talk to such fellows
better than mamma. At the Stern, in Wasserburg, we are capitally
served; I am treated here like a prince. About half an hour ago
(mamma being engaged at the time) the Boots knocked at the door
to take my orders about various things, and I gave them to him
with the same grave air that I have in my portrait. Mamma is just
going to bed. We both beg that papa will be careful of his
health, not go out too early, nor fret, [Footnote: The Father was
strongly disposed to hypochondria.] but laugh and be merry and in
good spirits. We think the Mufti H. C. [the Archbishop Hieronymus
Colloredo] a MUFF, but we know God to be compassionate, merciful,
and loving. I kiss papa's hands a thousand times, and embrace my
SISTER MADCAP as often as I have to-day taken snuff. I think I
have left my diplomas at home? [his appointment at court.] I beg
you will send them to me soon. My pen is rude, and I am not
refined.



60.

Munich, Sept. 26,1777.

WE arrived safely in Munich on the afternoon of the 24th, at
half-past four o'clock. A complete novelty to me was being
obliged to drive to the Custom House, escorted by a grenadier
with a fixed bayonet. The first person we knew, who met us when
driving, was Signer Consoli; he recognized me at once, and showed
the utmost joy at seeing me again. Next day he called on us. I
cannot attempt to describe the delight of Herr Albert [the
"learned landlord" of the Black Eagle, on the Kaufinger Gasse,
now Hotel Detzer]; he is indeed a truly honest man, and a very
good friend of ours. On my arrival I went to the piano, and did
not leave it till dinner-time. Herr Albert was not at home, but
he soon came in, and we went down to dinner together. There I met
M. Sfeer and a certain secretary, an intimate friend of his; both
send their compliments to you. Though tired by our journey, we
did not go to bed till late; we, however, rose next morning at
seven o'clock. My hair was in such disorder that I could not go
to Count Seeau's till half-past ten o'clock. When I got there I
was told that he had driven out to the chasse. Patience! In the
mean time I wished to call on Chorus-master Bernard, but he had
gone to the country with Baron Schmid. I found Herr von Belvall
deeply engaged in business; he sent you a thousand compliments.
Rossi came to dinner, and at two o'clock Consoli, and at three
arrived Becke [a friend of Mozart's and an admirable flute-
player], and also Herr von Belvall. I paid a visit to Frau von
Durst [with whom Nannerl had lived], who now lodges with the
Franciscans. At six o'clock I took a short walk with Herr Becke.
There is a Professor Huber here, whom you may perhaps remember
better than I do; he says that the last time he either saw or
heard me was at Vienna, at Herr von Mesmer's, junior. He is
neither tall nor short, pale, with silvery-gray hair, and his
physiognomy rather like that of Herr Unterbereiter. This
gentleman is vice-intendant of the theatre; his occupation is to
read through all the comedies to be acted, to improve or to
spoil, to add to or to put them aside. He comes every evening to
Albert's, and often talks to me. To-day, Friday, the 2eth, I
called on Count Seeau at half-past eight o'clock. This was what
passed. As I was going into the house I met Madame Niesser, the
actress, just coming out, who said, "I suppose you wish to see
the Count?" "Yes!" "He is still in his garden, and Heaven knows
when he may come!" I asked her where the garden was. "As I must
see him also," said she, "let us go together." We had scarcely
left the house when we saw the Count coming towards us about
twelve paces off; he recognized and instantly named me. He was
very polite, and seemed already to know all that had taken place
about me. We went up the steps together slowly and alone; I told
him briefly the whole affair. He said that I ought at once to
request an audience of his Highness the Elector, but that, if I
failed in obtaining it, I must make a written statement. I
entreated him to keep this all quite private, and he agreed to do
so. When I remarked to him that there really was room for a
genuine composer here, he said, "I know that well." I afterwards
went to the Bishop of Chiemsee, and was with him for half an
hour. I told him everything, and he promised to do all he could
for me in the matter. At one o'clock he drove to Nymphenburg, and
declared positively he would speak to the Electress. On Sunday
the Count comes here. Herr Joannes Kronner has been appointed
Vice-Concertmeister, which he owes to a blunt speech of his. He
has produced two symphonies--Deo mene liberi [God preserve me
from such]--of his own composition. The Elector asked him, "Did
you really compose these?" "Yes, your Royal Highness!" "From whom
did you learn?" "From a schoolmaster in Switzerland, where so
much importance is attached to the study of composition. This
schoolmaster taught me more than all your composers here, put
together, could teach me." Count Schonborn and his Countess, a
sister of the Archbishop [of Salzburg], passed through here to-
day. I chanced to be at the play at the time. Herr Albert, in the
course of conversation, told them that I was here, and that I had
given up my situation. They were all astonishment, and positively
refused to believe him when he said that my salary, of blessed
memory, was only twelve florins thirty kreuzers! They merely
changed horses, and would gladly have spoken with me, but I was
too late to meet them. Now I must inquire what you are doing, and
how you are. Mamma and I hope that you are quite well. I am still
in my very happiest humor; my head feels as light as a feather
since I got away from that chicanery. I have grown fatter
already.



61.

Munich, Sept. 29, 1777.

TRUE enough, a great many kind friends, but unluckily most of
them have little or nothing in their power. I was with Count
Seeau yesterday, at half-past ten o'clock, and found him graver
and less natural than the first time; but it was only in
appearance, for to-day I was at Prince Zeill's [Bishop of
Chiemsee--No. 56], who, with all courtesy, said to me, "I don't
think we shall effect much here. During dinner, at Nymphenburg, I
spoke privately to the Elector, who replied: 'It is too soon at
this moment; he must leave this and go to Italy and become
famous. I do not actually reject him, but these are too early
days as yet.'" There it is! Most of these grandees have such
paroxysms of enthusiasm for Italy. Still, he advised me to go to
the Elector, and to place my case before him as I had previously
intended. I spoke confidentially at dinner to-day with Herr
Woschitka [violoncellist in the Munich court orchestra, and a
member of the Elector's private band], and he appointed me to
come to-morrow at nine o'clock, when he will certainly procure me
an audience. We are very good friends now. He insisted on knowing
the name of my informant; but I said to him, "Rest assured that I
am your friend and shall continue to be so; I am in turn equally
convinced of your friendship, so you must be satisfied with
this." But to return to my narrative. The Bishop of Chiemsee also
spoke to the Electress when tete-a-tete with her. She shrugged
her shoulders, and said she would do her best, but was very
doubtful as to her success. I now return to Count Seeau, who
asked Prince Zeill (after he had told him everything). "Do you
know whether Mozart has not enough from his family to enable him
to remain here with a little assistance? I should really like to
keep him." Prince Zeill answered: "I don't know, but I doubt it
much; all you have to do is to speak to himself on the subject.
"This, then, was the cause of Count Seeau being so thoughtful on
the following day. I like being here, and I am of the same
opinion with many of my friends, that if I could only remain here
for a year or two, I might acquire both money and fame by my
works, and then more probably be sought by the court than be
obliged to seek it myself. Since my return here Herr Albert has a
project in his head, the fulfilment of which does not seem to me
impossible. It is this: He wishes to form an association of ten
kind friends, each of these to subscribe 1 ducat (50 gulden)
monthly, 600 florins a year. If in addition to this I had even
200 florins per annum from Count Seeau, this would make 800
florins altogether. How does papa like this idea? Is it not
friendly? Ought not I to accept it if they are in earnest? I am
perfectly satisfied with it; for I should be near Salzburg, and
if you, dearest papa, were seized with a fancy to leave Salzburg
(which from my heart I wish you were) and to pass your life in
Munich, how easy and pleasant would it be! For if we are obliged
to live in Salzburg with 504 florins, surely we might live in
Munich with 800.

To-day, the 30th, after a conversation with Herr Woschitka, I
went to court by appointment. Every one was in hunting-costume.
Baron Kern was the chamberlain on service. I might have gone
there last night, but I could not offend M. Woschitka, who
himself offered to find me an opportunity of speaking to the
Elector. At 10 o'clock he took me into a narrow little room,
through which his Royal Highness was to pass on his way to hear
mass, before going to hunt. Count Seeau went by, and greeted me
very kindly: "How are you, dear Mozart?" When the Elector came up
to me, I said, "Will your Royal Highness permit me to pay my
homage and to offer your Royal Highness my services?" "So you
have finally left Salzburg?" "I have left it forever, your Royal
Highness. I only asked leave to make a journey, and being
refused, I was obliged to take this step, although I have long
intended to leave Salzburg, which is no place for me, I feel
sure." "Good heavens! you are quite a young man. But your father
is still in Salzburg?" "Yes, your Royal Highness; he humbly lays
his homage at your feet, &c., &c. I have already been three times
in Italy. I have written three operas, and am a member of the
Bologna Academy; I underwent a trial where several maestri toiled
and labored for four or five hours, whereas I finished my work in
one. This is a sufficient testimony that I have abilities to
serve any court. My greatest wish is to be appointed by your
Royal Highness, who is himself such a great &c., &c." "But, my
good young friend, I regret that there is not a single vacancy.
If there were only a vacancy!" "I can assure your Royal Highness
that I would do credit to Munich." "Yes, but what does that avail
when there is no vacancy?" This he said as he was moving on; so I
bowed and took leave of his Royal Highness. Herr Woschitka
advises me to place myself often in the way of the Elector. This
afternoon I went to Count Salern's. His daughter is a maid of
honor, and was one of the hunting-party. Ravani and I were in the
street when the whole procession passed. The Elector and the
Electress noticed me very kindly. Young Countess Salern
recognized me at once, and waved her hand to me repeatedly. Baron
Rumling, whom I had previously seen in the antechamber, never was
so courteous to me as on this occasion. I will soon write to you
what passed with Salern. He was very kind, polite, and
straightforward.--P. S. Ma tres-chere soeur, next time I mean to
write you a letter all for yourself. My remembrances to B. C. M.
R. and various other letters of the alphabet. Adieu! A man built
a house here and inscribed on it: "Building is beyond all doubt
an immense pleasure, but I little thought that it would cost so
much treasure." During the night some one wrote underneath, "You
ought first to have counted the cost."



62.

Munich, Oct. 2,1777.

YESTERDAY, October lst, I was again at Count Salern's, and to-day
I even dined with him. I have played a great deal during the last
three days, and with right good will too. Papa must not, however,
imagine that I like to be at Count Salern's on account of the
young lady; by no means, for she is unhappily in waiting, and
therefore never at home, but I am to see her at court to-morrow
morning, at ten o'clock, in company with Madame Hepp, formerly
Madlle. Tosson. On Saturday the court leaves this, and does not
return till the 20th. To-morrow I am to dine with Madame and
Madlle. de Branca, the latter being a kind of half pupil of mine,
for Sigl seldom comes, and Becke, who usually accompanies her on
the flute, is not here. On the three days that I was at Count
Salern's I played a great many things extempore--two Cassations
[Divertimentos] for the Countess, and the finale and Rondo, and
the latter by heart. You cannot imagine the delight this causes
Count Salern. He understands music, for he was constantly saying
Bravo! while other gentlemen were taking snuff, humming and
hawing, and clearing their throats, or holding forth. I said to
him, "How I do wish the Elector were only here, that he might
hear me play! He knows nothing of me--he does not know what I can
do. How sad it is that these great gentlemen should believe what
any one tells them, and do not choose to judge for themselves!
BUT IT IS ALWAYS SO. Let him put me to the test. He may assemble
all the composers in Munich, and also send in quest of some from
Italy and France, Germany, and England and Spain, and I will
undertake to write against them all." I related to him all that
had occurred to me in Italy, and begged him, if the conversation
turned on me, to bring in these things. He said, "I have very
little influence, but the little that is in my power I will do
with pleasure." He is also decidedly of opinion that if I could
only remain here, the affair would come right of itself. It would
not be impossible for me to contrive to live, were I alone here,
for I should get at least 300 florins from Count Seeau. My board
would cost little, for I should be often invited out; and even
were it not so, Albert would always be charmed to see me at
dinner in his house. I eat little, drink water, and for dessert
take only a little fruit and a small glass of wine. Subject to
the advice of my kind friends, I would make the following
contract with Count Seeau:--I would engage to produce every year
four German operas, partly buffe and partly serie; from each of
these I should claim the profits of one performance, for such is
the custom here. This alone would bring me in 500 florins, which
along with my salary would make up 800 florins, but in all
probability more; for Reiner, an actor and singer, cleared 200
florins by his benefit, and I am VERY MUCH BELOVED HERE, and how
much more so should I be if I con-tributed to the elevation of
the national theatre of Germany in music! And this would
certainly be the case with me, for I was inspired with the most
eager desire to write when I heard the German operettas. The name
of the first singer here is Keiserin; her father is cook to a
count here; she is a very pleasing girl, and pretty on the stage;
I have not yet seen her near. She is a native of this place. When
I heard her it was only her third appearance on the stage. She
has a fine voice, not powerful, though by no means weak, very
pure, and a good intonation. Her instructor is Valesi; and her
style of singing shows that her master knows how to sing as well
as how to teach. When she sustains her voice for a couple of
bars, I am quite surprised at the beauty of her crescendo and
decrescendo. She as yet takes her shakes slowly, and this I
highly approve of, for it will be all the more pure and clear if
she ever wishes to take it quicker; besides, it is easier when
quick. She is a great favorite with the people here, and with me.

Mamma was in the pit; she went as early as half-past four o'clock
to get a place. I, however, did not go till half-past six
o'clock, for I can go to any box I please, being pretty well
known. I was in the Brancas' box; I looked at Keiserin with my
opera-glass, and at times she drew tears from my eyes. I often
called out bravo, bravissimo, for I always remembered that it was
only her third appearance. The piece was Das Fischermadchen, a
very good translation of Piccini's opera, with his music. As yet
they have no original pieces, but are now anxious soon to give a
German opera seria, and a strong wish prevails that I should
compose it. The aforesaid Professor Huber is one of those who
wish this. I shall now go to bed, for I can sit up no longer. It
is just ten o'clock. Baron Rumling lately paid me the following
compliment: "The theatre is my delight--good actors and
actresses, good singers, and a clever composer, such as
yourself." This is indeed only talk, and words are not of much
value, but he never before spoke to me in this way.

I write this on the 3d of October. To-morrow the court departs,
and does not return till the 20th. If it had remained here, I
would have taken the step I intended, and stayed on here for a
time; but as it is, I hope to resume my journey with mamma next
Tuesday. But meanwhile the project of the associated friends,
which I lately wrote to you about, may be realized, so that when
we no longer care to travel we shall have a resource to fall back
upon. Herr von Krimmel was to-day with the Bishop of Chiemsee,
with whom he has a good deal to do on the subject of salt. He is
a strange man; here he is called "your Grace,"--that is, THE
LACKEYS do so. Having a great desire that I should remain here,
he spoke very zealously to the Prince in my favor. He said to me,
"Only let me alone; I will speak to the Prince, and I have a
right to do so, for I have done many things to oblige him." The
Prince promised him that I should POSITIVELY be appointed, but
the affair cannot be so quickly settled. On the return of the
court he is to speak to the Elector with all possible earnestness
and zeal. At eight o'clock this morning I called on Count Seeau.
I was very brief, and merely said, "I have only come, your
Excellency, to explain my case clearly. I have been told that I
ought to go to Italy, which is casting a reproach on me. I was
sixteen months in Italy, I have written three operas, and all
this is notorious enough. What further occurred, your Excellency
will see from these papers." And after showing him the diplomata,
I added, "I only show these and say this to your Excellency that,
in the event of my being spoken of, and any injustice done me,
your Excellency may with good grounds take my part." He asked me
if I was now going to France. I said I intended to remain in
Germany; by this, however, he supposed I meant Munich, and said,
with a merry laugh, "So you are to stay here after all? " I
replied, "No! to tell you the truth, I should like to have
stayed, if the Elector had favored me with a small sum, so that I
might then have offered my compositions to your Excellency devoid
of all interested motives. It would have been a pleasure to me to
do this." At these words he half lifted his skull-cap.

At ten o'clock I went to court to call on Countess Salern. I
dined afterwards with the Brancas. Herr Geheimrath von Branca,
having been invited by the French Ambassador, was not at home. He
is called "your Excellency." Countess Salern is a Frenchwoman,
and scarcely knows a word of German; so I have always been in the
habit of talking French to her. I do so quite boldly, and she
says that I don't speak at all badly, and that I have the good
habit of speaking slowly, which makes me more easily understood.
She is a most excellent person, and very well-bred. The daughter
plays nicely, but fails in time. I thought this arose from want
of ear on her part, but I find I can blame no one but her
teacher, who is too indulgent and too easily satisfied. I
practised with her to-day, and I could pledge myself that if she
were to learn from me for a couple of months, she would play both
well and accurately.

At four o'clock I went to Frau von Tosson's, where I found mamma
and also Frau von Hepp. I played there till eight o'clock, and
after that we went home; and at half-past nine a small band of
music arrived, consisting of five persons--two clarionet-players,
two horns, and one bassoon. Herr Albert (whose name-day is to-
morrow) arranged this music in honor of me and himself. They
played rather well together, and were the same people whom we
hear during dinner at Albert's, but it is well known that they
are trained by Fiala. They played some of his pieces, and I must
say they are very pretty: he has some excellent ideas. To-morrow
we are to have a small musical party together, where I am to
play. (Nota bene, on that miserable piano! oh, dear! oh, dear!
oh, dear!) I beg you will excuse my horrid writing, but ink,
haste, sleep, and dreams are all against me. I am now and forever
amen, your dutiful son,

A. W. MOZART.



63.

Munich, Oct. 6, 1777.

Mamma cannot write; in the first place, she is not inclined, and,
secondly, she has a headache. So I must hold the pen for her and
keep faith with her. I am just going with the Professor to call
on Madlle. Keiserin. Yesterday we had in our house a clerical
wedding, or altum tempus ecclesiasticum. There was dancing, but I
only danced four minuets, and was in my own room again by eleven
o'clock, for, out of fifty young ladies, there was only one who
danced in time--Madlle. Kaser, a sister of Count Perusa's
secretary. The Professor thought fit to leave me in the lurch, so
I did not go to Madlle. Keiserin, because I don't know where she
lives. Last Saturday, the 4th, on the stately and solemn occasion
of the name-day of his Royal Highness the Archduke Albert, we had
a select music-party at home, which commenced at half-past three
o'clock and finished at eight. M. Dubreil, whom papa no doubt
remembers, was also present; he is a pupil of Tartini's. In the
forenoon he gave a lesson on the violin to the youngest son,
Carl, and I chanced to come in at the time, I never gave him
credit for much talent, but I saw that he took great pains in
giving his lesson; and when we entered into conversation about
violin, concert, and orchestral playing, he reasoned very well,
and was always of my opinion, so I retracted my former sentiments
with regard to him, and was persuaded that I should find him play
well in time, and a correct violinist in the orchestra. I,
therefore, invited him to be so kind as to attend our little
music rehearsal that afternoon. We played, first of all, the two
quintets of Haydn, but to my dismay I could scarcely hear
Dubreil, who could not play four continuous bars without a
mistake. He could never find the positions, and he was no good
friend to the sospirs [short pauses]. The only good thing was
that he spoke politely and praised the quintets; otherwise--As it
was, I said nothing to him, but he kept constantly saying
himself, "I beg your pardon, but really I am out again! the thing
is puzzling, but fine!" I invariably repIied, "It does not in the
least signify; we are only among ourselves." I then played the
concertos in C, in B, and in E flat, and after that a trio of
mine. This was finely accompanied, truly! In the adagio I was
obliged to play six bars of his part. As a finale, I played my
last divertimento in B; they all pricked up their ears. I played
as if I had been the greatest violin-player in all Europe.

The Sunday after, at three o'clock, we were at a certain Herr von
Hamm's. The Bishop of Chiemsee set off to-day for Salzburg. N.
B.--I send my sister, by him, "6 duetti a clavicembalo e
violino," by Schuster. I have often played them here; they are by
no means bad. If I remain long enough, I intend to compose six in
this style, for it is much liked here.



64.

Munich, Oct. 11, 1777.

WHY have I not as yet written anything about Misliweczeck? [See
No. 43.] Because I was only too glad not to think of him; for
when he is spoken of I invariably hear how highly he praises me,
and what a kind and true friend he is of mine; but then follow
pity and lamentation. He was de-cribed to me, and deeply was I
distressed. How could I bear that Misliweczeck, my intimate
friend, should be in the same town, nay, even in the same
corner of the world with me, and neither see him nor speak to
him? Impossible! so I resolved to go to visit him. On the
previous day, I called on the manager of the Duke's Hospital to
ask if I might see my friend in the garden, which I thought best,
though the doctors assured me there was no longer any risk of
infection. The manager agreed to my proposal, and said I should
find him in the garden between eleven and twelve o'clock, and, if
he was not there when I came, to send for him. Next day I went
with Herr von Hamm, secretary in the Crown Office, (of whom I
shall speak presently,) and mamma to the Duke's Hospital. Mamma
went into the Hospital church, and we into the garden.
Misliweczeck was not there, so we sent him a message. I saw him
coming across, and knew him at once from his manner of walking. I
must tell you that he had already sent me his remembrances by
Herr Heller, a violoncello-player, and begged me to visit him
before I left Munich. When he came up to me, we shook hands
cordially. "You see," said he, "how unfortunate I am." These
words and his appearance, which papa is already aware of from
description, so went to my heart that I could only say, with
tears in my eyes, "I pity you from my heart, my dear friend." He
saw how deeply I was affected, so rejoined quite cheerfully, "Now
tell me what you are doing; when I heard that you were in Munich,
I could scarcely believe it; how could Mozart be here and not
long ago have come to see me?" "I hope you will forgive me, but I
had such a number of visits to make, and I have so many kind
friends here." "I feel quite sure that you have indeed many kind
friends, but a truer friend than myself you cannot have." He
asked me whether papa had told me anything of a letter he had
received. I said, "Yes, he did write to me," (I was quite
confused, and trembled so much in every limb that I could
scarcely speak,) "but he gave me no details." He then told me
that Signor Gaetano Santoro, the Neapolitan impresario, was
obliged, owing to impegni and protezione, to give the composition
of the opera for this Carnival to a certain Maestro Valentini;
but he added, "Next year he has three at liberty, one of which is
to be at my service. But as I have already composed six times for
Naples, I don't in the least mind undertaking the less promising
one, and making over to you the best libretto, viz. the one for
the Carnival. God knows whether I shall be able to travel by that
time, but if not, I shall send back the scrittura. The company
for next year is good, being all people whom I have recommended.
You must know that I have such influence in Naples that, when I
say engage such a one, they do so at once." Marquesi is the primo
uomo, whom he, and indeed all Munich too, praises very highly;
Marchiani is a good prima donna; and there is a tenor, whose name
I cannot recall, but Misliweczeck says he is the best in all
Italy. He also said, "I do beg of you to go to Italy; there one
is esteemed and highly prized." And in truth he is right. When I
come to reflect on the subject, in no country have I received
such honors, or been so esteemed, as in Italy, and nothing
contributes more to a man's fame than to have written Italian
operas, and especially for Naples. He said he would write a
letter for me to Santoro, which I was to copy out when I went to
see him next day; but finding it impossible to return, he sent me
a sketch of the letter to-day. I was told that when Misliweczeck
heard people here speaking of Becke, or other performers on the
piano, he invariably said, "Let no one deceive himself; none can
play like Mozart; in Italy, where the greatest masters are, they
speak of no one but Mozart; when his name is mentioned, not a
word is said of others." I can now write the letter to Naples
when I please; but, indeed, the sooner the better. I should,
however, first like to have the opinion of that highly discreet
Hofcapellmeister, Herr von Mozart. I have the most ardent desire
to write another opera. The distance is certainly great, but the
period is still a long way off when I am to write this opera, and
there may be many changes before then. I think I might at all
events undertake it. If, in the mean time, I get no situation,
eh, bien! I shall then have a resource in Italy. I am at all
events certain to receive 100 ducats in the Carnival; and when I
have once written for Naples I shall be sought for everywhere. As
papa well knows, there is an opera buffa in Naples in spring,
summer, and autumn, for which I might write for the sake of
practice, not to be quite idle. It is true that there is not much
to be got by this, but still there is something, and it would be
the means of gaining more honor and reputation than by giving a
hundred concerts in Germany, and I am far happier when I have
something to compose, which is my chief delight and passion; and
if I get a situation anywhere, or have hopes of one, the
scrittura would be a great recommendation to me, and excite a
sensation, and cause me to be more thought of. This is mere talk,
but still I say what is in my heart. If papa gives me any good
grounds to show that I am wrong, then I will give it up, though,
I own, reluctantly. Even when I hear an opera discussed, or am in
a theatre myself and hear voices, oh! I really am beside myself!

To-morrow, mamma and I are to meet Misliweczeck in the Hospital
garden to take leave of him; for he wished me last time to fetch
mamma out of church, as he said he should like to see the mother
of so great a virtuoso. My dear papa, do write to him as often as
you have time to do so; you cannot confer a greater pleasure on
him, for the man is quite forsaken. Sometimes he sees no one for
a whole week, and he said to me, "I do assure you it does seem so
strange to me to see so few people; in Italy I had company every
day." He looks thin, of course, but is still full of fire and
life and genius, and the same kind, animated person he always
was. People talk much of his oratorio of "Abraham and Isaac,"
which he produced here. He has just completed (with the exception
of a few arias) a Cantata, or Serenata, for Lent; and when he was
at the worst he wrote an opera for Padua. Herr Heller is just
come from him. When I wrote to him yesterday I sent him the
Serenata that I wrote in Salzburg: for the Archduke Maximilian
["Il Re Pastore"].

Now to turn to something else. Yesterday I went with mamma
immediately after dinner to take coffee with the two Fraulein von
Freysinger. Mamma, however, took none, but drank two bottles of
Tyrolese wine. At three o'clock she went home again to make
preparations for our journey. I, however, went with the two
ladies to Herr von Hamm's, whose three young ladies each played a
concerto, and I one of Aichner's prima vista, and then went on
extemporizing. The teacher of these little simpletons, the
Demoiselles Hamm, is a certain clerical gentleman of the name of
Schreier. He is a good organ-player, but no pianist. He kept
staring at me with an eye-glass. He is a reserved kind of man who
does not talk much; he patted me on the shoulder, sighed, and
said, "Yes--you are--you understand--yes--it is true--you are an
out-and-outer!" By the by, can you recall the name of Freysingen-
-the papa of the two pretty girls I mentioned? He says he knows
you well, and that he studied with you. He particularly remembers
Messenbrunn, where papa (this was quite new to me) played most
incomparably on the organ. He said, "It was quite startling to
see the pace at which both hands and feet went, but quite
inimitable; a thorough master indeed; my father thought a great
deal of him; and how he humbugged the priests about entering the
Church! You are just what he was then, as like as possible; only
he was a degree shorter when I knew him." A propos, a certain
Hofrath Effeln sends you his kind regards; he is one of the best
Hofraths here, and would long ago have been made chancellor but
for one defect--TIPPLING. When we saw him for the first time at
Albert's, both mamma and I thought, "What an odd-looking fish!"
Just imagine a very tall man, stout and corpulent, and a
ridiculous face. When he crosses the room to another table, he
folds both hands on his stomach, stoops very low, and then draws
himself up again, and makes little nods; and when this is over he
draws back his right foot, and does this to each individual
separately. He says that he knows papa intimately. I am now going
for a little to the play. Next time I will write more fully, but
I can't possibly go on to-day, for my fingers do ache uncommonly.

Munich, October 11th, at 1/4 to 12 at night, I write as
follows:--I have been at the Drittl comedy, but only went in time
for the ballet, or rather the pantomime, which I had not before
seen. It is called "Das von der fur
Girigaricanarimanarischaribari verfertigte Ei." It was very good
and funny. We are going to-morrow to Augsburg on account of
Prince Taxis not being at Ratisbon but at Teschingen. He is, in
fact, at present at his country-seat, which is, however, only an
hour from Teschingen. I send my sister, with this, four preludes;
she will see and hear for herself the different keys into which
they lead. My compliments to all my kind friends, particularly to
young Count Arco, to Madlle. Sallerl, and to my best of all
friends, Herr Bullinger; I do beg that next Sunday at the usual
eleven-o'clock music he will be so good as to make an
authoritative oration in my name, and present my regards to all
the members of the orchestra and exhort them to industry, that I
may not one day be accused of being a humbug, for I have
everywhere extolled their orchestra, and I intend always to do
so.



65.

Augsburg, Oct. 14, 1777.

I HAVE made no mistake in my date, for I write before dinner, and
I think that next Friday, the day after to-morrow, we shall be
off again. Pray hear how generous the gentlemen of Augsburg are.
In no place was I ever so overwhelmed with marks of distinction
as here. My first visit was to the Stadtpfleger Longo Tabarro
[Burgomaster Langenmantl]. My cousin, [Footnote: Leopold Mozart
had a brother in Augsburg, a bookbinder, whose daughter, "das
Basle" (the cousin), was two years younger than Mozart.] a good,
kind, honest man and worthy citizen, went with me, and had the
honor to wait in the hall like a footman till my interview with
the high and mighty Stadtpfleger was over. I did not fail first
of all to present papa's respectful compliments. He deigned
graciously to remember you, and said, "And pray how have things
gone with him?" "Vastly well, God be praised!" I instantly
rejoined, "and I hope things have also gone well with you?" He
then became more civil, and addressed me in the third person, so
I called him "Sir"; though, indeed, I had done so from the first.
He gave me no peace till I went up with him to see his son-in-law
(on the second floor), my cousin meanwhile having the pleasure of
waiting in the staircase-hall. I was obliged to control myself
with all my might, or I must have given some polite hint about
this. On going upstairs I had the satisfaction of playing for
nearly three-quarters of an hour on a good clavichord of Stein's,
in the presence of the stuck-up young son, and his prim
condescending wife, and the simple old lady. I first
extemporized, and then played all the music he had, prima, vista,
and among others some very pretty pieces of Edlmann's. Nothing
could be more polite than they all were, and I was equally so,
for my rule is to behave to people just as they behave to me; I
find this to be the best plan. I said that I meant to go to
Stein's after dinner, so the young man offered to take me there
himself. I thanked him for his kindness, and promised to return
at two o'clock. I did so, and we went together in company with
his brother-in-law, who looks a genuine student. Although I had
begged that my name should not be mentioned, Herr von Langenmantl
was so incautious as to say, with a simper, to Herr Stein, "I
have the honor to present to you a virtuoso on the piano." I
instantly protested against this, saying that I was only an
indifferent pupil of Herr Sigl in Munich, who had charged me with
a thousand compliments to him. Stein shook his head dubiously,
and at length said, "Surely I have the honor of seeing M.
Mozart?" "Oh, no," said I; "my name is Trazom, and I have a
letter for you." He took the letter and was about to break the
seal instantly, but I gave him no time for that, saying, "What is
the use of reading the letter just now? Pray open the door of
your saloon at once, for I am so very anxious to see your
pianofortes." "With all my heart," said he, "just as you please;
but for all that I believe I am not mistaken." He opened the
door, and I ran straight up to one of the three pianos that stood
in the room. I began to play, and he scarcely gave himself time
to glance at the letter, so anxious was he to ascertain the
truth; so he only read the signature. "Oh!" cried he, embracing
me, and crossing himself and making all sorts of grimaces from
intense delight. I will write to you another day about his
pianos. He then took me to a coffee-house, but when we went in I
really thought I must bolt, there was such a stench of tobacco-
smoke, but for all that I was obliged to bear it for a good hour.
I submitted to it all with a good grace, though I could have
fancied that I was in Turkey. He made a great fuss to me about a
certain Graf, a composer (of flute concertos only); and said, "He
is something quite extraordinary," and every other possible
exaggeration. I became first hot and then cold from nervousness.
This Graf is a brother of the two who are in Harz and Zurich. He
would not give up his intention, but took me straight to him--a
dignified gentleman indeed; he wore a dressing-gown that I would
not be ashamed to wear in the street. All his words are on
stilts, and he has a habit of opening his mouth before knowing
what he is going to say; so he often shuts it again without
having said anything. After a great deal of ceremony he produced
a concerto for two flutes; I was to play first violin. The
concerto is confused, not natural, too abrupt in its modulations,
and devoid of all genius. When it was over I praised it highly,
for, indeed, he deserves this. The poor man must have had labor
and study enough to write it. At last they brought a clavichord
of Stein's out of the next room, a very good one, but inch-thick
with dust. Herr Graf, who is director here, stood there looking
like a man who had hitherto believed his own modulations to be
something very clever, but all at once discovers that others may
be still more so, and without grating on the ear. In a word, they
all seemed lost in astonishment.



66.

Augsburg, Oct. 17, 1777.

WITH regard to the daughter of Hamm, the Secretary of War, I can
only say that there can be no doubt she has a decided talent for
music, for she has only learned three years, and can play a
number of pieces very well. I find it difficult, however, to
explain distinctly the impression she makes on me while she is
playing; she seems to me so curiously constrained, and she has
such an odd way of stalking over the keys with her long bony
fingers! To be sure, she has had no really good master, and if
she remains in Munich she will never become what her father
wishes and hopes, for he is eager beyond measure that she should
one day be a distinguished pianiste. If she goes to papa at
Salzburg, it will be a twofold benefit to her, both as to music
and common sense, of which she certainly has no great share. She
has often made me laugh very much, and you would have amusement
enough for your trouble. She is too absent to think of eating
much. You say I ought to have practised with her? I really could
not for laughing, for when I occasionally played something with
the right hand, she instantly said bravissimo, and that in the
voice of a little mouse.

I will now relate to you as briefly as possible the Augsburg
history to which I have already alluded. Herr von Fingerle, who
sent his compliments to you, was also at Herr Graf's. The people
were very civil, and discussed the concert I proposed to give,
all saying, "It will be one of the most brilliant concerts ever
given in Augsburg. You have a great advantage in having made the
acquaintance of our Stadtpfleger Langenmantl; besides, the name
of Mozart has much influence here." So we separated mutually
pleased. I must now tell you that Herr von Langenmantl, junior,
when at Herr Stein's, said that he would pledge himself to
arrange a concert in the Stube, [Footnote: The Bauernstube, the
Patrician Casino.] (as something very select, and complimentary
to me,) for the nobility alone. You can't think with what zeal he
spoke, and promised to undertake it. We agreed that I should call
on him the next morning for the answer; accordingly I went; this
was on the 13th. He was very polite, but said that as yet he
could not say anything decided. I played there again for an hour,
and he invited me next day, the 14th, to dinner. In the forenoon
he sent to beg that I would come to him at eleven o'clock, and
bring some pieces with me, as he had asked some of the
professional musicians, and they intended to have some music. I
immediately sent some music, and went myself at eleven, when,
with many lame excuses, he coolly said, "By the by, I could do
nothing about the concert; oh, I was in such a rage yesterday on
your account. The patrician members of the Casino said that their
cashbox was at a very low ebb, and that you were not the kind of
virtuoso who could expect a souverain d'or." I merely smiled, and
said, "I quite agree with them." N. B.--He is Intendant of Music
in the Casino, and the old father a magistrate! but I cared very
little about it. We sat down to dinner; the old gentleman also
dined up-stairs with us, and was very civil, but did not say a
word about the concert. After dinner I played two concertos,
something out of my head, and then a trio of Hafeneder's on the
violin. I would gladly have played more, but I was so badly
accompanied that it gave me the colic. He said to me, good-
naturedly, "Don't let us part company to-day; go to the play with
us, and return here to supper." We were all very merry. When we
came back from the theatre, I played again till we went to
supper. Young Langenmantl had already questioned me in the
forenoon about my cross, [Footnote: Mozart, by his father's
desire, wore the "Order of the Golden Spur," conferred on him by
the Pope.] and I told him exactly how I got it, and what it was.
He and his brother-in-law said over and over again, "Let us order
a cross, too, that we may be on a par with Herr Mozart." I took
no notice of this. They also repeatedly said, "Hallo! you sir!
Knight of the Spur!" I said not a word; but during supper it
became really too bad. "What may it have cost? three ducats? must
you have permission to wear it? Do you pay extra for leave to do
so? We really must get one just like it." An officer there of the
name of Bach, said, "For shame! what would you do with the
cross?" That young ass, Kurzen Mantl, winked at him, but I saw
him, and he knew that I did. A pause ensued, and then he offered
me snuff, saying, "There, show that you don't care a pinch of
snuff for it." I still said nothing. At length he began once more
in a sneering tone: "I may then send to you to-morrow, and you
will be so good as to lend me the cross for a few minutes, and I
will return it immediately after I have spoken to the goldsmith
about it. I know that when I ask him its value (for he is a queer
kind of man) he will say a Bavarian thaler; it can't be worth
more, for it is not gold, only copper, ha! ha!" I said, "By no
means--it is lead, ha! ha!" I was burning with anger and rage. "I
say," rejoined he, "I suppose I may, if need be, leave out the
spur?" "Oh, yes," said I, "for you have one already in your head;
I, too, have one in mine, but of a very different kind, and I
should be sorry to exchange mine for yours; so there, take a
pinch of snuff on that!" and I offered him snuff. He became pale
with rage, but began again: "Just now that order looked so well
on that grand waistcoat of yours." I made no reply, so he called
the servant and said "Hallo! you must have greater respect for my
brother-in-law and myself when we wear the same cross as Herr
Mozart; take a pinch of snuff on that!" I started up; all did the
same, and showed great embarrassment. I took my hat and my sword,
and said, "I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you to-morrow."
"To-morrow I shall not be here." "Well, then, the next morning,
when I shall still be here." "Ho, ho! you surely don't mean to"--
"I mean nothing; you are a set of boors, so good-night," and off
I went.

Next day I told the whole story to Herr Stein, Herr Geniaulx, and
to Herr Director Graf--I don't mean about the cross, but how
highly disgusted I was at their having bragged so much about a
concert, and now it had come to nothing. "I call this making a
fool of a person and leaving him in the lurch. I am very sorry
that I ever came here. I could not possibly have believed that in
Augsburg, my papa's native town, such an insult could have been
offered to his son." You cannot imagine, dear papa, how angry and
indignant these three gentlemen were, saying, "Oh, you must
positively give a concert here; we don't stand in need of the
patricians." I, however, adhered to my resolution and said, "I am
willing to give a small farewell concert at Herr Stein's, for my
few kind friends here who are connoisseurs." The Director was
quite distressed, and exclaimed, "It is abominable--shameful; who
could have believed such a thing of Langenmantl! Par Dieu! if he
really wished it, no doubt it would have been carried through."
We then separated. The Director went down-stairs with me in his
dressing-gown as far as the door, and Herr Stein and Geniaulx
walked home with me. They urged us to make up our mind to stay
here for a time, but we remained firm. I must not forget to say
that, when young Langenmantl lisped out to me, in his usual cool
indifferent way, the pleasant news as to my concert, he added,
that the patricians invited me to their concert next Thursday. I
said, "I will come as one of the audience." "Oh, we hope you will
give us the pleasure of hearing you play also." "Well, perhaps I
may; why not?" But having received so grievous an insult the next
evening, I resolved not to go near him again, to steer clear of
the whole set of patricians, and to leave Augsburg. During
dinner, on the 16th, I was called out by a servant-maid of
Langenmantl's, who wished to know whether he might expect me to
go with him to the concert? and he begged I would come to him
immediately after dinner. I sent my compliments in return, that I
had no intention of going to the concert; nor could I come to
him, as I was already engaged (which was quite true); but that I
would call next morning to take leave of him, as on Saturday
next, at furthest, I was to leave Augsburg. In the meantime Herr
Stein had been to see the other patricians of the Evangelical
party, and spoke so strongly to them that these gentlemen were
quite excited. "What!" said they, "shall we permit a man who does
us so much honor to leave this without even hearing him? Herr von
Langenmantl, having already heard him, thinks that is enough."

At last they became so excited that Herr Kurzenmantl, the
excellent youth, was obliged to go to Herr Stein himself to
entreat him, in the name of the patricians, to do all in his
power to persuade me to attend the concert, but to say that I
must not expect great things. At last I went with him, though
with considerable reluctance. The principal gentlemen were very
polite, particularly Baron Belling, who is a director or some
such animal; he opened my music-portfolio himself. I brought a
symphony with me, which they played, and I took a violin part.
The orchestra is enough to throw any one into fits. That young
puppy Langenmantl was all courtesy, but his face looked as
impertinent as ever; he said to me, "I was rather afraid you
might have escaped us, or been offended by our jokes the other
evening." "By no means," said I coolly; "you are still very
young; but I advise you to be more cautious in future, for I am
not accustomed to such jokes. The subject on which you were so
facetious did you no credit, nor did it answer your purpose, for
you see I still wear the order; you had better have chosen some
other topic for your wit." "I assure you," said he, "it was only
my brother-in-law who"--"Let us say no more about it," said I.
"We had nearly been deprived of the pleasure of seeing you
altogether," he rejoined. "Yes; had it not been for Herr Stein, I
certainly should not have come; and, to tell you the truth, I am
only here now to prevent you Augsburg gentlemen being the
laughing-stock of other countries, which would have been the case
if I had told them that I was eight days in the city where my
father was born, without any one there taking the trouble to hear
me!" I played a concerto, and all went off well except the
accompaniment; and as a finale I played a sonata. At the close,
Baron Belling thanked me in the warmest manner in the name of all
the company; and, begging me to consider only their good will,
presented me with two ducats.

They give me no peace here till I agree to give a public concert
next Saturday. Perhaps--but I own I am heartily sick of it all. I
shall be indeed glad when I arrive at a place where there is a
court. I may with truth say that, were it not for my kind
cousins, my regrets would be as numberless as the hairs on my
head for ever having come to Augsburg. I must write you some
account of my fair cousin, but you must excuse my deferring this
till to-morrow, for one ought to be quite fresh to praise her as
highly as she deserves.

The l7th.--I now write early in the morning to say that my cousin
is pretty, intelligent, lovable, clever, and gay, probably
because she has lived so much in society; she was also some time
at Munich. We do, indeed, exactly suit each other, for she too is
rather inclined to be satirical, so we banter our friends most
merrily together. [The Mozart family were both well known and
dreaded for their somewhat sharp tongues.]



67.

Augsburg, Oct. 17, 1777.

I must now tell you about the Stein pianos. Before seeing these,
Spath's pianos were my favorites; but I must own that I give the
preference to those of Stein, for they damp much better than
those in Ratisbon. If I strike hard, whether I let my fingers
rest on the notes or lift them, the tone dies away at the same
instant that it is heard. Strike the keys as I choose, the tone
always remains even, never either jarring or failing to sound. It
is true that a piano of this kind is not to be had for less than
three hundred florins, but the pains and skill which Stein
bestows on them cannot be sufficiently repaid. His instruments
have a feature of their own; they are supplied with a peculiar
escapement. Not one in a hundred makers attends to this; but,
without it, it is impossible that a piano should not buzz and
jar. His hammers fall as soon as they touch the strings, whether
the keys be held down by the fingers or not. When he has
completed an instrument of this class, (which he told me
himself,) he tries all kinds of passages and runs on it, and
works away at it, testing its powers till it is capable of doing
anything, for he labors not for his own benefit alone, (or he
might be saved much trouble,) but for that of music. He often
says, "If I were not such a passionate lover of music, playing
also myself a little on the piano, I should long ago have lost
patience with my work, but I like my instruments to respond to
the player, and to be durable." His pianos do really last well.
He warrants the sounding-board neither breaking nor cracking;
when he has finished one, he exposes it in the air to rain, snow,
sun, and every kind of devilry, that it may give way, and then
inserts slips of wood which he glues in, making it quite strong
and solid. He is very glad when it does crack, for then he is
pretty sure nothing further can happen to it. He frequently makes
cuts into them himself, and then glues them up, thus making them
doubly strong. He has three of these pianos at this moment
finished, and I played on them again to-day.

We dined to-day with young Herr Gassner, who is the handsome
widower of a lovely young wife; they were only married two years.
He is an excellent and kind young man; he gave us a capital
dinner. A colleague of the Abbe Henri Bullinger, and Wishofer
also dined there, and an ex-Jesuit, who is at present
Capellmeister in the cathedral here. He knows Herr Schachtner
well [court-trumpeter at Salzburg], and was leader of his band in
Ingolstadt; he is called Father Gerbl. Herr Gassner, and one of
his wife's unmarried sisters, mamma, our cousin, and I went after
dinner to Herr Stein's. At four o'clock came the Capellmeister
and Herr Schmittbauer, the organist of St. Ulrich, a worthy good
old man. I played at sight a sonata of Becke's, which was rather
difficult, but very poor, al solito. The astonishment of the
Capellmeister and the organist was indescribable. I have played
my six sonatas by heart repeatedly, both here and in Munich. The
fifth in G, I played at the distinguished Casino concert, and the
last in D, which has an incomparable effect on Stein's pianos.
The pedals, pressed by the knees, are also better made by him
than by any one else; you scarcely require to touch them to make
them act, and as soon as the pressure is removed not the
slightest vibration is perceptible.

To-morrow perhaps I shall come to his organs, that is, write to
you about them, and I reserve for the last the subject of his
little daughter. When I said to Herr Stein that I should like to
play on one of his organs, as the organ was my passion, he seemed
surprised, and said, "What! such a man as you, so great a
pianist, like to play on an instrument devoid of sweetness and
expression, with no gradations from piano to forte, but always
going on the same?" "That does not signify; the organ always was,
both in my eyes and ears, the king of all instruments." "Well,
just as you please." So we went together. I could readily
perceive from his conversation that he did not expect me to do
great things on his organ, evidently thinking that I should
handle it in the style of a piano. He told me that by Schobert's
own desire he had taken him also to the organ, "and very nervous
it made me," said he, "for Schobert had told everybody, and the
church was nearly full. I did not doubt the man's spirit, fire,
and execution; still, this does not much suit the organ. But the
moment he began my opinion was entirely changed." I only said in
reply, "Do you then think, Herr Stein, that I am likely to run
wild on the organ?" "Oh! you!"--When we came to the organ-loft, I
began a prelude, when he laughed. A fugue followed. "I can now
quite understand why you like to play the organ," said he, "when
you can play in this manner." At first the pedal was a little
awkward for me, as it was without the breaks, beginning with C,
then D E in one row, whereas with us D and E are above, just
where E flat and F sharp are here; but I quickly mastered it.

I went also to try the old organ at St. Ulrich's. The stair that
leads to it is really dreadful. I requested that some other
person might play the organ for me, that I might go down and
listen to it, for above the organ has no effect; but I profited
very little by this, for the young leader of the choir, a priest,
made such reckless runs on the organ that it was impossible to
understand them, and when he attempted harmonies they proved only
discords, being always false. Afterwards they would insist on our
going to a coffee-room, for mamma and my cousin were with us. A
certain Father Emilian, a conceited jackass and a sorry witling,
was very sweet on my cousin, and wished to have his jest with
her, but she made a jest of him. At last, when rather tipsy,
(which soon occurred,) he began to talk about music, and sang a
canon, saying, "I never in my life heard anything finer." I said,
"I regret that I can't sing it with you, for nature has not given
me the power of intoning." "No matter," said he. So he began. I
made the third, but I sang different words--thus: "Pater Emilian,
oh! thou numskull"--sotto voce to my cousin; then we laughed on
for at least half an hour. The Pater said to me, "If we only
could be longer together, we could discuss the art of musical
composition." "In that case," said I, "our discussion would soon
come to an end." A famous rap on the knuckles for him! TO BE
CONTINUED.



68.

Augsburg, Oct. 23, 1777.

MY concert took place yesterday. Count Wolfeck interested himself
much in it, and brought some chanoinesses with him. I went to his
lodgings the very day I arrived, but he was not here at that
time. A few days ago he returned, and on hearing that I was still
in Augsburg, he did not wait for a visit from me, but at the very
moment when I was taking my hat and sword to go to call on him he
walked in. I must now give you a description of the last few days
before my concert. Last Saturday I was at St. Ulrich's, as I
already told you. Some days before my cousin took me with him to
present me to the Prelate of the Holy Cross, a kind excellent old
man. Previous to going to St. Ulrich's last Saturday, I went with
my cousin to the Monastery of the Holy Cross, as the first time I
was there neither the Deacon nor the Procurator was at home, and
my cousin told me that the Procurator was very jolly. [Here mamma
inserts a few lines--which frequently occurs in the letters. She
says at the close:] "I am quite surprised that Schuster's duets
[see No. 63] are still"--Wolfgang: "Oh, he has got them." Mamma:
"No, indeed; he always writes that he has not got them."
Wolfgang: "I hate arguing; I am sure he has got them, so there's
an end of it." Mamma: "You are mistaken." Wolfgang: "No; I am
right. I will show it to mamma in his own writing." Mamma: "Well,
where is it?" Wolfgang: "Here; read it." She is reading it at
this moment.

Last Sunday I attended service at the Holy Cross, and at ten
o'clock we went to Herr Stein's, where we tried over a couple of
symphonies for the concert. Afterwards I dined with my cousin at
the Holy Cross, where a band played during dinner. Badly as they
play in the monastery, I prefer it to the Augsburg orchestra. I
played a symphony, and a concerto in B of Vanhall's, on the
violin, with unanimous applause. The Dean is a kind, jovial man,
a cousin of Eberlin [deceased Capellmeister of Salzburg]. His
name is Zeschinger. He knows papa well. At night, after supper, I
played the Strassburg concerto; it went as smooth as oil; every
one praised the fine pure tone. A small clavichord was then
brought in, on which I preluded, and played a sonata and the
Fischer variations. Some of those present whispered to the Dean
that he ought to hear me play in the organ style. I asked him to
give me a theme, which he declined, but one of the monks did so.
I handled it quite leisurely, and all at once (the fugue being in
G minor) I brought in a lively movement in the major key, but in
the same tempo, and then at the end the original subject, only
reversed. At last it occurred to me to employ the lively movement
for the subject of the fugue also, I did not hesitate long, but
did so at once, and it went as accurately as if Daser [a Salzburg
tailor] had taken its measure. The Dean was in a state of great
excitement. "It is over," said he, "and it's no use talking about
it, but I could scarcely have believed what I have just heard;
you are indeed an able man. My prelate told me beforehand that in
his life he never heard any one play the organ in a more finished
and solid style" (he having heard me some days previously when
the Dean was not here). At last some one brought me a fugued
sonata, and asked me to play it. But I said, "Gentlemen, I really
must say this is asking rather too much, for it is not likely I
shall be able to play such a sonata at sight." "Indeed, I think
so too; it is too much; no one could do it," said the Dean
eagerly, being all in my favor. "At all events," said I, "I can
but try." I heard the Dean muttering all the time behind me, "Oh,
you rogue! oh, you knave!" I played till 11 o'clock, bombarded
and besieged, as it were, by fugue themes.

Lately, at Stein's, he brought me a sonata of Becke's, but I
think I already told you this. A propos, as to his little girl,
[Footnote: Nanette, at that time eight years old; afterwards the
admirable wife of Andreas Streicher, the friend of Schiller's
youth, and one of Beethoven's best friends in Vienna.] any one
who can see and hear her play without laughing must be Stein
[stone] like her father. She perches herself exactly opposite the
treble, avoiding the centre, that she may have more room to throw
herself about and make grimaces. She rolls her eyes and smirks;
when a passage comes twice she always plays it slower the second
time, and if three times, slower still. She raises her arms in
playing a passage, and if it is to be played with emphasis she
seems to give it with her elbows and not her fingers, as
awkwardly and heavily as possible. The finest thing is, that if a
passage occurs (which ought to flow like oil) where the fingers
must necessarily be changed, she does not pay much heed to that,
but lifts her hands, and quite coolly goes on again. This,
moreover, puts her in a fair way to get hold of a wrong note,
which often produces a curious effect. I only write this in order
to give you some idea of pianoforte-playing and teaching here, so
that you may in turn derive some benefit from it. Herr Stein is
quite infatuated about his daughter. She is eight years old, and
learns everything by heart. She may one day be clever, for she
has genius, but on this system she will never improve, nor will
she ever acquire much velocity of finger, for her present method
is sure to make her hand heavy. She will never master what is the
most difficult and necessary, and in fact the principal thing in
music, namely, time; because from her infancy she has never been
in the habit of playing in correct time. Herr Stein and I
discussed this point together for at least two hours. I have,
however, in some degree converted him; he asks my advice now on
every subject. He was quite devoted to Becke, and now he sees and
hears that I can do more than Becke, that I make no grimaces, and
yet play with so much expression that he himself acknowledges
none of his acquaintances have ever handled his pianos as I do.
My keeping so accurately in time causes them all much surprise.
The left hand being quite independent in the tempo rubato of an
adagio, they cannot at all comprehend. With them the left hand
always yields to the right. Count Wolfeck and others, who have a
passionate admiration for Becke, said lately publicly in a
concert that I beat Becke hollow. Count Wolfeck went round the
room saying, "In my life I never heard anything like this." He
said to me, "I must tell you that I never heard you play as you
did to-day, and I mean to say so to your father as soon as I go
to Salzburg." What do you think was the first piece after the
symphony? The concerto for three pianos. Herr Demmler took the
first part, I the second, and Herr Stein the third. I then played
a solo, my last sonata in D, for Durnitz, and afterwards my
concerto in B; then again a solo in the organ style, namely, a
fugue in C minor, then all of a sudden a splendid sonata in C
major, finishing with a rondo, all extempore. What a noise and
commotion there was! Herr Stein did nothing but make faces and
grimaces of astonishment. Herr Demmler was seized with fits of
laughter, for he is a queer creature, and when anything pleases
him exceedingly, he can't help laughing heartily; indeed, on this
occasion he actually began to swear! Addio!



69.

Augsburg, Oct. 25, 1777.

The receipts of the concert were 90 florins, without deducting
the expenses. Including, therefore, the two ducats we took in the
Casino concert, we had 100 florins. The expenses of the concert
did not exceed 16 florins 30 kreutzers; the room I had gratis. I
believe most of the musicians will make no charge. We have now
ALTOGETHER lost about 26 or 27 florins. This is not of much
moment. I am writing this on Saturday the 25th. This morning
early I received the letter with the sad news of Frau
Oberbereiterin's death. Madlle. Tonerl can now purse up her
mouth, or perhaps open it wide, and shut it again as empty as
ever. As to the baker's daughter, I have no objection to make; I
foresaw all this long ago. This was the cause of my reluctance to
leave home, and finding it so difficult to go. I hope the affair
is not by this time known all over Salzburg? I beg you, dear
papa, most urgently to keep the matter quiet as long as possible,
and in the mean time to pay her father on my account any expenses
he may have incurred by her entrance into the convent, which I
will repay gladly when I return to Salzburg.

I thank you most truly, dear papa, for your good wishes on my
name-day. Do not be uneasy on my account, for I have always God
before my eyes, I acknowledge His omnipotence, I dread His wrath;
but I also know His love, His compassion and mercy towards His
creatures, and that He will never forsake His servants. When His
will is done I am resigned; so I never can fail to be happy and
contented. I shall certainly also strive to live as strictly as
possible in accordance with your injunctions and advice. Thank
Herr Bullinger a thousand times for his congratulations. I mean
to write to him soon and thank him myself, but I may in the mean
time assure him that I neither know nor have any better, more
sincere, or truer friend than himself. I beg also humbly to thank
Madlle. Sallerl; pray tell her I mean to enclose some verses to
show my gratitude to her in my letter to Herr Bullinger. Thank my
sister also; she is to keep the Schuster duets, and give herself
no further trouble on the subject.


In your first letter, dear papa, you write that I lowered myself
by my conduct to that lad Langenmantl. Anything but that! I was
only straightforward, no more. I see you think he is still a boy;
he is one or two and twenty, and a married man. Can any one be
considered a boy who is married? I have never gone near him
since. I left two cards for him to-day, and excused myself for
not going in, having so many indispensable calls to make. I must
now conclude, for mamma insists absolument on going to dinner,
and then to pack. To-morrow we go straight to Wallerstein. My
dear little cousin, who sends you her regards, is anything but a
prude. She dressed a la Francaise to please me yesterday. She
looked at least 5 per cent, prettier in consequence. Now, Addio!

On the 26th of October the mother and son set off to Mannheim.
The mother writes that Wolfgang intended to write to Augsburg,
"but he will scarcely be able to do so to-day, for he is now at
the rehearsal of the oratorio; so I must beg you to accept my
humble self instead." Wolfgang then adds:--



70.

Mannheim, Oct. 30, 1777.

I must beg you also to accept my insignificancy. I went to-day
with Herr Danner to M. Cannabich's [Director of the Elector's
orchestra]. He was uncommonly polite, and I played something for
him on his piano, which is a very good one. We went together to
the rehearsal. I could scarcely help laughing when I was
presented to the musicians, because, though some who knew me by
renomme were very civil and courteous, the rest, who knew nothing
whatever about me, stared in such a ludicrous way, evidently
thinking that because I am little and young nothing great or
mature is to be found in me; but they shall soon find it out.
Herr Cannabich is to take me himself to-morrow to Count Savioli,
the Intendant of Music. One good thing is that the Elector's
name-day is close at hand. The oratorio they are rehearsing is
Handel's, but I did not stay to hear it, for they first rehearsed
a Psalm Magnificat of the Vice-Capellmeister here, [Abbe] Vogler,
which lasted a good hour. I must now conclude, for I have still
to write to my cousin.



71.

Mannheim, Nov. 4, 1777.

I am at Cannabich's every day, and mamma went with me there to-
day. He is a very different man from what he formerly was,
[FOOTNOTE: Mozart had been at his house, when a boy, with his
father.] and the whole orchestra say the same. He is very fond of
me. He has a daughter who plays the piano very nicely, and in
order to make him still more friendly towards me I am working
just now at a sonata for her, which is finished all but the
Rondo. When I had completed the first allegro and andante, I took
it to him myself and played it over; you can't think what
applause this sonata receives. There chanced to be some of the
musicians there at the moment--young Danner, Lang, who plays the
French horn, and the hautboy-player, whose name I forget, but who
plays remarkably well, and has a pleasing delicate tone [Ramm]. I
made him a present of a concerto for the hautboy; it is being
copied in Cannabich's room. The man is wild with delight. I
played him the concerto to-day at Cannabich's, and THOUGH KNOWN
TO BE MINE it pleased very much. No one said that it was NOT WELL
COMPOSED, because people here don't understand these things. They
ought to apply to the Archbishop; he would soon put them on the
right scent. [FOOTNOTE: The Archbishop never was satisfied with
any of the compositions that Mozart wrote for his concerts, but
invariably had some fault to find with them.] I played all my six
sonatas to-day at Cannabich's. Herr Kapellmeister Holzbauer went
with me to-day to Count Savioli's. Cannabich was there at the
time. Herr Holzbauer said to the Count in Italian that I wished
to have the honor of playing before his Serene Highness the
Elector. "I was here fifteen years ago," said I, "but now I am
older and more advanced, and I may say in music also"--"Oh!" said
the Count, "you are"--I have no idea whom he took me for, as
Cannabich interrupted him, but I affected not to hear, and
entered into conversation with the others. Still I observed that
he was speaking of me very earnestly. The Count then said to me,
"I hear that you play the piano very tolerably?" I bowed.

I must now tell you about the music here. On Saturday, All-
Saints' day, I attended high mass. The orchestra is very good and
numerous. On each side ten or eleven violins, four tenors, two
hautboys, two flutes, and two clarionets, two corni, four
violoncellos, four bassoons, and four double basses, besides
trumpets and kettle-drums. This should give fine music, but I
would not venture to produce one of my masses here. Why? From
their being short? No, everything is liked short. From their
church style? By no means; but solely because NOW in Mannheim,
under present circumstances, it is necessary to write chiefly for
the instruments, for nothing can possibly be conceived worse than
the voices here. Six soprani, six alti, six tenori, and six
bassi, to twenty violins and twelve bassi, are in the same
proportion as 0 to 1. Is it not so, Herr Bullinger? It proceeds
from this:--The Italians are miserably represented: they have
only two musici here, and they are already old. This race is
dying out. These soprano singers, too, would prefer singing
counter-tenor; for they can no longer take the high notes. The
few boys they have are wretched. The tenor and bass just like our
singers at funerals. Vogler, who lately conducted the mass, is
barren and frivolous--a man who imagines he can do a great deal,
and does very little. The whole orchestra dislike him. To-day,
Sunday, I heard a mass of Holzbauer's, which is now twenty-six
years old, but excellent. He writes very well, and has a good
church style, arranges the vocal parts as well as the
instrumental, and writes good fugues. They have two organists
here; it would be worth while to come to Mannheim on purpose to
hear them--which I had a famous opportunity of doing, as it is
the custom here for the organist to play during the whole of the
Benedictus. I heard the second organist first, and then the
other. In my opinion the second is preferable to the first; for
when I heard the former, I asked, "Who is that playing on the
organ?" "Our second organist." "He plays miserably." When the
other began, I said, "Who may that be?" "Our first organist."
"Why, he plays more miserably still." I believe if they were
pounded together, something even worse would be the result. It is
enough to kill one with laughing to look at these gentlemen. The
second at the organ is like a child trying to lift a millstone.
You can see his anguish in his face. The first wears spectacles.
I stood beside him at the organ and watched him with the
intention of learning something from him; at each note he lifts
his hands entirely off the keys. What he believes to be his forte
is to play in six parts, but he mostly makes fifths and octaves.
He often chooses to dispense altogether with his right hand when
there is not the slightest need to do so, and plays with the left
alone; in short, he fancies that he can do as he will, and that
he is a thorough master of his organ.

Mamma sends her love to you all; she cannot possibly write, for
she has still to say her officium. We came home very late from
the grand opera rehearsal. I must go to-morrow after high mass to
the illustrious Electress; she is resolved absolument to teach me
to knit filee. I am very eager about this, as she and the Elector
wish that I should knit in public next Thursday at the great gala
concert. The young Princess here, who is a child compared with
the Electress, knits very prettily. The Zweenbruck and his
Zwobrucken (Deux Ponts) arrived here at eight o'clock. A propos,
mamma and I earnestly beg you, dear papa, to send our charming
cousin a souvenir; we both regretted so much having nothing with
us, but we promised to write to you to send her something. We
wish two things to be sent--a double neckerchief in mamma's name,
like the one she wears, and in mine some ornament; a box, or
etui, or anything you like, only it must be pretty, for she
deserves it. [FOOTNOTE: The father was still in possession of
many of the ornaments and jewels presented to these children
during their artistic tours.] She and her father took a great
deal of trouble on our account, and wasted much time on us. My
cousin took the receipts for me at my concert. Addio!



72.

Mannheim, Nov. 5, 1777.

My dear Coz--Buzz,--

I have safely received your precious epistle--thistle, and from
it I perceive--achieve, that my aunt--gaunt, and you--shoe, are
quite well--bell. I have to-day a letter--setter, from my papa--
ah-ha, safe in my hands--sands. I hope you also got--trot, my
Mannheim letter--setter. Now for a little sense--pence. The
prelate's seizure--leisure, grieves me much--touch, but he will,
I hope, get well--sell. You write--blight, you will keep--cheap,
your promise to write to me--he-he, to Augsburg soon--spoon.
Well, I shall be very glad--mad. You further write, indeed you
declare, you pretend, you hint, you vow, you explain, you
distinctly say, you long, you wish, you desire, you choose,
command, and point out, you let me know and inform me that I must
send you my portrait soon--moon. Eh, bien! you shall have it
before long--song. Now I wish you good night--tight.

The 5th.--Yesterday I conversed with the illustrious Electress;
and to-morrow, the 6th, I am to play in the gala concert, and
afterwards, by desire of the Princess, in their private
apartments. Now for something rational! I beg of you--why not?--I
beg of you, my very dear cousin--why not?--when you write to
Madame Tavernier in Munich, to convey a message from me to the
two Demoiselles Freysinger--why not? odd enough! but why not?--
and I humbly ask pardon of Madlle. Josepha--I mean the youngest,
and pray why not? why should I not ask her pardon? strange! but I
don't know why I should not, so I do ask her pardon very humbly--
for not having yet sent the sonata I promised her, but I mean to
do so as soon as possible. Why not? I don't know why not. I can
now write no more--which makes my heart sore. To all my kind
friends much love--dove. Addio! Your old young, till death--
breath,

WOLFGANG AMADE ROSENCRANZ.

Miennham, eht ht5 rebotoc, 7771.



73.

Mannheim, Nov. 8, 1777.

This forenoon, at Herr Cannabich's, I wrote the Rondo of the
sonata for his daughter; so they would not let me leave them all
day. The Elector and the Electress, and the whole court, are very
much pleased with me. Both times I played at the concert, the
Elector and she stood close beside me at the piano. After the
music was at an end, Cannabich managed that I should be noticed
by the court. I kissed the Elector's hand, who said, "I think it
is now fifteen years since you were here?" "Yes, your Highness,
it is fifteen years since I had that honor." "You play
inimitably." The Princess, when I kissed her hand, said,
"Monsieur, je vous assure, on ne peut pas jouer mieux."

Yesterday I went with Cannabich to pay the visit mamma already
wrote to you about [to Duke Carl Theodor's children], and there I
conversed with the Elector as if he had been some kind friend. He
is a most gracious and good Prince. He said to me, "I hear you
wrote an opera at Munich" ["La finta Giardiniera"]? "Yes, your
Highness, and, with your gracious permission, my most anxious
wish is to write an opera here; I entreat you will not quite
forget me. I could also write a German one, God be praised!" said
I, smiling. "That may easily be arranged." He has one son and
three daughters, the eldest of whom and the young Count play the
piano. The Elector questioned me confidentially about his
children. I spoke quite honestly, but without detracting from
their master. Cannabich was entirely of my opinion. The Elector,
on going away, took leave of me with much courtesy.

After dinner to-day I went, at two o'clock, with Cannabich to
Wendling's, the flute-player, where they were all complaisance.
The daughter, who was formerly the Elector's favorite, plays the
piano very prettily; afterwards I played. I cannot describe to
you the happy mood I was in. I played extempore, and then three
duets with the violin, which I had never in my life seen, nor do
I now know the name of the author. They were all so delighted
that I--was desired to embrace the ladies. No hard task with the
daughter, for she is very pretty.

We then went again to the Elector's children; I played three
times, and from my heart too,--the Elector himself each time
asking me to play. He seated himself each time close to me and
never stirred. I also asked a certain Professor there to give me
a theme for a fugue, and worked it out.

Now for my congratulations!

My very dearest papa,--I cannot write poetically, for I am no
poet. I cannot make fine artistic phrases that cast light and
shadow, for I am no painter; I can neither by signs nor by
pantomime express my thoughts and feelings, for I am no dancer;
but I can by tones, for I am a musician. So to-morrow, at
Cannabich's, I intend to play my congratulations both for your
name-day and birthday. Mon tres-cher pere, I can only on this day
wish for you, what from my whole heart I wish for you every day
and every night--health, long life, and a cheerful spirit. I
would fain hope, too, that you have now less annoyance than when
I was in Salzburg; for I must admit that I was the chief cause of
this. They treated me badly, which I did not deserve, and you
naturally took my part, only too lovingly. I can tell you this
was indeed one of the principal and most urgent reasons for my
leaving Salzburg in such haste. I hope, therefore, that my wish
is fulfilled. I must now close by a musical congratulation. I
wish that you may live as many years as must elapse before no
more new music can be composed. Farewell! I earnestly beg you to
go on loving me a little, and, in the mean time, to excuse these
very poor congratulations till I open new shelves in my small and
confined knowledge-box, where I can stow away the good sense
which I have every intention to acquire.



74.

Mannheim, Nov. 13, 1777.

We received your last two letters, and now I must answer them in
detail. Your letter desiring me to inquire about Becke's parents
[in Wallerstein, No. 68] I did not get till I had gone to
Mannheim, so too late to comply with your wish; but it never
would have occurred to me to do so, for, in truth, I care very
little about him. Would you like to know how I was received by
him? Well and civilly; tbat is, he asked where I was going. I
said, most probably to Paris. He then gave me a vast deal of
advice, saying he had recently been there, and adding, "You will
make a great deal by giving lessons, for the piano is highly
prized in Paris." He also arranged that I should dine at the
officers' table, and promised to put me in the way of speaking to
the Prince. He regretted very much having at that moment a sore
throat, (which was indeed quite true,) so that he could not go
out with me himself to procure me some amusement. He was also
sorry that he could have no music in honor of me, because most of
the musical people had gone that very day on some pedestrian
excursion to--Heaven knows where! At his request I tried his
piano, which is very good. He often said Bravo! I extemporized,
and also played the sonatas in B and D. In short, he was very
polite, and I was also polite, but grave. We conversed on a
variety of topics--among others, about Vienna, and more
particularly that the Emperor [Joseph II.] was no great lover of
music. He said, "It is true he has some knowledge of composition,
but of nothing else. I can still recall (and he rubbed his
forehead) that when I was to play before him I had no idea what
to play; so I began with some fugues and trifles of that kind,
which in my own mind I only laughed at." I could scarcely resist
saying, "I can quite fancy your laughing, but scarcely so loud as
I must have done had I heard you!" He further said (what is the
fact) that the music in the Emperor's private apartments is
enough to frighten the crows. I replied, that whenever I heard
such music, if I did not quickly leave the room it gave me a
headache. "Oh! no; it has no such effect on me; bad music does
not affect my nerves, but fine music never fails to give me a
headache." I thought to myself again, such a shallow head as
yours is sure to suffer when listening to what is beyond its
comprehension.

Now for some of our news here. I was desired to go yesterday with
Cannabich to the Intendant, Count Savioli, to receive my present.
It was just what I had anticipated--a handsome gold watch. Ten
Carolins would have pleased me better just now, though the watch
and chain, with its appendages, are valued at twenty Carolins.
Money is what is most needed on a journey; and, by your leave, I
have now five watches. Indeed, I have serious thoughts of having
a second watch-pocket made, and, when I visit a grandee, to wear
two watches, (which is indeed the fashion here,) that no one may
ever again think of giving me another. I see from your letter
that you have not yet read Vogler's book. [FOOTNOTE: Ton
Wissenschaft und Ton Kunst.] I have just finished it, having
borrowed it from Cannabich. His history is very short. He came
here in a miserable condition, performed on the piano, and
composed a ballet. This excited the Elector's compassion, who
sent him to Italy. When the Elector was in Bologna, he questioned
Father Valoti about Vogler. "Oh! your Highness, he is a great
man," &c., &c. He then asked Father Martini the same question.
"Your Highness, he has talent; and by degrees, when he is older
and more solid, he will no doubt improve, though he must first
change considerably." When Vogler came back he entered the
Church, was immediately appointed Court Chaplain, and composed a
Miserere which all the world declares to be detestable, being
full of false harmony. Hearing; that it was not much commended,
he went to the Elector and complained that the orchestra played
badly on purpose to vex and annoy him; in short, he knew so well
how to make his game (entering into so many petty intrigues with
women) that he became Vice-Capellmeister. He is a fool, who
fancies that no one can be better or more perfect than himself.
The whole orchestra, from the first to the last, detest him. He
has been the cause of much annoyance to Holzbauer. His book is
more fit to teach arithmetic than composition. He says that he
can make a composer in three weeks, and a singer in six months;
but we have not yet seen any proof of this. He despises the
greatest masters. To myself he spoke with contempt of Bach
[Johann Christian, J. Sebastian's youngest son, called the London
Bach], who wrote two operas here, the first of which pleased more
than the second, Lucio Silla. As I had composed the same opera in
Milan, I was anxious to see it, and hearing from Holzbauer that
Vogler had it, I asked him to lend it to me. "With all my heart,"
said he; "I will send it to you to-morrow without fail, but you
won't find much talent in it. Some days after, when he saw me, he
said with a sneer, "Well, did you discover anything very fine--
did you learn anything from it? One air is rather good. What are
the words?" asked he of some person standing near. "What air do
you mean?" "Why, that odious air of Bach's, that vile--oh! yes,
pupille amate. He must have written it after a carouse of punch."
I really thought I must have laid hold of his pigtail; I
affected, however, not to hear him, said nothing, and went away.
He has now served out his time with the Elector.

The sonata for Madlle. Rosa Cannabich is finished. Last Sunday I
played the organ in the chapel for my amusement. I came in while
the Kyrie was going on, played the last part, and when the priest
intoned the Gloria I made a cadence, so different, however, from
what is usually heard here, that every one looked round in
surprise, and above all Holzbauer. He said to me, "If I had known
you were coming, I would have put out another mass for you."
"Oh!" said I, "to puzzle me, I suppose?" Old Toeschi and Wendling
stood all the time close beside me. I gave them enough to laugh
at. Every now and then came a pizzicato, when I rattled the keys
well; I was in my best humor. Instead of the Benedictus here,
there is always a voluntary, so I took the ideas of the Sanctus
and worked them out in a fugue. There they all stood making
faces. At the close, after Ita missa est, I played a fugue. Their
pedal is different from ours, which at first rather puzzled me,
but I soon got used to it. I must now conclude. Pray write to us
still at Mannheim. I know all about Misliweczeck's sonatas [see
No. 64], and played them lately at Munich; they are very easy and
agreeable to listen to. My advice is that my sister, to whom I
humbly commend myself, should play them with much expression,
taste, and fire, and learn them by heart. For these are sonatas
which cannot fail to please every one, are not difficult to
commit to memory, and produce a good effect when played with
precision.



75.

Mannheim, Nov. 13, 1777.

Potz Himmel! Croatians, demons, witches, hags, and cross
batteries! Potz Element! air, earth, fire, and water! Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America! Jesuits, Augustines, Benedictines,
Capucins, Minorites, Franciscans, Dominicans, Carthusians, and
Knights of the Cross! privateers, canons regular and irregular,
sluggards, rascals, scoundrels, imps, and villains all! donkeys,
buffaloes, oxen, fools, blockheads, numskulls, and foxes! What
means this? Four soldiers and three shoulder-belts! Such a thick
packet and no portrait! [FOOTNOTE: The "Basle" (his cousin) had
promised him her portrait. She sent it subsequently to Salzburg,
where it still hangs in the Mozarteum.] I was so anxious about
it--indeed, I felt sure of getting it, having yourself written
long ago to say that I should have it soon, very soon. Perhaps
you doubt my keeping my promise [about the ornaments--see No.
71], but I cannot think this either. So pray let me have the
likeness as quickly as you can; and I trust it is taken as I
entreated--in French costume.

How do I like Mannheim? As well as I can any place where my
cousin is not. I hope, on the other hand, that you have at all
events received my two letters--one from Hohenaltheim, and one
from Mannheim--this, such as it is, being the third from here,
but making the fourth in all. I must conclude, for we are just
going to dinner, and I am not yet dressed. Love me as I love you,
and then we shall never cease loving each other. Adieu! J'espere
que vous aurez deja pris quelque lection dans la langue
francaise, et je ne doute point que--ecoutez!--que vous aurez
bientot le francais mieux que moi; car il y a certainement deux
ans que je n'ai pas ecrit un mot de cette langue. Encore adieu!
Je vous baise les mains.



76.

Mannheim, Nov. 14-16, 1777.

I, Johannes, Chrysostomus, Amadeus, Wolfgangus, Sigismundus,
Mozart, plead guilty to having both yesterday and the day before
(and very often besides) stayed away from home till twelve
o'clock at night, from ten o'clock till the aforesaid hour, I
being in the presence and company of M. Cannabich, his wife and
daughter, the Herrn Schatzmeister, Ramm, and Lang, making
doggerel rhymes with the utmost facility, in thought and word,
but not in deed. I should not, however, have conducted myself in
so reckless a manner if our ringleader, namely, the so-called
Lisel (Elisabeth Cannabich), had not inveigled and instigated me
to mischief, and I am bound to admit that I took great pleasure
in it myself. I confess all these my sins and shortcomings from
the depths of my heart; and in the hope of often having similar
ones to confess, I firmly resolve to amend my present sinful
life. I therefore beg for a dispensation if it can be granted;
but, if not, it is a matter of indifference to me, for the game
will go on all the same. Lusus enim suum habet ambitum, says the
pious singer Meissner, (chap. 9, p. 24,) and also the pious
Ascenditor, patron of singed coffee, musty lemonade, milk of
almonds with no almonds in it, and, above all, strawberry ice
full of lumps of ice, being himself a great connoisseur and
artist in these delicacies.

The sonata I composed for Madlle. Cannabich I intend to write out
as soon as possible on small paper, and to send it to my sister.
I began to teach it to Madlle. Rose three days ago, and she has
learned the allegro. The andante will give us most trouble, for
it is full of expression, and must be played with accuracy and
taste, and the fortes and pianos given just as they are marked.
She is very clever, and learns with facility. Her right hand is
very good, but the left is unhappily quite ruined. I must say
that I do really feel very sorry for her, when I see her laboring
away till she is actually panting for breath; and this not from
natural awkwardness on her part, but because, being so accustomed
to this method, she cannot play in any other way, never having
been shown the right one. I said, both to her mother and herself,
that if I were her regular master I would lock up all her music,
cover the keys of the piano with a handkerchief, and make her
exercise her right and left hand, at first quite slowly in
nothing but passages and shakes, &c., until her hands were
thoroughly trained; and after that I should feel confident of
making her a genuine pianiste. They both acknowledged that I was
right. It is a sad pity; for she has so much genius, reads very
tolerably, has great natural aptitude, and plays with great
feeling.

Now about the opera briefly. Holzbauer's music [for the first
great German operetta, "Gunther von Schwarzburg"] is very
beautiful, but the poetry is not worthy of such music. What
surprises me most is, that so old a man as Holzbauer should still
have so much spirit, for the opera is incredibly full of fire.
The prima donna was Madame Elisabeth Wendling, not the wife of
the flute-player, but of the violinist. She is in very delicate
health; and, besides, this opera was not written for her, but for
a certain Madame Danzi, who is now in England; so it does not
suit her voice, and is too high for her. Herr Raaff, in four
arias of somewhere about 450 bars, sang in a manner which gave
rise to the remark that his want of voice was the principal cause
of his singing so badly. When he begins an air, unless at the
same moment it recurs to your mind that this is Raaff, the old
but once so renowned tenor, I defy any one not to burst out
laughing. It is a fact, that in my own case I thought, if I did
not know that this is the celebrated Raaff, I should be bent
double from laughing, but as it is--I only take out my
handkerchief to hide a smile. They tell me here that he never was
a good actor; that people went to hear, but not to see him. He
has by no means a pleasing exterior. In this opera he was to die,
singing in a long, long, slow air; and he died laughing! and
towards the end of the aria his voice failed him so entirely that
it was impossible to stand it! I was in the orchestra next
Wendling the flute-player, and as he had previously criticized
the song, saying it was unnatural to sing so long before dying,
adding, "I do think he will never die!" I said in return, "Have a
little patience; it will soon be all over with him, for I can
hear he is at the last gasp!" "And I too," said he, laughing. The
second singer, Madlle. Strasserin, sang very well, and is an
admirable actress.

There is a national stage here, which is permanent like that at
Munich; German operettas are sometimes given, but the singers in
them are wretched. Yesterday I dined with the Baron and Baroness
von Hagen, Oberstjagermeister here. Three days ago I called on
Herr Schmalz, a banker, to whom Herr Herzog, or rather Nocker and
Schidl, had given me a letter. I expected to have found a very
civil good sort of man. When I gave him the letter he read it
through, made me a slight bow, and said nothing. At last, after
many apologies for not having sooner waited on him, I told him
that I had played before the Elector. "Really!" Altum silentium.
I said nothing, he said nothing. At last I began again: "I will
no longer intrude on you. I have the honor to"--Here he
interrupted me. "If I can be of any service to you, I beg"--
"Before I leave this I must take the liberty to ask you"--"Not
for money?" "Yes, if you will be so good as to"--"Oh! that I
can't do; there is nothing in the letter about money. I cannot
give you any money, but anything else"--"There is nothing else in
which you can serve me--nothing whatever. I have the honor to
take my leave." I wrote the whole history yesterday to Herr
Herzog in Augsburg. We must now wait here for the answer, so you
may still write to us at Mannheim. I kiss your hand, and am your
young brother and father, as in your last letter you say "I am
the old man and son." To-day is the 16th when I finish this, or
else you will not know when it was sent off. "Is the letter
ready?" "Yes, mamma, here it is!"



77.

Mannheim, Nov. 20, 1777.

The gala began again yesterday [in honor of the Elector's name-
day]. I went to hear the mass, which was a spick-and-span new
composition of Vogler's. Two days ago I was present at the
rehearsal in the afternoon, but came away immediately after the
Kyrie. I never in my life heard anything like it; there is often
false harmony, and he rambles into the different keys as if he
wished to drag you into them by the hair of your head; but it
neither repays the trouble, nor does it possess any originality,
but is only quite abrupt. I shall say nothing of the way in which
he carries out his ideas. I only say that no mass of Vogler's can
possibly please any composer (who deserves the name). For
example, I suddenly hear an idea which is NOT BAD. Well, instead
of remaining NOT BAD, no doubt it soon becomes good? Not at all!
it becomes not only BAD, but VERY BAD, and this in two or three
different ways: namely, scarcely has the thought arisen when
something else interferes to destroy it; or he does not finish it
naturally, so that it may remain good; or it is not introduced in
the right place; or it is finally ruined by bad instrumentation.
Such is Vogler's music.

Cannabich composes far better than when we knew him in Paris, but
what both mamma and I remarked here at once in the symphonies is,
that one begins just like another, always slow and unisono. I
must now, dear papa, write you something about the Holy Cross in
Augsburg, which I have always forgotten to do. I met with a great
many civilities there, and the Prelate is the most good-natured
man in the world--a kind, worthy old simpleton, who may be
carried off at any moment, for his breath fails sadly. He
recently--in fact, the very day we left--had an attack of
paralysis. He, and the Dean and Procurator, begged us when we
came back to Augsburg to drive straight to the Holy Cross. The
Procurator is as jolly as Father Leopold at Seeon. [FOOTNOTE: A
cloister in Lower Bavaria, that Wolfgang often visited with his
father, as they had a dear friend there, Father Johannes.] My
cousin told me beforehand what kind of man he was, so we soon
became as well acquainted as if we had known each other for
twenty years. I lent him the mass in F, and the first of the
short masses in C, and the offertorium in counterpoint in D
minor. My fair cousin has undertaken to be custodian of these. I
got back the offertorium punctually, having desired that it
should be returned first. They all, and even the Prelate, plagued
me to give them a litany, De venerabili. I said I had not got it
with me. I really was by no means sure; so I searched, but did
not find it. They gave me no peace, evidently thinking that I
only wished to evade their request; so I said, "I really have not
the litany with me; it is at Salzburg. Write to my father; it is
his affair. If he chooses to give it to you, well and good; if
not, I have nothing to do with it." A letter from the Deacon to
you will therefore probably soon make its appearance. Do just as
you please, but if you do send him one, let it be the last in E
flat; they have voices enough for anything, and a great many
people will be assembled at that time; they even write for them
to come from a distance, for it is their greatest festival.
Adieu!



78.

Mannheim, Nov. 22, 1777.

THE first piece of information that I have to give you is, that
my truthful letter to Herr Herzog in Augsburg, puncto Schmalzii,
has had a capital effect. He wrote me a very polite letter in
return, expressing his annoyance that I should have been received
so uncourteously by detto Schmalz [melted butter]; so he herewith
sent me a sealed letter to detto Herr Milk, with a bill of
exchange for 150 florins on detto Herr Cheese. You must know
that, though I only saw Herr Herzog once, I could not resist
asking him to send me a draft on Herr Schmalz, or to Herrn
Butter, Milk, and Cheese, or whom he would--a ca! This joke has
succeeded; it is no good making a poor mouth!

We received this forenoon (the 2lst) your letter of the l7th. I
was not at home, but at Cannabich's, where Wendling was
rehearsing a concerto for which I have written the orchestral
accompaniments. To-day at six o'clock the gala concert took
place. I had the pleasure of hearing Herr Franzl (who married a
sister of Madame Cannabich's) play a concerto on the violin; he
pleased me very much. You know that I am no lover of mere
difficulties. He plays difficult music, but it does not appear to
be so; indeed, it seems as if one could easily do the same, and
this is real talent. He has a very fine round tone, not a note
wanting, and everything distinct and well accentuated. He has
also a beautiful staccato in bowing, both up and down, and I
never heard such a double shake as his. In short, though in my
opinion no WIZARD, he is a very solid violin-player.--I do wish I
could conquer my confounded habit of writing crooked.

I am sorry I was not at Salzburg when that unhappy occurrence
took place about Madame Adlgasserin, so that I might have
comforted her; and that I would have done--particularly being so
handsome a woman. [Footnote: Adlgasser was the organist of the
cathedral. His wife was thought very stupid. See the letter of
August 26, 1781.] I know already all that you write to me about
Mannheim, but I never wish to say anything prematurely; all in
good time. Perhaps in my next letter I may tell you of something
VERY GOOD in your eyes, but only GOOD in mine; or something you
will think VERY BAD, but I TOLERABLE; possibly, too, something
only TOLERABLE for you, but VERY GOOD, PRECIOUS, and DELIGHTFUL
for me! This sounds rather oracular, does it not? It is
ambiguous, but still may be divined.

My regards to Herr Bullinger; every time that I get a letter from
you, usually containing a few lines from him, I feel ashamed, as
it reminds me that I have never once written to my best and
truest friend, from whom I have received so much kindness and
civility. But I cannot try to excuse myself. I only beg of him to
do so for me as far as possible, and to believe that, as soon as
I have a little leisure, I will write to him--as yet I have had
none; for from the moment I know that it is even possible or
probable that I may leave a place, I have no longer a single hour
I can call my own, and though I have now a glimmer of hope, still
I shall not be at rest till I know how things are. One of the
oracle's sayings must come to pass. I think it will be the middle
one or the last--I care not which, for at all events it will be
something settled.

I no doubt wrote to you that Holzbauer's grand opera is in
German. If not, I write it now. The title is "Gunther von
Schwarzburg," but not our worshipful Herr Gunther, barber and
councillor at Salzburg! "Rosamunde" is to be given during the
ensuing Carnival, the libretto being a recent composition of
Wieland's, and the music also a new composition of Herr
Schweitzer. Both are to come here. I have already seen some parts
of the opera and tried it over on the piano, but I say nothing
about it as yet. The target you have had painted for me, to be
given in my name to the shooting-match, is first-rate, and the
verses inimitable. [Footnote: For cross-bow practice, attended
weekly by a circle of his Salzburg friends. On the target was
represented "the melancholy farewell of two persons dissolved in
tears, Wolfgang and the 'Basle.'"] I have now no more to write,
except that I wish you all a good night's rest, and that you may
all sleep soundly till this letter comes to wake you. Adieu! I
embrace from my heart--cart, my dear sister--blister, and am your
dutiful and attached son,

WOLFGANG AMADE MOZART,

Knight of the Golden Spur, Member of the great Verona Academy,
Bologna--oui, mon ami!



79.

Mannheim, Nov. 26, 1777.

--MOREOVER, every one acquainted with Mannheim, even the
nobility, advised me to come here. The reason why we are still in
this place is that I have some thoughts of remaining the winter
here, and I am only waiting for an answer from the Elector to
decide my plans. The Intendant, Count Savioli, is a very worthy
gentleman, and I told him to inform the Elector that, this being
such severe weather for travelling, I am willing to remain here
to teach the young Count [Carl Theodor's son]. He promised me to
do his best for me, but said that I must have patience till the
gala days were over. All this took place with the consent and at
the SUGGESTION of Cannabich. When I told him that I had spoken to
Savioli and what I had said, he replied he really thought it was
more likely to be brought about than not. Indeed, Cannabich spoke
to the Elector on the subject before the Count did so; and now I
must wait to hear the result. I am going to call on Herr Schmalz
to draw my 150 florins, for my landlord would no doubt prefer the
sound of gold to that of music. I little thought that I should
have the gift of a watch here, [see No. 74,] but such is again
the case. I would have been off long ago, but every one says to
me, "Where do you intend to go for the winter? Travelling is
detestable in such weather; stay here." Cannabich also wishes it
very much; so now I have taken steps to do so, and as such an
affair cannot be hurried, I must wait with patience, and I hope
soon to be able to send you good news. I have already two pupils
certain, besides the ARCH ones, who certainly won't give me less
than a louis each monthly. Without these I could not indeed
manage to remain. Now let the matter rest as it is, or as it may
be, what avail useless speculations? What is to occur we do not
know; still in so far we do! what God wills!

Now for a cheerful allegro--non siete si pegro. [Footnote: "Don't
be so desponding."] If we do leave this, we shall go straight to-
-where? To Weilburg, or whatever the name of the place may be, to
the Princess, sister of the Prince of Orange, whom we knew so
well at the Hague. There we shall stay--N. B., so long as we like
the officers' table, and no doubt receive at least six louis-
d'or.

A few days ago Herr Sterkel came here from Wurzburg. The day
before yesterday, the 24th, I dined with Cannabich's, and again
at Oberstjager von Hagen's, and spent the evening al solito with
Cannabich, where Sterkel joined us, [Footnote: Abbe Sterkel, a
favorite composer and virtuoso on the piano, whom Beethoven,
along with Simrock, Ries, and the two Rombergs, visited in the
autumn of 1791, in Aschaffenberg.] and played five duets [sonatas
with violin], but so quick that it was difficult to follow the
music, and neither distinctly nor in time. Every one said the
same. Madlle. Cannabich played my six sonatas, and in fact better
than Sterkel. I must now conclude, for I cannot write in bed, and
I am too sleepy to sit up any longer.



80.

Mannheim, Nov. 29, 1777.

I RECEIVED this morning your letter of the 24th, and perceive
that you cannot reconcile yourself to the chances of good or bad
fortune, if, indeed, the latter is to befall us. Hitherto, we
four have neither been very lucky nor very unlucky, for which I
thank God. You make us many reproaches which we do not deserve.
We spend nothing but what is absolutely necessary, and as to what
is required on a journey, you know that as well or better than we
do. No one BUT MYSELF has been the cause of our remaining so long
in Munich; and had I been alone I should have stayed there
altogether. Why were we fourteen days in Augsburg? Surely you
cannot have got my letters from there? I wished to give a
concert. They played me false, so I thus lost eight days. I was
absolument determined to go away, but was not allowed, so strong
was the wish that I should give a concert. I wished to be urged
to do so, and I was urged. I gave the concert; this accounts for
the fourteen days. Why did we go direct to Mannheim? This I
answered in my last letter. Why are we still here? How can you
suppose that I would stay here without good cause? But my father,
at all events, should--Well! you shall hear my reasons and the
whole course of the affair; but I had quite resolved not to write
to you on the subject until I could say something decided, (which
even yet I cannot do,) on purpose to avoid causing you care and
anxiety, which I always strive to do, for I knew that uncertain
intelligence would only fret you. But when you ascribe this to my
negligence, thoughtlessness, and indolence, I can only regret
your having such an opinion of me, and from my heart grieve that
you so little know your son. I am not careless, I am only
prepared for the worst; so I can wait and bear everything
patiently, so long as my honor and my good name of Mozart remain
uninjured. But if it must be so, so let it be. I only beg that
you will neither rejoice nor lament prematurely; for whatever may
happen, all will be well if we only have health; for happiness
exists--merely in the imagination.

Last Thursday week I went in the forenoon to wait on Count
Savioli, and asked him if it were possible to induce the Elector
to keep me here this winter, as I was anxious to give lessons to
his children. His answer was, "I will suggest it to the Elector,
and if it depends on me, the thing will certainly be done." In
the afternoon I went to Cannabich's, and as I had gone to Savioli
by his advice, he immediately asked me if I had been there. I
told him everything, on which he said, "I should like you very
much to spend the winter with us, but still more to see you in
some permanent situation." I replied, "I could wish nothing
better than to be settled near you, but I don't see how it is
possible. You have already two Capellmeisters, so I don't know
what I could have, for I would not be subordinate to Vogler."
"That you would never be," said he. "Here not one of the
orchestra is under the Capellmeister, nor even under the
Intendant. The Elector might appoint you Chamber Court composer;
only wait a little, and I will speak to Count Savioli on the
subject." On the Thursday after there was a grand concert. When
the Count saw me, he apologized for not having yet spoken to the
Elector, these being still gala days; but as soon as they were
over (next Monday) he would certainly speak to his Royal
Highness. I let three days pass, and, still hearing nothing
whatever, I went to him to make inquiries. He said, "My good M.
Mozart, (this was yesterday, Friday,) today there was a chasse,
so it was impossible for me to ask the Elector, but to-morrow at
this hour I will certainly give you an answer." I begged him not
to forget it. To tell you the truth, when I left him I felt
rather indignant, so I resolved to take with me the easiest of my
six variations of the Fischer minuet, (which I wrote here for
this express purpose,) to present to the young Count, in order to
have an opportunity to speak to the Elector myself. When I went
there, you cannot conceive the delight of the governess, by whom
I was most politely received. When I produced the variations, and
said that they were intended for the young Count, she said, "Oh!
that is charming, but I hope you have something for the Countess
also." "Nothing as yet," said I, "but if I stay here long enough
to have time to write something I will do so." "A propos," said
she, "I am so glad that you stay the winter here." "I? I have not
heard a word of it." "That does surprise me; how very odd! for
the Elector told me so himself lately; he said, 'By the by,
Mozart remains here all winter.'" "Well, when he said so, he was
the only man who could say so, for without the Elector I of
course cannot remain here;" and then I told her the whole story.
We agreed that I should come the next day (that is, to-day) at
four o'clock, and bring some piece of music for the Countess. She
was to speak to the Elector before I came; and I should be
certain to meet him. I went today, but he had not been there at
all; but I shall go again to-morrow. I have written a Rondo for
the Countess. Have I not then sufficient cause to stay here and
await the result? As this important step is finally taken, ought
I at this moment to set off? I have now an opportunity of
speaking to the Elector myself. I shall most probably spend the
winter here, for I am a favorite with his Royal Highness, who
thinks highly of me, and knows what I can do. I hope to be able
to give you good news in my next letter. I entreat you once more
neither to rejoice nor to be uneasy too soon, and not to confide
the affair to any one except Herr Bullinger and my sister. I send
my sister the allegro and the andante of the sonata I wrote for
Madlle. Cannabich. The Rondo will follow shortly; the packet
would have been too heavy had I sent it with the others. You must
be satisfied with the original, for you can more easily get it
copied for six kreutzers a sheet than I for twenty-four. Is not
that dear? Adieu! Possibly you have heard some stray bits of this
sonata; for at Cannabich's it is sung three times a day at least,
played on the piano and violin, or whistled--only sotto voce, to
be sure.



81.

Mannheim, Dec. 3, 1777.

I CAN still write nothing certain about my fate here. Last
Monday, after going three days in succession to my ARCH pupils,
morning and afternoon, I had the good fortune at last to meet the
Elector. We all, indeed, thought that I had again come in vain,
as it was so late in the day, but at length we saw him coming.
The governess made the Countess seat herself at the piano, and I
placed myself beside her to give her a lesson, and it was thus
the Elector found us on entering. We rose, but he desired us to
continue the lesson. When she had finished playing, the governess
addressed him, saying that I had written a beautiful Rondo. I
played it, and it pleased him exceedingly. At last he said, "Do
you think that she will be able to learn it?" "Oh! yes," said I;
"I only wish I had the good fortune to teach it to her myself."
He smiled, and said, "I should also like it; but would it not be
prejudicial to her to have two masters?" "Oh, no! your Highness,"
said I; "it all depends on whether she has a good or a bad one. I
hope your Highness will place trust and confidence in me." "Oh,
assuredly," said he. The governess then said, "M. Mozart has also
written these variations on the Fischer minuet for the young
Count." I played them, and he seemed to like them much. He now
began to jest with the Countess. I thanked him for his present of
a watch. He said, "I must reflect on your wish; how long do you
intend to remain here?" My answer was, "As long as your Highness
commands me to do so;" and then the interview was at an end. I
went there again this morning, and was told that the Elector had
repeated yesterday, "Mozart stays here this winter." Now I am
fairly in for it; so you see I must wait.

I dined to-day (for the fourth time) with Wendling. Before
dinner, Count Savioli came in with Capellmeister Schweitzer, who
arrived yesterday evening. Savioli said to me, "I spoke again
yesterday to the Elector, but he has not yet made up his mind." I
answered, "I wish to say a few words to you privately;" so we
went to the window. I told him the doubt the Elector had
expressed, and complained of the affair dragging on so long, and
said how much I had already spent here, entreating him to
persuade the Elector to engage me permanently; for I fear that he
will give me so little during the winter that it will be
impossible for me to remain. "Let him give me work; for I like
work." He said he would certainly suggest it to him, but this
evening it was out of the question, as he was not to go to court;
to-morrow, however, he promised me a decided answer. Now, let
what will happen. If he does not engage me, I shall, at all
events, apply for a sum of money for my travelling expenses, as I
have no intention to make him a present of the Rondo and the
variations. I assure you I am very easy on the subject, because I
feel quite certain that, come what may, all will go right. I am
entirely submissive to the will of God.

Your letter of the 27th arrived yesterday, and I hope you
received the allegro and andante of the sonata. I now enclose the
Rondo. Schweitzer is a good, worthy, upright man, dry and candid
like our Haydn; only his mode of speaking is more polished. There
are some very beautiful things in his new opera, and I don't
doubt that it will prove a great success. "Alceste" is much
liked, and yet it is not half so fine as "Rosamunde." Being the
first German operetta no doubt contributed very much to its
popularity; but now--N. B., on minds chiefly attracted by
novelty--it scarcely makes the same impression. Herr Wieland,
whose poetry it is, is also to come here this winter. That is a
man I should indeed like to see. Who knows? Perhaps I may. When
you read this, dear papa, please God, all will be settled.

If I do stay here, I am going to Paris during Lent with Herr
Wendling, Herr Ramm, the hautboy-player, who plays admirably, and
Ballet-master Cauchery. Wendling assures me I shall never regret
it; he has been twice in Paris, and has only just returned from
there. He says, "It is, in fact, the only place where either real
fame or money is to be acquired. You are a man of genius; I will
put you on the right path. You must write an opera seria and
comique, an oratorio, and every kind of thing. Any one who
composes a couple of operas in Paris receives a certain sum
yearly. There is also the Concert Spirituel and the Academie des
Amateurs, where you get five louis-d'or for a symphony. If you
teach, the custom is three louis-d'or for twelve lessons; and
then you get your sonatas, trios, and quartets published by
subscription. Cannabich and Toeschi send a great part of their
music t