 protest. I
don't know what your psychanalysis is going to show in the end,
but I for one have the greatest sympathy for that poor little
woman in the big house alone, surrounded by and dependent on
servants, while her husband is out collecting scandals."

"Which suggests our next step," he said, turning the subject. "I
hope that Butler has found out the retreat of Veronica Haversham."

We discovered Miss Haversham at last at Dr. Klemm's sanitarium, up
in the hills of Westchester County, a delightful place with a
reputation for its rest cures. Dr. Klemm was an old friend of
Kennedy's, having had some connection with the medical school at
the University.

She had gone up there rather suddenly, it seemed, to recuperate.
At least that was what was given out, though there seemed to be
much mystery about her, and she was taking no treatment as far as
was known.

"Who is her physician?" asked Kennedy of Dr. Klemm as we sat in
his luxurious office.

"A Dr. Maudsley of the city."

Kennedy glanced quickly at me in time to check an exclamation.

"I wonder if I could see her?"

"Why, of course--if she is willing," replied Dr. Klemm.

"I will have to have some excuse," ruminated Kennedy. "Tell her I
am a specialist in nervous troubles from the city, have been
visiting one of the other patients, anything."

Dr. Klemm pulled down a switch on a large oblong oak box on his
desk, asked for Miss Haversham, and waited a moment.

"What is that?" I asked.

"A vocaphone," replied Kennedy. "This sanitarium is quite up to
date, Klemm."

The doctor nodded and smiled. "Yes, Kennedy," he replied.
"Communicating with every suite of rooms we have the vocaphone. I
find it very convenient to have these microphones, as I suppose
you would call them, catching your words without talking into them
directly as you have to do in the telephone and then at the other
end emitting the words without the use of an earpiece, from the
box itself, as if from a megaphone horn. Miss Haversham, this is
Dr. Klemm. There is a Dr. Kennedy here visiting another patient, a
specialist from New York. He'd like very much to see you if you
can spare a few minutes."

"Tell him to come up." The voice seemed to come from the vocaphone
as though she were in the room with us.

Veronica Haversham was indeed wonderful, one of the leading
figures in the night life of New York, a statuesque brunette of
striking beauty, though I had heard of often ungovernable temper.
Yet there was something strange about her face here. It seemed
perhaps a little yellow, and I am sure that her nose had a
peculiar look as if she were suffering from an incipient rhinitis.
The pupils of her eyes were as fine as pin heads, her eyebrows
were slightly elevated. Indeed, I felt that she had made no
mistake in taking a rest if she would preserve the beauty which
had made her popularity so meteoric.

"Miss Haversham," began Kennedy, "they tell me that you are
suffering from nervousness. Perhaps I can help you. At any rate it
will do no harm to try. I know Dr. Maudsley well, and if he
doesn't approve--well, you may throw the treatment into the waste
basket."

"I'm sure I have no reason to refuse," she said. "What would you
suggest?"

"Well, first of all, there is a very simple test I'd like to try.
You won't find that it bothers you in the least--and if I can't
help you, then no harm is done."

Again I watched Kennedy as he tactfully went through the
preparations for another kind of psychanalysis, placing Miss
Haversham at her ease on a davenport in such a way that nothing
would distract her attention. As she reclined against the leather
pillows in the shadow it was not difficult to understand the lure
by which she held together the little coterie of her intimates.
One beautiful white arm, bare to the elbow, hung carelessly over
the edge of the davenport, displaying a plain gold bracelet.

"Now," began Kennedy, on whom I knew the charms of Miss Haversham
produced a negative effect, although one would never have guessed
it from his manner, "as I read off from this list of words, I wish
that you would repeat the first thing, anything," he emphasized,
"that comes into your head, no matter how trivial it may seem.
Don't force yourself to think. Let your ideas flow naturally. It
depends altogether on your paying attention to the words and
answering as quickly as you can--remember, the first word that
comes into your mind. It is easy to do. We'll call it a game," he
reassured.

Kennedy handed a copy of the list to me to record the answers.
There must have been some fifty words, apparently senseless,
chosen at random, it seemed. They were:


 head       to dance    salt        white        lie

 green      sick        new         child        to fear

 water      pride       to pray     sad          stork

 to sing    ink         money       to marry     false

 death      angry       foolish     dear         anxiety

 long       needle      despise     to quarrel   to kiss

 ship       voyage      finger      old          bride

 to pay     to sin      expensive   family       pure

 window     bread       to fall     friend       ridicule

 cold       rich        unjust      luck         to sleep


"The Jung association word test is part of the Freud
psychanalysis, also," he whispered to me, "You remember we tried
something based on the same idea once before?"

I nodded. I had heard of the thing in connection with blood-
pressure tests, but not this way.

Kennedy called out the first word, "Head," while in his hand he
held a stop watch which registered to one-fifth of a second.

Quickly she replied, "Ache," with an involuntary movement of her
hand toward her beautiful forehead.

"Good," exclaimed Kennedy. "You seem to grasp the idea better than
most of my patients."

I had recorded the answer, he the time, and we found out, I recall
afterward, that the time averaged something like two and two-
fifths seconds.

I thought her reply to the second word, "green," was curious. It
came quickly, "Envy."

However, I shall not attempt to give all the replies, but merely
some of the most significant. There did not seem to be any
hesitation about most of the words, but whenever Kennedy tried to
question her about a word that seemed to him interesting she made
either evasive or hesitating answers, until it became evident that
in the back of her head was some idea which she was repressing and
concealing from us, something that she set off with a mental "No
Thoroughfare."

He had finished going through the list, and Kennedy was now
studying over the answers and comparing the time records.

"Now," he said at length, running his eye over the words again, "I
want to repeat the performance. Try to remember and duplicate your
first replies," he said.

Again we went through what at first had seemed to me to be a
solemn farce, but which I began to see was quite important.
Sometimes she would repeat the answer exactly as before. At other
times a new word would occur to her. Kennedy was keen to note all
the differences in the two lists.

One which I recall because the incident made an impression on me
had to do with the trio, "Death--life--inevitable." "Why that?" he
asked casually.

"Haven't you ever heard the saying, 'One should let nothing which
one can have escape, even if a little wrong is done; no
opportunity should be missed; life is so short, death
inevitable'?"

There were several others which to Kennedy seemed more important,
but long after we had finished I pondered this answer. Was that
her philosophy of life? Undoubtedly she would never have
remembered the phrase if it had not been so, at least in a
measure.

She had begun to show signs of weariness, and Kennedy quickly
brought the conversation around to subjects of apparently a
general nature, but skillfully contrived so as to lead the way
along lines her answers had indicated.

Kennedy had risen to go, still chatting. Almost unintentionally he
picked up from a dressing table a bottle of white tablets, without
a label, shaking it to emphasize an entirely, and I believe
purposely, irrelevant remark.

"By the way," he said, breaking off naturally, "what is that?"

"Only something Dr. Maudsley had prescribed for me," she answered
quickly.

As he replaced the bottle and went on with the thread of the
conversation, I saw that in shaking the bottle he had abstracted a
couple of the tablets before she realized it. "I can't tell you
just what to do without thinking the case over," he concluded,
rising to go. "Yours is a peculiar case, Miss Haversham, baffling.
I'll have to study it over, perhaps ask Dr. Maudsley If I may see
you again. Meanwhile, I am sure what he is doing is the correct
thing."

Inasmuch as she had said nothing about what Dr. Maudsley was
doing, I wondered whether there was not just a trace of suspicion
in her glance at him from under her long dark lashes.

"I can't see that you have done anything," she remarked pointedly.
"But then doctors are queer--queer."

That parting shot also had in it, for me, something to ponder
over. In fact I began to wonder if she might not be a great deal
more clever than even Kennedy gave her credit for being, whether
she might not have submitted to his tests for pure love of pulling
the wool over his eyes.

Downstairs again, Kennedy paused only long enough to speak a few
words with his friend Dr. Klemm.

"I suppose you have no idea what Dr. Maudsley has prescribed for
her?" he asked carelessly.

"Nothing, as far as I know, except rest and simple food."

He seemed to hesitate, then he said under his voice, "I suppose
you know that she is a regular dope fiend, seasons her cigarettes
with opium, and all that."

"I guessed as much," remarked Kennedy, "but how does she get it
here?"

"She doesn't."

"I see," remarked Craig, apparently weighing now the man before
him. At length he seemed to decide to risk something.

"Klemm," he said, "I wish you would do something for me. I see you
have the vocaphone here. Now if--say Hazleton--should call--will
you listen in on that vocaphone for me?" Dr. Klemm looked squarely
at him.

"Kennedy," he said, "it's unprofessional, but---"

"So it is to let her be doped up under guise of a cure."

"What?" he asked, startled. "She's getting the stuff now?"

"No, I didn't say she was getting opium, or from anyone here. All
the same, if you would just keep an ear open---"

"It's unprofessional, but--you'd not ask it without a good reason.
I'll try."

It was very late when we got back to the city and we dined at an
uptown restaurant which we had almost to ourselves.

Kennedy had placed the little whitish tablets in a small paper
packet for safe keeping. As we waited for our order he drew one
from his pocket, and after looking at it a moment crushed it to a
powder in the paper.

"What is it?" I asked curiously. "Cocaine?"

"No," he said, shaking his head doubtfully.

He had tried to dissolve a little of the powder in some water from
the glass before him, but it would not dissolve.

As he continued to look at it his eye fell on the cut-glass
vinegar cruet before us. It was full of the white vinegar.

"Really acetic acid," he remarked, pouring out a little.

The white powder dissolved.

For several minutes he continued looking at the stuff.

"That, I think," he remarked finally, "is heroin."

"More 'happy dust'?" I replied with added interest now, thinking
of our previous case. "Is the habit so extensive?"

"Yes," he replied, "the habit is comparatively new, although in
Paris, I believe, they call the drug fiends, 'heroinomaniacs.' It
is, as I told you before, a derivative of morphine. Its scientific
name is diacetyl-morphin. It is New York's newest peril, one of
the most dangerous drugs yet. Thousands are slaves to it, although
its sale is supposedly restricted. It is rotting the heart out of
the Tenderloin. Did you notice Veronica Haversham's yellowish
whiteness, her down-drawn mouth, elevated eyebrows, and contracted
eyes? She may have taken it up to escape other drugs. Some people
have--and have just got a new habit. It can be taken
hypodermically, or in a tablet, or by powdering the tablet to a
white crystalline powder and snuffing up the nose. That's the way
she takes it. It produces rhinitis of the nasal passages, which I
see you observed, but did not understand. It has a more profound
effect than morphine, and is ten times as powerful as codeine. And
one of the worst features is that so many people start with it,
thinking it is as harmless as it has been advertised. I wouldn't
be surprised if she used from seventy-five to a hundred one-
twelfth grain tablets a day. Some of them do, you know."

"And Dr. Maudsley," I asked quickly, "do you think it is through
him or in spite of him?"

"That's what I'd like to know. About those words," he continued,
"what did you make of the list and the answers?"

I had made nothing and said so, rather quickly.

"Those," he explained, "were words selected and arranged to strike
almost all the common complexes in analyzing and diagnosing. You'd
think any intelligent person could give a fluent answer to them,
perhaps a misleading answer. But try it yourself, Walter. You'll
find you can't. You may start all right, but not all the words
will be reacted to in the same time or with the same smoothness
and ease. Yet, like the expressions of a dream, they often seem
senseless. But they have a meaning as soon as they are
'psychanalyzed.' All the mistakes in answering the second time,
for example, have a reason, if we can only get at it. They are not
arbitrary answers, but betray the inmost subconscious thoughts,
those things marked, split off from consciousness and repressed
into the unconscious. Associations, like dreams, never lie. You
may try to conceal the emotions and unconscious actions, but you
can't."

I listened, fascinated by Kennedy's explanation.

"Anyone can see that that woman has something on her mind besides
the heroin habit. It may be that she is trying to shake the habit
off in order to do it; it may be that she seeks relief from her
thoughts by refuge in the habit; and it may be that some one has
purposely caused her to contract this new habit in the guise of
throwing off an old. The only way by which to find out is to study
the case."

He paused. He had me keenly on edge, but I knew that he was not
yet in a position to answer his queries positively.

"Now I found," he went on, "that the religious complexes were
extremely few; as I expected the erotic were many. If you will
look over the three lists you will find something queer about
every such word as, 'child, 'to marry,' 'bride,' 'to lie,'
'stork,' and so on. We're on the right track. That woman does know
something about that child."

"My eye catches the words 'to sin,' 'to fall,' 'pure,' and
others," I remarked, glancing over the list.

"Yes, there's something there, too. I got the hint for the drug
from her hesitation over 'needle' and 'white.' But the main
complex has to do with words relating to that child and to love.
In short, I think we are going to find it to be the reverse of the
rule of the French, that it will be a case of 'cherchez l'homme.'"

Early the next day Kennedy, after a night of studying over the
case, journeyed up to the sanitarium again. We found Dr. Klemm
eager to meet us.

"What is it?" asked Kennedy, equally eager.

"I overheard some surprising things over the vocaphone," he
hastened. "Hazleton called. Why, there must have been some wild
orgies in that precious set of theirs, and, would you believe it,
many of them seem to have been at what Dr. Maudsley calls his
'stable studio,' a den he has fixed up artistically over his
garage on a side street."

"Indeed?"

"I couldn't get it all, but I did hear her repeating over and over
to Hazleton, 'Aren't you all mine? Aren't you all mine?' There
must be some vague jealousy lurking in the heart of that ardent
woman. I can't figure it out."

"I'd like to see her again," remarked Kennedy. "Will you ask her
if I may?"




CHAPTER XXXVI

THE ENDS OF JUSTICE


A few minutes later we were in the sitting room of her suite. She
received us rather ungraciously, I thought.

"Do you feel any better?" asked Kennedy.

"No," she replied curtly. "Excuse me for a moment. I wish to see
that maid of mine. Clarisse!"

She had hardly left the room when Kennedy was on his feet. The
bottle of white tablets, nearly empty, was still on the table. I
saw him take some very fine white powder and dust it quickly over
the bottle. It seemed to adhere, and from his pocket he quickly
drew a piece of what seemed to be specially prepared paper, laid
it over the bottle where the powder adhered, fitting it over the
curves. He withdrew it quickly, for outside we heard her light
step, returning. I am sure she either saw or suspected that
Kennedy had been touching the bottle of tablets, for there was a
look of startled fear on her face.

"Then you do not feel like continuing the tests we abandoned last
night?" asked Kennedy, apparently not noticing her look.

"No, I do not," she almost snapped. "You--you are detectives. Mrs.
Hazleton has sent you."

"Indeed, Mrs. Hazleton has not sent us," insisted Kennedy, never
for an instant showing his surprise at her mention of the name.

"You are. You can tell her, you can tell everybody. I'll tell--
I'll tell myself. I won't wait. That child is mine--mine--not
hers. Now--go!"

Veronica Haversham on the stage never towered in a fit of passion
as she did now in real life, as her ungovernable feelings broke
forth tempestuously on us.

I was astounded, bewildered at the revelation, the possibilities
in those simple words, "The child is mine." For a moment I was
stunned. Then as the full meaning dawned on me I wondered in a
flood of consciousness whether it was true. Was it the product of
her drug-disordered brain? Had her desperate love for Hazleton
produced a hallucination?

Kennedy, silent, saw that the case demanded quick action. I shall
never forget the breathless ride down from the sanitarium to the
Hazleton house on Riverside Drive.

"Mrs. Hazleton," he cried, as we hurried in, "you will pardon me
for this unceremonious intrusion, but it is most important. May I
trouble you to place your fingers on this paper--so?"

He held out to her a piece of the prepared paper. She looked at
him once, then saw from his face that he was not to be questioned.
Almost tremulously she did as he said, saying not a word. I
wondered whether she knew the story of Veronica, or whether so far
only hints of it had been brought to her.

"Thank you," he said quickly. "Now, if I may see Morton?"

It was the first time we had seen the baby about whom the rapidly
thickening events were crowding. He was a perfect specimen of
well-cared-for, scientific infant.

Kennedy took the little chubby fingers playfully in his own. He
seemed at once to win the child's confidence, though he may have
violated scientific rules. One by one he pressed the little
fingers on the paper, until little Morton crowed with delight as
one little piggy after another "went to market." He had deserted
thousands of dollars' worth of toys just to play with the simple
piece of paper Kennedy had brought with him. As I looked at him, I
thought of what Kennedy had said at the start. Perhaps this
innocent child was not to be envied after all. I could hardly
restrain my excitement over the astounding situation which had
suddenly developed.

"That will do," announced Kennedy finally, carelessly folding up
the paper and slipping it into his pocket. "You must excuse me
now."

"You see," he explained on the way to the laboratory, "that powder
adheres to fresh finger prints, taking all the gradations. Then
the paper with its paraffine and glycerine coating takes off the
powder."

In the laboratory he buried himself in work, with microscope
compasses, calipers, while I fumed impotently at the window.

"Walter," he called suddenly, "get Dr. Maudsley on the telephone.
Tell him to come immediately to the laboratory."

Meanwhile Kennedy was busy arranging what he had discovered in
logical order and putting on it the finishing touches.

As Dr. Maudsley entered Kennedy greeted him and began by plunging
directly into the case in answer to his rather discourteous
inquiry as to why he had been so hastily summoned.

"Dr. Maudsley," said Craig, "I have asked you to call alone
because, while I am on the verge of discovering the truth in an
important case affecting Morton Hazleton and his wife, I am
frankly perplexed as to how to go ahead."

The doctor seemed to shake with excitement as Kennedy proceeded.

"Dr. Maudsley," Craig added, dropping his voice, "is Morton III
the son of Millicent Hazleton or not? You were the physician in
attendance on her at the birth. Is he?"

Maudsley had been watching Kennedy furtively at first, but as he
rapped out the words I thought the doctor's eyes would pop out of
his head. Perspiration in great beads collected on his face.

"P--professor K--Kennedy," he muttered, frantically rubbing his
face and lower jaw as if to compose the agitation he could so ill
conceal, "let me explain."

"Yes, yes--go on," urged Kennedy.

"Mrs. Hazleton's baby was born--dead. I knew how much she and the
rest of the family had longed for an heir, how much it meant. And
I--substituted for the dead child a newborn baby from the
maternity hospital. It--it belonged to Veronica Haversham--then a
poor chorus girl. I did not intend that she should ever know it. I
intended that she should think her baby was dead. But in some way
she found out. Since then she has become a famous beauty, has
numbered among her friends even Hazleton himself. For nearly two
years I have tried to keep her from divulging the secret. From
time to time hints of it have leaked out. I knew that if Hazleton
with his infatuation of her were to learn---" "And Mrs. Hazleton,
has she been told?" interrupted Kennedy.

"I have been trying to keep it from her as long as I can, but it
has been difficult to keep Veronica from telling it. Hazleton
himself was so wild over her. And she wanted her son as she---"

"Maudsley," snapped out Kennedy, slapping down on the table the
mass of prints and charts which he had hurriedly collected and was
studying, "you lie! Morton is Millicent Hazleton's son. The whole
story is blackmail. I knew it when she told me of her dreams and I
suspected first some such devilish scheme as yours. Now I know it
scientifically."

He turned over the prints.

"I suppose that study of these prints, Maudsley, will convey
nothing to you. I know that it is usually stated that there are no
two sets of finger prints in the world that are identical or that
can be confused. Still, there are certain similarities of finger
prints and other characteristics, and these similarities have
recently been exhaustively studied by Bertilion, who has found
that there are clear relationships sometimes between mother and
child in these respects. If Solomon were alive, doctor, he would
not now have to resort to the expedient to which he did when the
two women disputed over the right to the living child. Modern
science is now deciding by exact laboratory methods the same
problem as he solved by his unique knowledge of feminine
psychology.

"I saw how this case was tending. Not a moment too soon, I said to
myself, 'The hand of the child will tell.' By the very variations
in unlike things, such as finger and palm prints, as tabulated and
arranged by Bertillon after study in thousands of cases, by the
very loops, whorls, arches and composites, I have proved my case.

"The dominancy, not the identity, of heredity through the infinite
varieties of finger markings is sometimes very striking. Unique
patterns in a parent have been repeated with marvelous accuracy in
the child. I knew that negative results might prove nothing in
regard to parentage, a caution which it is important to observe.
But I was prepared to meet even that.

"I would have gone on into other studies, such as Tammasia's, of
heredity in the veining of the back of the hands; I would have
measured the hands, compared the relative proportion of the parts;
I would have studied them under the X-ray as they are being
studied to-day; I would have tried the Reichert blood crystal test
which is being perfected now so that it will tell heredity itself.
There is no scientific stone I would have left unturned until I
had delved at the truth of this riddle. Fortunately it was not
necessary. Simple finger prints have told me enough. And best of
all, it has been in time to frustrate that devilish scheme you and
Veronica Haversham have been slowly unfolding."

Maudsley crumpled up, as it were, at Kennedy's denunciation. He
seemed to shrink toward the door.

"Yes," cried Kennedy, with extended forefinger, "you may go--for
the present. Don't try to run away. You're watched from this
moment on."

Maudsley had retreated precipitately.

I looked at Kennedy inquiringly. What to do? It was indeed a
delicate situation, requiring the utmost care to handle. If the
story had been told to Hazleton, what might he not have already
done? He must be found first of all if we were to meet the
conspiracy of these two.

Kennedy reached quickly for the telephone. "There is one stream of
scandal that can be dammed at its source," he remarked, calling a
number. "Hello. Klemm's Sanitarium? I'd like to speak with Miss
Haversham. What--gone? Disappeared? Escaped?"

He hung up the receiver and looked at me blankly. I was
speechless.

A thousand ideas flew through our minds at once. Had she perceived
the import of our last visit and was she now on her way to
complete her plotted slander of Millicent Hazleton, though it
pulled down on herself in the end the whole structure?

Hastily Kennedy called Hazleton's home, Butler, and one after
another of Hazleton's favorite clubs. It was not until noon that
Butler himself found him and came with him, under protest, to the
laboratory.

"What is it--what have you found?" cried Butler, his lean form a-
quiver with suppressed excitement.

Briefly, one fact after another, sparing Hazleton nothing, Kennedy
poured forth the story, how by hint and innuendo Maudsley had been
working on Millicent, undermining her, little knowing that he had
attacked in her a very tower of strength, how Veronica, infatuated
by him, had infatuated him, had led him on step by step.

Pale and agitated, with nerves unstrung by the life he had been
leading, Hazleton listened. And as Kennedy hammered one fact after
another home, he clenched his fists until the nails dug into his
very palms.

"The scoundrels," he ground out, as Kennedy finished by painting
the picture of the brave little broken-hearted woman fighting off
she knew not what, and the golden-haired, innocent baby stretching
out his arms in glee at the very chance to prove that he was what
he was. "The scoundrels--take me to Maudsley now. I must see
Maudsley. Quick!"

As we pulled up before the door of the reconstructed stable-
studio, Kennedy jumped out. The door was unlocked. Up the broad
flight of stairs, Hazleton went two at a time. We followed him
closely.

Lying on the divan in the room that had been the scene of so many
orgies, locked in each other's arms, were two figures--Veronica
Haversham and Dr. Maudsley.

She must have gone there directly after our visit to Dr. Klemm's,
must have been waiting for him when he returned with his story of
the exposure to answer her fears of us as Mrs. Hazleton's
detectives. In a frenzy of intoxication she must have flung her
arms blindly about him in a last wild embrace.

Hazleton looked, aghast.

He leaned over and took her arm. Before he could frame the name,
"Veronica!" he had recoiled.

The two were cold and rigid.

"An overdose of heroin this time," muttered Kennedy.

My head was in a whirl.

Hazleton stared blankly at the two figures abjectly lying before
him, as the truth burned itself indelibly into his soul. He
covered his face with his hands. And still he saw it all.

Craig said nothing. He was content to let what he had shown work
in the man's mind.

"For the sake of--that baby--would she--would she forgive?" asked
Hazleton, turning desperately toward Kennedy.

Deliberately Kennedy faced him, not as scientist and millionaire,
but as man and man.

"From my psychanalysis," he said slowly, "I should say that it IS
within your power, in time, to change those dreams."

Hazleton grasped Kennedy's hand before he knew it.

"Kennedy--home--quick. This is the first manful impulse I have had
for two years. And, Jameson--you'll tone down that part of it in
the newspapers that Junior--might read--when he grows up?"


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The War Terror, by Arthur B. Reeve





Produced by David Starner and the Online Distributed Proofreader's Team.









WISDOM OF THE EAST

BUDDHIST PSALMS

TRANSLATED FROM THE JAPANESE

OF

SHINRAN SHONIN

BY S. YAMABE AND L. ADAMS BECK



CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

LAUDING THE INFINITE ONE

OF PARADISE

CONCERNING THE GREAT SUTRA

CONCERNING THE SUTRA OF THE MEDITATION

CONCERNING THE LESSER SUTRA

OF THE MANY SUTRAS CONCERNING THE INFINITE ONE

CONCERNING THE WELFARE OF THE PRESENT WORLD

OF THANKSGIVING FOR NAGARJUNA, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

OF THANKSGIVING FOR VASUBANDH, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

OF THANKSGIVING FOR DONRAN, THE GREAT TEACHER OF CHINA

CONCERNING UNRIGHTEOUS DEEDS

CONCERNING DOSHAKU-ZENJI

CONCERNING ZENDO-DAISHI

CONCERNING GENSHIN-SOZU

CONCERNING HONEN SHONIN

OF THE THREE PERIODS

CONCERNING BELIEF AND DOUBT

IN PRAISE OF PRINCE SHOTOKU

WHEREIN WITH LAMENTATION I MAKE MY CONFESSION

ADDITIONAL PSALMS



INTRODUCTION

BY L. ADAMS BECK

It is a singular fact that though many of the earlier Buddhist
Scriptures have been translated by competent scholars, comparatively
little attention has been paid to later Buddhist devotional
writings, and this although the developments of Buddhism in China
and Japan give them the deepest interest as reflecting the spiritual
mind of those two great countries. They cannot, however, be
understood without some knowledge of the faith which passed so
entirely into their life that in its growth it lost some of its own
infant traits and took on others, rooted, no doubt, in the
beginnings in India, but expanded and changed as the features of the
child may be forgotten in the face of the man and yet perpetuate the
unbroken succession of heredity. It is especially true that Japan
cannot be understood without some knowledge of the Buddhism of the
Greater Vehicle (as the developed form is called), for it was the
influence that moulded her youth as a nation, that shaped her
aspirations, and was the inspiration of her art, not only in the
written word, but in every art and higher handicraftsmanship that
makes her what she is. Whatever centuries may pass or the future
hold in store for her, Japan can never lose the stamp of Buddhism in
her outer or her spiritual life.

The world knows little as yet of the soul of Mahayana Buddhism,
though much of its outer observance, and for this reason a crucial
injustice has been done in regarding it merely as a degraded form of
the earlier Buddhism--a rank off-shoot of the teachings of the
Gautama Buddha, a system of idolatry and priestly power from which
the austere purity of the earlier faith has passed away.

The truth is that Buddhism, like Christianity, in every country
where it has sowed its seed and reaped its harvest, developed along
the lines indicated by the mind of that people. The Buddhism of
Japan differs from that of Tibet as profoundly as the Christianity
of Abyssinia from that of Scotland--yet both have conserved the
essential principle.

Buddhism was not a dead abstraction, but a living faith, and it
therefore grew and changed with the growth of the mind of man,
enlarging its perception of truth. As in the other great faiths, the
ascent of the Mount of Vision reveals worlds undreamed, and
proclaims what may seem to be new truths, but are only new aspects
of the Eternal. Japanese Buddhists still base their belief on the
utterances of the Buddhas, but they have enlarged their conception
of the truths so taught, and they hold that the new flower and fruit
spring from the roots that were planted in dim ages before the
Gautama Buddha taught in India, and have since rushed hundred-armed
to the sun. Such is the religious history of mankind, and Buddhism
obeys its sequence.

The development of Mahayana Buddhism from the teaching of the
Gautama Buddha has been often compared with that of the Christian
faith from the Jewish, but it may be better compared with the growth
of a sacerdotal system from the simplicities of the Gospel of
St. Mark. That the development should have been on the same lines in
all essential matters of symbol and (in the most important respects)
of doctrine, modified only by Eastern habits of thought and
environment, is a miracle of coincidence which cannot be paralleled
in the world unless it be granted that Christianity filtering along
the great trade routes of an earlier world joined hands with
Buddhism in many unsuspected ways and places. Evidence is
accumulating that this is so, and in a measure at present almost
incredible. And if it be so--if it be true that in spite of racial
distinctions, differences of thought and circumstance, the religious
thought of East and West has so many and so great meeting-points,
the hope of the world in things spiritual may lie in the recognition
of that fact and in a future union now shadowed forth only in symbol
and in a great hope. This, however, is no essay on Buddhism, either
earlier or later, and what I have said is necessary to the
introduction of these Jodo-Wasan, or Psalms of the Pure Land, which
are a part not only of the literature, but also of the daily worship
and spiritual life of Japan. Their history may be briefly told.

Buddhism passed into Japan from China and Korea about 1320 years
ago, in or about the year A.D. 552. It adapted itself with perfect
comprehension to the ideals of the Japanese people, inculcating
among them the teachings of morality common to the great faiths
with, in addition, the spiritual unction, the passion of love and
sympathy, self-devotion, and compassion, in which Buddhism and
Christianity are alike pre-eminent. The negative side of Buddhism,
with its passionless calm and self-renunciation, is the only one
that has been realised in the West, and the teachings of Mahayana
which have borne fruit and flower, visible to all the world, of
happiness, courtesy, kindliness in the spiritual attitude of a whole
people, have never received the honour which was their due.

For with the Buddhist faith there came the germ of the belief that
the Gautama Buddha in his own grandeur bore witness to One
Greater--the Amitabha or Amida Buddha--that One who in boundless
light abideth, life of the Universe, without colour, without form,
the Lover of man, his Protector and Refuge. He may, He must be
worshipped, for in Him are all the essential attributes of Deity,
and He, the Saviour of mankind, has prepared a pure land of peace
for his servants, beyond the storms of life and death. This belief
eventually crystallised and became a dogma in the faith of the Pure
Land, known in Japan as Jodo Shinshu, a faith held by the majority
of the Japanese people. It is a Belief which has spread also in
Eastern Siberia, many parts of China, Hawaii, and, in fact,
whereever the Japanese race has spread. And the man who stated this
belief for all time was Shinran Shonin, author of the Psalms here
presented.

He was born in the year A.D. 1175 near City-Royal--Kyoto, the
ancient capital of Japan. He was a son of one of the noblest
families, in close connection with the Imperial House, and had it
not been for the passion for truth and the life of the spirit which
consumed him, his history would have been that of the many other
brilliant young men who sank into mere courtiers--"Dwellers above
the Clouds," as the royalties and courtiers of the day were called
among the people. But the clear air above the clouds in which his
spirit spread its wings was not that of City-Royal, and the Way
opened before him as it has opened before many a saint of the
Christian Church, for while still a child he lost both his parents,
and so, meditating on the impermanence of mortal life, and seeing
how the fashion of this world passes away, he abandoned his title
and became a monk in one of the noble monasteries whose successors
still stand glorious among the pine woods above Lake Biwa.

These were not only monasteries, but seats of learning, as in Europe
in the Middle Ages, and here the Doctrines were subjected to
brilliant analysis and logical subtleties which had almost
superseded the living faith. In that cold atmosphere the spirit of
Shiran Shonin could not spread its wings, though for twenty years he
gave his thoughts to its empty glitter. Therefore, at the age of
twenty-nine he cast it all behind him, and in deep humility cast
himself at the feet of the great Teacher Honen, who, in the shades
of Higashiyama, was setting forth the saving power of the Eternal
One who abideth in the Light and in whom is no darkness--the Buddha
of Boundless Light. And in this place and from this man Shinran
received enlightenment.

Life now lay before him as a problem. Unlike as the two men are in
character and methods, his position resembled that of Martin Luther
on quitting the Church of Rome. For the Buddhist monastic rule
requires its members to be homeless, celibate, vegetarian, and here,
like Luther, Shinran joined issue with them. To his mind the
attainment of man lay in the harmonious development of body and
spirit, and in the fulfilment, not the negation of the ordinary
human duties. Accordingly, in his thirty-first year, after deep
consideration, he married the daughter of Prince Kujo Kanezane,
Chief Minister of the Emperor and head of one of the greatest houses
in Japan, and in that happy union he tasted four years of simple
domestic joy, during which a son was born to him. Then the storm
broke.

Trouble was stirred up by the orthodox Buddhist Church with evil
reports which reached the ears of the Emperor, and Shinran was sent
into banishment in the lonely and primitive province of Echigo--a
terrible alternative for a man of noble birth and refined
culture. He took it, however, with perfect serenity as a mission to
those untaught and neglected people, and into their darkness he
brought the light of the Father of Lights, and the people flocked to
the warmth and wonder of the new hope, and heard him gladly. The
story is told by a contemporary, whom I have thus rendered:

"In the spring of the third year of the era of Kennin, the age of
Shinran Shonin was twenty-nine. Driven by the desire for seclusion,
he departed to the monastery of Yoshimizu. For as his day was so
remote from the era of the Lord Buddha, and the endurance of man in
the practice of religious austerity was now weakened, he would fain
seek the one broad, straight way that is now made plain before us,
leaving behind him the more devious and difficult roads in which he
had a long time wandered. For so it was that Honen Shonin, the great
teacher of the Doctrine of the Land of Pure Light, had taught him
plainly of the inmost heart of the Faith, raising up in him the firm
foundation of that teaching. Therefore he certainly received at that
time the true meaning of the Divine Promise of universal salvation,
and attained unto the imperishable faith by which alone the ignorant
can enter into Nirvana without condition or price.

"From the province of Echigo Shinran passed onward to that of
Hitachi, and entered into seclusion at Inada, that little village of
the region of Kasama. Very lonely was his dwelling, yet many
disciples sought after him, and though the humble door of the
monastery was closed against them, many nobles and lesser persons
thronged into the village. So his hope of spreading abroad the Holy
Teaching was fulfilled and his desire to bring joy to the people was
satisfied. Thus he declared that the revelation vouchsafed to him in
the Temple of Rokkaku by the Bodhisattwa of Pity was indeed made
manifest."

It is that revelation which speaks in these Psalms--the love,
aspiration, passion for righteousness and humility which are the
heart of all the great religious utterances of the world.

"Alas for me, Shinran, the ignorant exile who sinks into the deeps
of the great ocean of human affections, who toils to climb the high
mountains of worldly prosperity, and is neither glad to be with them
who return no more to illusion, nor takes delight in approaching
more nearly to true enlightenment. O the pity of it! O the shame of
it!"

This cry alternates with the joy of perfect aspiration, and it is
that which keeps these psalms in warm human touch with the
spirituality that is neither of race nor time, but for eternity.

He was sixty-two years of age when he returned from exile to
City-Royal, and though he made it his centre, it was his home no
more. He wandered from place to place, teaching as he went, after
the manner of the Buddhas. At the age of ninety his strength
suddenly failed, and the next day he passed away in perfect peace.

Such were the outward events of his life; his own writings must give
the history of his soul. His teachings to-day are spread far and
wide in the land of his birth, and are an inspiration to millions
within and without its shores. In him was the harmonised spirit of
Buddhism at its highest. Those who can enter into the heart of
Shinran Shonin will have gained understanding of the heart of a
mighty people which is said to be impossible of Western reading, and
yet in its essentials is simple as the heart of a child.

                                  L. ADAMS BECK.



EDITORIAL NOTE

The object of the Editors of this series is a very definite
one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these
books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding
between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of
Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but
followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident
that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of
Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of
Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another
creed and colour.

                                 L. CRANMER-BYNG.  S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY, 21 CROMWELL ROAD, KENSINGTON, S.W.



BUDDHIST PSALMS


LAUDING THE INFINITE ONE

1. Since He who is Infinite attained unto the Wisdom Supreme, the
long, long ages of ten Kalpas have rolled away.

The Light of His Dharma-Kaya is in this world eyes to the blind.

2. Seek refuge in the True Illumination! For the light of His Wisdom
is infinite.

In all the worlds there is nothing upon which His light shines not.

3. Take refuge in the Light universal.

As the Light of His deliverance is boundless, he who is within it is
freed from the lie of affirmation or denial.

4. Seek refuge in That which is beyond understanding,

For His glory is all-embracing as the air. It shineth and pierceth
all things, and there is nothing hid from the light thereof.

5. Take refuge in the ultimate Strength, for His pure radiance is
above all things. He who perceiveth this Light is set free from the
fetters of Karma.

6. Seek refuge in the World-Honoured.

Since His glorious radiance is above all He is called the Buddha of
Divine Light. And by Him is the darkness of the three worlds
Enlightened.

7. Excellent is the Light of His Wisdom. Therefore is he called the
Buddha of Clear Shining.

He who is within the Light, being washed from the soil of Karma,
shall attain unto the final deliverance.

8. Take refuge in the Mighty Consoler. Wheresoever His mercy shineth
throughout all the worlds, men rejoice in its gladdening light.

9. The darkness of ignorance perisheth before His light. Therefore
is He hailed as the Buddha of Radiant Wisdom. All the Buddhas and
the threefold choir of sages praise Him.

10. His glory shineth for ever and ever. Therefore is He called the
Buddha of Everlasting Light.

Most excellent is the virtue of this light, for he who perceiveth it
is born into Paradise without dissolution of being.

11. The glory of the Infinite is boundless, therefore is He known as
the Buddha of Light Past Comprehension.

All the Buddhas glorify the majesty of His holiness that leadeth all
the earth into His Kingdom.

12. His clear shining transcendeth all revelation, nor can human
speech utter it. Therefore is He named the Buddha of Light
Unspeakable.

All the Buddhas glorify the glory of the Infinite One who is Buddha
through His promise of Light immeasurable.

13. Take refuge in Him who is Holiest of Holy. Sun and moon are
lost in the ocean of His splendour. Therefore is He named that
Infinite in whose radiance Sun and Moon are darkened. Before whose
Divine Power even that Buddha made flesh in India himself faltereth
in ascribing praise to the Majesty of His true glory.

14. Far beyond human numbering are the wise in the high assemblage
of the Infinite One. Therefore let him who would be born into the
Land of Purity seek refuge in the Great Congregation.

15. In Paradise are the Mighty unnumbered, Bodhisattvas ranked in
that hierarchy nearest to the Perfect Enlightenment. Thence are they
made flesh upon earth according to the way of salvation that all
having life might be saved.

16. Take refuge in the ocean-deep Soul Universal.

For the sake of all dwelling in the Ten Regions hath He kept the
fullness of all the Teachings, in His divine and mighty promises.

17. He who is Infinite never resteth, for together with the
Bodhisattvas of Compassion and Pure Reason He laboureth, that the
souls of them that duly receive Him may have salvation, enlightening
them with the light of His mercy.

18. When he who is born into the land of Pure Peace returneth again
into this sinful world, even like unto that Buddha made flesh in
India, he wearieth not in seeking the welfare of all men.

19. Seek refuge in the World-Honoured, for His Divine Power is
Almighty and beyond man's measure, being made perfect in
inconceivable Holiness.

20. The Sravakas, the Bodhisattvas, the Heavenly Beings and Souls in
Paradise, they in whom wisdom is made equal unto beauty, declare
their attributes in order, according to their former birth.

21. Seek refuge in Him in whom all strengths are equal.

Nought is there to compare with the excellent beauty of the Souls in
Paradise, for their being is infinite as space, and far are they
above celestials and mortal man.

22. Whoso would be born into Paradise shall in this life be made one
with those men that return no more unto birth and death.

In that Pure Land is none who hath stood among doubting men, and
none also who hath trusted in his own deeds for Salvation. To this
do all the Buddhas witness.

23. If all having life in the Ten Regions hear this Holiest Name of
Him that is Infinite, and attain unto the true faith, they shall
obtain joy and gladness.

24. For when a man with joy accepteth the sacred vow of Him that is
infinite who saith, "I will not attain unto perfect Enlightenment
unless in Me shall all the world be made whole," at that very time
he shall assuredly be born into Paradise.

25. Seek refuge in the Almighty Spirit.

By the divine might of His promise, by the Infinite One was Paradise
created; yea, and the Souls of men that dwell therein. And there is
nought that may compare with them.

26. Seek refuge in the unutterable Wisdom.

Of His Land of Peace the half cannot be told. Even the word of the
Buddha himself could not utter it.

27. Myriads of happy souls were born, are born and shall be born
into that Land of Purity, not from this world alone, but from the
hidden worlds also, and the Ten Regions.

28. So soon as man heareth the holy name of the Infinite One and
with great gladness praiseth him, he shall attain to the reward of
the holy Treasury of Merit.

29. Go forward, O Valiant Souls, seeking the Law though all the
worlds fall into flame and ruin, for ye shall have passed beyond
birth and death!

30. The innumerable Buddhas praise the triumphant divinity of the
Bringer of Light. To Him do gather the myriad Bodhisattvas,
unnumbered as the Sands of Ganges in worship from the Eastern world.

31. As from the East, so gather also to the Infinite One the
Bodhisattvas from the Nine Regions of the worlds.

With Sacred Psalms the Gautama Buddha himself laudeth the boundless
glory of the Infinite One.

32. Seek refuge in the World-Honoured.

To Him do the myriad Buddhas of the ten Regions bring homage with
songs and praises, that they may sow the seeds of merit.

33. Bring homage to the Hall of Great Teaching and to the living Bo
tree that is in Paradise! Yet this land, glorious with the Holy
Tree, radiant with the Hall of Great Teaching that shineth with the
Seven Jewels, where innumerable souls hastening from all the ends of
the Earth shall be born, is but the temporal Paradise.

34. In awful reverence seek refuge in the purity of Him that
welcometh. For by His Divine Promise was this glorious land, great
beyond human measurement, made to be.

35. Seek refuge in the wisdom inconceivable. For the perfection of
His Virtue--that Virtue availing for all the world, and the perfect
way by which He willeth that man shall take refuge in Him, are past
all human speech or thought.

36. Take refuge in the wisdom that is most truly infinite. For He is
faithful, having promised in His Divine Might, and on his perfect
clear promise that cannot be shaken is the merciful way of salvation
builded.


OF PARADISE

37. Seek refuge in the heavenly harmony.

For the jewel groves and gem trees of Paradise give forth a sweet
and most excellent melody in pure and ordered unison.

38. Seek refuge in the Divine Promise, the Treasury of Merit,

For the seven jewel trees are fragrant in Paradise where the
flowers, the fruits, the branches and the leaves thereof

Cast back their radiance the one to the other.

39. Bring homage to the perfect Righteousness.

As the pure wind blows over the trees glorious with jewels,

It draweth from them a noble music with five-fold strains of
harmony.

40. In all the world is no place hidden from the glory shed by
hundreds of myriad rays from the heart of every flower of Paradise.

41. Like unto a golden mountain reflecting the myriad rays of these
heavenly blossoms, so is the form of the Infinite One.

42. From His Sacred Body, as from a well-spring, floweth this light
over the Ten Regions of the world.

By His Sacred teaching He leadeth all having life into the way of
light.

43. Seek refuge in the Treasury of Righteousness.

For in Paradise is that holy lake, with its waters of eightfold
Virtue, all-glorious with the seven jewels. And all this is the
inconceivable handiwork of Purity.

44. Seek refuge in the All-Honoured.

For when sorrow and sighing are fled away, the Holy Land shall
rejoice with joy and singing. Therefore is it called Paradise.

45. The Buddhas of the Three Ages and the Ten Regions, they in whom
the Dual Wisdom is perfect and their illumination entire, lead all
the worlds marvellously into the way of Salvation, the Truth being
their Vehicle.

46. He that seeketh refuge in the Kingdom of the Infinite One is a
citizen of the Kingdom of every Buddha.

Let him that is set free, with single heart give praises unto One
Buddha, for in so doing he praiseth all.

47. The faithful believer at that moment when he rejoiceth in the
sound of the name of the Infinite One hath revealed unto his very
eyes the Buddha of Light.

48. Let him that hath faith praise the Virtue of the Divine Wisdom.

Let him strive to declare it unto all men that he may offer his
thankfulness for the grace of the Buddha.


CONCERNING THE GREAT SUTRA

49. The Venerable Ananda, rising from his seat, and looking upwards
to the World-Honoured Gautama Buddha, his eyes being opened,
marvelled greatly, seeing the glory of his Lord so transfigured.

50. The Venerable Ananda asked the Cause of that glory, for the
Lord, shining in the Light that was hitherto unseen of the world,
taught openly, for the first time, that Truth for which He came into
the world.

51. In the meditation of the Great Calm the Buddha whose countenance
is glorious, commendeth the most excellent wisdom of Ananda for that
he asked the way of knowledge, desiring to be instructed.

52. That Buddha that was made flesh in India was in this world
manifested that he might preach the Divine Promise of Him who is
Infinite.

Hard is it to see the hidden blossom of the myriad-century-blooming
Lotus, so hard also is it for a man's understanding to receive the
message of that Blessed One.

53. Ten Kalpas of Ages have rolled away since He who is Infinite
attained unto the Wisdom, yet before the myriads of the Kalpas He
_was_.

54. He who is of the Light Ineffable, Holiest Refuge of men,
ordaining that His saving grace should be made manifest, duly
considered all the worlds of the Ten Regions, under the guidance of
the holy Buddha of Loka-is-Vara-Raja.

55. Purity, Rejoicing, Wisdom, these three are the Supernal Essence
of the light of the Infinite One that enlighteneth all things,
communicating good to all the worlds of the Ten Regions.

56. Teaching all that have life in the Ten Regions, that they might,
with sincerity, faith, and hope, be born again into Paradise, He set
forth that promise infinite and divine--the true seed of birth
within the Kingdom of Truth.

57. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith is in unity with them that
return no more to birth and death, for having thus attained, they
pass onward into Nirvana, their lives being ended.

58. In His great compassion the Blessed One accomplished His
infinite wisdom in His divine promise, ordaining that womanhood
shall be raised into manhood.

59. Instructing all that have life in the Ten Regions how they
should through sincerity, effort, and hope be born into the Temporal
Paradise, He faithfully promiseth to manifest Himself unto the eyes
of the dying, opening wide the gate of all righteousness before
them.

60. By the divine promise to the dying of His consoling presence our
Lord instructeth men that they shall make to grow all righteousness
revealed in the Sutra of Meditation upon the Buddha of Infinite
Life.

61. All righteous deeds done of men in true obedience to the holy
Doctrine of Sincerity and right-doing, are but the seed of merit
that shall be born within the Temporal Paradise.

62. Instructing All that have life in the Ten Regions how that they
may through sincerity, merit, and hope be born into the Temporal
Paradise, He promiseth that no man shall lose salvation, for He hath
opened the Gate of Truth.

63. By the Divine Promise of the final salvation hath our Lord
instructed the men of the Single Vehicle to recite His Holy Name
that is the Essence of all the merit revealed in the Lesser Sutra of
the Buddha of Infinite Life.

64. He that reciteth the Holy name by his own effort and in the mind
of meditation or of dispersing, being led by the virtue of the
divine promise of final salvation, turneth naturally in at the Gate
of Truth.

65. He that holds not the True Faith, even though he desire to be
born into the Pure Paradise of Joy, must go unto his own place, and
it shall be in the border of the Outermost Places, for this is the
fruit of doubting the mystery of the Supreme Wisdom.

66. That a man should be a Buddha, made manifest in this world, is a
rare thing and difficult. So difficult is it also to hear the
excellent doctrine of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. In all the
myriads of Kalpas such a way comes seldom.

67. Difficult is it for men to find a wise Teacher; so is it also
for them to be instructed and to hear the Holy Law. More difficult
still is it to receive the True Faith.

68. More difficult is it for men to receive the Divine Promise made
unto men than to receive all other teachings.

The Lord Buddha teacheth that this is of all hard things most
difficult and yet again more difficult.

69. The true Doctrine teacheth men that they may become Buddhas in
reciting the Holy Name, and so therefore is it that all other faiths
and moralities are but transitory doorways unto the Truth. Man
comprehendeth not that Pure Land of Peace unless he holdeth fast the
true Doctrine, casting aside that which is transitory.

70. Seek refuge in the Sole Vehicle of merciful promise. For the
transitory teachings have let and hindered men in the Way of
Enlightenment so that they must needs pass through the long
weariness of births and deaths.


CONCERNING THE SUTRA OF THE MEDITATION

71. That Lord that was made flesh in India, the Lord of great pity,
showing unto Vaidehi, Queen of Magadha, the golden mirror created by
his marvellous power, commanded her to choose the Land of Pure Joy
among all the worlds therein appearing.

72. Binbisara, he who commanded that an ascetic should be slain
before his pre-ordained time was come, by his own son was imprisoned
in a seven-walled prison as the due recompense of his violence.

73. Ajata-Satru, prince and heir of Magadha, denouncing his mother
as a traitor, with drawn sword ran furiously upon her.

74. Then said Jivaka the minister and another with him: "This act is
worthy only of an outcast. For the fame of our race unworthy art
thou to dwell in the Palace." And earnestly did they counsel him to
change his evil purpose.

75. Laying his hand on his sword-hilt, Jivaka, the minister, drew
backwards a few steps, steadfastly regarding the prince, that he
might avert this great sin. And so it was that the prince laid down
his sword, and secluded his mother in a palace.

76. Certain is it that Ananda with Vaidehi, Devadatta and yet
others, bearing their part in this great sorrow of the royal palace
of Magadha, must needs so suffer that they might know the infinite
pity of the Blessed One, that Lord who in this world made manifest
the true teaching.

77. And all these wise ones having so received instruction revealed
unto us, who are of all evil-doers worst, the true way, the refuge
of His divine promise that absolveth all the sins of men.

78. For when the full time was come that by the will of our Lord and
of Vaidehi the teaching of the Pure Land should be made known here
on Earth, Ajata-Satru, her son, sinned this sin, Varshakara his
minister bearing testimony against it.

79. It is needful that the heart of a man be opened unto the Faith
universal which He who is Blessed hath shown us, forsaking the
belief that his own works shall save him, for in every man the power
to perform righteous deeds is differing.


CONCERNING THE LESSER SUTRA

80. The Eternal Father is called the Buddha of Infinite Light,
because very mightily He holdeth in safety all beings dwelling in
the Ten Regions of the world who, by His merciful enlightenment,
recite His Holy Name.

81. The myriad Buddhas, unnumbered as the sands of Ganges, counsel
all having life to trust in the Supernal Virtue of the Holy Name,
declaring that weighed against this even righteous deeds are the
lesser good.

82. The innumerable Buddhas, countless as the sands of Ganges, are a
testimony and a shield to all that have life in this sorrowful and
sinful world, declaring unto them that teaching most high and
difficult of acceptance, which is the true faith.

83. Whoso attaineth unto a Soul clear and enduring as diamond shall
testify unto his thankfulness for the limitless grace of the Blessed
One, for even the testimony and the safeguarding that he hath of all
the Buddhas proceed only from the fulfilment of His most merciful
promise.

84. The innumerable Buddhas, countless as the sands of Ganges, guide
into a sure trust in the Holy Name those sinful creatures and
evil-hearted that wander in the darkness of this wicked world
bearing the five signs of degeneration upon it.


OF THE MANY SUTRAS CONCERNING THE INFINITE ONE

85. Having great pity, our Eternal Father lighteneth the dark night
of ignorance, manifesting Himself in that Land of Joy as the Buddha
of Infinite Light which enlighteneth all the worlds with its
immeasurable glory.

86. That Lord most compassionate, the Buddha of immeasurable Light,
He who had attained unto the Supreme Wisdom even before the myriads
of Kalpas were, pitying them that know not, made himself manifest in
the Palace of Kapila as the Lord Sakya-muni.

87. If a man had the duration of all the myriad Kalpas, had he
innumerable tongues and each of these tongues innumerable voices,
yet should he vainly essay the praises of that Blessed One.

88. The Lord instructeth us that the way into Paradise is straight
and easy. Therefore whoso receiveth not this Truth is, in verity,
called a man that hath not eyes to see nor ears to hear.

89. The One true freedom is the Highest, and the Absolute is perfect
freedom. And when we attain unto that freedom, for us shall desire
and doubt vanish away.

90. When every man is beloved of us, even as the son of our own
body, there is the Universal Mind made perfect in us. And this shall
be in Paradise.

91. He who is in all things supreme, is Himself Nirvana, and Nirvana
is that true light that abideth in the Land that is to come, but
this world cannot know it.

92. Our Lord instructeth us that he who rejoiceth in his faith is,
in so doing, in unity with the Highest. For true faith is the seed
of light, and the seed of true light is in itself the potentiality
of that which is Deity.

93. Whoso trusteth not in the Supreme Wisdom of the Enlightened One,
clinging unto his own purblind knowledge, must suffer by fire for
long Kalpas of ages.


CONCERNING THE WELFARE OF THE PRESENT WORLD

94. He that hath unending pity, the Buddha of Infinite Life, hath
given unto us in the Sutra of Golden Light a teaching concerning
long life, that the way of long life and the welfare of the people
might be made known unto them.

95. Dengyo-Daishi, he who taught the Tendai-shu in the mount of
Hiye, hath compassionately instructed us that we should recite
Namuamida-butsu, that Holiest Name, as a sure shield against the
seven sorts of calamities.

96. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name, that is higher than all other
virtues, shall be set free from the fetters of the past, the
present, and the future.

97. To him that reciteth the Holy Name shall be good unending even
in this world, for the sin of his former births is vanquished and
his youth set free from death.

98. To him that reciteth the Holy Name, shall Brahma and Chakra the
great king bring homage, and about him shall heavenly beings and
benignant deities keep watch throughout the days and nights.

99. That man that reciteth the Holy Name shall the four mighty
Regents in Heaven guard through the days and nights against the
disturbance of all evil spirits.

100. To him that reciteth the Holy Name shall the Deity of the Earth
bring homage, watching over him throughout the day and night, as the
shadow follows its substance.

101. To him who reciteth the Holy Name, Nanda and Upananda the Naga
Kings, together with their attendant deities shall bring homage,
watching over him throughout the day and night.

102. To him who reciteth the Holy Name, the King of Death, together
with his ministers in the five worlds, shall do reverence, guarding
him throughout the days and nights.

103. Mara, the Tempter, he who is Ruler of that heaven, where
pleasures are collected, hath sworn unto the Lord to shield him from
temptation who reciteth the Holy Name.

104. All good deities in Earth and Heaven shall be gracious unto him
who reciteth the Holy Name, shielding him throughout the days and
nights.

105. All evil spirits in heaven and earth tremble before that
believer who standeth upon the Immutable promise. For even in this
world hath he the mind of Divine Illumination.

106. Kwannon and Seishi, the Bodhisattvas of incarnate Pity and
Wisdom, together with their companions, innumerable as the sands of
Ganges, shall be beside him who reciteth the Holy Name, even as the
shadow cleaves to the substance.

107. Within the Light of Buddha of Infinite Light are unnumbered
Buddhas, and of these, each and every one shall shield him who hath
within him the true Faith.

108. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name shall be surrounded himself by
those Buddhas who cannot be numbered, who in the Ten Regions with
joy protect and guide him.

Upon the Sutra of Suraigama-Samadhi, I, Shinran Shonin, have uttered
these eight lauds praising the virtue of Seishi the Bodhisattva of
Wisdom.

109. Seishi, he who is the Bodhisattva of Wisdom, having
comprehended the fullness of the Holiest Name, rising from his seat,
prostrated himself beneath the feet of our Lord, worshipping Him, he
and his fellowship, and thus he spake:

110. "O my Lord, in the ancient time, before the Kalpas innumerable
as the sands of Ganges, there was manifest in this world a Buddha,
and His Name was called--The Buddha of Infinite Light.

111. "In His footsteps twelve Buddhas followed, and twelve long
Kalpas have rolled away. And of these Buddhas the last was He that
is called that Buddha in whose glory the Sun and Moon are even as
darkness.

112. "Unto me hath that Buddha revealed the Path of the meditation
of the Supreme--that meditation wherein He instructeth us that all
the Buddhas of all the Ten Regions compassionate as even as a father
pitieth his child.

113. Whoso seeketh refuge in Buddha, as a child in the bosom of his
mother shall verily perceive Him now or in the time that shall be.
And it shall be soon.

114. "As a man encompassed by the cloud of incense casteth sweet
odours about him, so he that trusteth in the Holy Promise is
spiritually endued with the Divine Essence.

115. "When I was initiate in right doing, I attained unto the high
way of that assurance that freed me from birth and death, through
the teaching of the Noble Doctrine of the Holy Name.

"Therefore in this world, rejoicing, I guide the faithful believer
into the way of Purity."

116. Now with all praise let us give thanks unto the merciful
goodness of the Bodhisattva of Wisdom.


OF THANKSGIVING FOR NAGARJUNA, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

117. Nagarjuna, the great teacher, setting forth in many excellent
writings the praise of the Kingdom of Purity, hath instructed us to
recite the Holy Name.

118. For the Lord Buddha declared in prophecy that in India, in the
Southern Parts, should arise a great Teacher, trampling upon the
false teachings of affirmation and denial.

119. Nagarjuna, the Great Teacher, he who mightily set forth the
noble doctrine of the greater Vehicle, and himself attained unto
that height whereon a man rejoiceth eternally in the Faith, hath
very sweetly persuaded men that they should receive the teaching of
the Holy Name.

120. Nagarjuna, that great priest, setting forth the two ways--the
way that is straight and plain, and the way of high austerity,
leadeth very gently to the Ark of the Divine Promise such as are
driven through the weariness of births and deaths.

121. He who receiveth this teaching of Nagarjuna the Great Teacher,
should recite always the Holy Name, believing the Divine Promise of
the Buddha of Infinite Light.

122. Whoso would quickly attain unto that resting-place where
illusion ceaseth, should recite the Holy Name holding his mind in
steadfast piety.

123. One Ark only, that Ark of the Divine Promise of our merciful
Father, doth voyage and bear us unto the shore of the eternal
peace--even us who so long have drifted hither and thither in the
ocean of birth and death.

124. This great priest hath in one utterance set forth that the Lord
is Ruler indeed of the sacred teaching, and that herein are the holy
Bodhisattvas His ministers. Therefore should we bring homage unto
our Lord.

125. The mighty company of the Bodhisattvas utter these words, "When
we became wise in holiness, yea, we who have striven through Kalpas
unnumbered,

126. "Yet could we not root out our earthly desires which are the
very seed of birth and death. But through that only way of the
meditation of the Highest did we attain unto the final deliverance
that hath destroyed all our sin."


OF THANKSGIVING FOR VASUBANDH, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

127. Among those doctrines taught of our Lord Vasubandh, the great
priest hath persuaded us who are full of sinful desires to accept
the Divine Promise of our infinite Father.

128. Only to Him who is above all things is known the glory of the
Land of Peace. Wide as the sky and boundless is it spread forth.

129. Whoso believeth in the power of the Divine Promise shall verily
be at one with the holy Essence, even as the turbid stream is clear
and pure within the ocean depth when they have flowed together.

130. When the assemblage of the believers in the holy faith is born
within that Land of Purity that hath sprung from the lotus of the
true enlightenment, soon shall their heart's desire be fulfilled in
them.

131. The heavenly spirits and those souls freed from illusion, they
who are born in the land of purity from the wisdom deep as the ocean
of the Divine Promise, differ not the one from the other in their
powers. Pure are they as the air is pure.

132. Vasubandh, that exalted master of excelling works, who himself
hath found refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, hath declared
that whoso is borne in the Vehicle of the Divine Promise shall
without doubt attain unto the Promised Land.

133. Whoso taketh refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, that light
that shineth unto all the worlds of the Ten Regions, shall be
called, according to the teaching of that master of excelling works,
a man whose heart is great, and to him shall the True Light be
shown.

134. He whose heart is great and who shall attain unto the true
enlightenment is he also that desireth the salvation of all living,
and verily the true faith given of that Blessed One is salvation.

135. The single heart perceiveth the true faith, and so doing is
strong and clear as the diamond, and this strength is the wisdom of
the supreme that strengthened us.

136. When we shall attain, unto the Promised Land, which is that
Nirvana past all understanding, there shall we labour abundantly for
the salvation of all living things. For so the Sutra teaches us in
these words: "A heart that inclineth to the succour of others."


OF THANKSGIVING FOR DONRAN, THE GREAT TEACHER OF CHINA

137. Donran, that great teacher of China, being instructed of
Bodhi-ruci, the priest of India, sought refuge in the Land of
Purity, and thus doing he burned with fire the books of the Taoist
teaching which he had aforetime held in honour.

138. Having thus cast from him the writings that he had so many
years diligently studied, he preached unto all men the doctrine of
the Divine Promise, and, so teaching, he led men that are fast bound
in the fetters of illusion, in at the Gate of the Great Peace.

139. A mighty King of this world brought homage unto him in his
monastery and put unto him this question, saying: "If so it is that
the Land of Purity should be in all the Ten Regions, how then is it
declared unto us in the Sutra that it is in the Western Heaven?"

140. And with humble piety he replied:

"Of this matter can I not tell thee. It is too high for me. Still am
I in the lower rank of wisdom, even still small is my knowledge. I
cannot fathom this great mystery."

141. All men in the priesthood or the people who know not the rock
of their trust, did Donran the Great Priest guide unto the sure
refuge of the doctrine of the Land of Bliss.

142. He abode in the Temple of the Great Rock, being favourably
bidden thereto by the King of the Gi Dynasty, and in the evening of
his days he travelled into the district of Dun.

143. And this King of the Gi Dynasty reverently offered unto him the
holy title of Shinran (Ran of Divinity) and the honourable name of
"Rock of the Venerable Ran"--that his dwelling-place should be
called by it.

144. Great and mighty upon the people was his spiritual power in the
temple of Genchu and in the fourth year of Kokwa of the Gi Dynasty
the Temple of Yosen became his beloved dwelling.

145. And when he had reached sixty-seven years, he sought his final
refuge in the Eternal Kingdom. And at that departing were vouchsafed
many holy marvels unto which all men, both of the priests and
people, came and did reverence.

146. And when Donran the Great High Priest had departed into the
Peace, the King of the Gi Dynasty by a royal order commanded there
should be built for him a holy monument in the lands of Dun.

147. What man could know the unsearchable mystery of the faith and
deeds of the Divine Promise were it not for that most excelling
commentary of Donran the wise Priest, which he wrote concerning the
teaching of Vasubandh that had lived aforetime.

148. He who believeth that the Sole Vehicle of the Divine Promise,
most perfect, most mighty, receiveth within itself the Greatest of
Sinners, and this because it is its chief will so to do, will
receive the depth of this essential teaching--namely, that before
the eyes of the Instructed, illusion and wisdom are in their Essence
One.

149. Among the Five Mysteries that are preached in this Sutra, the
mystery of the Divine Power of the Enlightened One is highest, and
this is the holy vow of our Blessed One, this and this only.

150. Unto us hath our Father given those two spiritual gifts. Of
these the first is the Virtue whereby we attain unto His Kingdom,
and the second is the Virtue whereby having so attained we return
into this world for the Salvation of men. By the merit of these two
gifts are we initiates of the true faith and of its deeds.

151. When we shall have attained unto the faith and the deeds of the
Merciful Promise through our Father that is in all things able to
give them unto us, birth and death are henceforward as Nirvana. And
this is called the Gift of Departure.

152. And when we shall have attained unto that height which is
desire for the ingathering of all beings into Paradise, shall we
return again into this world that we may be Saviours of Men. And
this is called the Gift of Returning.

153. That "Single Mind" expounded unto us by Vasubandh, the Master
of Writings that excel, is nothing other than the faith of us that
are now fast bound in illusion. So teacheth Donran the Great Teacher
in his Commentary.

154. The Buddha of that inexpressible Light that shineth into the
worlds of the Ten Regions, being for ever enlightened in the night
of ignorance, hath most certainly opened the way of Nirvana to every
man who even for one moment rejoiceth in receiving His Divine
Promise.

155. By the merit of His Infinite Light, when we attain unto that
faith divine and omnipotent, the ice of illusion shall melt into the
water of perfect wisdom.

156. Sin is made one with virtue in its essence, even as ice is one
with water. The more there is ice, so much the more water is
there. So also is the binding up of sin with virtue.

157. In the unbounded ocean of the Holy Name is not seen even one
single death of a blasphemer. For the myriad streams of sin are on
purity with the ocean of righteousness when they have flowed into
the impurity thereof.

158. When the streams of illusion have flowed into the Great Sea of
the Merciful Promise of the Enlightened One, whose light shineth
into all the worlds of the Ten Religions, then shall they too become
the pure water of the Perfect Wisdom.

159. No other way is there of attaining unto the Perfect
Enlightenment save only by birth into the Land of Gladness, and
therefore have all the Enlightened Ones exhorted men that they
should receive the Doctrine of the Kingdom Purity.

160. The Great Priest hath well taught us that in order to cleanse
our deeds, words, and thoughts of deceitfulness, our Father hath
performed the three of His pure and universal.

161. There is no way unto the Kingdom of Gladness save only by
attaining unto the true faith through that Holy Name, the very Jewel
of Wonder.

162. When the new birth through the clearness of the Divine Promise
is attained in the Eternal Kingdom, it is not like unto the birth of
this world; then is there no inferiority even in those that in this
world were sinners, for they have entered into Paradise.

163. The Holy Name of the Buddha of that Boundless Light that
shineth into all the worlds of the Ten Regions, and the glory of His
Wisdom, destroy the darkness of ignorance in the Eternal Night, thus
fulfilling all the desires of men.


CONCERNING UNRIGHTEOUS DEEDS

164. These three things are expounded unto us by Donran
Daishi. First, that faith is not holiness, for faith is not
abiding. At one time it abideth, at another it is gone.

165. And second: This faith is not Single Minded, for it hath not
resolution.

And third: It continueth not, for the other thoughts of the heart
divide it against itself.

166. The three ways of this faith lead the one to the other one. On
this must the believer fix his eyes. If his faith is not in
holiness, then hath he not the faith of resolution.

167. And having not the faith that is resolute, that faith cannot
endure, and because it endureth not, how can he attain unto the
faith of determination? And attaining not unto the faith of
determination, the faith is not sanctified in him.

168. For the attainment of Right Practice expounded by the Master of
the Written Word is according unto the true faith and this alone.

169. If a man return into the Great Way of the Divine Promise,
eschewing the narrow ways of deeds and works, in him shall the true
light of Nirvana be made manifest.

170. The mighty king So, he of the Ryo line, worshipped the Great
Teacher Donran Daishi, naming him the Bodhisattva of Ran, turning
his face in worship unto the dwelling-place of his Teacher.


CONCERNING DOSHAKU-ZENJI

171. Having cast away from him all trust in the righteous deeds of
the sages, Doshaku-Zenji, the Great Teacher, hath taught us to enter
in at the only gate that is the Gospel of the Pure Land.

172. Having thus cast away from him the laborious study of the
Doctrine of Nirvana, Doshaku, the Great Teacher, himself trusted
only in the power of the Divine Promise, and he persuaded men to
follow after him.

173. In this world of sin that is so far removed from the blessed
day of our Lord, is there no man who attaineth unto the wisdom
Supreme, yea, not though he should compass all righteous doing. So
teacheth our Lord of Great Teaching.

174. He who succeeded unto the teaching of Donran-Daishi,
Doshaku-zenji, the Great Priest, thus declareth: "To toil and labour
after righteous deeds in this life is the unavailing toil of
self-effort."

175. In this world, the doing of evil and the sin that is wrought of
men is violent and furious as the storm wind and rain. Therefore
have the compassionate Buddhas exhorted men to seek their refuge
within the Land of Purity.

176. From him that sinneth, throughout his life shall the fetters of
illusion fall away, if he shall recite the Holy Name with love and
adoration.

177. That he might lead men into the Eternal Kingdom--those men who
are in this life fast bound unto the evil thing, our Father teacheth
us, saying, "Recite my name," and hath promised further, "Doing
this, if they be not born again, I myself will not attain unto
Wisdom."


CONCERNING ZENDO-DAISHI

178. Rising like unto an incarnation of the Mighty Ocean, Zendo, the
great teacher, came into the world.

And for the sake of mankind in this sinful place, he called unto all
the Buddhas of the Ten Regions to be his testimony unto his
commentary on the Sutra.

179. Two interpreters of Zendo-Daishi were there in the age that
followed his own, and these were Hosho and Shoko. They, it is, who
have opened the Treasury of teaching that the inward purpose of the
Blessed One should be wholly made known.

180. How should women turn their hearts unto wisdom--they who are
fast bound with the five fetters? No, not through the ages of
myriads of Kalpas, until they seek refuge in the Divine Promise of
Him who is mighty.

181. Having thrown open the Gate of Righteousness, our Lord hath
instructed mankind in every sort of righteous deed. He hath set
before us how the five right deeds differ from the confused deeds
that are outside the Five, so that mankind may enter the way of the
Sole Practice.

182. To mingle the right action with the action that is not akin to
it is called the confused practice. The man that erreth therein
hath not attained unto the single heart. He knoweth not thankfulness
for the grace of the Enlightened One.

183. If he entreat in prayer the good things of this world, even
though he recite only the Blessed Name, he is condemned therein,
being also a man of the confused practice. He shall not be born into
the Land of Purity.

184. Not one, indeed, but not far asunder are the confused deed and
the confused practice. The teachings that are not the teachings of
the Land of Purity are to be condemned as confused deeds.

185. Having invoked the testimony of all the Buddhas, Zendo-Daishi
hath set before us the story of the two rivers, the one, the river
of fire, the other the river of water, that he might incline the
heart to righteous deeds, and guard the true faith of the Divine
Promise.

186. Verily a simple man may attain unto the true Illumination, if
he believe the Holy Promise that is the spirit of the teaching of
Shinshu. Because for this only was the Lord made manifest in this
world, and not according to those other teachings which shall pass
away and be no more.

187. Before the Almighty Power of the Divine teaching do all the
fetters of evil deeds fall away. Therefore is the Divine Promise of
our Father invoked as that Holy Thing which giveth unto us
omnipotent strength.

188. Yet, to whomsoever would enter the Promised Land, created in
the power of His Divine Vow, is belief in his own strength impotent.

And because they are needless, therefore the wise who have received
the Great and Lesser Vehicles must trust unto the promise of the
Almighty One.

189. Whoso hath known himself the slave of illusion shall yet,
relying on the Power of the Holy Promise, enter into the immortal
joy of the Truth, and all his earthly body shall fall from him.

190. Merciful and compassionate parents unto us are the Blessed One
and the Lord Buddha. For they have opened before us the ways of
good, having so purposed that the great Faith shall be.

191. He who is one with the True Soul hath attained unto a heart
clear and hard as diamond. Therefore is he at one with that man who
hath the three excellent forms of Penitence. This hath the Great
Teacher shown us.

192. By that faith alone, like unto a jewel of price, we who in this
sinful world have our being, may enter into the Eternal Kingdom,
being eternally freed from the yoke of birth and death.

193. At that moment when faith in the Enlightened One is perfected,
pure and lasting as the diamond, then shall the Spiritual Light
shine upon us and guard us, the light which for ever guideth us from
rebirth and death.

194. Whoso attaineth not unto the True Faith hath not in him one of
the Trinity of Virtues, that are Sincerity, Faith, and Hope, and the
man that hath not one of these three holdeth not the perfect faith.

195. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith given of Him is freed from
all let and hindrance, for his heart is at one with the Divine
Promise, and he is obedient unto the true teaching that is the Very
Word of the Buddha.

196. Whoso hath comprehended the truth of the Holy Name is at that
very moment freed from doubt. He hath possessed the Right thought,
and he is commended as excellent and rare in his attainment.

197. He shall be let and hindered that is not at one with the Divine
Promise, and therefore he whose faith is not full of Peace is a man
who holdeth not the Divine Thought.

198. The attainment of the Divine Wisdom shall come unto him who
reciteth the Holy Name, for his faith cometh from the Divine Promise
of Him that leadeth him into the Promised Land. He shall not fail
to attain unto the Great Nirvana.

199. At this time when the five Signs of Degeneration are manifest,
many men are there who doubt and blaspheme the Holy Doctrine. Yea,
even the Priests, together with the people, are enemies unto him who
walketh in the right way.

200. He who blasphemeth the Divine Promise is a man born blind. He
shall sink into three evil worlds for age-long myriads of Kalpas.

201. Though the way into the Land that is in the West hath been made
plain before us, yet the age-long Kalpas have rolled away without
good fruit thereof, for we have hindered ourselves and our brethren
that we might not enter therein.

202. Without the Almighty Strength of the Divine Promise how should
we leave this sinful world? Wherefore we should live in hearty
thanksgiving for the Grace of our Father, thinking ever upon the
ocean deeps of his love.

203. For it is by the marvellous mercy of our Lord that we may cast
aside the anguish of birth and death, in the shining hope of our
Eternal Kingdom.

Therefore should we return unto the Lord righteous deeds in
thanksgiving for His grace and mercy.


CONCERNING GENSHIN-SOZU

204. Genshin the Great Teacher declareth: "In this world have I,
even I, appeared as an incarnation of the Buddha, and now, my work
of Salvation being accomplished, I return unto the Eternal Kingdom
that is my home.

205. From the teaching of our Lord hath Genshin, the Great Teacher,
tenderly opened unto us the gate of the Doctrine of the Holy Name,
and hath so taught mankind in this evil world that is far removed
from the Golden Day of our Lord.

206. Genshin-Sozu, he who sat in the Assemblage on the Peak of
Vultures in the time of our Lord, hath taught us that there are two
Paradises, that which is eternal and that which is temporal, and
thus setteth forth the merit and the defect of the Right Practice
and of the Mingled Deed.

207. Acharya Genshin, the Great Teacher, considering one of the
Sutra with the commentary of Ekanzenji, hath made plain the
attributes of the Land of Outermost Places.

208. For he said: "Not one man is there of thousands who may not be
born into the Land of Purity." And thus saying, he commendeth the
followers of the Right Practice.

And again:

"There is not even one among tens of thousands who may enter it."
And so saying, he condemneth the doers of the mingled deed.

209. Further he setteth forth how few are the men who can enter into
the True Land of Purity. And very solemnly he warneth us that more
are they that are born into the Temporal Paradise.

210. Wheresoever men or women, be they noble or lowly born, recite
the Holy Name of our Father, there is no pre-eminence of place or
time. Freely may they do this, whether walking, resting, sitting,
or lying.

211. Though our eyes are so blinded by illusion that we discern not
the light whereby He embraceth us, yet that great mercy for ever
shineth upon us and is not weary.

212. Whatsoever may be his Visible Deed that would be born into the
Promised Land, he shall not forget day or night to hold fast unto
the name of the Divine Promise.

213. To us that in this world are sinners most sinful, there is none
other way of Salvation save that we should enter into the Land of
Purity, by reciting the holy name of Him who is our Father.



CONCERNING HONEN SHONIN

214. Since the day when Honen Shonin appeared in the world, and set
forth the single Ark of the Divine Promise, hath the Doctrine of the
Pure Land gloriously shone upon the hearts of all men in the land of
Nihon.

215. For from the strength of the wisdom of light, Honen, the Great
Teacher, came into the world and hath taught the chosen doctrine of
the Divine Promise, and he hath built Jodo-Shinshu upon the rock.

216. Though Zendo and Genshin, those great teachers, have well
instructed us, yet had Honen Shonin kept silence, wherewith should
we know the holy teaching of Shin-Shu, we who dwell in remote
country and in an evil day?

217. Throughout the long, long Kalpas of my lives that are overpast
could I never find the way of Deliverance, and if Honen Shonin, the
Great Teacher, had not arisen in this world, vainly had I spent the
precious hours of my life.

218. When his years were but fifteen, Honen Shonin entered into the
Way of Illumination, for in departing from worldly life he fulfilled
his heart's desire, and by him was clearly understanded the doctrine
of the transience of life.

219. The excellent righteousness of Honen Shonin, his deeds and the
wisdom that was in him, drew unto him for refuge many even of chief
priests of the heretics that seek Nirvana through the way of the
sages. Yea, they sought him even as their appointed teacher, radiant
and stray of soul as the diamond.

220. Even while Honen Shonin yet walked in this world, there issued
from his body rays of a golden shining, and this, so it is said,
hath Kanezane Fujiwara beheld with his own eyes.

221. The people passed it from mouth to mouth that this Honen Shonin
was the living incarnation of Doshaku Zenji, or yet again of Zendo
Daishi.

222. Before the eyes of men Honen Shonin stood as the Boddhisattva
of Wisdom, or, yet more, as the Blessed One again made flesh.

The Emperor and all his ministers did homage unto him, yea, and the
men of the chief city and of the far countries.

223. He who had been Emperor, in the time of Jokyu, brought homage
to Honen Shonin. All the priests and scholars of the word of
Confucius had understanding of the doctrine of Shin Shu.

224. A chosen vessel of the Blessed One that men might be saved,
Honen Shonin was manifested in the world, and he opened wide the
gate of perfect wisdom, having instructed mankind in the Holy Faith.

225. Of all rare things it is the rarest that we should ourselves
meet with the True Teacher, yet verily the chain of doubt in the
Divine Mercy is the true cause of unending birth and death.

226. Honen Shonin issued forth from the mysterious Light and his
disciples beheld it. In his eyes was there nought of disparity
between the wise and them that know not, between the noble and the
lowly born.

227. And now, his time being at hand, Honen Shonin spake:

"Thrice have I taken birth in the Land of Purity, and of these three
times the last hath given unto me the fullness of peace."

228. Once did Honen Shonin speak, saying: "In the glorious day of
our Lord was I among the holy Assemblage on the Peak of Vultures,
and my Spirit was rapt in self-instruction and in the doctrine of
salvation."

229. Having taken birth in that small and remote island, Honen
Shonin spread abroad the doctrine of the Holy Name for the sake of
all men's salvation. And thus had he done not only then, but many
times in ages gone by.

230. That Buddha, whose light is infinite, was made flesh in this
world as Honen Shonin, and when his merciful work was accomplished,
he returned into the Land of Purity.

231. When his life was drawing to a close, light was manifested
about him as a cloud of glory, yea, and music of the heavenly
places, sweet and excelling in harmony, and sweet odours scattered
about him.

232. Following steadfastly after the ensample of the Nirvana of the
Lord, he laid himself upon his right side, his head inclined unto
the north, his face turned unto the west. And the crowding people
attended upon him, even the priests and men and women of the nobles
and of the lowly born.

233. Now the time when Honen Shonin departed from this life was the
twenty-fifth day of the young spring. In the second year of
Kenriyaku he returned in peace unto the Land of the Father.

On the ninth day of February and the second of Ko-Yen, the
revelation that here followeth was sent unto me in a dream of
morning.

234. It is necessary that men should believe the divine promise of
Him who is Infinite.

Whoso believeth shall attain unto Perfect Wisdom, by the virtue of
that Light which embraceth him and shall never forsake him.


OF THE THREE PERIODS

235. Two thousand years and yet more are departed since the day when
our Lord entered into Nirvana. Ended are the two glorious
periods--the orthodox and the representative. Lament, O ye
disciples, who in this closing age would follow after the Lord.

236. The teachings of our Lord have entered into the Dragon Palace,
for in this closing age they are too high for men. Men are impotent
to follow after their practice or to attain unto them.

237. Throughout the three periods hath the Divine Promise of the
Buddha of Infinite Light prospered and grown. But in this period of
the closing age all righteous deeds are hidden within the Dragon
Palace.

238. In a certain Sutra are we thus instructed, since the age that
now is a part of the fifth in this closing age wherein men are fast
bound in warfare, all righteous deeds have disappeared from the
world.

239. Since the ancient days the life of men, whose age counted as
80,000 years, hath declined and lessened. And when they could live
but 20,000 years, they were men living in an evil world, and with
the five signs of degeneration upon them.

240. And since time itself hath decayed, the bodily frame of man
hath waxed smaller and feebler, and they are as furious serpents or
as wicked dragons, for the decay of time worketh within them.

241. The illusion that is bred of ignorance increaseth, and is
driven over the world like dust. Hatred great and unbreakable as
the high mountains is in the stead of love.

242. The perversity of man is as strong and piercing as the thorn of
the jungle. With eyes of suspicion and venomous anger do they accuse
and persecute them who believe upon the Holy Name.

243. It is a mark of the degeneration of time that man's life is
brief and death cometh upon him early and with iron hands breaketh
up his body and that which surrounds him wherein he dwelleth. And
they who leaving justice turn to wickedness do destroy one another
by their evil deeds.

244. No hope is there that the men now living in these last days
shall escape the fetters of birth and death if they refuse the
merciful promise of the Blessed One.

245. Of heretics in the faith are there ninety sorts that defile the
world and only the teaching of the Enlightened One cleanseth it. By
him alone that attaineth unto wisdom shall true joy to man be
fulfilled according to nature and in peace.

246. In these last times of decay the priests, together with the
people, do evil unto him that trusteth in the doctrine of the Holy
name.

247. Whoso attaineth not unto wisdom is eager to harm that man who,
with single heart, accepted the exalted promise. There is no end to
the infinity of the ocean of birth and death for those men who raven
to destroy the doctrine that is mighty to save them if they would
have it so.

248. Though the days of our present time are those that are called
orthodox, we, in whom ignorance is fulfilled, have not within us the
heart that is pure and true. How, then, can we of our own help
attain unto the deeds that shall gain the wisdom that is made
perfect.

249. The strong heart that is able to attain unto wisdom by
self-help is beyond human knowledge and speech. How is it possible
that men full of ignorance, fettered unto birth and death, should
possess such a heart.

250. Though we were masters of the strong will of self-effort, even
should we have seen face to face the Buddhas, myriad as the sands of
Ganges--they who in this world were manifested the one after the
other, yet were we drifted on the torrent of birth and death, in
self-effort were no rescue for us.

251. In these sinful days that are called the representative and
last times all the teachings of the Lord Buddha, the Sakiya-Muni
have vanished away, but the Divine Promise of the Buddha of Infinite
Light, shining greatly over the world, prosperously leads mankind
unto the Eternal Kingdom.

252. After choice that is peerless and beyond the world's
understanding, after five Kalpas of musing, the Blessed One builded
up the Divine Promise of the Light and Life Infinite. And this is
the Essence of His Mercy showed upon us.

253. The noble mind that shall attain unto wisdom in the doctrine of
the Pure Land is the mind that fain would become Buddha, and it is
named: "The mind that shall save men who suffer."

254. The mind that shall save men is that mind given by the high
promise of the Blessed One. Whoso attaineth unto the faith He
giveth shall be lord of the great Nirvana.

255. Whoso attaineth unto the mind that would fain become Buddha,
having sought refuge in the gift of the Blessed One, hath no term in
his own gift of welfare to mankind, having for ever laid down all
self-righteousness.

256. According to the all-seeing promise of the Blessed One when the
water of the faith He giveth entereth the soul, illusion passeth
straight-way into wisdom through the virtue of that true land of the
Divine Promise.

257. That man who trusteth in the two gifts granted by the Buddha of
Infinite Light, is raised up into the sphere of the Lesser
Enlightenment, and thence hath he the heart that dwelleth always on
the perfection of the Blessed One.

258. He that attaineth unto the faith that is true gift of the
promise of wisdom from the Blessed One, cometh unto the sphere of
the Lesser Enlightenment, for he is embraced in the arms of the
spiritual light that is of the Father Eternal.

259. Fifty-six thousand and seventy years shall pass before the
Bodhisattva that is Maitreya shall attain unto the Perfected
Wisdom. But whoso embraceth the true faith shall at this very time
be lord of the great Enlightenment.

260. He that hath ascended unto the height of the Lesser
Enlightenment, accepting the Divine Promise of the Holy Name, shall
enter into the Great Nirvana, being made equal unto the Bodhisattva
Maitreya.

261. He that receiveth the true Faith, and is one with them that
return no more to birth and death, shall receive the Perfected
Wisdom, even as that Bodhisattva Maitreya that is called, "He that
shall come."

262. And the wise in the age which is called Representative, having
utterly renounced all the doctrine of self-dependence, have entered
in at the gate of the Holy Name. For this is the way chosen for that
Age.

263. He who reciteth the Holy Name, having attained unto the true
faith, shall unceasingly adore the Eternal Father, that he may make
a return unto Him for His Grace.

264. Inexplicable and unutterable merit shall be given unto him who,
living in this sinful world, believeth the Divine Promise that
proceedeth from His will.

265. For the true welfare of men that shall be the Buddha of the
Great Light hath given the holy name of Wisdom unto the Bodhisattva
of Wisdom.

266. And with great compassion for mankind in this evil world the
Bodhisattva of Wisdom persuadeth them to believe upon the Holy Name,
and sweetly welcometh the believer that he may lead him into the
Land of Purity.

267. By the mercy of our Lord and of the Blessed One we are able to
attain unto the heart that desireth Buddhahood. At that time alone,
when we enter into the wisdom of the faith, shall we be ourselves
like unto them that would return good unto the Buddha for His Grace.

268. It is by the strength of the Divine Promise that we can reach
unto the holy name of Wisdom. Without the wisdom of the faith, how
is it possible that we should attain unto the Nirvana?

269. The Divine Light shineth over the Deep Night of ignorance,
therefore sorrow not that the wisdom of your eyes is darkened. The
holy Ark is at hand that voyageth over the great ocean of birth and
death; therefore fear not because your sin is heavy.

270. Great as is the night of the Divine Promise of our Salvation,
so light is the heaviest of our sins. Immeasurable is the wisdom of
our Father, and therefore they that are strong, as also they that
weary, shall never be forgotten.

271. Our Father hath perfected His mercy by uttering the Divine
Promise that giveth all His merit unto man, that He might save them
that are fast bound unto birth and death.

272. Yea, the recitation of His Holy Name is given of the Blessed
One. Therefore we must not offer this unto Him for the acquirement
of merit. For this will He most surely disdain.

273. Yea, verily, when the water of the mind of man floweth into the
great Ocean of the Divine Promise of the Perfect Wisdom it is
changed and becometh the mind of infinite compassion.

274. And the Lord saith, speaking through a certain Sutra:

"My disciples that shall be, they that are sinners because of the
lost way and love of evil things, it is they that shall destroy my
holy doctrine."

275. Whoso blasphemeth the doctrine of the Holy Name shall suffer
without ceasing, for he shall fall into the depth of the Hell of
Avichi for eighty thousands of Kalpas.

276. He to whom is given the true entrance into the True and
Promised Land, by the grace of our Lord and of the Blessed One,
shall be one with those men who return no more unto birth and death,
and after this transitory life attain unto the Great Peace.

277. Well may we understand from the teaching of the myriad Buddhas
in the Ten Regions--they that protect mankind--that the strong mind
that seeketh enlightenment by self-effort is vain and impotent.

278. The Buddhas in the Ten Regions, innumerable as the sands of
Ganges, bear witness that very few are there of men in this sinful
world and decaying time that attain unto the true faith.

279. If we accept not the two divine gifts, the gift of entering the
Promised Kingdom, and the gift of return into this evil world, then
shall the wheel of birth and death turn with us for ever. And how
shall we endure to sink into the sea of suffering?

280. Whoso believeth the marvellous wisdom of that Blessed One,
shall be joined unto them that return no more unto birth and
death. And when, possessed of excelling knowledge, such a man is
born into Paradise, soon shall he attain unto the Perfected Wisdom.

281. It is the sole way unto the Promised Land that man should
believe the wisdom that is beyond human knowledge, of the
Enlightened One. Yet it is of all hard things hardest to attain unto
the Faith, the true way that leadeth to Paradise.

282. Casting aside the sorrow of birth and death, that sorrow which
is timeless in its beginning, I hope now solely for the Great
Nirvana. There is no end to my thankfulness for the two mighty gifts
of our Eternal Father.

283. Few are the believers that shall be born into the Land that is
promised, but many are they that shall be born into the Temporal
Paradise. Because the hope that we shall see Light by our own
strength is vain, having no foundation, we have therefore drifted on
the ocean of birth and death for many myriads of Kalpas.

284. Because in the gift of the Holy Name is a grace great and
wonderful, if man attain unto the gift of departing, that of itself
shall guide him unto the gift of returning.

285. Through the great mercy of the gift of departing shall we
attain unto the compassion of the gift of returning. If it were not
the free gift of the Blessed One, how should we attain unto wisdom
in the Land of Purity.

286. The Buddha of the Infinite Light, together with the
Bodhisattvas of Compassion and Wisdom, having taken the Ark of the
Divine Promise, that is voyaging on the ocean of birth and death,
have gathered and saved mankind therewith.

287. Whoso in heart and soul believeth the Divine Promise of the
Buddha of Infinite Light must diligently recite the Holy Name both
sleeping and waking.

288. Those men in the hierarchy of Sages that have trusted unto
self-effort for the means of attaining wisdom, on entering into the
heritage of the Divine Promise believe in it as in the Reason that
transcendeth all reason.

289. Though the teachings of the Lord stand for ever, yet unto none
is it possible to follow them in exactness, and therefore is there
none that may attain unto supreme enlightenment in these last days
of the falling away.

290. In India, in China, and the land of Japan, may the many
teachers of the doctrine of the Land of Purity, with compassion and
tender acceptance, persuade mankind to strive unto the true faith
that they may be joined unto those that return no more unto birth
and death.

291. Even as His friends the Lord commendeth those men that, having
attained unto the true faith taught of the Blessed One unto us,
dwell within the joy of holiness.

292. It is very meet that our souls rejoice exceedingly in the grace
of the great compassion of the Buddha. Yea, even to the extinction
of the body. And for the gracious giving of our spiritual teachers
we must in like manner rejoice, yea, though our very bones be
broken.


CONCERNING BELIEF AND DOUBT

293. Whoso comprehendeth not the wisdom of the Enlightened One, and
doubteth concerning His illumination, shall rise no higher than the
Outermost Places, for he hath trusted in the power of Reward, and
hath relied upon the principle of morality.

294. Whoso doubteth the wisdom of the Enlightened One--that wisdom
beyond all human understanding--and reciteth the Holy Name, trusting
in the merit of himself, shall not rise beyond the outermost bounds
of the Pure Land that is the Temporal Paradise, for he hath not the
grace of right thankfulness for His Compassion.

295. Whoso shall accept the doctrine of rewards and doubteth the
wisdom of Him that hath Light that surpasseth all knowledge of man,
shall be made captive in Doubting Castle, and the three jewels of
the faith shall no more be his.

296. For his sin, in that he hath doubted the wisdom of the
Enlightened One, shall he remain in the Outermost Places of the Land
of Purity. And for as much as we are taught that the sin of doubt
is grievous, we are also instructed that he must there dwell for
many Kalpas.

297. If the prince committeth a sin against his Father, even the
Chakravarti, the King, he is fettered as a prisoner, though the
chain be of gold.

298. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name, and so doeth as a work of
self-merit, shall be bound in the prison of the sevenfold gems, for
he believeth not right by the divine promise of that Holy One, and
heavy is the sin of his doubting.

299. Yet he even that hath a doubting soul and sinneth the sin of
self-merit, must needs strive to comprehend the merciful goodness of
the Blessed One, and he shall recite the Holy Name if he would at
all be equalled unto him that holdeth the true faith.

300. It is the Law that he who soweth shall reap what he soweth,
therefore the man that is full of righteous deeds for the sake of
self-merit shall enter into the prison of the sevenfold gems, for he
doubteth the marvellous wisdom of Him that hath the Light.

301. Whoso doubteth of the wisdom of Him that hath Light beyond the
imagining of man, and trusteth to the root of goodness and
virtue--he shall not attain unto the Soul of Great Mercy, for he is
born into the Outermost Places of Paradise, and slow and dull of
heart is he.

302. Among those men that doubt the Holy Word, some are imprisoned
in the shut bud of the Lotus. And they shall be despised as they
that in illusion are born into the outermost Paradise or are held
captive within the narrow walls of the womb.

303. Whoso doubteth the omniscience of the wisdom of the
Light-Bearer, but holdeth to his belief in Reward, excellent
ofttimes in making the root of goodness to grow,

304. Because he doubteth the wisdom of the Eternal Wisdom, and is
held captive as in the strait prison of the womb, hath neither
knowledge nor wisdom, and is compared unto a man straitly bound in
captivity.

305. He that is born into the outermost place, all glorious with the
sevenfold jewels, shall not in five hundred years behold that
three-fold jewel, the Tri-ratna, for there is in him no spiritual
well-doing, that he should give it unto his fellow-men.

306. To him who is born into the Palace, glorious with the seven
jewels, for five hundred years there shall befall many sorts of
sorrows from his own evil doing.

307. Whoso hopeth reward and maketh to flourish the root of
goodness, shall remain in the transitory Paradise, for though he be
a good man, yet hath he a doubting heart.

308. Because he accepteth not the Divine Promise of Him who is the
Light unspeakable, and carrieth his doubt with him unto Paradise,
therefore the shut flower of his heart openeth not, therefore is he
unshapen as a child in the womb.

309. When he perceiveth the Land of Purity, the Bodhisattva Maitreya
thus questioneth the Holy One, saying, "What is the cause and what
the circumstance of that man who, having been born, yet remaineth as
it were straitened in the womb?

310. And thus spake the Lord unto the Bodhisattva Maitreya saying,

"Whoso trusteth in the root of goodness that he himself maketh to
grow and hath a doubting soul, he it is that is in the outermost
places of the Paradise, he it is that is said to be straitened still
in the womb of ignorance."

311. He who doubteth the wisdom of Him that is all Light, shall for
his sin be made captive until five hundred years be gone, and this
is called the conception within the womb of ignorance.

312. Whoso doubteth the wisdom that is beyond man's understanding,
and hath believed the doctrine of reward, shall of a certainty be
born within Doubting Castle, and this is called conception within
the womb of ignorance.

313. Whoso trusteth upon self-righteousness rather than upon the
wisdom of the Enlightened One that is beyond man's knowledge, shall
be conceived within the womb of ignorance, and to him shall the
mercy of the Three Jewels be unknown.

314. Whoso doubteth the wisdom of the Enlightened One that
surpasseth all knowledge of man and trusteth in the hope of reward,
and would attain unto birth in Paradise by making the root of
goodness to grow, shall be straitened in the womb of ignorance.

315. Heavy is the sin of doubting the wisdom of the Buddha. He who
is instructed taketh refuge in the wonderful wisdom of the
Enlightened One, being in contrition for his foolishness.

These twenty-three psalms above-written are made by me that men
should know the heaviness of their sin in doubting the Divine
Promise of the Buddha of Infinite Light.


IN PRAISE OF PRINCE SHOTOKU

316. Through the compassion of Shotoku the great prince we, having
accepted the Divine Promise sprung from the unsearchable wisdom of
the Illuminated One, are made equal unto Maitreya. Bodhisattva--the
Buddha that shall be--having been united unto those men who return
no more to birth and death.

317. The mighty Bodhisattva of Compassion, he who is the Saviour,
was made manifest in this world as Shotoku the Prince, who, like a
father, hath not forsaken us, and like a mother is ever amongst us.

318. From that past where was no beginning until the day that now
is, hath Shotoku the great prince, the Compassionate, dwelt among us
like unto a father and a mother.

319. Shotoku the Prince, from his Compassion, hath persuaded us to
enter in at the Divine Promise of the wondrous wisdom of the
Light-Bearer. And through this are we joined unto those men who
return no more unto birth and death.

320. Whoso attaineth unto the holy faith that is the power of
divinity, must, in the Ten Regions of the world, find the twofold
gift of the Enlightened One, that he may live in thankfulness for
His grace.

321. Shotoku, he who is mercy's self, the Compassionate, he who is
like unto a father, and the Bodhisattva of Mercy, the divine
tenderness, his succour is merciful as the pity of a mother.

322. Testimony is there that Shotoku the prince hath mercy upon us,
from the myriads of Kalpas even unto this day, because the wondrous
wisdom of Him who is Light beareth the load of his debt for the
believer.

Therefore before the eyes of His wisdom is the evil as the good, the
pure as the unclean.

323. Shotoku, the Prince, he that is in Japan called the Lord of
Teaching, he whose great mercy overtops all spoken words of
gratitude, must we therefore praise for evermore, having with single
heart sought refuge in him.

324. He who hath pitied the dwellers in the lands of Japan, the
Prince of Jogu, he whose ways are merciful, hath spread abroad the
Divine Promise of the Enlightened One. Therefore let us praise him
with great rejoicing. Throughout the many myriads of Kalpas, birth
after birth fell hitherto upon us.

325. We to whom he showed forth his compassion must be swift to
praise him, having continually sought refuge in him, and with a
single mind.

326. The high Prince Shotoku, he who hath guarded us and with great
carefulness led us upwards from remotest times, hath lovingly
entreated us to seek our refuge in the two-fold gift of the
Enlightened One.


WHEREIN WITH LAMENTATION I MAKE MY CONFESSION

327. Though I seek my refuge in the true faith of the Pure Land,

Yet hath not mine heart been truly sincere.

Deceit and untruth are in my flesh,

And in my soul is no clear shining.

328. In their outward seeming are all men diligent and truth
speaking,

But in their souls are greed and eager and unjust deceitfulness,

And in their flesh do lying and cunning triumph.

329. Too strong for me is the evil of my heart. I cannot overcome
it.

Therefore is my soul like unto the poison of serpents,

Even my righteous deeds, being mingled with this poison, must be
named the deeds of deceitfulness.

330. Shameless though I be and having no truth in my soul,

Yet the virtue of the Holy Name, the gift of Him that is
enlightened,

Is spread throughout the world through my words being as I am.

331. There is no mercy in my soul.

The good of my fellow-man is not dear in mine eyes.

If it were not for the Ark of Mercy, the divine promise of the
Infinite Wisdom,

How should I cross the Ocean of Misery?

332. I, whose mind is filled with cunning and deceit as the poison
of reptiles, am impotent to practise righteous deeds.

If I sought not refuge in the gift of our Father, I should die the
death of the shameless.

333. It is a token of this evil age that in this world the priests,
together with the people,

In secret serve strange gods,

While bearing the appearance of the devout sons of Buddha.

334. Sad and corrupt is it that the priests and people, following
after the superstitions of auspicious times and days, seek
sooth-saying and festivals

And worship the gods of heaven and earth.

335. Though I have heard that the names of priest and monk are
honourable,

Yet now are they held as light as the five shameless precepts of
Devadatta.

336. Being of one accord with the many minds of the heathen,

They bow in worship before devils,

While yet wearing the robe of the Buddha.

337. Sad and sorrowful is it that all the priests and people now in
the land of Yamato should worship the devils of heaven and earth, in
the name of the holy mysteries of the Buddha.

338. It is a mark of the downward way of this evil age that men
despise the name of priest or monk as a mean thing, considering them
like unto slaves.

339. May they yet bring offerings with homage unto the priests, even
as you do unto Saliputra or Mahamonugalyayana, those two great
servants of the Lord; though they are priests but in name and
without discipline, for this is the time of degeneration and of the
last days.

340. Though sin hath no substance in itself, and is but the shadow
of our illusion, and soul is in itself pure, yet in all this world
is there no sincere man.

341. Great sorrow is it that, in the wicked world of this age now so
near its end, the high priests who are born in the palankin, and the
monks who bear it now in Nara and Mount Hiyei, desire high secular
rank as the greatest honour.

342. That they consider the monk and nun as their slaves, and mock
at the honourable title of priest and minister, even as at the mean
name of slave, gives testimony that they despise the teaching of the
Buddha.

These sixteen psalms written above are written by me, Gutoku, with
lamentation, to be a record. To me even the honourable priests and
monks of the Central Temples seem now to be despised.


ADDITIONAL PSALMS

343. Having fulfilled forty and eight of the Divine Promise,

He attained unto the supreme enlightenment, and was manifest as the
Buddha of Infinite Light.

Whoso seeketh refuge with Him shall be certainly born into the Land
of Purity.

344. Into the Promised Land--the Paradise of the Great Calm.

He who practiseth the righteous deeds of the mingled motive hath no
claim of birth,

Therefore He that is Infinite would have us follow the deeds of the
single practice that is chosen of Him as teaching that is at the
root.

345. The merit of His holy austerities throughout the myriads of
Kalpas is fully declared in his name of Amida (the Infinite).

And the Holy Name, after the consideration of five Kalpas,

Will be accorded unto us who are alive in this degenerated age.

346. Because action, speech, and mind of the Infinite Life and the
believer in the Holy Name are welded as into a diamond, therefore
shall he certainly be one with the men that return no more unto
birth and death.

347. He that hath much knowledge and keepeth the Pure Land is not
chosen,

And whoso breaketh the Holy Law and sinneth is not disdained.

Only he that seeketh refuge in the Eternal Father shall enter into
Buddhahood as a pebble is transmuted into gold.

348. Our faith that endureth as the diamond cometh from the mind of
the Buddha that eternally endureth.

Lacking the aid of the Divine Power, how should we attain unto the
unchanging mind?

349. In the great ocean of the Divine Promise

Is there no ripple of illusion.

If we enter into the ark of the Holy Vow,

The spirit of mercy shall take part with our self-endeavour.

350. Since we have believed the Divine Promise,

How is it possible we should be in the power of life or death?

Unchanged may be our sinful body,

But our heart is in the Paradise for ever.


[Transcriber's Note: Numbering went 307, 308, 307, 310 . . . fixed]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Buddhist Psalms
by Shinran Shonin
Trans. S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck





Produced by David Starner and the Online Distributed Proofreader's Team.





WISDOM OF THE EAST

BUDDHIST PSALMS

TRANSLATED FROM THE JAPANESE

OF

SHINRAN SHŌNIN

BY S. YAMABE AND L. ADAMS BECK



CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

LAUDING THE INFINITE ONE

OF PARADISE

CONCERNING THE GREAT SUTRA

CONCERNING THE SUTRA OF THE MEDITATION

CONCERNING THE LESSER SUTRA

OF THE MANY SUTRAS CONCERNING THE INFINITE ONE

CONCERNING THE WELFARE OF THE PRESENT WORLD

OF THANKSGIVING FOR NAGARJUNA, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

OF THANKSGIVING FOR VASUBANDH, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

OF THANKSGIVING FOR DONRAN, THE GREAT TEACHER OF CHINA

CONCERNING UNRIGHTEOUS DEEDS

CONCERNING DOSHAKU-ZENJI

CONCERNING ZENDO-DAISHI

CONCERNING GENSHIN-SOZU

CONCERNING HŌNEN SHŌNIN

OF THE THREE PERIODS

CONCERNING BELIEF AND DOUBT

IN PRAISE OF PRINCE SHOTOKU

WHEREIN WITH LAMENTATION I MAKE MY CONFESSION

ADDITIONAL PSALMS



INTRODUCTION

BY L. ADAMS BECK

It is a singular fact that though many of the earlier Buddhist
Scriptures have been translated by competent scholars, comparatively
little attention has been paid to later Buddhist devotional
writings, and this although the developments of Buddhism in China
and Japan give them the deepest interest as reflecting the spiritual
mind of those two great countries. They cannot, however, be
understood without some knowledge of the faith which passed so
entirely into their life that in its growth it lost some of its own
infant traits and took on others, rooted, no doubt, in the
beginnings in India, but expanded and changed as the features of the
child may be forgotten in the face of the man and yet perpetuate the
unbroken succession of heredity. It is especially true that Japan
cannot be understood without some knowledge of the Buddhism of the
Greater Vehicle (as the developed form is called), for it was the
influence that moulded her youth as a nation, that shaped her
aspirations, and was the inspiration of her art, not only in the
written word, but in every art and higher handicraftsmanship that
makes her what she is. Whatever centuries may pass or the future
hold in store for her, Japan can never lose the stamp of Buddhism in
her outer or her spiritual life.

The world knows little as yet of the soul of Mahayana Buddhism,
though much of its outer observance, and for this reason a crucial
injustice has been done in regarding it merely as a degraded form of
the earlier Buddhism—a rank off-shoot of the teachings of the
Gautama Buddha, a system of idolatry and priestly power from which
the austere purity of the earlier faith has passed away.

The truth is that Buddhism, like Christianity, in every country
where it has sowed its seed and reaped its harvest, developed along
the lines indicated by the mind of that people. The Buddhism of
Japan differs from that of Tibet as profoundly as the Christianity
of Abyssinia from that of Scotland—yet both have conserved the
essential principle.

Buddhism was not a dead abstraction, but a living faith, and it
therefore grew and changed with the growth of the mind of man,
enlarging its perception of truth. As in the other great faiths, the
ascent of the Mount of Vision reveals worlds undreamed, and
proclaims what may seem to be new truths, but are only new aspects
of the Eternal. Japanese Buddhists still base their belief on the
utterances of the Buddhas, but they have enlarged their conception
of the truths so taught, and they hold that the new flower and fruit
spring from the roots that were planted in dim ages before the
Gautama Buddha taught in India, and have since rushed hundred-armed
to the sun. Such is the religious history of mankind, and Buddhism
obeys its sequence.

The development of Mahayana Buddhism from the teaching of the
Gautama Buddha has been often compared with that of the Christian
faith from the Jewish, but it may be better compared with the growth
of a sacerdotal system from the simplicities of the Gospel of
St. Mark. That the development should have been on the same lines in
all essential matters of symbol and (in the most important respects)
of doctrine, modified only by Eastern habits of thought and
environment, is a miracle of coincidence which cannot be paralleled
in the world unless it be granted that Christianity filtering along
the great trade routes of an earlier world joined hands with
Buddhism in many unsuspected ways and places. Evidence is
accumulating that this is so, and in a measure at present almost
incredible. And if it be so—if it be true that in spite of racial
distinctions, differences of thought and circumstance, the religious
thought of East and West has so many and so great meeting-points,
the hope of the world in things spiritual may lie in the recognition
of that fact and in a future union now shadowed forth only in symbol
and in a great hope. This, however, is no essay on Buddhism, either
earlier or later, and what I have said is necessary to the
introduction of these Jōdo-Wasan, or Psalms of the Pure Land, which
are a part not only of the literature, but also of the daily worship
and spiritual life of Japan. Their history may be briefly told.

Buddhism passed into Japan from China and Korea about 1320 years
ago, in or about the year A.D. 552. It adapted itself with perfect
comprehension to the ideals of the Japanese people, inculcating
among them the teachings of morality common to the great faiths
with, in addition, the spiritual unction, the passion of love and
sympathy, self-devotion, and compassion, in which Buddhism and
Christianity are alike pre-eminent. The negative side of Buddhism,
with its passionless calm and self-renunciation, is the only one
that has been realised in the West, and the teachings of Mahayana
which have borne fruit and flower, visible to all the world, of
happiness, courtesy, kindliness in the spiritual attitude of a whole
people, have never received the honour which was their due.

For with the Buddhist faith there came the germ of the belief that
the Gautama Buddha in his own grandeur bore witness to One
Greater—the Amitabha or Amida Buddha—that One who in boundless
light abideth, life of the Universe, without colour, without form,
the Lover of man, his Protector and Refuge. He may, He must be
worshipped, for in Him are all the essential attributes of Deity,
and He, the Saviour of mankind, has prepared a pure land of peace
for his servants, beyond the storms of life and death. This belief
eventually crystallised and became a dogma in the faith of the Pure
Land, known in Japan as Jōdo Shinshu, a faith held by the majority
of the Japanese people. It is a Belief which has spread also in
Eastern Siberia, many parts of China, Hawaii, and, in fact,
whereever the Japanese race has spread. And the man who stated this
belief for all time was Shinran Shōnin, author of the Psalms here
presented.

He was born in the year A.D. 1175 near City-Royal—Kyoto, the
ancient capital of Japan. He was a son of one of the noblest
families, in close connection with the Imperial House, and had it
not been for the passion for truth and the life of the spirit which
consumed him, his history would have been that of the many other
brilliant young men who sank into mere courtiers—“Dwellers above
the Clouds,” as the royalties and courtiers of the day were called
among the people. But the clear air above the clouds in which his
spirit spread its wings was not that of City-Royal, and the Way
opened before him as it has opened before many a saint of the
Christian Church, for while still a child he lost both his parents,
and so, meditating on the impermanence of mortal life, and seeing
how the fashion of this world passes away, he abandoned his title
and became a monk in one of the noble monasteries whose successors
still stand glorious among the pine woods above Lake Biwa.

These were not only monasteries, but seats of learning, as in Europe
in the Middle Ages, and here the Doctrines were subjected to
brilliant analysis and logical subtleties which had almost
superseded the living faith. In that cold atmosphere the spirit of
Shiran Shōnin could not spread its wings, though for twenty years he
gave his thoughts to its empty glitter. Therefore, at the age of
twenty-nine he cast it all behind him, and in deep humility cast
himself at the feet of the great Teacher Hōnen, who, in the shades
of Higashiyama, was setting forth the saving power of the Eternal
One who abideth in the Light and in whom is no darkness—the Buddha
of Boundless Light. And in this place and from this man Shinran
received enlightenment.

Life now lay before him as a problem. Unlike as the two men are in
character and methods, his position resembled that of Martin Luther
on quitting the Church of Rome. For the Buddhist monastic rule
requires its members to be homeless, celibate, vegetarian, and here,
like Luther, Shinran joined issue with them. To his mind the
attainment of man lay in the harmonious development of body and
spirit, and in the fulfilment, not the negation of the ordinary
human duties. Accordingly, in his thirty-first year, after deep
consideration, he married the daughter of Prince Kujo Kanezane,
Chief Minister of the Emperor and head of one of the greatest houses
in Japan, and in that happy union he tasted four years of simple
domestic joy, during which a son was born to him. Then the storm
broke.

Trouble was stirred up by the orthodox Buddhist Church with evil
reports which reached the ears of the Emperor, and Shinran was sent
into banishment in the lonely and primitive province of Echigo—a
terrible alternative for a man of noble birth and refined
culture. He took it, however, with perfect serenity as a mission to
those untaught and neglected people, and into their darkness he
brought the light of the Father of Lights, and the people flocked to
the warmth and wonder of the new hope, and heard him gladly. The
story is told by a contemporary, whom I have thus rendered:

“In the spring of the third year of the era of Kennin, the age of
Shinran Shōnin was twenty-nine. Driven by the desire for seclusion,
he departed to the monastery of Yoshimizu. For as his day was so
remote from the era of the Lord Buddha, and the endurance of man in
the practice of religious austerity was now weakened, he would fain
seek the one broad, straight way that is now made plain before us,
leaving behind him the more devious and difficult roads in which he
had a long time wandered. For so it was that Hōnen Shōnin, the great
teacher of the Doctrine of the Land of Pure Light, had taught him
plainly of the inmost heart of the Faith, raising up in him the firm
foundation of that teaching. Therefore he certainly received at that
time the true meaning of the Divine Promise of universal salvation,
and attained unto the imperishable faith by which alone the ignorant
can enter into Nirvana without condition or price.

“From the province of Echigo Shinran passed onward to that of
Hitachi, and entered into seclusion at Inada, that little village of
the region of Kasama. Very lonely was his dwelling, yet many
disciples sought after him, and though the humble door of the
monastery was closed against them, many nobles and lesser persons
thronged into the village. So his hope of spreading abroad the Holy
Teaching was fulfilled and his desire to bring joy to the people was
satisfied. Thus he declared that the revelation vouchsafed to him in
the Temple of Rokkaku by the Bodhisattwa of Pity was indeed made
manifest.”

It is that revelation which speaks in these Psalms—the love,
aspiration, passion for righteousness and humility which are the
heart of all the great religious utterances of the world.

“Alas for me, Shinran, the ignorant exile who sinks into the deeps
of the great ocean of human affections, who toils to climb the high
mountains of worldly prosperity, and is neither glad to be with them
who return no more to illusion, nor takes delight in approaching
more nearly to true enlightenment. O the pity of it! O the shame of
it!”

This cry alternates with the joy of perfect aspiration, and it is
that which keeps these psalms in warm human touch with the
spirituality that is neither of race nor time, but for eternity.

He was sixty-two years of age when he returned from exile to
City-Royal, and though he made it his centre, it was his home no
more. He wandered from place to place, teaching as he went, after
the manner of the Buddhas. At the age of ninety his strength
suddenly failed, and the next day he passed away in perfect peace.

Such were the outward events of his life; his own writings must give
the history of his soul. His teachings to-day are spread far and
wide in the land of his birth, and are an inspiration to millions
within and without its shores. In him was the harmonised spirit of
Buddhism at its highest. Those who can enter into the heart of
Shinran Shōnin will have gained understanding of the heart of a
mighty people which is said to be impossible of Western reading, and
yet in its essentials is simple as the heart of a child.

                                  L. ADAMS BECK.



EDITORIAL NOTE

The object of the Editors of this series is a very definite
one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these
books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding
between East and West—the old world of Thought and the new of
Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but
followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident
that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of
Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of
Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another
creed and colour.

                                 L. CRANMER-BYNG.  S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY, 21 CROMWELL ROAD, KENSINGTON, S.W.



BUDDHIST PSALMS


LAUDING THE INFINITE ONE

1. Since He who is Infinite attained unto the Wisdom Supreme, the
long, long ages of ten Kalpas have rolled away.

The Light of His Dharma-Kaya is in this world eyes to the blind.

2. Seek refuge in the True Illumination! For the light of His Wisdom
is infinite.

In all the worlds there is nothing upon which His light shines not.

3. Take refuge in the Light universal.

As the Light of His deliverance is boundless, he who is within it is
freed from the lie of affirmation or denial.

4. Seek refuge in That which is beyond understanding,

For His glory is all-embracing as the air. It shineth and pierceth
all things, and there is nothing hid from the light thereof.

5. Take refuge in the ultimate Strength, for His pure radiance is
above all things. He who perceiveth this Light is set free from the
fetters of Karma.

6. Seek refuge in the World-Honoured.

Since His glorious radiance is above all He is called the Buddha of
Divine Light. And by Him is the darkness of the three worlds
Enlightened.

7. Excellent is the Light of His Wisdom. Therefore is he called the
Buddha of Clear Shining.

He who is within the Light, being washed from the soil of Karma,
shall attain unto the final deliverance.

8. Take refuge in the Mighty Consoler. Wheresoever His mercy shineth
throughout all the worlds, men rejoice in its gladdening light.

9. The darkness of ignorance perisheth before His light. Therefore
is He hailed as the Buddha of Radiant Wisdom. All the Buddhas and
the threefold choir of sages praise Him.

10. His glory shineth for ever and ever. Therefore is He called the
Buddha of Everlasting Light.

Most excellent is the virtue of this light, for he who perceiveth it
is born into Paradise without dissolution of being.

11. The glory of the Infinite is boundless, therefore is He known as
the Buddha of Light Past Comprehension.

All the Buddhas glorify the majesty of His holiness that leadeth all
the earth into His Kingdom.

12. His clear shining transcendeth all revelation, nor can human
speech utter it. Therefore is He named the Buddha of Light
Unspeakable.

All the Buddhas glorify the glory of the Infinite One who is Buddha
through His promise of Light immeasurable.

13. Take refuge in Him who is Holiest of Holy. Sun and moon are
lost in the ocean of His splendour. Therefore is He named that
Infinite in whose radiance Sun and Moon are darkened. Before whose
Divine Power even that Buddha made flesh in India himself faltereth
in ascribing praise to the Majesty of His true glory.

14. Far beyond human numbering are the wise in the high assemblage
of the Infinite One. Therefore let him who would be born into the
Land of Purity seek refuge in the Great Congregation.

15. In Paradise are the Mighty unnumbered, Bodhisattvas ranked in
that hierarchy nearest to the Perfect Enlightenment. Thence are they
made flesh upon earth according to the way of salvation that all
having life might be saved.

16. Take refuge in the ocean-deep Soul Universal.

For the sake of all dwelling in the Ten Regions hath He kept the
fullness of all the Teachings, in His divine and mighty promises.

17. He who is Infinite never resteth, for together with the
Bodhisattvas of Compassion and Pure Reason He laboureth, that the
souls of them that duly receive Him may have salvation, enlightening
them with the light of His mercy.

18. When he who is born into the land of Pure Peace returneth again
into this sinful world, even like unto that Buddha made flesh in
India, he wearieth not in seeking the welfare of all men.

19. Seek refuge in the World-Honoured, for His Divine Power is
Almighty and beyond man’s measure, being made perfect in
inconceivable Holiness.

20. The Srāvakas, the Bodhisattvas, the Heavenly Beings and Souls in
Paradise, they in whom wisdom is made equal unto beauty, declare
their attributes in order, according to their former birth.

21. Seek refuge in Him in whom all strengths are equal.

Nought is there to compare with the excellent beauty of the Souls in
Paradise, for their being is infinite as space, and far are they
above celestials and mortal man.

22. Whoso would be born into Paradise shall in this life be made one
with those men that return no more unto birth and death.

In that Pure Land is none who hath stood among doubting men, and
none also who hath trusted in his own deeds for Salvation. To this
do all the Buddhas witness.

23. If all having life in the Ten Regions hear this Holiest Name of
Him that is Infinite, and attain unto the true faith, they shall
obtain joy and gladness.

24. For when a man with joy accepteth the sacred vow of Him that is
infinite who saith, “I will not attain unto perfect Enlightenment
unless in Me shall all the world be made whole,” at that very time
he shall assuredly be born into Paradise.

25. Seek refuge in the Almighty Spirit.

By the divine might of His promise, by the Infinite One was Paradise
created; yea, and the Souls of men that dwell therein. And there is
nought that may compare with them.

26. Seek refuge in the unutterable Wisdom.

Of His Land of Peace the half cannot be told. Even the word of the
Buddha himself could not utter it.

27. Myriads of happy souls were born, are born and shall be born
into that Land of Purity, not from this world alone, but from the
hidden worlds also, and the Ten Regions.

28. So soon as man heareth the holy name of the Infinite One and
with great gladness praiseth him, he shall attain to the reward of
the holy Treasury of Merit.

29. Go forward, O Valiant Souls, seeking the Law though all the
worlds fall into flame and ruin, for ye shall have passed beyond
birth and death!

30. The innumerable Buddhas praise the triumphant divinity of the
Bringer of Light. To Him do gather the myriad Bodhisattvas,
unnumbered as the Sands of Ganges in worship from the Eastern world.

31. As from the East, so gather also to the Infinite One the
Bodhisattvas from the Nine Regions of the worlds.

With Sacred Psalms the Gautama Buddha himself laudeth the boundless
glory of the Infinite One.

32. Seek refuge in the World-Honoured.

To Him do the myriad Buddhas of the ten Regions bring homage with
songs and praises, that they may sow the seeds of merit.

33. Bring homage to the Hall of Great Teaching and to the living Bo
tree that is in Paradise! Yet this land, glorious with the Holy
Tree, radiant with the Hall of Great Teaching that shineth with the
Seven Jewels, where innumerable souls hastening from all the ends of
the Earth shall be born, is but the temporal Paradise.

34. In awful reverence seek refuge in the purity of Him that
welcometh. For by His Divine Promise was this glorious land, great
beyond human measurement, made to be.

35. Seek refuge in the wisdom inconceivable. For the perfection of
His Virtue—that Virtue availing for all the world, and the perfect
way by which He willeth that man shall take refuge in Him, are past
all human speech or thought.

36. Take refuge in the wisdom that is most truly infinite. For He is
faithful, having promised in His Divine Might, and on his perfect
clear promise that cannot be shaken is the merciful way of salvation
builded.


OF PARADISE

37. Seek refuge in the heavenly harmony.

For the jewel groves and gem trees of Paradise give forth a sweet
and most excellent melody in pure and ordered unison.

38. Seek refuge in the Divine Promise, the Treasury of Merit,

For the seven jewel trees are fragrant in Paradise where the
flowers, the fruits, the branches and the leaves thereof

Cast back their radiance the one to the other.

39. Bring homage to the perfect Righteousness.

As the pure wind blows over the trees glorious with jewels,

It draweth from them a noble music with five-fold strains of
harmony.

40. In all the world is no place hidden from the glory shed by
hundreds of myriad rays from the heart of every flower of Paradise.

41. Like unto a golden mountain reflecting the myriad rays of these
heavenly blossoms, so is the form of the Infinite One.

42. From His Sacred Body, as from a well-spring, floweth this light
over the Ten Regions of the world.

By His Sacred teaching He leadeth all having life into the way of
light.

43. Seek refuge in the Treasury of Righteousness.

For in Paradise is that holy lake, with its waters of eightfold
Virtue, all-glorious with the seven jewels. And all this is the
inconceivable handiwork of Purity.

44. Seek refuge in the All-Honoured.

For when sorrow and sighing are fled away, the Holy Land shall
rejoice with joy and singing. Therefore is it called Paradise.

45. The Buddhas of the Three Ages and the Ten Regions, they in whom
the Dual Wisdom is perfect and their illumination entire, lead all
the worlds marvellously into the way of Salvation, the Truth being
their Vehicle.

46. He that seeketh refuge in the Kingdom of the Infinite One is a
citizen of the Kingdom of every Buddha.

Let him that is set free, with single heart give praises unto One
Buddha, for in so doing he praiseth all.

47. The faithful believer at that moment when he rejoiceth in the
sound of the name of the Infinite One hath revealed unto his very
eyes the Buddha of Light.

48. Let him that hath faith praise the Virtue of the Divine Wisdom.

Let him strive to declare it unto all men that he may offer his
thankfulness for the grace of the Buddha.


CONCERNING THE GREAT SUTRA

49. The Venerable Ananda, rising from his seat, and looking upwards
to the World-Honoured Gautama Buddha, his eyes being opened,
marvelled greatly, seeing the glory of his Lord so transfigured.

50. The Venerable Ananda asked the Cause of that glory, for the
Lord, shining in the Light that was hitherto unseen of the world,
taught openly, for the first time, that Truth for which He came into
the world.

51. In the meditation of the Great Calm the Buddha whose countenance
is glorious, commendeth the most excellent wisdom of Ananda for that
he asked the way of knowledge, desiring to be instructed.

52. That Buddha that was made flesh in India was in this world
manifested that he might preach the Divine Promise of Him who is
Infinite.

Hard is it to see the hidden blossom of the myriad-century-blooming
Lotus, so hard also is it for a man’s understanding to receive the
message of that Blessed One.

53. Ten Kalpas of Ages have rolled away since He who is Infinite
attained unto the Wisdom, yet before the myriads of the Kalpas He
_was_.

54. He who is of the Light Ineffable, Holiest Refuge of men,
ordaining that His saving grace should be made manifest, duly
considered all the worlds of the Ten Regions, under the guidance of
the holy Buddha of Loka-is-Vara-Raja.

55. Purity, Rejoicing, Wisdom, these three are the Supernal Essence
of the light of the Infinite One that enlighteneth all things,
communicating good to all the worlds of the Ten Regions.

56. Teaching all that have life in the Ten Regions, that they might,
with sincerity, faith, and hope, be born again into Paradise, He set
forth that promise infinite and divine—the true seed of birth
within the Kingdom of Truth.

57. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith is in unity with them that
return no more to birth and death, for having thus attained, they
pass onward into Nirvana, their lives being ended.

58. In His great compassion the Blessed One accomplished His
infinite wisdom in His divine promise, ordaining that womanhood
shall be raised into manhood.

59. Instructing all that have life in the Ten Regions how they
should through sincerity, effort, and hope be born into the Temporal
Paradise, He faithfully promiseth to manifest Himself unto the eyes
of the dying, opening wide the gate of all righteousness before
them.

60. By the divine promise to the dying of His consoling presence our
Lord instructeth men that they shall make to grow all righteousness
revealed in the Sutra of Meditation upon the Buddha of Infinite
Life.

61. All righteous deeds done of men in true obedience to the holy
Doctrine of Sincerity and right-doing, are but the seed of merit
that shall be born within the Temporal Paradise.

62. Instructing All that have life in the Ten Regions how that they
may through sincerity, merit, and hope be born into the Temporal
Paradise, He promiseth that no man shall lose salvation, for He hath
opened the Gate of Truth.

63. By the Divine Promise of the final salvation hath our Lord
instructed the men of the Single Vehicle to recite His Holy Name
that is the Essence of all the merit revealed in the Lesser Sutra of
the Buddha of Infinite Life.

64. He that reciteth the Holy name by his own effort and in the mind
of meditation or of dispersing, being led by the virtue of the
divine promise of final salvation, turneth naturally in at the Gate
of Truth.

65. He that holds not the True Faith, even though he desire to be
born into the Pure Paradise of Joy, must go unto his own place, and
it shall be in the border of the Outermost Places, for this is the
fruit of doubting the mystery of the Supreme Wisdom.

66. That a man should be a Buddha, made manifest in this world, is a
rare thing and difficult. So difficult is it also to hear the
excellent doctrine of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. In all the
myriads of Kalpas such a way comes seldom.

67. Difficult is it for men to find a wise Teacher; so is it also
for them to be instructed and to hear the Holy Law. More difficult
still is it to receive the True Faith.

68. More difficult is it for men to receive the Divine Promise made
unto men than to receive all other teachings.

The Lord Buddha teacheth that this is of all hard things most
difficult and yet again more difficult.

69. The true Doctrine teacheth men that they may become Buddhas in
reciting the Holy Name, and so therefore is it that all other faiths
and moralities are but transitory doorways unto the Truth. Man
comprehendeth not that Pure Land of Peace unless he holdeth fast the
true Doctrine, casting aside that which is transitory.

70. Seek refuge in the Sole Vehicle of merciful promise. For the
transitory teachings have let and hindered men in the Way of
Enlightenment so that they must needs pass through the long
weariness of births and deaths.


CONCERNING THE SUTRA OF THE MEDITATION

71. That Lord that was made flesh in India, the Lord of great pity,
showing unto Vaidehi, Queen of Magadha, the golden mirror created by
his marvellous power, commanded her to choose the Land of Pure Joy
among all the worlds therein appearing.

72. Binbisara, he who commanded that an ascetic should be slain
before his pre-ordained time was come, by his own son was imprisoned
in a seven-walled prison as the due recompense of his violence.

73. Ajāta-Šatru, prince and heir of Magadha, denouncing his mother
as a traitor, with drawn sword ran furiously upon her.

74. Then said Jīvaka the minister and another with him: “This act is
worthy only of an outcast. For the fame of our race unworthy art
thou to dwell in the Palace.” And earnestly did they counsel him to
change his evil purpose.

75. Laying his hand on his sword-hilt, Jīvaka, the minister, drew
backwards a few steps, steadfastly regarding the prince, that he
might avert this great sin. And so it was that the prince laid down
his sword, and secluded his mother in a palace.

76. Certain is it that Ananda with Vaidehi, Devadatta and yet
others, bearing their part in this great sorrow of the royal palace
of Magadha, must needs so suffer that they might know the infinite
pity of the Blessed One, that Lord who in this world made manifest
the true teaching.

77. And all these wise ones having so received instruction revealed
unto us, who are of all evil-doers worst, the true way, the refuge
of His divine promise that absolveth all the sins of men.

78. For when the full time was come that by the will of our Lord and
of Vaidehi the teaching of the Pure Land should be made known here
on Earth, Ajāta-Šatru, her son, sinned this sin, Varshakara his
minister bearing testimony against it.

79. It is needful that the heart of a man be opened unto the Faith
universal which He who is Blessed hath shown us, forsaking the
belief that his own works shall save him, for in every man the power
to perform righteous deeds is differing.


CONCERNING THE LESSER SUTRA

80. The Eternal Father is called the Buddha of Infinite Light,
because very mightily He holdeth in safety all beings dwelling in
the Ten Regions of the world who, by His merciful enlightenment,
recite His Holy Name.

81. The myriad Buddhas, unnumbered as the sands of Ganges, counsel
all having life to trust in the Supernal Virtue of the Holy Name,
declaring that weighed against this even righteous deeds are the
lesser good.

82. The innumerable Buddhas, countless as the sands of Ganges, are a
testimony and a shield to all that have life in this sorrowful and
sinful world, declaring unto them that teaching most high and
difficult of acceptance, which is the true faith.

83. Whoso attaineth unto a Soul clear and enduring as diamond shall
testify unto his thankfulness for the limitless grace of the Blessed
One, for even the testimony and the safeguarding that he hath of all
the Buddhas proceed only from the fulfilment of His most merciful
promise.

84. The innumerable Buddhas, countless as the sands of Ganges, guide
into a sure trust in the Holy Name those sinful creatures and
evil-hearted that wander in the darkness of this wicked world
bearing the five signs of degeneration upon it.


OF THE MANY SUTRAS CONCERNING THE INFINITE ONE

85. Having great pity, our Eternal Father lighteneth the dark night
of ignorance, manifesting Himself in that Land of Joy as the Buddha
of Infinite Light which enlighteneth all the worlds with its
immeasurable glory.

86. That Lord most compassionate, the Buddha of immeasurable Light,
He who had attained unto the Supreme Wisdom even before the myriads
of Kalpas were, pitying them that know not, made himself manifest in
the Palace of Kapila as the Lord Sakya-muni.

87. If a man had the duration of all the myriad Kalpas, had he
innumerable tongues and each of these tongues innumerable voices,
yet should he vainly essay the praises of that Blessed One.

88. The Lord instructeth us that the way into Paradise is straight
and easy. Therefore whoso receiveth not this Truth is, in verity,
called a man that hath not eyes to see nor ears to hear.

89. The One true freedom is the Highest, and the Absolute is perfect
freedom. And when we attain unto that freedom, for us shall desire
and doubt vanish away.

90. When every man is beloved of us, even as the son of our own
body, there is the Universal Mind made perfect in us. And this shall
be in Paradise.

91. He who is in all things supreme, is Himself Nirvana, and Nirvana
is that true light that abideth in the Land that is to come, but
this world cannot know it.

92. Our Lord instructeth us that he who rejoiceth in his faith is,
in so doing, in unity with the Highest. For true faith is the seed
of light, and the seed of true light is in itself the potentiality
of that which is Deity.

93. Whoso trusteth not in the Supreme Wisdom of the Enlightened One,
clinging unto his own purblind knowledge, must suffer by fire for
long Kalpas of ages.


CONCERNING THE WELFARE OF THE PRESENT WORLD

94. He that hath unending pity, the Buddha of Infinite Life, hath
given unto us in the Sutra of Golden Light a teaching concerning
long life, that the way of long life and the welfare of the people
might be made known unto them.

95. Dengyo-Daishi, he who taught the Tendai-shu in the mount of
Hiye, hath compassionately instructed us that we should recite
Namuamida-butsu, that Holiest Name, as a sure shield against the
seven sorts of calamities.

96. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name, that is higher than all other
virtues, shall be set free from the fetters of the past, the
present, and the future.

97. To him that reciteth the Holy Name shall be good unending even
in this world, for the sin of his former births is vanquished and
his youth set free from death.

98. To him that reciteth the Holy Name, shall Brahma and Chakra the
great king bring homage, and about him shall heavenly beings and
benignant deities keep watch throughout the days and nights.

99. That man that reciteth the Holy Name shall the four mighty
Regents in Heaven guard through the days and nights against the
disturbance of all evil spirits.

100. To him that reciteth the Holy Name shall the Deity of the Earth
bring homage, watching over him throughout the day and night, as the
shadow follows its substance.

101. To him who reciteth the Holy Name, Nanda and Upananda the Naga
Kings, together with their attendant deities shall bring homage,
watching over him throughout the day and night.

102. To him who reciteth the Holy Name, the King of Death, together
with his ministers in the five worlds, shall do reverence, guarding
him throughout the days and nights.

103. Mara, the Tempter, he who is Ruler of that heaven, where
pleasures are collected, hath sworn unto the Lord to shield him from
temptation who reciteth the Holy Name.

104. All good deities in Earth and Heaven shall be gracious unto him
who reciteth the Holy Name, shielding him throughout the days and
nights.

105. All evil spirits in heaven and earth tremble before that
believer who standeth upon the Immutable promise. For even in this
world hath he the mind of Divine Illumination.

106. Kwannon and Seishi, the Bodhisattvas of incarnate Pity and
Wisdom, together with their companions, innumerable as the sands of
Ganges, shall be beside him who reciteth the Holy Name, even as the
shadow cleaves to the substance.

107. Within the Light of Buddha of Infinite Light are unnumbered
Buddhas, and of these, each and every one shall shield him who hath
within him the true Faith.

108. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name shall be surrounded himself by
those Buddhas who cannot be numbered, who in the Ten Regions with
joy protect and guide him.

Upon the Sutra of Suraigama-Samadhi, I, Shinran Shōnin, have uttered
these eight lauds praising the virtue of Seishi the Bodhisattva of
Wisdom.

109. Seishi, he who is the Bodhisattva of Wisdom, having
comprehended the fullness of the Holiest Name, rising from his seat,
prostrated himself beneath the feet of our Lord, worshipping Him, he
and his fellowship, and thus he spake:

110. “O my Lord, in the ancient time, before the Kalpas innumerable
as the sands of Ganges, there was manifest in this world a Buddha,
and His Name was called—The Buddha of Infinite Light.

111. “In His footsteps twelve Buddhas followed, and twelve long
Kalpas have rolled away. And of these Buddhas the last was He that
is called that Buddha in whose glory the Sun and Moon are even as
darkness.

112. “Unto me hath that Buddha revealed the Path of the meditation
of the Supreme—that meditation wherein He instructeth us that all
the Buddhas of all the Ten Regions compassionate as even as a father
pitieth his child.

113. Whoso seeketh refuge in Buddha, as a child in the bosom of his
mother shall verily perceive Him now or in the time that shall be.
And it shall be soon.

114. “As a man encompassed by the cloud of incense casteth sweet
odours about him, so he that trusteth in the Holy Promise is
spiritually endued with the Divine Essence.

115. “When I was initiate in right doing, I attained unto the high
way of that assurance that freed me from birth and death, through
the teaching of the Noble Doctrine of the Holy Name.

“Therefore in this world, rejoicing, I guide the faithful believer
into the way of Purity.”

116. Now with all praise let us give thanks unto the merciful
goodness of the Bodhisattva of Wisdom.


OF THANKSGIVING FOR NAGARJUNA, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

117. Nagarjuna, the great teacher, setting forth in many excellent
writings the praise of the Kingdom of Purity, hath instructed us to
recite the Holy Name.

118. For the Lord Buddha declared in prophecy that in India, in the
Southern Parts, should arise a great Teacher, trampling upon the
false teachings of affirmation and denial.

119. Nagarjuna, the Great Teacher, he who mightily set forth the
noble doctrine of the greater Vehicle, and himself attained unto
that height whereon a man rejoiceth eternally in the Faith, hath
very sweetly persuaded men that they should receive the teaching of
the Holy Name.

120. Nagarjuna, that great priest, setting forth the two ways—the
way that is straight and plain, and the way of high austerity,
leadeth very gently to the Ark of the Divine Promise such as are
driven through the weariness of births and deaths.

121. He who receiveth this teaching of Nagarjuna the Great Teacher,
should recite always the Holy Name, believing the Divine Promise of
the Buddha of Infinite Light.

122. Whoso would quickly attain unto that resting-place where
illusion ceaseth, should recite the Holy Name holding his mind in
steadfast piety.

123. One Ark only, that Ark of the Divine Promise of our merciful
Father, doth voyage and bear us unto the shore of the eternal
peace—even us who so long have drifted hither and thither in the
ocean of birth and death.

124. This great priest hath in one utterance set forth that the Lord
is Ruler indeed of the sacred teaching, and that herein are the holy
Bodhisattvas His ministers. Therefore should we bring homage unto
our Lord.

125. The mighty company of the Bodhisattvas utter these words, “When
we became wise in holiness, yea, we who have striven through Kalpas
unnumbered,

126. “Yet could we not root out our earthly desires which are the
very seed of birth and death. But through that only way of the
meditation of the Highest did we attain unto the final deliverance
that hath destroyed all our sin.”


OF THANKSGIVING FOR VASUBANDH, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

127. Among those doctrines taught of our Lord Vasubandh, the great
priest hath persuaded us who are full of sinful desires to accept
the Divine Promise of our infinite Father.

128. Only to Him who is above all things is known the glory of the
Land of Peace. Wide as the sky and boundless is it spread forth.

129. Whoso believeth in the power of the Divine Promise shall verily
be at one with the holy Essence, even as the turbid stream is clear
and pure within the ocean depth when they have flowed together.

130. When the assemblage of the believers in the holy faith is born
within that Land of Purity that hath sprung from the lotus of the
true enlightenment, soon shall their heart’s desire be fulfilled in
them.

131. The heavenly spirits and those souls freed from illusion, they
who are born in the land of purity from the wisdom deep as the ocean
of the Divine Promise, differ not the one from the other in their
powers. Pure are they as the air is pure.

132. Vasubandh, that exalted master of excelling works, who himself
hath found refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, hath declared
that whoso is borne in the Vehicle of the Divine Promise shall
without doubt attain unto the Promised Land.

133. Whoso taketh refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, that light
that shineth unto all the worlds of the Ten Regions, shall be
called, according to the teaching of that master of excelling works,
a man whose heart is great, and to him shall the True Light be
shown.

134. He whose heart is great and who shall attain unto the true
enlightenment is he also that desireth the salvation of all living,
and verily the true faith given of that Blessed One is salvation.

135. The single heart perceiveth the true faith, and so doing is
strong and clear as the diamond, and this strength is the wisdom of
the supreme that strengthened us.

136. When we shall attain, unto the Promised Land, which is that
Nirvana past all understanding, there shall we labour abundantly for
the salvation of all living things. For so the Sutra teaches us in
these words: “A heart that inclineth to the succour of others.”


OF THANKSGIVING FOR DONRAN, THE GREAT TEACHER OF CHINA

137. Donran, that great teacher of China, being instructed of
Bodhi-ruci, the priest of India, sought refuge in the Land of
Purity, and thus doing he burned with fire the books of the Taoist
teaching which he had aforetime held in honour.

138. Having thus cast from him the writings that he had so many
years diligently studied, he preached unto all men the doctrine of
the Divine Promise, and, so teaching, he led men that are fast bound
in the fetters of illusion, in at the Gate of the Great Peace.

139. A mighty King of this world brought homage unto him in his
monastery and put unto him this question, saying: “If so it is that
the Land of Purity should be in all the Ten Regions, how then is it
declared unto us in the Sutra that it is in the Western Heaven?”

140. And with humble piety he replied:

“Of this matter can I not tell thee. It is too high for me. Still am
I in the lower rank of wisdom, even still small is my knowledge. I
cannot fathom this great mystery.”

141. All men in the priesthood or the people who know not the rock
of their trust, did Donran the Great Priest guide unto the sure
refuge of the doctrine of the Land of Bliss.

142. He abode in the Temple of the Great Rock, being favourably
bidden thereto by the King of the Gi Dynasty, and in the evening of
his days he travelled into the district of Dun.

143. And this King of the Gi Dynasty reverently offered unto him the
holy title of Shinran (Ran of Divinity) and the honourable name of
“Rock of the Venerable Ran”—that his dwelling-place should be
called by it.

144. Great and mighty upon the people was his spiritual power in the
temple of Genchu and in the fourth year of Kokwa of the Gi Dynasty
the Temple of Yosen became his beloved dwelling.

145. And when he had reached sixty-seven years, he sought his final
refuge in the Eternal Kingdom. And at that departing were vouchsafed
many holy marvels unto which all men, both of the priests and
people, came and did reverence.

146. And when Donran the Great High Priest had departed into the
Peace, the King of the Gi Dynasty by a royal order commanded there
should be built for him a holy monument in the lands of Dun.

147. What man could know the unsearchable mystery of the faith and
deeds of the Divine Promise were it not for that most excelling
commentary of Donran the wise Priest, which he wrote concerning the
teaching of Vasubandh that had lived aforetime.

148. He who believeth that the Sole Vehicle of the Divine Promise,
most perfect, most mighty, receiveth within itself the Greatest of
Sinners, and this because it is its chief will so to do, will
receive the depth of this essential teaching—namely, that before
the eyes of the Instructed, illusion and wisdom are in their Essence
One.

149. Among the Five Mysteries that are preached in this Sutra, the
mystery of the Divine Power of the Enlightened One is highest, and
this is the holy vow of our Blessed One, this and this only.

150. Unto us hath our Father given those two spiritual gifts. Of
these the first is the Virtue whereby we attain unto His Kingdom,
and the second is the Virtue whereby having so attained we return
into this world for the Salvation of men. By the merit of these two
gifts are we initiates of the true faith and of its deeds.

151. When we shall have attained unto the faith and the deeds of the
Merciful Promise through our Father that is in all things able to
give them unto us, birth and death are henceforward as Nirvana. And
this is called the Gift of Departure.

152. And when we shall have attained unto that height which is
desire for the ingathering of all beings into Paradise, shall we
return again into this world that we may be Saviours of Men. And
this is called the Gift of Returning.

153. That “Single Mind” expounded unto us by Vasubandh, the Master
of Writings that excel, is nothing other than the faith of us that
are now fast bound in illusion. So teacheth Donran the Great Teacher
in his Commentary.

154. The Buddha of that inexpressible Light that shineth into the
worlds of the Ten Regions, being for ever enlightened in the night
of ignorance, hath most certainly opened the way of Nirvana to every
man who even for one moment rejoiceth in receiving His Divine
Promise.

155. By the merit of His Infinite Light, when we attain unto that
faith divine and omnipotent, the ice of illusion shall melt into the
water of perfect wisdom.

156. Sin is made one with virtue in its essence, even as ice is one
with water. The more there is ice, so much the more water is
there. So also is the binding up of sin with virtue.

157. In the unbounded ocean of the Holy Name is not seen even one
single death of a blasphemer. For the myriad streams of sin are on
purity with the ocean of righteousness when they have flowed into
the impurity thereof.

158. When the streams of illusion have flowed into the Great Sea of
the Merciful Promise of the Enlightened One, whose light shineth
into all the worlds of the Ten Religions, then shall they too become
the pure water of the Perfect Wisdom.

159. No other way is there of attaining unto the Perfect
Enlightenment save only by birth into the Land of Gladness, and
therefore have all the Enlightened Ones exhorted men that they
should receive the Doctrine of the Kingdom Purity.

160. The Great Priest hath well taught us that in order to cleanse
our deeds, words, and thoughts of deceitfulness, our Father hath
performed the three of His pure and universal.

161. There is no way unto the Kingdom of Gladness save only by
attaining unto the true faith through that Holy Name, the very Jewel
of Wonder.

162. When the new birth through the clearness of the Divine Promise
is attained in the Eternal Kingdom, it is not like unto the birth of
this world; then is there no inferiority even in those that in this
world were sinners, for they have entered into Paradise.

163. The Holy Name of the Buddha of that Boundless Light that
shineth into all the worlds of the Ten Regions, and the glory of His
Wisdom, destroy the darkness of ignorance in the Eternal Night, thus
fulfilling all the desires of men.


CONCERNING UNRIGHTEOUS DEEDS

164. These three things are expounded unto us by Donran
Daishi. First, that faith is not holiness, for faith is not
abiding. At one time it abideth, at another it is gone.

165. And second: This faith is not Single Minded, for it hath not
resolution.

And third: It continueth not, for the other thoughts of the heart
divide it against itself.

166. The three ways of this faith lead the one to the other one. On
this must the believer fix his eyes. If his faith is not in
holiness, then hath he not the faith of resolution.

167. And having not the faith that is resolute, that faith cannot
endure, and because it endureth not, how can he attain unto the
faith of determination? And attaining not unto the faith of
determination, the faith is not sanctified in him.

168. For the attainment of Right Practice expounded by the Master of
the Written Word is according unto the true faith and this alone.

169. If a man return into the Great Way of the Divine Promise,
eschewing the narrow ways of deeds and works, in him shall the true
light of Nirvana be made manifest.

170. The mighty king So, he of the Ryo line, worshipped the Great
Teacher Donran Daishi, naming him the Bodhisattva of Ran, turning
his face in worship unto the dwelling-place of his Teacher.


CONCERNING DOSHAKU-ZENJI

171. Having cast away from him all trust in the righteous deeds of
the sages, Doshaku-Zenji, the Great Teacher, hath taught us to enter
in at the only gate that is the Gospel of the Pure Land.

172. Having thus cast away from him the laborious study of the
Doctrine of Nirvana, Doshaku, the Great Teacher, himself trusted
only in the power of the Divine Promise, and he persuaded men to
follow after him.

173. In this world of sin that is so far removed from the blessed
day of our Lord, is there no man who attaineth unto the wisdom
Supreme, yea, not though he should compass all righteous doing. So
teacheth our Lord of Great Teaching.

174. He who succeeded unto the teaching of Donran-Daishi,
Doshaku-zenji, the Great Priest, thus declareth: “To toil and labour
after righteous deeds in this life is the unavailing toil of
self-effort.”

175. In this world, the doing of evil and the sin that is wrought of
men is violent and furious as the storm wind and rain. Therefore
have the compassionate Buddhas exhorted men to seek their refuge
within the Land of Purity.

176. From him that sinneth, throughout his life shall the fetters of
illusion fall away, if he shall recite the Holy Name with love and
adoration.

177. That he might lead men into the Eternal Kingdom—those men who
are in this life fast bound unto the evil thing, our Father teacheth
us, saying, “Recite my name,” and hath promised further, “Doing
this, if they be not born again, I myself will not attain unto
Wisdom.”


CONCERNING ZENDO-DAISHI

178. Rising like unto an incarnation of the Mighty Ocean, Zendo, the
great teacher, came into the world.

And for the sake of mankind in this sinful place, he called unto all
the Buddhas of the Ten Regions to be his testimony unto his
commentary on the Sutra.

179. Two interpreters of Zendo-Daishi were there in the age that
followed his own, and these were Hoshō and Shōkō. They, it is, who
have opened the Treasury of teaching that the inward purpose of the
Blessed One should be wholly made known.

180. How should women turn their hearts unto wisdom—they who are
fast bound with the five fetters? No, not through the ages of
myriads of Kalpas, until they seek refuge in the Divine Promise of
Him who is mighty.

181. Having thrown open the Gate of Righteousness, our Lord hath
instructed mankind in every sort of righteous deed. He hath set
before us how the five right deeds differ from the confused deeds
that are outside the Five, so that mankind may enter the way of the
Sole Practice.

182. To mingle the right action with the action that is not akin to
it is called the confused practice. The man that erreth therein
hath not attained unto the single heart. He knoweth not thankfulness
for the grace of the Enlightened One.

183. If he entreat in prayer the good things of this world, even
though he recite only the Blessed Name, he is condemned therein,
being also a man of the confused practice. He shall not be born into
the Land of Purity.

184. Not one, indeed, but not far asunder are the confused deed and
the confused practice. The teachings that are not the teachings of
the Land of Purity are to be condemned as confused deeds.

185. Having invoked the testimony of all the Buddhas, Zendo-Daishi
hath set before us the story of the two rivers, the one, the river
of fire, the other the river of water, that he might incline the
heart to righteous deeds, and guard the true faith of the Divine
Promise.

186. Verily a simple man may attain unto the true Illumination, if
he believe the Holy Promise that is the spirit of the teaching of
Shinshu. Because for this only was the Lord made manifest in this
world, and not according to those other teachings which shall pass
away and be no more.

187. Before the Almighty Power of the Divine teaching do all the
fetters of evil deeds fall away. Therefore is the Divine Promise of
our Father invoked as that Holy Thing which giveth unto us
omnipotent strength.

188. Yet, to whomsoever would enter the Promised Land, created in
the power of His Divine Vow, is belief in his own strength impotent.

And because they are needless, therefore the wise who have received
the Great and Lesser Vehicles must trust unto the promise of the
Almighty One.

189. Whoso hath known himself the slave of illusion shall yet,
relying on the Power of the Holy Promise, enter into the immortal
joy of the Truth, and all his earthly body shall fall from him.

190. Merciful and compassionate parents unto us are the Blessed One
and the Lord Buddha. For they have opened before us the ways of
good, having so purposed that the great Faith shall be.

191. He who is one with the True Soul hath attained unto a heart
clear and hard as diamond. Therefore is he at one with that man who
hath the three excellent forms of Penitence. This hath the Great
Teacher shown us.

192. By that faith alone, like unto a jewel of price, we who in this
sinful world have our being, may enter into the Eternal Kingdom,
being eternally freed from the yoke of birth and death.

193. At that moment when faith in the Enlightened One is perfected,
pure and lasting as the diamond, then shall the Spiritual Light
shine upon us and guard us, the light which for ever guideth us from
rebirth and death.

194. Whoso attaineth not unto the True Faith hath not in him one of
the Trinity of Virtues, that are Sincerity, Faith, and Hope, and the
man that hath not one of these three holdeth not the perfect faith.

195. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith given of Him is freed from
all let and hindrance, for his heart is at one with the Divine
Promise, and he is obedient unto the true teaching that is the Very
Word of the Buddha.

196. Whoso hath comprehended the truth of the Holy Name is at that
very moment freed from doubt. He hath possessed the Right thought,
and he is commended as excellent and rare in his attainment.

197. He shall be let and hindered that is not at one with the Divine
Promise, and therefore he whose faith is not full of Peace is a man
who holdeth not the Divine Thought.

198. The attainment of the Divine Wisdom shall come unto him who
reciteth the Holy Name, for his faith cometh from the Divine Promise
of Him that leadeth him into the Promised Land. He shall not fail
to attain unto the Great Nirvana.

199. At this time when the five Signs of Degeneration are manifest,
many men are there who doubt and blaspheme the Holy Doctrine. Yea,
even the Priests, together with the people, are enemies unto him who
walketh in the right way.

200. He who blasphemeth the Divine Promise is a man born blind. He
shall sink into three evil worlds for age-long myriads of Kalpas.

201. Though the way into the Land that is in the West hath been made
plain before us, yet the age-long Kalpas have rolled away without
good fruit thereof, for we have hindered ourselves and our brethren
that we might not enter therein.

202. Without the Almighty Strength of the Divine Promise how should
we leave this sinful world? Wherefore we should live in hearty
thanksgiving for the Grace of our Father, thinking ever upon the
ocean deeps of his love.

203. For it is by the marvellous mercy of our Lord that we may cast
aside the anguish of birth and death, in the shining hope of our
Eternal Kingdom.

Therefore should we return unto the Lord righteous deeds in
thanksgiving for His grace and mercy.


CONCERNING GENSHIN-SOZU

204. Genshin the Great Teacher declareth: “In this world have I,
even I, appeared as an incarnation of the Buddha, and now, my work
of Salvation being accomplished, I return unto the Eternal Kingdom
that is my home.

205. From the teaching of our Lord hath Genshin, the Great Teacher,
tenderly opened unto us the gate of the Doctrine of the Holy Name,
and hath so taught mankind in this evil world that is far removed
from the Golden Day of our Lord.

206. Genshin-Sozu, he who sat in the Assemblage on the Peak of
Vultures in the time of our Lord, hath taught us that there are two
Paradises, that which is eternal and that which is temporal, and
thus setteth forth the merit and the defect of the Right Practice
and of the Mingled Deed.

207. Acharya Genshin, the Great Teacher, considering one of the
Sutra with the commentary of Ekanzenji, hath made plain the
attributes of the Land of Outermost Places.

208. For he said: “Not one man is there of thousands who may not be
born into the Land of Purity.” And thus saying, he commendeth the
followers of the Right Practice.

And again:

“There is not even one among tens of thousands who may enter it.”
And so saying, he condemneth the doers of the mingled deed.

209. Further he setteth forth how few are the men who can enter into
the True Land of Purity. And very solemnly he warneth us that more
are they that are born into the Temporal Paradise.

210. Wheresoever men or women, be they noble or lowly born, recite
the Holy Name of our Father, there is no pre-eminence of place or
time. Freely may they do this, whether walking, resting, sitting,
or lying.

211. Though our eyes are so blinded by illusion that we discern not
the light whereby He embraceth us, yet that great mercy for ever
shineth upon us and is not weary.

212. Whatsoever may be his Visible Deed that would be born into the
Promised Land, he shall not forget day or night to hold fast unto
the name of the Divine Promise.

213. To us that in this world are sinners most sinful, there is none
other way of Salvation save that we should enter into the Land of
Purity, by reciting the holy name of Him who is our Father.



CONCERNING HŌNEN SHŌNIN

214. Since the day when Hōnen Shōnin appeared in the world, and set
forth the single Ark of the Divine Promise, hath the Doctrine of the
Pure Land gloriously shone upon the hearts of all men in the land of
Nihon.

215. For from the strength of the wisdom of light, Hōnen, the Great
Teacher, came into the world and hath taught the chosen doctrine of
the Divine Promise, and he hath built Jodo-Shinshu upon the rock.

216. Though Zendo and Genshin, those great teachers, have well
instructed us, yet had Hōnen Shōnin kept silence, wherewith should
we know the holy teaching of Shin-Shu, we who dwell in remote
country and in an evil day?

217. Throughout the long, long Kalpas of my lives that are overpast
could I never find the way of Deliverance, and if Hōnen Shōnin, the
Great Teacher, had not arisen in this world, vainly had I spent the
precious hours of my life.

218. When his years were but fifteen, Hōnen Shōnin entered into the
Way of Illumination, for in departing from worldly life he fulfilled
his heart’s desire, and by him was clearly understanded the doctrine
of the transience of life.

219. The excellent righteousness of Hōnen Shōnin, his deeds and the
wisdom that was in him, drew unto him for refuge many even of chief
priests of the heretics that seek Nirvana through the way of the
sages. Yea, they sought him even as their appointed teacher, radiant
and stray of soul as the diamond.

220. Even while Hōnen Shōnin yet walked in this world, there issued
from his body rays of a golden shining, and this, so it is said,
hath Kanezane Fujiwara beheld with his own eyes.

221. The people passed it from mouth to mouth that this Hōnen Shōnin
was the living incarnation of Doshaku Zenji, or yet again of Zendo
Daishi.

222. Before the eyes of men Hōnen Shōnin stood as the Boddhisattva
of Wisdom, or, yet more, as the Blessed One again made flesh.

The Emperor and all his ministers did homage unto him, yea, and the
men of the chief city and of the far countries.

223. He who had been Emperor, in the time of Jokyu, brought homage
to Hōnen Shōnin. All the priests and scholars of the word of
Confucius had understanding of the doctrine of Shin Shu.

224. A chosen vessel of the Blessed One that men might be saved,
Hōnen Shōnin was manifested in the world, and he opened wide the
gate of perfect wisdom, having instructed mankind in the Holy Faith.

225. Of all rare things it is the rarest that we should ourselves
meet with the True Teacher, yet verily the chain of doubt in the
Divine Mercy is the true cause of unending birth and death.

226. Hōnen Shōnin issued forth from the mysterious Light and his
disciples beheld it. In his eyes was there nought of disparity
between the wise and them that know not, between the noble and the
lowly born.

227. And now, his time being at hand, Hōnen Shōnin spake:

“Thrice have I taken birth in the Land of Purity, and of these three
times the last hath given unto me the fullness of peace.”

228. Once did Hōnen Shōnin speak, saying: “In the glorious day of
our Lord was I among the holy Assemblage on the Peak of Vultures,
and my Spirit was rapt in self-instruction and in the doctrine of
salvation.”

229. Having taken birth in that small and remote island, Hōnen
Shōnin spread abroad the doctrine of the Holy Name for the sake of
all men’s salvation. And thus had he done not only then, but many
times in ages gone by.

230. That Buddha, whose light is infinite, was made flesh in this
world as Hōnen Shōnin, and when his merciful work was accomplished,
he returned into the Land of Purity.

231. When his life was drawing to a close, light was manifested
about him as a cloud of glory, yea, and music of the heavenly
places, sweet and excelling in harmony, and sweet odours scattered
about him.

232. Following steadfastly after the ensample of the Nirvana of the
Lord, he laid himself upon his right side, his head inclined unto
the north, his face turned unto the west. And the crowding people
attended upon him, even the priests and men and women of the nobles
and of the lowly born.

233. Now the time when Hōnen Shōnin departed from this life was the
twenty-fifth day of the young spring. In the second year of
Kenriyaku he returned in peace unto the Land of the Father.

On the ninth day of February and the second of Ko-Yen, the
revelation that here followeth was sent unto me in a dream of
morning.

234. It is necessary that men should believe the divine promise of
Him who is Infinite.

Whoso believeth shall attain unto Perfect Wisdom, by the virtue of
that Light which embraceth him and shall never forsake him.


OF THE THREE PERIODS

235. Two thousand years and yet more are departed since the day when
our Lord entered into Nirvana. Ended are the two glorious
periods—the orthodox and the representative. Lament, O ye
disciples, who in this closing age would follow after the Lord.

236. The teachings of our Lord have entered into the Dragon Palace,
for in this closing age they are too high for men. Men are impotent
to follow after their practice or to attain unto them.

237. Throughout the three periods hath the Divine Promise of the
Buddha of Infinite Light prospered and grown. But in this period of
the closing age all righteous deeds are hidden within the Dragon
Palace.

238. In a certain Sutra are we thus instructed, since the age that
now is a part of the fifth in this closing age wherein men are fast
bound in warfare, all righteous deeds have disappeared from the
world.

239. Since the ancient days the life of men, whose age counted as
80,000 years, hath declined and lessened. And when they could live
but 20,000 years, they were men living in an evil world, and with
the five signs of degeneration upon them.

240. And since time itself hath decayed, the bodily frame of man
hath waxed smaller and feebler, and they are as furious serpents or
as wicked dragons, for the decay of time worketh within them.

241. The illusion that is bred of ignorance increaseth, and is
driven over the world like dust. Hatred great and unbreakable as
the high mountains is in the stead of love.

242. The perversity of man is as strong and piercing as the thorn of
the jungle. With eyes of suspicion and venomous anger do they accuse
and persecute them who believe upon the Holy Name.

243. It is a mark of the degeneration of time that man’s life is
brief and death cometh upon him early and with iron hands breaketh
up his body and that which surrounds him wherein he dwelleth. And
they who leaving justice turn to wickedness do destroy one another
by their evil deeds.

244. No hope is there that the men now living in these last days
shall escape the fetters of birth and death if they refuse the
merciful promise of the Blessed One.

245. Of heretics in the faith are there ninety sorts that defile the
world and only the teaching of the Enlightened One cleanseth it. By
him alone that attaineth unto wisdom shall true joy to man be
fulfilled according to nature and in peace.

246. In these last times of decay the priests, together with the
people, do evil unto him that trusteth in the doctrine of the Holy
name.

247. Whoso attaineth not unto wisdom is eager to harm that man who,
with single heart, accepted the exalted promise. There is no end to
the infinity of the ocean of birth and death for those men who raven
to destroy the doctrine that is mighty to save them if they would
have it so.

248. Though the days of our present time are those that are called
orthodox, we, in whom ignorance is fulfilled, have not within us the
heart that is pure and true. How, then, can we of our own help
attain unto the deeds that shall gain the wisdom that is made
perfect.

249. The strong heart that is able to attain unto wisdom by
self-help is beyond human knowledge and speech. How is it possible
that men full of ignorance, fettered unto birth and death, should
possess such a heart.

250. Though we were masters of the strong will of self-effort, even
should we have seen face to face the Buddhas, myriad as the sands of
Ganges—they who in this world were manifested the one after the
other, yet were we drifted on the torrent of birth and death, in
self-effort were no rescue for us.

251. In these sinful days that are called the representative and
last times all the teachings of the Lord Buddha, the Sakiya-Muni
have vanished away, but the Divine Promise of the Buddha of Infinite
Light, shining greatly over the world, prosperously leads mankind
unto the Eternal Kingdom.

252. After choice that is peerless and beyond the world’s
understanding, after five Kalpas of musing, the Blessed One builded
up the Divine Promise of the Light and Life Infinite. And this is
the Essence of His Mercy showed upon us.

253. The noble mind that shall attain unto wisdom in the doctrine of
the Pure Land is the mind that fain would become Buddha, and it is
named: “The mind that shall save men who suffer.”

254. The mind that shall save men is that mind given by the high
promise of the Blessed One. Whoso attaineth unto the faith He
giveth shall be lord of the great Nirvana.

255. Whoso attaineth unto the mind that would fain become Buddha,
having sought refuge in the gift of the Blessed One, hath no term in
his own gift of welfare to mankind, having for ever laid down all
self-righteousness.

256. According to the all-seeing promise of the Blessed One when the
water of the faith He giveth entereth the soul, illusion passeth
straight-way into wisdom through the virtue of that true land of the
Divine Promise.

257. That man who trusteth in the two gifts granted by the Buddha of
Infinite Light, is raised up into the sphere of the Lesser
Enlightenment, and thence hath he the heart that dwelleth always on
the perfection of the Blessed One.

258. He that attaineth unto the faith that is true gift of the
promise of wisdom from the Blessed One, cometh unto the sphere of
the Lesser Enlightenment, for he is embraced in the arms of the
spiritual light that is of the Father Eternal.

259. Fifty-six thousand and seventy years shall pass before the
Bodhisattva that is Maitreya shall attain unto the Perfected
Wisdom. But whoso embraceth the true faith shall at this very time
be lord of the great Enlightenment.

260. He that hath ascended unto the height of the Lesser
Enlightenment, accepting the Divine Promise of the Holy Name, shall
enter into the Great Nirvana, being made equal unto the Bodhisattva
Maitreya.

261. He that receiveth the true Faith, and is one with them that
return no more to birth and death, shall receive the Perfected
Wisdom, even as that Bodhisattva Maitreya that is called, “He that
shall come.”

262. And the wise in the age which is called Representative, having
utterly renounced all the doctrine of self-dependence, have entered
in at the gate of the Holy Name. For this is the way chosen for that
Age.

263. He who reciteth the Holy Name, having attained unto the true
faith, shall unceasingly adore the Eternal Father, that he may make
a return unto Him for His Grace.

264. Inexplicable and unutterable merit shall be given unto him who,
living in this sinful world, believeth the Divine Promise that
proceedeth from His will.

265. For the true welfare of men that shall be the Buddha of the
Great Light hath given the holy name of Wisdom unto the Bodhisattva
of Wisdom.

266. And with great compassion for mankind in this evil world the
Bodhisattva of Wisdom persuadeth them to believe upon the Holy Name,
and sweetly welcometh the believer that he may lead him into the
Land of Purity.

267. By the mercy of our Lord and of the Blessed One we are able to
attain unto the heart that desireth Buddhahood. At that time alone,
when we enter into the wisdom of the faith, shall we be ourselves
like unto them that would return good unto the Buddha for His Grace.

268. It is by the strength of the Divine Promise that we can reach
unto the holy name of Wisdom. Without the wisdom of the faith, how
is it possible that we should attain unto the Nirvana?

269. The Divine Light shineth over the Deep Night of ignorance,
therefore sorrow not that the wisdom of your eyes is darkened. The
holy Ark is at hand that voyageth over the great ocean of birth and
death; therefore fear not because your sin is heavy.

270. Great as is the night of the Divine Promise of our Salvation,
so light is the heaviest of our sins. Immeasurable is the wisdom of
our Father, and therefore they that are strong, as also they that
weary, shall never be forgotten.

271. Our Father hath perfected His mercy by uttering the Divine
Promise that giveth all His merit unto man, that He might save them
that are fast bound unto birth and death.

272. Yea, the recitation of His Holy Name is given of the Blessed
One. Therefore we must not offer this unto Him for the acquirement
of merit. For this will He most surely disdain.

273. Yea, verily, when the water of the mind of man floweth into the
great Ocean of the Divine Promise of the Perfect Wisdom it is
changed and becometh the mind of infinite compassion.

274. And the Lord saith, speaking through a certain Sutra:

“My disciples that shall be, they that are sinners because of the
lost way and love of evil things, it is they that shall destroy my
holy doctrine.”

275. Whoso blasphemeth the doctrine of the Holy Name shall suffer
without ceasing, for he shall fall into the depth of the Hell of
Avichi for eighty thousands of Kalpas.

276. He to whom is given the true entrance into the True and
Promised Land, by the grace of our Lord and of the Blessed One,
shall be one with those men who return no more unto birth and death,
and after this transitory life attain unto the Great Peace.

277. Well may we understand from the teaching of the myriad Buddhas
in the Ten Regions—they that protect mankind—that the strong mind
that seeketh enlightenment by self-effort is vain and impotent.

278. The Buddhas in the Ten Regions, innumerable as the sands of
Ganges, bear witness that very few are there of men in this sinful
world and decaying time that attain unto the true faith.

279. If we accept not the two divine gifts, the gift of entering the
Promised Kingdom, and the gift of return into this evil world, then
shall the wheel of birth and death turn with us for ever. And how
shall we endure to sink into the sea of suffering?

280. Whoso believeth the marvellous wisdom of that Blessed One,
shall be joined unto them that return no more unto birth and
death. And when, possessed of excelling knowledge, such a man is
born into Paradise, soon shall he attain unto the Perfected Wisdom.

281. It is the sole way unto the Promised Land that man should
believe the wisdom that is beyond human knowledge, of the
Enlightened One. Yet it is of all hard things hardest to attain unto
the Faith, the true way that leadeth to Paradise.

282. Casting aside the sorrow of birth and death, that sorrow which
is timeless in its beginning, I hope now solely for the Great
Nirvana. There is no end to my thankfulness for the two mighty gifts
of our Eternal Father.

283. Few are the believers that shall be born into the Land that is
promised, but many are they that shall be born into the Temporal
Paradise. Because the hope that we shall see Light by our own
strength is vain, having no foundation, we have therefore drifted on
the ocean of birth and death for many myriads of Kalpas.

284. Because in the gift of the Holy Name is a grace great and
wonderful, if man attain unto the gift of departing, that of itself
shall guide him unto the gift of returning.

285. Through the great mercy of the gift of departing shall we
attain unto the compassion of the gift of returning. If it were not
the free gift of the Blessed One, how should we attain unto wisdom
in the Land of Purity.

286. The Buddha of the Infinite Light, together with the
Bodhisattvas of Compassion and Wisdom, having taken the Ark of the
Divine Promise, that is voyaging on the ocean of birth and death,
have gathered and saved mankind therewith.

287. Whoso in heart and soul believeth the Divine Promise of the
Buddha of Infinite Light must diligently recite the Holy Name both
sleeping and waking.

288. Those men in the hierarchy of Sages that have trusted unto
self-effort for the means of attaining wisdom, on entering into the
heritage of the Divine Promise believe in it as in the Reason that
transcendeth all reason.

289. Though the teachings of the Lord stand for ever, yet unto none
is it possible to follow them in exactness, and therefore is there
none that may attain unto supreme enlightenment in these last days
of the falling away.

290. In India, in China, and the land of Japan, may the many
teachers of the doctrine of the Land of Purity, with compassion and
tender acceptance, persuade mankind to strive unto the true faith
that they may be joined unto those that return no more unto birth
and death.

291. Even as His friends the Lord commendeth those men that, having
attained unto the true faith taught of the Blessed One unto us,
dwell within the joy of holiness.

292. It is very meet that our souls rejoice exceedingly in the grace
of the great compassion of the Buddha. Yea, even to the extinction
of the body. And for the gracious giving of our spiritual teachers
we must in like manner rejoice, yea, though our very bones be
broken.


CONCERNING BELIEF AND DOUBT

293. Whoso comprehendeth not the wisdom of the Enlightened One, and
doubteth concerning His illumination, shall rise no higher than the
Outermost Places, for he hath trusted in the power of Reward, and
hath relied upon the principle of morality.

294. Whoso doubteth the wisdom of the Enlightened One—that wisdom
beyond all human understanding—and reciteth the Holy Name, trusting
in the merit of himself, shall not rise beyond the outermost bounds
of the Pure Land that is the Temporal Paradise, for he hath not the
grace of right thankfulness for His Compassion.

295. Whoso shall accept the doctrine of rewards and doubteth the
wisdom of Him that hath Light that surpasseth all knowledge of man,
shall be made captive in Doubting Castle, and the three jewels of
the faith shall no more be his.

296. For his sin, in that he hath doubted the wisdom of the
Enlightened One, shall he remain in the Outermost Places of the Land
of Purity. And for as much as we are taught that the sin of doubt
is grievous, we are also instructed that he must there dwell for
many Kalpas.

297. If the prince committeth a sin against his Father, even the
Chakravarti, the King, he is fettered as a prisoner, though the
chain be of gold.

298. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name, and so doeth as a work of
self-merit, shall be bound in the prison of the sevenfold gems, for
he believeth not right by the divine promise of that Holy One, and
heavy is the sin of his doubting.

299. Yet he even that hath a doubting soul and sinneth the sin of
self-merit, must needs strive to comprehend the merciful goodness of
the Blessed One, and he shall recite the Holy Name if he would at
all be equalled unto him that holdeth the true faith.

300. It is the Law that he who soweth shall reap what he soweth,
therefore the man that is full of righteous deeds for the sake of
self-merit shall enter into the prison of the sevenfold gems, for he
doubteth the marvellous wisdom of Him that hath the Light.

301. Whoso doubteth of the wisdom of Him that hath Light beyond the
imagining of man, and trusteth to the root of goodness and
virtue—he shall not attain unto the Soul of Great Mercy, for he is
born into the Outermost Places of Paradise, and slow and dull of
heart is he.

302. Among those men that doubt the Holy Word, some are imprisoned
in the shut bud of the Lotus. And they shall be despised as they
that in illusion are born into the outermost Paradise or are held
captive within the narrow walls of the womb.

303. Whoso doubteth the omniscience of the wisdom of the
Light-Bearer, but holdeth to his belief in Reward, excellent
ofttimes in making the root of goodness to grow,

304. Because he doubteth the wisdom of the Eternal Wisdom, and is
held captive as in the strait prison of the womb, hath neither
knowledge nor wisdom, and is compared unto a man straitly bound in
captivity.

305. He that is born into the outermost place, all glorious with the
sevenfold jewels, shall not in five hundred years behold that
three-fold jewel, the Tri-ratna, for there is in him no spiritual
well-doing, that he should give it unto his fellow-men.

306. To him who is born into the Palace, glorious with the seven
jewels, for five hundred years there shall befall many sorts of
sorrows from his own evil doing.

307. Whoso hopeth reward and maketh to flourish the root of
goodness, shall remain in the transitory Paradise, for though he be
a good man, yet hath he a doubting heart.

308. Because he accepteth not the Divine Promise of Him who is the
Light unspeakable, and carrieth his doubt with him unto Paradise,
therefore the shut flower of his heart openeth not, therefore is he
unshapen as a child in the womb.

309. When he perceiveth the Land of Purity, the Bodhisattva Maitreya
thus questioneth the Holy One, saying, “What is the cause and what
the circumstance of that man who, having been born, yet remaineth as
it were straitened in the womb?

310. And thus spake the Lord unto the Bodhisattva Maitreya saying,

“Whoso trusteth in the root of goodness that he himself maketh to
grow and hath a doubting soul, he it is that is in the outermost
places of the Paradise, he it is that is said to be straitened still
in the womb of ignorance.”

311. He who doubteth the wisdom of Him that is all Light, shall for
his sin be made captive until five hundred years be gone, and this
is called the conception within the womb of ignorance.

312. Whoso doubteth the wisdom that is beyond man’s understanding,
and hath believed the doctrine of reward, shall of a certainty be
born within Doubting Castle, and this is called conception within
the womb of ignorance.

313. Whoso trusteth upon self-righteousness rather than upon the
wisdom of the Enlightened One that is beyond man’s knowledge, shall
be conceived within the womb of ignorance, and to him shall the
mercy of the Three Jewels be unknown.

314. Whoso doubteth the wisdom of the Enlightened One that
surpasseth all knowledge of man and trusteth in the hope of reward,
and would attain unto birth in Paradise by making the root of
goodness to grow, shall be straitened in the womb of ignorance.

315. Heavy is the sin of doubting the wisdom of the Buddha. He who
is instructed taketh refuge in the wonderful wisdom of the
Enlightened One, being in contrition for his foolishness.

These twenty-three psalms above-written are made by me that men
should know the heaviness of their sin in doubting the Divine
Promise of the Buddha of Infinite Light.


IN PRAISE OF PRINCE SHOTOKU

316. Through the compassion of Shotoku the great prince we, having
accepted the Divine Promise sprung from the unsearchable wisdom of
the Illuminated One, are made equal unto Maitreya. Bodhisattva—the
Buddha that shall be—having been united unto those men who return
no more to birth and death.

317. The mighty Bodhisattva of Compassion, he who is the Saviour,
was made manifest in this world as Shotoku the Prince, who, like a
father, hath not forsaken us, and like a mother is ever amongst us.

318. From that past where was no beginning until the day that now
is, hath Shotoku the great prince, the Compassionate, dwelt among us
like unto a father and a mother.

319. Shotoku the Prince, from his Compassion, hath persuaded us to
enter in at the Divine Promise of the wondrous wisdom of the
Light-Bearer. And through this are we joined unto those men who
return no more unto birth and death.

320. Whoso attaineth unto the holy faith that is the power of
divinity, must, in the Ten Regions of the world, find the twofold
gift of the Enlightened One, that he may live in thankfulness for
His grace.

321. Shotoku, he who is mercy’s self, the Compassionate, he who is
like unto a father, and the Bodhisattva of Mercy, the divine
tenderness, his succour is merciful as the pity of a mother.

322. Testimony is there that Shotoku the prince hath mercy upon us,
from the myriads of Kalpas even unto this day, because the wondrous
wisdom of Him who is Light beareth the load of his debt for the
believer.

Therefore before the eyes of His wisdom is the evil as the good, the
pure as the unclean.

323. Shotoku, the Prince, he that is in Japan called the Lord of
Teaching, he whose great mercy overtops all spoken words of
gratitude, must we therefore praise for evermore, having with single
heart sought refuge in him.

324. He who hath pitied the dwellers in the lands of Japan, the
Prince of Jogu, he whose ways are merciful, hath spread abroad the
Divine Promise of the Enlightened One. Therefore let us praise him
with great rejoicing. Throughout the many myriads of Kalpas, birth
after birth fell hitherto upon us.

325. We to whom he showed forth his compassion must be swift to
praise him, having continually sought refuge in him, and with a
single mind.

326. The high Prince Shotoku, he who hath guarded us and with great
carefulness led us upwards from remotest times, hath lovingly
entreated us to seek our refuge in the two-fold gift of the
Enlightened One.


WHEREIN WITH LAMENTATION I MAKE MY CONFESSION

327. Though I seek my refuge in the true faith of the Pure Land,

Yet hath not mine heart been truly sincere.

Deceit and untruth are in my flesh,

And in my soul is no clear shining.

328. In their outward seeming are all men diligent and truth
speaking,

But in their souls are greed and eager and unjust deceitfulness,

And in their flesh do lying and cunning triumph.

329. Too strong for me is the evil of my heart. I cannot overcome
it.

Therefore is my soul like unto the poison of serpents,

Even my righteous deeds, being mingled with this poison, must be
named the deeds of deceitfulness.

330. Shameless though I be and having no truth in my soul,

Yet the virtue of the Holy Name, the gift of Him that is
enlightened,

Is spread throughout the world through my words being as I am.

331. There is no mercy in my soul.

The good of my fellow-man is not dear in mine eyes.

If it were not for the Ark of Mercy, the divine promise of the
Infinite Wisdom,

How should I cross the Ocean of Misery?

332. I, whose mind is filled with cunning and deceit as the poison
of reptiles, am impotent to practise righteous deeds.

If I sought not refuge in the gift of our Father, I should die the
death of the shameless.

333. It is a token of this evil age that in this world the priests,
together with the people,

In secret serve strange gods,

While bearing the appearance of the devout sons of Buddha.

334. Sad and corrupt is it that the priests and people, following
after the superstitions of auspicious times and days, seek
sooth-saying and festivals

And worship the gods of heaven and earth.

335. Though I have heard that the names of priest and monk are
honourable,

Yet now are they held as light as the five shameless precepts of
Devadatta.

336. Being of one accord with the many minds of the heathen,

They bow in worship before devils,

While yet wearing the robe of the Buddha.

337. Sad and sorrowful is it that all the priests and people now in
the land of Yamato should worship the devils of heaven and earth, in
the name of the holy mysteries of the Buddha.

338. It is a mark of the downward way of this evil age that men
despise the name of priest or monk as a mean thing, considering them
like unto slaves.

339. May they yet bring offerings with homage unto the priests, even
as you do unto Saliputra or Mahamonugalyayana, those two great
servants of the Lord; though they are priests but in name and
without discipline, for this is the time of degeneration and of the
last days.

340. Though sin hath no substance in itself, and is but the shadow
of our illusion, and soul is in itself pure, yet in all this world
is there no sincere man.

341. Great sorrow is it that, in the wicked world of this age now so
near its end, the high priests who are born in the palankin, and the
monks who bear it now in Nara and Mount Hiyei, desire high secular
rank as the greatest honour.

342. That they consider the monk and nun as their slaves, and mock
at the honourable title of priest and minister, even as at the mean
name of slave, gives testimony that they despise the teaching of the
Buddha.

These sixteen psalms written above are written by me, Gutoku, with
lamentation, to be a record. To me even the honourable priests and
monks of the Central Temples seem now to be despised.


ADDITIONAL PSALMS

343. Having fulfilled forty and eight of the Divine Promise,

He attained unto the supreme enlightenment, and was manifest as the
Buddha of Infinite Light.

Whoso seeketh refuge with Him shall be certainly born into the Land
of Purity.

344. Into the Promised Land—the Paradise of the Great Calm.

He who practiseth the righteous deeds of the mingled motive hath no
claim of birth,

Therefore He that is Infinite would have us follow the deeds of the
single practice that is chosen of Him as teaching that is at the
root.

345. The merit of His holy austerities throughout the myriads of
Kalpas is fully declared in his name of Amida (the Infinite).

And the Holy Name, after the consideration of five Kalpas,

Will be accorded unto us who are alive in this degenerated age.

346. Because action, speech, and mind of the Infinite Life and the
believer in the Holy Name are welded as into a diamond, therefore
shall he certainly be one with the men that return no more unto
birth and death.

347. He that hath much knowledge and keepeth the Pure Land is not
chosen,

And whoso breaketh the Holy Law and sinneth is not disdained.

Only he that seeketh refuge in the Eternal Father shall enter into
Buddhahood as a pebble is transmuted into gold.

348. Our faith that endureth as the diamond cometh from the mind of
the Buddha that eternally endureth.

Lacking the aid of the Divine Power, how should we attain unto the
unchanging mind?

349. In the great ocean of the Divine Promise

Is there no ripple of illusion.

If we enter into the ark of the Holy Vow,

The spirit of mercy shall take part with our self-endeavour.

350. Since we have believed the Divine Promise,

How is it possible we should be in the power of life or death?

Unchanged may be our sinful body,

But our heart is in the Paradise for ever.


[Transcriber's Note: Numbering went 307, 308, 307, 310 . . . fixed]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Buddhist Psalms
by Shinran Shonin
Trans. S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck





This eBook was produced by Les Bowler, St. Ives, Dorset.




SOME POEMS BY SIR WALTER SCOTT




Contents:
   Introduction by Henry Morley.
   The Vision of Don Roderick
   The Field of Waterloo
   The Dance of Death
   Romance of Dunois
   The Troubadour
   Pibroch of Donald Dhu



INTRODUCTION.



Since there is room in this volume for more verses than Colonel
Hay's {1}, I have added to them a few poems by Sir Walter Scott; the
first written in 1811 at the time of the struggle with Napoleon in
the Peninsula, the second in 1815, after Waterloo.  Thus there is
over all this volume a thin haze of battle through which we see only
the finer feelings and the nobler hopes of man.  The day is to come
when war shall be no more, but wars have been and may again be
necessary to bring on that day; and it is of such war, not untinged
with the light of heaven, that we have passing shadows in this
little book.

"The Vision of Don Roderick; a Poem, by Walter Scott, Esq.," was
printed at Edinburgh by James Ballantyne & Co. in 1811.  They are
the present representatives of that firm by whom it is here
reprinted.  It was originally inscribed "to John Whitmore, Esq., and
to the Committee of Subscribers for relief of the Portuguese
Sufferers, in which he presides," as a "poem composed for the
benefit of the Fund under their management."

The Legend of Don Roderick will be given in the next volume of our
"Companion Poets," for Robert Southey founded upon it a Romantic
Tale in Verse, which is one of the best tales of the kind in the
English language.  Southey's tale of Roderick himself was written at
the same time when Walter Savage Landor was writing a play upon the
subject, and Scott was, in the piece here reprinted, making it the
starting-point of a vision of the war in the Peninsula.  The fatal
palace of Don Roderick may have been a fable connected with the
ruins of a Roman amphitheatre.  The fable, as translated by Scott
from a Spanish History of King Roderick, was this:-

"One mile on the east side of the city of Toledo, among some rocks,
was situated an ancient Tower of magnificent structure, though much
dilapidated by time, which consumes all:  four estadoes (i.e., four
times a man's height) below it, there was a Cave with a very narrow
entrance, and a gate cut out of the solid rock, lined with a strong
covering of iron, and fastened with many locks; above the gate some
Greek letters are engraved, which, although abbreviated, and of
doubtful meaning, were thus interpreted, according to the exposition
of learned men:- The King who opens this cave and discovers the
wonders will discover both good and evil things.  Many kings desired
to know the mystery of this Tower, and sought to find out the manner
with much care; but when they opened the gate, such a tremendous
noise arose in the Cave that it appeared as if the earth was
bursting; many of those present sickened with fear, and others lost
their lives.  In order to prevent such great perils (as they
supposed a dangerous enchantment was contained within), they secured
the gate with new locks, concluding, that though a king was destined
to open it, the fated time was not yet arrived.  At last King Don
Rodrigo, led on by his evil fortune and unlucky destiny, opened the
Tower; and some bold attendants whom he had brought with him
entered, although agitated with fear.  Having proceeded a good way,
they fled back to the entrance, terrified with a frightful vision
which they had beheld.  The King was greatly moved, and ordered many
torches, so contrived that the tempest in the cave could not
extinguish them, to be lighted.  Then the King entered, not without
fear, before all the others.  He discovered, by degrees, a splendid
hall, apparently built in a very sumptuous manner; in the middle
stood a Bronze Statue of very ferocious appearance, which held a
battle-axe in its hands.  With this he struck the floor violently,
giving it such heavy blows that the noise in the Cave was occasioned
by the motion of the air.  The King, greatly affrighted and
astonished, began to conjure this terrible vision, promising that he
would return without doing any injury in the Cave, after he had
obtained sight of what was contained in it.  The Statue ceased to
strike the floor, and the King, with his followers, somewhat
assured, and recovering their courage, proceeded into the hall; and
on the left of the Statue they found this inscription on the wall:
Unfortunate King, thou hast entered here in an evil hour.   On the
right side of the wall the words were inscribed:  By strange Nations
thou shalt be dispossessed, and thy subjects foully degraded.  On
the shoulders of the Statue other words were written, which said, I
call upon the Arabs.  And upon his heart was written, I do my
office.  At the entrance of the hall there was placed a round bowl,
from which a great noise, like the fall of waters, proceeded.  They
found no other thing in the hall,--and when the King, sorrowful and
greatly affected, had scarcely turned about to leave the Cavern, the
Statue again commenced its accustomed blows upon the floor.  After
they had mutually promised to conceal what they had seen, they again
closed the Tower, and blocked up the gate of the Cavern with earth,
that no memory might remain in the world of such a portentous and
evil-boding prodigy.  The ensuing midnight, they heard great cries
and clamour from the Cave, resounding like the noise of Battle, and
the ground shaking with a tremendous roar; the whole edifice of the
old Tower fell to the ground, by which they were greatly affrighted,
the Vision which they had beheld appearing to them as a dream."

Scott's poem on the Field of Waterloo was written to assist the
Waterloo subscription.

H. M.

"Quid dignum memorare tuis, Hispania, terris,
 Vox humana valet!"--CLAUDIAN.



THE VISION OF DON RODERICK.




PREFACE


The following Poem is founded upon a Spanish Tradition, bearing, in
general, that Don Roderick, the last Gothic King of Spain, when the
invasion of the Moors was depending, had the temerity to descend
into an ancient vault, near Toledo, the opening of which had been
denounced as fatal to the Spanish Monarchy.  The legend adds, that
his rash curiosity was mortified by an emblematical representation
of those Saracens who, in the year 714, defeated him in battle, and
reduced Spain under their dominion.  I have presumed to prolong the
Vision of the Revolutions of Spain down to the present eventful
crisis of the Peninsula, and to divide it, by a supposed change of
scene, into, THREE PERIODS.  The FIRST of these represents the
Invasion of the Moors, the Defeat and Death of Roderick, and closes
with the peaceful occupation of the country by the victors.  The
SECOND PERIOD embraces the state of the Peninsula when the conquests
of the Spaniards and Portuguese in the East and West Indies had
raised to the highest pitch the renown of their arms; sullied,
however, by superstition and cruelty.  An allusion to the
inhumanities of the Inquisition terminates this picture.  The LAST
PART of the Poem opens with the state of Spain previous to the
unparalleled treachery of BUONAPARTE, gives a sketch of the
usurpation attempted upon that unsuspicious and friendly kingdom,
and terminates with the arrival of the British succours.  It may be
further proper to mention, that the object of the Poem is less to
commemorate or detail particular incidents, than to exhibit a
general and impressive picture of the several periods brought upon
the stage.

EDINBURGH, June 24, 1811.


INTRODUCTION.


I.
  Lives there a strain, whose sounds of mounting fire
    May rise distinguished o'er the din of war;
  Or died it with yon Master of the Lyre
    Who sung beleaguered Ilion's evil star?
  Such, WELLINGTON, might reach thee from afar,
    Wafting its descant wide o'er Ocean's range;
  Nor shouts, nor clashing arms, its mood could mar,
    All, as it swelled 'twixt each loud trumpet-change,
That clangs to Britain victory, to Portugal revenge!

II.
  Yes! such a strain, with all o'er-pouring measure,
    Might melodise with each tumultuous sound
  Each voice of fear or triumph, woe or pleasure,
    That rings Mondego's ravaged shores around;
  The thundering cry of hosts with conquest crowned,
    The female shriek, the ruined peasant's moan,
  The shout of captives from their chains unbound,
    The foiled oppressor's deep and sullen groan,
A Nation's choral hymn, for tyranny o'erthrown.

III.
  But we, weak minstrels of a laggard day
    Skilled but to imitate an elder page,
  Timid and raptureless, can we repay
    The debt thou claim'st in this exhausted age?
  Thou givest our lyres a theme, that might engage
    Those that could send thy name o'er sea and land,
  While sea and land shall last; for Homer's rage
    A theme; a theme for Milton's mighty hand -
How much unmeet for us, a faint degenerate band!

IV.
  Ye mountains stern! within whose rugged breast
    The friends of Scottish freedom found repose;
  Ye torrents! whose hoarse sounds have soothed their rest,
    Returning from the field of vanquished foes;
  Say, have ye lost each wild majestic close
    That erst the choir of Bards or Druids flung,
  What time their hymn of victory arose,
    And Cattraeth's glens with voice of triumph rung,
And mystic Merlin harped, and grey-haired Llywarch sung?

V.
  Oh! if your wilds such minstrelsy retain,
    As sure your changeful gales seem oft to say,
  When sweeping wild and sinking soft again,
    Like trumpet-jubilee, or harp's wild sway;
  If ye can echo such triumphant lay,
    Then lend the note to him has loved you long!
  Who pious gathered each tradition grey
    That floats your solitary wastes along,
And with affection vain gave them new voice in song.

VI.
  For not till now, how oft soe'er the task
    Of truant verse hath lightened graver care,
  From Muse or Sylvan was he wont to ask,
    In phrase poetic, inspiration fair;
  Careless he gave his numbers to the air,
    They came unsought for, if applauses came:
  Nor for himself prefers he now the prayer;
    Let but his verse befit a hero's fame,
Immortal be the verse!--forgot the poet's name!

VII.
  Hark, from yon misty cairn their answer tost:
    "Minstrel! the fame of whose romantic lyre,
  Capricious-swelling now, may soon be lost,
    Like the light flickering of a cottage fire;
  If to such task presumptuous thou aspire,
    Seek not from us the meed to warrior due:
  Age after age has gathered son to sire
    Since our grey cliffs the din of conflict knew,
Or, pealing through our vales, victorious bugles blew.

VIII.
  "Decayed our old traditionary lore,
    Save where the lingering fays renew their ring,
  By milkmaid seen beneath the hawthorn hoar,
    Or round the marge of Minchmore's haunted spring;
  Save where their legends grey-haired shepherds sing,
    That now scarce win a listening ear but thine,
  Of feuds obscure, and Border ravaging,
    And rugged deeds recount in rugged line,
Of moonlight foray made on Teviot, Tweed, or Tyne.

IX.
  "No! search romantic lands, where the near Sun
    Gives with unstinted boon ethereal flame,
  Where the rude villager, his labour done,
    In verse spontaneous chants some favoured name,
  Whether Olalia's charms his tribute claim,
    Her eye of diamond, and her locks of jet;
  Or whether, kindling at the deeds of Graeme,
    He sing, to wild Morisco measure set,
Old Albin's red claymore, green Erin's bayonet!

X.
  "Explore those regions, where the flinty crest
    Of wild Nevada ever gleams with snows,
  Where in the proud Alhambra's ruined breast
    Barbaric monuments of pomp repose;
  Or where the banners of more ruthless foes
    Than the fierce Moor, float o'er Toledo's fane,
  From whose tall towers even now the patriot throws
    An anxious glance, to spy upon the plain
The blended ranks of England, Portugal, and Spain.

XI.
  "There, of Numantian fire a swarthy spark
    Still lightens in the sunburnt native's eye;
  The stately port, slow step, and visage dark,
    Still mark enduring pride and constancy.
  And, if the glow of feudal chivalry
    Beam not, as once, thy nobles' dearest pride,
  Iberia! oft thy crestless peasantry
    Have seen the plumed Hidalgo quit their side,
Have seen, yet dauntless stood--'gainst fortune fought and died.

XII.
  "And cherished still by that unchanging race,
    Are themes for minstrelsy more high than thine;
  Of strange tradition many a mystic trace,
    Legend and vision, prophecy and sign;
  Where wonders wild of Arabesque combine
    With Gothic imagery of darker shade,
  Forming a model meet for minstrel line.
    Go, seek such theme!"--the Mountain Spirit said.
With filial awe I heard--I heard, and I obeyed.



THE VISION OF DON RODERICK.



I.
  Rearing their crests amid the cloudless skies,
    And darkly clustering in the pale moonlight,
  Toledo's holy towers and spires arise,
    As from a trembling lake of silver white.
  Their mingled shadows intercept the sight
    Of the broad burial-ground outstretched below,
  And nought disturbs the silence of the night;
    All sleeps in sullen shade, or silver glow,
All save the heavy swell of Teio's ceaseless flow.

II.
  All save the rushing swell of Teio's tide,
    Or, distant heard, a courser's neigh or tramp;
  Their changing rounds as watchful horsemen ride,
    To guard the limits of King Roderick's camp.
  For through the river's night-fog rolling damp
    Was many a proud pavilion dimly seen,
  Which glimmered back, against the moon's fair lamp,
    Tissues of silk and silver twisted sheen,
And standards proudly pitched, and warders armed between.

III.
  But of their Monarch's person keeping ward,
    Since last the deep-mouthed bell of vespers tolled,
  The chosen soldiers of the royal guard
    The post beneath the proud Cathedral hold:
  A band unlike their Gothic sires of old,
    Who, for the cap of steel and iron mace,
  Bear slender darts, and casques bedecked with gold,
    While silver-studded belts their shoulders grace,
Where ivory quivers ring in the broad falchion's place.

IV.
  In the light language of an idle court,
    They murmured at their master's long delay,
  And held his lengthened orisons in sport:-
    "What! will Don Roderick here till morning stay,
  To wear in shrift and prayer the night away?
    And are his hours in such dull penance past,
  For fair Florinda's plundered charms to pay?"
    Then to the east their weary eyes they cast,
And wished the lingering dawn would glimmer forth at last.

V.

  But, far within, Toledo's Prelate lent
    An ear of fearful wonder to the King;
  The silver lamp a fitful lustre sent,
    So long that sad confession witnessing:
  For Roderick told of many a hidden thing,
    Such as are lothly uttered to the air,
  When Fear, Remorse, and Shame the bosom wring,
    And Guilt his secret burden cannot bear,
And Conscience seeks in speech a respite from Despair.

VI.
  Full on the Prelate's face, and silver hair,
    The stream of failing light was feebly rolled:
  But Roderick's visage, though his head was bare,
    Was shadowed by his hand and mantle's fold.
  While of his hidden soul the sins he told,
    Proud Alaric's descendant could not brook,
  That mortal man his bearing should behold,
    Or boast that he had seen, when Conscience shook,
Fear tame a monarch's brow, Remorse a warrior's look.

VII.
  The old man's faded cheek waxed yet more pale,
    As many a secret sad the King bewrayed;
  As sign and glance eked out the unfinished tale,
    When in the midst his faltering whisper stayed.
  "Thus royal Witiza was slain,"--he said;
    "Yet, holy Father, deem not it was I."
  Thus still Ambition strives her crimes to shade. -
    "Oh, rather deem 'twas stern necessity!
Self-preservation bade, and I must kill or die.

VIII.
  "And if Florinda's shrieks alarmed the air,
    If she invoked her absent sire in vain,
  And on her knees implored that I would spare,
    Yet, reverend Priest, thy sentence rash refrain!
  All is not as it seems--the female train
    Know by their bearing to disguise their mood:"
  But Conscience here, as if in high disdain,
    Sent to the Monarch's cheek the burning blood -
He stayed his speech abrupt--and up the Prelate stood.

IX.
  "O hardened offspring of an iron race!
    What of thy crimes, Don Roderick, shall I say?
  What alms, or prayers, or penance can efface
    Murder's dark spot, wash treason's stain away!
  For the foul ravisher how shall I pray,
    Who, scarce repentant, makes his crime his boast?
  How hope Almighty vengeance shall delay,
    Unless, in mercy to yon Christian host,
He spare the shepherd, lest the guiltless sheep be lost?"

X.
  Then kindled the dark tyrant in his mood,
    And to his brow returned its dauntless gloom;
  "And welcome then," he cried, "be blood for blood,
    For treason treachery, for dishonour doom!
  Yet will I know whence come they, or by whom.
    Show, for thou canst--give forth the fated key,
  And guide me, Priest, to that mysterious room,
    Where, if aught true in old tradition be,
His nation's future fates a Spanish King shall see."

XI.
  "Ill-fated Prince! recall the desperate word,
    Or pause ere yet the omen thou obey!
  Bethink, yon spell-bound portal would afford
    Never to former Monarch entrance-way;
  Nor shall it ever ope, old records say,
    Save to a King, the last of all his line,
  What time his empire totters to decay,
    And treason digs, beneath, her fatal mine,
And, high above, impends avenging wrath divine." -

XII.
  "Prelate! a Monarch's fate brooks no delay;
    Lead on!"--The ponderous key the old man took,
  And held the winking lamp, and led the way,
    By winding stair, dark aisle, and secret nook,
  Then on an ancient gateway bent his look;
    And, as the key the desperate King essayed,
  Low muttered thunders the Cathedral shook,
    And twice he stopped, and twice new effort made,
Till the huge bolts rolled back, and the loud hinges brayed.

XIII.
  Long, large, and lofty was that vaulted hall;
    Roof, walls, and floor were all of marble stone,
  Of polished marble, black as funeral pall,
    Carved o'er with signs and characters unknown.
  A paly light, as of the dawning, shone
    Through the sad bounds, but whence they could not spy;
  For window to the upper air was none;
    Yet, by that light, Don Roderick could descry
Wonders that ne'er till then were seen by mortal eye.

XIV.
  Grim sentinels, against the upper wall,
    Of molten bronze, two Statues held their place;
  Massive their naked limbs, their stature tall,
    Their frowning foreheads golden circles grace.
  Moulded they seemed for kings of giant race,
    That lived and sinned before the avenging flood;
  This grasped a scythe, that rested on a mace;
    This spread his wings for flight, that pondering stood,
Each stubborn seemed and stern, immutable of mood.

XV.
  Fixed was the right-hand Giant's brazen look
    Upon his brother's glass of shifting sand,
  As if its ebb he measured by a book,
    Whose iron volume loaded his huge hand;
  In which was wrote of many a fallen land
    Of empires lost, and kings to exile driven:
  And o'er that pair their names in scroll expand -
    "Lo, DESTINY and TIME! to whom by Heaven
The guidance of the earth is for a season given." -

XVI.
  Even while they read, the sand-glass wastes away;
    And, as the last and lagging grains did creep,
  That right-hand Giant 'gan his club upsway,
    As one that startles from a heavy sleep.
  Full on the upper wall the mace's sweep
    At once descended with the force of thunder,
  And hurtling down at once, in crumbled heap,
    The marble boundary was rent asunder,
And gave to Roderick's view new sights of fear and wonder.

XVII.
  For they might spy, beyond that mighty breach,
    Realms as of Spain in visioned prospect laid,
  Castles and towers, in due proportion each,
    As by some skilful artist's hand portrayed:
  Here, crossed by many a wild Sierra's shade,
    And boundless plains that tire the traveller's eye;
  There, rich with vineyard and with olive glade,
    Or deep-embrowned by forests huge and high,
Or washed by mighty streams, that slowly murmured by.

XVIII.
  And here, as erst upon the antique stage
    Passed forth the band of masquers trimly led,
  In various forms, and various equipage,
    While fitting strains the hearer's fancy fed;
  So, to sad Roderick's eye in order spread,
    Successive pageants filled that mystic scene,
  Showing the fate of battles ere they bled,
    And issue of events that had not been;
And, ever and anon, strange sounds were heard between.

XIX.
  First shrilled an unrepeated female shriek! -
    It seemed as if Don Roderick knew the call,
  For the bold blood was blanching in his cheek. -
    Then answered kettle-drum and attabal,
  Gong-peal and cymbal-clank the ear appal,
    The Tecbir war-cry, and the Lelie's yell,
  Ring wildly dissonant along the hall.
    Needs not to Roderick their dread import tell -
"The Moor!" he cried, "the Moor!--ring out the Tocsin bell!

XX.
  "They come! they come!  I see the groaning lands
    White with the turbans of each Arab horde;
  Swart Zaarah joins her misbelieving bands,
    Alla and Mahomet their battle-word,
  The choice they yield, the Koran or the Sword -
    See how the Christians rush to arms amain! -
  In yonder shout the voice of conflict roared,
    The shadowy hosts are closing on the plain -
Now, God and Saint Iago strike, for the good cause of Spain!

XXI.
  "By Heaven, the Moors prevail! the Christians yield!
    Their coward leader gives for flight the sign!
  The sceptred craven mounts to quit the field -
    Is not yon steed Orelio?--Yes, 'tis mine!
  But never was she turned from battle-line:
    Lo! where the recreant spurs o'er stock and stone! -
  Curses pursue the slave, and wrath divine!
    Rivers ingulph him!"--"Hush," in shuddering tone,
The Prelate said; "rash Prince, yon visioned form's thine own."

XXII.
  Just then, a torrent crossed the flier's course;
    The dangerous ford the Kingly Likeness tried;
  But the deep eddies whelmed both man and horse,
    Swept like benighted peasant down the tide;
  And the proud Moslemah spread far and wide,
    As numerous as their native locust band;
  Berber and Ismael's sons the spoils divide,
    With naked scimitars mete out the land,
And for the bondsmen base the free-born natives brand.

XXIII.
  Then rose the grated Harem, to enclose
    The loveliest maidens of the Christian line;
  Then, menials, to their misbelieving foes,
    Castile's young nobles held forbidden wine;
  Then, too, the holy Cross, salvation's sign,
    By impious hands was from the altar thrown,
  And the deep aisles of the polluted shrine
  Echoed, for holy hymn and organ-tone,
The Santon's frantic dance, the Fakir's gibbering moan.

XXIV.
  How fares Don Roderick?--E'en as one who spies
    Flames dart their glare o'er midnight's sable woof,
  And hears around his children's piercing cries,
    And sees the pale assistants stand aloof;
  While cruel Conscience brings him bitter proof,
    His folly, or his crime, have caused his grief;
  And while above him nods the crumbling roof,
    He curses earth and Heaven--himself in chief -
Desperate of earthly aid, despairing Heaven's relief!

XXV.
  That scythe-armed Giant turned his fatal glass
    And twilight on the landscape closed her wings;
  Far to Asturian hills the war-sounds pass,
    And in their stead rebeck or timbrel rings;
  And to the sound the bell-decked dancer springs,
    Bazars resound as when their marts are met,
  In tourney light the Moor his jerrid flings,
    And on the land as evening seemed to set,
The Imaum's chant was heard from mosque or minaret.

XXVI.
  So passed that pageant.  Ere another came,
    The visionary scene was wrapped in smoke
  Whose sulph'rous wreaths were crossed by sheets of flame;
    With every flash a bolt explosive broke,
  Till Roderick deemed the fiends had burst their yoke,
    And waved 'gainst heaven the infernal gonfalone!
  For War a new and dreadful language spoke,
    Never by ancient warrior heard or known;
Lightning and smoke her breath, and thunder was her tone.

XXVII.
  From the dim landscape rolled the clouds away -
    The Christians have regained their heritage;
  Before the Cross has waned the Crescent's ray,
    And many a monastery decks the stage,
  And lofty church, and low-browed hermitage.
    The land obeys a Hermit and a Knight, -
  The Genii those of Spain for many an age;
    This clad in sackcloth, that in armour bright,
And that was VALOUR named, this BIGOTRY was hight.

XXVIII.
  VALOUR was harnessed like a chief of old,
    Armed at all points, and prompt for knightly gest;
  His sword was tempered in the Ebro cold,
    Morena's eagle plume adorned his crest,
  The spoils of Afric's lion bound his breast.
    Fierce he stepped forward and flung down his gage;
  As if of mortal kind to brave the best.
    Him followed his Companion, dark and sage,
As he, my Master, sung the dangerous Archimage.

XXIX.
  Haughty of heart and brow the Warrior came,
    In look and language proud as proud might be,
  Vaunting his lordship, lineage, fights, and fame:
    Yet was that barefoot Monk more proud than he:
  And as the ivy climbs the tallest tree,
    So round the loftiest soul his toils he wound,
  And with his spells subdued the fierce and free,
    Till ermined Age and Youth in arms renowned,
Honouring his scourge and haircloth, meekly kissed the ground.

XXX.
  And thus it chanced that VALOUR, peerless knight,
    Who ne'er to King or Kaiser vailed his crest,
  Victorious still in bull-feast or in fight,
    Since first his limbs with mail he did invest,
  Stooped ever to that Anchoret's behest;
    Nor reasoned of the right, nor of the wrong,
  But at his bidding laid the lance in rest,
    And wrought fell deeds the troubled world along,
For he was fierce as brave, and pitiless as strong.

XXXI.
  Oft his proud galleys sought some new-found world,
    That latest sees the sun, or first the morn;
  Still at that Wizard's feet their spoils he hurled, -
    Ingots of ore from rich Potosi borne,
  Crowns by Caciques, aigrettes by Omrahs worn,
    Wrought of rare gems, but broken, rent, and foul;
  Idols of gold from heathen temples torn,
    Bedabbled all with blood.--With grisly scowl
The Hermit marked the stains, and smiled beneath his cowl.

XXXII.
  Then did he bless the offering, and bade make
    Tribute to Heaven of gratitude and praise;
  And at his word the choral hymns awake,
    And many a hand the silver censer sways,
  But with the incense-breath these censers raise,
    Mix steams from corpses smouldering in the fire;
  The groans of prisoned victims mar the lays,
    And shrieks of agony confound the quire;
While, 'mid the mingled sounds, the darkened scenes expire.

XXXIII.
  Preluding light, were strains of music heard,
    As once again revolved that measured sand;
  Such sounds as when, for silvan dance prepared,
    Gay Xeres summons forth her vintage band;
  When for the light bolero ready stand
    The mozo blithe, with gay muchacha met,
  He conscious of his broidered cap and band,
    She of her netted locks and light corsette,
Each tiptoe perched to spring, and shake the castanet.

XXXIV.
  And well such strains the opening scene became;
    For VALOUR had relaxed his ardent look,
  And at a lady's feet, like lion tame,
    Lay stretched, full loath the weight of arms to brook;
  And softened BIGOTRY, upon his book,
    Pattered a task of little good or ill:
  But the blithe peasant plied his pruning-hook,
    Whistled the muleteer o'er vale and hill,
And rung from village-green the merry seguidille.

XXXV.
  Grey Royalty, grown impotent of toil,
    Let the grave sceptre slip his lazy hold;
  And, careless, saw his rule become the spoil
    Of a loose Female and her minion bold.
  But peace was on the cottage and the fold,
    From Court intrigue, from bickering faction far;
  Beneath the chestnut-tree Love's tale was told,
    And to the tinkling of the light guitar,
Sweet stooped the western sun, sweet rose the evening star.

XXXVI.
  As that sea-cloud, in size like human hand,
    When first from Carmel by the Tishbite seen,
  Came slowly overshadowing Israel's land,
    A while, perchance, bedecked with colours sheen,
  While yet the sunbeams on its skirts had been,
    Limning with purple and with gold its shroud,
  Till darker folds obscured the blue serene
    And blotted heaven with one broad sable cloud,
Then sheeted rain burst down, and whirlwinds howled aloud:-

XXXVII.
  Even so, upon that peaceful scene was poured,
    Like gathering clouds, full many a foreign band,
  And HE, their Leader, wore in sheath his sword,
    And offered peaceful front and open hand,
  Veiling the perjured treachery he planned,
    By friendship's zeal and honour's specious guise,
  Until he won the passes of the land;
    Then burst were honour's oath and friendship's ties!
He clutched his vulture grasp, and called fair Spain his prize.

XXXVIII.
  An iron crown his anxious forehead bore;
    And well such diadem his heart became,
  Who ne'er his purpose for remorse gave o'er,
    Or checked his course for piety or shame;
  Who, trained a soldier, deemed a soldier's fame
    Might flourish in the wreath of battles won,
  Though neither truth nor honour decked his name;
    Who, placed by fortune on a Monarch's throne,
Recked not of Monarch's faith, or Mercy's kingly tone.

XXXIX.
  From a rude isle his ruder lineage came,
    The spark, that, from a suburb-hovel's hearth
  Ascending, wraps some capital in flame,
    Hath not a meaner or more sordid birth.
  And for the soul that bade him waste the earth -
    The sable land-flood from some swamp obscure
  That poisons the glad husband-field with dearth,
    And by destruction bids its fame endure,
Hath not a source more sullen, stagnant, and impure.

XL.
  Before that Leader strode a shadowy Form;
    Her limbs like mist, her torch like meteor showed,
  With which she beckoned him through fight and storm,
    And all he crushed that crossed his desperate road,
  Nor thought, nor feared, nor looked on what he trode.
    Realms could not glut his pride, blood could not slake,
  So oft as e'er she shook her torch abroad -
    It was AMBITION bade her terrors wake,
Nor deigned she, as of yore, a milder form to take.

XLI.
  No longer now she spurned at mean revenge,
    Or stayed her hand for conquered foeman's moan;
  As when, the fates of aged Rome to change,
    By Caesar's side she crossed the Rubicon.
  Nor joyed she to bestow the spoils she won,
    As when the banded powers of Greece were tasked
  To war beneath the Youth of Macedon:
    No seemly veil her modern minion asked,
He saw her hideous face, and loved the fiend unmasked.

XLII.
  That Prelate marked his march--On banners blazed
    With battles won in many a distant land,
  On eagle-standards and on arms he gazed;
    "And hopest thou, then," he said, "thy power shall stand?
  Oh! thou hast builded on the shifting sand,
    And thou hast tempered it with slaughter's flood;
  And know, fell scourge in the Almighty's hand,
    Gore-moistened trees shall perish in the bud,
And by a bloody death shall die the Man of Blood!"

XLIII.
  The ruthless Leader beckoned from his train
    A wan fraternal Shade, and bade him kneel,
  And paled his temples with the crown of Spain,
    While trumpets rang, and heralds cried "Castile!"
  Not that he loved him--No!--In no man's weal,
    Scarce in his own, e'er joyed that sullen heart;
  Yet round that throne he bade his warriors wheel,
    That the poor puppet might perform his part,
And be a sceptred slave, at his stern beck to start.

XLIV.
  But on the Natives of that Land misused,
    Not long the silence of amazement hung,
  Nor brooked they long their friendly faith abused;
    For, with a common shriek, the general tongue
  Exclaimed, "To arms!"--and fast to arms they sprung.
    And VALOUR woke, that Genius of the Land!
  Pleasure, and ease, and sloth aside he flung,
    As burst the awakening Nazarite his band,
When 'gainst his treacherous foes he clenched his dreadful hand.

XLV.
  That Mimic Monarch now cast anxious eye
    Upon the Satraps that begirt him round,
  Now doffed his royal robe in act to fly,
    And from his brow the diadem unbound.
  So oft, so near, the Patriot bugle wound,
    From Tarik's walls to Bilboa's mountains blown,
  These martial satellites hard labour found
    To guard awhile his substituted throne -
Light recking of his cause, but battling for their own.

XLVI.
  From Alpuhara's peak that bugle rung,
    And it was echoed from Corunna's wall;
  Stately Seville responsive war-shot flung,
    Grenada caught it in her Moorish hall;
  Galicia bade her children fight or fall,
    Wild Biscay shook his mountain-coronet,
  Valencia roused her at the battle-call,
    And, foremost still where Valour's sons are met,
First started to his gun each fiery Miquelet.

XLVII.
  But unappalled, and burning for the fight,
    The Invaders march, of victory secure;
  Skilful their force to sever or unite,
    And trained alike to vanquish or endure.
  Nor skilful less, cheap conquest to ensure,
    Discord to breathe, and jealousy to sow,
  To quell by boasting, and by bribes to lure;
    While nought against them bring the unpractised foe,
Save hearts for Freedom's cause, and hands for Freedom's blow.

XLVIII.
  Proudly they march--but, oh! they march not forth
    By one hot field to crown a brief campaign,
  As when their Eagles, sweeping through the North,
    Destroyed at every stoop an ancient reign!
  Far other fate had Heaven decreed for Spain;
    In vain the steel, in vain the torch was plied,
  New Patriot armies started from the slain,
    High blazed the war, and long, and far, and wide,
And oft the God of Battles blest the righteous side.

XLIX.
  Nor unatoned, where Freedom's foes prevail,
    Remained their savage waste.  With blade and brand
  By day the Invaders ravaged hill and dale,
    But, with the darkness, the Guerilla band
  Came like night's tempest, and avenged the land,
    And claimed for blood the retribution due,
  Probed the hard heart, and lopped the murd'rous hand;
    And Dawn, when o'er the scene her beams she threw
'Midst ruins they had made, the spoilers' corpses knew.

L.
  What minstrel verse may sing, or tongue may tell,
    Amid the visioned strife from sea to sea,
  How oft the Patriot banners rose or fell,
    Still honoured in defeat as victory!
  For that sad pageant of events to be
    Showed every form of fight by field and flood;
  Slaughter and Ruin, shouting forth their glee,
    Beheld, while riding on the tempest scud,
The waters choked with slain, the earth bedrenched with blood!

LI.
  Then Zaragoza--blighted be the tongue
    That names thy name without the honour due!
  For never hath the harp of Minstrel rung,
    Of faith so felly proved, so firmly true!
  Mine, sap, and bomb thy shattered ruins knew,
    Each art of war's extremity had room,
  Twice from thy half-sacked streets the foe withdrew,
    And when at length stern fate decreed thy doom,
They won not Zaragoza, but her children's bloody tomb.

LII.
  Yet raise thy head, sad city!  Though in chains,
    Enthralled thou canst not be!  Arise, and claim
  Reverence from every heart where Freedom reigns,
    For what thou worshippest!--thy sainted dame,
  She of the Column, honoured be her name
    By all, whate'er their creed, who honour love!
  And like the sacred relics of the flame,
    That gave some martyr to the blessed above,
To every loyal heart may thy sad embers prove!

LIII.
  Nor thine alone such wreck.  Gerona fair!
    Faithful to death thy heroes shall be sung,
  Manning the towers, while o'er their heads the air
    Swart as the smoke from raging furnace hung;
  Now thicker darkening where the mine was sprung,
    Now briefly lightened by the cannon's flare,
  Now arched with fire-sparks as the bomb was flung,
    And reddening now with conflagration's glare,
While by the fatal light the foes for storm prepare.

LIV.
  While all around was danger, strife, and fear,
    While the earth shook, and darkened was the sky,
  And wide Destruction stunned the listening ear,
    Appalled the heart, and stupefied the eye, -
  Afar was heard that thrice-repeated cry,
    In which old Albion's heart and tongue unite,
  Whene'er her soul is up, and pulse beats high,
    Whether it hail the wine-cup or the fight,
And bid each arm be strong, or bid each heart be light.

LV.
  Don Roderick turned him as the shout grew loud -
    A varied scene the changeful vision showed,
  For, where the ocean mingled with the cloud,
    A gallant navy stemmed the billows broad.
  From mast and stern St. George's symbol flowed,
    Blent with the silver cross to Scotland dear;
  Mottling the sea their landward barges rowed,
    And flashed the sun on bayonet, brand, and spear,
And the wild beach returned the seamen's jovial cheer.

LVI.
  It was a dread, yet spirit-stirring sight!
    The billows foamed beneath a thousand oars,
  Fast as they land the red-cross ranks unite,
    Legions on legions bright'ning all the shores.
  Then banners rise, and cannon-signal roars,
    Then peals the warlike thunder of the drum,
  Thrills the loud fife, the trumpet-flourish pours,
    And patriot hopes awake, and doubts are dumb,
For, bold in Freedom's cause, the bands of Ocean come!

LVII.
  A various host they came--whose ranks display
    Each mode in which the warrior meets the fight,
  The deep battalion locks its firm array,
    And meditates his aim the marksman light;
  Far glance the light of sabres flashing bright
    Where mounted squadrons shake the echoing mead,
  Lacks not artillery breathing flame and night,
    Nor the fleet ordnance whirled by rapid steed,
That rivals lightning's flash in ruin and in speed.

LVIII.
  A various host--from kindred realms they came,
    Brethren in arms, but rivals in renown -
  For yon fair bands shall merry England claim,
    And with their deeds of valour deck her crown.
  Hers their bold port, and hers their martial frown,
    And hers their scorn of death in freedom's cause,
  Their eyes of azure, and their locks of brown,
    And the blunt speech that bursts without a pause,
And free-born thoughts which league the Soldier with the Laws.

LIX.
  And, oh! loved warriors of the Minstrel's land!
    Yonder your bonnets nod, your tartans wave!
  The rugged form may mark the mountain band,
    And harsher features, and a mien more grave;
  But ne'er in battlefield throbbed heart so brave
    As that which beats beneath the Scottish plaid;
  And when the pibroch bids the battle rave,
    And level for the charge your arms are laid,
Where lives the desperate foe that for such onset stayed!

LX.
  Hark! from yon stately ranks what laughter rings,
    Mingling wild mirth with war's stern minstrelsy,
  His jest while each blithe comrade round him flings,
    And moves to death with military glee:
  Boast, Erin, boast them! tameless, frank, and free,
    In kindness warm, and fierce in danger known,
  Rough Nature's children, humorous as she:
    And HE, yon Chieftain--strike the proudest tone
Of thy bold harp, green Isle!--the Hero is thine own.

LXI.
  Now on the scene Vimeira should be shown,
    On Talavera's fight should Roderick gaze,
  And hear Corunna wail her battle won,
    And see Busaco's crest with lightning blaze:-
  But shall fond fable mix with heroes' praise?
    Hath Fiction's stage for Truth's long triumphs room?
  And dare her wild flowers mingle with the bays
    That claim a long eternity to bloom
Around the warrior's crest, and o'er the warrior's tomb!

LXII.
  Or may I give adventurous Fancy scope,
    And stretch a bold hand to the awful veil
  That hides futurity from anxious hope,
    Bidding beyond it scenes of glory hail,
  And painting Europe rousing at the tale
    Of Spain's invaders from her confines hurled,
  While kindling nations buckle on their mail,
    And Fame, with clarion-blast and wings unfurled,
To Freedom and Revenge awakes an injured World!

LXIII.
  O vain, though anxious, is the glance I cast,
    Since Fate has marked futurity her own:
  Yet Fate resigns to worth the glorious past,
    The deeds recorded, and the laurels won.
  Then, though the Vault of Destiny be gone,
    King, Prelate, all the phantasms of my brain,
  Melted away like mist-wreaths in the sun,
    Yet grant for faith, for valour, and for Spain,
One note of pride and fire, a Patriot's parting strain!


CONCLUSION.


I.
  "Who shall command Estrella's mountain-tide
    Back to the source, when tempest-chafed, to hie?
  Who, when Gascogne's vexed gulf is raging wide,
    Shall hush it as a nurse her infant's cry?
  His magic power let such vain boaster try,
    And when the torrent shall his voice obey,
  And Biscay's whirlwinds list his lullaby,
    Let him stand forth and bar mine eagles' way,
And they shall heed his voice, and at his bidding stay.

II.
  "Else ne'er to stoop, till high on Lisbon's towers
    They close their wings, the symbol of our yoke,
  And their own sea hath whelmed yon red-cross powers!"
    Thus, on the summit of Alverca's rock
  To Marshal, Duke, and Peer, Gaul's Leader spoke.
    While downward on the land his legions press,
  Before them it was rich with vine and flock,
    And smiled like Eden in her summer dress; -
Behind their wasteful march a reeking wilderness.

III.
  And shall the boastful Chief maintain his word,
    Though Heaven hath heard the wailings of the land,
  Though Lusitania whet her vengeful sword,
    Though Britons arm and WELLINGTON command!
  No! grim Busaco's iron ridge shall stand
    An adamantine barrier to his force;
  And from its base shall wheel his shattered band,
    As from the unshaken rock the torrent hoarse
Bears off its broken waves, and seeks a devious course.

IV.
  Yet not because Alcoba's mountain-hawk
    Hath on his best and bravest made her food,
  In numbers confident, yon Chief shall baulk
    His Lord's imperial thirst for spoil and blood:
  For full in view the promised conquest stood,
    And Lisbon's matrons from their walls might sum
  The myriads that had half the world subdued,
    And hear the distant thunders of the drum,
That bids the bands of France to storm and havoc come.

V.
  Four moons have heard these thunders idly rolled,
    Have seen these wistful myriads eye their prey,
  As famished wolves survey a guarded fold -
    But in the middle path a Lion lay!
  At length they move--but not to battle-fray,
    Nor blaze yon fires where meets the manly fight;
  Beacons of infamy, they light the way
    Where cowardice and cruelty unite
To damn with double shame their ignominious flight.

VI.
  O triumph for the Fiends of Lust and Wrath!
    Ne'er to be told, yet ne'er to be forgot,
  What wanton horrors marked their wreckful path!
    The peasant butchered in his ruined cot,
  The hoary priest even at the altar shot,
    Childhood and age given o'er to sword and flame,
  Woman to infamy;--no crime forgot,
    By which inventive demons might proclaim
Immortal hate to man, and scorn of God's great name!

VII.
  The rudest sentinel, in Britain born,
    With horror paused to view the havoc done,
  Gave his poor crust to feed some wretch forlorn,
    Wiped his stern eye, then fiercer grasped his gun.
  Nor with less zeal shall Britain's peaceful son
    Exult the debt of sympathy to pay;
  Riches nor poverty the tax shall shun,
    Nor prince nor peer, the wealthy nor the gay,
Nor the poor peasant's mite, nor bard's more worthless lay.

VIII.
  But thou--unfoughten wilt thou yield to Fate,
    Minion of Fortune, now miscalled in vain!
  Can vantage-ground no confidence create,
    Marcella's pass, nor Guarda's mountain-chain?
  Vainglorious fugitive! yet turn again!
    Behold, where, named by some prophetic Seer,
  Flows Honour's Fountain, {2} as foredoomed the stain
    From thy dishonoured name and arms to clear -
Fallen Child of Fortune, turn, redeem her favour here!

IX.
  Yet, ere thou turn'st, collect each distant aid;
    Those chief that never heard the lion roar!
  Within whose souls lives not a trace portrayed
    Of Talavera or Mondego's shore!
  Marshal each band thou hast, and summon more;
    Of war's fell stratagems exhaust the whole;
  Rank upon rank, squadron on squadron pour,
    Legion on legion on thy foeman roll,
And weary out his arm--thou canst not quell his soul.

X.
  O vainly gleams with steel Agueda's shore,
    Vainly thy squadrons hide Assuava's plain,
  And front the flying thunders as they roar,
    With frantic charge and tenfold odds, in vain!
  And what avails thee that, for CAMERON slain,
    Wild from his plaided ranks the yell was given -
  Vengeance and grief gave mountain-range the rein,
    And, at the bloody spear-point headlong driven,
Thy Despot's giant guards fled like the rack of heaven.

XI.
  Go, baffled boaster! teach thy haughty mood
    To plead at thine imperious master's throne,
  Say, thou hast left his legions in their blood,
    Deceived his hopes, and frustrated thine own;
  Say, that thine utmost skill and valour shown,
    By British skill and valour were outvied;
  Last say, thy conqueror was WELLINGTON!
    And if he chafe, be his own fortune tried -
God and our cause to friend, the venture we'll abide.

XII.
  But you, ye heroes of that well-fought day,
    How shall a bard, unknowing and unknown,
  His meed to each victorious leader pay,
    Or bind on every brow the laurels won?
  Yet fain my harp would wake its boldest tone,
    O'er the wide sea to hail CADOGAN brave;
  And he, perchance, the minstrel-note might own,
    Mindful of meeting brief that Fortune gave
'Mid yon far western isles that hear the Atlantic rave.

XIII.
  Yes! hard the task, when Britons wield the sword,
    To give each Chief and every field its fame:
  Hark! Albuera thunders BERESFORD,
    And Red Barosa shouts for dauntless GRAEME!
  O for a verse of tumult and of flame,
    Bold as the bursting of their cannon sound,
  To bid the world re-echo to their fame!
    For never, upon gory battle-ground,
With conquest's well-bought wreath were braver victors crowned!

XIV.
  O who shall grudge him Albuera's bays,
    Who brought a race regenerate to the field,
  Roused them to emulate their fathers' praise,
    Tempered their headlong rage, their courage steeled,
  And raised fair Lusitania's fallen shield,
    And gave new edge to Lusitania's sword,
  And taught her sons forgotten arms to wield -
    Shivered my harp, and burst its every chord,
If it forget thy worth, victorious BERESFORD!

XV.
  Not on that bloody field of battle won,
    Though Gaul's proud legions rolled like mist away,
  Was half his self-devoted valour shown, -
    He gaged but life on that illustrious day;
  But when he toiled those squadrons to array,
    Who fought like Britons in the bloody game,
  Sharper than Polish pike or assagay,
    He braved the shafts of censure and of shame,
And, dearer far than life, he pledged a soldier's fame.

XVI.
  Nor be his praise o'erpast who strove to hide
    Beneath the warrior's vest affection's wound,
  Whose wish Heaven for his country's weal denied;
    Danger and fate he sought, but glory found.
  From clime to clime, where'er war's trumpets sound,
    The wanderer went; yet Caledonia! still
  Thine was his thought in march and tented ground;
    He dreamed 'mid Alpine cliffs of Athole's hill,
And heard in Ebro's roar his Lyndoch's lovely rill.

XVII.
  O hero of a race renowned of old,
    Whose war-cry oft has waked the battle-swell,
  Since first distinguished in the onset bold,
    Wild sounding when the Roman rampart fell!
  By Wallace' side it rung the Southron's knell,
    Alderne, Kilsythe, and Tibber owned its fame,
  Tummell's rude pass can of its terrors tell,
    But ne'er from prouder field arose the name
Than when wild Ronda learned the conquering shout of GRAEME!

XVIII.
  But all too long, through seas unknown and dark,
    (With Spenser's parable I close my tale,)
  By shoal and rock hath steered my venturous bark,
    And landward now I drive before the gale.
  And now the blue and distant shore I hail,
    And nearer now I see the port expand,
  And now I gladly furl my weary sail,
    And, as the prow light touches on the strand,
I strike my red-cross flag and bind my skiff to land.



THE FIELD OF WATERLOO.



I.

Fair Brussels, thou art far behind,
Though, lingering on the morning wind,
  We yet may hear the hour
Pealed over orchard and canal,
With voice prolonged and measured fall,
  From proud St. Michael's tower;
Thy wood, dark Soignies, holds us now,
Where the tall beeches' glossy bough
  For many a league around,
With birch and darksome oak between,
Spreads deep and far a pathless screen,
  Of tangled forest ground.
Stems planted close by stems defy
The adventurous foot--the curious eye
  For access seeks in vain;
And the brown tapestry of leaves,
Strewed on the blighted ground, receives
  Nor sun, nor air, nor rain.
No opening glade dawns on our way,
No streamlet, glancing to the ray,
  Our woodland path has crossed;
And the straight causeway which we tread
Prolongs a line of dull arcade,
Unvarying through the unvaried shade
  Until in distance lost.

II.
A brighter, livelier scene succeeds;
In groups the scattering wood recedes,
Hedge-rows, and huts, and sunny meads,
  And corn-fields glance between;
The peasant, at his labour blithe,
Plies the hooked staff and shortened scythe:-
  But when these ears were green,
Placed close within destruction's scope,
Full little was that rustic's hope
  Their ripening to have seen!
And, lo, a hamlet and its fane:-
Let not the gazer with disdain
  Their architecture view;
For yonder rude ungraceful shrine,
And disproportioned spire, are thine,
  Immortal WATERLOO!

III.
Fear not the heat, though full and high
The sun has scorched the autumn sky,
And scarce a forest straggler now
To shade us spreads a greenwood bough;
These fields have seen a hotter day
Than e'er was fired by sunny ray,
Yet one mile on--yon shattered hedge
Crests the soft hill whose long smooth ridge
  Looks on the field below,
And sinks so gently on the dale
That not the folds of Beauty's veil
  In easier curves can flow.
Brief space from thence, the ground again
Ascending slowly from the plain
  Forms an opposing screen,
Which, with its crest of upland ground,
Shuts the horizon all around.
  The softened vale between
Slopes smooth and fair for courser's tread;
Not the most timid maid need dread
To give her snow-white palfrey head
  On that wide stubble-ground;
Nor wood, nor tree, nor bush are there,
Her course to intercept or scare,
  Nor fosse nor fence are found,
Save where, from out her shattered bowers,
Rise Hougomont's dismantled towers.

IV.
Now, see'st thou aught in this lone scene
Can tell of that which late hath been? -
  A stranger might reply,
"The bare extent of stubble-plain
Seems lately lightened of its grain;
And yonder sable tracks remain
Marks of the peasant's ponderous wain,
  When harvest-home was nigh.
On these broad spots of trampled ground,
Perchance the rustics danced such round
  As Teniers loved to draw;
And where the earth seems scorched by flame,
To dress the homely feast they came,
And toiled the kerchiefed village dame
  Around her fire of straw."

V.
So deem'st thou--so each mortal deems,
Of that which is from that which seems:-
  But other harvest here
Than that which peasant's scythe demands,
Was gathered in by sterner hands,
  With bayonet, blade, and spear.
No vulgar crop was theirs to reap,
No stinted harvest thin and cheap!
Heroes before each fatal sweep
  Fell thick as ripened grain;
And ere the darkening of the day,
Piled high as autumn shocks, there lay
The ghastly harvest of the fray,
  The corpses of the slain.

VI.
Ay, look again--that line, so black
And trampled, marks the bivouac,
Yon deep-graved ruts the artillery's track,
  So often lost and won;
And close beside, the hardened mud
Still shows where, fetlock-deep in blood,
The fierce dragoon, through battle's flood,
  Dashed the hot war-horse on.
These spots of excavation tell
The ravage of the bursting shell -
And feel'st thou not the tainted steam,
That reeks against the sultry beam,
  From yonder trenched mound?
The pestilential fumes declare
That Carnage has replenished there
  Her garner-house profound.

VII.
Far other harvest-home and feast,
Than claims the boor from scythe released,
  On these scorched fields were known!
Death hovered o'er the maddening rout,
And, in the thrilling battle-shout,
Sent for the bloody banquet out
  A summons of his own.
Through rolling smoke the Demon's eye
Could well each destined guest espy,
Well could his ear in ecstasy
  Distinguish every tone
That filled the chorus of the fray -
From cannon-roar and trumpet-bray,
From charging squadrons' wild hurra,
From the wild clang that marked their way, -
  Down to the dying groan,
And the last sob of life's decay,
  When breath was all but flown.

VIII.
Feast on, stern foe of mortal life,
Feast on!--but think not that a strife,
With such promiscuous carnage rife,
  Protracted space may last;
The deadly tug of war at length
Must limits find in human strength,
  And cease when these are past.
Vain hope!--that morn's o'erclouded sun
Heard the wild shout of fight begun
  Ere he attained his height,
And through the war-smoke, volumed high,
Still peals that unremitted cry,
  Though now he stoops to night.
For ten long hours of doubt and dread,
Fresh succours from the extended head
Of either hill the contest fed;
  Still down the slope they drew,
The charge of columns paused not,
Nor ceased the storm of shell and shot;
  For all that war could do
Of skill and force was proved that day,
And turned not yet the doubtful fray
  On bloody Waterloo.

IX.
Pale Brussels! then what thoughts were thine,
When ceaseless from the distant line
  Continued thunders came!
Each burgher held his breath, to hear
These forerunners of havoc near,
  Of rapine and of flame.
What ghastly sights were thine to meet,
When rolling through thy stately street,
The wounded showed their mangled plight
In token of the unfinished fight,
And from each anguish-laden wain
The blood-drops laid thy dust like rain!
How often in the distant drum
Heard'st thou the fell Invader come,
While Ruin, shouting to his band,
Shook high her torch and gory brand! -
Cheer thee, fair City!  From yon stand,
Impatient, still his outstretched hand
  Points to his prey in vain,
While maddening in his eager mood,
And all unwont to be withstood,
  He fires the fight again.

X.
"On! On!" was still his stern exclaim;
"Confront the battery's jaws of flame!
  Rush on the levelled gun!
My steel-clad cuirassiers, advance!
Each Hulan forward with his lance,
My Guard--my Chosen--charge for France,
  France and Napoleon!"
Loud answered their acclaiming shout,
Greeting the mandate which sent out
Their bravest and their best to dare
The fate their leader shunned to share.
But HE, his country's sword and shield,
Still in the battle-front revealed,
Where danger fiercest swept the field,
  Came like a beam of light,
In action prompt, in sentence brief -
"Soldiers, stand firm!" exclaimed the Chief,
  "England shall tell the fight!"

XI.
On came the whirlwind--like the last
But fiercest sweep of tempest-blast -
On came the whirlwind--steel-gleams broke
Like lightning through the rolling smoke;
  The war was waked anew,
Three hundred cannon-mouths roared loud,
And from their throats, with flash and cloud,
  Their showers of iron threw.
Beneath their fire, in full career,
Rushed on the ponderous cuirassier,
The lancer couched his ruthless spear,
And hurrying as to havoc near,
  The cohorts' eagles flew.
In one dark torrent, broad and strong,
The advancing onset rolled along,
Forth harbingered by fierce acclaim,
That, from the shroud of smoke and flame,
Pealed wildly the imperial name.

XII.
But on the British heart were lost
The terrors of the charging host;
For not an eye the storm that viewed
Changed its proud glance of fortitude,
Nor was one forward footstep stayed,
As dropped the dying and the dead.
Fast as their ranks the thunders tear,
Fast they renewed each serried square;
And on the wounded and the slain
Closed their diminished files again,
Till from their line scarce spears'-lengths three,
Emerging from the smoke they see
Helmet, and plume, and panoply, -
  Then waked their fire at once!
Each musketeer's revolving knell,
As fast, as regularly fell,
As when they practise to display
Their discipline on festal day.
  Then down went helm and lance,
Down were the eagle banners sent,
Down reeling steeds and riders went,
Corslets were pierced, and pennons rent;
  And, to augment the fray,
Wheeled full against their staggering flanks,
The English horsemen's foaming ranks
  Forced their resistless way.
Then to the musket-knell succeeds
The clash of swords--the neigh of steeds -
As plies the smith his clanging trade,
Against the cuirass rang the blade;
And while amid their close array
The well-served cannon rent their way,
And while amid their scattered band
Raged the fierce rider's bloody brand,
Recoiled in common rout and fear,
Lancer and guard and cuirassier,
Horsemen and foot,--a mingled host
Their leaders fall'n, their standards lost.

XIII.
Then, WELLINGTON! thy piercing eye
This crisis caught of destiny -
  The British host had stood
That morn 'gainst charge of sword and lance
As their own ocean-rocks hold stance,
But when thy voice had said, "Advance!"
  They were their ocean's flood. -
O Thou, whose inauspicious aim
Hath wrought thy host this hour of shame,
Think'st thou thy broken bands will bide
The terrors of yon rushing tide?
Or will thy chosen brook to feel
The British shock of levelled steel,
  Or dost thou turn thine eye
Where coming squadrons gleam afar,
And fresher thunders wake the war,
  And other standards fly? -
Think not that in yon columns, file
Thy conquering troops from distant Dyle -
  Is Blucher yet unknown?
Or dwells not in thy memory still
(Heard frequent in thine hour of ill),
What notes of hate and vengeance thrill
  In Prussia's trumpet-tone? -
What yet remains?--shall it be thine
To head the relics of thy line
  In one dread effort more? -
The Roman lore thy leisure loved,
And than canst tell what fortune proved
  That Chieftain, who, of yore,
Ambition's dizzy paths essayed
And with the gladiators' aid
  For empire enterprised -
He stood the cast his rashness played,
Left not the victims he had made,
Dug his red grave with his own blade,
And on the field he lost was laid,
  Abhorred--but not despised.

XIV.
But if revolves thy fainter thought
On safety--howsoever bought, -
Then turn thy fearful rein and ride,
Though twice ten thousand men have died
  On this eventful day
To gild the military fame
Which thou, for life, in traffic tame
  Wilt barter thus away.
Shall future ages tell this tale
Of inconsistence faint and frail?
And art thou He of Lodi's bridge,
Marengo's field, and Wagram's ridge!
Or is thy soul like mountain-tide,
That, swelled by winter storm and shower,
Rolls down in turbulence of power,
  A torrent fierce and wide;
Reft of these aids, a rill obscure,
Shrinking unnoticed, mean and poor,
  Whose channel shows displayed
The wrecks of its impetuous course,
But not one symptom of the force
  By which these wrecks were made!

XV.
Spur on thy way!--since now thine ear
Has brooked thy veterans' wish to hear,
  Who, as thy flight they eyed
Exclaimed,--while tears of anguish came,
Wrung forth by pride, and rage, and shame,
  "O that he had but died!"
But yet, to sum this hour of ill,
Look, ere thou leav'st the fatal hill,
  Back on yon broken ranks -
Upon whose wild confusion gleams
The moon, as on the troubled streams
  When rivers break their banks,
And, to the ruined peasant's eye,
Objects half seen roll swiftly by,
  Down the dread current hurled -
So mingle banner, wain, and gun,
Where the tumultuous flight rolls on
Of warriors, who, when morn begun,
  Defied a banded world.

XVI.
List--frequent to the hurrying rout,
The stern pursuers' vengeful shout
Tells, that upon their broken rear
Rages the Prussian's bloody spear.
  So fell a shriek was none,
When Beresina's icy flood
Reddened and thawed with flame and blood,
And, pressing on thy desperate way,
Raised oft and long their wild hurra,
  The children of the Don.
Thine ear no yell of horror cleft
So ominous, when, all bereft
Of aid, the valiant Polack left -
Ay, left by thee--found soldiers grave
In Leipsic's corpse-encumbered wave.
Fate, in those various perils past,
Reserved thee still some future cast;
On the dread die thou now hast thrown
Hangs not a single field alone,
Nor one campaign--thy martial fame,
Thy empire, dynasty, and name
  Have felt the final stroke;
And now, o'er thy devoted head
The last stern vial's wrath is shed,
  The last dread seal is broke.

XVII.
Since live thou wilt--refuse not now
Before these demagogues to bow,
Late objects of thy scorn and hate,
Who shall thy once imperial fate
Make wordy theme of vain debate. -
Or shall we say, thou stoop'st less low
In seeking refuge from the foe,
Against whose heart, in prosperous life,
Thine hand hath ever held the knife?
  Such homage hath been paid
By Roman and by Grecian voice,
And there were honour in the choice,
  If it were freely made.
Then safely come--in one so low, -
So lost,--we cannot own a foe;
Though dear experience bid us end,
In thee we ne'er can hail a friend. -
Come, howsoe'er--but do not hide
Close in thy heart that germ of pride,
Erewhile, by gifted bard espied,
  That "yet imperial hope;"
Think not that for a fresh rebound,
To raise ambition from the ground,
  We yield thee means or scope.
In safety come--but ne'er again
Hold type of independent reign;
  No islet calls thee lord,
We leave thee no confederate band,
No symbol of thy lost command,
To be a dagger in the hand
  From which we wrenched the sword.

XVIII.
Yet, even in yon sequestered spot,
May worthier conquest be thy lot
  Than yet thy life has known;
Conquest, unbought by blood or harm,
That needs nor foreign aid nor arm,
  A triumph all thine own.
Such waits thee when thou shalt control
Those passions wild, that stubborn soul,
  That marred thy prosperous scene:-
Hear this--from no unmoved heart,
Which sighs, comparing what THOU ART
  With what thou MIGHT'ST HAVE BEEN!

XIX.
Thou, too, whose deeds of fame renewed
Bankrupt a nation's gratitude,
To thine own noble heart must owe
More than the meed she can bestow.
For not a people's just acclaim,
Not the full hail of Europe's fame,
Thy Prince's smiles, the State's decree,
The ducal rank, the gartered knee,
Not these such pure delight afford
As that, when hanging up thy sword,
Well may'st thou think, "This honest steel
Was ever drawn for public weal;
And, such was rightful Heaven's decree,
Ne'er sheathed unless with victory!"

XX.
Look forth, once more, with softened heart,
Ere from the field of fame we part;
Triumph and Sorrow border near,
And joy oft melts into a tear.
Alas! what links of love that morn
Has War's rude hand asunder torn!
For ne'er was field so sternly fought,
And ne'er was conquest dearer bought,
Here piled in common slaughter sleep
Those whom affection long shall weep
Here rests the sire, that ne'er shall strain
His orphans to his heart again;
The son, whom, on his native shore,
The parent's voice shall bless no more;
The bridegroom, who has hardly pressed
His blushing consort to his breast;
The husband, whom through many a year
Long love and mutual faith endear.
Thou canst not name one tender tie,
But here dissolved its relics lie!
Oh! when thou see'st some mourner's veil
Shroud her thin form and visage pale,
Or mark'st the Matron's bursting tears
Stream when the stricken drum she hears;
Or see'st how manlier grief, suppressed,
Is labouring in a father's breast, -
With no inquiry vain pursue
The cause, but think on Waterloo!

XXI.
Period of honour as of woes,
What bright careers 'twas thine to close! -
Marked on thy roll of blood what names
To Britain's memory, and to Fame's,
Laid there their last immortal claims!
Thou saw'st in seas of gore expire
Redoubted PICTON'S soul of fire -
Saw'st in the mingled carnage lie
All that of PONSONBY could die -
DE LANCEY change Love's bridal-wreath
For laurels from the hand of Death -
Saw'st gallant MILLER'S failing eye
Still bent where Albion's banners fly,
And CAMERON, in the shock of steel,
Die like the offspring of Lochiel;
And generous GORDON, 'mid the strife,
Fall while he watched his leader's life. -
Ah! though her guardian angel's shield
Fenced Britain's hero through the field.
Fate not the less her power made known,
Through his friends' hearts to pierce his own!

XXII.
Forgive, brave Dead, the imperfect lay!
Who may your names, your numbers, say?
What high-strung harp, what lofty line,
To each the dear-earned praise assign,
From high-born chiefs of martial fame
To the poor soldier's lowlier name?
Lightly ye rose that dawning day,
From your cold couch of swamp and clay,
To fill, before the sun was low,
The bed that morning cannot know. -
Oft may the tear the green sod steep,
And sacred be the heroes' sleep,
  Till time shall cease to run;
And ne'er beside their noble grave,
May Briton pass and fail to crave
A blessing on the fallen brave
  Who fought with Wellington!

XXIII.
Farewell, sad Field! whose blighted face
Wears desolation's withering trace;
  Long shall my memory retain
Thy shattered huts and trampled grain,
With every mark of martial wrong,
That scathe thy towers, fair Hougomont!
Yet though thy garden's green arcade
The marksman's fatal post was made,
Though on thy shattered beeches fell
The blended rage of shot and shell,
Though from thy blackened portals torn,
Their fall thy blighted fruit-trees mourn,
Has not such havoc bought a name
Immortal in the rolls of fame?
Yes--Agincourt may be forgot,
And Cressy be an unknown spot,
  And Blenheim's name be new;
But still in story and in song,
For many an age remembered long,
Shall live the towers of Hougomont
  And Field of Waterloo!


CONCLUSION.


  Stern tide of human Time! that know'st not rest,
  But, sweeping from the cradle to the tomb,
  Bear'st ever downward on thy dusky breast
  Successive generations to their doom;
  While thy capacious stream has equal room
  For the gay bark where Pleasure's steamers sport,
  And for the prison-ship of guilt and gloom,
  The fisher-skiff, and barge that bears a court,
Still wafting onward all to one dark silent port; -

  Stern tide of Time! through what mysterious change
  Of hope and fear have our frail barks been driven!
  For ne'er, before, vicissitude so strange
  Was to one race of Adam's offspring given.
  And sure such varied change of sea and heaven,
  Such unexpected bursts of joy and woe,
  Such fearful strife as that where we have striven,
  Succeeding ages ne'er again shall know,
Until the awful term when Thou shalt cease to flow.

  Well hast thou stood, my Country!--the brave fight
  Hast well maintained through good report and ill;
  In thy just cause and in thy native might,
  And in Heaven's grace and justice constant still;
  Whether the banded prowess, strength, and skill
  Of half the world against thee stood arrayed,
  Or when, with better views and freer will,
  Beside thee Europe's noblest drew the blade,
Each emulous in arms the Ocean Queen to aid.

  Well art thou now repaid--though slowly rose,
  And struggled long with mists thy blaze of fame,
  While like the dawn that in the orient glows
  On the broad wave its earlier lustre came;
  Then eastern Egypt saw the growing flame,
  And Maida's myrtles gleamed beneath its ray,
  Where first the soldier, stung with generous shame,
  Rivalled the heroes of the watery way,
And washed in foemen's gore unjust reproach away.

  Now, Island Empress, wave thy crest on high,
  And bid the banner of thy Patron flow,
  Gallant Saint George, the flower of Chivalry,
  For thou halt faced, like him, a dragon foe,
  And rescued innocence from overthrow,
  And trampled down, like him, tyrannic might,
  And to the gazing world may'st proudly show
  The chosen emblem of thy sainted Knight,
Who quelled devouring pride and vindicated right.

  Yet 'mid the confidence of just renown,
  Renown dear-bought, but dearest thus acquired,
  Write, Britain, write the moral lesson down:
  'Tis not alone the heart with valour fired,
  The discipline so dreaded and admired,
  In many a field of bloody conquest known,
  --Such may by fame be lured, by gold be hired:
  'Tis constancy in the good cause alone
Best justifies the meed thy valiant sons have won.



THE DANCE OF DEATH.   [1815.]



I.
Night and morning were at meeting
  Over Waterloo;
Cocks had sung their earliest greeting;
  Faint and low they crew,
For no paly beam yet shone
On the heights of Mount Saint John;
Tempest-clouds prolonged the sway
Of timeless darkness over day;
Whirlwind, thunder-clap, and shower
Marked it a predestined hour.
Broad and frequent through the night
Flashed the sheets of levin-light:
Muskets, glancing lightnings back,
Showed the dreary bivouac
  Where the soldier lay,
Chill and stiff, and drenched with rain,
Wishing dawn of morn again,
  Though death should come with day.

II.
'Tis at such a tide and hour
Wizard, witch, and fiend have power,
And ghastly forms through mist and shower
  Gleam on the gifted ken;
And then the affrighted prophet's ear
Drinks whispers strange of fate and fear
Presaging death and ruin near
  Among the sons of men; -
Apart from Albyn's war-array,
'Twas then grey Allan sleepless lay;
Grey Allan, who, for many a day,
  Had followed stout and stern,
Where, through battle's rout and reel,
Storm of shot and edge of steel,
Led the grandson of Lochiel,
  Valiant Fassiefern.
Through steel and shot he leads no more,
Low laid 'mid friends' and foemen's gore -
But long his native lake's wild shore,
And Sunart rough, and high Ardgower,
  And Morven long shall tell,
And proud Bennevis hear with awe
How, upon bloody Quatre-Bras,
Brave Cameron heard the wild hurra
  Of conquest as he fell.

III.
Lone on the outskirts of the host,
The weary sentinel held post,
And heard, through darkness far aloof,
The frequent clang of courser's hoof,
Where held the cloaked patrol their course,
And spurred 'gainst storm the swerving horse;
But there are sounds in Allan's ear,
Patrol nor sentinel may hear,
And sights before his eye aghast
Invisible to them have passed,
  When down the destined plain,
'Twixt Britain and the bands of France,
Wild as marsh-borne meteor's glance,
Strange phantoms wheeled a revel dance,
  And doomed the future slain. -
Such forms were seen, such sounds were heard,
When Scotland's James his march prepared
  For Flodden's fatal plain;
Such, when he drew his ruthless sword,
As Choosers of the Slain, adored
  The yet unchristened Dane.
An indistinct and phantom band,
They wheeled their ring-dance hand in hand,
  With gestures wild and dread;
The Seer, who watched them ride the storm,
Saw through their faint and shadowy form
  The lightning's flash more red;
And still their ghastly roundelay
Was of the coming battle-fray,
  And of the destined dead.

IV.  SONG.
Wheel the wild dance
While lightnings glance,
  And thunders rattle loud,
And call the brave
To bloody grave,
  To sleep without a shroud.

Our airy feet,
So light and fleet,
  They do not bend the rye
That sinks its head when whirlwinds rave,
And swells again in eddying wave,
  As each wild gust blows by;
But still the corn,
At dawn of morn,
  Our fatal steps that bore,
At eve lies waste,
A trampled paste
  Of blackening mud and gore.
Wheel the wild dance
While lightnings glance,
  And thunders rattle loud,
And call the brave
To bloody grave,
  To sleep without a shroud.

V.
Wheel the wild dance!
Brave sons of France,
  For you our ring makes room;
Make space full wide
For martial pride,
  For banner, spear, and plume.
Approach, draw near,
Proud cuirassier!
  Room for the men of steel!
Through crest and plate
The broadsword's weight
  Both head and heart shall feel.

VI.
Wheel the wild dance
While lightnings glance,
  And thunders rattle loud,
And call the brave
To bloody grave,
  To sleep without a shroud.

Sons of the spear!
You feel us near
  In many a ghastly dream;
With fancy's eye
Our forms you spy,
  And hear our fatal scream.
With clearer sight
Ere falls the night,
  Just when to weal or woe
Your disembodied souls take flight
On trembling wing--each startled sprite
  Our choir of death shall know.

VII.
Wheel the wild dance
While lightnings glance,
  And thunders rattle loud,
And call the brave
To bloody grave,
  To sleep without a shroud.

Burst, ye clouds, in tempest showers,
Redder rain shall soon be ours -
  See the east grows wan -
Yield we place to sterner game,
Ere deadlier bolts and direr flame
Shall the welkin's thunders shame,
Elemental rage is tame
  To the wrath of man.

VIII.
At morn, grey Allan's mates with awe
Heard of the visioned sights he saw,
  The legend heard him say;
But the Seer's gifted eye was dim,
Deafened his ear, and stark his limb,
  Ere closed that bloody day.
He sleeps far from his Highland heath,
But often of the Dance of Death
  His comrades tell the tale
On picquet-post, when ebbs the night,
And waning watch-fires glow less bright,
  And dawn is glimmering pale.



ROMANCE OF DUNOIS.   FROM THE FRENCH.   [1815.]



[The original of this little Romance makes part of a manuscript
collection of French Songs, probably compiled by some young officer,
which was found on the field of Waterloo, so much stained with clay
and with blood as sufficiently to indicate what had been the fate of
its late owner.  The song is popular in France, and is rather a good
specimen of the style of composition to which it belongs.  The
translation is strictly literal.]

It was Dunois, the young and brave, was bound for Palestine,
But first he made his orisons before Saint Mary's shrine:
"And grant, immortal Queen of Heaven," was still the Soldier's
prayer;
That I may prove the bravest knight, and love the fairest fair."

His oath of honour on the shrine he graved it with his sword,
And followed to the Holy Land the banner of his Lord;
Where, faithful to his noble vow, his war-cry filled the air,
"Be honoured aye the bravest knight, beloved the fairest fair."

They owed the conquest to his arm, and then his Liege-Lord said,
"The heart that has for honour beat by bliss must be repaid. -
My daughter Isabel and thou shall be a wedded pair,
For thou art bravest of the brave, she fairest of the fair."

And then they bound the holy knot before Saint Mary's shrine,
That makes a paradise on earth, if hearts and hands combine;
And every lord and lady bright that were in chapel there
Cried, "Honoured be the bravest knight, beloved the fairest fair!"



THE TROUBADOUR.   FROM THE SAME COLLECTION.   [1815.]



Glowing with love, on fire for fame
  A Troubadour that hated sorrow
Beneath his lady's window came,
  And thus he sung his last good-morrow:
"My arm it is my country's right,
  My heart is in my true-love's bower;
Gaily for love and fame to fight
  Befits the gallant Troubadour."

And while he marched with helm on head
  And harp in hand, the descant rung,
As faithful to his favourite maid,
  The minstrel-burden still he sung:
"My arm it is my country's right,
  My heart is in my lady's bower;
Resolved for love and fame to fight
  I come, a gallant Troubadour."

Even when the battle-roar was deep,
  With dauntless heart he hewed his way,
'Mid splintering lance and falchion-sweep,
  And still was heard his warrior-lay:
"My life it is my country's right,
  My heart is in my lady's bower;
For love to die, for fame to fight,
  Becomes the valiant Troubadour."

Alas! upon the bloody field
  He fell beneath the foeman's glaive,
But still reclining on his shield,
  Expiring sung the exulting stave:-
"My life it is my country's right,
  My heart is in my lady's bower;
For love and fame to fall in fight
  Becomes the valiant Troubadour."



PIBROCH OF DONALD DHU.



[This is a very ancient pibroch belonging to Clan MacDonald.  The
words of the set, theme, or melody, to which the pipe variations are
applied, run thus in Gaelic:-

Piobaireachd Dhonuil Dhuidh, piobaireachd Dhonuil;
Piobaireachd Dhonuil Dhuidh, piobaireachd Dhonuil;
Piobaireachd Dhonuil Dhuidh, piobaireachd Dhonuil;
Piob agus bratach air faiche Inverlochi.
The pipe-summons of Donald the Black,
The pipe-summons of Donald the Black,
The war-pipe and the pennon are on the gathering-place
at Inverlochy.]

     Pibroch of Donuil Dhu,
       Pibroch of Donuil,
     Wake thy wild voice anew,
       Summon Clan Conuil.
     Come away, come away,
       Hark to the summons!
     Come in your war array,
       Gentles and commons.

     Come from deep glen, and
       From mountain so rocky,
     The war-pipe and pennon
       Are at Inverlochy.
     Come every hill-plaid, and
       True heart that wears one,
     Come every steel blade, and
       Strong hand that bears one.

     Leave untended the herd,
       The flock without shelter;
     Leave the corpse uninterr'd,
       The bride at the altar;
     Leave the deer, leave the steer,
       Leave nets and barges:
     Come with your fighting gear,
       Broadswords and targes.

     Come as the winds come, when
       Forests are rended;
     Come as the waves come, when
       Navies are stranded:
     Faster come, faster come,
       Faster and faster,
     Chief, vassal, page and groom,
       Tenant and master.

     Fast they come, fast they come;
       See how they gather!
     Wide waves the eagle plume,
       Blended with heather.
     Cast your plaids, draw your blades,
       Forward each man set!
     Pibroch of Donuil Dhu,
       Knell for the onset!




Footnotes:

{1}  This eText comes from a book (Pike Country Ballads etc.) which
contains a number of poems by John Hay.  These have been released
separately by Project Gutenberg under the title "Pike Country
Ballads and Other Poems" by John Hay.   They are not included here
to avoid duplication.

{2}  The literal translation of Fuentes d'Honoro.








Scanned and proofed by Thomas Pollock of The Men's Tribune,
www.menstribune.com


THE UNEXPURGATED CASE AGAINST WOMAN SUFFRAGE


BY SIR ALMROTH E. WRIGHT M.D., F.R.S.

1913



CONTENTS

PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

Programme of This Treatise--Motives from which Women Claim the
Suffrage--Types of Men who Support the Suffrage--John Stuart Mill.


PART I

ARGUMENTS WHICH ARE ADDUCED IN SUPPORT OF WOMAN'S SUFFRAGE

I

ARGUMENTS FROM ELEMENTARY NATURAL RIGHTS

Signification of the Term "Woman's Rights"--Argument from
"Justice"--Juridical Justice--"Egalitarian Equity"--Argument from
Justice Applied to Taxation--Argument from Liberty--Summary of
Arguments from Elementary Natural Rights.

II

ARGUMENTS FROM INTELLECTUAL GRIEVANCES OF WOMAN

Complaint of Want of Chivalry--Complaint of "Insults"--Complaint of
"Illogicalties"--Complaint of "Prejudices"--The Familiar Suffragist
Grievance of the Drunkard Voter and the Woman of Property Who is a
Non-Voter--The Grievance of Woman being Required to Obey Man-Made
Laws.

III

ARGUMENTS WHICH TAKE THE FORM OF "COUNSELS OF PERFECTION" ADDRESSED TO
MAN

Argument that Woman Requires a Vote for her Protection--Argument that
Woman ought to be Invested with the Responsibilities of Voting in
Order that She May Attain Her Full Intellectual Stature.


PART II

ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE CONCESSION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SUFFRAGE TO
WOMAN

I

WOMAN'S DISABILITY IN THE MATTER OF PHYSICAL FORCE

International Position of State would be Imperilled by Woman's
Suffrage--Internal Equilibrium of State would be Imperilled.

II

WOMAN'S DISABILITY IN THE MATTER OF INTELLECT

Characteristics of the Feminine Mind--Suffragist Illusions with
Regard to the Equality of Man and Woman as Workers--Prospect for
the Intellectual Future of Woman--Has Woman Advanced ?

III

WOMAN'S DISABILITY IN THE MATTER OF PUBLIC MORALITY

Standards by which Morality can be Appraised--Conflict between
Different Moralities--The Correct Standard of Morality--Moral
Psychology of Man and Woman--Difference between Man and Woman in
Matters of Public Morality.

IV

MENTAL OUTLOOK AND PROGRAMME OF THE FEMALE LEGISLATIVE REFORMER

V

ULTERIOR ENDS WHICH THE WOMAN'S SUFFRAGE MOVEMENT HAS IN VIEW



PART III

IS THERE, IF THE SUFFRAGE IS BARRED, ANY PALLIATIVE OR CORRECTIVE FOR
THE DISCONTENTS OF WOMAN?

I

PALLIATIVES OR CORRECTIVES FOR THE DISCONTENT OF WOMAN

What are the Suffragist's Grievances?--Economic and Physiological
Difficulties of Woman--Intellectual Grievances of Suffragist and
Corrective.


APPENDIX

LETTER ON MILITANT HYSTERIA



PREFACE



It has come to be believed that everything that has a bearing upon the
concession of the suffrage to woman has already been brought forward.

In reality, however, the influence of women has caused man to leave
unsaid many things which he ought to have said.

Especially in two respects has woman restricted the discussion.

She has placed her taboo upon all generalisations about women, taking
exception to these on the threefold ground that there would be no
generalisations which would hold true of all women; that
generalisations when reached possess no practical utility; and that
the element of sex does not leave upon women any general imprint such
as could properly be brought up in connexion with the question of
admitting them to the electorate.

Woman has further stifled discussion by placing her taboo upon
anything seriously unflattering being said about her in public.

I would suggest, and would propose here myself to act upon the
suggestion, that, in connexion with the discussion of woman's
suffrage, these restrictions should be laid aside.

In connexion with the setting aside of the restriction upon
generalising, I may perhaps profitably point out that all
generalisations, and not only generalisations which relate to women,
are _ex hypothesi [by hypothesis]_ subject to individual exceptions.
(It is to generalisations that the proverb that "the exception proves
the rule" really applies.) I may further point out that practically
every decision which we take in ordinary life, and all legislative
action without exception, is based upon generalisations; and again,
that the question of the suffrage, and with it the larger question as
to the proper sphere of woman, finally turns upon the question as to
what imprint woman's sexual system leaves upon her physical frame,
character, and intellect: in more technical terms, it turns upon the
question as to what are the _secondary sexual character[istic]s_ of
woman.

Now only by a felicitous exercise of the faculty of successful
generalisation can we arrive at a knowledge of these.

With respect to the restriction that nothing which might offend
woman's _amour propre [self love]_ shall be said in public, it may be
pointed out that, while it was perfectly proper and equitable that no
evil (and, as Pericles proposed, also no good) should be said of woman
in public so long as she confined herself to the domestic sphere, the
action of that section of women who have sought to effect an entrance
into public life, has now brought down upon woman, as one of the
penalties, the abrogation of that convention.

A consideration which perhaps ranks only next in importance to that
with which we have been dealing, is that of the logical sanction of
the propositions which are enunciated in the course of such
controversial discussions as that in which we are here involved.

It is clearly a precondition of all useful discussion that the author
and reader should be in accord with respect to the authority of the
generalisations and definitions which supply the premisses for his
reasonings.

Though this might perhaps to the reader appear an impractical ideal, I
would propose here to attempt to reach it by explaining the logical
method which I have set myself to follow.

Although I have from literary necessity employed in my text some of
the verbal forms of dogmatism, I am very far from laying claim to any
dogmatic authority. More than that, I would desire categorically to
repudiate such a claim.

For I do not conceal from myself that, if I took up such a position, I
should wantonly be placing myself at the mercy of my reader. For he
could then, by merely refusing to see in me an authority, bring down
the whole edifice of my argument like a house of cards.

Moreover I am not blind to what would happen if, after I claimed to be
taken as an authority, the reader was indulgent enough still to go on
to read what I have written.

He would in such a case, the moment he encountered a statement with
which he disagreed, simply waive me on one side with the words, "So
you say."

And if he should encounter a statement with which he agreed, he would
in his wisdom, censure me for neglecting to provide for that
proposition a satisfactory logical foundation.

If it is far from my thoughts to claim a right of dictation, it is
equally remote from them to take up the position that I have in my
arguments furnished _proof_ of the thesis which I set out to
establish.

It would be culpable misuse of language to speak in such connexion of
_proof_ or _disproof_.

Proof by testimony, which is available in con-nexion with questions of
fact, is unavailable in connexion with general truths; and logical
proof is obtainable only in that comparatively narrow sphere where
reasoning is based--as in mathematics--upon axioms, or--as in certain
really crucial experiments in the mathematic sciences--upon quasi-
axiomatic premisses.

Everywhere else we base our reasonings on premisses which are simply
more or less probable; and accordingly the conclusions which we arrive
at have in them always an element of insecurity.

It will be clear that in philosophy, in jurisprudence, in political
economy and sociology, and in literary criticism and such like, we are
dealing not with certainties but with propositions which are, for
literary convenience, invested with the garb of certainties.

What kind of logical sanction is it, then, which can attach to
reasonings such as are to be set out here?

They have in point of fact the sanction which attaches to reasonings
based upon premisses arrived at by the method of _diacritical
judgment._

It is, I hasten to notify the reader, not the method, but only the
name here assigned to it, which is unfamiliar. As soon as I exhibit it
in the working, the reader will identify it as that by which every
generalisation and definition ought to be put to the proof.

I may for this purpose take the general statements or definitions
which serve as premisses for my reasonings in the text.

I bring forward those generalisations and definitions because they
commend themselves to my diacritical judgment. In other words, I set
them forth as results which have been reached after reiterated efforts
to call up to mind the totality of my experience, and to de-tect the
factor which is common to all the individual experiences.

When for instance I propose a definition, I have endeavoured to call
to mind all the different uses of the word with which I am
familiar--eliminating, of course, all the obviously incorrect uses.

And when I venture to attempt a generalisation about woman, I
endeavour to recall to mind without distinction all the different
women I have encountered, and to extricate from my impressions what
was common to all,--omitting from consideration (except only when I am
dealing specifically with these) all plainly abnormal women.

Having by this procedure arrived at a generalisation--which may of
course be correct or incorrect--I submit it to my reader, and ask from
him that he should, after going through the same mental operations as
myself, review my judgment, and pronounce his verdict.

If it should then so happen that the reader comes, in the case of any
generalisation, to the same verdict as that which I have reached, that
particular generalisation will, I submit, now go forward not as a
datum of my individual experience, but as the intellectual resultant
of two separate and distinct experiences. It will thereby be immensely
fortified.

If, on the other hand, the reader comes to the conclusion that a
particular generalisation is out of conformity with his experience,
that generalisation will go forward shorn of some, or perchance all,
its authority.

But in any case each individual generalisation must be referred
further.

And at the end it will, according as it finds, or fails to find,
acceptance among the thoughtful, be endorsed as a truth, and be
gathered into the garner of human knowledge; or be recognised as an
error, and find its place with the tares, which the householder, in
time of the harvest, will tell the reapers to bind in bundles to burn
them.

A. E. W.
1913.



INTRODUCTION

Programme of this Treatise--Motives  from which Women Claim the
Suffrage--Types of Men who Support the Suffrage--John Stuart Mill.

The task which I undertake here is to show that the Woman's Suffrage
Movement has no real intellectual or moral sanction, and that there
are very weighty reasons why the suffrage should not be conceded to
woman.

I would propose to begin by analysing the mental attitude of those who
range themselves on the side of woman suffrage, and then to pass on to
deal with the principal arguments upon which the woman suffragist
relies.

The preponderating majority of the women who claim the suffrage do not
do so from motives of public interest or philanthropy.

They are influenced almost exclusively by two motives: resentment at
the suggestion that woman should be accounted by man as inherently his
inferior in certain important respects; and reprehension of a state of
society in which more money, more personal liberty (In reality only
more of the personal liberty which the possession of money confers),
more power, more public recognition and happier physiological
conditions fall to the share of man.

A cause which derives its driving force so little from philanthropy
and public interest and so much from offended _amour propre_ and
pretensions which are, as we shall see, unjustified, has in reality no
moral prestige.

For its intellectual prestige the movement depends entirely on the
fact that it has the advocacy of a certain number of distinguished
men.

It will not be amiss to examine that advocacy.

The "intellectual" whose name appears at the foot of woman's suffrage
petitions will, when you have him by himself, very often Make
confession:--"Woman suffrage," he will tell you, "is not the grave and
important cause which the ardent female suffragist deems it to be. Not
only will it not do any of the things which she imagines it is going
to do, but it will leave the world exactly where it is. Still--the
concession of votes to women is desirable from the point of view of
symmetry of classification; and it will soothe the ruffled feelings of
quite a number of very worthy women."

It may be laid down as a broad general rule that only two classes of
men have the cause of woman's suffrage really at heart.

The first is the crank who, as soon as he thinks he has discerned a
moral principle, immediately gets into the saddle, and then rides
hell-for-leather, reckless of all considerations of public expediency.

The second is that very curious type of man, who when it is suggested
in his hearing that the species woman is, measured by certain
intellectual and moral standards, the inferior of the species man,
solemnly draws himself up and asks, "Are you, sir, aware that you are
insulting my wife?"

To this, the type of man who feels every unfavourable criticism of
woman as a personal affront to himself, John Stuart Mill, had
affinities.

We find him writing a letter to the Home Secretary, informing him, in
relation to a Parliamentary Bill restricting the sale of arsenic to
male persons over twenty-one years, that it was a "gross insult to
every woman, all women from highest to lowest being deemed unfit to
have poison in their possession, lest they shall commit murder."

We find him again, in a state of indignation with the English marriage
laws, preluding his nuptials with Mrs. Taylor by presenting that lady
with a formal charter; renouncing all authority over her, and
promising her security against all infringements of her liberty which
might proceed from _himself_.

To this lady he is always ascribing credit for his eminent
intellectual achievements. And lest his reader should opine that woman
stands somewhat in the shade with respect to her own intellectual
triumphs, Mill undertakes the explanation. "Felicitous thoughts," he
tells us, "occur by hundreds to every woman of intellect. But they
are mostly lost for want of a husband or friend . . . to estimate them
properly, and to bring them before the world; and even when they are
brought before it they generally appear as his ideas."

Not only did Mill see woman and all her works through an optical
medium which gave images like this; but there was upon his retina
a large blind area. By reason of this last it was inapprehensible
to him that there could be an objection to the sexes co-operating
indiscriminately in work. It was beyond his ken that the sex element
would under these conditions invade whole departments of life which
are now free from it. As he saw things, there was in point of fact a
risk of the human race dying out by reason of the inadequate
imperativeness of its sexual instincts.

Mill's unfaithfulness to the facts cannot, however, all be put down to
constitutional defects of vision. When he deals with woman he is no
longer scrupulously conscientious. We begin to have our suspicions of
his uprightness when we find him in his _Subjection of Women_ laying
it down as a fundamental postulate that the subjection of woman to man
is always morally indefensible. For no upright mind can fail to see
that the woman who lives in a condition of financial dependence upon
man has no moral claim to unrestricted liberty. The suspicion of
Mill's honesty which is thus awakened is confirmed by further critical
reading of his treatise. In that skilful tractate one comes across,
every here and there, a _suggestio falsi [suggestion of a falsehood],_
or a _suppressio veri [suppression of the truth],_ or a fallacious
analogy nebulously expressed, or a mendacious metaphor, or a passage
which is contrived to lead off attention from some weak point in the
feminist case.[1] Moreover, Mill was unmindful of the obligations of
intellectual morality when he allowed his stepdaughter, in connexion
with feminist questions, to draft letters [2] which went forward as
his own.

[1] _Vide [See]_ in this connexion the incidental references to Mill
on pp. 50, 81 footnote, and 139.
[2] Vide _Letters of John Stuart Mill,_ vol. ii, pp. 51, 79, 80, 100,
141, 157, 238, 239, 247, 288, and 349. There is yet another factor
which must be kept in mind in connexion with the writings of Mill. It
was the special characteristic of the man to set out to tackle concrete
problems and then to spend his strength upon abstractions.

In his _Political Economy_, where his proper subject matter was man
with his full equipment of impulses, Mill took as his theme an
abstraction: an _economic man_ who is actuated solely by the desire of
gain. He then worked out in great elaboration the course of conduct
which an aggregate of these puppets of his imagination would pursue.
Having persuaded

himself, after this, that he had in his possession a _vade mecum_
_[handbook]_ to the comprehension of human societies, he now took it
upon himself to expound the principles which govern and direct these.
Until such time as this procedure was unmasked, Mill's political
economy enjoyed an unquestioned authority.

Exactly the same plan was followed by Mill in handling the question of
woman's suffrage. Instead of dealing with woman as she is, and with
woman placed in a setting of actually subsisting conditions, Mill
takes as his theme a woman who is a creature of his imagination. This
woman is, _by assumption_, in mental endowments a replica of man. She
lives in a world which is, _by tacit assumption_, free from
complications of sex. And, if practical considerations had ever come
into the purview of Mill's mind, she would, _by tacit assumption_, be
paying her own way, and be making full personal and financial
contributions to the State. It is in connexion with this fictitious
woman that Mill sets himself to work out the benefits which women
would derive from co-partnership with men in the government of the
State, and those which such co-partnership would confer on the
community. Finally, practising again upon himself the same imposition
as in his _Political Economy_, this unpractical trafficker in
abstractions sets out to persuade his reader that he has, by dealing
with fictions of the mind, effectively grappled with the concrete
problem of woman's suffrage.

This, then, is the philosopher who gives intellectual prestige to the
Woman's Suffrage cause.

But is there not, let us in the end ask ourselves, here and there at
least, a man who is of real account in the world of affairs, and who
is--not simply a luke-warm Platonic friend or an opportunist
advocate--but an impassioned promoter of the woman's suffrage
movement? One knows quite well that there is. But then one suspects
--one perhaps discerns by "the spirit sense"--that this impassioned
promoter of woman's suffrage is, on the sequestered side of his life,
an idealistic dreamer: one for whom some woman's memory has become,
like Beatrice for Dante, a mystic religion.

We may now pass on to deal with the arguments by which the woman
suffragist has sought to establish her case.


PART I

ARGUMENTS WHICH ARE ADDUCED IN SUPPORT OF WOMAN'S SUFFRAGE

I

ARGUMENTS FROM ELEMENTARY NATURAL RIGHTS

Signification of the Term "Woman's Rights"--Argument from "Justice"
--Juridical Justice-"Egalitarian Equity"--Argument from Justice
Applied to Taxation--Argument from Liberty--Summary of Arguments from
Elementary Natural Rights.


Let us note that the suffragist does not--except, perhaps, when she is
addressing herself to unfledged girls and to the sexually
embittered--really produce much effect by inveighing against the legal
grievances of woman under the bastardy laws, the divorce laws, and the
law which fixes the legal age of consent. This kind of appeal does not
go down with the ordinary man and woman--first, because there are many
who think that in spite of occasional hardships the public advantage
is, on the whole, very well served by the existing laws; secondly,
because any alterations which might be desirable could very easily be
made without recourse to woman's suffrage; and thirdly, because the
suffragist consistently acts on the principle of bringing up against
man everything that can possibly be brought up against him, and of
never allowing anything to appear on the credit side of the ledger.

The arguments which the woman suffragist really places confidence in
are those which are provided by undefined general principles,
apothegms set out in the form of axioms, formulae which are vehicles
for fallacies, ambiguous abstract terms, and "question-begging"
epithets. Your ordinary unsophisticated man and woman stand almost
helpless against arguments of this kind.

For these bring to bear moral pressure upon human nature.  And when
the intellect is confused by a word or formula which conveys an
ethical appeal, one may very easily find oneself committed to action
which one's unbiased reason would never have approved. The very first
requirement in connexion with any word or phrase which conveys a moral
exhortation is, therefore, to analyse it and find out its true
signification. For all such concepts as justice, rights, freedom,
chivalry--and it is with these that we shall be specially
concerned--are, when properly defined and understood beacon-lights,
but when ill understood and undefined, stumbling-blocks in the path of
humanity.

We may appropriately begin by analysing the term "Woman's Rights" and
the correlative formula "Woman has a right to the suffrage."

Our attention here immediately focuses upon the term _right_.  It is
one of the most important of the verbal agents by which the suffragist
hopes to bring moral pressure to bear upon man.

Now, the term _right_ denotes in its juridical sense a debt which is
owed to us by the State. A right is created when the community binds
itself to us, its individual members, to intervene by force to
restrain any one from interfering with us, and to protect us in the
enjoyment of our faculties, privileges, and property.

The term is capable of being given a wider meaning.  While no one
could appropriately speak of our having a _right_ to health or
anything that man has not the power to bestow, it is arguable that
there are, independent of and antecedent to law, elementary rights: a
right to freedom; a right to protection against personal violence; a
right to the protection of our property; and a right to the impartial
administration of regulations which are binding upon all. Such a use
of the term _right_ could be justified on the ground that everybody
would be willing to make personal sacrifices, and to combine with his
fellows for the purpose of securing these essentials--an understanding
which would almost amount to legal sanction.

The suffragist who employs the term "Woman's _Rights_" does not employ
the word rights in either of these senses. Her case is analogous to
that of a man who should in a republic argue about the divine _right_
of kings; or that of the Liberal who should argue that it was his
_right_ to live permanently under a Liberal government; or of any
member of a minority who should, with a view of getting what he wants,
argue that he was contending only for his rights.

The woman suffragist is merely bluffing.  Her formula "_Woman's
Rights_" means simply "_Woman's Claims_."

For the moment--for we shall presently be coming back to the question
of the enforcement of rights--our task is to examine the arguments
which the suffragist brings forward in support of her claims.

First and chief among these is the argument that the _Principle of
Justice_ prescribes that women should be enfranchised.

When we inquire what the suffragist understands under the Principle of
Justice, one receives by way of answer only the _petitio principii
[question begging]_ that Justice is a moral principle which includes
woman suffrage among its implications.

In reality it is only very few who clearly apprehend the nature of
Justice. For under this appellation two quite different principles are
confounded.

The primary and correct signification of the term Justice will perhaps
be best arrived at by pursuing the following train of considerations:--

When man, long impatient at arbitrary and quite incalculable
autocratic judgments, proceeded to build up a legal system to take the
place of these, he built it upon the following series of
axioms:--(_a_) All actions of which the courts are to take cognisance
shall be classified. (_b_) The legal consequences of each class of
action shall be definitely fixed. (_c_) The courts shall adjudicate
only on questions of fact, and on the issue as to how the particular
deed which is the cause of action should be classified. And (_d_) such
decisions shall carry with them in an automatic manner the appointed
legal consequences.

For example, if a man be arraigned for the appropriation of another
man's goods, it is an axiom that the court (when once the questions of
fact have been disposed of) shall adjudicate only on the issue as to
whether the particular appropriation of goods in dispute comes under
the denomination of larceny, burglary, or other co-ordinate category;
and that upon this the sentence shall go forth: directing that the
legal consequences which are appointed to that particular class of
action be enforced.

This is the system every one can see administered in every court of
justice.

There is, however, over and above what has just been set out another
essential element in Justice. It is an element which readily escapes
the eye.

I have in view the fact that the classifications which are adopted and
embodied in the law must not be arbitrary classifications. They must
all be conformable to the principle of utility, and be directed to the
advantage of society.

If, for instance, burglary is placed in a class apart from larceny, it
is discriminated from it because this distinction is demanded by
considerations of public advantage. But considerations of utility
would not countenance, and by consequence Justice would not accept, a
classification of theft into theft committed by a poor man and theft
committed by a rich man.

The conception of Justice is thus everywhere interfused with
considerations of utility and expediency.

It will have become plain that if we have in view the justice which is
administered in the courts--we may here term it _Juridical
Justice_--then the question as to whether it is _just_ to refuse the
suffrage to woman will be determined by considering whether the
classification of men as voters and of women as non-voters is in the
public interest. Put otherwise, the question whether it would be just
that woman should have a vote would require the answer "Yes" or "No,"
according as the question whether it would be expedient or inexpedient
that woman should vote required the answer "Yes" or "No." But it would
be for the electorate, not for the woman suffragist, to decide that
question.

There is, as already indicated, another principle which passes under
the name of Justice. I have in view the principle that in the
distribution of wealth or political power, or any other privileges
which it is in the power of the State to bestow, every man should
share equally with every other man, and every woman equally with every
man, and that in countries where Europeans and natives live side by
side, these latter should share all privileges equally with the
white--the goal of endeavour being that all distinctions depending
upon natural endowment, sex, and race should be effaced.

We may call this principle the _Principle of Egalitarian
Equity_--first, because it aims at establishing a quite artificial
equality; secondly, because it makes appeal to our ethical instincts,
and claims on that ground to override the distinctions of which formal
law takes account.

But let us reflect that we have here a principle which properly
understood, embraces in its purview all mankind, and not mankind only
but also the lower animals. That is to say, we have here a principle,
which consistently followed out, would make of every man and woman _in
primis [at first]_ a socialist; then a woman suffragist; then a
philo-native, negrophil, and an advocate of the political rights of
natives and negroes; and then, by logical compulsion ant
anti-vivisectionist, who accounts it _unjust_ to experiment on an
animal; a vegetarian, who accounts it _unjust_ to kill animals for
food; and findly one who, like the Jains, accounts it unjust to take
the life of even verminous insects.

If we accept this principle of egalitarian equity as of absolute
obligation, we shall have to accept along with woman's suffrage all
the other "isms" believed in, and agitated for, by the cranks who are
so numerously represented in the ranks of woman suffragists.

If, on the other hand, we accept the doctrine of egalitarian equity
with the qualification that it shall apply only so far as what it
enjoins is conformable to public advantage, we shall again make
expediency the criterion of the justice of woman's suffrage.

Before passing on it will be well to point out that the argument from
Justice meets us not only in the form that Justice requires that woman
should have a vote, but also in all sorts of other forms. We encounter
it in the writings of publicists, in the formula _Taxation_ _carries
with it a Right to Representation_; and we encounter it in the
streets, on the banners of woman suffrage processions, in the form
_Taxation without Representation is Tyranny_.

This latter theorem of taxation which is displayed on the banners of
woman suffrage is, I suppose, deliberately and intentionally a
_suggestio falsi_. For only that taxation is tyrannous which is
diverted to objects which are not useful to the contributors. And even
the suffragist does not suggest that the taxes which are levied on
women are differentially applied to the uses of men.

Putting, then, this form of argument out of sight, let us come to
close quarters with the question whether the payment of taxes gives a
title to control the finances of the State.

Now, if it really did so without any regard to the status of the
claimant, not only women, but also foreigners residing in, or holding
property in, England, and with these lunatics and miners with
property, and let me, for the sake of a pleasanter collocation of
ideas, hastily add peers of the realm, who have now no control over
public finance, ought to receive the parliamentary franchise. And in
like manner if the payment of a tax, without consideration of its
amount, were to give a title to a vote, every one who bought an
article which had paid a duty would be entitled to a vote in his own,
or in a foreign, country according as that duty has been paid at home
or abroad.

In reality the moral and logical nexus between the payment of taxes
and the control of the public revenue is that the solvent and
selfsupporting citizens, and only these, are entitled to direct its
financial policy.

If I have not received, or if I have refunded, any direct
contributions I may have received from the coffers of the State; if I
have paid my _pro rata_ share of its establishment charges--_i.e._ of
the costs of both internal administration and external defence; and I
have further paid my proportional share of whatever may be required to
make up for the deficit incurred on account of my fellow-men and women
who either require direct assistance from the State, or cannot meet
their share of the expenses of the State, I am a _solvent citizen_;
and if I fail to meet these liabilities, I am an _insolvent citizen_
even though I pay such taxes as the State insists upon my paying.

Now if a woman insists, in the face of warnings that she had better
not do so, on taxing man with dishonesty for withholding from her
financial control over the revenues of the State, she has only herself
to blame if she is told very bluntly that her claim to such control is
barred by the fact that she is, as a citizen insolvent. The taxes paid
by women would cover only a, very small proportion of the
establishment charges of the State which would properly be assigned to
them. It falls to man to make up that deficit.

And it is to be noted with respect to those women who pay their full
pro rata contribution and who ask to be treated as a class apart from,
and superior to, other women, that only a very small proportion of
these have made their position for themselves.

Immeasurably the larger number are in a solvent position only because
men have placed them there. All large fortunes and practically all the
incomes which are furnished by investments are derived from man.

Nay; but the very revenues which the Woman Suffrage Societies devote
to man's vilification are to a preponderating extent derived from
funds which he earned and gave over to woman.

In connexion with the financial position of woman as here stated, it
will be well to consider first the rich woman's claim to the vote.

We may seek light on the logical and moral aspects of this claim by
considering here two parallel cases.

The position which is occupied by the peer under the English
Constitution furnishes a very interesting parallel to the position of
the woman who is here in question.

Time out of mind the Commons have viewed with the utmost jealousy any
effort of the House of Lords to obtain co-partnership with them in the
control of the finances of the State; and, in pursuance of that
traditional policy, the peers have recently, after appeal to the
country, been shorn of the last vestige of financial control. Now we
may perhaps see, in this jealousy of a House of Lords, which
represents inherited wealth, displayed by a House of Commons
representing voters electing on a financial qualification, an
unconscious groping after the moral principle that those citizens who
are solvent by their own efforts, and only these, should control the
finances of the State.

And if this analogy finds acceptance, it would not--even if there were
nothing else than this against such proposals--be logically possible,
after ousting the peers who are large tax-payers from all control over
the finances of the State, to create a new class of voters out of the
female representatives of unearned wealth.

The second parallel case which we have to consider presents a much
simpler analogy. Consideration will show that the position occupied in
the State by the woman who has inherited money is analogous to that
occupied in a firm by a sleeping partner who stands in the shoes of a
deceased working partner, and who has only a small amount of capital
in the business. Now, if such a partner were to claim any financial
control, and were to make trouble about paying his _pro rata_
establishment charges, he would be very sharply called to order. And
he would never dream of appealing to Justice by breaking windows,
going to gaol, and undertaking a hunger strike.

Coming back from the particular to the general, and from the logical
to the moral aspect of woman's claim to control the finances of the
State on the ground that she is a tax-payer, it will suffice to point
out that this claim is on a par with the claim to increased political
power and completer control over the finances of the State which is
put forward by a class of male voters who are already paying much less
than their _pro rata_ share of the upkeep of the State.

In each case it is a question of trying to get control of other
people's money. And in the case of woman it is of "trying on" in
connexion with her public partnership with man that principle of
domestic partnership, "All yours is mine, and all mine's my own."

Next to the plea of justice, the plea which is advanced most
insistently by the woman who is contending for a vote is the plea of
liberty.

We have here, again, a word which is a valuable asset to woman
suffrage both in the respect that it brings moral pressure to bear,
and in the respect that it is a word of ambiguous meaning.

In accordance with this we have John Stuart Mill making propaganda for
woman suffrage in a tractate entitled the_ Subjection of_ _Women_; we
have a Woman's _Freedom_ League--"freedom" being a question-begging
synonym for "parliamentary franchise"--and everywhere in the
literature of woman's suffrage we have talk of woman's "emancipation";
and we have women characterised as serfs, or slaves--the terms _serfs_
and _slaves_ supplying, of course, effective rhetorical synonyms for
non-voters.

When we have succeeded in getting through these thick husks of untruth
we find that the idea of liberty which floats before the eyes of woman
is, not at all a question of freedom from unequitable legal
restraints, but essentially a question of getting more of the personal
liberty (or command of other people's services), which the possession
of money confers and more freedom from sexual restraints.

The suffragist agitator makes profit out of this ambiguity.  In
addressing the woman worker who does not, at the rate which her labour
commands on the market, earn enough to give her any reasonable measure
of financial freedom, the agitator will assure her that the suffrage
would bring her more money, describing the woman suffrage cause to her
as the cause of liberty. By juggling in this way with the two meanings
of "liberty" she will draw her into her toils.

The vote, however, would not raise wages of the woman worker and bring
to her the financial, nor yet the physiological freedom she is
seeking.

The tactics of the suffragist agitator are the same when she is
dealing with a woman who is living at the charges of a husband or
relative, and who recoils against the idea that she lies under a moral
obligation to make to the man who works for her support some return of
gratitude. The suffragist agitator will point out to her that such an
obligation is slavery, and that the woman's suffrage cause is the
cause of freedom.

And so we find the women who want to have everything for nothing, and
the wives who do not see that they are beholden to man for anything,
and those who consider that they have not made a sufficiently good
bargain for themselves--in short, all the ungrateful women--flock to
the banner of Women's Freedom--the banner of financial freedom for
woman at the expense of financial servitude for man.

The grateful woman will practically always be an anti-suffragist.

It will be well, before passing on to another class of arguments, to
summarise what has been said in the three foregoing sections.

We have recognised that woman has not been defrauded of elementary
natural rights; that Justice, as distinguished from egalitarian
equity, does not prescribe that she should be admitted to the
suffrage; and that her status is not, as is dishonestly alleged, a
status of serfdom or slavery.

With this the whole case for recrimination against man, and _a
fortiori [for greater reason]_ the case for [a] resort to violence,
collapses.

And if it does collapse, this is one of those things that carries
consequences. It would beseem man to bethink himself that to give in
to an unjustified and doubtfully honest claim is to minister to the
demoralisation of the claimant.


II

ARGUMENTS FROM INTELLECTUAL GRIEVANCES OF WOMAN

Complaint of Want of Chivalry--Complaint of "Insults"--Complaint of
"Illogicalities"--Complaint of "Prejudices"--The Familiar Suffragist
Grievance of the Drunkard Voter and the Woman of Property Who is a
Non-Voter--The Grievance of Woman being Required to Obey Man-Made
Laws.

We pass from the argument from elementary natural rights to a
different class of arguments--intellectual grievances. The suffragist
tells us that it is unchivalrous to oppose woman's suffrage; that it
is insulting to tell woman that she is unfit to exercise the fran-
chise; that it is "illogical" to make in her case an exception to a
general rule; that it is mere "prejudice" to withhold the vote from
her; that it is indignity that the virtuous and highly intelligent
woman has no vote, while the drunkard has; and that the woman of
property has no vote, while her male underlings have; and, lastly,
that it is an affront that a woman should be required to obey
"man-made" laws.

We may take these in their order.

Let us consider chivalry, first, from the standpoint of the woman
suffragist. Her notion of _chivalry_ is that man should accept every
disadvantageous offer which may be made to him by woman.

That, of course, is to make chivalry the principle of egalitarian
equity limited in its application to the case between man and woman.

It follows that she who holds that the suffrage ought, in obedience to
that principle of justice, to be granted to her by man, might quite
logically hold that everything else in man's gift ought also to be
conceded.

But to do the woman suffragist justice, she does not press the
argument from chivalry. Inasmuch as life has brought home to her that
the ordinary man has quite other conceptions of that virtue, she
declares that "she has no use for it."

Let us now turn to the anti-suffragist view. The anti-suffragist (man
or woman) holds that chivalry is a principle which enters into every
reputable relation between the sexes, and that of all the civilising
agencies at work in the world it is the most important.

But I think I hear the reader interpose, "What, then, is chivalry if
it is not a question of serving woman without reward?"

A moment's thought will make the matter clear.

When a man makes this compact with a woman, "I will do you reverence,
and protect you, and yield you service; and you, for your part, will
hold fast to an ideal of gentleness, of personal refinement, of
modesty, of joyous maternity, and to who shall say what other graces
and virtues that endear woman to man," that is _chivalry_.

It is not a question of a purely one-sided bargain, as in the
suffragist conception. Nor yet is it a bargain about purely material
things.

It is a bargain in which man gives both material things, and also
things which pertain perhaps somewhat to the spirit; and in which
woman gives back of these last.

But none the less it is of the nature of a contract. There is in it
the inexorable _do ut des; facio ut facias [give me this, and I will
give you that; do this for me, and I will do that for you]._

And the contract is infringed when woman breaks out into violence,
when she jettisons her personal refinement, when she is ungrateful,
and, possibly, when she places a quite extravagantly high estimate
upon her intellectual powers.

We now turn from these almost too intimate questions of personal
morality to discuss the other grievances which were enumerated above.

With regard to the suffragist's complaint that it is _"insulting"_ for
woman to be told that she is as a class unfit to exercise the
suffrage, it is relevant to point out that one is not insulted by
being told about oneself, or one's class, untruths, but only at being
told about oneself, or one's class, truths which one dislikes. And it
is, of course, an offence against ethics to try to dispose of an
unpalatable generalisation by characterising it as "insulting." But
nothing that man could do would be likely to prevent the suffragist
resorting to this aggravated form of intellectual immorality.

We may now turn to the complaint that it is "illogical" to withhold
the vote from women.

This is the kind of complaint which brings out in relief the logical
endowment and legislative sagacity of the suffragist.

With regard to her logical endowment it will suffice to indicate that
the suffragist would appear to regard the promulgation of a rule which
is to hold without exception as an essentially logical act; and the
admission of any class exception to a rule of general application as
an illogicality. It would on this principle be "illogical" to except,
under conscription, the female population from military service.

With regard to the suffragist's legislative sagacity we may note that
she asks that we should put back the clock, and return to the days
when any arbitrary principle might be adduced as a ground for
legislation. It is as if Bentham had never taught:--

"What is it to offer a _good reason_ with respect to a law?  It is to
allege the good or evil which the law tends to produce; so much good,
so many arguments in its favour; so much evil, so many arguments
against it.

"What is it to offer a _false reason?_  It is the alleging for, or
against a law, something else than its good or evil effects."

Next, we may take up the question as to whether an unwelcome
generalisation may legitimately be got out of the way by
characterising it as a prejudice. This is a fundamentally important
question not only in connexion with such an issue as woman suffrage,
but in connexion with all search for truth in those regions where
crucial scientific experiments cannot be instituted.

In the whole of this region of thought we have to guide ourselves by
generalisations.

Now every generalisation is in a sense a _prejudgment_. We make
inferences from cases or individuals that have already presented
themselves to such cases or individuals of the same class as may
afterwards present themselves. And if our generalisation happens to be
an unfavourable one, we shall of necessity have prejudged the case
against those who are exceptions to their class.

Thus, for example, the proposition that woman is incapable of usefully
exercising the parliamentary franchise prejudges the case against a
certain number of capable women. It would none the less be absolutely
anarchical to propose to abandon the system of guiding ourselves by
prejudgments; and unfavourable prejudgments or prejudices are
logically as well justified, and are obviously as indispensable to us
as favourable prejudgments.

The suffragist who proposes to dispose of generalisations which are
unfavourable to woman as prejudices ought therefore to be told to
stand down.

It has probably never suggested itself to her that, if there were a
mind which was not stored with both favourable prejudgments and
prejudices, it would be a mind which had learned absolutely nothing
from experience.

But I hear the reader interpose, "Is there not a grave danger that
generalisations may be erroneous?"

And I can hear the woman suffragist interject, "Is there not a grave
danger that unflattering generalisations about woman may be
erroneous?"

The answer to the general question is that there is of course always
the risk that our generalisations may be erroneous. But when a
generalisation finds wide acceptance among the thoughtful, we have
come as close to truth as it is possible for humanity to come.

To the question put by the suffragist the reply is that experience
with regard to the capacity of woman has been accumulating in all
climes, and through all times; and that the belief of men in the
inherent inferiority of women in the matter of intellectual morality,
and in the power of adjudication, has never varied.

I pass now to the two most familiar grievances of the suffragist; the
grievance that the virtuous and intelligent woman has no vote, while
the male drunkard has; and the grievance that the woman of property
has no vote, while her male underlings have.

All that is worth while saying on these points is that the suffragist
is here manufacturing grievances for herself, _first_, by reasoning
from the false premiss that every legal distinction which happens to
press hardly upon a few individuals ought for that to be abrogated;
and, _secondly_, by steady leaving out of sight that logical
inconsistencies can, for the more part, be got rid of only at the
price of bringing others into being.

The man who looks forward to the intellectual development of woman
must be brought near to despair when he perceives that practically
every woman suffragist sees in every hard case arising in connexion
with a legal distinction affecting woman, an insult and example of the
iniquity of man-made laws, or a logical inconsistency which could with
a very little good-will be removed.

We have come now to the last item on our list, to the grievance that
woman has to submit herself to "_man-made laws_."

This is a grievance which well rewards study. It is worth study from
the suffragist point of view, because it is the one great injury under
which all others are subsumed. And it is worth studying from the
anti-suffragist point of view, because it shows how little the
suffragist understands of the terms she employs; and how unreal are
the wrongs which she resents.

Quite marvelously has the woman suffragist in this connexion
misapprehended; or would she have us say misrepresented?

The woman suffragist misapprehends--it will be better to assume that
she "misapprehends"--when she suggests that we, the male electors,
have framed the laws.

In reality the law which we live under--and the law in those States
which have adopted either the English, or the Roman law--descends from
the past. It has been evolved precedent, by precedent, by the
decisions of generation upon generation of judges, and it has for
centuries been purged by amending statutes. Moreover we, the present
male electors--the electors who are savagely attacked by the
suffragist for our asserted iniquities in connexion with the laws
which regulate sexual relations--have never in our capacity as
electors had any power to alter an old, or to suggest a new law;
except only in so far as by voting Conservative or Liberal we may
indirectly have remotely influenced the general trend of legislation.

"Well but"--the suffragist will here rejoin--"is it not at any rate
true that in the drafting of statutes and the framing of judicial
decisions man has always nefariously discriminated against woman?"

The question really supplies its own answer. It will be obvious to
every one who considers that the drafting of statutes and the
formulating of legal decisions is almost as impersonal a procedure as
that of drawing up the rules to govern a game; and it offers hardly
more opportunity for discriminating between man and woman.

There are, however, three questions in connexion with which the law
can and does make a distinction between man and woman.

The _first_ is that of sexual relations: rape, divorce, bastardy, and
the age of consent. In connexion with _rape_, it has never been
alleged that the law is not sufficiently severe. It is, or has been,
under colonial conditions, severe up to the point of ferocity. In the
matter of _divorce_ the law of a minority of man-governed States
differentiates in favour of man. It does so influenced by tradition,
by what are held to be the natural equities, and by the fact that a
man is required to support his wife's progeny. The law of _bastardy
[illegitimate childbirth]_ is what it is because of the dangers of
blackmail. The law which fixes the age of consent discriminates
against man, laying him open to a criminal charge in situations where
woman--and it is not certain that she is not a more frequent
offender--escapes scot-free.

The _second_ point in which the law differentiates is in the matter of
exacting personal service for the State. If it had not been that man
is more prone to discriminate in favour of woman than against her,
every military State, when exacting personal military service from
men, would have demanded from women some such equivalent personal
service as would be represented by a similar period of work in an army
clothing establishment, or ordnance factory, or army laundry; or would
at any rate have levied upon woman a ransom in lieu of such service.

The _third_ point in which the law distinguishes between man and woman
is with reference to the suffrage. The object of this book is to show
that this is equitable and in the interests of both.

The suffragist further misapprehends when she regards it as an
indignity to obey laws which she has not herself framed, or
specifically sanctioned. (The whole male electorate, be it remarked,
would here lie under the same dignity as woman.)

But in reality, whether it is a question of the rules of a game, or of
the reciprocal rights and duties of members of a community, it is, and
ought to be, to every reasonable human being not a grievance, but a
matter of felicitation, that an expert or a body of experts should
have evolved a set of rules under which order and harmony are
achieved. Only vanity and folly would counsel amateurs to try to draw
up rules or laws for themselves.

Again, the woman suffragist takes it as a matter of course that she
would herself be able to construct a system of workable laws. In point
of fact, the framing of a really useful law is a question of divining
something which will apply to an infinite number of different cases
and individuals. It is an intellectual feat on a par with the framing
of a great generalisation. And would woman--that being of such short
sight, whose mind is always so taken up with whatever instances lie
nearest to her--be capable of framing anything that could pass muster
as a great generalisation?

Lastly, the suffragist fails to see that the function of framing the
laws is not an essential function of citizenship.

The essential functions of citizenship are the shaping of public
policy, and the control of the administrative Acts of Government.

Such directive control is in a state of political freedom exercised
through two quite different agencies.

It is exercised--and it is of the very essence of political freedom
that this should be the normal method of control--in the first place,
through expressed public opinion. By this are continuously regulated
not only momentous matters of State, such as declarations of war and
the introduction of constitutional changes, but also smaller and more
individual matters, such as the commutation of a capital sentence, or
the forcible feeding of militant suffragists.

In the background, behind the moral compulsion of expressed public
opinion, there is, in the case of a Parliamentary State, also another
instrument of control. I have in view that periodical settlement of
the contested rulership of the State by the force of a majority of
electors which is denoted a general election.

The control exercised by the suffrages of the electors in a general
election is in certain important respects less effective than that
exercised by the everyday public expression of opinion. It falls short
in the respect that its verdicts are, except only in connexion with
the issue as to whether the Government is to be retained in office or
dismissed, ambiguous verdicts; further, in the respect that it comes
into application either before governmental proposals have taken
definite shape, or only after the expiration of a term of years, when
the events are already passing out of memory.

If we now consider the question of woman's franchise from the wider
point of view here opened up, it will be clear that, so far as
concerns the control which is exercised through public opinion on the
Government, the intelligent woman, and especially the intelligent
woman who has made herself an expert on any matter, is already in
possession of that which is a greater power than the franchise. She
has the power which attaches to all intelligent opinion promulgated in
a free State. Moreover, wherever the special interest of women are
involved, any woman may count on being listened to if she is voicing
the opinions of any considerable section of her sex.

In reality, therefore, woman is disfranchised only so far as relates
to the confirmation of a Government in office, or its dismissal by the
_ultima ratio [ultimate reason]_ of an electoral contest. And when we
reflect that woman does not come into consideration as a compelling
force, and that an electoral contest partakes of the nature of a civil
war, it becomes clear that to give her the parliamentary vote would be
to reduce all those trials of strength which take the form of
electoral contests to the level of a farce.

With this I have, I will not say completed the tale of the
suffragist's grievances--that would be impossible--but I have at any
rate dealt with those which she has most acrimoniously insisted upon.


III

ARGUMENTS WHICH TAKE THE FORM OF "COUNSELS OF PERFECTION" ADDRESSED TO
MAN

Argument that Woman Requires a Vote for her Protection--Argument that
Woman ought to be Invested with the Responsibilities of Voting in
Order that She May Attain Her Full Intellectual Stature.

There, however, remains still a further class of arguments.  I have in
view here arguments which have nothing to do with elementary natural
rights, nor yet with wounded _amour propre._ They concern ethics, and
sympathy, and charitable feelings.

The suffragist here gives to man "counsels of perfection."

It will be enough to consider here two of these:--the _first_, the
argument that woman, being the weaker vessel, needs, more than man,
the suffrage for her _protection_; the _second_, that woman, being
less than man in relation to public life, ought to be given the vote
for _instructional purposes_.

The first of these appeals will, for instance, take the following
form:--"Consider the poor sweated East End woman worker. She knows
best where the shoe pinches. You men can't know. Give her a vote; and
you shall see that she will very soon better her condition."

When I hear that argument I consider:--We will suppose that woman was
ill. Should we go to her and say: "You know best, know better than any
man, what is wrong with you. Here are all the medicines and remedies.
Make your own selection, for that will assuredly provide what will be
the most likely to help."

If this would be both futile and inhuman, much more would it be so to
seek out this woman who is sick in fortune and say to her, "Go and
vote for the parliamentary candidate who will be likely to influence
the trend of legislation in a direction which will help."

What would really help the sweated woman labourer would, of course, be
to have the best intellect brought to bear, not specially upon the
problem of indigent woman, but upon the whole social problem.

But the aspect of the question which is, from our present point of
view, the fundamentally important one is the following: Granting that
the extension of the suffrage to woman would enable her, as the
suffragist contends, to bring pressure upon her parliamentary
representative, man, while anxious to do his very best for woman,
might very reasonably refuse to go about it in this particular way.

If a man has a wife whom he desires to treat indulgently, he does not
necessarily open a joint account with her at his bankers.

If he wants to contribute to a charity he does not give to the
managers of that charity a power of attorney over his property.

And if he is a philanthropical director of a great business he does
not, when a pathetic case of poverty among his staff is brought to his
notice, imperil the fortunes of his undertaking by giving to his
workmen shares and a vote in the management.

Moreover, he would perhaps regard it as a little suspect if a group of
those who were claiming this as a right came and told him that "it was
very _selfish_ of him" not to grant their request.

Precious above rubies to the suffragist and every other woman who
wants to apply the screw to man is that word _selfish_. It furnishes
her with the _petitio principii_ that man is under an ethical
obligation to give anything she chooses to ask.

We come next--and this is the last of all the arguments we have to
consider--to the argument that the suffrage ought to be given to woman
for instructional purposes.

Now it would be futile to attempt to deny that we have ready to hand
in the politics of the British Empire--that Empire which is swept
along in "the too vast orb of her fate"--an ideal political
training-ground in which we might put woman to school. The woman voter
would there be able to make any experiment she liked.

But one wonders why it has not been proposed to carry woman's
instruction further, and for instructional purposes to make of a woman
let us say a judge, or an ambassador, or a Prime Minister.

There would--if only it were legitimate to sacrifice vital national
interests--be not a little to say in favour of such a course. One
might at any rate hope by these means once for all to bring home to
man the limitations of woman.


PART II

ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE CONCESSION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SUFFRAGE TO
WOMAN

I

WOMAN'S DISABILITY IN THE MATTER OF PHYSICAL FORCE

International Position of State would be Imperilled by Woman's
Suffrage--Internal Equilibrium of State would be Imperilled.

The woman suffrage movement has now gone too far to be disposed of by
the overthrow of its arguments, and by a mere indication of those
which could be advanced on the other side. The situation demands the
bringing forward of the case against woman's suffrage; and it must be
the full and quite unexpurgated case.

I shall endeavour to do this in the fewest possible words, and to be
more especially brief where I have to pass again over ground which I
have previously traversed in dealing with the arguments of the
suffragists.

I may begin with what is fundamental. It is an axiom that we should in
legislating guide ourselves directly by considerations of utility and
expediency. For abstract principles--I have in view here _rights,
justice, egalitarian equity, equality, liberty, chivalry, logicality,_
and such like--are not all of them guides to utility; and each of
these is, as we have seen, open to all manner of private
misinterpretation.

Applying the above axiom to the issue before us, it is clear that we
ought to confine ourselves here to the discussion of the question as
to whether the State would, or would not, suffer from the admission of
women to the electorate.

We can arrive at a judgment upon this by considering, on the one hand,
the class-characters of women so far as these may be relevant to the
question of the suffrage; and, on the other hand, the legislative
programmes put forward by the female legislative reformer and the
feminist.

In connexion with the class-characters of woman, it will be well,
before attempting to indicate them, to interpolate here the general
consideration that the practical statesman, who has to deal with
things as they are, is not required to decide whether the characters
of women which will here be considered are, as the physiologist (who
knows that the sexual products influence every tissue of the body)
cannot doubt, "secondary sexual characters"; or, as the suffragist
contends, "acquired characters." It will be plain that whether defects
are "secondary sexual characters" (and therefore as irremediable as
"racial characters"); or whether they are "acquired characters" (and
as such theoretically remediable) they are relevant to the question of
the concession of the suffrage just so long as they continue to be
exhibited.[1]

[1] This is a question on which Mill (vide _Subjection of Women_, last
third of Chapter I) has endeavoured to confuse the issues for his
reader, first, by representing that by no possibility can man know
anything of the "nature," _i.e._, of the "secondary sexual
characters" of woman; and, secondly, by distracting attention from the
fact that "acquired characters" may produce unfitness for the
suffrage.

The primordial argument against giving woman the vote is that that
vote would not represent physical force.

Now it is by physical force alone and by prestige--which represents
physical force in the background--that a nation protects itself
against foreign interference, upholds its rule over subject
populations, and enforces its own laws. And nothing could in the end
more certainly lead to war and revolt than the decline of the military
spirit and loss of prestige which would inevitably follow if man
admitted woman into political co-partnership.

While it is arguable that such a partnership with woman in government
as obtains in Australia and New Zealand is sufficiently unreal to be
endurable, there cannot be two opinions on the question that a virile
and imperial race will not brook any attempt at forcible control by
women.

Again, no military foreign nation or native race would ever believe in
the stamina and firmness of purpose of any nation that submitted even
to the semblance of such control.

The internal equilibrium of the State also would be endangered by the
admission to the register of millions of electors whose vote would not
be endorsed by the authority of physical force.

Regarded  from this point of view a Woman's Suffrage measure stands on
an absolutely different basis to any other extension of the suffrage.
An extension which takes in more men--whatever else it may do--makes
for stability in the respect that it makes the decrees of the
legislature more irresistible. An extension which takes in any women
undermines the physical sanction of the laws.

We can see indications of the evil that would follow such an event in
the profound dissatisfaction which is felt when--in violation of the
democratic principle that every man shall count for one, and no man
for more than one--the political wishes of the large constituencies
which return relatively few members to Parliament, are overborne by
those of constituencies which, with a smaller aggregate population,
return more members.

And we see what such evil finally culminates in when the
over-representation of one part of a country and the corresponding
under-representation of other portions has led a large section of the
people to pledge themselves to disregard the eventual ordinances of
Parliament.

If ever the question as to whether the will of Ulster or that of the
Nationalists is to prevail is brought to the arbitrament of physical
force, it will be due to the inequalities of parliamentary
representation as between England and Ireland, and as between the
Unionist and Nationalist population of Ulster.

The general lesson that all governmental action ought to be backed by
force, is further brought home to the conscience when we take note of
the fact that every one feels that public morality is affronted when
senile, infirm, and bedridden men are brought to the poll to turn the
scale in hotly contested elections.

For electoral decisions are felt to have moral prestige only when the
electoral figures quantitatively represent the physical forces which
are engaged on either side. And where vital interests are involved, no
class of men can be expected to accept any decision other than one
which rests upon the _ultima ratio_.

Now all the evils which are the outcome of disparities between the
parliamentary power and the organised physical force of contending
parties would "grow" a hundredfold if women were admitted to the
suffrage.

There would after that be no electoral or parliamentary decision which
would not be open to challenge on the ground that it was impossible to
tell whether the party which came out the winner had a majority which
could enforce its will, or only a majority obtained by the inclusion
of women. And no measure of redistribution could ever set that right.

There may find place here also the consideration that the voting of
women would be an unsettling element in the government of the State,
forasmuch as they would, by reason of a general lack of interest in
public affairs, only very; seldom come to the poll: would, in fact,
come to the poll in full strength only when some special appeal had
come home to their emotions.

Now an electorate which includes a very large proportion of quite
uninterested voters would be in the same case as a legislature which
included a very large proportion of members who made a practice of
staying away. It would be in the same case, because the absentees, who
would not have acquired the training which comes from consecutive
attention to public affairs, might at any moment step in and upset the
stability of State by voting for some quite unconsidered measure.

Coming back in conclusion to our main issue, I would re-emphasise an
aspect of the question upon which I have already elsewhere insisted.[1]
I have in view the fact that woman does, and should, stand to physical
violence in a fundamentally different relation to man. Nothing can
alter the fact that, the very moment woman resorts to violence, she
places herself within the jurisdiction of an ethical law, which is as
old as civilisation, and which was framed in its interests.

[1] _Vide_ Appendix, pp. 176-179.


II

WOMAN'S DISABILITY IN THE MATTER OF INTELLECT

Characteristics of the Feminine Mind--Suffragist Illusions with Regard
to the Equality of Man and Woman as Workers--Prospect for the
Intellectual Future of Woman--Has Woman Advanced?

The woman voter would be pernicious to the State not only because she
could not back her vote by physical force, but also by reason of her
intellectual defects.

Woman's mind attends in appraising a statement primarily to the mental
images which it evokes, and only secondarily--and sometimes not at
all--to what is predicated in the statement. It is over-influenced by
individual instances; arrives at conclusions on incomplete evidence;
has a very imperfect sense of proportion; accepts the congenial as
true, and rejects the uncongenial as false; takes the imaginary which
is desired for reality, and treats the undesired reality which is out
of sight as non-existent--building up for itself in this way, when
biased by predilections and aversions, a very unreal picture of the
external world.

The explanation of this is to be found in all the physiological
attachments of woman's mind:[1] in the fact that mental images are in
her over-intimately linked up with emotional reflex responses; that
yielding to such reflex responses gives gratification; that
intellectual analysis and suspense of judgment involve an inhibition
of reflex responses which is felt as neural distress; that precipitate
judgment brings relief from this physiological strain; and that woman
looks upon her mind not as an implement for the pursuit of truth, but
as an instrument for providing her with creature comforts in the form
of agreeable mental images.

[1] Certain of these have already been referred to in the letter printed
in the Appendix (_ vide_ p.167 _infra_).

In order to satisfy the physical yearning for such comforts, a
considerable section of intelligent and virtuous women insist on
picturing to themselves that the reign of physical force is over, or as
good as over; that distinctions based upon physical and intellectual force
may be reckoned as non-existent; that male supremacy as resting upon these
is a thing of the past; and that Justice means Egalitarian Equity--means
equating the weaklings with the strong and the incapable with the capable.

All this because these particular ideas are congenial to the woman of
refinement, and because it is to her, when she is a suffragist,
uncongenial that there should exist another principle of justice which
demands from the physically and intellectually capable that they shall
retain the reins of government in their own hands; and specially
uncongenial that in all man-governed States the ideas of justice of
the more forceful should have worked out so much to the advantage of
women, that a large majority of these are indifferent or actively
hostile to the Woman's Suffrage Movement.

In further illustration of what has been said above, it may be pointed
out that woman, even intelligent woman, nurses all sorts of
misconceptions about herself. She, for instance, is constantly
picturing to herself that she can as a worker lay claim to the same
all-round efficiency as a man--forgetting that woman is notoriously
unadapted to tasks in which severe physical hardships have to be
confronted; and that hardly any one would, if other alternative
offered, employ a woman in any work which imposed upon her a combined
physical and mental strain, or in any work where emergencies might
have to be faced.

In like manner the suffragist is fond of picturing to herself that
woman is for all ordinary purposes the intellectual equal, and that
the intelligent woman is the superior of the ordinary man.

These results are arrived at by fixing the attention upon the fact
that an ordinary man and an ordinary woman are, from the point of view
of memory and apprehension, very much on a level; and that a highly
intelligent woman has a quicker memory and a more rapid power of
apprehension than the ordinary man; and further, by leaving out of
regard that it is not so much a quick memory or a rapid power of
apprehension which is required for effective intellectual work, as
originality, or at any rate independence of thought, a faculty of
felicitious generalisations and diacritical judgment, long-sustained
intellectual effort, an unselective mirroring of the world in the
mind, and that relative immunity to fallacy which goes together with a
stable and comparatively unresponsive nervous system.

When we consider that the intellect of the quite ungifted man works
with this last-mentioned physiological advantage, we can see that the
male intellect must be, and--_pace [with the permission of]_ the woman
suffragist--it in point of fact is, within its range, a better
instrument for dealing with the practical affairs of life than that of
the intelligent woman.

How far off we are in the case of woman from an unselective mirroring
of the world in the mind is shown by the fact that large and important
factors of life may be represented in woman's mind by lacunae [gaps]
of which she is totally unconscious.

Thus, for instance, that not very unusual type of spinster who is in a
condition of retarded development (and you will find this kind of
woman even on County Council's), is completely unconscious of the
sexual element in herself and in human nature generally. Nay, though
one went from the dead, he could not bring it home to her that
unsatisfied sexuality is an intellectual disability.

Sufficient illustration will now have been given of woman's incapacity
to take a complete or objective view of any matter in which she has a
personal, or any kind of emotional interest; and this would now be the
place to discuss those other aspects of her mind which are relevant to
her claim to the suffrage. I refer to her logical endowment and her
political sagacity.

All that I might have been required to say here on these issues has,
however, already been said by me in dealing with the arguments of the
suffragist. I have there carefully written it in between the lines.

One thing only remains over.--We must, before we pass on, consider
whether woman has really, as she tells us, given earnest for the
future weeding out of these her secondary sexual characters, by making
quite phenomenal advances within the lifetime of the present
generation; and, above all, whether there is any basis for woman's
confident assurance that, when for a few generations she shall have
enjoyed educational advantages, she will at any rate pull up level
with man.

The vision of the future may first engage our attention; for only this
roseate prospect makes of any man a feminist.

Now the basis that all this hope rests upon is the belief that it is a
law of heredity that acquired characteristics are handed down; and,
let it be observed, that whereas this theory found, not many decades
ago, under the influence of Darwin, thousands of adherents among
scientific men, it finds to-day only here and there an adherent.

But let that pass, for we have to consider here, not only whether
acquired characteristics are handed down, but further whether, "if we
held that doctrine true," it would furnish scientific basis for the
belief that educational advantages carried on from generation to
generation would level up woman's intellect to man's; and whether, as
the suffragist also believes, the narrow education of past generations
of women can be held responsible for their present intellectual
shortcomings.

A moment's consideration will show--for we may here fix our eyes only
on the future--that woman could not hope to advance relatively to man
except upon the condition that the acquired characteristics of woman,
instead of being handed down equally to her male and female
descendants, were accumulated upon her daughters.

Now if that be a law of heredity, it is a law which is as yet unheard
of outside the sphere of the woman suffrage societies. Moreover, one
is accustomed to hear women, when they are not arguing on the
suffrage, allege that clever mothers make clever sons.

It must, as it will have come home to us, be clear to every thoughtful
mind that woman's belief that she will, through education and the
cumulation of its effects upon her through generations, become a more
glorious being, rests, not upon any rational basis, but only on the
physiological fact that what is congenial to woman impresses itself
upon her as true. All that sober science in the form of history and
physiology would seem to entitle us to hope from the future of woman
is that she will develop _pari passu [step by step]_ with man; and
that education will teach her not to retard him overmuch by her
lagging in the rear.

In view of this larger issue, the question as to whether woman has, in
any real sense of the word, been making progress in the course of the
present generation, loses much of interest.

If to move about more freely, to read more freely, to speak out her
mind more freely, and to have emancipated herself from traditionary
beliefs--and, I would add, traditionary ethics--is to have advanced,
woman has indubitably advanced.

But the educated native too has advanced in all these respects; and he
also tells us that he is pulling up level with the white man.

Let us at any rate, when the suffragist is congratulating herself on
her own progress, meditate also upon that dictum of Nietzsche,
"Progress is writ large on all woman's banners and bannerets; but one
can actually see her going back."


III

WOMAN'S DISABILITY IN THE MATTER OF PUBLIC MORALITY

Standards by which Morality can be Appraised--Conflict between
Different Moralities--The Correct Standard of Morality--Moral
Psychology of Men and Woman--Difference between Man and Woman in
Matters of Public Morality.

Yet a third point has to come into consideration in connexion with the
woman voter. This is, that she would be pernicious to the State also
by virtue of her defective moral equipment.

Let me make clear what is the nature of the defect of morality which
is here imputed to woman.

Conduct may be appraised by very different standards.

We may appraise it by reference to a transcendental religious ideal
which demands that the physical shall be subordinated to the
spiritual, and that the fetters of self should be flung aside.

Or again, we may bring into application purely mundane utilitarian
standards, and may account conduct as immoral or moral according as it
seeks only the happiness of the agent, or the happiness of the narrow
circle of humanity which includes along with him also his relatives
and intimate friends, or again, the welfare of the wider circle which
includes all those with whom he may have come into contact, or whom he
may affect through his work; or again, the welfare of the whole
body-politic of which we are members; or lastly, that of the general
body of mankind.

Now it might be contended that all these different moralities are in
their essence one and the same; and that one cannot comply with the
requirements of any one of these systems of morality without
fulfilling in a measure the requirements of all the other moralities.

It might, for example, be urged that if a man strive after the
achievement of a transcendental ideal in which self shall be annulled,
he will _pro tanto [to such extent]_ be bringing welfare to his
domestic circle; or again, that it would be impossible to promote
domestic welfare without, through this, promoting the welfare of the
nation, and through that the general welfare of the world.

In like manner it might be argued that all work done for abstract
principles of morality like liberty and justice, for the advancement
of knowledge, and for whatever else goes to the building up of a
higher civilisation, will, by promoting the welfare of the general
body of mankind, redound to the advantage of each several nation, and
ultimately to the advantage of each domestic circle.

But all this would be true only in a very superficial and strictly
qualified sense. In reality, just as there is eternal conflict between
egoism and altruism, so there is conflict between the different
moralities.

To take examples, the attempt to actualise the transcendental
religious ideal may, when pursued with ardour, very easily conflict
with the morality which makes domestic felicity its end. And again--as
we see in the anti-militarist movement in France, in the history of
the early Christian Church, in the case of the Quakers and in the
teachings of Tolstoy--it may quite well set itself in conflict with
national ideals, and dictate a line of conduct which is, from the
point of view of the State, immoral.

We need no further witness of the divorce between idealistic and
national morality than that which is supplied in the memorable
utterance of Bishop Magee, "No state which was conducted on truly
Christian principles could hold together for a week."

And domestic morality will constantly come into conflict with public
morality.

To do everything in one's power to advance one's relatives and friends
irrespectively of all considerations of merit would, no doubt, be
quite sound domestic morality; it could, however, not always be
reconciled with public morality. In the same way, to take one's
country's part in all eventualities would be patriotic, but it might
quite well conflict with the higher interests of humanity.

Now, the point towards which we have been winning our way is that each
man's moral station and degree will be determined by the election
which he makes where egoism and altruism, and where a narrower and a
wider code of morality, conflict.

That the moral law forbids yielding to the promptings of egoism or to
those of the narrower moralities when this involves a violation of the
precepts of the wider morality is axiomatic. Criminal and anti-social
actions are not excused by the fact that motives which impelled their
commission were not purely egoistic.

But the ethical law demands more than abstention from definitely
anti-social actions. It demands from every individual that he shall
recognise the precepts of public morality as of superior obligation to
those of egoism and domestic morality.

By the fact that her public men recognised this ethical law Rome won
for herself in the ancient world spectacular grandeur. By an
unexampled national obedience to it glory has in our time accrued to
Japan. And, in truth, there is not anywhere any honour or renown but
such as comes from casting away the bonds of self and of the narrower
moralities to carry out the behests of the wider morality.

Even in the strongholds of transcendental religion where it was
axiomatic that morality began and was summed up in personal morality,
it is gradually coming to be recognised that, where we have two
competing moralities, it is always the wider morality which has the
prior claim upon our allegiance.

Kingsley's protest against the morality of "saving one's dirty soul"
marked a step in advance. And we find full recognition of the superior
claim of the larger morality in that other virile dictum of Bishop
Magee, "I would rather have England free, than England sober." That
is, "I would maintain the conditions which make for the highest
civilisation even at the price of a certain number of lapses in
personal and domestic morality."

What is here new, let it be noted, is only the acknowledgment by those
whose official allegiance is to a transcendental ideal of personal
morality that they are called upon to obey a higher allegiance. For
there has always existed, in the doctrine that guilty man could not be
pardoned and taken back into favour until the claims of eternal
justice had been satisfied, theoretical recognition of the principle
that one must conform to the precepts of abstract morality before one
may ethically indulge oneself in the lower moralities of philanthropy
and personal benevolence.

The view point from which I would propose to survey the morality of
woman has now been reached. It has, however, still to be pointed out
that we may appropriately, in comparing the morals of man and woman,
confine our survey to a comparatively narrow field. That is to say, we
may here rule out all that relates to purely personal and domestic
morality--for this is not relevant to the suffrage. And we may also
rule out all that relates to offences against the police laws--such as
public drunkenness and offences against the criminal law--for these
would come into consideration only in connexion with an absolutely
inappreciable fraction of voters.

It will be well to begin by signalising certain points in the moral
psychology of man.

When morality takes up its abode in a man who belongs to the
intellectual caste it will show itself in his becoming mindful of his
public obligations. He will consider the quality of his work as
affecting the interest of those who have to place dependence upon it;
behaviour to those who are casually brought into relations with him;
the discharge of his indebtedness to the community; and the proper
conduct of public affairs.

In particular, it will be to him a matter of concern that the law
shall be established upon classifications which are just (in the sense
of being conformable to public advantage); and that the laws shall
everywhere be justly, that is to say rigorously and impartially,
administered.

If we now turn to the man in the street we shall not find him
especially sensible to the appeals of morality. But when the special
call comes it will generally be possible to trust him: as an elector,
to vote uninfluenced by considerations of private advantage; and, when
called to serve on a jury, to apply legal classifications without
distinction of person.

Furthermore, in all times of crisis he may be counted upon to apply
the principles of communal morality which have been handed down in the
race.

The _Titanic_ disaster, for example, showed in a conspicuous manner
that the ordinary man will, "letting his own life go," obey the
communal law which lays it upon him, when involved in a catastrophe,
to save first the women and children.

Lastly, we come to the man who is intolerant of all the ordinary
restraints of personal and domestic morality. Even in him the seeds of
communal morality will often be found deeply implanted.

Time and again a regiment of scallawags, who have let all other
morality go hang, have, when the proper chord has been made to vibrate
in them, heard the call of communal morality, and done deeds which
make the ears of whosoever heareth of them to tingle.

We come into an entirely different land when we come to the morality
of woman. It is personal and domestic, not public, morality which is
instinctive in her.

In other words, when egoism gives ground to altruism, that altruism is
exercised towards those who are linked up to her by a bond of sexual
affection, or a community in blood, or failing this, by a relation of
personal friendship, or by some other personal relation.

And even when altruism has had her perfect work, woman feels no
interest in, and no responsibility towards, any abstract moral ideal.

And though the suffragist may protest, instancing in disproof of this
her own burning enthusiasm for justice, we, for our part, may
legitimately ask whether evidence of a moral enthusiasm for justice
would be furnished by a desire to render to others their due, or by
vehement insistence upon one's own rights, and systematic attempts to
extort, under the cover of the word "justice," advantages for oneself.

But it will be well to dwell a little longer on, and to bring out more
clearly, the point that woman's moral ideals are personal and
domestic, as distinguished from impersonal and public.

Let us note in this connexion that it would be difficult to conceive
of a woman who had become deaf to the appeal of personal and domestic
morality making it a matter of _amour propre_ to respond to a call of
public morality; and difficult to conceive of a woman recovering lost
self-respect by fulfilling such an obligation.

But one knows that woman will rise and respond to the call of any
strong human or transcendental personal affection.

Again, it is only a very exceptional woman who would, when put to her
election between the claims of a narrow and domestic and a wider or
public morality, subordinate the former to the latter.

In ordinary life, at any rate, one finds her following in such a case
the suggestions of domestic--I had almost called it animal--morality.

It would be difficult to find any one who would trust a woman to be
just to the rights of others in the case where the material interests
of her children, or of a devoted husband, were involved. And even to
consider the question of being in such a case intellectually just to
any one who came into competition with personal belongings like
husband and child would, of course, lie quite beyond the moral horizon
of ordinary woman.

It is not only the fact that the ideals of abstract justice and truth
would inevitably be brushed aside by woman in the interests of those
she loves which comes into consideration here; it is also the fact
that woman is almost without a moral sense in the matter of executing
a public trust such as voting or attaching herself to a political
association with a view to influencing votes.

There is between man and woman here a characteristic difference.

While it is, of course, not a secret to anybody that the baser sort of
man can at any time be diverted from the path of public morality by a
monetary bribe or other personal advantage, he will not, at any rate,
set at naught all public morality by doing so for a peppercorn. He
will, for instance, not join, for the sake of a daughter, a political
movement in which he has no belief; nor vote for this or that
candidate just to please a son; or censure a member of Parliament who
has in voting on female suffrage failed to consider the predilections
of his wife.

But woman, whether she be politically enfranchised as in Australasia,
or unenfranchised as at home; whether she be immoral in the sense of
being purely egoistic, or moral in the sense of being altruistic, very
rarely makes any secret or any shame of doing these things.

In this matter one would not be very far from the truth if one alleged
that there are no good women, but only women who have lived under the
influence of good men.

Even more serious than this postponement of public to private morality
is the fact that even reputedly ethical women will, in the interests
of what they take to be idealistic causes, violate laws which are
universally accepted as being of moral obligation.

I here pass over the recent epidemic of political crime among women to
advert to the want of conscience which permits, in connexion with
professedly idealistic causes, not only misrepresentations, but the
making of deliberately false statements on matters of public concern.

It is, for example, an illustration of the profoundly different moral
atmospheres in which men and women live that when a public woman
recently made, for what was to her an idealistic purpose, a
deliberately false statement of fact in _The Times_, she quite naively
confessed to it, seeing nothing whatever amiss in her action.

And it did not appear that any other woman suffragist could discern
any kind of immorality in it. The worst thing they could find to say
was that it perhaps was a little _gauche_ to confess to making a
deliberately false statement on a public question when it was for the
moment particularly desirable that woman should show up to best
advantage before the eyes of man.

We may now for a moment put aside the question of woman's public
morality and consider a question which is inextricably mixed up with
the question of the admission of woman to the suffrage. This is the
mental attitude and the programme of the female legislative reformer.


IV

MENTAL OUTLOOK AND PROGRAMME OF THE FEMALE LEGISLATIVE REFORMER

The suffragist woman, when she is the kind of woman who piques herself
upon her ethical impulses, will, even when she is intellectually very
poorly equipped, and there is no imprint of altruism upon her life,
assure you that nothing except the moral influence of woman, exerted
through the legislation, which her practical mind would be capable of
initiating, will ever avail to abate existing social evils, and to
effect the moral redemption of the world.

It will not be amiss first to try to introduce a little clearness and
order into our ideas upon those formidably difficult problems which
the female legislative reformer desires to attack, and then to
consider how a rational reforming mind would go to work in the matter
of proposing legislation for these.

_First_ would come those evils which result from individuals seeking
advantage to themselves by the direct infliction of injury upon
others. Violations of the criminal law and the various forms of
sweating and fleecing one's fellow-men come under this category.

_Then_ would come the evils which arise out of purveying physiological
and psychological refreshments and excitements, which are, according
as they are indulged in temperately or intemperately, grateful and
innocuous, or sources of disaster and ruin. The evils which are
associated with the drink traffic and the betting industry are typical
examples.

_Finally,_ there would come into consideration the evils of death or
physical suffering deliberately inflicted by man upon man with a view
to preventing worse evils. The evil of war would come under this
category. In this same category might also come the much lesser evil
of punitive measures inflicted upon criminals. And with this might be
coupled the evil of killing and inflicting physical suffering upon
animals for the advantage of man.

We may now consider how the rational legislative reformer would in
each case go to work.

He would not start with the assumption that it _must_ be possible by
some alteration of the law to abolish or conspicuously reduce any of
the afore-mentioned evils; nor yet with the assumption that, if a
particular alteration of the law would avail to bring about this
result, that alteration ought necessarily to be made. He would
recognise that many things which are theoretically desirable are
unattainable; and that many legislative measures which could perfectly
well be enforced would be barred by the fact that they would entail
deplorable unintended consequences.

The rational legislator whom we have here in view would accordingly
always take expert advice as to whether the desired object could be
achieved by legal compulsion; and as to whether a projected law which
satisfied the condition of being workable would give a balance of
advantages over disadvantages.

In connexion with a proposal for the prevention of sweating he would,
for instance, take expert advice as to whether its provisions could be
enforced; and whether, if enforceable, they would impose added
hardships on any class of employees or penalties on any innocent class
of employers.

In like manner in connexion with a proposed modification in criminal
procedure, the rational reformer would defer to the expert on the
question as to whether such modification would secure greater
certainty of punishment for the guilty without increasing the risk of
convicting the innocent.

In connexion with the second category of evils--the category under
which would come those of drinking and betting--the rational
legislative reformer would recognise the complete impracticability of
abolishing by legislative prohibition physiological indulgences and
the evils which sometimes attend upon them.

He would consider instead whether these attendant evils could be
reduced by making the regulating laws more stringent; and whether more
stringent restrictions--in addition to the fact that they would filch
from the all too small stock of human happiness--would not, by paving
the way for further invasions of personal liberty, cripple the free
development of the community.

On the former question, which only experts could properly answer, the
reasonable reformer would defer to their advice. The answer to the
last question he would think out for himself.

In connexion with the evils which are deliberately inflicted by man
with a view to reaping either personal profit, or profit for the
nation, or profit for humanity, the reasonable reformer would begin by
making clear to himself that the world we live in is not such a world
as idealism might conjure up, but a world of violence, in which life
must be taken and physical suffering be inflicted.

And he would recognise that the vital material interests of the nation
can be protected only by armed force; that civilisation can be
safeguarded only by punishing violations of the criminal law; and that
the taking of animal life and the infliction of a certain amount of
physical suffering upon animals is essential to human well-being,
comfort, and recreation; and essential also to the achievement of the
knowledge which is required to combat disease.

And the reasonable reformer will, in conformity with this, direct his
efforts, not to the total abolition of war, but to the prevention of
such wars as are not waged for really vital material interests, and to
the abatement of the ferocities of warfare.

In the case of punishment for criminals he would similarly devote his
efforts not to the abrogation of punishments, but to the
relinquishment of any that are not reformatory, or really deterrent.

In like manner the reasonable reformer would not seek to prohibit the
slaughtering of animals for food, or the killing off of animal pests,
or the trapping, shooting, or hunting of animals for sport or profit,
nor yet would he seek to prevent their utilisation of animals for the
acquirement of knowledge.

He would direct his efforts to reducing the pain which is inflicted,
and to preserving everywhere measure and scale--not sentimentally
forbidding in connexion with one form of utilisation of animals what
is freely allowed in connexion with another--but differentiating, if
differentiating at all in favour of permitting the infliction of
proportionately greater suffering in the case where national and
humanitarian interests, than in the case where mere recreation and
luxury and personal profit, are at stake.

Having recognised what reason would prescribe to the legislative
reformer, we have next to inquire how far the man voter conforms to
these prescriptions of reason, and how far the woman reformer would do
so if she became a voter.

Let it be noted that the man in the street makes no question about
falling in with the fact that he is born into a world of violence, and
he acquiesces in the principle that the State, and, failing the State,
the individual, may employ force and take life in defence of vital
material interests. And he frankly falls in with it being a matter of
daily routine to kill and inflict suffering upon animals for human
profit or advantage.

Even if these principles are not formulated by the man in the street
in quite such plain terms, he not only carries them out in practice,
but he conducts all his thinking upon these presuppositions.

He, for instance, would fall in with the proposition that morality
does not require from man that he should give up taking life or
inflicting physical suffering. And he would not cavil with the
statement that man should put reasonable limits to the amount of
suffering he inflicts, and confine this within as narrow a range as
possible--always requiring for the death or suffering inflicted some
tangible advantage.

Moreover, if the question should be raised as to whether such
advantage will result, the ordinary man will as a rule, where the
matter lies beyond his personal ken, take expert opinion before
intervening.

He will, for instance, be prepared to be so guided in connexion with
such questions as whether disease could, if more knowledge were
available, be to a large extent prevented and cured; as to how far
animal experiments would contribute to the acquirement of that
knowledge; and as to how far the physical suffering which might be
involved in these experiments can be minimised or abolished. But not
every man is prepared to fall in with this programme of inflicting
physical suffering for the relief of physical suffering. There is also
a type of spiritually-minded man who in this world of violence sets
his face uncompromisingly against the taking of any life and the
infliction of any physical suffering--refusing to make himself a
partaker of evil.

An idealist of this type will, like Tolstoy, be an anti-militarist.
He will advocate a general gaol delivery for criminals. He will be a
vegetarian. He will not allow an animal's life to be taken in his
house, though the mice scamper over his floors. And he will,
consistently with his conviction that it is immoral to resort to
force, refuse to take any part in legislation or government.

This attitude, which is that commended by the Hindoo and the Buddhist
religions, is, of course, a quite unpractical attitude towards life.
It is, in fact, a self-destructive attitude, unless a man's
fellow-citizens are prepared by forcible means to secure to him the
enjoyment of the work of his hands or of his inherited property, or
unless those who refuse to desist from the exercise of force are
prepared to untake the support of idealists.

We have not only these two classes of men--the ordinary man who has no
compunction in resorting to force when the requirements of life demand
it, and the idealist who refuses to have any lot or part in violence;
there is also a hybrid. This male hybrid will descant on the general
iniquity of violence, and then not only connive at those forms of
violence which minister to his personal comforts, but also make a
virtue of trying to abate by legal violence some particular form of
physical suffering which happens to offend in a quite special manner
his individual sensibility.

There is absolutely nothing to be said about this kind of reforming
crank, except only that anything which may be said in relation to the
female legislative reformer may be appositely said of him; and perhaps
also this, that the ordinary man holds him both in intellectual and in
moral contempt, and is resolved not to allow him to do any really
serious injury to the community.

To become formidable this quasi-male person must, as he recognises,
ally himself with the female legislative reformer.

Passing on to deal with her, it imports us first to realise that while
the male voter has--except where important constitutional issues were
in question--been accustomed to leave actual legislation to the
expert, the female reformer gives notice beforehand that she will, as
soon as ever she gets the suffrage, insist on pressing forward by her
vote her reforming schemes.

What would result from the ordinary voter legislating on matters which
require expert knowledge will be plain to every one who will consider
the evolution of law.

There stand over against each other here, as an example and a warning,
the Roman Law, which was the creation of legal experts: the praetor
and the jurisconsult; and the legal system of the Greeks, which was
the creation of a popular assembly--and it was a popular assembly
which was quite ideally intelligent.

Upon the Roman Law has been built the law of the greater part of the
civilised world. The Greek is a by-word for inconsequence.

How can one, then, without cold shudders think of that legal system
which the female amateur legal reformer would bring to the birth?

Let us consider her qualifications.  Let us first take cognisance of
the fact that the reforming woman will neither stand to the principle
that man may, where this gives a balance of advantage, inflict on his
fellow-man, and _a fortiori_ upon animals, death and physical
suffering; nor yet will she stand to the principle that it is
ethically unlawful to do deeds of violence.

She spends her life halting between these two opinions, eternally
shilly-shallying.

She will, for instance, begin by announcing that it can never be
lawful to do evil that good may come; and that killing and inflicting
suffering is an evil. (In reality the precept of not doing evil that
good may come has relation only to breaking for idealistic purposes
moral laws of higher obligation.) She will then go back upon that and
concede that war may sometimes be lawful, and that the punishment of
criminals is not an evil. But if her emotions are touched by the
forcible feeding of a criminal militant suffragist, she will again go
back upon that and declare that the application of force is an
intolerable evil.

Or, again, she will concede that the slaughtering of animals for food
is not an evil, but that what is really unforgivable is the infliction
of physical suffering on animals. And all the time for her, as well as
for man, calves and lambs are being emasculated to make her meat
succulent; wild animals are painfully done to death to provide her
table with delicacies; birds with young in the nest are shot so that
she may parade in their plumage; or fur-bearing animals are for her
comfort and adornment massacred and tortured in traps.

When a man crank who is co-responsible for these things begins to talk
idealistic reforms, the ordinary decent man refuses to have anything
more to say to him.

But when a woman crank holds this language, the man merely shrugs his
shoulders. "It is," he tells himself, "after all, the woman whom God
gave him."

It must be confessed that the problem as to how man with a dual nature
may best accommodate himself to a world of violence presents a very
difficult problem.

It would obviously be no solution to follow out everywhere a programme
of violence. Not even the predatory animals do that. Tigers do not
savage their cubs; hawks do not pluck hawks' eyes; and dogs do not
fight bitches.

Nor would, as has been shown, the solution of the problem be arrived
at by everywhere surrendering--if we had been given the grace to do
this--to the compunctious visitings of nature.

What is required is to find the proper compromise.  As to what that
would be there is, as between the ordinary man and woman on the one
side, and the male crank and the battalions of sentimental women on
the other, a conflict which is, to all intents and purposes, a sex
war.

The compromise which ordinary human nature had fixed upon--and it is
one which, ministering as it does to the survival of the race, has
been adopted through the whole range of nature--is that of making
within the world in which violence rules a series of enclaves in which
the application of violence is progressively restricted and limited.

Outside the outermost of the series of ring fences thus constituted
would be the realm of uncompromising violence such as exists when
human life is endangered by wild animals, or murderous criminals, or
savages. Just within this outermost fence would be civilised war--for
in civilised war non-combatants and prisoners and wounded are excluded
from the application of violence. In like manner we bring humanity in
general within a more sheltered enclosure than animals--pet animals
within a more sheltered enclosure than other animals. Again, we bring
those who belong to the white race within a narrower protecting circle
than mankind in general, and those of our own nation within a still
narrower one.

Following out the same principle, we include women and children within
a narrower shelter fence than our adult fellow-male; and we use the
weapon of force more reluctantly when we are dealing with our
relatives and friends than when we are dealing with those who are not
personally known to us; and finally, we lay it aside more completely
when we are dealing with the women of our households than when we are
dealing with the males.

The cause of civilisation and of the amenities, and the welfare of the
nation, of the family, and of woman, are all intimately bound up with
a faithful adherence to this compromise.

But this policy imposes upon those whom it shelters from violence
corresponding obligations.

In war non-combatants--not to speak of the wounded on the
battlefield--must desist from hostile action on the pain of being shot
down like wild beasts. And though an individual non-combatant might
think it a patriotic action for him to take part in war, the
thoughtful man would recognise that such action was a violation of a
well-understood covenant made in the interest of civilisation, and
that to break through this covenant was to abrogate a humanitarian
arrangement by which the general body of non-combatants immensely
benefits.

Exactly the same principle finds, as already pointed out, application
when a woman employs direct violence, or aspires to exercise by voting
indirect violence.

One always wonders if the suffragist appreciates all that woman stands
to lose and all that she imperils by resort to physical force. One
ought not to have to tell her that, if she had to fight for her
position, her status would be that which is assigned to her among the
Kaffirs--not that which civilised man concedes to her.

>From considering the compromise by which man adapts his dual nature to
violence in the world, we turn to that which the female legislative
reformer would seek to impose by the aid of her vote.

Her proposal, as the reader will have discerned, would be that all
those evils which make appeal to the feminine emotions should be
legally prohibited, and that all those which fail to make this appeal
shall be tolerated.

In the former class would be included those which come directly under
woman's ken, or have been brought vividly before the eyes of her
imagination by emotional description. And the specially intolerable
evils will be those which, owing to the fact that they fall upon woman
or her immediate belongings, induce in the female legislative reformer
pangs of sympathetic discomfort.

In the class of evils which the suffragist is content to tolerate, or
say nothing about, would be those which are incapable of evoking in
her such sympathetic pangs, and she concerns herself very little with
those evils which do not furnish her with a text for recriminations
against man.

Conspicuous in this programme is the absence of any sense of
proportion. One would have imagined that it would have been plain to
everybody that the evils which individual women suffer at the hands of
man are very far from being the most serious ills of humanity. One
would have imagined that the suffering inflicted by disease and by bad
social conditions--suffering which falls upon man and woman
alike--deserved a first place in the thoughts of every reformer. And
one might have expected it to be common knowledge that the wrongs
individual men inflict upon women have a full counterpart in the
wrongs which individual women inflict upon men. It may quite well be
that there are mists which here "blot and fill the perspective" of the
female legislative reformer. But to look only upon one's own things,
and not also upon the things of others, is not for that morally
innocent.

There is further to be noted in connexion with the female legislative
reformer that she has never been able to see why she should be
required to put her aspirations into practical shape, or to consider
ways and means, or to submit the practicability of her schemes to
expert opinion. One also recognises that from a purely human point of
view such tactics are judicious. For if the schemes of the female
legislative reformer were once to be reviewed from the point of view
of their practicability, her utility as a legislator would come into
question, and the suffragist could no longer give out that there has
been committed to her from on High a mission to draw water for
man-kind out of the wells of salvation.

Lastly, we have to reflect in connection with the female legislative
reformer that to go about proposing to reform the laws means to
abandon that special field of usefulness which lies open to woman in
alleviating misery and redressing those hard cases which will, under
all laws and regulations of human manufacture and under all social
dispositions, inevitably occur. Now when a woman leaves a social task
which is commensurate with her abilities, and which asks from her
personal effort and self-sacrifice, for a task which is quite beyond
her abilities, but which, she thinks, will bring her personal kudos,
shall we impute it to her for righteousness?


V

ULTERIOR ENDS WHICH THE WOMAN'S SUFFRAGE MOVEMENT HAS IN VIEW

We have now sufficiently considered the suffragist's humanitarian
schemes, and we may lead up to the consideration of her further
projects by contrasting woman's suffrage as it presents itself under
colonial conditions--_i.e._ woman's suffrage without the female
legislative reformer and the feminist--with the woman suffrage which
is being agitated for in England--_i.e._ woman suffrage with the
female legislative reformer and the feminist.

In the colonies and undeveloped countries generally where women are in
a minority, and where owing to the fact that practically all have an
opportunity of marrying, there are not for woman any difficult
economic and physiological conditions, there is no woman's question;
and by consequence no female legislative reformer or feminist. The
woman voter follows, as the opportunist politicians who enfranchised
her intended, the lead of her men-folk--serving only a pawn in the
game of politics. Under such conditions woman's suffrage kleaves
things as they are, except only that it undermines the logical
foundations of the law, and still further debases the standard of
public efficiency and public morality.

In countries, such as England, where an excess female population [1]
has made economic difficulties for woman, and where the severe sexual
restrictions, which here obtains, have bred in her sex-hostility, the
suffrage movement has as its avowed ulterior object the abrogation of
all distinctions which depend upon sex; and the achievement of the
economic independence of woman.

[1] In England and Wales there are, in a population of 8,000,000 women
between the ages of twenty and fifty, 3,000,000 unmarried women.

To secure this economic independence every post, occupation, and
Government service is to be thrown open to woman; she is to receive
everywhere the same wages as man; male and female are to work side by
side; and they are indiscriminately to be put in command the one over
the other.  Furthermore, legal rights are to be secured to the wife over
her husband's property and earnings. The programme is, in fact, to give
to woman an economic independence out of the earnings and taxes of man.

Nor does feminist ambition stop short here. It demands that women
shall be included in every advisory committee, every governing board,
every jury, every judicial bench, every electorate, every parliament,
and every ministerial cabinet; further, that every masculine
foundation, university, school of learning, academy, trade union,
professional corporation and scientific society shall be converted
into an epicene institution--until we shall have everywhere one vast
cock-and-hen show.

The proposal to bring man and woman together everywhere into extremely
intimate relationships raises very grave questions. It brings up,
first, the question of sexual complications; secondly, the question as
to whether the tradition of modesty and reticence between the sexes is
to be definitely sacrificed; and, most important of all, the question
as to whether epicene conditions would place obstacles in the way of
intellectual work.

Of these issues the feminist puts the first two quite out of account.
I have already elsewhere said my say upon these matters.[1] With regard
to the third, the feminist either fails to realise that purely
intellectual intercourse--as distinguished from an intercommunion of
mental images--with woman is to a large section of men repugnant; or
else, perceiving this, she makes up her mind that, this
notwithstanding, she will get her way by denouncing the man who does
not welcome her as _selfish_; and by insisting that under feminism
(the quotation is from Mill, the italics which question his sincerity
are mine) "the mass of mental faculties available for the higher service
of mankind would be _doubled_."

[1] _Vide_ Appendix, pp. 169-173.

The matter cannot so lightly be disposed of. It will be necessary for
us to find out whether really intimate association with woman on the
purely intellectual plane is realisable. And if it is, in fact,
unrealisable, it will be necessary to consider whether it is the
exclusion of women from masculine corporations; or the perpetual
attempt of women to force their way into these, which would deserve to
be characterised as _selfish_.

In connexion with the former of these issues, we have to consider here
not whether that form of intellectual co-operation in which the man
plays the game, and the woman moves the pawns under his orders, is
possible. That form of co-operation is of course possible, and it has,
doubtless, certain utilities.

Nor yet have we to consider whether quite intimate and purely
intellectual association on an equal footing between a particular man
and a selected woman may or may not be possible. It will suffice to
note that the feminist alleges that this also is possible; but
everybody knows that the woman very often marries the man.

What we have to ask is whether--even if we leave out of regard the
whole system of attractions or, as the case may be, repulsions which
come into operation when the sexes are thrown together--purely
intellectual intercourse between man and the typical unselected woman
is not barred by the intellectual immoralities and limitations which
appear to be secondary sexual characters of woman.

With regard to this issue, there would seem to be very little real
difference of opinion among men. But there are great differences in
the matter of candour. There are men who speak out, and who enunciate
like Nietzsche that "man and woman are alien--never yet has any one
conceived how alien."

There are men who, from motives of delicacy or policy, do not speak
out--averse to saying anything that might be unflattering to woman.

And there are men who are by their profession of the feminist faith
debarred from speaking out, but who upon occasion give themselves
away.

Of such is the man who in the House of Commons champions the cause of
woman's suffrage, impassionately appealing to Justice; and then
betrays himself by announcing that he would shake off from his feet
the dust of its purlieus if ever women were admitted as
members--_i.e._ if ever women were forced upon _him_ as close
intellectual associates.

Wherever we look we find aversion to compulsory intellectual
co-operation with woman. We see it in the sullen attitude which the
ordinary male student takes up towards the presence of women students
in his classes. We see it in the fact that the older English
universities, which have conceded everything else to women, have made
a strong stand against making them actual members of the university;
for this would impose them on men as intellectual associates. Again we
see the aversion in the opposition to the admission of women to the
bar. But we need not look so far afield. Practically every man feels
that there is in woman--patent, or hidden away--an element of unreason
which, when you come upon it, summarily puts an end to purely
intellectual intercourse. One may reflect, for example, upon the way
the woman's suffrage controversy has been conducted.

Proceeding now on the assumption that these things are so, and that
man feels that he and woman belong to different intellectual castes,
we come now to the question as to whether it is man who is selfish
when he excludes women from his institutions, or woman when she
unceasingly importunes for admittance. And we may define as _selfish_
all such conduct as pursues the advantage of the agent at the cost of
the happiness and welfare of the general body of mankind.

We shall be in a better position to pronounce judgment on this
question of ethics when we have considered the following series of
analogies:

When a group of earnest and devout believers meet together for special
intercession and worship, we do not tax them with selfishness if they
exclude unbelievers.

Nor do we call people who are really devoted to music selfish if,
coming together for this, they make a special point of excluding the
unmusical.

Nor again would the imputation of selfishness lie against members of a
club for black-balling a candidate who would, they feel, be
uncongenial.

Nor should we regard it as an act of selfishness if the members of a
family circle, or of the same nation, or of any social circle, desired
to come together quite by themselves.

Nor yet would the term selfish apply to an East End music hall
audience when they eject any one who belongs to a different social
class to themselves and wears good clothes.

And the like would hold true of servants resenting their employers
intruding upon them in their hours of leisure or entertainments.

If we do not characterise such exclusions as selfish, but rather
respect and sympathise with them, it is because we recognise that the
whole object and _raison d' etre_ of association would in each case be
nullified by the weak-minded admission of the incompatible intruder.

We recognise that if any charge of selfishness would lie, it would lie
against that intruder.

Now if this holds in the case where the interests of religious worship
or music, or family, national, or social life, or recreation and
relaxation after labour are in question, it will hold true even more
emphatically where the interests of intellectual work are involved.

But the feminist will want to argue.  She will--taking it as always
for granted that woman has a right to all that men's hands or brains
have fashioned--argue that it is very important for the intellectual
development of woman that she should have exactly the same
opportunities as man. And she will, scouting [rejecting with contempt]
the idea of any differences between the intelligences of man and
woman, discourse to you of their intimate affinity.

It will, perhaps, be well to clear up these points.

The importance of the higher development of woman is unquestionable.

But after all it is the intellect of man which really comes into
account in connexion with "the mass of mental faculties available for
the higher service of mankind."

The maintenance of the conditions which allow of man's doing his best
intellectual work is therefore an interest which is superior to that
of the intellectual development of woman. And woman might quite
properly be referred for her intellectual development to instructional
institutions which should be special to herself.

Coming to the question of the intimate resemblances between the
masculine and the feminine intelligence, no man would be venturesome
enough to dispute these, but he may be pardoned if he thinks--one
would hope in no spirit of exaltation--also of the differences.

We have an instructive analogy in connexion with the learned
societies.

It is uncontrovertible that every candidate for election into such a
society will have, and will feel that he has, affinities with the
members of that association. And he is invited to set these forth in
his application. But there may also be differences of which he is not
sensible. On that question the electors are the judges; and they are
the final court of appeal.

There would seem to be here a moral which the feminist would do well
to lay to heart.

There is also another lesson which she might very profitably consider.
A quite small difference will often constitute as effective a bar to a
useful and congenial co-operation as a more fundamental difference.

In the case of a body of intellectual workers one might at first sight
suppose that so small a distinction as that of belonging to a
different nationality--sex, of course, is an infinitely profounder
difference--would not be a bar to unrestricted intellectual
co-operation.

But in point of fact it is in every country, in every learned society,
a uniform rule that when foreign scientists or scholars are admitted
they are placed not on the ordinary list of working members, but on a
special list.

One discerns that there is justification for this in the fact that a
foreigner would in certain eventualities be an incompatible person.

One may think of the eventuality of the learned society deciding to
recognise a national service, or to take part in a national movement.
And one is not sure that a foreigner might not be an incompatible
person in the eventuality of a scientist or scholar belonging to a
nationality with which the foreigner's country was at feud being
brought forward for election. And he would, of course, be an
impossible person in a society if he were, in a spirit of chauvinism,
to press for a larger representation of his own fellow-countrymen.

Now this is precisely the kind of way man feels about woman.  He
recognises that she is by virtue of her sex for certain purposes an
incompatible person; and that, quite apart from this, her secondary
sexual characters might in certain eventualities make her an
impossible person.

We may note, before passing on, that these considerations would seem
to prescribe that woman should be admitted to masculine institutions
only when real humanitarian grounds demand it; that she
should--following here the analogy of what is done in the learned
societies with respect to foreigners--be invited to co-operate with
men only when she is quite specially eminent, or beyond all question
useful for the particular purpose in hand; and lastly, that when
co-opted into any masculine institution woman should always be placed
upon a special list, to show that it was proposed to confine her
co-operation within certain specified limits.

>From these general questions, which affect only the woman with
intellectual aspirations, we pass to consider what would be the effect
of feminism upon the rank and file of women if it made of these
co-partners with man in work. They would suffer not only because
woman's physiological disabilities and the restrictions which arise
out of her sex place her at a great disadvantage when she has to enter
into competition with man, but also because under feminism man would
be less and less disposed to take off woman's shoulders a part of her
burden.

And there can be no dispute that the most valuable financial asset of
the ordinary woman is the possibility that a man may be willing--and
may, if only woman is disposed to fulfil her part of the bargain, be
not only willing but anxious--to support her and to secure for her, if
he can, a measure of that freedom which comes from the possession of
money.

In view of this every one who has a real fellow-feeling for woman, and
who is concerned for her material welfare, as a father is concerned
for his daughter's, will above everything else desire to nurture and
encourage in man the sentiment of chivalry, and in woman that
disposition of mind that makes chivalry possible.

And the woman workers who have to fight the battle of life for
themselves would indirectly profit from this fostering of chivalry;
for those women who are supported by men do not compete in the limited
labour market which is open to the woman worker.

>From every point of view, therefore, except perhaps that of the
exceptional woman who would be able to hold her own against masculine
competition--and men always issue informal letters of naturalisation
to such an exceptional woman--the woman suffrage which leads up to
feminism would be a social disaster.


PART III

IS THERE, IF THE SUFFRAGE IS BARRED, ANY PALLIATIVE OF CORRECTIVE FOR
THE DISCONTENTS OF WOMAN?

I

PALLIATIVES OR CORRECTIVES FOR THE DISCONTENTS OF WOMAN

What are the Suffragist's Grievances?--Economic and Physiological
Difficulties of Woman--Intellectual Grievances of Suffragist and
Corrective.

Is there then, let us ask ourselves, if the suffrage with its
programme of feminism is barred as leading to social disaster, any
palliative or corrective that can be applied to the present
discontents of woman?

If such is to be found, it is to be found only by placing clearly
before us the suffragist's grievances.

These grievances are, _first,_ the economic difficulties of the woman
who seeks to earn her living by work other than unskilled manual
labour; _secondly_, the difficult physiological conditions in which
woman is placed by the excess of the female over the male population
and by her diminished chances of marriage [1]; and _thirdly,_ the
tedium which obsesses the life of the woman who is not forced, and
cannot force herself, to work. On the top of these grievances comes
the fact that the suffragist conceives herself to be harshly and
unfairly treated by man. This last is the fire which sets a light to
all the inflammable material.

[1] _Vide_ footnote, p. 138.

It would be quite out of question to discuss here the economic and
physiological difficulties of woman. Only this may be said: it is
impossible, in view of the procession of starved and frustrated lives
which is continuously filing past, to close one's eyes to the urgency
of this woman's problem.

After all, the primary object of all civilisation is to provide for
every member of the community food and shelter and fulfilment of
natural cravings. And when, in what passes as a civilised community, a
whole class is called upon to go without any one of these our human
requirements, it is little wonder that it should break out.

But when a way of escape stands open revolt is not morally justified.

Thus, for example, a man who is born into, but cannot support himself
in, a superior class of society is not, as long as he can find a
livelihood abroad in a humbler walk in life, entitled to revolt.

No more is the woman who is in economic or physiological difficulties.
For, if only she has the pluck to take it, a way of escape stands open
to her.

She can emigrate; she can go out from the social class in which she is
not self-supporting into a humbler social class in which she could
earn a living; and she can forsake conditions in which she must remain
a spinster for conditions in which she may perhaps become a mother.
Only in this way can the problem of finding work, and relief of
tedium, for the woman who now goes idle be resolved.

If women were to avail themselves of these ways of escape out of
unphysiological conditions, the woman agitator would probably find it
as difficult to keep alive a passionate agitation for woman suffrage
as the Irish Nationalist agitator to keep alive, after the settlement
of the land question and the grant of old age pensions, a passionate
agitation for a separate Parliament for Ireland.

For the happy wife and mother is never passionately concerned about
the suffrage. It is always the woman who is galled either by
physiological hardships, or by the fact that she has not the same
amount of money as man, or by the fact that man does not desire her as
a co-partner in work, and withholds the homage which she thinks he
ought to pay to her intellect.

For this class of grievances the present education of woman is
responsible. The girl who is growing up to woman's estate is never
taught where she stands relatively to man. She is not taught anything
about woman's physical disabilities. She is not told--she is left to
discover it for herself when too late--that child and husband are to
woman physiological requirements. She is not taught the defects and
limitations of the feminine mind. One might almost think there were no
such defects and limitations; and that woman was not always
overestimating her intellectual power. And the ordinary girl is not
made to realise woman's intrinsically inferior money-earning capacity.
She is not made to realise that the woman who cannot work with her
hands is generally hard put to earn enough to keep herself alive in
the incomplete condition of a spinster.

As a result of such education, when, influenced by the feminist
movement, woman comes to institute a comparison between herself and
man, she brings into that comparison all those qualities in which she
is substantially his equal, and leaves out of account all those in
which she is his inferior.

The failure to recognise that man is the master, and why he is the
master, lies at the root of the suffrage movement. By disregarding
man's superior physical force, the power of compulsion upon which all
government is based is disregarded. By leaving out of account those
powers of the mind in which man is the superior, woman falls into the
error of thinking that she can really compete with him, and that she
belongs to the self-same intellectual caste. Finally, by putting out
of sight man's superior money-earning capacity, the power of the purse
is ignored.

Uninstructed woman commits also another fundamental error in her
comparison. Instead of comparing together the average man and the
average woman, she sets herself to establish that there is no defect
in woman which cannot be discovered also in man; and that there is no
virtue or power in the ordinary man which cannot be discovered also in
woman. Which having been established to her satisfaction, she is led
inevitably to the conclusion that there is nothing whatever to choose
between the sexes. And from this there is only a step to the position
that human beings ought to be assigned, without distinction of sex, to
each and every function which would come within the range of their
individual capacities, instead of being assigned as they are at
present: men to one function, and women to another.

Here again women ought to have been safeguarded by education.  She
ought to have been taught that even when an individual woman comes up
to the average of man this does not abrogate the disqualification
which attaches to a difference of sex. Nor yet--as every one who
recognises that we live in a world which conducts itself by
generalisations will see--does it abrogate the disqualification of
belonging to an inferior intellectual caste.

The present system of feminine education is blameworthy not only in
the respect that it fails to draw attention to these disqualifications
and to teach woman where she stands; it is even more blameworthy in
that it fails to convey to the girl who is growing up any conception
of that absolutely elementary form of morality which consists in
distinguishing _meum_ and _tuum_ [_that which is mine_ and _that which
is yours_].

Instead of her educators encouraging every girl to assert "rights" as
against man, and put forward claims, they ought to teach her with
respect to him those lessons of behaviour which are driven home once
for all into every boy at a public school.

Just as there you learn that you may not make unwarranted demands upon
your fellow, and just as in the larger world every nation has got to
learn that it cannot with impunity lay claim to the possessions of its
neighbours, so woman will have to learn that when things are not
offered to her, and she has not the power to take them by force, she
has got to make the best of things as they are.

One would wish for every girl who is growing up to womanhood that it
might be brought home to her by some refined and ethically-minded
member of her own sex how insufferable a person woman becomes when,
like a spoilt child, she exploits the indulgence of man; when she
proclaims that it is his duty to serve her and to share with her his
power and possessions; when she makes an outcry when he refuses to
part with what is his own; and when she insists upon thrusting her
society upon men everywhere.

And every girl ought to be warned that to embark upon a policy of
recrimination when you do not get what you want, and to proclaim
yourself a martyr when, having hit, you are hit back, is the way to
get yourself thoroughly disliked.

Finally, every girl ought to be shown, in the example of the militant
suffragist, how revolt and martyrdom, undertaken in order to possess
oneself of what belongs to others, effects the complete
disorganisation of moral character.

No one would wish that in the education of girls these quite unlovely
things should be insisted upon more than was absolutely necessary. But
one would wish that the educators of the rising generation of women
should, basing themselves upon these foundations, point out to every
girl how great is woman's debt to civilisation; in other words, how
much is under civilisation done for woman by man.

And one would wish that, in a world which is rendered unwholesome by
feminism, every girl's eyes were opened to comprehend the great
outstanding fact of the world: the fact that, turn where you will, you
find individual man showering upon individual woman--one man in
tribute to her enchantment, another out of a sense of gratitude, and
another just because she is something that is his--every good thing
which, suffrage or no suffrage, she never could have procured for
herself.


APPENDIX

LETTER ON MILITANT HYSTERIA

Reprinted by permission from _The Times_  (London), March 28, 1912.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES

SIR,--For man the physiological psychology of woman is full of
difficulties.

He is not a little mystified when he encounters in her periodically
recurring phases of hypersensitiveness, unreasonableness, and loss of
the sense of proportion.

He is frankly perplexed when confronted with a complete alteration of
character in a woman who is child-bearing.

When he is a witness of the "tendency of woman to morally warp when
nervously ill," and of the terrible physical havoc which the pangs of
a disappointed love may work, he is appalled.

And it leaves on his mind an eerie feeling when he sees serious and
long-continued mental disorders developing in connexion with the
approaching extinction of a woman's reproductive faculty.

No man can close his eyes to these things; but he does not feel at
liberty to speak of them.

"For the woman that God gave him is not his to give away."[1]

[1 From "The Female of the Species" by Rudyard Kipling]

As for woman herself, she makes very light of any of these mental
upsettings.

She perhaps smiles a little at them. . . .[1]

[1] In the interests of those who feel that female dignity is
compromised by it, I have here omitted a woman's flippant overestimate
of the number of women in London society who suffer from nervous
disorders at the climacteric [i.e. menopause].

None the less, these upsettings of her mental equilibrium are the
things that a woman has most cause to fear; and no doctor can ever
lose sight of the fact that the mind of woman is always threatened
with danger from the reverberations of her physiological emergencies.

It is with such thoughts that the doctor lets his eyes rest upon the
militant suffragist. He cannot shut them to the fact that there is
mixed up with the woman's movement much mental disorder; and he cannot
conceal from himself the physiological emergencies which lie behind.

The recruiting field for the militant suffragists is the million of
our excess female population--that million which had better long ago
have gone out to mate with its complement of men beyond the sea.

Among them there are the following different types of women:--

(_a_)  First--let us put them first--come a class of women who hold,
with minds otherwise unwarped, that they may, whenever it is to their
advantage, lawfully resort to physical violence.

The programme, as distinguished from the methods, of these women is
not very different from that of the ordinary suffragist woman.

(_b_)  There file past next a class of women who have all their
life-long been strangers to joy, women in whom instincts long
suppressed have in the end broken into flame. These are the sexually
embittered women in whom everything has turned into gall and
bitterness of heart, and hatred of men.

Their legislative programme is license for themselves, or else
restrictions for man.

(_c_)  Next there file past the incomplete. One side of their nature
has undergone atrophy, with the result that they have lost touch with
their living fellow men and women.

Their programme is to convert the whole world into an epicene
institution---an epicene institution in which man and woman shall
everywhere work side by side at the selfsame tasks and for the
selfsame pay.

These wishes can never by any possibility be realised.  Even in
animals--I say _even,_ because in these at least one of the sexes has
periods of complete quiscence--male and female cannot be safely worked
side by side, except when they are incomplete.

While in the human species safety can be obtained, it can be obtained
only at the price of continual constraint.

And even then woman, though she protests that she does not require it,
and that she does not receive it, practically always does receive
differential treatment at the hands of man.

It would be well, I often think, that every woman should be clearly
told--and the woman of the world will immediately understand--that
when man sets his face against the proposal to bring in an epicene
world, he does so because he can do his best work only in surroundings
where he is perfectly free from suggestion and from restraint, and
from the onus which all differential treatment imposes.

And I may add in connexion with my own profession that when a medical
man asks that he should not be the yoke-fellow of a medical woman he
does so also because he would wish to keep up as between men and
women--even when they are doctors--some of the modesties and
reticences upon which our civilisation has been built up.

Now the medical woman is of course never on the side of modesty,[1] or
in favour of any reticences. Her desire for knowledge does not allow
of these.

[1] To those who have out of inadvertence and as laymen and women
misunderstood, it may be explained that the issue here discussed is
the second in order of the three which are set out on p. 139 (_supra_).

(_d_)  Inextricably mixed up with the types which we have been
discussing is the type of woman whom Dr. Leonard Williams's recent
letter brought so distinctly before our eyes--the woman who is
poisoned by her misplaced self-esteem; and who flies out at every man
who does not pay homage to her intellect.

She is the woman who is affronted when a man avers that _for him_ the
glory of woman lies in her power of attraction, in her capacity for
motherhood, and in unswerving allegiance to the ethics which are
special to her sex.

I have heard such an intellectually embittered woman say, though she
had been self-denyingly taken to wife, that "never in the whole course
of her life had a man ever as much as done her a kindness."

The programme of this type of woman is, as a preliminary, to compel
man to admit her claim to be his intellectual equal; and, that done,
to compel him to divide up everything with her to the last farthing,
and so make her also his financial equal.

And her journals exhibit to us the kind of parliamentary
representative she desiderates. He humbly, hat in hand, asks for his
orders from a knot of washerwomen standing arms a-kimbo.[2]

[2] I give, in response to a request, the reference: _Votes for Women,_
March 18, 1910, p. 381.

(_e_)  Following in the wake of these embittered human beings come
troops of girls just grown up.

All these will assure you, these young girls--and what is seething in
their minds is stirring also in the minds in the girls in the colleges
and schools which are staffed by unmarried suffragists--that woman has
suffered all manner of indignity and injustice at the hands of man.



And these young girls have been told about the intellectual, and
moral, and financial value of woman--such tales as it never entered
into the heart of man to conceive.

The programme of these young women is to be married upon their own
terms. Man shall--so runs their scheme--work for their support--to
that end giving up his freedom, and putting himself under orders, for
many hours of the day; but they themselves must not be asked to give
up any of their liberty to him, or to subordinate themselves to his
interests, or to obey him in anything.

To obey a man would be to commit the unpardonable sin.

It is not necessary, in connexion with a movement which proceeds on
the lines set out above, any further to labour the point that there is
in it an element of mental disorder. It is plain that it is there.

There is also a quite fatuous element in the programmes of the
militant suffragist. We have this element, for instance, in the
doctrine that, notwithstanding the fact that the conditions of the
labour market deny it to her, woman ought to receive the same wage as
a man for the same work.

This doctrine is fatuous, because it leaves out of sight that, even if
woman succeeds in doing the same work as man, he has behind him a much
larger reserve of physical strength. As soon as a time of strain
comes, areserve of strength and freedom from periodic indisposition is
worth paying extra for.

Fatuous also is the dogma that woman ought to have the same pay for
the same work--fatuous because it leaves out of sight that woman's
commercial value in many of the best fields of work is subject to a
very heavy discount by reason of the fact that she cannot, like a male
employee, work cheek by jowl with a male employer; nor work among men
as a man with his fellow employees.

So much for the woman suffragist's protest that she can conceive of no
reason for a differential rate of pay for man.

Quite as fatuous are the marriage projects of the militant suffragist.
Every woman of the world could tell her--whispering it into her
private ear--that if a sufficient number of men should come to the
conclusion that it was not worth their while to marry except on the
terms of fair give-and-take, the suffragist woman's demands would have
to come down.

It is not at all certain that the institution of matrimony--which,
after all, is the great instrument in the levelling up of the
financial situation of woman--can endure apart from some willing
subordination on the part of the wife.

It will have been observed that there is in these programmes, in
addition to the element of mental disorder and to the element of the
fatuous, which have been animadverted upon, also a very ugly element
of dishonesty. In reality the very kernel of the militant suffrage
movement is the element of immorality.

There is here not only immorality in the ends which are in view, but
also in the methods adopted for the attainment of those ends.

We may restrict ourselves to indicating wherein lies the immorality of
the methods.

There is no one who does not discern that woman in her relations to
physical force stands in quite a different position to man.

Out of that different relation there must of necessity shape itself a
special code of ethics for woman. And to violate that code must be for
woman immorality.

So far as I have seen, no one in this controversy has laid his finger
upon the essential point in the relations of woman to physical
violence.

It has been stated--and in the main quite truly stated--that woman in
the mass cannot, like man, back up her vote by bringing physical force
into play.

But the woman suffragist here counters by insisting that she as an
individual may have more physical force than an individual man.

And it is quite certain--and it did not need suffragist raids and
window-breaking riots to demonstrate it--that woman in the mass can
bring a certain amount of physical force to bear.

The true inwardness of the relation in which woman stands to physical
force lies not in the question of her having it at command, but in the
fact that she cannot put it forth without placing herself within the
jurisdiction of an ethical law.

The law against which she offends when she resorts to physical
violence is not an ordinance of man; it is not written in the statutes
of any State; it has not been enunciated by any human law-giver. It
belongs to those unwritten, and unassailable, and irreversible
commandments of religion, [_Greek_ 1], which we suddenly and
mysteriously become aware of when we see them violated.

[1 From _Antigone_ by Sophocles; "_the unwritten and unassailable
statutes given to us by the gods._" Sir Almroth had it in the original
Greek with Greek fonts.]

The law which the militant suffragist has violated is among the
ordinances of that code which forbade us even to think of employing
our native Indian troops against the Boers; which brands it as an
ignominy when a man leaves his fellow in the lurch and saves his own
life; and which makes it an outrage for a man to do violence to a
woman.

To violate any ordinance of that code is more dishonourable than to
transgress every statutory law.

We see acknowledgment of it in the fact that even the uneducated man
in the street resents it as an outrage to civilisation when he sees a
man strike a blow at a woman.

But to the man who is committing the outrage it is a thing simply
unaccountable that any one should fly out at him.

In just such a case is the militant suffragist. She cannot understand
why any one should think civilisation is outraged when she scuffles in
the street mud with a policeman.

If she asks for an explanation, it perhaps behoves a man to supply it.

Up to the present in the whole civilised world there has ruled a truce
of God as between man and woman. That truce is based upon the solemn
covenant that within the frontiers of civilisation (outside them of
course the rule lapses) the weapon of physical force may not be
applied by man against woman; nor by woman against man.

Under this covenant, the reign of force which prevails in the world
without comes to an end when a man enters his household.

Under this covenant that half of the human race which most needs
protection is raised up above the waves of violence.

Within the terms of this compact everything that woman has received
from man, and everything man receives from woman, is given as a free
gift.

Again, under this covenant a full half of the programme of
Christianity has been realised; and a foundation has been laid upon
which it may be possible to build higher; and perhaps finally in the
ideal future to achieve the abolition of physical violence and war.

And it is this solemn covenant, the covenant so faithfully kept by
man, which has been violated by the militant suffragist in the
interest of her morbid, stupid, ugly, and dishonest programmes.

Is it wonder if men feel that they have had enough of the militant
suffragist, and that the State would be well rid of her if she were
crushed under the soldiers' shields like the traitor woman at the
Tarpeian rock [in ancient Rome where traitors were killed]?

We may turn now to that section of woman suffragists--one is almost
inclined to doubt whether it any longer exists--which is opposed to
all violent measures, though it numbers in its ranks women who are
stung to the quick by the thought that man, who will concede the vote
to the lowest and most degraded of his own sex, withholds it from
"even the noblest woman in England."

When that excited and somewhat pathetic appeal is addressed to us,
we have only to consider what a vote really gives.

The parliamentary vote is an instrument--and a quite astonishly
disappointing instrument it is--for obtaining legislation; that is,
for directing that the agents of the State shall in certain defined
circumstances bring into application the weapon of physical
compulsion.

Further, the vote is an instrument by which we give to this or that
group of statesmen anthority to supervise and keep in motion the whole
machinery of compulsion.

To take examples.  A vote cast in favour of a Bill for the prohibition
of alcohol--if we could find opportunity for giving a vote on such a
question--would be a formal expression of our desire to apply, through
the agency of the paid servants of the State, that same physical
compulsion which Mrs. Carrie Nation put into application in her
"bar-smashing" crusades.

And a vote which puts a Government into office in a country where
murder is punishable by death is a vote which, by agency of the
hangman, puts the noose round the neck of every convicted murderer.

So that the difference between voting and direct resort to force is
simply the difference between exerting physical violence in person,
and exerting it through the intermediary of an agent of the State.

The thing, therefore, that is withheld from "the noblest woman in
England," while it is conceded to the man who is lacking in nobility
of character, is in the end only an instrument by which she might
bring into application physical force.

When one realises that that same noblest woman of England would shrink
from any personal exercise of violence, one would have thought that it
would have come home to her that it is not precisely her job to
commission a man forcibly to shut up a public-house, or to hang a
murderer.

One cannot help asking oneself whether, if she understood what a vote
really means, the noblest woman in England would still go on
complaining of the bitter insult which is done to her in withholding
the vote.

But the opportunist--the practical politician, as he calls
himself--will perhaps here intervene, holding some such language as
this:--"Granting all you say, granting, for the sake of argument,
that the principle of giving votes to woman is unsound, and that evil
must ultimately come of it, how can you get over the fact that no very
conspicuous harm has resulted from woman suffrage in the countries
which have adopted it? And can any firm reasons be rendered for the
belief that the giving of votes to women in England would be any whit
more harmful than in the Colonies?"

A very few words will supply the answer.

The evils of woman suffrage lie, _first,_ in the fact that to give the
vote to women is to give it to voters who as a class are quite
incompetent to adjudicate upon political issues; _secondly,_ in the
fact that women are a class of voters who cannot effectively back up
their votes by force; and, _thirdly,_ in the fact that it may
seriously embroil man and woman.

The first two aspects of the question have already in this controversy
been adequately dealt with. There remains the last issue.

>From the point of view of this issue the conditions which we have to
deal with in this country are the absolute antithesis of those ruling
in any of the countries and States which have adopted woman suffrage.

When woman suffrage was adopted in these countries it was adopted in
some for one reason, in others for another. In some it was adopted
because it appealed to the _doctrinaire [theoretical]_ politician as
the proper logical outcome of a democratic and Socialistic policy. In
others it was adopted because opportunist politicians saw in it an
instrument by which they might gain electioneering advantages. So much
was this the case that it sometimes happened that the woman's vote was
sprung upon a community which was quite unprepared and indifferent to
it.

The cause of woman suffrage was thus in the countries of which we
speak neither in its inception nor in its realisation a question of
revolt of woman against the oppression of man. It had, and has, no
relation to the programmes of the militant suffragists as set out at
the outset of this letter.

By virtue of this, all the evils which spring from the embroiling of
man and woman have in the countries in question been conspicuously
absent.

Instead of seeing himself confronted by a section of embittered and
hostile women voters which might at any time outvote him and help to
turn an election, man there sees his women folk voting practically
everywhere in accordance with his directions, and lending him a hand
to outvote his political opponent.

Whether or no such voting is for the good of the common weal is beside
our present question. But it is clearly an arrangement which leads to
amity and peace between a man and his womenkind, and through these to
good-will towards all women.

In England everything is different.

If woman suffrage comes in here, it will have come as a surrender to
a very violent feminist agitation--an agitation which we have traced
back to our excess female population and the associated abnormal
physiological conditions.

If ever Parliament concedes the vote to woman in England, it will be
accepted by the militant suffragist, not as an eirenicon, but as a
victory which she will value only for the better carrying on of her
fight _a outrance [to the bitter end]_ against the oppression and
injustice of man.

A conciliation with hysterical revolt is neither an act of peace; nor
will it bring peace.

Nor would the conferring of the vote upon women carry with it any
advantages from the point of view of finding a way out of the material
entanglements in which woman is enmeshed, and thus ending the war
between man and woman.

One has only to ask oneself whether or not it would help the
legislator in remodelling the divorce or the bastardy laws if he had
conjoined with him an unmarried militant suffragist as assessor.

Peace will come again.  It will come when woman ceases to believe and
to teach all manner of evil of man despitefully. It will come when she
ceases to impute to him as a crime her own natural disabilities, when
she ceases to resent the fact that man cannot and does not wish to
work side by side with her. And peace will return when every woman for
whom there is no room in England seeks "rest" beyond the sea, "each
one in the house of her husband," and when the woman who remains in
England comes to recognise that she can, without sacrifice of dignity,
give a willing subordination to the husband or father, who, when all
is said and done, earns and lays up money for her.

A. E. WRIGHT.
_March_ 27, 1912.









Produced by Geoffrey Cowling




[Transcriber's note: In 'A Day on a Selection' a speech is attributed
to "Tom"--in first edition as well as recent ones--which clearly
belongs to "Corney" alias "neighbour". This has been noted in
loc.]





While the Billy Boils

by Henry Lawson


CONTENTS


First Series


An Old Mate of Your Father's

Settling on the Land

Enter Mitchell

Stiffner and Jim (Thirdly, Bill)

When the Sun Went Down

The Man who Forgot

Hungerford

A Camp-fire Yarn

His Country--After All

A Day on a Selection

That There Dog of Mine

Going Blind

Arvie Aspinall's Alarm Clock

Stragglers

The Union Buries its Dead

On the Edge of a Plain

In a Dry Season

He's Come Back

Another of Mitchell's Plans

Steelman

Drifted Back

Remailed

Mitchell Doesn't Believe in the Sack

Shooting the Moon

His Father's Mate

An Echo from the Old Bark School

The Shearing of the Cook's Dog

"Dossing Out" and "Camping"

Across the Straits

Some Day

Brummy Usen



Second Series


The Drover's Wife

Steelman's Pupil

An Unfinished Love Story

Board and Residence

His Colonial Oath

A Visit of Condolence

In a Wet Season

"Rats"

Mitchell: A Character Sketch

The Bush Undertaker

Our Pipes

Coming Across

The Story of Malachi

Two Dogs and a Fence

Jones's Alley

Bogg of Geebung

She Wouldn't Speak

The Geological Spieler

Macquarie's Mate

Baldy Thompson

For Auld Lang Syne





First Series


AN OLD MATE OF YOUR FATHER'S


You remember when we hurried home from the old bush school how we were
sometimes startled by a bearded apparition, who smiled kindly down on
us, and whom our mother introduced, as we raked off our hats, as "An
old mate of your father's on the diggings, Johnny."  And he would pat
our heads and say we were fine boys, or girls--as the case may have
been--and that we had our father's nose but our mother's eyes, or the
other way about; and say that the baby was the dead spit of its
mother, and then added, for father's benefit: "But yet he's like you,
Tom."  It did seem strange to the children to hear him address the
old man by his Christian name---considering that the mother always
referred to him as "Father."  She called the old mate Mr So-and-so,
and father called him Bill, or something to that effect.

Occasionally the old mate would come dressed in the latest city
fashion, and at other times in a new suit of reach-me-downs, and yet
again he would turn up in clean white moleskins, washed tweed coat,
Crimean shirt, blucher boots, soft felt hat, with a fresh-looking
speckled handkerchief round his neck.  But his face was mostly round
and brown and jolly, his hands were always horny, and his beard grey.
Sometimes he might have seemed strange and uncouth to us at first, but
the old man never appeared the least surprised at anything he said or
did--they understood each other so well--and we would soon take to
this relic of our father's past, who would have fruit or lollies for
us--strange that he always remembered them--and would surreptitiously
slip "shilluns" into our dirty little hands, and tell us stories
about the old days, "when me an' yer father was on the diggin's, an'
you wasn't thought of, my boy."

Sometimes the old mate would stay over Sunday, and in the forenoon or
after dinner he and father would take a walk amongst the deserted
shafts of Sapling Gully or along Quartz Ridge, and criticize old
ground, and talk of past diggers' mistakes, and second bottoms, and
feelers, and dips, and leads--also outcrops--and absently pick up
pieces of quartz and slate, rub them on their sleeves, look at them in
an abstracted manner, and drop them again; and they would talk of some
old lead they had worked on: "Hogan's party was here on one side of
us, Macintosh was here on the other, Mac was getting good gold and so
was Hogan, and now, why the blanky blank weren't we on gold?"  And
the mate would always agree that there was "gold in them ridges and
gullies yet, if a man only had the money behind him to git at it."
And then perhaps the guv'nor would show him a spot where he intended
to put down a shaft some day--the old man was always thinking of
putting down a shaft.  And these two old fifty-niners would mooch
round and sit on their heels on the sunny mullock heaps and break clay
lumps between their hands, and lay plans for the putting down of
shafts, and smoke, till an urchin was sent to "look for his father
and Mr So-and-so, and tell 'em to come to their dinner."

And again--mostly in the fresh of the morning--they would hang about
the fences on the selection and review the live stock: five dusty
skeletons of cows, a hollow-sided calf or two, and one shocking piece
of equine scenery--which, by the way, the old mate always praised.
But the selector's heart was not in farming nor on selections--it was
far away with the last new rush in Western Australia or Queensland, or
perhaps buried in the worked-out ground of Tambaroora, Married Man's
Creek, or Araluen; and by-and-by the memory of some half-forgotten
reef or lead or Last Chance, Nil Desperandum, or Brown Snake claim
would take their thoughts far back and away from the dusty patch of
sods and struggling sprouts called the crop, or the few discouraged,
half-dead slips which comprised the orchard.  Then their conversation
would be pointed with many Golden Points, Bakery Hill, Deep Creeks,
Maitland Bars, Specimen Flats, and Chinamen's Gullies.  And so they'd
yarn till the youngster came to tell them that "Mother sez the
breakfus is gettin' cold," and then the old mate would rouse himself
and stretch and say, "Well, we mustn't keep the missus waitin',
Tom!"

And, after tea, they would sit on a log of the wood-heap, or the
edge of the veranda--that is, in warm weather--and yarn about
Ballarat and Bendigo--of the days when we spoke of being on a place
oftener than at it: _on_ Ballarat, _on_ Gulgong, _on_ Lambing Flat,
on _Creswick_--and they would use the definite article before the
names, as: "on The Turon; The Lachlan; The Home Rule; The Canadian
Lead."  Then again they'd yarn of old mates, such as Tom Brook, Jack
Henright, and poor Martin Ratcliffe--who was killed in his golden
hole--and of other men whom they didn't seem to have known much
about, and who went by the names of "Adelaide Adolphus," "Corney
George," and other names which might have been more or less
applicable.

And sometimes they'd get talking, low and mysterious like, about "Th'
Eureka Stockade;" and if we didn't understand and asked questions,
"what was the Eureka Stockade?" or "what did they do it for?"
father'd say: "Now, run away, sonny, and don't bother; me and Mr
So-and-so want to talk."  Father had the mark of a hole on his leg,
which he said he got through a gun accident when a boy, and a scar on
his side, that we saw when he was in swimming with us; he said he got
that in an accident in a quartz-crushing machine.  Mr So-and-so had a
big scar on the side of his forehead that was caused by a pick
accidentally slipping out of a loop in the rope, and falling down a
shaft where he was working.  But how was it they talked low, and their
eyes brightened up, and they didn't look at each other, but away over
sunset, and had to get up and walk about, and take a stroll in the
cool of the evening when they talked about Eureka?

And, again they'd talk lower and more mysterious like, and perhaps
mother would be passing the wood-heap and catch a word, and asked:

"Who was she, Tom?"

And Tom--father--would say:

"Oh, you didn't know her, Mary; she belonged to a family Bill knew at
home."

And Bill would look solemn till mother had gone, and then they would
smile a quiet smile, and stretch and say, "Ah, well!" and start
something else.

They had yarns for the fireside, too, some of those old mates of our
father's, and one of them would often tell how a girl--a queen of the
diggings--was married, and had her wedding-ring made out of the gold
of that field; and how the diggers weighed their gold with the new
wedding-ring--for luck--by hanging the ring on the hook of the scales
and attaching their chamois-leather gold bags to it (whereupon she
boasted that four hundred ounces of the precious metal passed through
her wedding-ring); and how they lowered the young bride, blindfolded,
down a golden hole in a big bucket, and got her to point out the drive
from which the gold came that her ring was made out of.  The point of
this story seems to have been lost--or else we forget it--but it was
characteristic.  Had the girl been lowered down a duffer, and asked to
point out the way to the gold, and had she done so successfully, there
would have been some sense in it.

And they would talk of King, and Maggie Oliver, and G. V. Brooke, and
others, and remember how the diggers went five miles out to meet the
coach that brought the girl actress, and took the horses out and
brought her in in triumph, and worshipped her, and sent her off in
glory, and threw nuggets into her lap.  And how she stood upon the
box-seat and tore her sailor hat to pieces, and threw the fragments
amongst the crowd; and how the diggers fought for the bits and thrust
them inside their shirt bosoms; and how she broke down and cried, and
could in her turn have worshipped those men--loved them, every one.
They were boys all, and gentlemen all.  There were college men,
artists, poets, musicians, journalists--Bohemians all.  Men from all
the lands and one.  They understood art--and poverty was dead.

And perhaps the old mate would say slyly, but with a sad, quiet smile:

"Have you got that bit of straw yet, Tom?"

Those old mates had each three pasts behind them.  The two they told
each other when they became mates, and the one they had shared.

And when the visitor had gone by the coach we noticed that the old man
would smoke a lot, and think as much, and take great interest in the
fire, and be a trifle irritable perhaps.

Those old mates of our father's are
getting few and far between, and only happen along once in a way to
keep the old man's memory fresh, as it were.  We met one to-day, and
had a yarn with him, and afterwards we got thinking, and somehow began
to wonder whether those ancient friends of ours were, or were not,
better and kinder to their mates than we of the rising generation are
to our fathers; and the doubt is painfully on the wrong side.




SETTLING ON THE LAND


The worst bore in Australia just now is the man who raves about
getting the people on the land, and button-holes you in the street
with a little scheme of his own.  He generally does not know what he
is talking about.

There is in Sydney a man named Tom Hopkins who settled on the land
once, and sometimes you can get him to talk about it.  He did very
well at his trade in the city, years ago, until he began to think that
he could do better up-country.  Then he arranged with his sweetheart
to be true to him and wait whilst he went west and made a home.  She
drops out of the story at this point.

He selected on a run at Dry Hole Creek, and for months awaited the
arrival of the government surveyors to fix his boundaries; but they
didn't come, and, as he had no reason to believe they would turn up
within the next ten years, he grubbed and fenced at a venture, and
started farming operations.

Does the reader know what grubbing means?  Tom does.  He found the
biggest, ugliest, and most useless trees on his particular piece of
ground; also the greatest number of adamantine stumps.  He started
without experience, or with very little, but with plenty of advice
from men who knew less about farming than he did.  He found a soft
place between two roots on one side of the first tree, made a narrow,
irregular hole, and burrowed down till he reached a level where the
tap-root was somewhat less than four feet in diameter, and not quite
as hard as flint: then he found that he hadn't room to swing the axe,
so he heaved out another ton or two of earth--and rested.  Next day he
sank a shaft on the other side of the gum; and after tea, over a pipe,
it struck him that it would be a good idea to burn the tree out, and
so use up the logs and lighter rubbish lying round.  So he widened the
excavation, rolled in some logs, and set fire to them--with no better
result than to scorch the roots.

Tom persevered.  He put the trace harness on his horse, drew in all
the logs within half a mile, and piled them on the windward side of
that gum; and during the night the fire found a soft place, and the
tree burnt off about six feet above the surface, falling on a
squatter's boundary fence, and leaving the ugliest kind of stump to
occupy the selector's attention; which it did, for a week.  He waited
till the hole cooled, and then he went to work with pick, shovel, and
axe: and even now he gets interested in drawings of machinery, such as
are published in the agricultural weeklies, for getting out stumps
without graft.  He thought he would be able to get some posts and
rails out of that tree, but found reason to think that a cast-iron
column would split sooner--and straighter.  He traced some of the
surface roots to the other side of the selection, and broke most of
his trace-chains trying to get them out by horse-power--for they had
other roots going down from underneath.  He cleared a patch in the
course of time and for several seasons he broke more ploughshares than
he could pay for.

Meanwhile the squatter was not idle.  Tom's tent was robbed several
times, and his hut burnt down twice.  Then he was charged with
killing some sheep and a steer on the run, and converting them to his
own use, but got off mainly because there was a difference of opinion
between the squatter and the other local J.P. concerning politics and
religion.

Tom ploughed and sowed wheat, but nothing came up to speak of--the
ground was too poor; so he carted stable manure six miles from the
nearest town, manured the land, sowed another crop, and prayed for
rain.  It came.  It raised a flood which washed the crop clean off the
selection, together with several acres of manure, and a considerable
portion of the original surface soil; and the water brought down
enough sand to make a beach, and spread it over the field to a depth
of six inches.  The flood also took half a mile of fencing from along
the creek-bank, and landed it in a bend, three miles down, on a dummy
selection, where it was confiscated.

Tom didn't give up--he was energetic.  He cleared another piece of
ground on the siding, and sowed more wheat; it had the rust in it, or
the smut--and averaged three shillings per bushel.  Then he sowed
lucerne and oats, and bought a few cows: he had an idea of starting a
dairy.  First, the cows' eyes got bad, and he sought the advice of a
German cocky, and acted upon it; he blew powdered alum through paper
tubes into the bad eyes, and got some of it snorted and butted back
into his own.  He cured the cows' eyes and got the sandy blight in his
own, and for a week or so be couldn't tell one end of a cow from the
other, but sat in a dark corner of the hut and groaned, and soaked his
glued eyelashes in warm water.  Germany stuck to him and nursed him,
and saw him through.

Then the milkers got bad udders, and Tom took his life in his hands
whenever he milked them.  He got them all right presently--and butter
fell to fourpence a pound.  He and the aforesaid cocky made
arrangements to send their butter to a better market; and then the
cows contracted a disease which was known in those parts as "plooro
permoanyer," but generally referred to as "th' ploorer."

Again Tom sought advice, acting upon which he slit the cows' ears, cut
their tails half off to bleed them, and poured pints of "pain
killer" into them through their nostrils; but they wouldn't make an
effort, except, perhaps, to rise and poke the selector when he tried
to tempt their appetites with slices of immature pumpkin.  They died
peacefully and persistently, until all were gone save a certain
dangerous, barren, slab-sided luny bovine with white eyes and much
agility in jumping fences, who was known locally as Queen Elizabeth.

Tom shot Queen Elizabeth, and turned his attention to agriculture
again.  Then his plough horses took bad with some thing the Teuton
called "der shtranguls."  He submitted them to a course of treatment
in accordance with Jacob's advice--and they died.

Even then Tom didn't give in--there was grit in that man.  He borrowed
a broken-down dray-horse in return for its keep, coupled it with his
own old riding hack, and started to finish ploughing.  The team wasn't
a success.  Whenever the draught horse's knees gave way and he
stumbled forward, he jerked the lighter horse back into the plough,
and something would break.  Then Tom would blaspheme till he was
refreshed, mend up things with wire and bits of clothes-line, fill his
pockets with stones to throw at the team, and start again.  Finally he
hired a dummy's child to drive the horses.  The brat did his best he
tugged at the head of the team, prodded it behind, heaved rocks at it,
cut a sapling, got up his enthusiasm, and wildly whacked the light
horse whenever the other showed signs of moving--but he never
succeeded in starting both horses at one and the same time.  Moreover
the youth was cheeky, and the selector's temper had been soured: he
cursed the boy along with the horses, the plough, the selection, the
squatter, and Australia.  Yes, he cursed Australia.  The boy cursed
back, was chastised, and immediately went home and brought his father.

Then the dummy's dog tackled the selector's dog and this precipitated
things.  The dummy would have gone under had his wife not arrived on
the scene with the eldest son and the rest of the family.  They all
fell foul of Tom.  The woman was the worst.  The selector's dog chawed
the other and came to his master's rescue just in time---or Tom
Hopkins would never have lived to become the inmate of a lunatic
asylum.

Next year there
happened to be good grass on Tom's selection and nowhere else, and he
thought it wouldn't be a bad idea--to get a few poor sheep, and fatten
them up for market: sheep were selling for about seven-and-sixpence a
dozen at that time.  Tom got a hundred or two, but the squatter had a
man stationed at one side of the selection with dogs to set on the
sheep directly they put their noses through the fence (Tom's was
not a sheep fence).  The dogs chased the sheep across the selection
and into the run again on the other side, where another man waited
ready to pound them.

Tom's dog did his best; but he fell sick while chawing up the fourth
capitalistic canine, and subsequently died.  The dummies had robbed
that cur with poison before starting it across--that was the only way
they could get at Tom's dog.

Tom thought that two might play at the game, and he tried; but his
nephew, who happened to be up from the city on a visit, was arrested
at the instigation of the squatter for alleged sheep-stealing, and
sentenced to two years' hard; during which time the selector himself
got six months for assaulting the squatter with intent to do him
grievous bodily harm-which, indeed, he more than attempted, if a
broken nose, a fractured jaw, and the loss of most of the squatters'
teeth amounted to anything.  The squatter by this time had made peace
with the other local Justice, and had become his father-in-law.

When Tom came out there was little left for him to live for; but he
took a job of fencing, got a few pounds together, and prepared to
settle on the land some more.  He got a "missus" and a few cows
during the next year; the missus robbed him and ran away with the
dummy, and the cows died in the drought, or were impounded by the
squatter while on their way to water.  Then Tom rented an orchard up
the creek, and a hailstorm destroyed all the fruit.  Germany happened
to be represented at the time, Jacob having sought shelter at Tom's
but on his way home from town.  Tom stood leaning against the door
post with the hail beating on him through it all.  His eyes were very
bright and very dry, and every breath was a choking sob.  Jacob let
him stand there, and sat inside with a dreamy expression on his hard
face, thinking of childhood and fatherland, perhaps.  When it was over
he led Tom to a stool and said, "You waits there, Tom.  I must go
home for somedings.  You sits there still and waits twenty minutes;"
then he got on his horse and rode off muttering to himself; "Dot man
moost gry, dot man moost gry."  He was back inside of twenty minutes
with a bottle of wine and a cornet under his overcoat.  He poured the
wine into two pint-pots, made Tom drink, drank himself, and then took
his cornet, stood up at the door, and played a German march into the
rain after the retreating storm.  The hail had passed over his
vineyard and he was a ruined man too.  Tom did "gry" and was all
right.  He was a bit disheartened, but he did another job of fencing,
and was just beginning to think about "puttin' in a few vines an'
fruit-trees" when the government surveyors--whom he'd forgotten all
about--had a resurrection and came and surveyed, and found that the
real selection was located amongst some barren ridges across the
creek.  Tom reckoned it was lucky he didn't plant the orchard, and he
set about shifting his home and fences to the new site.  But the
squatter interfered at this point, entered into possession of the farm
and all on it, and took action against the selector for
trespass--laying the damages at L2500.

Tom was admitted to the lunatic asylum at Parramatta next year, and
the squatter was sent there the following summer, having been ruined
by the drought, the rabbits, the banks, and a wool-ring.  The two
became very friendly, and had many a sociable argument about the
feasibility--or otherwise--of blowing open the flood-gates of Heaven
in a dry season with dynamite.

Tom was discharged a few years since.  He knocks about certain suburbs
a good deal.  He is seen in daylight seldom, and at night mostly in
connection with a dray and a lantern.  He says his one great regret is
that he wasn't found to be of unsound mind before he went up-country.



ENTER MITCHELL


The Western train had just arrived at Redfern railway station with a
lot of ordinary passengers and one swagman.

He was short, and stout, and bow-legged, and freckled, and sandy.  He
had red hair and small, twinkling, grey eyes, and--what often goes
with such things--the expression of a born comedian.  He was dressed
in a ragged, well-washed print shirt, an old black waistcoat with a
calico back, a pair of cloudy moleskins patched at the knees and held
up by a plaited greenhide belt buckled loosely round his hips, a pair
of well-worn, fuzzy blucher boots, and a soft felt hat, green with
age, and with no brim worth mentioning, and no crown to speak of.  He
swung a swag on to the platform, shouldered it, pulled out a billy and
water-bag, and then went to a dog-box in the brake van.

Five minutes later he
appeared on the edge of the cab platform, with an anxious-looking
cattle-dog crouching against his legs, and one end of the chain in his
hand.  He eased down the swag against a post, turned his face to the
city, tilted his hat forward, and scratched the well-developed back of
his head with a little finger.  He seemed undecided what track to
take.

"Cab, Sir!"

The swagman turned slowly and regarded cabby with a quiet grin.

"Now, do I look as if I want a cab?"

"Well, why not?  No harm, anyway--I thought you might want a cab."

Swaggy scratched his head, reflectively.

"Well," he said, "you're the first man that has thought so these
ten years.  What do I want with a cab?"

"To go where you're going, of course."

"Do I look knocked up?"

"I didn't say you did."

"And I didn't say you said I did....Now, I've been on the track this
five years.  I've tramped two thousan' miles since last Chris'mas, and
I don't see why I can't tramp the last mile.  Do you think my old dog
wants a cab?"

The dog shivered and whimpered; he seemed to want to get away from the
crowd.

"But then, you see, you ain't going to carry that swag through the
streets, are you?" asked the cabman.

"Why not?  Who'll stop me!  There ain't no law agin it, I b'lieve?"

"But then, you see, it don't look well, you know."

"Ah!  I thought we'd get to it at last."

The traveller up-ended his bluey against his knee, gave it an
affectionate pat, and then straightened himself up and looked fixedly
at the cabman.

"Now, look here!" he said, sternly and impressively, "can you see
anything wrong with that old swag o' mine?"

It was a stout, dumpy swag, with a red blanket outside, patched with
blue, and the edge of a blue blanket showing in the inner rings at the
end.  The swag might have been newer; it might have been cleaner; it
might have been hooped with decent straps, instead of bits of
clothes-line and greenhide--but otherwise there was nothing the matter
with it, as swags go.

"I've humped that old swag for years," continued the bushman; "I've
carried that old swag thousands of miles--as that old dog knows--an'
no one ever bothered about the look of it, or of me, or of my old dog,
neither; and do you think I'm going to be ashamed of that old swag,
for a cabby or anyone else?  Do you think I'm going to study anybody's
feelings?  No one ever studied mine!  I'm in two minds to summon you
for using insulting language towards me!"

He lifted the swag by the twisted towel which served for a
shoulder-strap, swung it into the cab, got in himself and hauled the
dog after him.

"You can drive me somewhere where I can leave my swag and dog while I
get some decent clothes to see a tailor in," he said to the cabman.
"My old dog ain't used to cabs, you see."

Then he added, reflectively: "I drove a cab myself,
once, for five years in Sydney."



Stiffner and Jim

(Thirdly, Bill)


We were tramping down in Canterbury, Maoriland, at the time, swagging
it--me and Bill--looking for work on the new railway line.  Well, one
afternoon, after a long, hot tramp, we comes to Stiffner's
Hotel--between Christchurch and that other place--I forget the name of
it--with throats on us like sunstruck bones, and not the price of a
stick of tobacco.

We had to have a drink, anyway, so we chanced it.  We walked right
into the bar, handed over our swags, put up four drinks, and tried to
look as if we'd just drawn our cheques and didn't care a curse for any
man.  We looked solvent enough, as far as swagmen go.  We were dirty
and haggard and ragged and tired-looking, and that was all the more
reason why we might have our cheques all right.

This Stiffner was a hard customer.  He'd been a spieler, fighting man,
bush parson, temperance preacher, and a policeman, and a commercial
traveller, and everything else that was damnable; he'd been a
journalist, and an editor; he'd been a lawyer, too.  He was an ugly
brute to look at, and uglier to have a row with--about six-foot-six,
wide in proportion, and stronger than Donald Dinnie.

He was meaner than a gold-field Chinaman, and sharper than a sewer
rat: he wouldn't give his own father a feed, nor lend him a
sprat--unless some safe person backed the old man's I.O.U.

We knew that we needn't expect any mercy from Stiffner; but something
had to be done, so I said to Bill:

"Something's got to be done, Bill!  What do you think of it?"

Bill was mostly a quiet young chap, from Sydney, except when he got
drunk--which was seldom--and then he was a customer, from all round.
He was cracked on the subject of spielers.  He held that the
population of the world was divided into two classes--one was spielers
and the other was the mugs.  He reckoned that he wasn't a mug.  At
first I thought he was a spieler, and afterwards I thought that he was
a mug.  He used to say that a man had to do it these times; that he
was honest once and a fool, and was robbed and starved in consequences
by his friends and relations; but now he intended to take all that he
could get.  He said that you either had to have or be had; that men
were driven to be sharps, and there was no help for it.

Bill said:

"We'll have to sharpen our teeth, that's all, and chew somebody's
lug."

"How?" I asked.

There was a lot of navvies at the pub, and I knew one or two by sight,
so Bill says:

"You know one or two of these mugs.  Bite one of their ears.

"So I took aside a chap that I knowed and bit his ear for ten bob,
and gave it to Bill to mind, for I thought it would be safer with him
than with me.

"Hang on to that," I says, "and don't lose it for your natural
life's sake, or Stiffner'll stiffen us."

We put up about nine bob's worth of drinks that night--me and
Bill--and Stiffner didn't squeal: he was too sharp.  He shouted once
or twice.

By-and-by I left Bill and turned in, and in the morning when I woke up
there was Bill sitting alongside of me, and looking about as lively as
the fighting kangaroo in London in fog time.  He had a black eye and
eighteen pence.  He'd been taking down some of the mugs.

"Well, what's to be done now?" I asked.  "Stiffner can smash us
both with one hand, and if we don't pay up he'll pound our swags and
cripple us.  He's just the man to do it.  He loves a fight even more
than he hates being had."

"There's only one thing to be done, Jim," says Bill, in a tired,
disinterested tone that made me mad.

"Well, what's than" I said.

"Smoke!"

"Smoke be damned," I snarled, losing my temper.

"You know dashed well that our swags are in the bar, and we can't
smoke without them.

"Well, then," says Bill, "I'll toss you to see who's to face the
landlord."

"Well, I'll be blessed!" I says.  "I'll see you further first.  You
have got a front.  You mugged that stuff away, and you'll have to get
us out of the mess."

It made him wild to be called a mug, and we swore and growled at each
other for a while; but we daren't speak loud enough to have a fight,
so at last I agreed to toss up for it, and I lost.

Bill started to give me some of his points, but I shut him up quick.

"You've had your turn, and made a mess of it," I said.  "For God's
sake give me a show.  Now, I'll go into the bar and ask for the swags,
and carry them out on to the veranda, and then go back to settle up.
You keep him talking all the time.  You dump the two swags together,
and smoke like sheol.  That's all you've got to do."

I went into the bar, got the swags front the missus, carried them out
on to the veranda, and then went back.

Stiffner came in.

"Good morning!"

"Good morning, sir," says Stiffner.

"It'll be a nice day, I think?"

"Yes, I think so.  I suppose you are going on?"

"Yes, we'll have to make a move to-day."

Then I hooked carelessly on to the counter with one elbow, and looked
dreamy-like out across the clearing, and presently I gave a sort of
sigh and said: "Ah, well! I think I'll have a beer."

"Right you are!  Where's your mate?"

"Oh, he's round at the back.  He'll be round directly; but he ain't
drinking this morning."

Stiffner laughed that nasty empty laugh of his.  He thought Bill was
whipping the cat.

"What's yours, boss?" I said.

"Thankee!...Here's luck!"

"Here's luck!"

The country was pretty open round there--the nearest timber was better
than a mile away, and I wanted to give Bill a good start across the
flat before the go-as-you-can commenced; so I talked for a while, and
while we were talking I thought I might as well go the whole hog--I
might as well die for a pound as a penny, if I had to die; and if I
hadn't I'd have the pound to the good, anyway, so to speak.  Anyhow,
the risk would be about the same, or less, for I might have the spirit
to run harder the more I had to run for--the more spirits I had to run
for, in fact, as it turned out--so I says:

"I think I'll take one of them there flasks of whisky to last us on
the road."

"Right y'are," says Stiffner.  "What'll ye have--a small one or a
big one?"

"Oh, a big one, I think--if I can get it into my pocket."

"It'll be a tight squeeze," he said, and he laughed.

"I'll try," I said.  "Bet you two drinks I'll get it in."

"Done!" he says.  "The top inside coat-pocket, and no tearing."

It was a big bottle, and all my pockets were small; but I got it into
the pocket he'd betted against.  It was a tight squeeze, but I got it
in.

Then we both laughed, but his laugh was nastier than usual, because it
was meant to be pleasant, and he'd lost two drinks; and my laugh
wasn't easy--I was anxious as to which of us would laugh next.

Just then I noticed something, and an idea struck me--about the
most up-to-date idea that ever struck me in my life.  I noticed that
Stiffner was limping on his right foot this morning, so I said to him:

"What's up with your foot?" putting my hand in my pocket.  "Oh,
it's a crimson nail in my boot," he said.  "I thought I got the
blanky thing out this morning; but I didn't."

There just happened to be an old bag of shoemaker's tools in the bar,
belonging to an old cobbler who was lying dead drunk on the veranda.
So I said, taking my hand out of my pocket again:

"Lend us the boot, and I'll fix it in a minute.  That's my old
trade."

"Oh, so you're a shoemaker," he said.  "I'd never have thought
it."

He laughs one of his useless laughs that wasn't wanted, and slips off
the boot--he hadn't laced it up--and hands it across the bar to me.
It was an ugly brute--a great thick, iron-bound, boiler-plated navvy's
boot.  It made me feel sore when I looked at it.

I got the bag and pretended to fix the nail; but I didn't.

"There's a couple of nails gone from the sole," I said.  "I'll put
'em in if I can find any hobnails, and it'll save the sole," and I
rooted in the bag and found a good long nail, and shoved it right
through the sole on the sly.  He'd been a bit of a sprinter in his
time, and I thought it might be better for me in the near future if
the spikes of his running-shoes were inside.

"There, you'll find that better, I fancy," I said, standing the boot
on the bar counter, but keeping my hand on it in an absent-minded kind
of way.  Presently I yawned and stretched myself, and said in a
careless way:

"Ah, well!  How's the slate?" He scratched the back of his head and
pretended to think.

"Oh, well, we'll call it thirty bob."

Perhaps he thought I'd slap down two quid.

"Well," I says, "and what will you do supposing we don't pay you?"

He looked blank for a moment.  Then he fired up and gasped and choked
once or twice; and then he cooled down suddenly and laughed his
nastiest laugh--he was one of those men who always laugh when they're
wild--and said in a nasty, quiet tone:

"You thundering, jumped-up crawlers!  If you don't (something) well
part up I'll take your swags and (something) well kick your gory pants
so you won't be able to sit down for a month--or stand up either!"

"Well, the sooner you begin the better," I said; and I chucked the
boot into a corner and bolted.


He jumped the bar counter, got his boot, and came after me.  He paused
to slip the boot on--but he only made one step, and then gave a howl
and slung the boot off and rushed back.  When I looked round again
he'd got a slipper on, and was coming--and gaining on me, too.  I
shifted scenery pretty quick the next five minutes.  But I was soon
pumped.  My heart began to beat against the ceiling of my head, and my
lungs all choked up in my throat.  When I guessed he was getting
within kicking distance I glanced round so's to dodge the kick.  He
let out; but I shied just in time.  He missed fire, and the slipper
went about twenty feet up in the air and fell in a waterhole.

He was done then, for the ground was stubbly and stony.  I seen Bill
on ahead pegging out for the horizon, and I took after him and reached
for the timber for all I was worth, for I'd seen Stiffner's missus
coming with a shovel--to bury the remains, I suppose; and those two
were a good match--Stiffner and his missus, I mean.

Bill looked round once, and melted into the bush pretty soon after
that.  When I caught up he was about done; but I grabbed my swag and
we pushed on, for I told Bill that I'd seen Stiffner making for the
stables when I'd last looked round; and Bill thought that we'd better
get lost in the bush as soon as ever we could, and stay lost, too, for
Stiffner was a man that couldn't stand being had.

The first thing that Bill said when we got safe into camp was: "I
told you that we'd pull through all right.  You need never be
frightened when you're travelling with me.  Just take my advice and
leave things to me, and we'll hang out all right.  Now-."

But I shut him up.  He made me mad.

"Why, you--!  What the sheol did _you_ do?"

"Do?" he says.  "I got away with the swags, didn't I?  Where'd they
be now if it wasn't for me?"

Then I sat on him pretty hard for his pretensions, and paid him out
for all the patronage he'd worked off on me, and called him a mug
straight, and walked round him, so to speak, and blowed, and told him
never to pretend to me again that he was a battler.

Then, when I thought I'd licked him into form, I cooled down and
soaped him up a bit; but I never thought that he had three climaxes
and a crisis in store for me.

He took it all pretty cool; he let me have my fling, and gave me time
to get breath; then he leaned languidly over on his right side, shoved
his left hand down into his left trouserpocket, and brought up a
boot-lace, a box of matches, and nine-and-six.

As soon as I got the focus of it I gasped:

"Where the deuce did you get that?"

"I had it all along," he said, "but I seen at the pub that you had
the show to chew a lug, so I thought we'd save it--nine-and-sixpences
ain't picked up every day."

Then he leaned over on his left, went down into the other pocket,
and came up with a piece of tobacco and half-a-sovereign.

My eyes bulged out.

"Where the blazes did you get that from?" I yelled.

"That," he said, "was the half-quid you give me last night.
Half-quids ain't to be thrown away these times; and, besides, I had a
down on Stiffner, and meant to pay him out; I reckoned that if we
wasn't sharp enough to take him down we hadn't any business to be
supposed to be alive.  Anyway, I guessed we'd do it; and so we
did--and got a bottle of whisky into the bargain."

Then he leaned back, tired-like, against the log, and dredged his
upper left-hand waistcoat-pocket, and brought up a sovereign wrapped
in a pound note.  Then he waited for me to speak; but I couldn't.  I
got my mouth open, but couldn't get it shut again.

"I got that out of the mugs last night, but I thought that we'd want
it, and might as well keep it.  Quids ain't so easily picked up,
nowadays; and, besides, we need stuff more'n Stiffner does, and so--"

"And did he know you had the stuff?" I gasped.

"Oh, yes, that's the fun of it.  That's what made him so excited.  He
was in the parlour all the time I was playing.  But we might as well
have a drink!

"We did.  I wanted it."


Bill turned in by-and-by, and looked like a sleeping innocent in the
moonlight.  I sat up late, and smoked, and thought hard, and watched
Bill, and turned in, and thought till near daylight, and then went to
sleep, and had a nightmare about it.  I dreamed I chased Stiffner
forty miles to buy his pub, and that Bill turned out to be his nephew.

Bill divvied up all right, and gave me half a crown over, but I didn't
travel with him long after that.  He was a decent young fellow as far
as chaps go, and a good mate as far as mates go; but he was too far
ahead for a peaceful, easy-going chap like me.  It would have worn me
out in a year to keep up to him.

P.S.--The name of this should have been:
  'Bill and Stiffner (thirdly, Jim)'




WHEN THE SUN WENT DOWN


Jack Drew sat on the edge of the shaft, with his foot in the loop and
one hand on the rope, ready to descend.  His elder brother, Tom, stood
at one end of the windlass and the third mate at the other.  Jack
paused before swinging off, looked up at his brother, and impulsively
held out his hand:

"You ain't going to let the sun go down, are you, Tom?"

But Tom kept both hands on the windlass-handle and said nothing.

"Lower away!"

They lowered him to the bottom, and Tom shouldered his pick in silence
and walked off to the tent.  He found the tin plate, pint-pot, and
things set ready for him on the rough slab table under the bush shed.
The tea was made, the cabbage and potatoes strained and placed in a
billy near the fire.  He found the fried bacon and steak between two
plates in the camp-oven.  He sat down to the table but he could not
eat.  He felt mean.  The inexperience and hasty temper of his brother
had caused the quarrel between them that morning; but then Jack
admitted that, and apologized when he first tried to make it up.

Tom moved round uneasily and tried to smoke: he could not get Jack's
last appeal out of his ears--"You ain't going to let the sun go down,
Tom?"

Tom found himself glancing at the sun.  It was less than two hours
from sunset.  He thought of the words of the old Hebrew--or
Chinese--poet; he wasn't religious, and the authorship didn't matter.
The old poet's words began to haunt him "Let not the sun go down upon
your wrath--Let not the sun go down upon your wrath."

The line contains good, sound advice; for quick-tempered men are often
the most sensitive, and when they let the sun go down on the aforesaid
wrath that quality is likely to get them down and worry them during
the night.

Tom started to go to the claim, but checked himself, and sat down and
tried to draw comfort from his pipe.  He understood his brother
thoroughly, but his brother never understood him--that was where the
trouble was.  Presently he got thinking how Jack would worry about the
quarrel and have no heart for his work.  Perhaps he was fretting over
it now, all alone by himself, down at the end of the damp, dark drive.
Tom had a lot of the old woman about him, in spite of his unsociable
ways and brooding temper.

He had almost made up his mind to go below again, on some excuse, when
his mate shouted from the top of the shaft:

"Tom! Tom! For Christ's sake come here!"

Tom's heart gave a great thump, and he ran like a kangaroo to the
shaft.  All the diggers within hearing were soon on the spot.  They
saw at a glance what had happened.  It was madness to sink without
timber in such treacherous ground.  _The sides of the shaft were
closing in_.  Tom sprang forward and shouted through the crevice:

"To the face, Jack!  To the face, for your life!"

"The old Workings!" he cried, turning to the diggers.  "Bring a fan
and tools.  We'll dig him out."

A few minutes later a fan was rigged over a deserted shaft close by,
where fortunately the windlass had been left for bailing purposes, and
men were down in the old drive.  Tom knew that he and his mates had
driven very close to the old workings.

He knelt in the damp clay before the face and worked like a madman; he
refused to take turn about, and only dropped the pick to seize a
shovel in his strong hands, and snatch back the loose clay from under
his feet; he reckoned that he had six or, perhaps, eight feet to
drive, and he knew that the air could not last long in the new
drive--even if that had not already fallen in and crushed his brother.
Great drops of perspiration stood out on Tom's forehead, and his
breath began to come in choking sobs, but he still struck strong,
savage blows into the clay before him, and the drive lengthened
quickly.  Once he paused a moment to listen, and then distinctly heard
a sound as of a tool or stone being struck against the end of the new
drive.  Jack was safe!

Tom dug on until the clay suddenly fell away from his pick and left a
hole, about the size of a plate, in the "face" before him.  "Thank
God!" said a hoarse, strained voice at the other side.

"All right, Jack!"

"Yes, old man; you are just in time; I've hardly got room to stand
in, and I'm nearly smothered."  He was crouching against the "face"
of the new drive.

Tom dropped his pick and fell back against the man behind him.

"Oh, God! my back!" he cried.

Suddenly he struggled to his knees, and then fell forward on his hand
and dragged himself close to the hole in the end of the drive.

"Jack!" he gasped, "Jack!"

"Right, old man; what's the matter?"

"I've hurt my heart, Jack!--Put your hand--quick!...The sun's going
down."

Jack's hand came out through the hole, Tom gripped it, and then fell
with his face in the damp clay.

They half carried, half dragged him from the drive, for the roof was
low and they were obliged to stoop.  They took him to the shaft and
sent him up, lashed to the rope.

A few blows of the
pick, and Jack scrambled from his prison and went to the surface, and
knelt on the grass by the body of his brother.  The diggers gathered
round and took off their hats.  And the sun went down.



THE MAN WHO FORGOT


"Well, I dunno," said Tom Marshall--known as "The Oracle"--"I've
heerd o' sich cases before: they ain't commin, but--I've heerd o' sich
cases before," and he screwed up the left side of his face whilst he
reflectively scraped his capacious right ear with the large blade of a
pocket-knife.

They were sitting at the western end of the rouseabouts' hut, enjoying
the breeze that came up when the sun went down, and smoking and
yarning.  The "case" in question was a wretchedly forlorn-looking
specimen of the swag-carrying clan whom a boundary-rider had found
wandering about the adjacent plain, and had brought into the station.
He was a small, scraggy man, painfully fair, with a big, baby-like
head, vacant watery eyes, long thin hairy hands, that felt like pieces
of damp seaweed, and an apologetic cringe-and-look-up-at-you manner.
He professed to have forgotten who he was and all about himself.

The Oracle was deeply interested in this case, as indeed he was in
anything else that "looked curious." He was a big, simple-minded
shearer, with more heart than brains, more experience than sense, and
more curiosity than either.  It was a wonder that he had not profited,
even indirectly, by the last characteristic.  His heart was filled
with a kind of reverential pity for anyone who was fortunate or
unfortunate enough to possess an "affliction;" and amongst his mates
had been counted a deaf man, a blind man, a poet, and a man who "had
rats."  Tom had dropped across them individually, when they were down
in the world, and had befriended them, and studied them with great
interest--especially the poet; and they thought kindly of him, and
were grateful--except the individual with the rats, who reckoned Tom
had an axe to grind--that he, in fact, wanted to cut his (Rat's) liver
out as a bait for Darling cod--and so renounced the mateship.

It was natural, then, for The Oracle to take the present case under
his wing.  He used his influence with the boss to get the Mystery on
"picking up," and studied him in spare time, and did his best to
assist the poor hushed memory, which nothing the men could say or do
seemed able to push further back than the day on which the stranger
"kind o' woke up" on the plain, and found a swag beside him.  The
swag had been prospected and fossicked for a clue, but yielded none.
The chaps were sceptical at first, and inclined to make fun of the
Mystery; but Tom interfered, and intimated that if they were skunks
enough to chyack or try on any of their "funny business" with a
"pore afflicted chap," he (Tom) would be obliged to "perform."
Most of the men there had witnessed Tom's performance, and no one
seemed ambitious to take a leading part in it.  They preferred to be
in the audience.

"Yes," reflected The Oracle, "it's a curious case, and I dare say
some of them big doctors, like Morell Mackenzie, would be glad to give
a thousand or two to get holt on a case like this."

"Done," cried Mitchell, the goat of the shed.  "I'll go halves!--or
stay, let's form a syndicate and work the Mystery."

Some of the rouseabouts laughed, but the joke fell as flat with Tom as
any other joke.

"The worst of it is," said the Mystery himself, in the whine that
was natural to him, and with a timid side look up at Tom--"the worst
of it is I might be a lord or duke, and don't know anything about it.
I might be a rich man, with a lot of houses and money.  I might be a
lord."

The chaps guffawed.

"Wot'yer laughing at?" asked Mitchell.  "I don't see anything
unreasonable about it; he might be a lord as far as looks go.  I've
seen two."

"Yes," reflected Tom, ignoring Mitchell, "there's something in
that; but then again, you see, you might be Jack the Ripper.  Better
let it slide, mate; let the dead past bury its dead.  Start fresh with
a clean sheet."

"But I don't even know my name, or whether I'm married or not,"
whined the outcast.  "I might have a good wife and little ones."

"Better keep on forgetting, mate," Mitchell said, "and as for a
name, that's nothing.  I don't know mine, and I've had eight.  There's
plenty good names knocking round.  I knew a man named Jim Smith that
died.  Take his name, it just suits you, and he ain't likely to call
round for it; if he does, you can say you was born with it."

So they called him Smith, and soon began to regard him as a harmless
lunatic and to take no notice of his eccentricities.  Great interest
was taken in the case for a time, and even Mitchell put in his oar
and tried all sorts of ways to assist the Mystery in his weak,
helpless, and almost pitiful endeavours to recollect who he was.  A
similar case happened to appear in the papers at this time, and the
thing caught on to such an extent that The Oracle was moved to impart
some advice from his store of wisdom.

"I wouldn't think too much over it if I was you," said he to
Mitchell, "hundreds of sensible men went mad over that there
Tichborne case who didn't have anything to do with it, but just
through thinking on it; and you're ratty enough already, Jack.  Let it
alone and trust me to find out who's Smith just as soon as ever we cut
out."

Meanwhile Smith ate, worked, and slept, and borrowed tobacco and
forgot to return it--which was made a note of.  He talked freely about
his case when asked, but if he addressed anyone, it was with the air
of the timid but good young man, who is fully aware of the extent and
power of this world's wickedness, and stands somewhat in awe of it,
but yet would beg you to favour a humble worker in the vineyard by
kindly accepting a tract, and passing it on to friends after perusal.


One Saturday morning, about a fortnight before cut out, The Oracle
came late to his stand, and apparently with something on his mind.
Smith hadn't turned up, and the next rouseabout was doing his work, to
the mutual dissatisfaction of all parties immediately concerned.

"Did you see anything of Smith?" asked Mitchell of The Oracle.
"Seems to have forgot to get up this morning."

Tom looked disheartened and disappointed.  _"He's forgot
again_," said he, slowly and impressively.

"Forgot what?  We know he's blessed well forgot to come to graft."

"He's forgot again," repeated Tom.  "He woke up this morning and
wanted to know who he was and where he was."  Comments.

"Better give him best, Oracle," said Mitchell presently.  "If he
can't find out who he is and where he is, the boss'll soon find it out
for him."

"No," said Tom, "when I take a thing in hand I see it through."

This was also characteristic of the boss-over-the-board, though in
another direction.  He went down to the but and inquired for Smith.

"Why ain't you at work?"

"Who am I, sir?  Where am I?" whined Smith. "Can you please tell me
who I am and where I am?"

The boss drew a long breath and stared blankly at the Mystery; then he
erupted.

"Now, look here!" he howled, "I don't know who the gory sheol you
are, except that you're a gory lunatic, and what's more, I don't care
a damn.  But I'll soon show you where you are!  You can call up at the
store and get your cheque, and soon as you blessed well like; and then
take a walk, and don't forget to take your lovely swag with you."

The matter was discussed at the dinner-table.  The Oracle swore that
it was a cruel, mean way to treat a "pore afflicted chap," and
cursed the boss.  Tom's admirers cursed in sympathy, and trouble
seemed threatening, when the voice of Mitchell was heard to rise in
slow, deliberate tones over the clatter of cutlery and tin plates.

"I wonder," said the voice, "I wonder whether Smith forgot his
cheque?"

It was ascertained that Smith hadn't.

There was some eating and thinking done.  Soon Mitchell's voice was
heard again, directed at The Oracle.

It said "Do you keep any vallabels about your bunk, Oracle?"

Tom looked hard at Mitchell.  "Why?"

"Oh, nothin': only I think it wouldn't be a bad idea for you to look
at your bunk and see whether Smith forgot."

The chaps grew awfully interested.  They fixed their eyes on Tom, and
he looked with feeling from one face to another; then he pushed his
plate back, and slowly extracted his long legs from between the stool
and the table.  He climbed to his bunk, and carefully reviewed the
ingredients of his swag.  Smith hadn't forgot.

When The Oracle's face came round again there was in it a strange
expression which a close study would have revealed to be more of anger
than of sorrow, but that was not all.  It was an expression such as a
man might wear who is undergoing a terrible operation, without
chloroform, but is determined not to let a whimper escape him.  Tom
didn't swear, and by that token they guessed how mad he was.  'Twas a
rough shed, with a free and lurid vocabulary, but had they all sworn
in chorus, with One-eyed Bogan as lead, it would not have done justice
to Tom's feelings--and they realized this.

The Oracle took down his bridle from its peg, and started for the door
amid a respectful and sympathetic silence, which was only partly
broken once by the voice of Mitchell, which asked in an awed whisper:

"Going ter ketch yer horse, Tom?" The Oracle nodded, and passed on;
he spake no word--he was too full for words.

Five minutes passed, and then the voice of Mitchell was heard again,
uninterrupted by the clatter of tinware.  It said in impressive tones:

"It would not be a bad idea for some of you chaps that camp in the
bunks along there, to have a look at your things.  Scotty's bunk is
next to Tom's."

Scotty shot out of his place as if a snake had hold of his leg,
starting a plank in the table and upsetting three soup plates.  He
reached for his bunk like a drowning man clutching at a plank, and
tore out the bedding.  Again, Smith hadn't forgot.

Then followed a general overhaul, and it was found in most cases that
Smith had remembered.  The pent-up reservoir of blasphemy burst forth.

The Oracle came up with Smith that night at the nearest shanty, and
found that he had forgotten again, and in several instances, and was
forgetting some more under the influence of rum and of the flattering
interest taken in his case by a drunken Bachelor of Arts who happened
to be at the pub.  Tom came in quietly from the rear, and crooked his
finger at the shanty-keeper.  They went apart from the rest, and
talked together a while very earnestly.  Then they secretly examined
Smith's swag, the core of which was composed of Tom's and his mate's
valuables.

Then The Oracle stirred up Smith's recollections and departed.

Smith was about again in a couple of weeks.  He was damaged somewhat
physically, but his memory was no longer impaired.



HUNGERFORD


One of the hungriest cleared roads in New South Wales runs to within a
couple of miles of Hungerford, and stops there; then you strike
through the scrub to the town.  There is no distant prospect of
Hungerford--you don't see the town till you are quite close to it, and
then two or three white-washed galvanized-iron roofs start out of the
mulga.

They say that a past Ministry commenced to clear the road from Bourke,
under the impression that Hungerford was an important place, and went
on, with the blindness peculiar to governments, till they got to
within two miles of the town.  Then they ran short of rum and rations,
and sent a man on to get them, and make inquiries.  The member never
came back, and two more were sent to find him--or Hungerford.  Three
days later the two returned in an exhausted condition, and submitted a
motion of want-of-confidence, which was lost.  Then the whole House
went on and was lost also.  Strange to relate, that Government was
never missed.

However, we found Hungerford and camped there for a day.  The town is
right on the Queensland border, and an interprovincial rabbit-proof
fence--with rabbits on both sides of it--runs across the main street.

This fence is a standing joke with Australian rabbits--about the only
joke they have out there, except the memory of Pasteur and poison and
inoculation.  It is amusing to go a little way out of town, about
sunset, and watch them crack Noah's Ark rabbit jokes about that fence,
and burrow under and play leap-frog over it till they get tired.  One
old buck rabbit sat up and nearly laughed his ears off at a joke of
his own about that fence.  He laughed so much that he couldn't get
away when I reached for him.  I could hardly eat him for laughing.  I
never saw a rabbit laugh before; but I've seen a 'possum do it.

Hungerford consists of two houses and a humpy in New South Wales, and
five houses in Queensland.  Characteristically enough, both the pubs
are in Queensland.  We got a glass of sour yeast at one and paid
sixpence for it--we had asked for English ale.

The post office is in New South Wales, and the police-barracks in
Bananaland.  The police cannot do anything if there's a row going on
across the street in New South Wales, except to send to Brisbane and
have an extradition warrant applied for; and they don't do much if
there's a row in Queensland.  Most of the rows are across the border,
where the pubs are.

At least, I believe that's how it is, though the man who told me might
have been a liar.  Another man said he was a liar, but then _he_
might have been a liar himself--a third person said he was one.  I
heard that there was a fight over it, but the man who told me about
the fight might not have been telling the truth.

One part of the town swears at Brisbane when things go wrong, and the
other part curses Sydney.

The country looks as though a great ash-heap had been spread out
there, and mulga scrub and firewood planted--and neglected.  The
country looks just as bad for a hundred miles round Hungerford, and
beyond that it gets worse--a blasted, barren wilderness that doesn't
even howl.  If it howled it would be a relief.

I believe that Bourke and Wills found Hungerford, and it's a pity they
did; but, if I ever stand by the graves of the men who first travelled
through this country, when there were neither roads nor stations, nor
tanks, nor bores, nor pubs, I'll--I'll take my hat off.  There were
brave men in the land in those days.

It is said that the explorers gave the district its name chiefly
because of the hunger they found there, which has remained there ever
since.  I don't know where the "ford" comes in--there's nothing to
ford, except in flood-time.  Hungerthirst would have been better.  The
town is supposed to be situated on the banks of a river called the
Paroo, but we saw no water there, except what passed for it in a tank.
The goats and sheep and dogs and the rest of the population drink
there.  It is dangerous to take too much of that water in a raw state.

Except in flood-time you couldn't find the bed of the river without
the aid of a spirit-level and a long straight-edge.  There is a
Custom-house against the fence on the northern side.  A pound of tea
often costs six shillings on that side, and you can get a common lead
pencil for fourpence at the rival store across the street in the
mother province.  Also, a small loaf of sour bread sells for a
shilling at the humpy aforementioned.  Only about sixty per cent of
the sugar will melt.

We saw one of the storekeepers give a dead-beat swagman five
shillings' worth of rations to take him on into Queensland.  The
storekeepers often do this, and put it down on the loss side of their
books.  I hope the recording angel listens, and puts it down on the
right side of his book.

We camped on the Queensland side of the fence, and after tea had a
yarn with an old man who was minding a mixed flock of goats and sheep;
and we asked him whether he thought Queensland was better than New
South Wales, or the other way about.

He scratched the back of his head, and thought a while, and hesitated
like a stranger who is going to do you a favour at some personal
inconvenience.

At last, with the bored air of a man who has gone through the same
performance too often before, he stepped deliberately up to the fence
and spat over it into New South Wales.  After which he got leisurely
through and spat back on Queensland.

"That's what I think of the blanky colonies!" he said.

He gave us time to become sufficiently impressed; then he said:

"And if I was at the Victorian and South Australian border I'd do the
same thing."

He let that soak into our minds, and added: "And the same with West
Australia--and--and Tasmania."  Then he went away.

The last would have been a long spit--and he forgot Maoriland.

We heard afterwards that his name was Clancy and he had that day been
offered a job droving at "twenty-five shillings a week and find your
own horse."  Also find your own horse feed and tobacco and soap and
other luxuries, at station prices.  Moreover, if you lost your own
horse you would have to find another, and if that died or went astray
you would have to find a third--or forfeit your pay and return on
foot.  The boss drover agreed to provide flour and mutton--when such
things were procurable.

Consequently, Clancy's unfavourable opinion of the colonies.

My mate
and I sat down on our swags against the fence to talk things over.
One of us was very deaf.  Presently a black tracker went past and
looked at us, and returned to the pub.  Then a trooper in Queensland
uniform came along and asked us what the trouble was about, and where
we came from and were going, and where we camped.  We said we were
discussing private business, and he explained that he thought it was a
row, and came over to see.  Then he left us, and later on we saw him
sitting with the rest of the population on a bench under the hotel
veranda.  Next morning we rolled up our swags and left Hungerford to
the north-west.




A CAMP-FIRE YARN


"This girl," said Mitchell,
continuing a yarn to his mate, "was about the ugliest girl I ever saw,
except one, and I'll tell you about her directly.  The old man had a
carpenter's shop fixed up in a shed at the back of his house, and he
used to work there pretty often, and sometimes I'd come over and yarn
with him.  One day I was sitting on the end of the bench, and the old
man was working away, and Mary was standing there too, all three of
us yarning--she mostly came poking round where I was if I happened to
be on the premises--or at least I thought so--and we got yarning about
getting married, and the old cove said he'd get married again if the
old woman died.

"'_You_ get married again!' said Mary.  'Why, father,
you wouldn't get anyone to marry you--who'd have you?'

"'Well,' he said, 'I bet I'll get someone sooner than you, anyway.
You don't seem to be able to get anyone, and it's pretty near time you
thought of settlin' down and gettin' married.  I wish _someone_
would have you.'

"He hit her pretty hard there, but it served her right.  She got as
good as she gave.  She looked at me and went all colours, and then she
went back to her washtub.

"She was mighty quiet at tea-time--she seemed hurt a lot, and I
began to feel sorry I'd laughed at the old man's joke, for she was
really a good, hard-working girl, and you couldn't help liking her.

"So after tea I went out to her in the kitchen, where she was washing
up, to try and cheer her up a bit.  She'd scarcely speak at first,
except to say 'Yes' or 'No', and kept her face turned away from me;
and I could see that she'd been crying.  I began to feel sorry for her
and mad at the old man, and I started to comfort her.  But I didn't go
the right way to work about it.  I told her that she mustn't take any
notice of the old cove, as he didn't mean half he said.  But she
seemed to take it harder than ever, and at last I got so sorry for her
that I told her that _I'd_ have her if she'd have me."

"And what did she say?" asked Mitchell's mate, after a pause.

"She said she wouldn't have me at any price!"

The mate laughed, and Mitchell grinned his quiet grin.

"Well, this set me thinking," he continued.  "I always knew I was a
dashed ugly cove, and I began to wonder whether any girl would really
have me; and I kept on it till at last I made up my mind to find out
and settle the matter for good--or bad.

"There was another farmer's daughter living close by, and I met her
pretty often coming home from work, and sometimes I had a yarn with
her.  She was plain, and no mistake: Mary was a Venus alongside of
her.  She had feet like a Lascar, and hands about ten sizes too large
for her, and a face like that camel--only red; she walked like a
camel, too.  She looked like a ladder with a dress on, and she didn't
know a great A from a corner cupboard.

"Well, one evening I met her at the sliprails, and presently I asked
her, for a joke, if she'd marry me.  Mind you, I never wanted to marry
_her_; I was only curious to know whether any girl would have me.

"She turned away her face and seemed to hesitate, and I was just
turning away and beginning to think I was a dashed hopeless case,
when all of a sudden she fell up against me and said she'd be my
wife....And it wasn't her fault that she wasn't."

"What did she do?"

"Do!  What didn't she do?  Next day she went down to our place when I
was at work, and hugged and kissed mother and the girls all round, and
cried, and told mother that she'd try and be a dutiful daughter to
her.  Good Lord! You should have seen the old woman and the girls when
I came home.

"Then she let everyone know that Bridget Page was engaged to Jack
Mitchell, and told her friends that she went down on her knees every
night and thanked the Lord for getting the love of a good man.  Didn't
the fellows chyack me, though!  My sisters were raving mad about it,
for their chums kept asking them how they liked their new sister, and
when it was going to come off, and who'd be bridesmaids and best man,
and whether they weren't surprised at their brother Jack's choice; and
then I'd gammon at home that it was all true.

"At last the place got too hot for me.  I got sick of dodging that
girl.  I sent a mate of mine to tell her that it was all a joke, and
that I was already married in secret; but she didn't see it, then I
cleared, and got a job in Newcastle, but had to leave there when my
mates sent me the office that she was coming.  I wouldn't wonder but
what she is humping her swag after me now.  In fact, I thought you was
her in disguise when I set eyes on you first....You needn't get mad
about it; I don't mean to say that you're quite as ugly as she was,
because I never saw a man that was--or a woman either.  Anyway, I'll
never ask a woman to marry me again unless I'm ready to marry her."

Then Mitchell's mate told a yarn.

"I knew a case once something like the one you were telling me about;
the landlady of a hash-house where I was stopping in Albany told me.
There was a young carpenter staying there, who'd run away from Sydney
from an old maid who wanted to marry him.  He'd cleared from the
church door, I believe.  He was scarcely more'n a boy--about
nineteen--and a soft kind of a fellow, something like you, only
good-looking--that is, he was passable.  Well, as soon as the woman
found out where he'd gone, she came after him.  She turned up at the
boarding-house one Saturday morning when Bobbie was at work; and the
first thing she did was to rent a double room from the landlady and
buy some cups and saucers to start housekeeping with.  When Bobbie
came home he just gave her one look and gave up the game.

"'Get your dinner, Bobbie,' she said, after she'd slobbered over him
a bit, 'and then get dressed and come with me and get married!'

"She was about three times his age, and had a face like that picture
of a lady over Sappho Smith's letters in the Sydney _Bulletin_.

"Well, Bobbie went with her like a--like a lamb; never gave a kick or
tried to clear."

"Hold on," said Mitchell, "did you ever shear lambs?"

"Never mind.  Let me finish the yarn.  Bobbie was married; but she
wouldn't let him out of her sight all that afternoon, and he had to
put up with her before them all.  About bedtime he sneaked out and
started along the passage to his room that he shared with two or three
mates.  But she'd her eye on him.

"'Bobbie, Bobbie!' she says, 'Where are you going?'

"'I'm going to bed,' said Bobbie.  'Good night!'

"'Bobbie, Bobbie,' she says, sharply.  'That isn't our room;
_this_ is our room, Bobbie.  Come back at once!  What do you
mean, Bobbie?  _Do you hear me, Bobbie?_'

"So Bobbie came back, and went in with the scarecrow.  Next morning
she was first at the breakfast table, in a dressing-gown and curl
papers.  And when they were all sitting down Bobbie sneaked in,
looking awfully sheepish, and sidled for his chair at the other end of
the table.  But she'd her eyes on him.

"'Bobbie, Bobbie!' she said, 'Come and kiss me, Bobbie!'" And he
had to do it in front of them all.

"But I believe she made him a good wife."




HIS COUNTRY-AFTER ALL


The Blenheim coach was descending into the valley of the Avetere
River--pronounced Aveterry--from the saddle of Taylor's Pass.  Across
the river to the right, the grey slopes and flats stretched away to
the distant sea from a range of tussock hills.  There was no native
bush there; but there were several groves of imported timber standing
wide apart---sentinel-like--seeming lonely and striking in their
isolation.

"Grand country, New Zealand, eh?" said a stout man with a brown
face, grey beard, and grey eyes, who sat between the driver and
another passenger on the box.

"You don't call this grand country!" exclaimed the other passenger,
who claimed to be, and looked like, a commercial traveller, and might
have been a professional spieler--quite possibly both.  "Why, it's
about the poorest country in New Zealand!  You ought to see some of
the country in the North Island--Wairarapa and Napier districts, round
about Pahiatua.  I call this damn poor country."

"Well, I reckon you wouldn't, if you'd ever been in Australia--back
in New South Wales.  The people here don't seem to know what a grand
country they've got.  You say this is the worst, eh?  Well, this would
make an Australian cockatoo's mouth water-the worst of New Zealand
would."

"I always thought Australia was all good country," mused the
driver--a flax-stick.  "I always thought--"

"Good country!" exclaimed the man with the grey beard, in a tone of
disgust.  "Why, it's only a mongrel desert, except some bits round
the coast.  The worst dried-up and God-forsaken country I was ever
in."

There was a silence, thoughtful on the driver's part, and aggressive
on that of the stranger.

"I always thought," said the driver, reflectively, after the
pause--"I always thought Australia was a good country," and he
placed his foot on the brake.

They let him think.  The coach descended the natural terraces above
the river bank, and pulled up at the pub.


"So you're a native of Australia?" said the bagman to the
grey-beard, as the coach went on again.

"Well, I suppose I am.  Anyway, I was born there.  That's the main
thing I've got against the darned country."

"How long did you stay there?"

"Till I got away," said the stranger.  Then, after a think, he
added, "I went away first when I was thirty-five--went to the
islands.  I swore I'd never go back to Australia again; but I did.  I
thought I had a kind of affection for old Sydney.  I knocked about the
blasted country for five or six years, and then I cleared out to
'Frisco.  I swore I'd never go back again, and I never will."

"But surely you'll take a run over and have a look at old Sydney and
those places, before you go back to America, after getting so near?"

"What the blazes do I want to have a look at the blamed country
for?" snapped the stranger, who had refreshed considerably.  "I've
got nothing to thank Australia for--except getting out of it.  It's
the best country to get out of that I was ever in."

"Oh, well, I only thought you might have had some friends over
there," interposed the traveller in an injured tone.

"Friends!  That's another reason.  I wouldn't go back there for all
the friends and relations since Adam.  I had more than quite enough of
it while I was there.  The worst and hardest years of my life were
spent in Australia.  I might have starved there, and did do it half my
time.  I worked harder and got less in my own country in five years
than I ever did in any other in fifteen"--he was getting mixed--"and
I've been in a few since then.  No, Australia is the worst country
that ever the Lord had the sense to forget.  I mean to stick to the
country that stuck to me, when I was starved out of my own dear native
land--and that country is the United States of America.  What's
Australia?  A big, thirsty, hungry wilderness, with one or two cities
for the convenience of foreign speculators, and a few collections of
humpies, called towns--also for the convenience of foreign
speculators; and populated mostly by mongrel sheep, and partly by
fools, who live like European slaves in the towns, and like dingoes in
the bush--who drivel about 'democracy,' and yet haven't any more spunk
than to graft for a few Cockney dudes that razzle-dazzle most of the
time in Paris.  Why, the Australians haven't even got the grit to
claim enough of their own money to throw a few dams across their
watercourses, and so make some of the interior fit to live in.
America's bad enough, but it was never so small as that....Bah!  The
curse of Australia is sheep, and the Australian war cry is Baa!"

"Well, you're the first man I ever heard talk as you've been doing
about his own country," said the bagman, getting tired and impatient
of being sat on all the time.  "'Lives there a man with a soul so
dead, who never said--to--to himself'...I forget the darned thing."

He tried to remember it.  The man whose soul was dead cleared his
throat for action, and the driver--for whom the bagman had shouted
twice as against the stranger's once--took the opportunity to observe
that he always thought a man ought to stick up for his own country.

The stranger ignored him and opened fire on the bagman.  He proceeded
to prove that that was all rot--that patriotism was the greatest curse
on earth; that it had been the cause of all war; that it was the
false, ignorant sentiment which moved men to slave, starve, and fight
for the comfort of their sluggish masters; that it was the enemy of
universal brotherhood, the mother of hatred, murder, and slavery, and
that the world would never be any better until the deadly poison,
called the sentiment of patriotism, had been "educated" out of the
stomachs of the people.  "Patriotism!" he exclaimed scornfully.
"My country!  The darned fools; the country never belonged to them,
but to the speculators, the absentees, land-boomers, swindlers, gangs
of thieves--the men the patriotic fools starve and fight for--their
masters.  Ba-a!"

The opposition collapsed.

The coach had climbed the terraces on the south side of the river, and
was bowling along on a level stretch of road across the elevated flat.

"What trees are those?" asked the stranger, breaking the aggressive
silence which followed his unpatriotic argument, and pointing to a
grove ahead by the roadside.  "They look as if they've been planted
there.  There ain't been a forest here surely?"

"Oh, they're some trees the Government imported," said the bagman,
whose knowledge on the subject was limited.  "Our own bush won't grow
in this soil."

"But it looks as if anything else would--"

Here the stranger sniffed once by accident, and then several times
with interest.

It was a warm morning after rain.  He fixed his eyes on those trees.

They didn't look like Australian gums; they tapered to the tops, the
branches were pretty regular, and the boughs hung in shipshape
fashion.  There was not the Australian heat to twist the branches and
turn the leaves.

"Why!" exclaimed the stranger, still staring and sniffing hard.
"Why, dang me if they ain't (sniff) Australian gums!"

"Yes," said the driver, flicking his horses, "they are."

"Blanky (sniff) blanky old Australian gums!" exclaimed the
ex-Australian, with strange enthusiasm.

"They're not old," said the driver; "they're only young trees.  But
they say they don't grow like that in Australia--'count of the
difference in the climate.  I always thought--"

But the other did not appear to hear him; he kept staring hard at the
trees they were passing.  They had been planted in rows and
cross-rows, and were coming on grandly.

There was a rabbit trapper's camp amongst those trees; he had made a
fire to boil his billy with gum-leaves and twigs, and it was the scent
of that fire which interested the exile's nose, and brought a wave of
memories with it.

"Good day, mate!" he shouted suddenly to the rabbit trapper, and to
the astonishment of his fellow passengers.

"Good day, mate!"  The answer came back like an echo--it seemed to
him--from the past.

Presently he caught sight of a few trees which had evidently been
planted before the others--as an experiment, perhaps--and, somehow,
one of them had grown after its own erratic native fashion--gnarled
and twisted and ragged, and could not be mistaken for anything else
but an Australian gum.

"A thunderin' old blue-gum!" ejaculated the traveller, regarding the
tree with great interest.

He screwed his neck to get a last glimpse, and then sat silently
smoking and gazing straight ahead, as if the past lay before him--and
it _was_ before him.

"Ah, well!" he said, in explanation of a long meditative silence on
his part; "ah, well--them saplings--the smell of them gum-leaves set
me thinking."  And he thought some more.

"Well, for my part," said a tourist in the coach, presently, in a
condescending tone, "I can't see much in Australia.  The bally
colonies are--"

"Oh, that be damned!" snarled the Australian-born--they had finished
the second flask of whisky.  "What do you Britishers know about
Australia?  She's as good as England, anyway."


"Well, I suppose you'll go straight back to the States as soon as
you've done your business in Christchurch," said the bagman, when
near their journey's end they had become confidential.

"Well, I dunno.  I reckon I'll
just take a run over to Australia first.  There's an old mate of mine
in business in Sydney, and I'd like to have a yarn with him."



A DAY ON A SELECTION


The scene is a small New South Wales western selection, the holder
whereof is native-English.  His wife is native-Irish.  Time, Sunday,
about 8 a.m.  A used-up looking woman comes from the slab-and-bark
house, turns her face towards the hillside, and shrieks:

"T-o-o-m_may_!"

No response, and presently she draws a long breath and
screams again:

"_Tom_m-a-a-y!"

A faint echo comes from far up the siding where Tommy's presence is
vaguely indicated by half a dozen cows moving slowly--very
slowly--down towards the cow-yard.

The woman retires.  Ten minutes later she comes out again and screams:

"_Tom_my!

"Y-e-e-a-a-s-s!" very passionately and shrilly.

"Ain't you goin' to bring those cows down to-day?"

"Y-e-e-a-a-s-s-s!--carn't yer see I'm comin'?"

A boy is seen to run wildly along the siding and hurl a missile at a
feeding cow; the cow runs forward a short distance through the trees,
and then stops to graze again while the boy stirs up another milker.

An hour goes by.

The rising Australian generation is represented by a thin, lanky youth
of about fifteen.  He is milking.  The cow-yard is next the house, and
is mostly ankle-deep in slush.  The boy drives a dusty,
discouraged-looking cow into the bail, and pins her head there; then
he gets tackle on to her right hind leg, hauls it back, and makes it
fast to the fence.  There are eleven cows, but not one of them can be
milked out of the bail--chiefly because their teats are sore.  The
selector does not know what makes the teats sore, but he has an
unquestioning faith in a certain ointment, recommended to him by a man
who knows less about cows than he does himself, which he causes to be
applied at irregular intervals--leaving the mode of application to the
discretion of his son.  Meanwhile the teats remain sore.

Having made the cow fast, the youngster cautiously takes hold of the
least sore teat, yanks it suddenly, and dodges the cow's hock.  When
he gets enough milk to dip his dirty hands in, he moistens the teats,
and things go on more smoothly.  Now and then he relieves the monotony
of his occupation by squirting at the eye of a calf which is dozing in
the adjacent pen.  Other times he milks into his mouth.  Every time
the cow kicks, a burr or a grass-seed or a bit of something else falls
into the milk, and the boy drowns these things with a well-directed
stream--on the principle that what's out of sight is out of mind.

Sometimes the boy sticks his head into the cow's side, hangs on by a
teat, and dozes, while the bucket, mechanically gripped between his
knees, sinks lower and lower till it rests on the ground.  Likely as
not he'll doze on until his mother's shrill voice startles him with an
inquiry as to whether he intends to get that milking done to-day;
other times he is roused by the plunging of the cow, or knocked over
by a calf which has broken through a defective panel in the pen.  In
the latter case the youth gets tackle on to the calf, detaches its
head from the teat with the heel of his boot, and makes it fast
somewhere.  Sometimes the cow breaks or loosens the leg-rope and gets
her leg into the bucket and then the youth clings desperately to the
pail and hopes she'll get her hoof out again without spilling the
milk.  Sometimes she does, more often she doesn't--it depends on the
strength of the boy and the pail and on the strategy of the former.
Anyway, the boy will lam the cow down with a jagged yard shovel, let
her out, and bail up another.

When he considers that he has finished milking he lets the cows out
with their calves and carries the milk down to the dairy, where he has
a heated argument with his mother, who--judging from the quantity of
milk--has reason to believe that he has slummed some of the milkers.
This he indignantly denies, telling her she knows very well the cows
are going dry.

The dairy is built of rotten box bark--though there is plenty of good
stringy-bark within easy distance--and the structure looks as if it
wants to lie down and is only prevented by three crooked props on the
leaning side; more props will soon be needed in the rear for the dairy
shows signs of going in that direction.  The milk is set in dishes
made of kerosene-tins, cut in halves, which are placed on bark shelves
fitted round against the walls.  The shelves are not level and the
dishes are brought to a comparatively horizontal position by means of
chips and bits of bark, inserted under the lower side.  The milk is
covered by soiled sheets of old newspapers supported on sticks laid
across the dishes.  This protection is necessary, because the box bark
in the roof has crumbled away and left fringed holes--also because the
fowls roost up there.  Sometimes the paper sags, and the cream may
have to be scraped off an article on dairy farming.

The selector's wife removes the newspapers, and reveals a thick,
yellow layer of rich cream, plentifully peppered with dust that has
drifted in somehow.  She runs a forefinger round the edges of the
cream to detach it from the tin, wipes her finger in her mouth, and
skims.  If the milk and cream are very thick she rolls the cream over
like a pancake with her fingers, and lifts it out in sections.  The
thick milk is poured into a slop-bucket, for the pigs and calves, the
dishes are "cleaned"--by the aid of a dipper full of warm water and
a rag--and the wife proceeds to set the morning's milk.  Tom holds up
the doubtful-looking rag that serves as a strainer while his mother
pours in the milk.  Sometimes the boy's hands get tired and he lets
some of the milk run over, and gets into trouble; but it doesn't
matter much, for the straining-cloth has several sizable holes in the
middle.

The door of the dairy faces the dusty road and is off its hinges and
has to be propped up.  The prop is missing this morning, and Tommy is
accused of having been seen chasing old Poley with it at an earlier
hour.  He never seed the damn prop, never chased no cow with it, and
wants to know what's the use of always accusing him.  He further
complains that he's always blamed for everything.  The pole is not
forthcoming, and so an old dray is backed against the door to keep it
in position.  There is more trouble about a cow that is lost, and
hasn't been milked for two days.  The boy takes the cows up to the
paddock sliprails and lets the top rail down: the lower rail fits
rather tightly and some exertion is required to free it, so he makes
the animals jump that one.  Then he "poddies"-hand-feeds--the calves
which have been weaned too early.  He carries the skim-milk to the
yard in a bucket made out of an oil-drum--sometimes a kerosene-tin--
seizes a calf by the nape of the neck with his left hand, inserts the
dirty forefinger of his right into its mouth, and shoves its head down
into the milk.  The calf sucks, thinking it has a teat, and pretty
soon it butts violently--as calves do to remind their mothers to let
down the milk--and the boy's wrist gets barked against the jagged edge
of the bucket.  He welts that calf in the jaw, kicks it in the
stomach, tries to smother it with its nose in the milk, and finally
dismisses it with the assistance of the calf rope and a shovel, and
gets another.  His hand feels sticky and the cleaned finger makes it
look as if he wore a filthy, greasy glove with the forefinger torn
off.

The selector himself is standing against a fence talking to a
neighbour.  His arms rest on the top rail of the fence, his chin rests
on his hands, his pipe rests between his fingers, and his eyes rest on
a white cow that is chewing her cud on the opposite side of the fence.
The neighbour's arms rest on the top rail also, his chin rests on his
hands, his pipe rests between his fingers, and his eyes rest on the
cow.  They are talking about that cow.  They have been talking about
her for three hours.  She is chewing her cud.  Her nose is well up and
forward, and her eyes are shut.  She lets her lower jaw fall a little,
moves it to one side, lifts it again, and brings it back into position
with a springing kind of jerk that has almost a visible recoil.  Then
her jaws stay perfectly still for a moment, and you would think she
had stopped chewing.  But she hasn't.  Now and again a soft, easy,
smooth-going swallow passes visibly along her clean, white throat and
disappears.  She chews again, and by and by she loses consciousness
and forgets to chew.  She never opens her eyes.  She is young and in
good condition; she has had enough to eat, the sun is just properly
warm for her, and--well, if an animal can be really happy, she ought
to be.

Presently the two men drag themselves away from the fence, fill their
pipes, and go to have a look at some rows of forked sticks, apparently
stuck in the ground for some purpose.  The selector calls these sticks
fruit-trees, and he calls the place "the orchard."  They fool round
these wretched sticks until dinnertime, when the neighbour says he
must be getting home.  "Stay and have some dinner!  Man alive!  Stay
and have some dinner!" says the selector; and so the friend stays.

It is a broiling hot day in summer, and the dinner consists of hot
roast meat, hot baked potatoes, hot cabbage, hot pumpkin, hot peas, and
burning-hot plum-pudding.  The family drinks on an average four cups of
tea each per meal.  The wife takes her place at the head of the table
with a broom to keep the fowls out, and at short intervals she
interrupts the conversation with such exclamations as "Shoo! shoo!"
"Tommy, can't you see that fowl?  Drive it out!"  The fowls evidently
pass a lot of their time in the house.  They mark the circle described
by the broom, and take care to keep two or three inches beyond it.
Every now and then you see a fowl on the dresser amongst the crockery,
and there is great concern to get it out before it breaks something.
While dinner is in progress two steers get into the wheat through a
broken rail which has been spliced with stringy-bark, and a calf or two
break into the vineyard.  And yet this careless Australian selector,
who is too shiftless to put up a decent fence, or build a decent house
and who knows little or nothing about farming, would seem by his
conversation to have read up all the great social and political
questions of the day.  Here are some fragments of conversation caught
at the dinner-table.  Present--the selector, the missus, the neighbour,
Corney George--nicknamed "Henry George"--Tommy, Jacky, and the younger
children.  The spaces represent interruptions by the fowls and
children:

Corney George (continuing conversation): "But Henry George says, in
'Progress and Poverty,' he says--"

Missus (to the fowls): "Shoo! Shoo!"

Corney: "He says--"

Tom: "Marther, jist speak to this Jack."

Missus (to Jack): "If you can't behave yourself, leave the table."

Tom [Corney, probably]: "He says in Progress and--"

Missus: "Shoo!"

Neighbour: "I think 'Lookin' Backwards' is more--"

Missus: "Shoo! Shoo! Tom, can't you see that fowl?"

Selector: "Now I think 'Caesar's Column' is more likely--Just look
at--"

Missus: "Shoo! Shoo!"

Selector: "Just look at the French Revolution."

Corney: "Now, Henry George-"

Tom: "Marther! I seen a old-man kangaroo up on--"

Missus: "Shut up!  Eat your dinner an' hold your tongue.  Carn't
you see someone's speakin'?"

Selector: "Just look at the French--"

Missus (to the fowls): "Shoo!  Shoo!" (turning suddenly and
unexpectedly on Jacky): "Take your fingers out of the sugar!--Blast
yer! that I should say such a thing."

Neighbour: "But 'Lookin' Backwards"'

Missus: "There you go, Tom!  Didn't I say you'd spill that tea?  Go
away from the table!"

Selector: "I think 'Caesar's Column' is the only natural--"

Missus: "Shoo! Shoo!" She loses patience, gets up and fetches a
young rooster with the flat of the broom, sending him flying into the
yard; he falls with his head towards the door and starts in again.
Later on the conversation is about Deeming.

Selector: "There's no doubt the man's mad--"

Missus: "Deeming!  That Windsor wretch!  Why, if I was in the law I'd
have him boiled alive!  Don't tell me he didn't know what he was
doing!  Why, I'd have him--"

Corney: "But, missus, you--"

Missus (to the fowls): "Shoo!  Shoo!"



THAT THERE DOG O' MINE


Macquarie the shearer had met with an accident.  To tell the truth, he
had been in a drunken row at a wayside shanty, from which he had
escaped with three fractured ribs, a cracked head, and various minor
abrasions.  His dog, Tally, had been a sober but savage participator
in the drunken row, and had escaped with a broken leg.  Macquarie
afterwards shouldered his swag and staggered and struggled along the
track ten miles to the Union Town hospital.  Lord knows how he did it.
He didn't exactly know himself.  Tally limped behind all the way, on
three legs.

The doctors examined the man's injuries and were surprised at his
endurance.  Even doctors are surprised sometimes--though they don't
always show it.  Of course they would take him in, but they objected to
Tally.  Dogs were not allowed on the premises.

"You will have to turn that dog out," they said to the shearer, as
he sat on the edge of a bed.

Macquarie said nothing.

"We cannot allow dogs about the place, my man," said the doctor in a
louder tone, thinking the man was deaf.

"Tie him up in the yard then."

"No.  He must go out.  Dogs are not permitted on the grounds."

Macquarie rose slowly to his feet, shut his agony behind his set
teeth, painfully buttoned his shirt over his hairy chest, took up his
waistcoat, and staggered to the corner where the swag lay.

"What are you going to do?" they asked.

"You ain't going to let my dog stop?"

"No.  It's against the rules.  There are no dogs allowed on
premises."

He stooped and lifted his swag, but the pain was too great, and he
leaned back against the wall.

"Come, come now! man alive!"  exclaimed the doctor, impatiently.
"You must be mad.  You know you are not in a fit state to go out.
Let the wardsman help you to undress."

"No!" said Macquarie.  "No.  If you won't take my dog in you don't
take me.  He's got a broken leg and wants fixing up just--just as much
as--as I do.  If I'm good enough to come in, he's good enough--and--
and better."

He paused awhile, breathing painfully, and then went on.

"That--that there old dog of mine has follered me faithful and true,
these twelve long hard and hungry years.  He's about--about the only
thing that ever cared whether I lived or fell and rotted on the cursed
track."

He rested again; then he continued: "That--that there dog was pupped
on the track," he said, with a sad sort of a smile.  "I carried him
for months in a billy, and afterwards on my swag when he knocked
up....And the old slut--his mother--she'd foller along quite
contented--and sniff the billy now and again--just to see if he was
all right....She follered me for God knows how many years.  She
follered me till she was blind--and for a year after.  She follered me
till she could crawl along through the dust no longer, and--and then I
killed her, because I couldn't leave her behind alive!"

He rested again.

"And this here old dog," he continued, touching Tally's upturned
nose with his knotted fingers, "this here old dog has follered me
for--for ten years; through floods and droughts, through fair times
and--and hard--mostly hard; and kept me from going mad when I had no
mate nor money on the lonely track; and watched over me for weeks when
I was drunk--drugged and poisoned at the cursed shanties; and saved my
life more'n once, and got kicks and curses very often for thanks; and
forgave me for it all; and--and fought for me.  He was the only living
thing that stood up for me against that crawling push of curs when
they set onter me at the shanty back yonder--and he left his mark on
some of 'em too; and--and so did I."

He took another spell.

Then he drew in his breath, shut his teeth hard, shouldered his swag,
stepped into the doorway, and faced round again.

The dog limped out of the corner and looked up anxiously.

"That there dog," said Macquarie to the hospital staff in general,
"is a better dog than I'm a man--or you too, it seems--and a better
Christian.  He's been a better mate to me than I ever was to any
man--or any man to me.  He's watched over me; kep' me from getting
robbed many a time; fought for me; saved my life and took drunken
kicks and curses for thanks--and forgave me.  He's been a true,
straight, honest, and faithful mate to me--and I ain't going to desert
him now.  I ain't going to kick him out in the road with a broken leg.
I--Oh, my God! my back!"

He groaned and lurched forward, but they caught him, slipped off the
swag, and laid him on a bed.

Half an hour later the shearer was comfortably fixed up.

"Where's my dog!" he asked, when he came to himself.

"Oh, the dog's all right," said the nurse, rather impatiently.
"Don't bother.  The doctor's setting his leg out in the yard."




GOING BLIND


I met him in the Full-and-Plenty Dining Rooms.  It was a cheap place
in the city, with good beds upstairs let at one shilling per
night--"Board and residence for respectable single men, fifteen
shillings per week."  I was a respectable single man then.  I boarded
and resided there.  I boarded at a greasy little table in the greasy
little corner under the fluffy little staircase in the hot and greasy
little dining-room or restaurant downstairs.  They called it
dining-rooms, but it was only one room, and them wasn't half enough
room in it to work your elbows when the seven little tables and
forty-nine chairs were occupied.  There was not room for an
ordinary-sized steward to pass up and down between the tables; but our
waiter was not an ordinary-sized man--he was a living skeleton in
miniature.  We handed the soup, and the "roast beef one," and
"roast lamb one," "corn beef and cabbage one," "veal and stuffing
one," and the "veal and pickled pork," one--or two, or three, as
the case might be--and the tea and coffee, and the various kinds of
puddings--we handed them over each other, and dodged the drops as well
as we could.  The very hot and very greasy little kitchen was
adjacent, and it contained the bathroom and other conveniences, behind
screens of whitewashed boards.

I resided upstairs in a room where there were five beds and one
wash-stand; one candle-stick, with a very short bit of soft yellow
candle in it; the back of a hair-brush, with about a dozen bristles in
it; and half a comb--the big-tooth end--with nine and a half teeth at
irregular distances apart.

He was a typical bushman, not one of those tall, straight, wiry, brown
men of the West, but from the old Selection Districts, where many
drovers came from, and of the old bush school; one of those slight
active little fellows whom we used to see in cabbage-tree hats,
Crimean shirts, strapped trousers, and elastic-side boots--
"larstins," they called them.  They could dance well; sing
indifferently, and mostly through their noses, the old bush songs;
play the concertina horribly; and ride like--like--well, they
_could_ ride.

He seemed as if he had forgotten to grow old and die out with this old
colonial school to which he belonged.  They _had_ careless and
forgetful ways about them.  His name was Jack Gunther, he said, and
he'd come to Sydney to try to get something done to his eyes.  He had
a portmanteau, a carpet bag, some things in a three-bushel bag, and a
tin bog.  I sat beside him on his bed, and struck up an acquaintance,
and he told me all about it.  First he asked me would I mind shifting
round to the other side, as he was rather deaf in that ear.  He'd been
kicked by a horse, he said, and had been a little dull o' hearing on
that side ever since.

He was as good as blind.  "I can see the people near me," he said,
"but I can't make out their faces.  I can just make out the pavement
and the houses close at hand, and all the rest is a sort of white
blur."  He looked up: "That ceiling is a kind of white, ain't it?
And this," tapping the wall and putting his nose close to it, "is a
sort of green, ain't it?"  The ceiling might have been whiter.  The
prevalent tints of the wall-paper had originally been blue and red,
but it was mostly green enough now--a damp, rotten green; but I was
ready to swear that the ceiling was snow and that the walls were as
green as grass if it would have made him feel more comfortable.  His
sight began to get bad about six years before, he said; he didn't take
much notice of it at first, and then he saw a quack, who made his eyes
worse.  He had already the manner of the blind--the touch of every
finger, and even the gentleness in his speech.  He had a boy down with
him--a "sorter cousin of his," and the boy saw him round.  "I'll
have to be sending that youngster back," he said, "I think I'll send
him home next week.  He'll be picking up and learning too much down
here."

I happened to know the district he came from, and we would sit by the
hour and talk about the country, and chaps by the name of this and
chaps by the name of that--drovers mostly, whom we had met or had
heard of.  He asked me if I'd ever heard of a chap by the name of Joe
Scott--a big sandy-complexioned chap, who might be droving; he was his
brother, or, at least, his half-brother, but he hadn't heard of him
for years; he'd last heard of him at Blackall, in Queensland; he might
have gone overland to Western Australia with Tyson's cattle to the new
country.

We talked about grubbing and fencing and digging and droving and
shearing--all about the bush--and it all came back to me as we talked.
"I can see it all now," he said once, in an abstracted tone, seeming
to fix his helpless eyes on the wall opposite.  But he didn't see the
dirty blind wall, nor the dingy window, nor the skimpy little bed, nor
the greasy wash-stand; he saw the dark blue ridges in the sunlight,
the grassy sidings and flats, the creek with clumps of she-oak here
and there, the course of the willow-fringed river below, the distant
peaks and ranges fading away into a lighter azure, the granite ridge
in the middle distance, and the rocky rises, the stringy-bark and the
apple-tree flats, the scrubs, and the sunlit plains--and all.  I could
see it, too--plainer than ever I did.

He had done a bit of fencing in his time, and we got talking about
timber.  He didn't believe in having fencing-posts with big butts; he
reckoned it was a mistake.  "You see," he said, "the top of the
butt catches the rain water and makes the post rot quicker.  I'd back
posts without any butt at all to last as long or longer than posts
with 'em--that's if the fence is well put up and well rammed."  He
had supplied fencing stuff, and fenced by contract, and--well, you can
get more posts without butts out of a tree than posts with them.  He
also objected to charring the butts.  He said it only made more
work--and wasted time--the butts lasted longer without being charred.

I asked him if he'd ever got stringy-bark palings or shingles out of
mountain ash, and he smiled a smile that did my heart good to see, and
said he had.  He had also got them out of various other kinds of
trees.

We talked about soil and grass, and gold-digging, and many other
things which came back to one like a revelation as we yarned.

He had been to the hospital several times.  "The doctors don't say
they can cure me," he said, "they say they might, be able to improve
my sight and hearing, but it would take a long time--anyway, the
treatment would improve my general health.  They know what's the
matter with my eyes," and he explained it as well as he could.  "I
wish I'd seen a good doctor when my eyes first began to get weak; but
young chaps are always careless over things.  It's harder to get cured
of anything when you're done growing."

He was always hopeful and cheerful.  "If the worst comes to the worst,"
he said, "there's things I can do where I come from.  I might do a
bit o' wool-sorting, for instance.  I'm a pretty fair expert.  Or else
when they're weeding out I could help.  I'd just have to sit down and
they'd bring the sheep to me, and I'd feel the wool and tell them what
it was--being blind improves the feeling, you know."

He had a packet of portraits, but he couldn't make them out very well
now.  They were sort of blurred to him, but I described them and he
told me who they were.  "That's a girl o' mine," he said, with
reference to one--a jolly, good-looking bush girl.  "I got a letter
from her yesterday.  I managed to scribble something, but I'll get
you, if you don't mind, to write something more I want to put in on
another piece of paper, and address an envelope for me."

Darkness fell quickly upon him now--or, rather, the "sort of white
blur" increased and closed in.  But his hearing was better, he said,
and he was glad of that and still cheerful.  I thought it natural that
his hearing should improve as he went blind.

One day he said that he did not think he would bother going to the
hospital any more.  He reckoned he'd get back to where he was known.
He'd stayed down too long already, and the "stuff" wouldn't stand
it.  He was expecting a letter that didn't come.  I was away for a
couple of days, and when I came back he had been shifted out of the
room and had a bed in an angle of the landing on top of the staircase,
with the people brushing against him and stumbling over his things all
day on their way up and down.  I felt indignant, thinking that--the
house being full--the boss had taken advantage of the bushman's
helplessness and good nature to put him there.  But he said that he
was quite comfortable.  "I can get a whiff of air here," he said.

Going in next day I thought for a moment that I had dropped suddenly
back into the past and into a bush dance, for there was a concertina
going upstairs.  He was sitting on the bed, with his legs crossed, and
a new cheap concertina on his knee, and his eyes turned to the patch
of ceiling as if it were a piece of music and he could read it.  "I'm
trying to knock a few tunes into my head," he said, with a brave
smile, "in case the worst comes to the worst."  He tried to be
cheerful, but seemed worried and anxious.  The letter hadn't come.  I
thought of the many blind musicians in Sydney, and I thought of the
bushman's chance, standing at a corner swanking a cheap concertina,
and I felt sorry for him.

I went out with a vague idea of seeing someone about the matter, and
getting something done for the bushman--of bringing a little influence
to his assistance; but I suddenly remembered that my clothes were worn
out, my hat in a shocking state, my boots burst, and that I owed for a
week's board and lodging, and was likely to be thrown out at any
moment myself; and so I was not in a position to go where there was
influence.

When I went back to the restaurant there was a long, gaunt
sandy-complexioned bushman sitting by Jack's side.  Jack introduced
him as his brother, who had returned unexpectedly to his native
district, and had followed him to Sydney.  The brother was rather
short with me at first, and seemed to regard the restaurant
people--all of us, in fact--in the light of spielers who wouldn't
hesitate to take advantage of Jack's blindness if he left him a
moment; and he looked ready to knock down the first man who stumbled
against Jack, or over his luggage--but that soon wore off.  Jack was
going to stay with Joe at the Coffee Palace for a few weeks, and then
go back up-country, he told me.  He was excited and happy.  His
brother's manner towards him was as if Jack had just lost his wife, or
boy or someone very dear to him.  He would not allow him to do
anything for himself, nor try to--not even lace up his boot.  He
seemed to think that he was thoroughly helpless, and when I saw him
pack up Jack's things, and help him at the table and fix his tie and
collar with his great brown hands, which trembled all the time with
grief and gentleness, and make Jack sit down on the bed whilst he got
a cab and carried the trap down to it, and take him downstairs as if
he were made of thin glass, and settle with the landlord--then I knew
that Jack was all right.

We had a drink together--Joe, Jack, the cabman, and I.  Joe was very
careful to hand Jack the glass, and Jack made joke about it for Joe's
benefit.  He swore he could see a glass yet, and Joe laughed, but
looked extra troubled the next moment.

I felt their grips on my hand for five minutes after we parted.




Arvie Aspinall's Alarm Clock


In one of these years a paragraph appeared in a daily paper to the
effect that a constable had discovered a little boy asleep on the
steps of Grinder Bros' factory at four o'clock one rainy morning.
He awakened him, and demanded an explanation.

The little fellow explained that he worked there, and was frightened
of being late; he started work at six, and was apparently greatly
astonished to hear that it was only four.  The constable examined a
small parcel which the frightened child had in his hand.  It contained
a clean apron and three slices of bread and treacle.

The child further explained that he woke up and thought it was late,
and didn't like to wake mother and ask her the time "because she'd
been washin'."  He didn't look at the clock, because they "didn't
have one."  He volunteered no explanations as to how he expected
mother to know the time, but, perhaps, like many other mites of his
kind, he had unbounded faith in the infinitude of a mother's wisdom.
His name was Arvie Aspinall, please sir, and he lived in Jones's
Alley.  Father was dead.

A few days later the same paper took great pleasure in stating, in
reference to that "Touching Incident" noticed in a recent issue,
that a benevolent society lady had started a subscription among her
friends with the object of purchasing an alarm-clock for the little
boy found asleep at Grinder Bros' workshop door.

Later on, it was mentioned, in connection with the touching incident,
that the alarm-clock had been bought and delivered to the boy's
mother, who appeared to be quite overcome with gratitude.  It was
learned, also, from another source, that the last assertion was
greatly exaggerated.

The touching incident was worn out in another paragraph, which left no
doubt that the benevolent society lady was none other than a charming
and accomplished daughter of the House of Grinder.


It was late in the last day of the Easter Holidays, during which Arvie
Aspinall had lain in bed with a bad cold.  He was still what he called
"croopy."  It was about nine o'clock, and the business of Jones's
Alley was in full swing.

"That's better, mother, I'm far better," said Arvie, "the sugar and
vinegar cuts the phlegm, and the both'rin' cough gits out.  It got out
to such an extent for the next few minutes that he could not speak.
When he recovered his breath, he said:

"Better or worse, I'll have to go to work to-morrow.  Gimme the
clock, mother."

"I tell you you shall not go!  It will be your death."

"It's no use talking, mother; we can't starve--and--s'posin' somebody
got my place!  Gimme the clock, mother."

"I'll send one of the children round to say you're ill.  They'll
surely let you off for a day or two."

"Tain't no use; they won't wait; I know them--what does Grinder Bros
care if I'm ill?  Never mind, mother, I'll rise above 'em all yet.
_Give me the clock_, mother."

She gave him the clock, and he proceeded to wind it up and set the
alarm.

"There's somethin' wrong with the gong," he muttered, "it's gone
wrong two nights now, but I'll chance it.  I'll set the alarm at five,
that'll give me time to dress and git there early.  I wish I hadn't to
walk so far."

He paused to read some words engraved round the dial:

    Early to bed and early to rise
    Makes a man healthy and wealthy and wise.

He had read the verse often before, and was much taken with the swing
and rhythm of it.  He had repeated it to himself, over and over again,
without reference to the sense or philosophy of it.  He had never
dreamed of doubting anything in print--and this was engraved.  But now
a new light seemed to dawn upon him.  He studied the sentence awhile,
and then read it aloud for the second time.  He turned it over in his
mind again in silence.

"Mother!" he said suddenly, "I think it lies."  She placed the
clock on the shelf, tucked him into his little bed on the sofa, and
blew out the light.

Arvie seemed to sleep, but she lay awake thinking of her troubles.
Of her husband carried home dead from his work one morning; of her
eldest son who only came to loaf on her when he was out of jail;
of the second son, who had feathered his nest in another city,
and had no use for her any longer; of the next--poor delicate little
Arvie--struggling manfully to help, and wearing his young life out at
Grinder Bros when he should be at school; of the five helpless younger
children asleep in the next room: of her hard life--scrubbing floors
from half-past five till eight, and then starting her day's work--
washing!--of having to rear her children in the atmosphere of the
slums, because she could not afford to move and pay a higher rent;
and of the rent.

Arvie commenced to mutter in his sleep.

"Can't you get to sleep, Arvie?" she asked.  "Is your throat sore?
Can I get anything for you?"

"I'd like to sleep," he muttered, dreamily, "but it won't seem
more'n a moment before--before--"

"Before what, Arvie?" she asked, quickly, fearing that he was
becoming delirious.

"Before the alarm goes off!"

 He was talking in his sleep.

She rose gently and put the alarm on two hours.  "He can rest now,"
she whispered to herself.

Presently Arvie sat bolt upright, and said quickly, "Mother! I
thought the alarm went off!"  Then, without waiting for an answer, he
lay down as suddenly and slept.

The rain had cleared away, and a bright, starry dome was over sea and
city, over slum and villa alike; but little of it could be seen from
the hovel in Jones's Alley, save a glimpse of the Southern Cross and a
few stars round it.  It was what ladies call a "lovely night," as
seen from the house of Grinder--"Grinderville"--with its moonlit
terraces and gardens sloping gently to the water, and its windows lit
up for an Easter ball, and its reception-rooms thronged by its own
exclusive set, and one of its charming and accomplished daughters
melting a select party to tears by her pathetic recitation about a
little crossing sweeper.

There _was_ something wrong with the alarm-clock, or else Mrs
Aspinall had made a mistake, for the gong sounded startlingly in the
dead of night.  She woke with a painful start, and lay still,
expecting to hear Arvie get up; but he made no sign.  She turned a
white, frightened face towards the sofa where he lay--the light from
the alley's solitary lamp on the pavement above shone down through the
window, and she saw that he had not moved.

Why didn't the clock wake him?  He was such a light sleeper!
"Arvie!" she called; no answer.  "Arvie !" she called again, with
a strange ring of remonstrance mingling with the terror in her voice.
Arvie never answered.

"Oh! my God!" she moaned.

She rose and stood by the sofa.  Arvie lay on his back with his arms
folded--a favourite sleeping position of his; but his eyes were wide
open and staring upwards as though they would stare through ceiling
and roof to the place where God ought to be.



STRAGGLERS


An oblong hut, walled with blue-grey hardwood slabs, adzed at the ends
and set horizontally between the round sapling studs; high roof of the
eternal galvanized iron.  A big rubbish heap lies about a yard to the
right of the door, which opens from the middle of one of the side
walls; it might be the front or the back wall--there is nothing to fix
it.  Two rows of rough bunks run round three sides of the interior;
and a fire-place occupies one end--the kitchen end.  Sleeping, eating,
gambling and cooking accommodation for thirty men in about eighteen by
forty feet.

The rouseabouts and shearers use the hut in common during shearing.
Down the centre of the place runs a table made of stakes driven into
the ground, with cross-pieces supporting a top of half-round slabs set
with the flat sides up, and affording a few level places for
soup-plates; on each side are crooked, unbarked poles laid in short
forks, to serve as seats.  The poles are worn smoothest opposite the
level places on the table.  The floor is littered with rubbish--old
wool-bales, newspapers, boots, worn-out shearing pants, rough bedding,
etc., raked out of the bunks in impatient search for missing
articles--signs of a glad and eager departure with cheques when the
shed last cut out.

To the west is a dam, holding back a broad, shallow sheet of grey
water, with dead trees standing in it.

Further up along this water is a brush shearing-shed, a rough
framework of poles with a brush roof.  This kind of shed has the
advantage of being cooler than iron.  It is not rain-proof, but
shearers do not work in rainy weather; shearing even slightly damp
sheep is considered the surest and quickest way to get the worst kind
of rheumatism.  The floor is covered with rubbish from the roof, and
here and there lies a rusty pair of shears.  A couple of dry tar-pots
hang by nails in the posts.  The "board" is very uneven and must be
bad for sweeping.  The pens are formed by round, crooked stakes driven
into the ground in irregular lines, and the whole business reminds us
of the "cubby-house" style of architecture of our childhood.

Opposite stands the wool-shed, built entirely of galvanized iron; a
blinding object to start out of the scrub on a blazing, hot day.  God
forgive the man who invented galvanized iron, and the greed which
introduced it into Australia: you could not get worse roofing material
for a hot country.

The wool-washing, soap-boiling, and wool-pressing arrangements are
further up the dam.  "Government House" is a mile away, and is
nothing better than a bush hut; this station belongs to a company.
And the company belongs to a bank.  And the banks belong to England,
mostly.

Mulga scrub all round, and, in between, patches of reddish sand where
the grass ought to be.

It is New Year's Eve.  Half a dozen travellers are camping in the hut,
having a spell.  They need it, for there are twenty miles of dry
lignum plain between here and the government bore to the east; and
about eighteen miles of heavy, sandy, cleared road north-west to the
next water in that direction.  With one exception, the men do not seem
hard up; at least, not as that condition is understood by the swagmen
of these times.  The least lucky one of the lot had three weeks' work
in a shed last season, and there might probably be five pounds amongst
the whole crowd.  They are all shearers, or at least they say they
are.  Some might be only "rousers."

These men have a kind of stock hope of getting a few stragglers to
shear somewhere; but their main object is to live till next shearing.
In order to do this they must tramp for tucker, and trust to the
regulation--and partly mythical--pint of flour, and bit of meat, or
tea and sugar, and to the goodness of cooks and storekeepers and
boundary-riders.  You can only depend on getting tucker _once_ at
one place; then you must tramp on to the next.  If you cannot get it
once you must go short; but there is a lot of energy in an empty
stomach.  If you get an extra supply you may camp for a day and have a
spell.  To live you must walk.  To cease walking is to die.

The Exception is an outcast amongst bush outcasts, and looks better
fitted for Sydney Domain.  He lies on the bottom of a galvanized-iron
case, with a piece of blue blanket for a pillow.  He is dressed in a
blue cotton jumper, a pair of very old and ragged tweed trousers, and
one boot and one slipper.  He found the slipper in the last shed,
and the boot in the rubbish-heap here.  When his own boots gave out he
walked a hundred and fifty miles with his feet roughly sewn up in
pieces of sacking from an old wool-bale.  No sign of a patch, or an
attempt at mending anywhere about his clothes, and that is a bad sign;
when a swagman leaves off mending or patching his garments, his case
is about hopeless.  The Exception's swag consists of the aforesaid bit
of blanket rolled up and tied with pieces of rag.  He has no water-
bag; carries his water in a billy; and how he manages without a bag is
known only to himself.  He has read every scrap of print within reach,
and now lies on his side, with his face to the wall and one arm thrown
up over his head; the jumper is twisted back, and leaves his skin bare
from hip to arm-pit.  His lower face is brutal, his eyes small and
shifty, and ugly straight lines run across his low forehead.  He says
very little, but scowls most of the time--poor devil.  He might be, or
at least _seem_, a totally different man under more favourable
conditions.  He is probably a free labourer.

A very sick jackaroo lies in one of the bunks.  A sandy,
sawney-looking Bourke native takes great interest in this wreck;
watches his every movement as though he never saw a sick man before.
The men lie about in the bunks, or the shade of the hut, and rest, and
read all the soiled and mutilated scraps of literature they can rake
out of the rubbish, and sleep, and wake up swimming in perspiration,
and growl about the heat.

It _is_ hot, and two shearers' cats--a black and a white one--sit
in one of the upper bunks with their little red tongues out, panting
like dogs.  These cats live well during shearing, and take their
chances the rest of the year--just as shed rouseabouts have to do.
They seem glad to see the traveller come; he makes things more
homelike.  They curl and sidle affectionately round the table-legs,
and the legs of the men,_ and purr, and carry their masts up, and
regard the cooking with feline interest and approval, and look as
cheerful as cats can--and as contented.  God knows how many tired,
dusty, and sockless ankles they rub against in their time.

Now and then a man takes his tucker-bags and goes down to the station
for a bit of flour, or meat, or tea, or sugar, choosing the time when
the manager is likely to be out on the run.  The cook here is a "good
cook," from a traveller's point of view; too good to keep his place
long.

Occasionally someone gets some water in an old kerosene-tin and washes
a shirt or pair of trousers, and a pair or two of socks--or
foot-rags--(Prince Alfreds they call them).  That is, he soaks some of
the stiffness out of these articles.

Three times a day the black billies and cloudy nose-bags are placed on
the table.  The men eat in a casual kind of way, as though it were
only a custom of theirs, a matter of form--a habit which could be left
off if it were worth while.

The Exception is heard to remark to no one in particular that he'll
give all he has for a square meal.

"An' ye'd get it cheap, begod!" says a big Irish shearer.  "Come
and have dinner with us; there's plenty there."

But the Exception only eats a few mouthfuls, and his appetite is gone;
his stomach has become contracted, perhaps.

The Wreck cannot eat at all, and seems internally disturbed by the
sight of others eating.

One of the men is a cook, and this morning he volunteered
good-naturedly to bake bread for the rest.  His mates amuse themselves
by chyacking him.

"I've heard he's a dirty and slow cook," says one, addressing
Eternity.

"Ah!" says the cook, "you'll be glad to come to me for a pint of
flour when I'm cooking and you're on the track, some day.

Sunset.  Some of the men sit at the end of the hut to get the full
benefit of a breeze which comes from the west.  A great bank of
rain-clouds is rising in that direction, but no one says he thinks it
will rain; neither does anybody think we're going to have some rain.
None but the greenest jackaroo would venture that risky and foolish
observation.  Out here, it can look more like rain without raining,
and continue to do so for a longer time, than in most other places.

The Wreck went down to the station this afternoon to get some medicine
and bush medical advice.  The Bourke sawney helped him to do up his
swag; he did it with an awed look and manner, as though he thought it
a great distinction to be allowed to touch the belongings of such a
curiosity.  It was afterwards generally agreed that it was a good idea
for the Wreck to go to the station; he would get some physic and, a
bit of tucker to take him on.  "For they'll give tucker to a sick man
sooner than to a chap what's all right."

The Exception is rooting about in the rubbish for the other blucher
boot.

The men get a little more sociable, and "feel" each other to find
out who's "Union," and talk about water, and exchange hints as to
good tucker-tracks, and discuss the strike, and curse the squatter
(which is all they have got to curse), and growl about Union leaders,
and tell lies against each other sociably.  There are tally lies; and
lies about getting tucker by trickery; and long-tramp-with-heavy-swag-
and-no-water lies; and lies about getting the best of squatters and
bosses-over-the-board; and droving, fighting, racing, gambling and
drinking lies.  Lies _ad libitum_; and every true Australian
bushman must try his best to tell a bigger out-back lie than the last
bush-liar.

Pat is not quite easy in his mind.  He found an old pair of pants in
the scrub this morning, and cannot decide whether they are better than
his own, or, rather, whether his own are worse--if that's possible.
He does not want to increase the weight of his swag unnecessarily by
taking both pairs.  He reckons that the pants were thrown away when
the shed cut out last, but then they might have been lying out exposed
to the weather for a longer period.  It is rather an important
question, for it is very annoying, after you've mended and patched an
old pair of pants, to find, when a day or two further on the track,
that they are more rotten than the pair you left behind.

There is some growling about the water here, and one of the men makes
a billy of tea.  The water is better cooked.  Pint-pots and sugar-bags
are groped out and brought to the kitchen hut, and each man fills his
pannikin; the Irishman keeps a thumb on the edge of his, so as to know
when the pot is full, for it is very dark, and there is no more
firewood.  You soon know this way, especially if you are in the habit
of pressing lighted tobacco down into your pipe with the top of your
thumb.  The old slush-lamps are all burnt out.

Each man feels for the mouth of his
sugar-bag with one hand while he keeps the bearings of his pot with
the other.

The Irishman has lost his match-box, and feels for it all over the
table without success.  He stoops down with his hands on his knees,
gets the table-top on a level with the flicker of firelight, and
"moons" the object, as it were.

Time to turn in.  It is very dark inside and bright moonlight without;
every crack seems like a ghost peering in.  Some of the men will roll
up their swags on the morrow and depart; some will take another day's
spell.  It is all according to the tucker.




THE UNION BURIES ITS DEAD


While out boating one Sunday afternoon on a billabong across the
river, we saw a young man on horseback driving some horses along the
bank.  He said it was a fine day, and asked if the Water was deep
there.  The joker of our party said it was deep enough to drown him,
and he laughed and rode farther up. We didn't take-much notice of him.

Next day a funeral gathered at a corner pub and asked each other in to
have a drink while waiting for the hearse.  They passed away some of
the time dancing jigs to a piano in the bar parlour.  They passed away
the rest of the time skylarking and fighting.

The defunct was a young Union labourer, about twenty-five, who had
been drowned the previous day while trying to swim some horses across
a billabong of the Darling.

He was almost a stranger in town, and the fact of his having been a
Union man accounted for the funeral.  The police found some Union
papers in his swag, and called at the General Labourers' Union Office
for information about him.  That's how we knew.  The secretary had
very little information to give.  The departed was a "Roman," and
the majority of the town were otherwise--but Unionism is stronger than
creed.  Liquor, however, is stronger than Unionism; and, when the
hearse presently arrived, more than two-thirds of the funeral were
unable to follow.

The procession numbered fifteen, fourteen souls following the broken
shell of a soul.  Perhaps not one of the fourteen possessed a soul any
more than the corpse did--but that doesn't matter.

Four or five of the funeral, who were boarders at the pub, borrowed a
trap which the landlord used to carry passengers to and from the
railway station.  They were strangers to us who were on foot, and we
to them.  We were all strangers to the corpse.

A horseman, who looked like a drover just returned from a big trip,
dropped into our dusty wake and followed us a few hundred yards,
dragging his packhorse behind him, but a friend made wild and
demonstrative signals from a hotel veranda--hooking at the air in
front with his right hand and jobbing his left thumb over his shoulder
in the direction of the bar--so the drover hauled off and didn't catch
up to us any more.  He was a stranger to the entire show.

We walked in twos.  There were three twos.  It was very hot and dusty;
the heat rushed in fierce dazzling rays across every iron roof and
light-coloured wall that was turned to the sun.  One or two pubs
closed respectfully until we got past.  They closed their bar doors
and the patrons went in and out through some side or back entrance for
a few minutes.  Bushmen seldom grumble at an inconvenience of this
sort, when it is caused by a funeral.  They have too much respect for
the dead.

On the way to the cemetery we passed three shearers sitting on the
shady side of a fence.  One was drunk--very drunk.  The other two
covered their right ears with their hats, out of respect for the
departed--whoever he might have been--and one of them kicked the drunk
and muttered something to him.

He straightened himself up, stared, and reached helplessly for his
hat, which he shoved half off and then on again.  Then he made a great
effort to pull himself together--and succeeded.  He stood up, braced
his back against the fence, knocked off his hat, and remorsefully
placed his foot on it--to keep it off his head till the funeral
passed.

A tall, sentimental drover, who walked by my side, cynically quoted
Byronic verses suitable to the occasion--to death--and asked with
pathetic humour whether we thought the dead man's ticket would be
recognized "over yonder."  It was a G.L.U. ticket, and the general
opinion was that it would be recognized.

Presently my friend said:

"You remember when we were in the boat yesterday, we saw a man
driving some horses along the bank?"

"Yes."

He nodded at the hearse and said "Well, that's him."

I thought awhile.

"I didn't take any particular notice of him," I said.  "He said
something, didn't he?"

"Yes; said it was a fine day.  You'd have taken more notice if you'd
known that he was doomed to die in the hour, and that those were the
last words he would say to any man in this world."

"To be sure," said a full voice from the rear.  "If ye'd known
that, ye'd have prolonged the conversation."

We plodded on across the railway line and along the hot, dusty road
which ran to the cemetery, some of us talking about the accident, and
lying about the narrow escapes we had had ourselves.  Presently
someone said:

"There's the Devil."

I looked up and saw a priest standing in the shade of the tree by the
cemetery gate.

The hearse was drawn up and the tail-boards were opened.  The funeral
extinguished its right ear with its hat as four men lifted the coffin
out and laid it over the grave.  The priest--a pale, quiet young
fellow--stood under the shade of a sapling which grew at the head of
the grave.  He took off his hat, dropped it carelessly on the ground,
and proceeded to business.  I noticed that one or two heathens winced
slightly when the holy water was sprinkled on the coffin.  The drops
quickly evaporated, and the little round black spots they left were
soon dusted over; but the spots showed, by contrast, the cheapness and
shabbiness of the cloth with which the coffin was covered.  It seemed
black before; now it looked a dusky grey.

Just here man's ignorance and vanity made a farce of the funeral.  A
big, bull-necked publican, with heavy, blotchy features, and a
supremely ignorant expression, picked up the priest's straw hat and
held it about two inches over the head of his reverence during the
whole of the service.  The father, be it remembered, was standing in
the shade.  A few shoved their hats on and off uneasily, struggling
between their disgust far the living and their respect for the dead.
The hat had a conical crown and a brim sloping down all round like a
sunshade, and the publican held it with his great red claw spread over
the crown.  To do the priest justice, perhaps he didn't notice the
incident.  A stage priest or parson in the same position might have
said, "Put the hat down, my friend; is not the memory of our departed
brother worth more than my complexion?"  A wattle-bark layman might
have expressed himself in stronger language, none the less to the
point.  But my priest seemed unconscious of what was going on.
Besides, the publican was a great and important pillar of the church.
He couldn't, as an ignorant and conceited ass, lose such a good
opportunity of asserting his faithfulness and importance to his
church.

The grave looked very narrow under the coffin, and I drew a breath of
relief when the box slid easily down.  I saw a coffin get stuck once,
at Rookwood, and it had to be yanked out with difficulty, and laid on
the sods at the feet of the heart-broken relations, who howled
dismally while the grave-diggers widened the hole.  But they don't cut
contracts so fine in the West.  Our grave-digger was not altogether
bowelless, and, out of respect for that human quality described as
"feelin's," he scraped up some light and dusty soil and threw it
down to deaden the fall of the clay lumps on the coffin.  He also
tried to steer the first few shovelfuls gently down against the end of
the grave with the back of the shovel turned outwards, but the hard
dry Darling River clods rebounded and knocked all the same.  It didn't
matter much--nothing does.  The fall of lumps of clay on a stranger's
coffin doesn't sound any different from the fall of the same things on
an ordinary wooden box--at least I didn't notice anything awesome or
unusual in the sound; but, perhaps, one of us--the most
sensitive--might have been impressed by being reminded of a burial of
long ago, when the thump of every sod jolted his heart.

I have left out the wattle--because it wasn't there.  I have also
neglected to mention the heart-broken old mate, with his grizzled head
bowed and great pearly drops streaming down his rugged cheeks.  He was
absent--he was probably "Out Back."  For similar reasons I have
omitted reference to the suspicious moisture in the eyes of a bearded
bush ruffian named Bill.  Bill failed to turn up, and the only
moisture was that which was induced by the heat.  I have left out the
"sad Australian sunset" because the sun was not going down at the
time.  The burial took place exactly at midday.

The dead bushman's name was Jim, apparently; but they found no
portraits, nor locks of hair, nor any love letters, nor anything of
that kind in his swag--not even a reference to his mother; only some
papers relating to Union matters.  Most of us didn't know the name
till we saw it on the coffin; we knew him as "that poor chap that got
drowned yesterday."

"So his name's James Tyson," said my drover acquaintance, looking at
the plate.

"Why! Didn't you know that before?" I asked.

"No; but I knew he was a Union man."

It turned out, afterwards, that J.T. wasn't his real name--only "the
name he went by."  Anyhow he was buried by it, and most of the
"Great Australian Dailies" have mentioned in their brevity columns
that a young man named James John Tyson was drowned in a billabong of
the Darling last Sunday.

We did hear, later on,
what his real name was; but if we ever chance to read it in the
"Missing Friends Column," we shall not be able to give any
information to heart-broken mother or sister or wife, nor to anyone
who could let him hear something to his advantage--for we have already
forgotten the name.




ON THE EDGE OF A PLAIN


"I'd been away from home for eight years," said Mitchell to his
mate, as they dropped their swags in the mulga shade and sat down.
"I hadn't written a letter--kept putting it off, and a blundering
fool of a fellow that got down the day before me told the old folks
that he'd heard I was dead."

Here he took a pull at his water-bag.

"When I got home they were all in mourning for me.  It was night, and
the girl that opened the door screamed and fainted away like a shot."

He lit his pipe.

"Mother was upstairs howling and moaning in a chair, with all the
girls boo-hoo-ing round her for company.  The old man was sitting in
the back kitchen crying to himself."

He put his hat down on the ground, dinted in the crown, and poured
some water into the hollow for his cattle-pup.

"The girls came rushing down.  Mother was so pumped out that she
couldn't get up.  They thought at first I was a ghost, and then they
all tried to get holt of me at once--nearly smothered me.  Look at
that pup!  You want to carry a tank of water on a dry stretch when
you've got a pup that drinks as much as two men."

He poured a drop more water into the top of his hat.

"Well, mother screamed and nearly fainted when she saw me.  Such a
picnic you never saw.  They kept it up all night.  I thought the old
cove was gone off his chump.  The old woman wouldn't let go my hand
for three mortal hours.  Have you got the knife?"

He cut up some more tobacco.

"All next day the house was full of neighbours, and the first to come
was an old sweetheart of mine; I never thought she cared for me till
then.  Mother and the girls made me swear never to go away any more;
and they kept watching me, and hardly let me go outside for fear
I'd--"

"Get drunk?"

"No--you're smart--for fear I'd clear.  At last I swore on the Bible
that I'd never leave home while the old folks were alive; and then
mother seemed easier in her mind."

He rolled the pup over and examined his feet.  "I expect I'll have to
carry him a bit--his feet are sore.  Well, he's done pretty well this
morning, and anyway he won't drink so much when he's carried."

"You broke your promise about leaving home," said his mate.

Mitchell stood up, stretched himself, and looked dolefully from his
heavy swag to the wide, hot, shadeless cotton-bush plain ahead.

"Oh, yes," he yawned, "I stopped at home for a week, and then they
began to growl because I couldn't get any work to do."

The mate guffawed and Mitchell grinned.  They shouldered the
swags, with the pup on top of Mitchell's, took up their billies and
water-bags, turned their unshaven faces to the wide, hazy distance,
and left the timber behind them.




IN A DRY SEASON


Draw a wire fence and a few ragged gums, and add some scattered sheep
running away from the train.  Then you'll have the bush all along the
New South Wales western line from Bathurst on.

The railway towns consist of a public house and a general store, with
a square tank and a school-house on piles in the nearer distance.  The
tank stands at the end of the school and is not many times smaller
than the building itself.  It is safe to call the pub "The Railway
Hotel," and the store "The Railway Stores," with an "s."  A
couple of patient, ungroomed hacks are probably standing outside the
pub, while their masters are inside having a drink--several drinks.
Also it's safe to draw a sundowner sitting listlessly on a bench on
the veranda, reading the _Bulletin_.  The Railway Stores seem to
exist only in the shadow of the pub, and it is impossible to conceive
either as being independent of the other.  There is sometimes a small,
oblong weather-board building--unpainted, and generally leaning in one
of the eight possible directions, and perhaps with a twist in
another--which, from its half-obliterated sign, seems to have started
as a rival to the Railway Stores; but the shutters are up and the
place empty.

The only town I saw that differed much from the above consisted of a
box-bark humpy with a clay chimney, and a woman standing at the door
throwing out the wash-up water.

By way of variety, the artist might make a water-colour sketch of a
fettler's tent on the line, with a billy hanging over the fire in
front, and three fettlers standing round filling their pipes.

Slop sac suits, red faces, and old-fashioned, flat-brimmed hats, with
wire round the brims, begin to drop into the train on the other side
of Bathurst; and here and there a hat with three inches of crape round
the crown, which perhaps signifies death in the family at some remote
date, and perhaps doesn't.  Sometimes, I believe, it only means grease
under the band.  I notice that when a bushman puts crape round his hat
he generally leaves it there till the hat wears out, or another friend
dies.  In the latter case, he buys a new piece of crape.  This outward
sign of bereavement usually has a jolly red face beneath it.  Death is
about the only cheerful thing in the bush.

We crossed the Macquarie--a narrow, muddy gutter with a dog swimming
across, and three goats interested.

A little farther on we saw the first sundowner.  He carried a Royal
Alfred, and had a billy in one hand and a stick in the other.  He was
dressed in a tail-coat turned yellow, a print shirt, and a pair of
moleskin trousers, with big square calico patches on the knees; and
his old straw hat was covered with calico.  Suddenly he slipped his
swag, dropped his billy, and ran forward, boldly flourishing the
stick.  I thought that he was mad, and was about to attack the train,
but he wasn't; he was only killing a snake.  I didn't have time to see
whether he cooked the snake or not--perhaps he only thought of Adam.

Somebody told me that the country was very dry on the other side of
Nevertire.  It is.  I wouldn't like to sit down on it any where.  The
least horrible spot in the bush, in a dry season, is where the bush
isn't--where it has been cleared away and a green crop is trying to
grow.  They talk of settling people on the land!  Better settle
_in_ it.  I'd rather settle on the water; at least, until some
gigantic system of irrigation is perfected in the West.

Along about Byrock we saw the first shearers.  They dress like the
unemployed, but differ from that body in their looks of independence.
They sat on trucks and wool-bales and the fence, watching the train,
and hailed Bill, and Jim, and Tom, and asked how those individuals
were getting on.

Here we came across soft felt hats with straps round the crowns, and
full-bearded faces under them.  Also a splendid-looking black tracker
in a masher uniform and a pair of Wellington boots.

One or two square-cuts and stand-up collars struggle dismally through
to the bitter end.  Often a member of the unemployed starts cheerfully
out, with a letter from the Government Labour Bureau in his pocket,
and nothing else.  He has an idea that the station where he has the
job will be within easy walking distance of Bourke.  Perhaps he thinks
there'll be a cart or a buggy waiting for him.  He travels for a night
and day without a bite to eat, and, on arrival, he finds that the
station is eighty or a hundred miles away.  Then he has to explain
matters to a publican and a coach-driver.  God bless the publican and
the coach-driver!  God forgive our social system!

Native industry was represented at one place along the line by three
tiles, a chimney-pot, and a length of piping on a slab.

Somebody said to me, "Yer wanter go out back, young man, if yer
wanter see the country.  Yer wanter get away from the line."  I don't
wanter; I've been there.

You could go to the brink of eternity so far as Australia is concerned
and yet meet an animated mummy of a swagman who will talk of going
"out back."  Out upon the out-back fiend!

About Byrock we met the bush liar in all his glory.  He was dressed
like--like a bush larrikin.  His name was Jim.  He had been to a ball
where some blank had "touched" his blanky overcoat.  The overcoat
had a cheque for ten "quid" in the pocket.  He didn't seem to feel
the loss much.  "Wot's ten quid?"  He'd been everywhere, including
the Gulf country.  He still had three or four sheds to go to.  He had
telegrams in his pocket from half a dozen squatters and supers
offering him pens on any terms.  He didn't give a blank whether he
took them or no.  He thought at first he had the telegrams on him but
found that he had left them in the pocket of the overcoat aforesaid.
He had learned butchering in a day.  He was a bit of a scrapper
himself and talked a lot about the ring.  At the last station where he
shore he gave the super the father of a hiding.  The super was a big
chap, about six-foot-three, and had knocked out Paddy Somebody in one
round.  He worked with a man who shore four hundred sheep in nine
hours.

Here a quiet-looking bushman in a corner of the carriage grew
restless, and presently he opened his mouth and took the liar down in
about three minutes.

At 5.30 we saw a long line of camels moving out across the sunset.
There's something snaky about camels.  They remind me of turtles and
goannas.

Somebody said, "Here's Bourke."




HE'D COME BACK


The yarn was all lies, I suppose; but it wasn't bad.  A city bushman
told it, of course, and he told it in the travellers' hut.

"As true's God hears me I never meant to desert her in cold blood,"
he said.  "We'd only been married about two years, and we'd got along
grand together; but times was hard, and I had to jump at the first
chance of a job, and leave her with her people, an' go up-country."

He paused and fumbled with his pipe until all ears were brought to
bear on him.

"She was a beauty, and no mistake; she was far too good for me--I
often wondered how she came to have a chap like me."

He paused again, and the others thought over it--and wondered too,
perhaps.

The joker opened his lips to speak, but altered his mind about it.

"Well, I travelled up into Queensland, and worked back into Victoria
'n' South Australia, an' I wrote home pretty reg'lar and sent what
money I could.  Last I got down on to the south-western coast of South
Australia--an' there I got mixed up with another woman--you know what
that means, boys?"

Sympathetic silence.

"Well, this went on for two years, and then the other woman drove me
to drink.  You know what a woman can do when the devil's in her?"

Sound between a sigh and a groan from Lally Thompson.  "My oath," he
said, sadly.

"You should have made it _three_ years, Jack," interposed the
joker; "you said two years before."  But he was suppressed.

"Well, I got free of them both, at last--drink and the woman, I mean;
but it took another--it took a couple of years to pull myself
straight--"

Here the joker opened his mouth again, but was warmly requested to
shut it.

"Then, chaps, I got thinking.  My conscience began to hurt me,
and--and hurt worse every day.  It nearly drove me to drink again.
Ah, boys, a man--if he is a man--can't expect to wrong a woman and
escape scot-free in the end."  (Sigh from Lally Thompson.)
"It's the one thing that always comes home to a man, sooner
or later--you know what that means, boys."

Lally Thompson: "My oath!"

The joker: "Dry up yer crimson oath!  What do you know about
women?"

Cries of "Order!"

"Well," continued the story-teller, "I got thinking.  I heard that
my wife had broken her heart when I left her, and that made matters
worse.  I began to feel very bad about it.  I felt mean.  I felt
disgusted with myself.  I pictured my poor, ill-treated, little wife
and children in misery and poverty, and my conscience wouldn't let me
rest night or day"--(Lally Thompson seemed greatly moved)--"so at
last I made up my mind to be a man, and make--what's the word?"

"Reparation," suggested the joker.

"Yes, so I slaved like a nigger for a year or so, got a few pounds
together and went to find my wife.  I found out that she was living in
a cottage in Burwood, Sydney, and struggling through the winter on
what she'd saved from the money her father left her.

"I got a shave and dressed up quiet and decent.  I was older-looking
and more subdued like, and I'd got pretty grey in those few years that
I'd been making a fool of myself; and, some how, I felt rather glad
about it, because I reckoned she'd notice it first thing--she was
always quick at noticing things--and forgive me all the quicker.
Well, I waylaid the school kids that evening, and found out mine--a
little boy and a girl--and fine youngsters they were.  The girl took
after her mother, and the youngster was the dead spit o' me.  I gave
'em half a crows each and told them to tell their mother that someone
would come when the sun went down."

Bogan Bill nodded approvingly.

"So at sundown I went and knocked at the door.  It opened and there
stood my little wife looking prettier than ever--only careworn."

Long, impressive pause.

"Well, Jack, what did she do?" asked Bogan.

"She didn't do nothing."

"Well, Jack, and what did she say?"

Jack sighed and straightened himself up: "She said--she said--'Well,
so you've come back.'"

"Painful silence.

"Well, Jack, and what did you say?"

"I said yes."

"Well, and so you had!" said Tom Moonlight.

"It wasn't that, Tom," said Jack sadly and wearily--"_It was the
way she said it_!"

Lally Thompson rubbed his eyes: "And what did you do, Jack?" he
asked gently.

"I stayed for a year, and then I deserted her again--but meant it
that time."

"Ah, well!  It's time to turn in."




ANOTHER OF MITCHELL'S PLANS FOR THE FUTURE


"I'll get down among the cockies along the Lachlan, or some of these
rivers," said Mitchell, throwing down his swag beneath a big tree.
"A man stands a better show down there.  It's a mistake to come out
back.  I knocked around a good deal down there among the farms.  Could
always get plenty of tucker, and a job if I wanted it.  One cocky I
worked for wanted me to stay with him for good.  Sorry I didn't.  I'd
have been better off now.  I was treated more like one of the family,
and there was a couple of good-looking daughters.  One of them was
clean gone on me.  There are some grand girls down that way.  I always
got on well with the girls, because I could play the fiddle and sing a
bit.  They'll be glad to see me when I get back there again, I know.
I'll be all right--no more bother about tucker.  I'll just let things
slide as soon as I spot the house.  I'll bet my boots the kettle will
be boiling, and everything in the house will be on the table before
I'm there twenty minutes.  And the girls will be running to meet the
old cocky when he comes riding home at night, and they'll let down the
sliprails, and ask him to guess 'who's up at our place?'  Yes, I'll
find a job with some old cocky, with a good-looking daughter or two.
I'll get on ploughing if I can; that's the sort of work I like; best
graft about a farm.

"By and by the cocky'll have a few sheep he wants shorn, and one day
he'll say to me, 'Jack, if you hear of a shearer knockin' round let me
know--I've got a few sheep I want shore.'

"'How many have you got?' I'll say.

"'Oh, about fifteen hundred.'

"'And what d'you think of giving?'

"'Well, about twenty-five bob a hundred, but if a shearer sticks out
for thirty, send him up to talk with me.  I want to get 'em shore as
soon as possible.'

"'It's all right,' I'll say, 'you needn't bother; I'll shear your
sheep.'

"'Why,' he'll say, 'can _you_ shear?'

"'Shear?  Of course I can!  I shore before you were born.'  It won't
matter if he's twice as old as me.

"So I'll shear his sheep and make a few pounds, and he'll be glad and
all the more eager to keep me on, so's to always have someone to shear
his sheep.  But by and by I'll get tired of stopping in the one place
and want to be on the move, so I'll tell him I'm going to leave.

"'Why, what do you want to go for?' he'll say, surprised, 'ain't you
satisfied?'

"'Oh, yes, I'm satisfied, but I want a change.'

"'Oh, don't go,' he'll say; 'stop and we'll call it twenty-five bob
a week.'

"But I'll tell him I'm off--wouldn't stay for a hundred when I'd made
up my mind; so, when he sees he can't persuade me he'll get a bit
stiff and say:

"'Well, what about that there girl?  Are you goin' to go away and
leave her like that?'

"'Why, what d'yer mean?' I'll say.  'Leave her like what?'  I won't
pretend to know what he's driving at.

"'Oh!' he'll say, 'you know very well what I mean.  The question is:
_Are you going to marry the girl or not_?'

"I'll see that things are gettin' a little warm and that I'm in a
corner, so I'll say:

"'Why, I never thought about it.  This is pretty sudden and out of
the common, isn't it?  I don't mind marrying the girl if she'll have
me.  Why! I haven't asked her yet!'

"'Well, look here,' he'll say, 'if you agree to marry the girl--and
I'll make you marry her, any road--I'll give you that there farm over
there and a couple of hundred to start on.'

"So, I'll marry her and settle down and be a cocky myself and if you
ever happen to be knocking round there hard up, you needn't go short of
tucker a week or two; but don't come knocking round the house when I'm
not at home."




STEELMAN


Steelman was a hard case.  If you were married, and settled down, and
were so unfortunate as to have known Steelman in other days, he would,
if in your neighbourhood and dead-beat, be sure to look you up.  He
would find you anywhere, no matter what precautions you might take.
If he came to your house, he would stay to tea without invitation, and
if he stayed to tea, he would ask you to "fix up a shake-down on the
floor, old man," and put him up for the night; and, if he stopped all
night, he'd remain--well, until something better turned up.

There was no shaking off Steelman.  He had a way about him which would
often make it appear as if you had invited him to stay, and pressed
him against his roving inclination, and were glad to have him round
for company, while he remained only out of pure goodwill to you.  He
didn't like to offend an old friend by refusing his invitation.

Steelman knew his men.

The married victim generally had neither the courage nor the ability
to turn him out.  He was cheerfully blind and deaf to all hints, and
if the exasperated missus said anything to him straight, he would look
shocked, and reply, as likely as not:

"Why, my good woman, you must be mad!  I'm your husband's guest!"

And if she wouldn't cook for him, he'd cook for himself.  There was no
choking him off.  Few people care to call the police in a case like
this; and besides, as before remarked, Steelman knew his men.  The
only way to escape from him was to move--but then, as likely as not,
he'd help pack up and come along with his portmanteau right on top of
the last load of furniture, and drive you and your wife to the verge
of madness by the calm style in which he proceeded to superintend the
hanging of your pictures.

Once he quartered himself like this on an old schoolmate of his, named
Brown, who had got married and steady and settled down.  Brown tried
all ways to get rid of Steelman, but he couldn't do it.  One day Brown
said to Steelman:


"Look here, Steely, old man, I'm very sorry, but I'm afraid we won't
be able to accommodate you any longer--to make you comfortable, I
mean.  You see, a sister of the missus is coming down on a visit for a
month or two, and we ain't got anywhere to put her, except in your
room.  I wish the missus's relations to blazes!  I didn't marry the
whole blessed family; but it seems I've got to keep them."

Pause--very awkward and painful for poor Brown.  Discouraging silence
from Steelman.  Brown rested his elbows on his knees, and, with a
pathetic and appealing movement of his hand across his forehead, he
continued desperately:

"I'm very sorry, you see, old man--you know I'd like you to stay--I
want you to stay....It isn't my fault--it's the missus's doings.  I've
done my best with her, but I can't help it.  I've been more like a
master in my own house--more comfortable--and I've been better treated
since I've had you to back me up....I'll feel mighty lonely, anyway,
when ycu're gone....But...  you know...as soon as her sister
goes...you know...."

Here poor Brown broke down--very sorry he had spoken at all; but
Steely came to the rescue with a ray of light.

"What's the matter with the little room at the back?" he asked.

"Oh, we couldn't think of putting you there," said Brown, with a
last effort; "it's not fined up; you wouldn't be comfortable, and,
besides, it's damp, and you'd catch your death of cold.  It was never
meant for anything but a wash-house.  I'm sorry I didn't get another
room built on to the house."

"Bosh!" interrupted Steelman, cheerfully.  "Catch a cold!  Here
I've been knocking about the country for the last five years--sleeping
out in all weathers--and do you think a little damp is going to hurt
me?  Pooh!  What do you take me for?  Don't you bother your head about
it any more, old man; I'll fix up the lumber-room for myself, all
right; and all you've got to do is to let me know when the
sister-in-law business is coming on, and I'll shift out of my room in
time for the missus to get it ready for her.  Here, have you got a bob
on you?  I'll go out and get some beer.  A drop'll do you good."

"Well, if you can make yourself comfortable, I'll be only too glad
for you to stay," said Brown, wearily.

"You'd better invite some woman you know to come on a visit, and pass
her off as your sister," said Brown to his wife, while Steelman was
gone for the beer.  "I've made a mess of it."

Mrs Brown said, "I knew you would."

Steelman knew his men.

But at last Brown reckoned that he could stand it no longer.  The
thought of it made him so wild that he couldn't work.  He took a day
off to get thoroughly worked up in, came home that night full to the
chin of indignation and Dunedin beer, and tried to kick Steelman out.
And Steelman gave him a hiding.

Next morning Steelman was sitting beside Brown's bed with a saucer of
vinegar, some brown paper, a raw beef-steak, and a bottle of soda.

"Well, what have you got to say for yourself now, Brown?" he said,
sternly.  "Ain't you jolly well ashamed of yourself to come home in
the beastly state you did last night, and insult a guest in your
house, to say nothing of an old friend--and perhaps the best friend
you ever had, if you only knew it?  Anybody else would have given you
in charge and got you three months for the assault.  You ought to have
some consideration for your wife and children, and your own
character--even if you haven't any for your old mate's feelings.
Here, drink this, and let me fix you up a bit; the missus has got the
breakfast waiting."



DRIFTED BACK



The
stranger walked into the corner grocery with the air of one who had
come back after many years to see someone who would be glad to see
him.  He shed his swag and stood it by the wall with great
deliberation; then he rested his elbow on the counter, stroked his
beard, and grinned quizzically at the shopman, who smiled back
presently in a puzzled way.

"Good afternoon," said the grocer.

"Good afternoon."

Pause.

"Nice day," said the grocer.

Pause.

"Anything I can do for you?"

"Yes; tell the old man there's a chap wants to speak to him for a
minute."

"Old man?  What old man?"

"Hake, of course--old Ben Hake!  Ain't he in?"

The grocer smiled.

"Hake ain't here now.  I'm here."

"How's that?"

"Why, he sold out to me ten years ago."

"Well, I suppose I'll find him somewhere about town?"

"I don't think you will.  He left Australia when he sold out.
He's--he's dead now."

"Dead! Old Ben Hake?"

"Yes.  You knew him, then?"

The stranger seemed to have lost a great deal of his assurance.  He
turned his side to the counter, hooked his elbow on it, and gazed out
through the door along Sunset Track.

"You can give me half a pound of nailrod," he said, in a quiet
tone--"I s'pose young Hake is in town?"

"No; the whole family went away.  I think there's one of the sons in
business in Sydney now."

"I s'pose the M'Lachlans are here yet?"

"No; they are not.  The old people died about five years ago; the
sons are in Queensland, I think; and both the girls are married and in
Sydney."

"Ah, well!...I see you've got the railway here now."

"Oh, yes!  Six years."

"Times is changed a lot."

"They are."

"I s'pose--I s'pose you can tell me where I'll find old Jimmy
Nowlett?"

"Jimmy Nowlett?  Jimmy Nowlett?  I never heard of the name.  What was
he?"

"Oh, he was a bullock-driver.  Used to carry from the mountains
before the railway was made."

"Before my time, perhaps.  There's no one of that name round here
now."

"Ah, well!...I don't suppose you knew the Duggans?"

"Yes, I did.  The old man's dead, too, and the family's gone
away--Lord knows where.  They weren't much loss, to all accounts.  The
sons got into trouble, I b'lieve--went to the bad.  They had a bad
name here."

"Did they?  Well, they had good hearts--at least, old Malachi Duggan
 and the eldest son had....You can give me a couple of pounds of
 sugar."

"Right.  I suppose it's a long time since you were here last?"

"Fifteen years."

"Indeed!"

"Yes.  I don't s'pose I remind you of anyone you know around here?"

"N--no!" said the grocer with a smile.  'I can't say you do."

"Ah, well!  I s'pose I'll find the Wilds still living in the same
place?"

"The Wilds?  Well, no.  The old man is dead, too, and--"

"And--and where's Jim?  He ain't dead?"

"No; he's married and settled down in Sydney."

Long pause.

"Can you--" said the stranger, hesitatingly; "did you--I suppose
you knew Mary--Mary Wild?"

"Mary?" said the grocer, smilingly.  "That was my wife's maiden
name.  Would you like to see her?"

"No, no!  She mightn't remember me!"

He reached hastily for his swag, and shouldered it.

"Well, I must be gettin' on."

"I s'pose you'll camp here over Christmas?"

"No; there's nothing to stop here for--I'll push on.  I did intend to
have a Christmas here--in fact, I came a long way out of my road
a-purpose....I meant to have just one more Christmas with old Ben Hake
an' the rest of the boys--but I didn't know as they'd moved on so far
west.  The old bush school is dyin' out."

There was a smile in his eyes, but his bearded lips twitched a little.

"Things is changed.  The old houses is pretty much the same, an' the
old signs want touchin' up and paintin' jest as had as ever; an'
there's that old palin' fence that me an' Ben Hake an' Jimmy Nowlett
put up twenty year ago.  I've tramped and travelled long ways since
then.  But things is changed--at least, people is....Well, I must be
goin'.  There's nothing to keep me here.  I'll push on and get into my
track again.  It's cooler travellin' in the night."

"Yes, it's been pretty hot to-day."

"Yes, it has.  Well, s'long."

"Good day.  Merry Christmas!"

"Eh?  What?  Oh, yes!  Same to you! S'long!"

"Good day!" He drifted out and away along Sunset Track.




REMAILED



There is an old custom prevalent in Australasia--and other parts, too,
perhaps, for that matter--which, we think, deserves to be written up.
It might not be an "honoured" custom from a newspaper manager's or
proprietor's point of view, or from the point of view (if any)
occupied by the shareholders on the subject; but, nevertheless, it is
a time-honoured and a good old custom.  Perhaps, for several reasons,
it was more prevalent among diggers than with the comparatively
settled bushmen of to-day--the poor, hopeless, wandering swaggy
doesn't count in the matter, for he has neither the wherewithal nor
the opportunity to honour the old custom; also his movements are too
sadly uncertain to permit of his being honoured by it.  We refer to
the remailing of newspapers and journals from one mate to another.

Bill gets his paper and reads it through conscientiously from
beginning to end by candle or slush-lamp as he lies on his back in the
hut or tent with his pipe in his mouth; or, better still, on a Sunday
afternoon as he reclines on the grass in the shade, in all the glory
and comfort of a clean pair of moleskins and socks and a clean shirt.
And when he has finished reading the paper--if it is not immediately
bespoke--he turns it right side out, folds it, and puts it away where
he'll know where to find it.  The paper is generally bespoke in the
following manner:

"Let's have a look at that paper after you, Bill, when yer done with
it," says Jack.

And Bill says:

"I just promised it to Bob.  You can get it after him."

And, when it is finally lent, Bill says:

"Don't forget to give that paper back to me when yer done with it.
Don't let any of those other blanks get holt of it, or the chances are
I won't set eyes on it again."

But the other blanks get it in their turn after being referred to
Bill.  "You must ask Bill," says Jack to the next blank, "I got it
from him."  And when Bill gets his paper back finally--which is often
only after much bush grumbling, accusation, recrimination, and
denial--he severely and carefully re-arranges theme pages, folds the
paper, and sticks it away up over a rafter, or behind a post or
batten, or under his pillow where it will safe.  He wants that paper
to send to Jim.

Bill is but an indifferent hand at folding, and knows
little or nothing about wrappers.  He folds and re-folds the paper
several times and in various ways, but the first result is often the
best, and is finally adopted.  The parcel looks more ugly than neat;
but Bill puts a weight upon it so that it won't fly open, and looks
round for a piece of string to tie it with.  Sometimes he ties it firmly
round the middle, sometimes at both ends; at other times he runs the
string down inside the folds and ties it that way, or both ways, or
all the ways, so as to be sure it won't come undone--which it doesn't
as a rule.  If he can't find a piece of string long enough, he ties
two bits together, and submits the result to a rather severe test;
and if the string is too thin, or he has to use thread, he doubles it.
Then he worries round to find out who has got the ink, or whether
anyone has seen anything of the pen; and when he gets them, he writes
the address with painful exactitude on the margin of the paper,
sometimes in two or three places.  He has to think a moment before he
writes; and perhaps he'll scratch the back of his head afterwards
with an inky finger, and regard the address with a sort of mild,
passive surprise.  His old mate Jim was always plain Jim to him, and
nothing else; but, in order to reach Jim, this paper has to be
addressed to--

    MR JAMES MITCHELL,
    c/o J.  W.  Dowell, Esq.,
    Munnigrub Station--

and so on.  "Mitchell" seems strange--Bill couldn't think of it for
the moment--and so does "James."

And, a week or so later, over on Coolgardie, or away up in northern
Queensland, or bush-felling down in Maoriland, Jim takes a stroll up
to the post office after tea on mail night.  He doesn't expect any
letters, but there might be a paper from Bill.  Bill generally sends
him a newspaper.  They seldom write to each other, these old mates.

There were points, of course, upon which Bill and Jim couldn't
agree--subjects upon which they argued long and loud and often in the
old days; and it sometimes happens that Bill across an article or a
paragraph which agrees with and, so to speak, barracks for a pet
theory of his as against one held by Jim; and Bill marks it with a
chuckle and four crosses at the corners--and an extra one at each side
perhaps--and sends it on to Jim; he reckons it'll rather corner old
Jim.  The crosses are not over ornamental nor artistic, but very
distinct; Jim sees them from the reverse side of the sheet first,
maybe, and turns it over with interest to see what it is.  He grins a
good-humoured grin as he reads--poor old Bill is just as thick-headed
and obstinate as ever--just as far gone on his old fad.  It's rather
rough on Jim, because he's too far off to argue; but, if he's very
earnest on the subject, he'll sit down and write, using all his old
arguments to prove that the man who wrote that rot was a fool.  This
is one of the few things that will make them write to each other.  Or
else Jim will wait till he comes across a paragraph in another paper
which barracks for his side of the argument, and, in his opinion;
rather knocks the stuffing out of Bill's man; then he marks it with
more and bigger crosses and a grin, and sends it along to Bill.  They
are both democrats--these old mates generally are--and at times one
comes across a stirring article or poem, and marks it with approval
and sends it along.  Or it may be a good joke, or the notice of the
death of an old mate.  What a wave of feeling and memories a little
par can take through the land!

Jim is a sinner and a scoffer, and Bill is an earnest, thorough,
respectable old freethinker, and consequently they often get a _War
Cry_ or a tract sent inside their exchanges--somebody puts it in
for a joke.

Long years ago--long years ago Bill and Jim were sweet on a rose of
the bush--or a lily of the goldfields--call her Lily King.  Both
courted her at the same time, and quarrelled over her--fought over
her, perhaps--and were parted by her for years.  But that's all
bygones.  Perhaps she loved Bill, perhaps she loved Jim--perhaps both;
or, maybe, she wasn't sure which.  Perhaps she loved neither, and was
only stringing them on.  Anyway, she didn't marry either the one or
the other.  She married another man--call him Jim Smith.  And so, in
after years, Bill comes across a paragraph in a local paper, something
like the following:

    On July 10th, at her residence, Eureka Cottage, Ballarat-street,
    Tally Town, the wife of James Smith of twins (boy and girl);
    all three doing well.

And Bill marks it with a loud chuckle and big crosses, and sends it
along to Jim.  Then Bill sits and thinks and smokes, and thinks till
the fire goes out, and quite forgets all about putting that necessary
patch on his pants.

And away down on Auckland gum-fields, perhaps, Jim reads the par with
a grin; then grows serious, and sits and scrapes his gum by the
flickering firelight in a mechanical manner, and--thinks.  His
thoughts are far away in the back years--faint and far, far and faint.
For the old, lingering, banished pain returns and hurts a man's heart
like the false wife who comes back again, falls on her knees before
him, and holds up her trembling arms and pleads with swimming,
upturned eyes, which are eloquent with the love she felt too late.

It is supposed to
be something to have your work published in an English magazine, to
have it published in book form, to be flattered by critics and
reprinted throughout the country press, or even to be cut up well and
severely.  But, after all, now we come to think of it, we would almost
as soon see a piece of ours marked with big inky crosses in the
soiled and crumpled rag that Bill or Jim gets sent him by an old mate
of his--the paper that goes thousands of miles scrawled all over with
smudgy addresses and tied with a piece of string.




MITCHELL DOESN'T BELIEVE IN THE SACK



"If ever I do get a job again," said Mitchell, "I'll stick to it
while there's a hand's turn of work to do, and put a few pounds
together.  I won't be the fool I always was.  If I'd had sense a
couple of years ago, I wouldn't be tramping through this damned sand
and mulga now.  I'll get a job on a station, or at some toff's house,
knocking about the stables and garden, and I'll make up my mind to
settle down to graft for four or five years."

"But supposing you git the sack?" said his mate.

"I won't take it.  Only for taking the sack I wouldn't be hard up
to-day.  The boss might come round and say:

'I won't want you after this week, Mitchell.  I haven't got any more
work for you to do.  Come up and see me at the office presently.'

"So I'll go up and get my money; but I'll be pottering round as usual
on Monday, and come up to the kitchen for my breakfast.  Some time in
the day the boss'll be knocking round and see me.

"'Why, Mitchell,' he'll say, 'I thought you was gone.'

"'I didn't say I was going,' I'll say.  'Who told you that--or what
made you think so?'

"'I thought I told you on Saturday that I wouldn't want you any
more,' he'll say, a bit short.  'I haven't got enough work to keep a
man going; I told you that; I thought you understood.  _Didn't I give
you the sack on Saturday_?'

"'It's no use;' I'll say, 'that sort of thing's played out.  I've
been had too often that way; I've been sacked once too often.  Taking
the sack's been the cause of all my trouble; I don't believe in it.
If I'd never taken the sack I'd have been a rich man to-day; it might
be all very well for horses, but it doesn't suit me; it doesn't hurt
you, but it hurts me.  I made up my mind that when I got a place to
suit me, I'd stick in it.  I'm comfortable here and satisfied, and
you've had no cause to find fault with me.  It's no use you trying to
sack me, because I won't take it.  I've been there before, and you
might as well try to catch an old bird with chaff.'

"'Well, I won't pay you, and you'd better be off,' he'll say, trying
not to grin.

"'Never mind the money,' I'll say, 'the bit of tucker won't cost you
anything, and I'll find something to do round the house till you have
some more work.  I won't ask you for anything, and, surely to God I'll
find enough to do to pay for my grub!'

"So I'll potter round and take things easy and call up at the kitchen
as usual at meal times, and by and by the boss'll think to himself:
'Well, if I've got to feed this chap I might as well get some work out
of him.'

"So he'll find me, something regular to do--a bit of fencing, or
carpentering, or painting, or something, and then I'll begin to call up
for my stuff again, as usual."




 SHOOTING THE MOON



We lay in camp in the fringe of the mulga, and watched the big, red,
smoky, rising moon out on the edge of the misty plain, and smoked and
thought together sociably.  Our nose-bags were nice and heavy, and we
still had about a pound of nail-rod between us.

The moon reminded my mate, Jack Mitchell, of something--anything
reminded him of something, in fact.

"Did you ever notice," said Jack, in a lazy tone, just as if he
didn't want to tell a yarn--"Did you ever notice that people always
shoot the moon when there's no moon?  Have you got the matches?"

He lit up; he was always lighting up when he was reminded of
something.

"This reminds me--Have you got the knife?  My pipe's stuffed up."

He dug it out, loaded afresh, and lit up again.

"I remember once, at a pub I was staying at, I had to leave without
saying good-bye to the landlord.  I didn't know him very well at that
time.

"My room was upstairs at the back, with the window opening on to the
backyard.  I always carried a bit of clothes-line in my swag or
portmanteau those times.  I travelled along with a portmanteau those
times.  I carried the rope in case of accident, or in case of fire, to
lower my things out of the window--or hang myself, maybe, if things
got too bad.  No, now I come to think of it, I carried a revolver for
that, and it was the only thing I never pawned."

"To hang yourself with?" asked the mate.

"Yes--you're very smart," snapped Mitchell; "never mind---.  This
reminds me that I got a chap at a pub to pawn my last suit, while I
stopped inside and waited for an old mate to send me a pound; but I
kept the shooter, and if he hadn't sent it I'd have been the late John
Mitchell long ago."

"And sometimes you lower'd out when there wasn't a fire."

"Yes, that will pass; you're improving in the funny business.  But
about the yarn.  There was two beds in my room at the pub, where I had
to go away without shouting for the boss, and, as it happened, there
was a strange chap sleeping in the other bed that night, and, just as
I raised the window and was going to lower my bag out, he woke up.

"'Now, look here,' I said, shaking my fist at him, like that, 'if you
say a word, I'll stoush yer!'

"'Well,' he said, 'well, you needn't be in such a sweat to jump down
a man's throat.  I've got my swag under the bed, and I was just going
to ask you for the loan of the rope when you're done with it.'

"Well, we chummed.  His name was Tom--Tom--something, I forget the
other name, but it doesn't matter.  Have you got the matches?"

He wasted three matches, and continued--

"There was a lot of old galvanized iron lying about under the window,
and I was frightened the swag would make a noise; anyway, I'd have to
drop the rope, and that was sure to make a noise.  So we agreed for
one of us to go down and land the swag.  If we were seen going down
without the swags it didn't matter, for we could say we wanted to go
out in the yard for something."

"If you had the swag you might pretend you were walking in your
sleep," I suggested, for the want of something funnier to say.

"Bosh," said Jack, "and get woke up with a black eye.  Bushies
don't generally carry their swags out of pubs in their sleep, or walk
neither; it's only city swells who do that.  Where's the blessed
matches?

"Well, Tom agreed to go, and presently I saw a shadow under the
window, and lowered away.

"'All right?' I asked in a whisper.

"'All right!" whispered the shadow.

"I lowered the other swag.

"'All right?'

"'All right!' said the shadow, and just then the moon came out.

"'All right!' says the shadow.

"But it wasn't all right.  It was the landlord himself!

"It seems he got up and went out to the back in the night, and just
happened to be coming in when my mate Tom was sneaking out of the back
door.  He saw Tom, and Tom saw him, and smoked through a hole in the
palings into the scrub.  The boss looked up at the window, and dropped
to it.  I went down, funky enough, I can tell you, and faced him.  He
said:

"'Look here, mate, why didn't you come straight to me, and tell me
how you was fixed, instead of sneaking round the trouble in that
fashion?  There's no occasion for it.'

"I felt mean at once, but I said: 'Well, you see, we didn't know you,
boss.'

"'So it seems.  Well, I didn't think of that.  Anyway, call up your
mate and come and have a drink; we'll talk over it afterwards.' So I
called Tom.  'Come on,' I shouted.  'It's all right.'

"And the boss kept us a couple of days, and then gave us
as much tucker as we could carry, and a drop of stuff and a few bob to
go on the track again with."

"Well, he was white, any road."

"Yes.  I knew him well after that, and only heard one man say a word
against him."

"And did you stoush him?"

"No; I was going to, but Tom wouldn't let me.  He said he was
frightened I might make a mess of it, and he did it himself."

"Did what?  Make a mess of it?"

"He made a mess of the other man that slandered that publican.  I'd
be funny if I was you.  Where's the matches?"

"And could Tom fight?"

"Yes.  Tom could fight."

"Did you travel long with him after that?"

"Ten years."

"And where is he now?"

"Dead--Give us the matches."




HIS FATHER'S MATE



It was Golden Gully still, but golden in name only, unless indeed the
yellow mullock heaps or the bloom of the wattle-trees on the hillside
gave it a claim to the title.  But the gold was gone from the gully,
and the diggers were gone, too, after the manner of Timon's friends
when his wealth deserted him.  Golden Gully was a dreary place, dreary
even for an abandoned goldfield.  The poor, tortured earth, with its
wounds all bare, seemed to make a mute appeal to the surrounding bush
to come up and hide it, and, as if in answer to its appeal, the shrub
and saplings were beginning to close in from the foot of the range.
The wilderness was reclaiming its own again.

The two dark, sullen hills that stood on each side were clothed from
tip to hollow with dark scrub and scraggy box-trees; but above the
highest row of shafts on one side ran a line of wattle-trees in full
bloom.

The top of the western hill was shaped somewhat like a saddle, and
standing high above the eucalypti on the point corresponding with the
pommel were three tall pines.  These lonely trees, seen for many miles
around, had caught the yellow rays of many a setting sun long before
the white man wandered over the ranges.

The predominant note of the scene was a painful sense of listening,
that never seemed to lose its tension--a listening as though for the
sounds of digger life, sounds that had gone and left a void that was
accentuated by the signs of a former presence.  The main army of
diggers had long ago vanished to new rushes, leaving only its
stragglers and deserters behind.  These were men who were too poor to
drag families about, men who were old and feeble, and men who had lost
their faith in fortune.  They had dropped unnoticed out of the ranks;
and remained to scratch out a living among the abandoned claims.

Golden Gully had its little community of fossickers who lived in a
clearing called Spencer's Flat on one side and Pounding Flat on the
other, but they lent no life to the scene; they only haunted it.  A
stranger might have thought the field entirely deserted until he came
on a coat and a billy at the foot of saplings amongst the holes, and
heard, in the shallow ground underneath, the thud of a pick, which
told of some fossicker below rooting out what little wash remained.

One afternoon towards Christmas, a windlass was erected over an old
shaft of considerable depth at the foot of the gully.  A greenhide
bucket attached to a rope on the windlass was lying next morning near
the mouth of the shaft, and beside it, on a clear-swept patch, was a
little mound of cool wet wash-dirt.

A clump of saplings near at hand threw a shade over part of the
mullock heap, and in this shade, seated on an old coat, was a small
boy of eleven or twelve years, writing on a slate.

He had fair hair, blue eyes, and a thin old-fashioned face--a face
that would scarcely alter as he grew to manhood.  His costume
consisted of a pair of moleskin trousers, a cotton shirt, and one
suspender.  He held the slate rigidly with a corner of its frame
pressed close against his ribs, whilst his head hung to one side, so
close to the slate that his straggling hair almost touched it.  He was
regarding his work fixedly out of the corners of his eyes, whilst he
painfully copied down the head line, spelling it in a different way
each time.  In this laborious task he appeared to be greatly assisted
by a tongue that lolled out of the corner of his mouth and made an
occasional revolution round it, leaving a circle of temporarily clean
face.  His small clay-covered toes also entered into the spirit of the
thing, and helped him not a little by their energetic wriggling.  He
paused occasionally to draw the back of his small brown arm across his
mouth.

Little Isley Mason, or, as he was called, "His Father's Mate," had
always been a favourite with the diggers and fossickers from the days
when he used to slip out first thing in the morning and take a run
across the frosty flat in his shirt.  Long Bob Sawkins would often
tell how Isley came home one morning from his run in the long, wet
grass as naked as he was born, with the information that he had lost
his shirt.

Later on, when most of the diggers had gone, and Isley's mother was
dead, he was to be seen about the place with bare, sunbrowned arms and
legs, a pick and shovel, and a gold dish about two-thirds of his
height in diameter, with which he used to go "a-speckin'" and
"fossickin'" amongst the old mullock heaps.  Long Bob was Isley's
special crony, and he would often go out of his way to lay the boy
outer bits o' wash and likely spots, lamely excusing his long yarns
with the child by the explanation that it was "amusin' to draw Isley
out."

Isley had been sitting writing for some time when a deep voice called
out from below:

"Isley!"

"Yes, father."

"Send down the bucket."

"Right."

Isley put down his slate, and going to the shaft dropped the bucket
down as far as the slack rope reached; then, placing one hand on the
bole of the windlass and holding the other against it underneath, he
let it slip round between his palms until the bucket reached bottom.
A sound of shovelling was heard for a few moments, and presently the
voice cried, "Wind away, sonny."

"Thet ain't half enough," said the boy, peering down.  "Don't be
frightened to pile it in, father.  I kin wind up a lot more'n thet."

A little more scraping, and the boy braced his feet well upon the
little mound of clay which he had raised under the handle of the
windlass to make up for his deficiency in stature.

"Now then, Isley!"

Isley wound slowly but sturdily, and soon the bucket of "wash"
appeared above the surface; then he took it in short lifts and
deposited it with the rest of the wash-dirt.

"Isley!" called his father again.

"Yes, father."

"Have you done that writing lesson yet?"

"Very near."

"Then send down the slate next time for some sums."

"All right."

The boy resumed his seat, fixed the corner of the slate well into his
ribs, humped his back, and commenced another wavering line.

Tom Mason was known on the place as a silent, hard worker.  He was a
man of about sixty, tall, and dark bearded.  There was nothing
uncommon about his face, except, perhaps, that it hardened, as the
face of a man might harden who had suffered a long succession of
griefs and disappointments.  He lived in little hut under a peppermint
tree at the far edge of Pounding Flat.  His wife had died there about
six years before, and new rushes broke out and he was well able to go,
he never left Golden Gully.

Mason was kneeling in front of the "face" digging away by the light
of a tallow candle stuck in the side.  The floor of the drive was very
wet, and his trousers were heavy and cold with clay and water; but the
old digger was used to this sort of thing.  His pick was not bringing
out much to-day, however, for he seemed abstracted and would
occasionally pause in his work, while his thoughts wandered far away
from the narrow streak of wash-dirt in the "face."

He was digging out pictures from a past life.  They were not pleasant
ones, for his face was stony and white in the dim glow of the candle.

Thud, thud, thud--the blows became slower and more irregular as the
fossicker's mind wandered off into the past.  The sides of the drive
seemed to vanish slowly away, and the "face" retreated far out
beyond a horizon that was hazy in the glow of the southern ocean.  He
was standing on the deck of a ship and by his side stood a brother.
They were sailing southward to the Land of Promise that was shining
there in all its golden glory!  The sails pressed forward in the
bracing wind, and the clipper ship raced along with its burden of the
wildest dreamers ever borne in a vessel's hull!  Up over long blue
ocean ridges, down into long blue ocean gullies; on to lands so new,
and yet so old, where above the sunny glow of the southern skies
blazed the shining names of Ballarat! and Bendigo!  The deck seemed to
lurch, and the fossicker fell forward against the face of the drive.
The shock recalled him, and he lifted his pick once more.

But the blows slacken again as another vision rises before him.  It is
Ballarat now.  He is working in a shallow claim at Eureka, his brother
by his side.  The brother looks pale and ill, for he has been up all
night dancing and drinking.  Out behind them is the line of blue
hills; in front is the famous Bakery Hill, and down to the left Golden
Point.  Two mounted troopers are riding up over Specimen Hill.  What
do they want?

They take the brother away, handcuffed.  Manslaughter last night.
Cause--drink and jealousy.

The vision is gone again.  Thud, thud, goes the pick; it counts the
years that follow--one, two, three, four, up to twenty, and then it
stops for the next scene--a selection on the banks of a bright river
in New South Wales.  The little homestead is surrounded by vines and
fruit-trees.  Many swarms of bees work under the shade of the trees,
and a crop of wheat is nearly ripe on the hillside.

A man and a boy are engaged in clearing a paddock just below the
homestead.  They are father and son; the son, a boy of about
seventeen, is the image of his father.

Horses' feet again!  Here comes Nemesis in mounted troopers' uniform.

The mail was stuck up last night about five miles away, and a
refractory passenger shot.  The son had been out 'possum shooting' all
night with some friends.

The troopers take the son away handcuffed: "Robbery under arms."

The father was taking out a stump when the troopers came.  His foot is
still resting on the spade, which is half driven home.  He watches the
troopers take the boy up to the house, and then, driving the spade to
its full depth, he turns up another sod.  The troopers reach the door
of the homestead; but still he digs steadily, and does not seem to
hear his wife's cry of despair.  The troopers search the boy's room
and bring out some clothing in two bundles; but still the father digs.
They have saddled up one of the farm horses and made the boy mount.
The father digs.  They ride off along the ridge with the boy between
them.  The father never lifts his eyes; the hole widens round the
stump; he digs away till the brave little wife comes and takes him
gently by the arm.  He half rouses himself and follows her to the
house like an obedient dog.

Trial and disgrace follow, and then other misfortunes, pleuro among
the cattle, drought, and poverty.

Thud, thud, thud again!  But it is not the sound of the fossicker's
pick--it is the fall of sods on his wife's coffin.

It is a little bush cemetery, and he stands stonily watching them fill
up her grave.  She died of a broken heart and shame.  "I can't bear
disgrace!  I can't bear disgrace!" she had moaned all these six weary
years--for the poor are often proud.

But he lives on, for it takes a lot to break a man's heart.  He holds
up his head and toils on for the sake of a child that is left, and
that child is--Isley.

And now the fossicker seems to see a vision of the future.  He seems
to be standing somewhere, an old, old man, with a younger one at his
side; the younger one has Isley's face.  Horses' feet again!  Ah, God!
Nemesis once more in troopers' uniform!

The fossicker falls on his knees in the mud and clay at the bottom of
the drive, and prays Heaven to take his last child ere Nemesis comes
for him.


Long Bob Sawkins had been known on the diggings as "Bob the Devil."
His profile at least from one side, certainly did recall that of the
sarcastic Mephistopheles; but the other side, like his true character,
was by no means a devil's.  His physiognomy had been much damaged, and
one eye removed by the premature explosion of a blast in some old
Ballarat mine.  The blind eye was covered with a green patch, which
gave a sardonic appearance to the remaining features.

He was a stupid, heavy, good-natured Englishman.  He stuttered a
little, and had a peculiar habit of wedging the monosyllable "why"
into his conversation at times when it served no other purpose than to
fill up the pauses caused by his stuttering; but this by no means
assisted him in his speech, for he often stuttered over the "why"
itself.

The sun was getting low down, and its yellow rays reached far up among
the saplings of Golden Gully when Bob appeared coming down by the path
that ran under the western hill.  He was dressed in the usual
costume-cotton shirt, moleskin trousers, faded hat and waistcoat, and
blucher boots.  He carried a pick over his shoulder, the handle of
which was run through the heft of a short shovel that hung down
behind, and he had a big dish under his arm.  He paused opposite the
shaft with the windlass, and hailed the boy in his usual form of
salutation.

"Look, see here Isley!"

"What is it, Bob?"

"I seed a young--why--magpie up in the scrub, and yer oughter be able
to catch it."

"Can't leave the shaft; father's b'low."

"How did yer father know there was any--why--wash in the old shaft?"

"Seed old Corney in town Saturday, 'n he said thur was enough to make
it worth while bailin' out.  Bin bailin' all the mornin'."

Bob came over, and letting his tools down with a clatter he hitched up
the knees of his moleskins and sat down on one heel.

"What are yer--why--doin' on the slate, Isley?" said he, taking out
an old clay pipe and lighting it.

"Sums," said Isley.

Bob puffed away at his pipe a moment.

"'Tain't no use!" he said, sitting down on the clay and drawing his
knees up.  "Edication's a failyer."

"Listen at 'im!" exclaimed the boy.  "D'yer mean ter say it ain't
no use learnin' readin' and writin' and sums?"

"Isley!"

"Right, father."

The boy went to the windlass and let the bucket down.  Bob offered to
help him wind up, but Isley, proud of showing his strength to his
friend, insisted on winding by himself.

"You'll be--why--a strong man some day, Isley," said Bob, landing
the bucket.

"Oh, I could wind up a lot more'n father puts in.  Look how I greased
the handles!  It works like butter now," and the boy sent the handles
spinning round with a jerk to illustrate his meaning.

"Why did they call yer Isley for?" queried Bob, as they resumed
their seats.  "It ain't yer real name, is it?"

"No, my name's Harry.  A digger useter say I was a isle in the ocean
to father 'n mother, 'n then I was nicknamed Isle, 'n then Isley."

"You hed a--why--brother once, didn't yer?"

"Yes, but thet was afore I was borned.  He died, at least mother used
ter say she didn't know if he was dead; but father says he's dead as
fur's he's concerned."

"And your father hed a brother, too.  Did yer ever--why--hear of
him?"

"Yes, I heard father talkin' about it wonst to mother.  I think
father's brother got into some row in a bar where a man was killed."

"And was yer--why--father--why--fond of him?"

"I heard father say that he was wonst, but thet was all past."

Bob smoked in silence for a while, and seemed to look at some dark
clouds that were drifting along like a funeral out in the west.
Presently he said half aloud something that sounded like "All,
all--why--past."

"Eh?" said Isley.

"Oh, it's--why, why--nothin'," answered Bob, rousing himself.
"Is that a paper in yer father's coat-pocket, Isley?"

"Yes," said the boy, taking it out.

Bob took the paper and stared hard at it for a moment or so.

"There's something about the new goldfields there," said Bob,
putting his finger on a tailor's advertisement.  "I wish
you'd--why--read it to me, Isley; I can't see the small print they
uses nowadays."

"No, thet's not it," said the boy, taking the paper, "it's
something about--"

"Isley!"

"'Old on, Bob, father wants me."

The boy ran to the shaft, rested his hands and forehead against the
bole of the windlass, and leant over to hear what his father was
saying.

Without a moment's warning the treacherous bole slipped round; a small
body bounded a couple of times against the sides of the shaft and fell
at Mason's feet, where it lay motionless!


"Mason!"

"Ay?"

"Put him in the bucket and lash him to the rope with your belt!"

A few moments, and--

"Now, Bob!"

Bob's trembling hands would scarcely grasp the handle, but he managed
to wind somehow.

Presently the form of the child appeared, motionless and covered with
clay and water.  Mason was climbing up by the steps in the side of the
shaft.

Bob tenderly unlashed the boy and laid him under the saplings on the
grass; then he wiped some of the clay and blood away from the child's
forehead, and dashed over him some muddy water.

Presently Isley gave a gasp and opened his eyes.

"Are yer--why--hurt much, Isley?" asked Bob.

"Ba-back's bruk, Bob!"

"Not so bad as that, old man."

"Where's father?"

"Coming up."

Silence awhile, and then--

"Father! father! be quick, father!"

Mason reached the surface and came and knelt by the other side of the
boy.

"I'll, I'll--why--run fur some brandy," said Bob.

"No use, Bob," said Isley.  "I'm all bruk up."

"Don't yer feel better, sonny?"

"No--I'm--goin' to--die, Bob."

"Don't say it, Isley," groaned Bob.

A short silence, and then the boy's body suddenly twisted with pain.
But it was soon over.  He lay still awhile, and then said quietly:

"Good-bye, Bob!"

Bob made a vain attempt to speak.  "Isley!" he said,"---"

The child turned and stretched out his hands to the silent,
stony-faced man on the other side.

"Father--father, I'm goin'!"

A shuddering groan broke from Mason's lips, and then all was quiet.

Bob had taken off his hat to wipe his, forehead, and his face, in
spite of its disfigurement, was strangely like the face of the
stone-like man opposite.

For a moment they looked at one another across the body of the child,
and then Bob said quietly:

"He never knowed."

"What does it matter?" said Mason gruffly; and, taking up the dead
child, he walked towards the hut.

It was a very sad little group that gathered outside Mason's but next
morning.  Martin's wife had been there all the morning cleaning up and
doing what she could.  One of the women had torn up her husband's only
white shirt for a shroud, and they had made the little body look clean
and even beautiful in the wretched little hut.

One after another the fossickers took off their hats and entered,
stooping through the low door.  Mason sat silently at the foot of the
bunk with his head supported by his hand, and watched the men with a
strange, abstracted air.

Bob had ransacked the camp in search of some boards for a coffin.

"It will be the last I'll be able to--why--do for him," he said.

At last he came to Mrs Martin in despair.  That lady took him into the
dining-room, and pointed to a large pine table, of which she was very
proud.

"Knock that table to pieces," she said.

Taking off the few things that were lying on it, Bob turned it over
and began to knock the top off.

When he had finished the coffin one of the fossicker's wives said it
looked too bare, and she ripped up her black riding-skirt, and made
Bob tack the cloth over the coffin.

There was only one vehicle available in the place, and that was
Martin's old dray; so about two o'clock Pat Martin attached his old
horse Dublin to the shafts with sundry bits of harness and plenty of
old rope, and dragged Dublin, dray and all, across to Mason's hut.

The little coffin was carried out, and two gin-cases were placed by
its side in the dray to serve as seats for Mrs Martin and Mrs
Grimshaw, who mounted in tearful silence.

Pat Martin felt for his pipe, but remembered himself and mounted on
the shaft.  Mason fastened up the door of the hut with a padlock.  A
couple of blows on one of his sharp points roused Dublin from his
reverie.  With a lurch to the right and another to the left he
started, and presently the little funeral disappeared down the road
that led to the "town" and its cemetery.


About six months afterwards Bob Sawkins went on a short journey, and
returned with a tall, bearded young man.  He and Bob arrived after dark,
and went straight to Mason's hut.  There was a light inside, but when
Bob knocked there was no answer.

"Go in; don't be afraid,'" he said to his companion.

The stranger pushed open the creaking door, and stood bareheaded just
inside the doorway.

A billy was boiling unheeded on the fire.  Mason sat at the table with
his face buried in his arms.

"Father!"

There was no answer, but the flickering of the firelight made the
stranger think he could detect an impatient shrug in Mason's shoulders.

For a moment the stranger paused irresolute, and then stepping up to
the table he laid his hand on Mason's arm, and said gently:

"Father! Do you want another mate?"

But the sleeper did not--at least, not in this world.




AN ECHO FROM THE OLD BARK SCHOOL



It was the first Monday after the holidays.  The children had taken
their seats in the Old Bark School, and the master called out the roll
as usual:

"Arvie Aspinall."..."'Es, sir."

"David Cooper."..."Yes, sir."

"John Heegard."..."Yezzer."

"Joseph Swallow."..."Yesser."

"James Bullock."..."Present."

"Frederick Swallow."..."Y'sir."

"James Nowlett."....(Chorus of "Absent.")

"William Atkins."...(Chorus of "Absent.")

"Daniel Lyons."..."Perresent, sor-r-r."

Dan was a young immigrant, just out from the sod, and rolled his
"r's" like a cock-dove.  His brogue was rich enough to make an
Irishman laugh.

Bill was "wagging it."  His own especial chum was of the opinion
that Bill was sick.  The master's opinion did not coincide, so he
penned a note to William's parents, to be delivered by the model boy
of the school.

"Bertha Lambert."..."Yes, 'air."

"May Carey."..."Pesin', sair."

"Rose Cooper."..."Yes, sir."

"Janet Wild."..."Y-y-yes, s-sir."

"Mary Wild."...

A solemn hush fell upon the school, and presently Janet Wild threw her
arms out on the desk before her, let her face fall on them, and sobbed
heart-brokenly.  The master saw his mistake too late; he gave his head
a little half-affirmative, half-negative movement, in that pathetic
old way of his; rested his head on one hand, gazed sadly at the name,
and sighed.

But the galoot of the school spoilt the pathos of it all, for, during
the awed silence which followed the calling of the girl's name, he
suddenly brightened up--the first time he was ever observed to do so
during school hours--and said, briskly and cheerfully "Dead--sir!"

He hadn't been able to answer a question correctly for several days.

"Children," said the master gravely and sadly, "children, this is
the first time I ever had to put 'D' to the name of one of my
scholars.  Poor Mary! she was one of my first pupils--came the first
morning the school was opened.  Children, I want you to be a little
quieter to-day during play-hour, out of respect for the name of your
dead schoolmate whom it has pleased the Almighty to take in her
youth."

"Please, sir," asked the galoot, evidently encouraged by his fancied
success, "please, sir, what does 'D' stand for?"

"Damn you for a hass!" snarled Jim Bullock between his teeth, giving
the galoot a vicious dig in the side with his elbow.




THE SHEARING OF THE COOK'S DOG



The dog was a little conservative mongrel poodle, with long dirty
white hair all over him--longest and most over his eyes, which
glistened through it like black beads.  Also he seemed to have a bad
liver.  He always looked as if he was suffering from a sense of
injury, past or to come.  It did come.  He used to follow the shearers
up to the shed after breakfast every morning, but he couldn't have
done this for love--there was none lost between him and the men.  He
wasn't an affectionate dog; it wasn't his style.  He would sit close
against the shed for an hour or two, and hump himself, and sulk, and
look sick, and snarl whenever the "Sheep-Ho" dog passed, or a man
took notice of him.  Then he'd go home.  What he wanted at the shed at
all was only known to himself; no one asked him to come.  Perhaps he
came to collect evidence against us.  The cook called him "my darg,"
and the men called the cook "Curry and Rice," with "old" before it
mostly.

Rice was a little, dumpy, fat man, with a round, smooth, good-humoured
face, a bald head, feet wide apart, and a big blue cotton apron.  He
had been a ship's cook.  He didn't look so much out of place in the
hut as the hut did round him.  To a man with a vivid imagination, if
he regarded the cook dreamily for a while, the floor might seem to
roll gently like the deck of a ship, and mast, rigging, and cuddy rise
mistily in the background.  Curry might have dreamed of the cook's
galley at times, but he never mentioned it.  He ought to have been at
sea, or comfortably dead and stowed away under ground, instead of
cooking for a mob of unredeemed rouseabouts in an uncivilized shed in
the scrub, six hundred miles from the ocean.

They chyacked the cook occasionally, and grumbled--or pretended to
grumble--about their tucker, and then he'd make a roughly pathetic
speech, with many references to his age, and the hardness of his work,
and the smallness of his wages, and the inconsiderateness of the men.
Then the joker of the shed would sympathize with the cook with his
tongue and one side of his face--and joke with the other.


One day in the shed, during smoke-ho the devil whispered to a shearer
named Geordie that it would be a lark to shear the cook's dog--the
Evil One having previously arranged that the dog should be there,
sitting close to Geordie's pen, and that the shearer should have a
fine lamb comb on his machine.  The idea was communicated through
Geordie to his mates, and met with entire and general approval; and
for five or ten minutes the air was kept alive by shouting and
laughter of the men, and the protestations of the dog.  When the
shearer touched skin, he yelled "Tar!" and when he finished he
shouted "Wool away!" at the top of his voice, and his mates echoed
him with a will.  A picker-up gathered the fleece with a great show of
labour and care, and tabled it, to the well-ventilated disgust of old
Scotty, the wool-roller.  When they let the dog go he struck for
home--a clean-shaven poodle, except for a ferocious moustache and a
tuft at the end of his tail.

The cook's assistant said that he'd have given a five-pound note for a
portrait of Curry-and-Rice when that poodle came back from the shed.
The cook was naturally very indignant; he was surprised at first--then
he got mad.  He had the whole afternoon to get worked up in, and at
tea-time he went for the men properly.

"Wotter yer growlin' about?" asked one.  "Wot's the matter with
yer, anyway?"

"I don't know nothing about yer dog!" protested a rouseabout;
"wotyer gettin' on to me for?"

"Wotter they bin doin' to the cook now?"  inquired a ring leader
innocently, as he sprawled into his place at the table.  "Can't yer
let Curry alone?  Wot d'yer want to be chyackin' him for?  Give it a
rest."

"Well, look here, chaps," observed Geordie, in a determined tone,
"I call it a shame, that's what I call it.  Why couldn't you leave an
old man's dog alone?  It was a mean, dirty trick to do, and I suppose
you thought it funny.  You ought to be ashamed of yourselves, the
whole lot of you, for a drafted mob of crawlers.  If I'd been there it
wouldn't have been done; and I wouldn't blame Curry if he was to
poison the whole convicted push."

General lowering of faces and pulling of hats down over eyes, and
great working of knives and forks; also sounds like men trying not to
laugh.

"Why couldn't you play a trick on another man's darg?"  said Curry.
"It's no use tellin' me.  I can see it all as plain as if I was on
the board--all of you runnin' an' shoutin' an' cheerin' an' laughin',
and all over shearin' and ill-usin' a poor little darg!  Why couldn't
you play a trick on another man's darg?...  It doesn't matter
much--I'm nearly done cookie' here now.... Only that I've got a family
to think of I wouldn't 'a' stayed so long.  I've got to be up at five
every mornin', an' don't get to bed till ten at night, cookin' an'
bakin' an' cleanin' for you an' waitin' on you.  First one lot in from
the wool-wash, an' then one lot in from the shed, an' another lot in,
an' at all hours an' times, an' all wantin' their meals kept hot, an'
then they ain't satisfied.  And now you must go an' play a dirty trick
on my darg!  Why couldn't you have a lark with some other man's
darg!"

Geordie bowed his head and ate as though he had a cud, like a cow, and
could chew at leisure.  He seemed ashamed, as indeed we all
were--secretly.  Poor old Curry's oft-repeated appeal, "Why couldn't
you play a trick with another man's dog?" seemed to have something
pathetic about it.  The men didn't notice that it lacked philanthropy
and logic, and probably the cook didn't notice it either, else he
wouldn't have harped on it.  Geordie lowered his face, and just then,
as luck or the devil would have it, he caught sight of the dog.  Then
he exploded.

The cook usually forgot all about it in an hour, and then, if you
asked him what the chaps had been doing, he'd say, "Oh, nothing!
nothing!  Only their larks!"  But this time he didn't; he was narked
for three days, and the chaps marvelled much and were sorry, and
treated him with great respect and consideration.  They hadn't thought
he'd take it so hard--the dog shearing business--else they wouldn't
have done it.  They were a little puzzled too, and getting a trifle
angry, and would shortly be prepared to take the place of the injured
party, and make things unpleasant for the cook.  However, he
brightened up towards the end of the week, and then it all came out.

"I wouldn't 'a' minded so much," he said, standing by the table with
a dipper in one hand, a bucket in the other, and a smile on his face.
"I wouldn't 'a' minded so much only they'll think me a flash man in
Bourke with that theer darg trimmed up like that!"




"DOSSING OUT" AND "CAMPING"



At least two hundred poor beggars were counted sleeping out on the
pavements of the main streets of Sydney the other night--grotesque
bundles of rags lying under the verandas of the old Fruit Markets and
York Street shops, with their heads to the wall and their feet to the
gutter.  It was raining and cold that night, and the unemployed had
been driven in from Hyde Park and the bleak Domain--from dripping
trees, damp seats, and drenched grass--from the rain, and cold, and
the wind.  Some had sheets of old newspapers to cover them-and some
hadn't.  Two were mates, and they divided a _Herald_ between
them.  One had a sheet of brown paper, and another (lucky man!) had a
bag--the only bag there.  They all shrank as far into their rags as
possible--and tried to sleep.  The rats seemed to take them for
rubbish, too, and only scampered away when one of the outcasts moved
uneasily, or coughed, or groaned--or when a policeman came along.

One or two rose occasionally and rooted in the dust-boxes on the
pavement outside the shops--but they didn't seem to get anything.
They were feeling "peckish," no doubt, and wanted to see if they
could get something to eat before the corporation carts came along.
So did the rats.

Some men can't sleep very well on an empty stomach--at least, not at
first; but it mostly comes with practice.  They often sleep for ever
in London.  Not in Sydney as yet--so we say.

Now and then one of our outcasts would stretch his cramped limbs to
ease them--but the cold soon made him huddle again.  The pavement must
have been hard on the men's "points," too; they couldn't dig holes
nor make soft places for their hips, as you can in camp out back.  And
then, again, the stones had nasty edges and awkward slopes, for the
pavements were very uneven.

The Law came along now and then, and had a careless glance at the
unemployed in bed.  They didn't look like sleeping beauties.  The Law
appeared to regard them as so much rubbish that ought not to have been
placed there, and for the presence of which somebody ought to be
prosecuted by the Inspector of Nuisances.  At least, that was the
expression the policeman had on his face.

And so Australian workmen lay at two o'clock in the morning in the
streets of Sydney, and tried to get a little sleep before the traffic
came along and took their bed.

The idea of sleeping out might be nothing to bushmen--not even an
idea; but "dossing out" in the city and "camping" in the bush are
two very different things.  In the bush you can light a fire, boil
your billy, and make some tea--if you have any; also fry a chop (there
are no sheep running round in the city).  You can have a clean meal,
take off your shirt and wash it, and wash yourself--if there's water
enough--and feel fresh and clean.  You can whistle and sing by the
camp-fire, and make poetry, and breathe fresh air, and watch the
everlasting stars that keep the mateless traveller from going mad as
he lies in his lonely camp on the plains.  Your privacy is even more
perfect than if you had a suite of rooms at the Australia; you are at
the mercy of no policeman; there's no one to watch you but God--and He
won't move you on.  God watches the "dossers-out," too, in the city,
but He doesn't keep them from being moved on or run in.

With the city unemployed the case is entirely different.  The city
outcast cannot light a fire and boil a billy--even if he has one--he'd
be run in at once for attempting to commit arson, or create a riot, or
on suspicion of being a person of unsound mind.  If he took off his
shirt to wash it, or went in for a swim, he'd be had up for indecently
exposing his bones--and perhaps he'd get flogged.  He cannot whistle
or sing on his pavement bed at night, for, if he did, he'd be
violently arrested by two great policemen for riotous conduct.  He
doesn't see many stars, and he's generally too hungry to make poetry.
He only sleeps on the pavement on sufferance, and when the policeman
finds the small hours hang heavily on him, he can root up the
unemployed with his big foot and move him on--or arrest him for being
around with the intention to commit a felony; and, when the wretched
"dosser" rises in the morning, he cannot shoulder his swag and take
the track--he must cadge a breakfast at some back gate or restaurant,
and then sit in the park or walk round and round, the same old
hopeless round, all day.  There's no prison like the city for a poor
man.

Nearly every man the traveller meets in the bush is about as dirty and
ragged as himself, and just about as hard up; but in the city nearly
every man the poor unemployed meets is a dude, or at least, well
dressed, and the unemployed _feels_ dirty and mean and degraded
by the contrast--and despised.

And he can't help feeling like a criminal.  It may be imagination, but
every policeman seems to regard him with suspicion, and this is
terrible to a sensitive man.

We once had the key of the street for a night.  We don't know how much
tobacco we smoked, how many seats we sat on, or how many miles we
walked before morning.  But we do know that we felt like a felon, and
that every policeman seemed to regard us with a suspicious eye; and at
last we began to squint furtively at every trap we met, which,
perhaps, made him more suspicious, till finally we felt bad enough to
be run in and to get six months' hard.

Three winters ago a man, whose name doesn't matter, had a small office
near Elizabeth Street, Sydney.  He was an hotel broker, debt
collector, commission agent, canvasser, and so on, in a small way--a
very small way--but his heart was big.  He had a partner.  They
batched in the office, and did their cooking over a gas lamp.  Now,
every day the man-whose-name-doesn't-matter would carefully collect
the scraps of food, add a slice or two of bread and butter, wrap it
all up in a piece of newspaper, and, after dark, step out and leave
the parcel on a ledge of the stonework outside the building in the
street.  Every morning it would be gone.  A shadow came along in the
night and took it.  This went on for many months, till at last one
night the man-whose-name-doesn't-matter forgot to put the parcel out,
and didn't think of it till he was in bed.  It worried him, so that at
last he had to get up and put the scraps outside.  It was midnight.
He felt curious to see the shadow, so he waited until it came along.
It wasn't his long-lost brother, but it was an old mate of his.

Let us finish with a sketch:

The scene was Circular Quay, outside the Messageries sheds.  The usual
number of bundles of misery--covered more or less with dirty sheets of
newspaper--lay along the wall under the ghastly glare of the electric
light.  Time--shortly after midnight.  From among the bundles an old
man sat up.  He cautiously drew off his pants, and then stood close to
the wall, in his shirt, tenderly examining the seat of the trousers.
Presently he shook them out, folded them with great care, wrapped them
in a scrap of newspaper, and laid them down where his head was to be.
He had thin, hairy legs and a long grey beard.  From a bundle of rags
he extracted another pair of pants, which were all patches and
tatters, and into which he engineered his way with great caution.
Then he sat down, arranged the paper over his knees, laid his old
ragged grey head back on his precious Sunday-go-meetings-and slept.




ACROSS THE STRAITS



We crossed Cook's Straits from Wellington in one of those rusty little
iron tanks that go up and down and across there for twenty or thirty
years and never get wrecked--for no other reason, apparently, than
that they have every possible excuse to go ashore or go down on those
stormy coasts.  The age, construction, or condition of these boats,
and the south-easters, and the construction of the coastline, are all
decidedly in favour of their going down; the fares are high and the
accommodation is small and dirty.  It is always the same where there
is no competition.

A year or two ago, when a company was running boats between Australia
and New Zealand without competition, the steerage fare was three pound
direct single, and two pound ten shillings between Auckland and
Wellington.  The potatoes were black and green and soggy, the beef
like bits scraped off the inside of a hide which had lain out for a
day or so, the cabbage was cabbage leaves, the tea muddy.  The whole
business took away our appetite regularly three times a day, and there
wasn't enough to go round, even if it had been good--enough tucker, we
mean; there was enough appetite to go round three or four times, but
it was driven away by disgust until after meals.  If we had not, under
cover of darkness, broached a deck cargo of oranges, lemons, and
pineapples, and thereby run the risk of being run in on arrival, there
would have been starvation, disease, and death on that boat before the
end--perhaps mutiny.

You can go across now for one pound, and get something to eat on the
road; but the travelling public will go on patronizing the latest
reducer of fares until the poorer company gets starved out and fares
go up again--then the travelling public will have to pay three or four
times as much as they do now, and go hungry on the voyage; all of
which ought to go to prove that the travelling public is as big a fool
as the general public.

We can't help thinking that the captains and crews of our primitive
little coastal steamers take the chances so often that they in time
get used to it, and, being used to it, have no longer any misgivings
or anxiety in rough weather concerning a watery grave, but feel as
perfectly safe as if they were in church with their wives or
sisters--only more comfortable--and go on feeling so until the
worn-out machinery breaks down and lets the old tub run ashore, or
knocks a hole in her side, or the side itself rusts through at last
and lets the water in, or the last straw in the shape of an extra ton
of brine tumbles on board, and the _John Smith (Newcastle)_, goes
down with a swoosh before the cook has time to leave off peeling his
potatoes and take to prayer.

These cheerful--and, maybe, unjust--reflections are perhaps in
consequence of our having lost half a sovereign to start with.  We
arrived at the booking-office with two minutes to spare, two sticks of
Juno tobacco, a spare wooden pipe--in case we lost the other--a letter
to a friend's friend down south, a pound note (Bank of New Zealand),
and two half-crowns, with which to try our fortunes in the South
Island.  We also had a few things in a portmanteau and two blankets in
a three-bushel bag, but they didn't amount to much.  The clerk put
down the ticket with the half-sovereign on top of it, and we wrapped
the latter in the former and ran for the wharf.  On the way we
snatched the ticket out to see the name of the boat we were going by,
in order to find it, and it was then, we suppose, that the semi-quid
got lost.

Did you ever lose a sovereign or a half-sovereign under similar
circumstances?  You think of it casually and feel for it carelessly at
first, to be sure that it's there all right; then, after going through
your pockets three or four times with rapidly growing uneasiness, you
lose your head a little and dredge for that coin hurriedly and with
painful anxiety.  Then you force yourself to be calm, and proceed to
search yourself systematically, in a methodical manner.  At this
stage, if you have time, it's a good plan to sit down and think out
when and where you last had that half-sovereign, and where you have
been since, and which way you came from there, and what you took out
of your pocket, and where, and whether you might have given it in
mistake for sixpence at that pub where you rushed in to have a
beer--and then you calculate the chances against getting it back
again.  The last of these reflections is apt to be painful, and the
painfulness is complicated and increased when there happen to have
been several pubs and a like number of hurried farewell beers in the
recent past.

And for months after that you cannot get rid of the idea that that
half-sov. might be about your clothes somewhere.  It haunts you.  You
turn your pockets out, and feel the lining of your coat and vest inch
by inch, and examine your letter papers--everything you happen to have
had in your pocket that day--over and over again, and by and by you
peer in envelopes and unfold papers that you didn't have in your
pocket at all, but might have had.  And when the novelty of the first
search has worn off, and the fit takes you, you make another search.
Even after many months have passed away, some day--or night--when you
are hard up for tobacco and a drink, you suddenly think of that late
lamented half-sov., and are moved by adverse circumstances to look
through your old clothes in a sort of forlorn hope, or to give good
luck a sort of chance to surprise you--the only chance that you can
give it.

By the way, seven-and-six of that half-quid should have gone to the
landlord of the hotel where we stayed last, and somehow, in spite of
this enlightened age, the loss of it seemed a judgment; and seeing
that the boat was old and primitive, and there was every sign of a
three days' sou'-easter, we sincerely hoped that judgment was
complete--that supreme wrath had been appeased by the fine of ten bob
without adding any Jonah business to it.

This reminds us that we once found a lost half-sovereign in the bowl
of a spare pipe six months after it was lost.  We wish it had stayed
there and turned up to-night.  But, although when you are in great
danger--say, adrift in an open boat--tales of providential escapes and
rescues may interest and comfort you, you can't get any comfort out of
anecdotes concerning the turning up of lost quids when you have just
lost one yourself.  All you want is to find it.

It bothers you even not to be able to account for a bob.  You always
like to know that you have had something for your money, if only a
long beer.  You would sooner know that you fooled your money away on a
spree, and made yourself sick than lost it out of an extra hole in
your pocket, and kept well.

We left Wellington with a feeling of pained regret, a fellow-wanderer
by our side telling us how he had once lost "fi-pun-note"--and about
two-thirds of the city unemployed on the wharf looking for that
half-sovereign.  Well, we hope that some poor devil found it;
although, to tell the truth, we would then have by far preferred to
have found it ourselves.

A sailor said that the _Moa_ was a good sea-boat, and, although
she was small and old, _he_ was never afraid of her.  He'd sooner
travel in her than in some of those big cheap ocean liners with more
sand in them than iron or steel--You, know the rest.  Further on, in a
conversation concerning the age of these coasters, he said that they'd
last fully thirty years if well painted and looked after.  He said
that this one was seldom painted, and never painted properly; and
then, seemingly in direct contradiction to his previously expressed
confidence in the safety and seaworthiness of the _Moa_, he said
that he could poke a stick through her anywhere.  We asked him not to
do it.

It came on to splash, and we went below to reflect, and search once
more for that half-sovereign.  The cabin was small and close, and
dimly lighted, and evil smelling, and shaped like the butt end of a
coffin.  It might not have smelt so bad if we hadn't lost that
half-sovereign.  There was a party of those gipsy-like Assyrians--two
families apparently--the women and children lying very sick about the
lower bunks; and a big, good-humoured-looking young Maori propped
between the end of the table and the wall, playing a concertina.  The
sick people were too sick, and the concertina seemed too much in
sympathy with them, and the lost half-quid haunted us more than ever
down there; so we started to climb out.

The first thing that struck us was the jagged top edge of that iron
hood-like arrangement over the gangway.  The top half only of the
scuttle was open.  There was nothing to be seen except a fog of spray
and a Newfoundland dog sea-sick under the lee of something.  The next
thing that struck us was a tub of salt water, which came like a cannon
ball and broke against the hood affair, and spattered on deck like a
crockery shop.  We climbed down again backwards, and sat on the floor
with emphasis, in consequence of stepping down a last step that wasn't
there, and cracked the back of our heads against the edge of the
table.  The Maori helped us up, and we had a drink with him at the
expense of one of the half-casers mentioned in the beginning of this
sketch.  Then the Maori shouted, then we, then the Maori again, then
we again; and then we thought, "Dash it, what's a half-sovereign?
We'll fall on our feet all right."

We went up Queen Charlotte's Sound, a long crooked arm of the sea
between big, rugged, black-looking hills.  There was a sort of
lighthouse down near the entrance, and they said an old Maori woman
kept it.  There were some whitish things on the sides of the hills,
which we at first took for cattle, and then for goats.  They were
sheep.  Someone said that that country was only fit to carry sheep.
It must have been bad, then, judging from some of the country in
Australia which is only fit to carry sheep.  Country that wouldn't
carry goats would carry sheep, we think.  Sheep are about the hardiest
animals on the face of this planet--barring crocodiles.

You may rip a sheep open whilst watching for the boss's boots or
yarning to a pen-mate, and then when you have stuffed the works back
into the animal, and put a stitch in the slit, and poked it somewhere
with a tar-stick (it doesn't matter much where) the jumbuck will be
all right and just as lively as ever, and turn up next shearing
without the ghost of a scratch on its skin.

We reached Picton, a small collection of twinkling lights in a dark
pocket, apparently at the top of a sound.  We climbed up on to the
wharf, got through between two railway trucks, and asked a policeman
where we were, and where the telegraph office was.  There were several
pretty girls in the office, laughing and chyacking the counter clerks,
which jarred upon the feelings of this poor orphan wanderer in strange
lands.  We gloomily took a telegram form, and wired to a friend in
North Island, using the following words: "Wire quid; stumped."

Then we crossed the street to a pub and asked for a roof and they told
us to go up to No. 8.  We went up, struck a match, lit the candle, put
our bag in a corner, cleared the looking-glass off the toilet table,
got some paper and a pencil out of our portmanteau, and sat down and
wrote this sketch.

The candle is going out.




"SOME DAY"



The two travellers had yarned late in their camp, and the moon was
getting low down through the mulga.  Mitchell's mate had just finished
a rather racy yarn, but it seemed to fall flat on Mitchell--he was in
a sentimental mood.  He smoked a while, and thought, and then said:

"Ah! there was one little girl that I was properly struck on.  She
came to our place on a visit to my sister.  I think she was the best
little girl that ever lived, and about the prettiest.  She was just
eighteen, and didn't come up to my shoulder; the biggest blue eyes you
ever saw, and she had hair that reached down to her knees, and so
thick you couldn't span it with your two hands--brown and glossy--and
her skin with like lilies and roses.  Of course, I never thought she'd
look at a rough, ugly, ignorant brute like me, and I used to keep out
of her way and act a little stiff towards her; I didn't want the
others to think I was gone on her, because I knew they'd laugh at me,
and maybe she'd laugh at me more than all.  She would come and talk to
me, and sit near me at table; but I thought that that was on account
of her good nature, and she pitied me because I was such a rough,
awkward chap.  I was gone on that girl, and no joking; and I felt
quite proud to think she was a countrywoman of mine.  But I wouldn't
let her know that, for I felt sure she'd only laugh.

"Well, things went on till I got the offer of two or three years'
work on a station up near the border, and I had to go, for I was hard
up; besides, I wanted to get away.  Stopping round where she was only
made me miserable.

"The night I left they were all down at the station to see me
off--including the girl I was gone on.  When the train was ready to
start she was standing away by herself on the dark end of the
platform, and my sister kept nudging me and winking, and fooling
about, but I didn't know what she was driving at.  At last she said:

"'Go and speak to her, you noodle; go and say good-bye to Edie.'

"So I went up to where she was, and, when the others turned their
backs--

"'Well, good-bye, Miss Brown,' I said, holding out my hand; 'I don't
suppose I'll ever see you again, for Lord knows when I'll be back.
Thank you for coming to see me off.'

"Just then she turned her face to the light, and I saw she was
crying.  She was trembling all over.  Suddenly she said, 'Jack! Jack!'
just like that, and held up her arms like this."

Mitchell was speaking in a tone of voice that didn't belong to him,
and his mate looked up.  Mitchell's face was solemn, and his eyes were
fixed on the fire.

"I suppose you gave her a good hug then, and a kiss?" asked the
mate.

"I s'pose so," snapped Mitchell.  "There is some things a man
doesn't want to joke about.... Well, I think we'll shove on one of the
billies, and have a drink of tea before we turn in."

"I suppose," said Mitchell's mate, as they drank their tea, "I
suppose you'll go back and marry her some day?"

"Some day!  That's it; it looks like it, doesn't it?  We all say,
'Some day.'  I used to say it ten years ago, and look at me now.  I've
been knocking round for five years, and the last two years constant on
the track, and no show of getting off it unless I go for good, and
what have I got for it?  I look like going home and getting married,
without a penny in my pocket or a rag to my back scarcely, and no show
of getting them.  I swore I'd never go back home without a cheque,
and, what's more, I never will; but the cheque days are past.  Look at
that boot!  If we were down among the settled districts we'd be called
tramps and beggars; and what's the difference?  I've been a fool, I
know, but I've paid for it; and now there's nothing for it but to
tramp, tramp, tramp for your tucker, and keep tramping till you get
old and careless and dirty, and older, and more careless and dirtier,
and you get used to the dust and sand, and heat, and flies, and
mosquitoes, just as a bullock does, and lose ambition and hope, and
get contented with this animal life, like a dog, and till your swag
seems part of yourself, and you'd be lost and uneasy and
light-shouldered without it, and you don't care a damn if you'll ever
get work again, or live like a Christian; and you go on like this till
the spirit of a bullock takes the place of the heart of a man.  Who
cares?  If we hadn't found the track yesterday we might have lain and
rotted in that lignum, and no one been any the wiser--or sorrier--who
knows?  Somebody might have found us in the end, but it mightn't have
been worth his while to go out of his way and report us.  Damn the
world, say I!"

He smoked for a while in savage silence; then he knocked the ashes out
of his pipe, felt for his tobacco with a sigh, and said:

"Well, I am a bit out of sorts to-night.  I've been thinking....I
think we'd best turn in, old man; we've got a long, dry stretch before
us to-morrow."

They rolled out their swags on the sand, lay down, and wrapped
themselves in their blankets.  Mitchell covered his face with a piece
of calico, because the moonlight and wind kept him awake.




"BRUMMY USEN"



We caught up with an old swagman crossing the plain, and tramped along
with him till we came to good shade to have a smoke in.  We had got
yarning about men getting lost in the bush or going away and being
reported dead.

"Yes," said the old 'whaler', as he dropped his swag in the shade,
sat down on it, and felt for his smoking tackle, "there's scarcely an
old bushman alive--or dead, for the matter of that--who hasn't been
dead a few times in his life--or reported dead, which amounts to the
same thing for a while.  In my time there was as many live men in the
bush who was supposed to be dead as there was dead men who was
supposed to be alive--though it's the other way about now--what with
so many jackaroos tramping about out back and getting lost in the dry
country that they don't know anything about, and dying within a few
yards of water sometimes.  But even now, whenever I hear that an old
bush mate of mine is dead, I don't fret about it or put a black band
round my hat, because I know he'll be pretty sure to turn up
sometimes, pretty bad with the booze, and want to borrow half a crown.

"I've been dead a few times myself, and found out afterwards that my
friends was so sorry about it, and that I was such a good sort of a
chap after all, when I was dead that--that I was sorry I didn't stop
dead.  You see, I was one of them chaps that's better treated by their
friends and better thought of when--when they're dead.

"Ah, well!  Never mind....Talking of killing bushmen before their
time reminds me of some cases I knew.  They mostly happened among the
western spurs of the ranges.  There was a bullock-driver named Billy
Nowlett.  He had a small selection, where he kept his family, and used
to carry from the railway terminus to the stations up-country.  One
time he went up with a load and was not heard of for such a long time
that his missus got mighty uneasy; and then she got a letter from a
publican up Coonamble way to say that Billy was dead.  Someone wrote,
for the widow, to ask about the wagon and the bullocks, but the
shanty-keeper wrote that Billy had drunk them before he died, and that
he'd also to say that he'd drunk the money he got for the carrying;
and the publican enclosed a five-pound note for the widow--which was
considered very kind of him.

"Well, the widow struggled along and managed without her husband just
the same as she had always struggled along and managed with him--a
little better, perhaps.  An old digger used to drop in of evenings and
sit by the widow's fire, and yarn, and sympathize, and smoke, and
think; and just as he began to yarn a lot less, and smoke and think a
lot more, Billy Nowlett himself turned up with a load of rations for a
sheep station.  He'd been down by the other road, and the letter he'd
wrote to his missus had gone astray.  Billy wasn't surprised to hear
that he was dead--he'd been killed before--but he was surprised about
the five quid.

"You see, it must have been another bullock-driver that died.  There
was an old shanty-keeper up Coonamble way, so Billy said, that used to
always mistake him for another bullocky and mistake the other bullocky
for him--couldn't tell the one from the other no way--and he used to
have bills against Billy that the other bullock-driver'd run up, and
bills against the other that Billy'd run up, and generally got things
mixed up in various ways, till Billy wished that one of 'em was dead.
And the funniest part of the business was that Billy wasn't no more
like the other man than chalk is like cheese.  You'll often drop
across some colour-blind old codger that can't tell the difference
between two people that ain't got a bit of likeness between 'em.

"Then there was young Joe Swallow.  He was found dead under a
burned-down tree in Dead Man's Gully--'dead past all recognition,'
they said--and he was buried there, and by and by his ghost began to
haunt the gully: at least, all the schoolkids seen it, and there was
scarcely a grown-up person who didn't know another person who'd seen
the ghost--and the other person was always a sober chap that wouldn't
bother about telling a lie.  But just as the ghost was beginning to
settle down to work in the gully, Joe himself turned up, and then the
folks began to reckon that it was another man was killed there, and
that the ghost belonged to the other man; and some of them began to
recollect that they'd thought all along that the ghost wasn't Joe's
ghost--even when they thought that it was really Joe that was killed
there.

"Then, again, there was the case of Brummy Usen--Hughison I think
they spelled it--the bushranger; he was shot by old Mr S---, of E---,
while trying to stick the old gentleman up.  There's something about
it in a book called 'Robbery Under Arms', though the names is all
altered--and some other time I'll tell you all about the digging of
the body up for the inquest and burying it again.  This Brummy used to
work for a publican in a sawmill that the publican had; and this
publican and his daughter identified the body by a woman holding up a
branch tattooed on the right arm.  I'll tell you all about that
another time.  This girl remembered how she used to watch this
tattooed woman going up and down on Brummy's arm when he was working
in the saw-pit--going up and down and up and down, like this, while
Brummy was working his end of the saw.  So the bushranger was
inquested and justifiable-homicided as Brummy Usen, and buried again
in his dust and blood stains and monkey-jacket.

"All the same it wasn't him; for the real Brummy turned up later on;
but he couldn't make the people believe he wasn't dead.  They was
mostly English country people from Kent and Yorkshire and those
places; and the most self-opinionated and obstinate people that ever
lived when they got a thing into their heads; and they got it into
their heads that Brummy Usen was shot while trying to bail up old Mr
S--- and was dead and buried.

"But the wife of the publican that had the saw-pit knew him; he went
to her, and she recognized him at once; she'd got it into her head
from the first that it wasn't Brummy that was shot, and she stuck to
it--she was just as self-opinionated as the neighbours, and many a
barney she had with them about it.  She would argue about it till the
day she died, and then she said with her dying breath: 'It wasn't
Brummy Usen.'  No more it was--he was a different kind of man; he
hadn't spunk enough to be a bushranger, and it was a better man that
was buried for him; it was a different kind of woman, holding up a
different kind of branch, that was tattooed on Brummy's arm.  But, you
see, Brummy'd always kept himself pretty much to himself, and no one
knew him very well; and, besides, most of them were pretty drunk at
the inquest--except the girl, and she was too scared to know what she
was saying--they had to be so because the corpse was in such a bad
state.

"Well, Brummy hung around for a time, and tried to prove that he
wasn't an impostor, but no one wouldn't believe him.  He wanted to get
some wages that was owing to him.

"He tried the police, but they were just as obstinate as the rest;
and, beside, they had their dignity to hold up.  'If I ain't Brummy,'
he'd say, 'who are I?'  But they answered that he knew best.  So he
did.

"At last he said that it didn't matter much, any road; and so he went
away--Lord knows where--to begin life again, I s'pose."

The traveller smoked awhile reflectively; then he quietly rolled up
his right sleeve and scratched his arm.

And on that arm we saw the tattooed figure of a woman, holding up a
branch.

We tramped on by his side again towards the station-thinking very hard
and not feeling very comfortable.

 He must have been an awful old liar, now we come to think of it.





Second Series




THE DROVER'S WIFE




The two-roomed house is built of round timber, slabs, and
stringy-bark, and floored with split slabs.  A big bark kitchen
standing at one end is larger than the house itself, veranda included.

Bush all round--bush with no horizon, for the country is flat.  No
ranges in the distance.  The bush consists of stunted, rotten native
apple-trees.  No undergrowth.  Nothing to relieve the eye save the
darker green of a few she-oaks which are sighing above the narrow,
almost waterless creek.  Nineteen miles to the nearest sign of
civilization--a shanty on the main road.

The drover, an ex-squatter, is away with sheep.  His wife and children
are left here alone.

Four ragged, dried-up-looking children are playing about the house.
Suddenly one of them yells: "Snake! Mother, here's a snake!"

The gaunt, sun-browned bushwoman dashes from the kitchen, snatches her
baby from the ground, holds it on her left hip, and reaches for a
stick.

"Where is it?"

"Here! gone into the wood-heap!" yells the eldest boy--a sharp-faced
urchin of eleven.  "Stop there, mother!  I'll have him.  Stand back!
I'll have the beggar!"

"Tommy, come here, or you'll be bit.  Come here at once when I tell
you, you little wretch!"

The youngster comes reluctantly, carrying a stick bigger than himself.
Then he yells, triumphantly:

"There it goes--under the house!" and darts away with club uplifted.
At the same time the big, black, yellow-eyed dog-of-all-breeds, who
has shown the wildest interest in the proceedings, breaks his chain
and rushes after that snake.  He is a moment late, however, and his
nose reaches the crack in the slabs just as the end of its tail
disappears.  Almost at the same moment the boy's club comes down and
skins the aforesaid nose.  Alligator takes small notice of this, and
proceeds to undermine the building; but he is subdued after a
struggle and chained up.  They cannot afford to lose him.

The drover's wife makes the children stand together near the dog-house
while she watches for the snake.  She gets two small dishes of milk
and sets them down near the wall to tempt it to come out; but an hour
goes by and it does not show itself.

It is near sunset, and a thunderstorm is coming.  The children must be
brought inside.  She will not take them into the house, for she knows
the snake is there, and may at any moment come up through a crack in
the rough slab floor; so she carries several armfuls of firewood into
the kitchen, and then takes the children there.  The kitchen has no
floor--or, rather, an earthen one--called a "ground floor" in this part
of the bush.  There is a large, roughly-made table in the centre of
the place.  She brings the children in, and makes them get on this
table.  They are two boys and two girls--mere babies.  She gives them
some supper, and then, before it gets dark, she goes into the house,
and snatches up some pillows and bedclothes--expecting to see or lay
her hand on the snake any minute.  She makes a bed on the kitchen
table for the children, and sits down beside it to watch all night.

She has an eye on the corner, and a green sapling club laid in
readiness on the dresser by her side; also her sewing basket and a
copy of the _Young Ladies' Journal_.  She has brought the dog
into the room.

Tommy turns in, under protest, but says he'll lie awake all night and
smash that blinded snake.

His mother asks him how many times she has told him not to swear.

He has his club with him under the bedclothes, and Jacky protests:

"Mummy!  Tommy's skinnin' me alive wif his club.  Make him take it
out."

Tommy: "Shet up, you little---!  D'yer want to be bit with the snake?"

Jacky shuts up.

"If yer bit," says Tommy, after a pause, "you'll swell up, an' smell,
an' turn red an' green an' blue all over till yer bust.  Won't he,
mother?"

"Now then, don't frighten the child.  Go to sleep," she says.

The two younger children go to sleep, and now and then Jacky
complains of being "skeezed."  More room is made for him.  Presently
Tommy says: "Mother!  listen to them (adjective) little possums.
I'd like to screw their blanky necks."

And Jacky protests drowsily.

"But they don't hurt us, the little blanks!".

Mother: "There, I told you you'd teach Jacky to swear."  But the
remark makes her smile.  Jacky goes to sleep.  Presently Tommy asks:

"Mother!  Do you think they'll ever extricate the (adjective)
kangaroo?"

"Lord!  How am I to know, child?  Go to sleep."

"Will you wake me if the snake comes out?"

"Yes.  Go to sleep."

Near midnight.  The children are all asleep and she sits there still,
sewing and reading by turns.  From time to time she glances round the
floor and wall-plate, and, whenever she hears a noise, she reaches for
the stick.  The thunderstorm comes on, and the wind, rushing through
the cracks in the slab wall, threatens to blow out her candle.  She
places it on a sheltered part of the dresser and fixes up a newspaper
to protect it.  At every flash of lightning, the cracks between the
slabs gleam like polished silver.  The thunder rolls, and the rain
comes down in torrents.

Alligator lies at full length on the floor, with his eyes turned
towards the partition.  She knows by this that the snake is there.
There are large cracks in that wall opening under the floor of the
dwelling-house.

She is not a coward, but recent events have shaken her nerves.  A
little son of her brother-in-law was lately bitten by a snake, and
died.  Besides, she has not heard from her husband for six months,
and is anxious about him.

He was a drover, and started squatting here when they were married.
The drought of 18-- ruined him.  He had to sacrifice the remnant of
his flock and go droving again.  He intends to move his family into
the nearest town when he comes back, and, in the meantime, his
brother, who keeps a shanty on the main road, comes over about once a
month with provisions.  The wife has still a couple of cows, one
horse, and a few sheep.  The brother-in-law kills one of the latter
occasionally, gives her what she needs of it, and takes the rest in
return for other provisions.  She is used to being left alone.  She
once lived like this for eighteen months.  As a girl she built the
usual castles in the air; but all her girlish hopes and aspirations
have long been dead.  She finds all the excitement and recreation she
needs in the _Young Ladies' Journal_, and Heaven help her! takes
a pleasure in the fashion-plates.

Her husband is an Australian, and so is she.  He is careless, but a
good enough husband.  If he had the means he would take her to the
city and keep her there like a princess.  They are used to being
apart, or at least she is.  "No use fretting," she says.  He may
forget sometimes that he is married; but if he has a good cheque when
he comes back he will give most of it to her.  When he had money he
took her to the city several times--hired a railway sleeping
compartment, and put up at the best hotels.  He also bought her a
buggy, but they had to sacrifice that along with the rest.

The last two children were born in the bush--one while her husband was
bringing a drunken doctor, by force, to attend to her.  She was alone
on this occasion, and very weak.  She had been ill with a fever.  She
prayed to God to send her assistance.  God sent Black Mary--the
"whitest" gin in all the land.  Or, at least, God sent King Jimmy
first, and he sent Black Mary.  He put his black face round the door
post, took in the situation at a glance, and said cheerfully: "All
right, missus--I bring my old woman, she down alonga creek."

One of the children died while she was here alone.  She rode nineteen
miles for assistance, carrying the dead child.


It must be near one or two o'clock.  The fire is burning low.
Alligator lies with his head resting on his paws, and watches the
wall.  He is not a very beautiful dog, and the light shows numerous
old wounds where the hair will not grow.  He is afraid of nothing on
the face of the earth or under it.  He will tackle a bullock as
readily as he will tackle a flea.  He hates all other dogs--except
kangaroo-dogs--and has a marked dislike to friends or relations of the
family.  They seldom call, however.  He sometimes makes friends with
strangers.  He hates snakes and has killed many, but he will be bitten
some day and die; most snake-dogs end that way.

Now and then the bushwoman lays down her work and watches, and
listens, and thinks.  She thinks of things in her own life, for there
is little else to think about.

The rain will make the grass grow, and this reminds her how she fought
a bush-fire once while her husband was away.  The grass was long, and
very dry, and the fire threatened to burn her out.  She put on an old
pair of her husband's trousers and beat out the flames with a green
bough, till great drops of sooty perspiration stood out on her
forehead and ran in streaks down her blackened arms.  The sight of his
mother in trousers greatly amused Tommy, who worked like a little hero
by her side, but the terrified baby howled lustily for his "mummy."
The fire would have mastered her but for four excited bushmen who
arrived in the nick of time.  It was a mixed-up affair all round; when
she went to take up the baby he screamed and struggled convulsively,
thinking it was a "blackman;" and Alligator, trusting more to the
child's sense than his own instinct, charged furiously, and (being old
and slightly deaf) did not in his excitement at first recognize his
mistress's voice, but continued to hang on to the moleskins until
choked off by Tommy with a saddle-strap.  The dog's sorrow for his
blunder, and his anxiety to let it be known that it was all a mistake,
was as evident as his ragged tail and a twelve-inch grin could make
it.  It was a glorious time for the boys; a day to look back to, and
talk about, and laugh over for many years.

She thinks how she fought a flood during her husband's absence.  She
stood for hours in the drenching downpour, and dug an overflow gutter
to save the dam across the creek.  But she could not save it.  There
are things that a bushwoman can not do.  Next morning the dam was
broken, and her heart was nearly broken too, for she thought how her
husband would feel when he came home and saw the result of years of
labour swept away.  She cried then.

She also fought the pleuro-pneumonia--dosed and bled the few remaining
cattle, and wept again when her two best cows died.

Again, she fought a mad bullock that besieged the house for a day.
She made bullets and fired at him through cracks in the slabs with an
old shot-gun.  He was dead in the morning.  She skinned him and got
seventeen-and-sixpence for the hide.

She also fights the crows and eagles that have designs on her
chickens.  Her plan of campaign is very original.  The children cry
"Crows, mother!" and she rushes out and aims a broomstick at the
birds as though it were a gun, and says "Bung!" The crows leave in a
hurry; they are cunning, but a woman's cunning is greater.

Occasionally a bushman in the horrors, or a villainous-looking
sundowner, comes and nearly scares the life out of her.  She generally
tells the suspicious-looking stranger that her husband and two sons
are at work below the dam, or over at the yard, for he always
cunningly inquires for the boss.

Only last week a gallows-faced swagman--having satisfied himself that
there were no men on the place--threw his swag down on the veranda,
and demanded tucker.  She gave him something to eat; then he expressed
his intention of staying for the night.  It was sundown then.  She got
a batten from the sofa, loosened the dog, and confronted the stranger,
holding the batten in one hand and the dog's collar with the other.
"Now you go!" she said.  He looked at her and at the dog, said "All
right, mum," in a cringing tone, and left.  She was a determined-
looking woman, and Alligator's yellow eyes glared unpleasantly--
besides, the dog's chawing-up apparatus greatly resembled that of the
reptile he was named after.

She has few pleasures to think of as she sits here alone by the fire,
on guard against a snake.  All days are much the same to her; but on
Sunday afternoon she dresses herself, tidies the children, smartens
up baby, and goes for a lonely walk along the bush-track, pushing an
old perambulator in front of her.  She does this every Sunday.  She
takes as much care to make herself and the children look smart as she
would if she were going to do the block in the city.  There is nothing
to see, however, and not a soul to meet.  You might walk for twenty
miles along this track without being able to fix a point in your mind,
unless you are a bushman.  This is because of the everlasting, maddening
sameness of the stunted trees--that monotony which makes a man long to
break away and travel as far as trains can go, and sail as far as
ship can sail--and farther.

But this bushwoman is used to the loneliness of it.  As a girl-wife
she hated it, but now she would feel strange away from it.

She is glad when her husband returns, but she does not gush or make a
fuss about it.  She gets him something good to eat, and tidies up the
children.

She seems contented with her lot.  She loves her children, but has no
time to show it.  She seems harsh to them.  Her surroundings are not
favourable to the development of the "womanly" or sentimental side of
nature.


It must be near morning now; but the clock is in the dwellinghouse.
Her candle is nearly done; she forgot that she was out of candles.
Some more wood must be got to keep the fire up, and so she shuts the
dog inside and hurries round to the woodheap.  The rain has cleared
off.  She seizes a stick, pulls it out, and--crash! the whole pile
collapses.

Yesterday she bargained with a stray blackfellow to bring her some
wood, and while he was at work she went in search of a missing cow.
She was absent an hour or so, and the native black made good use of
his time.  On her return she was so astonished to see a good heap of
wood by the chimney, that she gave him an extra fig of tobacco, and
praised him for not being lazy.  He thanked her, and left with head
erect and chest well out.  He was the last of his tribe and a King;
but he had built that wood-heap hollow.

She is hurt now, and tears spring to her eyes as she sits down again
by the table.  She takes up a handkerchief to wipe the tears away, but
pokes her eyes with her bare fingers instead.  The handkerchief is
full of holes, and she finds that she has put her thumb through one,
and her forefinger through another.

This makes her laugh, to the surprise of the dog.  She has a keen,
very keen, sense of the ridiculous; and some time or other she will
amuse bushmen with the story.

She had been amused before like that.  One day she sat down "to have
a good cry," as she said--and the old cat rubbed against her dress and
"cried too." Then she had to laugh.


It must be near daylight now.  The room is very close and hot because
of the fire.  Alligator still watches the wall from time to time.
Suddenly he becomes greatly interested; he draws himself a few inches
nearer the partition, and a thrill runs through his body.  The hair on
the back of his neck begins to bristle, and the battle-light is in his
yellow eyes.  She knows what this means, and lays her hand on the
stick.  The lower end of one of the partition slabs has a large crack
on both sides.  An evil pair of small, bright bead-like eyes glisten
at one of these holes.  The snake--a black one--comes slowly out,
about a foot, and moves its head up and down.  The dog lies still, and
the woman sits as one fascinated.  The snake comes out a foot farther.
She lifts her stick, and the reptile, as though suddenly aware of
danger, sticks his head in through the crack on the other side of the
slab, and hurries to get his tail round after him.  Alligator springs,
and his jaws come together with a snap.  He misses, for his nose is
large, and the snake's body close down in the angle formed by the
slabs and the floor.  He snaps again as the tail comes round.  He has
the snake now, and tugs it out eighteen inches.  Thud, thud comes the
woman's club on the ground.  Alligator pulls again.  Thud, thud.
Alligator gives another pull and he has the snake out--a black brute,
five feet long.  The head rises to dart about, but the dog has the
enemy close to the neck.  He is a big, heavy dog, but quick as a
terrier.  He shakes the snake as though he felt the original curse in
common with mankind.  The eldest boy wakes up, seizes his stick, and
tries to get out of bed, but his mother forces him back with a grip of
iron.  Thud, thud--the snake's back is broken in several places.
Thud, thud--its head is crushed, and Alligator's nose skinned again.

She lifts the mangled reptile on the point of her stick, carries it to
the fire, and throws it in; then piles on the wood and watches the
snake burn.  The boy and dog watch too.  She lays her hand on the
dog's head, and all the fierce, angry light dies out of his yellow
eyes.  The younger children are quieted, and presently go to sleep.
The dirty-legged boy stands for a moment in his shirt, watching the
fire.  Presently he looks up at her, sees the tears in her eyes, and,
throwing his arms round her neck exclaims:

"Mother, I won't never go drovin'; blarst me if I do!"  And she hugs
him to her worn-out breast and kisses him; and they sit thus together
while the sickly daylight breaks over the bush.




STEELMAN'S PUPIL



Steelman was a hard case, but some said that Smith was harder.
Steelman was big and good-looking, and good-natured in his way; he was
a spieler, pure and simple, but did things in humorous style.  Smith
was small and weedy, of the sneak variety; he had a whining tone and a
cringing manner.  He seemed to be always so afraid you were going to
hit him that he would make you want to hit him on that account alone.

Steelman "had" you in a fashion that would make your friends laugh.
Smith would "have" you in a way which made you feel mad at the bare
recollection of having been taken in by so contemptible a little
sneak.

They battled round together in the North Island of Maoriland for a
couple of years.

One day Steelman said to Smith:

"Look here, Smithy, you don't know you're born yet.  I'm going to take
you in hand and teach you."

And he did.  If Smith wouldn't do as Steelman told him, or wasn't
successful in cadging, or mugged any game they had in hand, Steelman
would threaten to stoush him; and, if the warning proved ineffectual
after the second or third time, he would stoush him.

One day, on the track, they came to a place where an old Scottish
couple kept a general store and shanty.  They camped alongside the
road, and Smith was just starting up to the house to beg supplies when
Steelman cried:

"Here!--hold on.  Now where do you think you're going to?"

"Why, I'm going to try and chew the old party's lug, of course.
We'll be out of tucker in a couple of days," said Smith.

Steelman sat down on a stump in a hopeless, discouraged sort of way.

"It's no use," he said, regarding Smith with mingled reproach and
disgust.  "It's no use.  I might as well give it best.  I can see
that it's only waste of time trying to learn you anything.  Will I
ever be able to knock some gumption into your thick skull?  After all
the time and trouble and pains I've took with your education, you
hain't got any more sense than to go and mug a business like that!
When will you learn sense?  Hey?  After all, I--Smith, you're a born
mug!"

He always called Smith a "mug" when he was particularly wild at him,
for it hurt Smith more than anything else.  "There's only two classes
in the world, spielers and mugs--and you're a mug, Smith."

"What have I done, anyway?" asked Smith helplessly.  "That's all I
want to know."

Steelman wearily rested his brow on his hand.

"That will do, Smith," he said listlessly; "don't say another word,
old man; it'll only make my head worse; don't talk.  You might, at
the very least, have a little consideration for my feelings--even if
you haven't for your own interests."  He paused and regarded Smith
sadly.  "Well, I'll give you another show.  I'll stage the business
for you."

He made Smith doff his coat and get into his worst pair of
trousers--and they were bad enough; they were hopelessly "gone"
beyond the extreme limit of bush decency.  He made Smith put on a rag
of a felt hat and a pair of "'lastic-sides" which had fallen off a
tramp and lain baking and rotting by turns on a rubbish heap; they had
to be tied on Smith with bits of rag and string.  He drew dark shadows
round Smith's eyes, and burning spots on his cheek-bones with some
greasepaints he used when they travelled as "The Great Steelman and
Smith Combination Star Dramatic Co."  He damped Smith's hair to make
it dark and lank, and his face more corpse-like by comparison--in
short, he made him up to look like a man who had long passed the very
last stage of consumption, and had been artificially kept alive in the
interests of science.

"Now you're ready," said Steelman to Smith.  "You left your whare
the day before yesterday and started to walk to the hospital at
Palmerston.  An old mate picked you up dying on the road, brought you
round, and carried you on his back most of the way here.  You firmly
believe that Providence had something to do with the sending of that
old mate along at that time and place above all others.  Your mate
also was hard up; he was going to a job--the first show for work he'd
had in nine months--but he gave it up to see you through; he'd give up
his life rather than desert a mate in trouble.  You only want a couple
of shillings or a bit of tucker to help you on to Palmerston.  You
know you've got to die, and you only want to live long enough to get
word to your poor old mother, and die on a bed.

"Remember, they're Scotch up at that house.  You understand the
Scotch barrack pretty well by now--if you don't it ain't my fault.
You were born in Aberdeen, but came out too young to remember much
about the town.  Your father's dead.  You ran away to sea and came out
in the _Bobbie Burns_ to Sydney.  Your poor old mother's in
Aberdeen now--Bruce or Wallace Wynd will do.  Your mother might be
dead now--poor old soul!--any way, you'll never see her again.  You
wish you'd never run away from home.  You wish you'd been a better son
to your poor old mother; you wish you'd written to her and answered
her last letter.  You only want to live long enough to write home and
ask for forgiveness and a blessing before you die.  If you had a drop
of spirits of some sort to brace you up you might get along the road
better.  (Put this delicately.)  Get the whine out of your voice and
breathe with a wheeze--like this; get up the nearest approach to a
deathrattle that you can.  Move as if you were badly hurt in your
wind--like this.  (If you don't do it better'n that, I'll stoush you.)
Make your face a bit longer and keep your lips dry--don't lick them,
you damned fool!-_breathe_ on them; make 'em dry as chips.
That's the only decent pair of breeks you've got, and the only shoon.
You're a Presbyterian--not a U.P., the Auld Kirk.  Your mate would
have come up to the house only--well, you'll have to use the stuffing
in your head a bit; you can't expect me to do all the brain work.
Remember it's consumption you've got--galloping consumption; you know
all the symptoms--pain on top of your right lung, bad cough, and night
sweats.  Something tells you that you won't see the new year--it's a
week off Christmas now.  And if you come back without anything, I'll
blessed soon put you out of your misery."


Smith came back with about four pounds of shortbread and as much
various tucker as they could conveniently carry; a pretty good suit of
cast-off tweeds; a new pair of 'lastic-sides from the store stock; two
bottles of patent medicine and a black bottle half-full of home-made
consumption-cure; also a letter to a hospital-committee man, and three
shillings to help him on his way to Palmerston.  He also got about
half a mile of sympathy, religious consolation, and medical advice
which he didn't remember.

"_Now_," he said, triumphantly, "am I a mug or not?"

Steelman kindly ignored the question.  "I _did_ have a better
opinion of the Scotch," he said, contemptuously.


Steelman got on at an hotel as billiard-marker and decoy, and in six
months he managed that pub.  Smith, who'd been away on his own
account, turned up in the town one day clean broke, and in a
deplorable state.  He heard of Steelman's luck, and thought he was
"all right," so went to his old friend.

Cold type--or any other kind of type--couldn't do justice to
Steelman's disgust.  To think that this was the reward of all the time
and trouble he'd spent on Smith's education!  However, when he cooled
down, he said:

"Smith, you're a young man yet, and it's never too late to mend.
There is still time for reformation.  I can't help you now; it would
only demoralize you altogether.  To think, after the way I trained
you, you can't battle round any better'n this!  I always thought you
were an irreclaimable mug, but I expected better things of you towards
the end.  I thought I'd make _something_ of you.  It's enough to
dishearten any man and disgust him with the world.  Why! you ought
to be a rich man now with the chances and training you had!  To
think--but I won't talk of that; it has made me ill.  I suppose I'll
have to give you something, if it's only to get rid of the sight of
you.  Here's a quid, and I'm a mug for giving it to you.  It'll do you
more harm than good; and it ain't a friendly thing nor the right
thing for me--who always had your welfare at heart--to give it to you
under the circumstances.  Now, get away out of my sight, and don't
come near me till you've reformed.  If you do, I'll have to stoush you
out of regard for my own health and feelings."


But Steelman came down in the world again and picked up Smith on the
road, and they battled round together for another year or so; and at
last they were in Wellington--Steelman "flush" and stopping at an
hotel, and Smith stumped, as usual, and staying with a friend.  One
night they were drinking together at the hotel, at the expense of some
mugs whom Steelman was "educating."  It was raining hard.  When
Smith was going home, he said:

"Look here, Steely, old man.  Listen to the rain!  I'll get wringing
wet going home.  You might as well lend me your overcoat to-night.
You won't want it, and I won't hurt it."

And, Steelman's heart being warmed by his successes, he lent the
overcoat.

Smith went and pawned it, got glorious on the proceeds, and took the
pawn-ticket to Steelman next day.

Smith had reformed.




AN UNFINISHED LOVE STORY



Brook let down the heavy, awkward sliprails, and the gaunt cattle
stumbled through, with aggravating deliberation, and scattered slowly
among the native apple-trees along the sidling.  First there came an
old easygoing red poley cow, then a dusty white cow; then two shaggy,
half-grown calves--who seemed already to have lost all interest in
existence--and after them a couple of "babies," sleek, glossy, and
cheerful; then three more tired-looking cows, with ragged udders and
hollow sides; then a lanky barren heifer--red, of course--with
half-blind eyes and one crooked horn--she was noted for her great
agility in jumping two-rail fences, and she was known to the selector
as "Queen Elizabeth;" and behind her came a young cream-coloured
milker--a mighty proud and contented young mother--painfully and
patiently dragging her first calf, which was hanging obstinately to a
teat, with its head beneath her hind legs.  Last of all there came the
inevitable red steer, who scratched the dust and let a stupid
"bwoo-ur-r-rr" out of him as he snuffed at the rails.

Brook had shifted the rails there often before--fifteen years
ago--perhaps the selfsame rails, for stringy-bark lasts long; and the
action brought the past near to him--nearer than he wished.  He did
not like to think of that hungry, wretched selection existence; he
felt more contempt than pity for the old-fashioned, unhappy boy, who
used to let down the rails there, and drive the cattle through.

He had spent those fifteen years in cities, and had come here,
prompted more by curiosity than anything else, to have a quiet
holiday.  His father was dead; his other relations had moved away,
leaving a tenant on the old selection.

Brook rested his elbow on the top rail of an adjacent panel and
watched the cattle pass, and thought until Lizzie--the tenant's
niece--shoved the red steer through and stood gravely regarding him
(Brook, and not the steer); then he shifted his back to the fence and
looked at her.  He had not much to look at: a short, plain, thin girl
of nineteen, with rather vacant grey eyes, dark ringlets, and
freckles; she had no complexion to speak of; she wore an ill-fitting
print frock, and a pair of men's 'lastic-sides several sizes too large
for her.  She was "studying for a school-teacher;" that was the
height of the ambition of local youth.  Brook was studying her.

He turned away to put up the rails.  The lower rail went into its place
all right, but the top one had got jammed, and it stuck as though it
was spiked.  He worked the rail up and down and to and fro, took it
under his arm and tugged it; but he might as well have pulled at one
of the posts.  Then he lifted the loose end as high as he could, and
let it fall--jumping back out of the way at the same time; this
loosened it, but when he lifted it again it slid so easily and far
into its socket that the other end came out and fell, barking Brook's
knee.  He swore a little, then tackled the rail again; he had the
same trouble as before with the other end, but succeeded at last.
Then he turned away, rubbing his knee.

Lizzie hadn't smiled, not once; she watched him gravely all the
while.

"Did you hurt your knee?" she asked, without emotion.

"No.  The rail did."

She reflected solemnly for a while, and then asked him if it felt
sore.

He replied rather briefly in the negative.

"They were always nasty, awkward rails to put up," she remarked,
after some more reflection.

Brook agreed, and then they turned their faces towards the
homestead.  Half-way down the sidling was a clump of saplings, with a
big log lying amongst them.  Here Brook paused.  "We'll sit down for a
while and have a rest," said he.  "Sit down, Lizzie."

She obeyed with the greatest of gravity.  Nothing was said for awhile.
She sat with her hands folded in her lap, gazing thoughtfully at the
ridge, which was growing dim.  It looked better when it was dim, and
so did the rest of the scenery.  There was no beauty lost when
darkness hid the scenery altogether.  Brook wondered what the girl was
thinking about.  The silence between them did not seem awkward,
somehow; but it didn't suit him just then, and so presently he broke
it.

"Well, I must go to-morrow."

"Must you?"

"Yes."

She thought awhile, and then she asked him if he was glad to go.

"Well, I don't know.  Are you sorry, Lizzie?"

She thought a good long while, and then she said she was.

He moved closer to the girl, and suddenly slipped his arm round her
waist.  She did not seem agitated; she still gazed dreamily at the
line of ridges, but her head inclined slightly towards him.

"Lizzie, did you ever love anyone?"--then anticipating the usual
reply--"except, of course, your father and mother, and all that sort
of thing." Then, abruptly: "I mean did you ever have a sweetheart?"

She reflected, so as to be sure; then she said she hadn't.  Long
pause, and he, the city man, breathed hard--not the girl.  Suddenly
he moved nervously, and said:

"Lizzie--Lizzie!  Do you know what love means?"

She pondered over this for some minutes, as a result of which she said
she thought that she did.

"Lizzie!  Do you think you can love me?"

She didn't seem able to find an answer to that.  So he caught her to
him in both arms, and kissed her hard and long on the mouth.  She was
agitated now--he had some complexion now; she struggled to her feet,
trembling.

"We must go now," she said quickly.  "They will be waiting for tea."

He stood up before her, and held her there by both hands.

"There is plenty of time.  Lizzie--"

"Mis-ter Br-o-o-k-er!  Li-i-z-zee-e-e!  Come ter yer tea-e-e!"
yelled a boy from the house.

"We must really go now."

"Oh, they can wait a minute.  Lizzie, don't be frightened"--bending his
head--"Lizzie, put your arms round my neck and kiss me--now.  Do as I
tell you, Lizzie--they cannot see us," and he drew her behind a
bush.  "Now, Lizzie."

She obeyed just as a frightened child might.

"We must go now," she panted, breathless from such an embrace.

"Lizzie, you will come for a walk with me after tea?"

"I don't know--I can't promise.  I don't think it would be right.
Aunt mightn't like me to."

"Never mind aunt.  I'll fix her.  We'll go for a walk over to the
school-teacher's place.  It will be bright moonlight."

"I don't like to promise.  My father and mother might not--"

"Why, what are you frightened of?  What harm is there in it?"  Then,
softly, "Promise, Lizzie."

"Promise, Lizzie."

She was hesitating.

"Promise, Lizzie.  I'm going away to-morrow--might never see you
again.  You will come, Lizzie?  It will be our last talk together.
Promise, Lizzie....Oh, then, if you don't like to, I won't press
you.... Will you come, or no?"

"Ye-es."

"One more, and I'll take you home."

It was nearly dark.


Brook was moved to get up early next morning and give the girl a hand
with the cows.  There were two rickety bails in the yard.  He had not
forgotten how to milk, but the occupation gave him no pleasure--it
brought the past near again.

Now and then he would turn his face, rest his head against the side of
the cow, and watch Lizzie at her work; and each time she would, as
though in obedience to an influence she could not resist, turn her
face to him--having noted the pause in his milking.  There was a
wonder in her expression--as if something had come into her life which
she could not realize--curiosity in his.

When the spare pail was full, he would follow her with it to the
little bark dairy; and she held out the cloth which served as a
strainer whilst he poured the milk in, and, as the last drops went
through, their mouths would come together.

He carried the slop-buckets to the pigsty for her, and helped to poddy
(hand feed) a young calf.  He had to grip the calf by the nape of the
neck, insert a forefinger in its mouth, and force its nose down into
an oil-drum full of skim milk.  The calf sucked, thinking it had a
teat; and so it was taught to drink.  But calves have a habit, born of
instinct, of butting the udders with their noses, by way of reminding
their mothers to let down the milk; and so this calf butted at times,
splashing sour milk over Brook, and barking his wrist against the
sharp edge of the drum.  Then he would swear a little, and Lizzie
would smile sadly and gravely.

Brook did not go away that day, nor the next, but he took the coach on
the third day thereafter.  He and Lizzie found a quiet corner to say
good-bye in.  She showed some emotion for the first time, or, perhaps,
the second--maybe the third time--in that week of her life.  They had
been out together in the moonlight every evening.  (Brook had been
fifteen years in cities.)  They had scarcely looked at each other that
morning--and scarcely spoken.

He looked back as the coach started and saw her sitting inside the big
kitchen window.  She waved her hand--hopelessly it seemed.  She had
rolled up her sleeve, and to Brook the arm seemed strangely white and
fair above the line of sunburn round the wrist.  He hadn't noticed it
before.  Her face seemed fairer too, but, perhaps, it was only the
effect of light and shade round that window.

He looked back again, as the coach turned the corner of the fence,
and was just in time to see her bury her face in her hands with a
passionate gesture which did not seem natural to her.

Brook reached the city next evening, and, "after hours," he staggered
in through a side entrance to the lighted parlour of a private bar.

They say that Lizzie broke her heart that year, but, then, the world
does not believe in such things nowadays.




BOARD AND RESIDENCE



One o'clock on Saturday.  The unemployed's one o'clock on Saturday!
Nothing more can be done this week, so you drag yourself wearily and
despairingly "home," with the cheerful prospect of a penniless
Saturday afternoon and evening and the long horrible Australian-city
Sunday to drag through.  One of the landlady's clutch--and she
_is_ an old hen--opens the door, exclaims:

"Oh, Mr Careless!" and grins.  You wait an anxious minute, to
postpone the disappointment which you feel by instinct is coming, and
then ask hopelessly whether there are any letters for you.

"No, there's nothing for you, Mr Careless."  Then in answer to the
unspoken question, "The postman's been, but there's nothing for you."

You hang up your hat in the stuffy little passage, and start upstairs,
when, "Oh, Mr Careless, mother wants to know if you've had yer
dinner."

You haven't, but you say you have.  You are empty enough inside, but
the emptiness is filled up, as it were, with the wrong sort of hungry
vacancy--gnawing anxiety.  You haven't any stomach for the warm,
tasteless mess which has been "kep' 'ot" for you in a cold stove.
You feel just physically tired enough to go to your room, lie down on
the bed, and snatch twenty minutes' rest from that terrible unemployed
restlessness which, you know, is sure to drag you to your feet to pace
the room or tramp the pavement even before your bodily weariness has
nearly left you.  So you start up the narrow, stuffy little flight of
steps call the "stairs."  Three small doors open from the landing--a
square place of about four feet by four.  The first door is yours; it
is open, and--

Decided odour of bedroom dust and fluff, damped and kneaded with cold
soap-suds.  Rear view of a girl covered with a damp, draggled,
dirt-coloured skirt, which gapes at the waistband from the "body,"
disclosing a good glimpse of soiled stays (ribs burst), and yawns
behind over a decidedly dirty white petticoat, the slit of which last,
as she reaches forward and backs out convulsively, half opens and then
comes together in an unsatisfactory, startling, tantalizing way, and
allows a hint of a red flannel under-something.  The frayed ends of
the skirt lie across a hopelessly-burst pair of elastic-sides which
rest on their inner edges--toes out--and jerk about in a seemingly
undecided manner.  She is damping and working up the natural layer on
the floor with a piece of old flannel petticoat dipped occasionally in
a bucket which stands by her side, containing about a quart of muddy
water.  She looks round and exclaims, "Oh, did you want to come in,
Mr Careless?"  Then she says she'll be done in a minute; furthermore
she remarks that if you want to come in you won't be in her road.  You
don't--you go down to the dining-room--parlour--sitting-room---
nursery--and stretch yourself on the sofa in the face of the
painfully-evident disapproval of the landlady.

You have been here, say, three months, and are only about two weeks
behind.  The landlady still says, "Good morning, Mr Careless," or
"Good evening, Mr Careless," but there is an unpleasant accent on
the "Mr," and a still more unpleasantly pronounced stress on the
"morning" or "evening."  While your money lasted you paid up well
and regularly--sometimes in advance--and dined out most of the time;
but that doesn't count now.

Ten minutes pass, and then the landlady's disapproval becomes manifest
and aggressive.  One of the little girls, a sharp-faced little
larrikiness, who always wears a furtive grin of cunning--it seems as
though it were born with her, and is perhaps more a misfortune than a
fault--comes in and says please she wants to tidy up.

So you get up and take your hat and go out again to look for a place
to rest in--to try not to think.

You _wish_ you could get away up-country.  You also wish you were dead.


The landlady, Mrs Jones, is a widow, or grass-widow, Welsh, of course,
and clannish; flat face, watery grey eyes, shallow, selfish,
ignorant, and a hypocrite unconsciously--by instinct.

But the worst of it is that Mrs Jones takes advantage of the situation
to corner you in the passage when you want to get out, or when you
come in tired, and talk.  It amounts to about this: She has been
fourteen years in this street, taking in boarders; everybody knows
her; everybody knows Mrs Jones; her poor husband died six years ago
(God rest his soul); she finds it hard to get a living these times;
work, work, morning, noon, and night (talk, talk, talk, more likely).
"Do you know Mr Duff of the Labour Bureau?"  He has known her family
for years; a very nice gentleman--a very nice gentleman indeed; he
often stops at the gate to have a yarn with her on his way to the
office (he must be hard up for a yarn).  She doesn't know hardly
nobody in this street; she never gossips; it takes her all her time to
get a living; she can't be bothered with neighbours; it's always best
to keep to yourself and keep neighbours at a distance.  Would you
believe it, Mr Careless, she has been two years in this house and
hasn't said above a dozen words to the woman next door; she'd just
know her by sight if she saw her; as for the other woman she wouldn't
know her from a crow.  Mr Blank and Mrs Blank could tell you the
same....She always had gentlemen staying with her; she never had no
cause to complain of one of them except once; they always treated her
fair and honest.  Here follows story about the exception; he, I
gathered, was a journalist, and she could never depend on him.  He
seemed, from her statements, to have been decidedly erratic in his
movements, mode of life and choice of climes.  He evidently caused her
a great deal of trouble and anxiety, and I felt a kind of sneaking
sympathy for his memory.  One young fellow stayed with her five years;
he was, etc.  She couldn't be hard on any young fellow that gets out
of work; of course if he can't get it he can't pay; she can't get
blood out of a stone; she couldn't turn him out in the street.  "I've
got sons of my own, Mr Careless, I've got sons of my own."...She is
sure she always does her best to make her boarders comfortable, and if
they want anything they've only got to ask for it.  The kettle is
always on the stove if you want a cup of tea, and if you come home
late at night and want a bit of supper you've only got to go to the
safe (which of us would dare?).  She never locks it, she never
did....And then she begins about her wonderful kids, and it goes on
hour after hour.  Lord! it's enough to drive a man mad.

We were recommended to this place on the day of our arrival by a young
dealer in the furniture line, whose name was Moses--and he looked like
it, but we didn't think of that at the time.  He had Mrs Jones's card
in his window, and he left the shop in charge of his missus and came
round with us at once.  He assured us that we couldn't do better than
stay with her.  He said she was a most respectable lady, and all her
boarders were decent young fellows-gentlemen; she kept everything
scrupulously clean, and kept the best table in town, and she'd do for
us (washing included) for eighteen shillings per week; she generally
took the first week in advance.  We asked him to have a beer--for the
want of somebody else to ask--and after that he said that Mrs Jones
was a kind, motherly body, and understood young fellows; and that we'd
be even more comfortable than in our own home; that we'd be allowed to
do as we liked--she wasn't particular; she wouldn't mind it a bit if
we came home late once in a way--she was used to that, in fact; she
liked to see young fellows enjoying themselves.  We afterwards found
out that he got so much on every boarder he captured.  We also found
out--after paying in advance---that her gentlemen generally sent out
their white things to be done; she only did the coloured things, so we
had to pay a couple of bob extra a week to have our "biled" rags and
collars sent out and done; and after the first week they bore sad
evidence of having been done on the premises by one of the frowsy
daughters.  But we paid all the same.  And, good Lord! if she keeps
the best table in town, we are curious to see the worst.  When you go
down to breakfast you find on the table in front of your chair a cold
plate, with a black something--God knows what it looks like--in the
centre of it.  It eats like something scraped off the inside of a hide
and burnt; and with this you have a cup of warm grey slush called a
"cup of tea."  Dinner: A slice of alleged roast beef or boiled
mutton, of no particular colour or taste; three new spuds, of which
the largest is about the size of an ordinary hen's egg, the smallest
that of a bantam's, and the middle one in between, and which eat soggy
and have no taste to speak of, save that they are a trifle bitter; a
dab of unhealthy-looking green something, which might be either
cabbage leaves or turnip-tops, and a glass of water.  The whole mess
is lukewarm, including the water--it would all be better cold.  Tea: A
thin slice of the aforesaid alleged roast or mutton, and the pick of
about six thin slices of stale bread--evidently cut the day before
yesterday.  This is the way Mrs Jones "does" for us for eighteen
shillings a week.  The bread gave out at tea-time this evening, and a
mild financial boarder tapped his plate with his knife, and sent the
bread plate out to be replenished.  It came back with _one_ slice
on it.

The mild financial boarder, with desperate courage, is telling the
landlady that he'll have to shift next week--it is too far to go to
work, he cannot always get down in time; he is very sorry he has to
go, he says; he is very comfortable here, but it can't be helped;
anyway, as soon as he can get work nearer, he'll come back at once;
also (oh, what cowards men are when women are concerned), he says he
wishes she could shift and take a house down at the other end of the
town.  She says (at least here are some fragments of her gabble which
we caught and shorthanded): "Well, I'm very sorry to lose you, Mr
Sampson, very sorry indeed; but of course if you must go, you must.
Of course you can't be expected to walk that distance every morning,
and you mustn't be getting to work late, and losing your place...  Of
course we could get breakfast an hour earlier if...well, as I said
before, I'm sorry to lose you and, indeed...You won't forget to come
and see us...glad to see you at any time... Well, any way, if you ever
want to come back, you know, your bed will be always ready for you,
and you'll be treated just the same, and made just as comfortable--you
won't forget that" (he says he won't); "and you won't forget to
come to dinner sometimes" (he says he won't); "and, of course...You
know I always try...Don't forget to drop in sometimes... Well, anyway,
if you ever do happen to hear of a decent young fellow who wants a
good, clean, comfortable home, you'll be sure to send him to me, will
you?" (He says he will.)  "Well, of course, Mr Sampson, etc., etc.,
etc., and-so-on, and-so-on, and-so-on, and-so-on, ..."  It's enough
to give a man rats.

He escapes, and we regard his departure very much as a gang of
hopeless convicts might regard the unexpected liberation of one of
their number.

This is the sort of life that gives a man a God-Almighty longing to
break away and take to the bush.




HIS COLONIAL OATH



I lately met an old schoolmate of mine up-country.  He was much
changed.  He was tall and lank, and had the most hideous bristly red
beard I ever saw.  He was working on his father's farm.  He shook hands,
looked anywhere but in my face--and said nothing.  Presently I remarked
at a venture "So poor old Mr B., the schoolmaster, is dead."

"My oath!" he replied.

"He was a good old sort."

"My oath!"

"Time goes by pretty quick, doesn't it?"

His oath (colonial).

"Poor old Mr B.  died awfully sudden, didn't he?"

He looked up the hill, and said: "My oath!"

Then he added: "My blooming oath!"

I thought, perhaps, my city rig or manner embarrassed him, so I stuck
my hands in my pockets, spat, and said, to set him at his ease: "It's
blanky hot to-day.  I don't know how you blanky blanks stand such
blank weather!  It's blanky well hot enough to roast a crimson carnal
bullock; ain't it?"  Then I took out a cake of tobacco, bit off a
quarter, and pretended to chew.  He replied:

"My oath!"

The conversation flagged here.  But presently, to my great surprise,
he came to the rescue with:

"He finished me, yer know."

"Finished?  How?  Who?"

He looked down towards the river, thought (if he did think) and said:
"Finished me edyercation, yer know."

"Oh! you mean Mr B.?"

"My oath--he finished me first-rate."

"He turned out a good many scholars, didn't he?"

"My oath!  I'm thinkin' about going down to the trainin' school."'

"You ought to--I would if I were you."

"My oath!"

"Those were good old times," I hazarded, "you remember the old bark
school?"

He looked away across the sidling, and was evidently getting uneasy.
He shifted about, and said:

"Well, I must be goin'."

"I suppose you're pretty busy now?"

"My oath!  So long."

"Well, good-bye.  We must have a yarn some day."

"My oath!"

He got away as quickly as he could.

I wonder whether he _was_ changed after all--or, was it I?  A
man does seem to get out of touch with the bush after living in cities
for eight or ten years.




A VISIT OF CONDOLENCE



"Does Arvie live here, old woman?"

"Why?"

"Strike me dead! carn't yer answer a civil queschin?"

"How dare you talk to me like that, you young larrikin!  Be off! or
I'll send for a policeman."

"Blarst the cops!  D'yer think I cares for 'em?  Fur two pins I'd
fetch a push an' smash yer ole shanty about yer ears--y'ole cow!
_I only arsked if Arvie lived here_!  Holy Mosis! carn't a feller
ask a civil queschin?"

"What do you want with Arvie?  Do you know him?"

"My oath!  Don't he work at Grinder Brothers?  I only come out of my
way to do him a good turn; an' now I'm sorry I come--damned if I
ain't--to be barracked like this, an' shoved down my own throat.
(_Pause_) I want to tell Arvie that if he don't come ter work
termorrer, another bloke'll collar his job.  I wouldn't like to see a
cove collar a cove's job an' not tell a bloke about it.  What's up
with Arvie, anyhow?  Is he sick?"

"Arvie is dead!"

"Christ!  (_Pause_) Garn!  What-yer-giv'n-us?  Tell Arvie Bill
Anderson wants-ter see him."

"My God! haven't I got enough trouble without a young wretch like
you coming to torment me?  For God's sake go away and leave me alone!
I'm telling you the truth, my my poor boy died of influenza last
night."

"My oath!"

The ragged young rip gave a long, low whistle, glanced up and down
Jones's Alley, spat out some tobacco-juice, and said "Swelp me Gord!
I'm sorry, mum.  I didn't know.  How was I to know you wasn't havin'
me?"

He withdrew one hand from his pocket and scratched the back of his
head, tilting his hat as far forward as it had previously been to the
rear, and just then the dilapidated side of his right boot attracted
his attention.  He turned the foot on one side, and squinted at the
sole; then he raised the foot to his left knee, caught the ankle in a
very dirty hand, and regarded the sole-leather critically, as though
calculating how long it would last.  After which he spat desperately
at the pavement, and said:

"Kin I see him?"

He followed her up the crooked little staircase with a who's-afraid
kind of swagger, but he took his hat off on entering the room.

He glanced round, and seemed to take stock of the signs of poverty--so
familiar to his class--and then directed his gaze to where the body
lay on the sofa with its pauper coffin already by its side.  He looked
at the coffin with the critical eye of a tradesman, then he looked at
Arvie, and then at the coffin again, as if calculating whether the
body would fit.

The mother uncovered the white, pinched face of the dead boy, and Bill
came and stood by the sofa.  He carelessly drew his right hand from
his pocket, and laid the palm on Arvie's ice-cold forehead.

"Poor little cove!" Bill muttered, half to himself; and then, as
though ashamed of his weakness, he said:

"There wasn't no post mortem, was there?"

"No," she answered; "a doctor saw him the day before--there was no
post mortem."

"I thought there wasn't none," said Bill, "because a man that's been
post mortemed always looks as if he'd been hurt.  My father looked
right enough at first--just as if he was restin'--but after they'd had
him opened he looked as if he'd been hurt.  No one else could see it,
but I could.  How old was Arvie?"

"Eleven."'

"I'm twelve--goin' on for thirteen.  Arvie's father's dead, ain't he?"

"Yes."

"So's mine.  Died at his work, didn't he?"

"Yes."

"So'd mine.  Arvie told me his father died of something with his
heart!"

"Yes."

"So'd mine; ain't it rum?  You scrub offices an' wash, don't yer?"

"Yes."

"So does my mother.  You find it pretty hard to get a livin', don't
yer, these times?"

"My God, yes!  God only knows what I'll do now my poor boy's gone.
I generally get up at half-past five to scrub out some offices, and
when that's done I've got to start my day's work, washing.  And then
I find it hard to make both ends meet."

"So does my mother.  I suppose you took on bad when yer husband was
brought home?"

"Ah, my God! Yes.  I'll never forget it till my dying day.  My poor
husband had been out of work for weeks, and he only got the job two
days before he died.  I suppose it gave your mother a great shock?"

"My oath!  One of the fellows that carried father home said: 'Yer
husband's dead, mum,' he says; 'he dropped off all of a suddint,'
and mother said, 'My God! my God!' just like that, and went off."

"Poor soul! poor soul!  And--now my Arvie's gone.  Whatever will me
and the children do?  Whatever will I do?  Whatever will I do?  My
God! I wish I was under the turf."

"Cheer up, mum!" said Bill.  "It's no use frettin' over what's done."

He wiped some tobacco-juice off his lips with the back of his hand,
and regarded the stains reflectively for a minute or so.  Then he
looked at Arvie again.

"You should ha' tried cod liver oil," said Bill.

"No.  He needed rest and plenty of good food."

"He wasn't very strong."

"No, he was not, poor boy."

"I thought he wasn't.  They treated him bad at Grinder Brothers: they
didn't give him a show to learn nothing; kept him at the same work all
the time, and he didn't have cheek enough to arsk the boss for a rise,
lest he'd be sacked.  He couldn't fight, an' the boys used to tease
him; they'd wait outside the shop to have a lark with Arvie.  I'd like
to see 'em do it to me.  He couldn't fight; but then, of course, he
wasn't strong.  They don't bother me while I'm strong enough to heave
a rock; but then, of course, it wasn't Arvie's fault.  I s'pose he had
pluck enough, if he hadn't the strength."  And Bill regarded the
corpse with a fatherly and lenient eye.

"My God!" she cried, "if I'd known this, I'd sooner have starved than
have my poor boy's life tormented out of him in such a place.  He
never complained.  My poor, brave-hearted child!  He never
complained!  Poor little Arvie!  Poor little Arvie!"

"He never told yer?"

"No--never a word."

"My oath! You don't say so!  P'raps he didn't want to let you know he
couldn't hold his own; but that wasn't his fault, I s'pose.  Y'see, he
wasn't strong."

An old print hanging over the bed attracted his attention, and he
regarded it with critical interest for awhile:

"We've got a pickcher like that at home.  We lived in Jones's Alley
wunst--in that house over there.  How d'yer like livin' in Jones's
Alley?"

"I don't like it at all.  I don't like having to bring my children up
where there are so many bad houses; but I can't afford to go somewhere
else and pay higher rent."

"Well, there _is_ a good many night-shops round here.  But
then," he added, reflectively, "you'll find them everywheres.  An',
besides, the kids git sharp, an' pick up a good deal in an alley like
this; 'twon't do 'em no harm; it's no use kids bein' green if they
wanter get on in a city.  You ain't been in Sydney all yer life, have
yer?"

"No.  We came from the bush, about five years ago.  My poor husband
thought he could do better in the city.  I was brought up in the
bush."'

"I thought yer was.  Well, men are sick fools.  I'm thinking about
gittin' a billet up-country, myself, soon.  Where's he goin' ter be
buried?"

"At Rookwood, to-morrow."

"I carn't come.  I've got ter work.  Is the Guvmint goin' to bury
him?"

"Yes."

Bill looked at the body with increased respect.  "Kin I do anythin'
for you?  Now, don't be frightened to arsk!"

"No.  Thank you very much, all the same."

"Well, I must be goin'; thank yer fur yer trouble, mum."

"No trouble, my boy--mind the step."

"It _is_ gone.  I'll bring a piece of board round some night and mend it
for you, if you like; I'm learnin' the carpenterin'; I kin nearly
make a door.  Tell yer what, I'll send the old woman round to-night to
fix up Arvie and lend yer a hand."

"No, thank you.  I suppose your mother's got work and trouble enough;
I'll manage."

"I'll send her round, anyway; she's a bit rough, but she's got a soft
gizzard; an' there's nothin' she enjoys better than fixin' up a body.
Good-bye, mum."

"Good-bye, my child."

He paused at the door, and said:

"I'm sorry, mum.  Swelp me God! I'm sorry.  S'long, an' thank yer."

An awe-stricken child stood on the step, staring at Bill with great
brimming eyes.  He patted it on the head and said "Keep yer pecker up,
young 'un!"




IN A WET SEASON



It was raining--"general rain."

The train left Bourke, and then there began the long, long agony of
scrub and wire fence, with here and there a natural clearing, which
seemed even more dismal than the funereal "timber" itself.  The only
thing which might seem in keeping with one of these soddened flats
would be the ghost of a funeral--a city funeral with plain hearse and
string of cabs--going very slowly across from the scrub on one side
to the scrub on the other.  Sky like a wet, grey blanket; plains
like dead seas, save for the tufts of coarse grass sticking up out of
the water; scrub indescribably dismal--everything damp, dark, and
unspeakably dreary.

Somewhere along here we saw a swagman's camp--a square of calico
stretched across a horizontal stick, some rags steaming on another
stick in front of a fire, and two billies to the leeward of the blaze.
We knew by instinct that there was a piece of beef in the larger one.
Small, hopeless-looking man standing with his back to the fire, with
his hands behind him, watching the train; also, a damp, sorry-looking
dingo warming itself and shivering by the fire.  The rain had held up
for a while.  We saw two or three similar camps further on, forming a
temporary suburb of Byrock.

The population was on the platform in old overcoats and damp, soft
felt hats; one trooper in a waterproof.  The population looked
cheerfully and patiently dismal.  The local push had evidently turned
up to see off some fair enslavers from the city, who had been
up-country for the cheque season, now over.  They got into another
carriage.  We were glad when the bell rang.

The rain recommenced.  We saw another swagman about a mile on
struggling away from the town, through mud and water.  He did not seem
to have heart enough to bother about trying to avoid the worst
mud-holes.  There was a low-spirited dingo at his heels, whose sole
object in life was seemingly to keep his front paws in his master's
last footprint.  The traveller's body was bent well forward from the
hips up; his long arms--about six inches through his coat
sleeves--hung by his sides like the arms of a dummy, with a billy at
the end of one and a bag at the end of the other; but his head was
thrown back against the top end of the swag, his hat-brim rolled up in
front, and we saw a ghastly, beardless face which turned neither to
the right nor the left as the train passed him.

After a long while we closed our book, and looking through the window,
saw a hawker's turn-out which was too sorrowful for description.

We looked out again while the train was going slowly, and saw a
teamster's camp: three or four wagons covered with tarpaulins which
hung down in the mud all round and suggested death.  A long, narrow
man, in a long, narrow, shoddy overcoat and a damp felt hat, was
walking quickly along the road past the camp.  A sort of cattle-dog
glided silently and swiftly out from under a wagon, "heeled" the
man, and slithered back without explaining.  Here the scene vanished.

We remember stopping--for an age it seemed--at half a dozen straggling
shanties on a flat of mud and water.  There was a rotten weather-board
pub, with a low, dripping veranda, and three wretchedly forlorn horses
hanging, in the rain, to a post outside.  We saw no more, but we knew
that there were several apologies for men hanging about the rickety
bar inside--or round the parlour fire.  Streams of cold, clay-coloured
water ran in all directions, cutting fresh gutters, and raising a
yeasty froth whenever the water fell a few inches.  As we left, we saw
a big man in an overcoat riding across a culvert; the tails of the
coat spread over the horse's rump, and almost hid it.  In fancy still
we saw him--hanging up his weary, hungry little horse in the rain, and
swaggering into the bar; and we almost heard someone say, in a
drawling tone: "'Ello, Tom!  'Ow are yer poppin' up?"'

The train stopped (for about a year) within a mile of the next
station.  Trucking-yards in the foreground, like any other
trucking-yard along the line; they looked drearier than usual, because
the rain had darkened the posts and rails.  Small plain beyond,
covered with water and tufts of grass.  The inevitable, God-forgotten
"timber," black in the distance; dull, grey sky and misty rain over
all.  A small, dark-looking flock of sheep was crawling slowly in
across the flat from the unknown, with three men on horse-back
zigzagging patiently behind.  The horses just moved--that was all.
One man wore an oilskin, one an old tweed overcoat, and the third had
a three-bushel bag over his head and shoulders.

Had we returned an hour later, we should have seen the sheep huddled
together in a corner of the yard, and the three horses hanging up
outside the local shanty.

We stayed at Nyngan--which place we refrain from sketching--for a few
hours, because the five trucks of cattle of which we were in charge
were shunted there, to be taken on by a very subsequent goods train.
The Government allows one man to every five trucks in a cattle-train.
We shall pay our fare next time, even if we have not a shilling left
over and above.  We had haunted local influence at Comanavadrink for
two long, anxious, heart-breaking weeks ere we got the pass; and we
had put up with all the indignities, the humiliation--in short, had
suffered all that poor devils suffer whilst besieging Local Influence.
We only thought of escaping from the bush.

The pass said that we were John Smith, drover, and that we were
available for return by ordinary passenger-train within two days, we
think--or words in that direction.  Which didn't interest us.  We
might have given the pass away to an unemployed in Orange, who wanted
to go out back, and who begged for it with tears in his eyes; but we
didn't like to injure a poor fool who never injured us--who was an
entire stranger to us.  He didn't know what Out Back meant.

Local Influence had given us a kind of note of introduction to be
delivered to the cattle-agent at the yards that morning; but the
agent was not there--only two of his satellites, a Cockney
colonial-experience man, and a scrub-town clerk, both of whom we
kindly ignore.  We got on without the note, and at Orange we amused
ourself by reading it.  It said:

"Dear Old Man--Please send this beggar on; and I hope he'll be landed
safely at Orange--or--or wherever the cattle go--yours,---"

We had been led to believe that the bullocks were going to Sydney.  We
took no further interest in those cattle.

After Nyngan the bush grew darker and drearier; and the plains more
like ghastly oceans; and here and there the "dominant note of
Australian scenery" was accentuated, as it were, by naked, white,
ring-barked trees standing in the water and haunting the ghostly
surroundings.

We spent that night in a passenger compartment of a van which had been
originally attached to old No. 1 engine.  There was only one damp
cushion in the whole concern.  We lent that to a lady who travelled
for a few hours in the other half of the next compartment.  The seats
were about nine inches wide and sloped in at a sharp angle to the bare
matchboard wall, with a bead on the outer edge; and as the cracks had
become well caulked with the grease and dirt of generations, they held
several gallons of water each.  We scuttled one, rolled ourself in a
rug, and tried to sleep; but all night long overcoated and comfortered
bushmen would get in, let down all the windows, and then get out again
at the next station.  Then we would wake up frozen and shut the
windows.

We dozed off again, and woke at daylight, and recognized the ridgy
gum-country between Dubbo and Orange.  It didn't look any drearier
than the country further west--because it couldn't.  There is scarcely
a part of the country out west which looks less inviting or more
horrible than any other part.

The weather cleared, and we had sunlight for Orange, Bathurst, the
Blue Mountains, and Sydney.  They deserve it; also as much rain as
they need.




"RATS"



"Why, there's two of them, and they're having a fight!  Come on."'

It seemed a strange place for a fight--that hot, lonely, cotton-bush
plain.  And yet not more than half a mile ahead there were apparently
two men struggling together on the track.

The three travellers postponed their smoke-ho and hurried on.  They
were shearers--a little man and a big man, known respectively as
"Sunlight" and "Macquarie," and a tall, thin, young jackeroo whom
they called "Milky."

"I wonder where the other man sprang from?  I didn't see him before,"
said Sunlight.

"He muster bin layin' down in the bushes," said Macquarie.  "They're
goin' at it proper, too.  Come on!  Hurry up and see the fun!"

They hurried on.

"It's a funny-lookin' feller, the other feller," panted Milky.  "He
don't seem to have no head.  Look! he's down--they're both down!  They
must ha' clinched on the ground.  No! they're up an' at it again....
Why, good Lord!  I think the other's a woman!"

"My oath! so it is!" yelled Sunlight.  "Look! the brute's got her
down again!  He's kickin' her.  Come on, chaps; come on, or he'll do
for her!"

They dropped swags, water-bags and all, and raced forward; but
presently Sunlight, who had the best eyes, slackened his pace and
dropped behind.  His mates glanced back at his face, saw a peculiar
expression there, looked ahead again, and then dropped into a walk.

They reached the scene of the trouble, and there stood a little
withered old man by the track, with his arms folded close up under
his chin; he was dressed mostly in calico patches; and half a dozen
corks, suspended on bits of string from the brim of his hat, dangled
before his bleared optics to scare away the flies.  He was scowling
malignantly at a stout, dumpy swag which lay in the middle of the
track.

"Well, old Rats, what's the trouble?" asked Sunlight.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," answered the old man, without looking round.
"I fell out with my swag, that's all.  He knocked me down, but I've
settled him."

"But look here," said Sunlight, winking at his mates, "we saw you
jump on him when he was down.  That ain't fair, you know."

"But you didn't see it all," cried Rats, getting excited.  "He hit
_me_ down first!  And look here, I'll fight him again for nothing,
and you can see fair play."

They talked awhile; then Sunlight proposed to second the swag, while
his mate supported the old man, and after some persuasion, Milky
agreed, for the sake of the lark, to act as time-keeper and referee.

Rats entered into the spirit of the thing; he stripped to the waist,
and while he was getting ready the travellers pretended to bet on the
result.

Macquarie took his place behind the old man, and Sunlight up-ended the
swag.  Rats shaped and danced round; then he rushed, feinted, ducked,
retreated, darted in once more, and suddenly went down like a shot on
the broad of his back.  No actor could have done it better; he went
down from that imaginary blow as if a cannon-ball had struck him in
the forehead.

Milky called time, and the old man came up, looking shaky.  However,
he got in a tremendous blow which knocked the swag into the bushes.

Several rounds followed with varying success.

The men pretended to get more and more excited, and betted freely;
and Rats did his best.  At last they got tired of the fun, Sunlight
let the swag lie after Milky called time, and the jackaroo awarded
the fight to Rats.  They pretended to hand over the stakes, and then
went back for their swags, while the old man put on his shirt.

Then he calmed down, carried his swag to the side of the track, sat
down on it and talked rationally about bush matters for a while; but
presently he grew silent and began to feel his muscles and smile
idiotically.

"Can you len' us a bit o' meat?" said he suddenly.

They spared him half a pound; but he said he didn't want it all, and
cut off about an ounce, which he laid on the end of his swag.  Then he
took the lid off his billy and produced a fishing-line.  He baited
the hook, threw the line across the track, and waited for a bite.
Soon he got deeply interested in the line, jerked it once or twice,
and drew it in rapidly.  The bait had been rubbed off in the grass.
The old man regarded the hook disgustedly.

"Look at that!" he cried.  "I had him, only I was in such a hurry.
I should ha' played him a little more."

Next time he was more careful.  He drew the line in warily, grabbed an
imaginary fish and laid it down on the grass.  Sunlight and Co. were
greatly interested by this time.

"Wot yer think o' that?" asked Rats.  "It weighs thirty pound if it
weighs an ounce!  Wot yer think o' that for a cod? The hook's half-way
down his blessed gullet!"

He caught several cod and a bream while they were there, and invited
them to camp and have tea with him.  But they wished to reach a
certain shed next day, so--after the ancient had borrowed about a pound
of meat for bait--they went on, and left him fishing contentedly.

But first Sunlight went down into his pocket and came up with half a
crown, which he gave to the old man, along with some tucker.  "You'd
best push on to the water before dark, old chap," he said, kindly.

When they turned their heads again, Rats was still fishing but when
they looked back for the last time before entering the timber, he was
having another row with his swag; and Sunlight reckoned that the
trouble arose out of some lies which the swag had been telling about
the bigger fish it caught.




MITCHELL: A CHARACTER SKETCH



It was a very mean station, and Mitchell thought he had better go
himself and beard the overseer for tucker.  His mates were for waiting
till the overseer went out on the run, and then trying their luck with
the cook; but the self-assertive and diplomatic Mitchell decided to
go.

"Good day," said Mitchell.

"Good day," said the manager.

"It's hot," said Mitchell.

"Yes, it's hot."

"I don't suppose," said Mitchell; "I don't suppose it's any use
asking you for a job?"

"Naw."

"Well, I won't ask you," said Mitchell, "but I don't suppose you want
any fencing done?"

"Naw."

"Nor boundary-riding'?"

"Naw."

"You ain't likely to want a man to knock round?"

"Naw."

"I thought not.  Things are pretty bad just now."

"Na--yes--they are."

"Ah, well; there's a lot to be said on the squatter's side as well as
the men's.  I suppose I can get a bit of rations?"

"Ye-yes."  (_Shortly_)--"Wot d'yer want?"

"Well, let's see; we want a bit of meat and flour--I think that's
all.  Got enough tea and sugar to carry us on."

"All right.  Cook! have you got any meat?"

"No!"

To Mitchell: "Can you kill a sheep?"

"Rather!"

To the cook: "Give this man a cloth and knife and steel, and let him
go up to the yard and kill a sheep."  (To Mitchell) "You can take a
fore-quarter and get a bit of flour."

Half an hour later Mitchell came back with the carcass wrapped in the
cloth.

"Here yer are; here's your sheep," he said to the cook.  "That's all
right; hang it in there.  Did you take a forequarter?"'

"No."

"Well, why didn't you?  The boss told you to."

"I didn't want a fore-quarter.  I don't like it.  I took a
hind-quarter."

So he had.

The cook scratched his head; he seemed to have nothing to say.  He
thought about trying to think, perhaps, but gave it best.  It was too
hot and he was out of practice.

"Here, fill these up, will you?" said Mitchell.  "That's the tea-bag,
and that's the sugar-bag, and that's the flour-bag."  He had taken them
from the front of his shirt.

"Don't be frightened to stretch 'em a little, old man.  I've got two
mates to feed."

The cook took the bags mechanically and filled them well before he
knew what he was doing.  Mitchell talked all the time.

"Thank you," said he--"got a bit of baking-powder?"

"Ye-yes, here you are."

"Thank you.  Find it dull here, don't you?"

"Well, yes, pretty dull.  There's a bit of cooked beef and some bread
and cake there, if you want it!"

"Thanks," said Mitchell, sweeping the broken victuals into an old
pillow-slip which he carried on his person for such an emergency.
"I s'pose you find it dull round here."

"Yes, pretty dull."

"No one to talk to much?" "No, not many."

"Tongue gets rusty?"

"Ye--es, sometimes."

"Well, so long, and thank yer."

"So long," said the cook (he nearly added "thank yer").

"Well, good day; I'll see you again."

"Good day."

Mitchell shouldered his spoil and left.

The cook scratched his head; he had a chat with the overseer
afterwards, and they agreed that the traveller was a bit gone.

But Mitchell's head wasn't gone--not much: he had been round a
bit--that was all.




THE BUSH UNDERTAKER



"Five Bob!"

The old man shaded his eyes and peered through the dazzling glow of
that broiling Christmas Day.  He stood just within the door of a
slab-and-bark hut situated upon the bank of a barren creek;
sheep-yards lay to the right, and a low line of bare, brown ridges
formed a suitable background to the scene.

"Five Bob!" shouted he again; and a dusty sheep-dog rose wearily
from the shaded side of the but and looked inquiringly at his master,
who pointed towards some sheep which were straggling from the flock.

"Fetch 'em back," he said confidently.

The dog went off, and his master returned to the interior of the hut.

"We'll yard 'em early," he said to himself; "the super won't know.
We'll yard 'em early, and have the arternoon to ourselves."

"We'll get dinner," he added, glancing at some pots on the fire.
"I cud do a bit of doughboy, an' that theer boggabri'll eat like
tater-marrer along of the salt meat."  He moved one of the black
buckets from the blaze.  "I likes to keep it jist on the sizzle," he
said in explanation to himself; "hard bilin' makes it tough--I'll keep
it jist a-simmerin'."

Here his soliloquy was interrupted by the return of the dog.

"All right, Five Bob," said the hatter, "dinner'll be ready
dreckly.  Jist keep yer eye on the sheep till I calls yer; keep 'em
well rounded up, an' we'll yard 'em afterwards and have a holiday."

This speech was accompanied by a gesture evidently intelligible, for
the dog retired as though he understood English, and the cooking
proceeded.

"I'll take a pick an' shovel with me an' root up that old
blackfellow," mused the shepherd, evidently following up a recent
train of thought; "I reckon it'll do now.  I'll put in the spuds."

The last sentence referred to the cooking, the first to a
blackfellow's grave about which he was curious.

"The sheep's a-campin'," said the soliloquizer, glancing through the
door.  "So me an' Five Bob'll be able to get our dinner in peace.  I
wish I had just enough fat to make the pan siss; I'd treat myself to a
leather-jacket; but it took three weeks' skimmin' to get enough for
them theer doughboys."

In due time the dinner was dished up; and the old man seated himself
on a block, with the lid of a gin-case across his knees for a table.
Five Bob squatted opposite with the liveliest interest and
appreciation depicted on his intelligent countenance.

Dinner proceeded very quietly, except when the carver paused to ask
the dog how some tasty morsel went with him, and Five Bob's tail
declared that it went very well indeed.

"Here y'are, try this," cried the old man, tossing him a large piece
of doughboy.  A click of Five Bob's jaws and the dough was gone.

"Clean into his liver!" said the old man with a faint smile.  He
washed up the tinware in the water the duff had been boiled in, and
then, with the assistance of the dog, yarded the sheep.

This accomplished, he took a pick and shovel and an old sack, and
started out over the ridge, followed, of course, by his four-legged
mate.  After tramping some three miles he reached a spur, running out
from the main ridge.  At the extreme end of this, under some
gum-trees, was a little mound of earth, barely defined in the grass,
and indented in the centre as all blackfellows' graves were.

He set to work to dig it up, and sure enough, in about half an hour he
bottomed on payable dirt.

When he had raked up all the bones, he amused himself by putting them
together on the grass and by speculating as to whether they had
belonged to black or white, male or female.  Failing, however, to
arrive at any satisfactory conclusion, he dusted them with great care,
put them in the bag, and started for home.

He took a short cut this time over the ridge and down a gully which
was full of ring-barked trees and long white grass.  He had nearly
reached its mouth when a great greasy black goanna clambered up a
sapling from under his feet and looked fightable.

"Dang the jumpt-up thing!" cried the old man.  "It 'gin me a
start!"

At the foot of the sapling he espied an object which he at first
thought was the blackened carcass of a sheep, but on closer
examination discovered to be the body of a man; it lay with its
forehead resting on its hands, dried to a mummy by the intense heat
of the western summer.

"Me luck's in for the day and no mistake!" said the shepherd,
scratching the back of his head, while he took stock of the remains.
He picked up a stick and tapped the body on the shoulder; the flesh
sounded like leather.  He turned it over on its side; it fell flat on
its back like a board, and the shrivelled eyes seemed to peer up at
him from under the blackened wrists.

He stepped back involuntarily, but, recovering himself, leant on his
stick and took in all the ghastly details.

There was nothing in the blackened features to tell aught of name or
race, but the dress proclaimed the remains to be those of a European.
The old man caught sight of a black bottle in the grass, close beside
the corpse.  This set him thinking.  Presently he knelt down and
examined the soles of the dead man's blucher boots, and then, rising
with an air of conviction, exclaimed: "Brummy! by gosh!--busted up at
last!

"I tole yer so, Brummy," he said impressively, addressing the
corpse.  "I allers told yer as how it 'ud be--an' here y'are, you
thundering jumpt-up cuss-o'-God fool.  Yer cud earn more'n any man in
the colony, but yer'd lush it all away.  I allers sed as how it 'ud
end, an' now yer kin see fur y'self.

"I spect yer was a-comin' t' me t' get fixt up an' set straight agin;
then yer was a-goin' to swear off, same as yer 'allers did; an' here
y'are, an' now I expect I'll have t' fix yer up for the last time an'
make yer decent, for 'twon't do t' leave yer alyin' out here like a
dead sheep."

He picked up the corked bottle and examined it.  To his great surprise
it was nearly full of rum.

"Well, this gits me," exclaimed the old man; "me luck's in, this
Christmas, an' no mistake.  He must 'a' got the jams early in his
spree, or he wouldn't be a-making for me with near a bottleful left.
Howsomenever, here goes."

Looking round, his eyes lit up with satisfaction as he saw some bits
of bark which had been left by a party of strippers who had been
getting bark there for the stations.  He picked up two pieces, one
about four and the other six feet long, and each about two feet wide,
and brought them over to the body.  He laid the longest strip by the
side of the corpse, which he proceeded to lift on to it.

"Come on, Brummy," he said, in a softer tone than usual, "ye ain't
as bad as yer might be, considerin' as it must be three good months
since yer slipped yer wind.  I spect it was the rum as preserved yer.
It was the death of yer when yer was alive, an' now yer dead, it
preserves yer like--like a mummy."

Then he placed the other strip on top, with the hollow side
downwards--thus sandwiching the defunct between the two
pieces--removed the saddle-strap, which he wore for a belt, and
buckled it round one end, while he tried to think of something with
which to tie up the other.

"I can't take any more strips off my shirt," he said, critically
examining the skirts of the old blue overshirt he wore.  "I might get
a strip or two more off, but it's short enough already.  Let's see;
how long have I been a-wearin' of that shirt; oh, I remember, I bought
it jist two days afore Five Bob was pupped.  I can't afford a new
shirt jist yet; howsomenever, seein' it's Brummy, I'll jist borrow a
couple more strips and sew 'em on agen when I git home."

He up-ended Brummy, and placing his shoulder against the middle of the
lower sheet of bark, lifted the corpse to a horizontal position;
then, taking the bag of bones in his hand, he started for home.

"I ain't a-spendin' sech a dull Christmas arter all," he reflected,
as he plodded on; but he had not walked above a hundred yards when he
saw a black goanna sidling into the grass.

"That's another of them theer dang things!" he exclaimed.  "That's two
I've seed this mornin'."

Presently he remarked: "Yer don't smell none too sweet, Brummy.
It must 'a' been jist about the middle of shearin' when yer pegged out.
I wonder who got yer last cheque.  Shoo! theer's another black
goanner--theer must be a flock of 'em."

He rested Brummy on the ground while he had another pull at the
bottle, and, before going on, packed the bag of bones on his shoulder
under the body, and he soon stopped again.

"The thunderin' jumpt-up bones is all skew-whift," he said.  "'Ole
on, Brummy, an' I'll fix 'em"--and he leaned the dead man against a
tree while he settled the bones on his shoulder, and took another pull
at the bottle.

About a mile further on he heard a rustling in the grass to the right,
and, looking round, saw another goanna gliding off sideways, with its
long snaky neck turned towards him.

This puzzled the shepherd considerably, the strangest part of it being
that Five Bob wouldn't touch the reptile, but slunk off with his tail
down when ordered to "sick 'em."

"Theer's sothin' comic about them theer goanners," said the old man
at last.  "I've seed swarms of grasshoppers an' big mobs of
kangaroos, but dang me if ever I seed a flock of black goanners
afore!"

On reaching the hut the old man dumped the corpse against the wall,
wrong end up, and stood scratching his head while he endeavoured to
collect his muddled thoughts; but he had not placed Brummy at the
correct angle, and, consequently, that individual fell forward and
struck him a violent blow on the shoulder with the iron toes of his
blucher boots.

The shock sobered him.  He sprang a good yard, instinctively hitching
up his moleskins in preparation for flight; but a backward glance
revealed to him the true cause of this supposed attack from the rear.
Then he lifted the body, stood it on its feet against the chimney, and
ruminated as to where he should lodge his mate for the night, not
noticing that the shorter sheet of bark had slipped down on the boots
and left the face exposed.

"I spect I'll have ter put yer into the chimney-trough for the
night, Brummy," said he, turning round to confront the corpse.  "Yer
can't expect me to take yer into the hut, though I did it when yer was
in a worse state than--Lord!"

The shepherd was not prepared for the awful scrutiny that gleamed on
him from those empty sockets; his nerves received a shock, and it
was some time before he recovered himself sufficiently to speak.

"Now, look a-here, Brummy," said he, shaking his finger severely at
the delinquent, "I don't want to pick a row with yer; I'd do as much
for yer an' more than any other man, an' well yer knows it; but if yer
starts playin' any of yer jumpt-up pranktical jokes on me, and
a-scarin' of me after a-humpin' of yer 'ome, by the 'oly frost I'll
kick yer to jim-rags, so I will."

This admonition delivered, he hoisted Brummy into the chimney-trough,
and with a last glance towards the sheep-yards, he retired to his bunk
to have, as he said, a snooze.

He had more than a snooze, however, for when he woke, it was dark, and
the bushman's instinct told him it must be nearly nine o'clock.

He lit a slush-lamp and poured the remainder of the rum into a
pannikin; but, just as he was about to lift the draught to his lips,
he heard a peculiar rustling sound overhead, and put the pot down on
the table with a slam that spilled some of the precious liquor.

Five Bob whimpered, and the old shepherd, though used to the weird and
dismal, as one living alone in the bush must necessarily be, felt the
icy breath of fear at his heart.

He reached hastily for his old shot-gun, and went out to investigate.
He walked round the but several times and examined the roof on all
sides, but saw nothing.  Brummy appeared to be in the same position.

At last, persuading himself that the noise was caused by possums or
the wind, the old man went inside, boiled his billy, and, after
composing his nerves somewhat with a light supper and a meditative
smoke, retired for the night.  He was aroused several times before
midnight by the same mysterious sound overhead, but, though he rose
and examined the roof on each occasion by the light of the rising
moon, he discovered nothing.

At last he determined to sit up and watch until daybreak, and for this
purpose took up a position on a log a short distance from the hut,
with his gun laid in readiness across his knee.

After watching for about an hour, he saw a black object coming over
the ridge-pole.  He grabbed his gun and fired.  The thing disappeared.
He ran round to the other side of the hut, and there was a great black
goanna in violent convulsions on the ground.

Then the old man saw it all.  "The thunderin' jumpt-up thing has been
a-havin' o' me," he exclaimed.  "The same cuss-o'-God wretch has
a-follered me 'ome, an' has been a-havin' its Christmas dinner off of
Brummy, an' a-hauntin' o' me into the bargain, the jumpt-up tinker!"

As there was no one by whom he could send a message to the station,
and the old man dared not leave the sheep and go himself, he
determined to bury the body the next afternoon, reflecting that
the authorities could disinter it for inquest if they pleased.

So he brought the sheep home early and made arrangements for the
burial by measuring the outer casing of Brummy and digging a hole
according to those dimensions.

"That 'minds me," he said.  "I never rightly knowed Brummy's
religion, blest if ever I did.  Howsomenever, there's one thing
sartin--none o' them theer pianer-fingered parsons is a-goin' ter
take the trouble ter travel out inter this God-forgotten part to hold
sarvice over him, seein' as how his last cheque's blued.  But, as
I've got the fun'ral arrangements all in me own hands, I'll do jestice
to it, and see that Brummy has a good comfortable buryin'--and more's
unpossible."

"It's time yer turned in, Brum," he said, lifting the body down.

He carried it to the grave and dropped it into one corner like a post.
He arranged the bark so as to cover the face, and, by means of a
piece of clothes-line, lowered the body to a horizontal position.
Then he threw in an armful of gum-leaves, and then, very reluctantly,
took the shovel and dropped in a few shovelfuls of earth.

"An' this is the last of Brummy," he said, leaning on his spade and
looking away over the tops of the ragged gums on the distant range.

This reflection seemed to engender a flood of memories, in which the
old man became absorbed.  He leaned heavily upon his spade and
thought.

"Arter all," he murmured sadly, "arter all--it were Brummy.

"Brummy," he said at last.  "It's all over now; nothin' matters
now--nothin' didn't ever matter, nor--nor don't.  You uster say as how
it 'ud be all right termorrer" (pause); "termorrer's come,
Brummy--come fur you--it ain't come fur me yet, but--it's a-comin'."

He threw in some more earth.

"Yer don't remember, Brummy, an' mebbe yer don't want to remember--
_I_ don't want to remember--but--well, but, yer see that's where
yer got the pull on me."

He shovelled in some more earth and paused again.

The dog rose, with ears erect, and looked anxiously first at his
master and then into the grave.

"Theer oughter be somethin' sed," muttered the old man; "'tain't
right to put 'im under like a dog.  Theer oughter be some sort o'
sarmin."  He sighed heavily in the listening silence that followed
this remark and proceeded with his work.  He filled the grave to the
brim this time, and fashioned the mound carefully with his spade.
Once or twice he muttered the words, "I am the rassaraction."  As he
laid the tools quietly aside, and stood at the head of the grave, he
was evidently trying to remember the something that ought to be said.
He removed his hat, placed it carefully on the grass, held his hands
out from his sides and a little to the front, drew a long deep breath,
and said with a solemnity that greatly disturbed Five Bob: "Hashes
ter hashes, dus ter dus, Brummy--an'--an' in hopes of a great an'
gerlorious rassaraction!"

He sat down on a log near by, rested his elbows on his knees and
passed his hand wearily over his forehead--but only as one who was
tired and felt the heat; and presently he rose, took up the tools,
and walked back to the hut.

And the sun sank again on the grand Australian bush--the nurse and
tutor of eccentric minds, the home of the weird.




OUR PIPES



The moon rose away out on the edge of a smoky plain, seen through a
sort of tunnel or arch in the fringe of mulga behind which we were
camped--Jack Mitchell and I.  The timber proper was just behind us,
very thick and very dark.  The moon looked like a big new copper
boiler set on edge on the horizon of the plain, with the top turned
towards us and a lot of old rags and straw burning inside.

We had tramped twenty-five miles on a dry stretch on a hot
day--swagmen know what that means.  We reached the water about two
hours "after dark "--swagmen know what that means.  We didn't sit
down at once and rest--we hadn't rested for the last ten miles.  We
knew that if we sat down we wouldn't want to get up again in a hurry--
that, if we did, our leg-sinews, especially those of our calves, would
"draw" like red-hot wire's.  You see, we hadn't been long on the
track this time--it was only our third day out.  Swagmen will
understand.

We got the billy boiled first, and some leaves laid down for our beds
and the swags rolled out.  We thanked the Lord that we had some cooked
meat and a few johnny-cakes left, for we didn't feel equal to cooking.
We put the billy of tea and our tucker-bags between the heads of our
beds, and the pipes and tobacco in the crown of an old hat, where we
could reach them without having to get up.  Then we lay down on our
stomachs and had a feed.  We didn't eat much--we were too tired for
that--but we drank a lot of tea.  We gave our calves time to tone down
a bit; then we lit up and began to answer each other.  It got to be
pretty comfortable, so long as we kept those unfortunate legs of ours
straight and didn't move round much.

We cursed society because we weren't rich men, and then we felt
better and conversation drifted lazily round various subjects and
ended in that of smoking.

"How came to start smoking?" said Mitchell.  "Let's see."  He
reflected.  "I started smoking first when I was about fourteen or
fifteen.  I smoked some sort of weed--I forget the name of it--but it
wasn't tobacco; and then I smoked cigarettes--not the ones we get now,
for those cost a penny each.  Then I reckoned that, if I could smoke
those, I could smoke a pipe."

He reflected.

"We lived in Sydney then--Surry Hills.  Those were different times;
the place was nearly all sand.  The old folks were alive then, and we
were all at home, except Tom."

He reflected.

"Ah, well!...Well, one evening I was playing marbles out in front of
our house when a chap we knew gave me his pipe to mind while he went
into a church-meeting.  The little church was opposite--a 'chapel' they
called it."

He reflected.

"The pipe was alight.  It was a clay pipe and niggerhead tobacco.
Mother was at work out in the kitchen at the back, washing up the
tea-things, and, when I went in, she said: 'You've been smoking!'

"Well, I couldn't deny it--I was too sick to do so, or care much,
anyway.

"'Give me that pipe!' she said.

"I said I hadn't got it.

"'_Give--me--that--pipe_!' she said.

"I said I hadn't got it.

"'Where is it?' she said.

"'Jim Brown's got it,' I said, 'it's his.'

"'Then I'll give it to Jim Brown,' she said; and she did; though it
wasn't Jim's fault, for he only gave it to me to mind.  I didn't smoke
the pipe so much because I wanted to smoke a pipe just then, as
because I had such a great admiration for Jim."

Mitchell reflected, and took a look at the moon.  It had risen clear
and had got small and cold and pure-looking, and had floated away back
out amongst the stars.

"I felt better towards morning, but it didn't cure me--being sick and
nearly dead all night, I mean.  I got a clay pipe and tobacco, and the
old lady found it and put it in the stove.  Then I got another pipe
and tobacco, and she laid for it, and found it out at last; but she
didn't put the tobacco in the stove this time--she'd got experience.
I don't know what she did with it.  I tried to find it, but couldn't.
I fancy the old man got hold of it, for I saw him with a plug that
looked very much like mine."

He reflected.

"But I wouldn't be done.  I got a cherry pipe.  I thought it wouldn't
be so easy to break if she found it.  I used to plant the bowl in one
place and the stem in another because I reckoned that if she found one
she mightn't find the other.  It doesn't look much of an idea now, but
it seemed like an inspiration then.  Kids get rum ideas."

He reflected.

"Well, one day I was having a smoke out at the back, when I heard her
coming, and I pulled out the stem in a hurry and put the bowl behind
the water-butt and the stem under the house.  Mother was coming round
for a dipper of water.  I got out of her way quick, for I hadn't time
to look innocent; but the bowl of the pipe was hot and she got a whiff
of it.  She went sniffing round, first on one side of the cask and
then on the other, until she got on the scent and followed it up and
found the bowl.  Then I had only the stem left.  She looked for that,
but she couldn't scent it.  But I couldn't get much comfort out of
that.  Have you got the matches?

"Then I gave it best for a time and smoked cigars.  They were the
safest and most satisfactory under the circumstances, but they cost me
two shillings a week, and I couldn't stand it, so I started a pipe
again and then mother gave in at last.  God bless her, and God forgive
me, and us all--we deserve it.  She's been at rest these seventeen
long years."

Mitchell reflected.

"And what did your old man do when he found out that you were
smoking?" I asked.

"The old man?"

He reflected.

"Well, he seemed to brighten up at first.  You see, he was sort of
pensioned off by mother and she kept him pretty well inside his
income....Well, he seemed to sort of brighten up--liven up--when he
found out that I was smoking."

"Did he?  So did my old man, and he livened me up, too.  But what did
your old man do--what did he say?"

"Well," said Mitchell, very slowly, "about the first thing he did
was to ask me for a fill."

He reflected.

"Ah!  many a solemn, thoughtful old smoke we had together on the
quiet--the old man and me."

He reflected.

"Is your old man dead, Mitchell?" I asked softly.  "Long ago--these
twelve years," said Mitchell.




COMING ACROSS



We were delayed for an hour or so inside Sydney Heads, taking
passengers from the _Oroya_, which had just arrived from England
and anchored off Watson's Bay.  An Adelaide boat went alongside the
ocean liner, while we dropped anchor at a respectable distance.  This
puzzled some of us until one of the passengers stopped an ancient
mariner and inquired.  The sailor jerked his thumb upwards, and left.
The passengers stared aloft till some of them got the lockjaw in the
back of their necks, and then another sailor suggested that we had
yards to our masts, while the Adelaide boat had not.

It seemed a pity that the new chums for New Zealand didn't have a
chance to see Sydney after coming so far and getting so near.  It
struck them that way too.  They saw Melbourne, which seemed another
injustice to the old city.  However, nothing matters much nowadays,
and they might see Sydney in happier times.

They looked like new chums, especially the "furst clarsters," and
there were two or three Scotsmen among them who looked like Scots, and
talked like it too; also an Irishman.  Great Britain and Ireland do
not seem to be learning anything fresh about Australia.  We had a yarn
with one of these new arrivals, and got talking about the banks.  It
turned out that he was a radical.  He spat over the side and said:

"It's a something shame the way things is carried on!  Now, look
here, a banker can rob hundreds of wimmin and children an' widders and
orfuns, and nothin' is done to him; but if a poor man only embezzles a
shilling _he gets transported to the colonies for life_."  The
italics are ours, but the words were his.

We explained to this new chum that transportation was done away with
long ago, as far as Australia was concerned, that no more convicts
were sent out here--only men who ought to be; and he seemed surprised.
He did not call us a liar, but he looked as if he thought that we were
prevaricating.  We were glad that he didn't say so, for he was a
bigger man.  New chums are generally more robust than Australians.

When we got through the Heads someone pointed to the wrong part of the
cliff and said:

"That's where the _Dunbar_ was wrecked."

Shortly afterwards another man pointed to another wrong part of the
cliffs and observed incidentally:

"That's where the _Dunbar_ was wrecked."

Pretty soon a third man came along and pointed to a third wrong part
of the cliff, and remarked casually:

"That's where the _Dunbar_ was wrecked."

We moved aft and met the fourth mate, who jerked his thumb over his
shoulder at the cliffs in general, and muttered condescendingly:

"That's where the _Dunbar_ was wrecked."

It was not long before a woman turned round and asked "Was that the
place where the Dunbar was wrecked, please?"

We said "Yes," and she said "Lor," and beckoned to a friend.

We went for'ard and met an old sailor, who glared at us, jerked his
thumb at the coast and growled:

"That's where the _Dunbar_ went down."

Then we went below; but we felt a slight relief when he said "went
down" instead of "was wrecked."

It is doubtful whether a passenger boat ever cleared Sydney Heads
since the wild night of that famous wreck without someone pointing to
the wrong part of the cliffs, and remarking:

"That's where the _Dunbar_ was wrecked."

The _Dunbar_ fiend is inseparable from Australian coasting steamers.


We travelled second-class in the interests of journalism.  You get
more points for copy in the steerage.  It was a sacrifice; but we
hope to profit by it some day.

There were about fifty male passengers, including half a dozen New
Zealand shearers, two of whom came on board drunk--their remarks for
the first night mainly consisted of "gory." "Gory" is part of the
Australian language now--a big part.

The others were chiefly tradesmen, labourers, clerks and bagmen,
driven out of Australia by the hard times there, and glad, no doubt,
to get away.  There was a jeweller on board, of course, and his name
was Moses or Cohen.  If it wasn't it should have been--or Isaacs.  His
christian name was probably Benjamin.  We called him Jacobs.  He
passed away most of his time on board in swopping watch lies with the
other passengers and good-naturedly spoiling their Waterburys.

One commercial traveller shipped with a flower in his buttonhole.  His
girl gave it to him on the wharf, and told him to keep it till it
faded, and then press it.  She was a barmaid.  She thought he was
"going saloon," but he came forward as soon as the wharf was out of
sight.  He gave the flower to the stewardess, and told us about these
things one moonlight night during the voyage.

There was another--a well-known Sydney man--whose friends thought he
was going saloon, and turned up in good force to see him off.  He
spent his last shilling "shouting," and kept up his end of the
pathetic little farce out of consideration for the feelings of certain
proud female relatives, and not because he was "proud"--at least in
that way.  He stood on a conspicuous part of the saloon deck and waved
his white handkerchief until Miller's Point came between.  Then he
came forward where he belonged.  But he was proud--bitterly so.  He
had a flower too, but he did not give it to the stewardess.  He had it
pressed, we think (for we knew him), and perhaps he wears it now over
the place where his heart used to be.

When Australia was fading from view we shed a tear, which was all we
had to shed; at least, we tried to shed a tear, and could not.  It is
best to be exact when you are writing from experience.

Just as Australia was fading from view, someone looked through a
glass, and said in a sad, tired kind of voice that he could just see
the place where the _Dunbar_ was wrecked.

Several passengers were leaning about and saying "Europe!
E-u-rope!"  in agonized tones.  None of them were going to Europe,
and the new chums said nothing about it.  This reminds us that some
people say "Asia! Asia! Ak-kak-Asia!" when somebody spills the
pepper.  There was a pepper-box without a stopper on the table in our
cabin.  The fact soon attracted attention.

A new chum came along and asked us whether the Maoris were very bad
round Sydney.  He'd heard that they were.  We told him that we had
never had any trouble with them to speak of, and gave him another
show.

"Did you ever hear of the wreck of the _Dunbar_?" we asked.  He
said that he never "heerd tell" of it, but he had heerd of the wreck
of the _Victoria_.

We gave him best.

The first evening passed off quietly, except for the vinously-excited
shearers.  They had sworn eternal friendship with a convivial dude
from the saloon, and he made a fine specimen fool of himself for an
hour or so.  He never showed his nose for'ard again.

Now and then a passenger would solemnly seek the steward and have a
beer.  The steward drew it out of a small keg which lay on its side on
a shelf with a wooden tap sticking out of the end of it--out of the
end of the keg, we mean.  The beer tasted like warm but weak vinegar,
and cost sixpence per small glass.  The bagman told the steward that
he could not compliment him on the quality of his liquor, but the
steward said nothing.  He did not even seem interested--only bored.
He had heard the same remark often before, no doubt.  He was a fat,
solemn steward--not formal, but very reticent--unresponsive.  He
looked like a man who had conducted a religious conservative paper
once and failed, and had then gone into the wholesale produce line,
and failed again, and finally got his present billet through the
influence of his creditors and two clergymen.  He might have been a
sociable fellow, a man about town, even a gay young dog, and a radical
writer before he was driven to accept the editorship of the aforesaid
periodical.  He probably came of a "good English family."  He was
now, very likely, either a rigid Presbyterian or an extreme
freethinker.  He thought a lot, anyway, and looked as if he knew a lot
too--too much for words, in fact.

We took a turn on deck before turning in, and heard two men arguing
about the way in which the _Dunbar_ was wrecked.

The commercial travellers, the jeweller, and one or two new chums who
were well provided with clothing undressed deliberately and retired
ostentatiously in pyjamas, but there were others--men of better
days--who turned in either very early or very late, when the cabin was
quiet, and slipped hurriedly and furtively out of their clothes and
between the blankets, as if they were ashamed of the poverty of their
underwear.  It is well that the Lord can see deep down into the hearts
of men, for He has to judge them; it is well that the majority of
mankind cannot, because, if they could, the world would be altogether
too sorrowful to live in; and we do not think the angels can either,
else they would not be happy--if they could and were they would not be
angels any longer--they would be devils.  Study it out on a slate.

We turned in feeling comfortably dismal, and almost wishing that we
had gone down with the _Dunbar_.

The intoxicated shearers and the dude kept their concert up till a
late hour that night--or, rather, a very early hour next morning;
and at about midnight they were reinforced by the commercial
traveller and Moses, the jeweller, who had been visiting acquaintances
aft.  This push was encouraged by voices from various bunks, and
enthusiastically barracked for by a sandy-complexioned, red-headed
comedian with twinkling grey eyes, who occupied the berth immediately
above our own.

They stood with their backs to the bunks, and their feet braced
against the deck, or lurched round, and took friendly pulls from
whisky flasks, and chyacked each other, and laughed, and blowed, and
lied like--like Australian bushmen; and occasionally they broke out
into snatches of song--and as often broke down.  Few Englishmen know
more than the first verse, or two lines, of even their most popular
song, and, where elevated enough to think they can sing, they repeat
the first verse over and over again, with the wrong words, and with a
sort of "Ta-ra-ra-rum-ti-tooral, ta-ra-ra-ra-ra-rum-ti, ta-ra-ra-rum-
tum-ti-rum-rum-tum-ti-dee-e-e," by way of variation.

Presently--suddenly, it seemed to our drowsy senses--two of the
shearers and the bagman commenced arguing with drunken gravity and
precision about politics, even while a third bushman was approaching
the climax of an out-back yarn of many adjectives, of which he himself
was the hero.  The scraps of conversation that we caught were somewhat
as follow.  We leave out most of the adjectives.

First Voice: "Now, look here.  The women will vote for men, not
principles.  That's why I'm against women voting.  Now, just mark
my---"

Third Voice (trying to finish yarn): "Hold on.  Just wait till I
tell yer.  Well, this bloomin' bloke, he says---"

Second Voice (evidently in reply to first): "Principles you mean,
not men.  You're getting a bit mixed, old man."  (Smothered chuckle
from comedian over our head.)

Third Voice (seeming to drift round in search of sympathy): "'You
will!' sez I.  'Yes, I will,' he sez.  'Oh, you will, will yer?' I
sez; and with that I---"

Second Voice (apparently wandering from both subjects) "Blanker has
always stuck up for the workin' man, an' he'll get in, you'll see.
Why, he's a bloomin' workin' man himself.  Me and Blanker---"

Disgusted voice from a bunk: "Oh, that's damn rot!  We've had enough
of lumpers in parliament!  Horny hands are all right enough, but we
don't want any more blanky horny heads!"

Third Voice (threateningly): "Who's talkin' about 'orny heads?  That
pitch is meant for us, ain't it?  Do you mean to say that I've got a
'orny head?"

Here two men commenced snarling at each other, and there was some talk
of punching the causes of the dispute; but the bagman interfered, a
fresh flask was passed round, and some more eternal friendship sworn
to.

We dozed off again, and the next time we were aware of anything the
commercial and Moses had disappeared, the rest were lying or sitting
in their bunks, and the third shearer was telling a yarn about an
alleged fight he had at a shed up-country; and perhaps he was telling
it for the benefit of the dissatisfied individual who made the
injudicious remark concerning horny heads.

"So I said to the boss-over-the-board, 'you're a nice sort of a
thing,' I sez.  'Who are you talkin' to?' he says.  'You, bless
yer,' I says.  'Now, look here,' he says, 'you get your cheque and
clear! 'All right,' I says, 'you can take that!' and I hauled off
and landed him a beauty under the butt of the listener.  Then the
boss came along with two blacklegs, but the boys made a ring, and I
laid out the blanks in just five minutes.  Then I sez to the boss,
'That's the sort of cove I am,' I sez, 'an' now, if you---"

But just here there came a deep, growling voice--seemingly from out of
the depths of the forehold--anyway, there came a voice, and it said:

"For the Lord's sake give her a rest!"

The steward turned off the electricity, but there were two lanterns
dimly burning in our part of the steerage.  It was a narrow
compartment running across the width of the boat, and had evidently
been partitioned off from the top floor of the hold to meet the
emigration from Australia to New Zealand.  There were three tiers of
bunks, two deep, on the far side, three rows of single bunks on the
other, and two at each end of the cabin, the top ones just under the
portholes.

The shearers had turned in "all standing;" two of them were lying
feet to feet in a couple of outside lower berths.  One lay on his
stomach with his face turned outwards, his arm thrown over the side of
the bunk, and his knuckles resting on the deck, the other rested on
the broad of his back with his arm also hanging over the side and his
knuckles resting on the floor.  And so they slept the sleep of the
drunk.

A fair, girl-faced young Swiss emigrant occupied one of the top
berths, with his curly, flaxen head resting close alongside one of the
lanterns that were dimly burning, and an Anglo-foreign dictionary in
his hand.  His mate, or brother, who resembled him in everything
except that he had dark hair, lay asleep alongside; and in the next
berth a long consumptive-looking new chum sat in his pyjamas, with his
legs hanging over the edge, and his hands grasping the sideboard, to
which, on his right hand, a sort of tin-can arrangement was hooked.
He was staring intently at nothing, and seemed to be thinking very
hard.

We dozed off again, and woke suddenly to find our eyes wide open, and
the young Swiss still studying, and the jackaroo still sitting in the
same position, but with a kind of waiting expression on his face--a
sort of expectant light in his eyes.  Suddenly he lurched for the can,
and after awhile he lay back looking like a corpse.

We slept again, and finally awoke to daylight and the clatter of
plates.  All the bunks were vacated except two, which contained
corpses, apparently.


Wet decks, and a round, stiff, morning breeze, blowing strongly
across the deck, abeam, and gustily through the open portholes.
There was a dull grey sky, and the sea at first sight seemed to be of
a dark blue or green, but on closer inspection it took a dirty slate
colour, with splashes as of indigo in the hollows.  There was one of
those near, yet far-away horizons.

About two-thirds of the men were on deck, but the women had not shown
up yet--nor did they show up until towards the end of the trip.

Some of the men were smoking in a sheltered corner, some walking up
and down, two or three trying to play quoits, one looking at the
poultry, one standing abaft the purser's cabin with hands in the
pockets of his long ragged overcoat, watching the engines, and two
more--carpenters--were discussing a big cedar log, about five feet in
diameter, which was lashed on deck alongside the hatch.

While we were waiting for the _Oroya_ some of the ship's officers
came and had a consultation over this log and called up part of the
crew, who got some more ropes and a chain on to it.  It struck us at
the time that that log would make a sensation if it fetched loose in
rough weather.  But there wasn't any rough weather.

The fore-cabin was kept clean; the assistant steward was good-humoured
and obliging; his chief was civil enough to freeze the Never-Never
country; but the bill of fare was monotonous.

During the afternoon a first-salooner made himself obnoxious by
swelling round for'ard.  He was a big bull-necked "Britisher" (that
word covers it) with a bloated face, prominent gooseberry eyes, fore
'n' aft cap, and long tan shoes.  He seemed as if he'd come to see a
"zoo," and was dissatisfied with it--had a fine contempt for it, in
fact, because it did not come up to other zoological gardens that he
had seen in London, and on the _aw_--continong and in the--_aw_-er--
_aw_--the States, dontcherknow.  The fellows reckoned that he ought to
be "took down a peg" (dontcherknow) and the sandy-complexioned comedian
said he'd do it.  So he stepped softly up to the swell, tapped him
lightly on the shoulder, and pointed aft--holding his arm out like a
pump handle and his forefinger rigid.

The Britisher's face was a study; it was blank at first and then it
went all colours, and wore, in succession, every possible expression
except a pleasant one.  He seemed bursting with indignation, but he
did not speak--could not, perhaps; and, as soon as he could det