ts and the
maintenance of tax receipts at a sufficiently high level. The fundamental
fact which at present dominates the Government's financial situation is
that seven and a half billions of its war indebtedness mature within the
next two and a half years. Of this amount, two and a half billions are
floating debt and five billions, Victory Notes and War. Savings
Certificates. The fiscal program of the Government must be determined with
reference to these maturities. Sound policy demands that Government
expenditures be reduced to the lowest amount which will permit the various
services to operate efficiently and that Government receipts from taxes and
salvage be maintained sufficiently high to provide for current
requirements, including interest and sinking fund charges on the public
debt, and at the same time retire the floating debt and part of the Victory
Loan before maturity.

With rigid economy, vigorous salvage operations, and adequate revenues from
taxation, a surplus of current receipts over current expenditures can be
realized and should be applied to the floating debt. All branches of the
Government should cooperate to see that this program is realized. I cannot
overemphasize the necessity of economy in Government appropriations and
expenditures and the avoidance by the Congress of practices which take
money from the Treasury by indefinite or revolving fund appropriations. The
estimates for the present year show that over a billion dollars of
expenditures were authorized by the last Congress in addition to the
amounts shown in the usual compiled statements of appropriations. This
strikingly illustrates the importance of making direct and specific
appropriations. The relation between the current receipts and current
expenditures of the Government during the present fiscal year, as well as
during the last half of the last fiscal year, has been disturbed by the
extraordinary burdens thrown upon the Treasury by the Transportation Act,
in connection with the return of the railroads to private control. Over
$600,000,000 has already been paid to the railroads under this
act-$350,000,000 during the present fiscal year; and it is estimated that
further payments aggregating possibly $650,000,000 must still be made to
the railroads during the current year. It is obvious that these large
payments have already seriously limited the Government's progress in
retiring the floating debt.

Closely connected with this, it seems to me, is the necessity for an
immediate consideration of the revision of our tax laws. Simplification of
the income and profits taxes has become an immediate necessity. These taxes
performed an indispensable service during the war. The need for their
simplification, however, is very great, in order to save the taxpayer
inconvenience and expense and in order to make his liability more certain
and definite. Other and more detailed recommendations with regard to taxes
will no doubt be laid before you by the Secretary of the Treasury and the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue.

It is my privilege to draw to the attention of Congress for very
sympathetic consideration the problem of providing adequate facilities for
the care and treatment of former members of the military and naval forces
who are sick and disabled as the result of their participation in the war.
These heroic men can never be paid in money for the service they
patriotically rendered the nation. Their reward will lie rather in
realization of the fact that they vindicated the rights of their country
and aided in safeguarding civilization. The nation's gratitude must be
effectively revealed to them by the most ample provision for their medical
care and treatment as well as for their vocational training and placement.
The time has come when a more complete program can be formulated and more
satisfactorily administered for their treatment and training, and I
earnestly urge that the Congress give the matter its early consideration.
The Secretary of the Treasury and the Board for Vocational Education will
outline in their annual reports proposals covering medical care and
rehabilitation which I am sure will engage your earnest study and commend
your most generous support.

Permit me to emphasize once more the need for action upon certain matters
upon which I dwelt at some length in my message to the second session of
the Sixty-sixth Congress. The necessity, for example, of encouraging the
manufacture of dyestuffs and related chemicals; the importance of doing
everything possible to promote agricultural production along economic
lines, to improve agricultural marketing, and to make rural life more
attractive and healthful; the need for a law regulating cold storage in
such a way as to limit the time during which goods may be kept in storage,
prescribing the method of disposing of them if kept beyond the permitted
period, and requiring goods released from storage in all cases to bear the
date of their receipt. It would also be most serviceable if it were
provided that all goods released from cold storage for interstate shipment
should have plainly marked upon each package the selling or market price at
which they went into storage, in order that the purchaser might be able to
learn what profits stood between him and the producer or the wholesale
dealer. Indeed, It would be very serviceable to the public if all goods
destined for interstate commerce were made to carry upon every packing case
whose form made it possible a plain statement of the price at which they
left the hands of the producer. I respectfully call your attention also to
the recommendations of the message referred to with regard to a federal
license for all corporations engaged in interstate commerce.

In brief, the immediate legislative need of the time is the removal of all
obstacles to the realization of the best ambitions of our people in their
several classes of employment and the strengthening of all
instrumentalities by. which difficulties are to be met and removed and
justice dealt out, whether by law or by some form of mediation and
conciliation. I do not feel it to be my privilege at present to, suggest
the detailed and particular methods by which these objects may be attained,
but I have faith that the inquiries of your several committees will
discover the way and the method.

In response to what I believe to be the impulse of sympathy and opinion
throughout the United States, I earnestly suggest that the Congress
authorize the Treasury of the United States to make to the struggling
government of Armenia such a loan as was made to several of the Allied
governments during the war, and I would also suggest that it would be
desirable to provide in the legislation itself that the expenditure of the
money thus loaned should be under the supervision of a commission, or at
least a commissioner, from the United States in order that revolutionary
tendencies within Armenia itself might not be afforded by the loan a
further tempting opportunity.

Allow me to call your attention to the fact that the people of the
Philippine Islands have succeeded in maintaining a stable government since
the last action of the Congress in their behalf, and have thus fulfilled
the condition set by the Congress as precedent to a consideration of
granting independence to the Islands. I respectfully submit that this
condition precedent having been fulfilled, it is now our liberty and our
duty to keep our promise to the people of those islands by granting them
the independence which they so honorably covet.

I have not so much laid before you a series of recommendations, gentlemen,
as sought to utter a confession of faith, of the faith in which I was bred
and which it is my solemn purpose to stand by until my last fighting day. I
believe this to be the faith of America, the faith of the future, and of
all the victories which await national action in the days to come, whether
in America or elsewhere.

***

State of the Union Address
Warren Harding
December 6, 1921

MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS:

It is a very gratifying privilege to come to the Congress with the Republic
at peace with all the nations of the world. More, it is equally gratifying
to report that our country is not only free from every impending, menace of
war, but there are growing assurances of the permanency of the peace which
we so deeply cherish.

For approximately ten years we have dwelt amid menaces of war or as
participants in war's actualities, and the inevitable aftermath, with its
disordered conditions, bits added to the difficulties of government which
adequately can not be appraised except by, those who are in immediate
contact and know the responsibilities. Our tasks would be less difficult if
we had only ourselves to consider, but so much of the world was involved,
the disordered conditions are so well-nigh universal, even among nations
not engaged in actual warfare, that no permanent readjustments can be
effected without consideration of our inescapable relationship to world
affairs in finance and trade. Indeed, we should be unworthy of our best
traditions if we were unmindful of social, moral, and political conditions
which are not of direct concern to us, but which do appeal to the human
sympathies and the very becoming interest of a people blest with our
national good fortune.

It is not my purpose to bring to you a program of world restoration. In the
main such a program must be worked out by the nations more directly
concerned. They must themselves turn to the heroic remedies for the
menacing conditions under which they are struggling, then we can help, and
we mean to help. We shall do so unselfishly because there is compensation
in the consciousness of assisting, selfishly because the commerce and
international exchanges in trade, which marked our high tide of fortunate
advancement, are possible only when the nations of all continents are
restored to stable order and normal relationship.

In the main the contribution of this Republic to restored normalcy in the
world must come through the initiative of the executive branch of the
Government, but the best of intentions and most carefully considered
purposes would fail utterly if the sanction and the cooperation of Congress
were not cheerfully accorded.

I am very sure we shall have no conflict of opinion about constitutional
duties or authority. During the anxieties of war, when necessity seemed
compelling there were excessive grants of authority and all extraordinary
concentration of powers in the Chief Executive. The repeal of war-time
legislation and the automatic expirations which attended the peace
proclamations have put an end to these emergency excesses but I have the
wish to go further than that. I want to join you ill restoring-, ill the
most cordial way, the spirit of coordination and cooperation, and that
mutuality of confidence and respect which is necessary ill representative
popular government.

Encroachment upon the functions of Congress or attempted dictation of its
policy are not to be thought of, much less attempted, but there is all
insistent call for harmony of purpose and concord of action to speed the
solution of the difficult problems confronting both the legislative and
executive branches of the Government.

It is worth while to make allusion here to the character of our Clove
Government, mindful as one must be that an address to you is no less it
message to all our people, for whom you speak most intimately. Ours is it
popular Government through political parties. We divide along political
lines, and I would ever have it so. I do not mean that partisan preferences
should hinder any public servant in the performance of a conscientious and
patriotic official duty. We saw partisan lines utterly obliterated when war
imperiled, and our faith in the Republic was riveted anew. We ought not to
find these partisan lines obstructing the expeditious solution of the
urgent problems of peace.

Granting that we are fundamentally a representative popular Government,
with political parties the governing agencies, I believe the political
party in power should assume responsibility, determine upon policies ill
the conference which supplements conventions and election campaigns, and
then strive for achievement through adherence to the accepted policy.

There is vastly greater security, immensely more of the national
viewpoint, much larger and prompter accomplishment where our divisions are
along party lines, in the broader and loftier sense, than to divide
geographically, or according to pursuits, or personal following. For a
century and a third, parties have been charged with responsibility and held
to strict accounting. When they fail, they are relieved of authority; and
the system has brought its to a national eminence no less than a world
example.

Necessarily legislation is a matter of compromise. The full ideal is seldom
attained. In that meeting of minds necessary to insure results, there must
and will be accommodations and compromises, but in the estimate of
convictions and sincere put-poses the supreme responsibility to national
interest must not be ignored. The shield to the high-minded public servant
who adheres to party policy is manifest, but the higher purpose is the good
of the Republic as a whole.

It would be ungracious to withhold acknowledgment of the really large
volume and excellent quality of work accomplished by the extraordinary
session of Congress which so recently adjourned. I am not unmindful of the
very difficult tasks with which you were called to deal, and no one can
ignore the insistent conditions which, during recent years, have called for
the continued and almost exclusive attention of your membership to public
work. It would suggest insincerity if I expressed complete accord with
every expression recorded in your roll calls, but we are all agreed about
the difficulties and the inevitable divergence of opinion in seeking the
reduction, amelioration and readjustment of the burdens of taxation. Later
on, when other problems are solved, I shall make some recommendations about
renewed consideration of our tax program, but for the immediate time before
us we must be content with the billion dollar reduction in the tax draft
upon the people, and diminished irritations, banished uncertainty and
improved methods of collection. By your sustainment of the rigid economies
already inaugurated, with hoped-for extension of these economies and added
efficiencies in administration, I believe further reductions may be enacted
and hindering burdens abolished.

In these urgent economies we shall be immensely assisted by the budget
system for which you made provision in the extraordinary session. The first
budget is before you. Its preparation is a signal achievement, and the
perfection of the system, a thing impossible in the few months available
for its initial trial, will mark its enactment as the beginning of the
greatest reformation in governmental practices since the beginning of the
Republic.

There is pending a grant of authority to the administrative branch of the
Government for the funding and settlement of our vast foreign loans growing
out of our grant of war credits. With the hands of the executive branch
held impotent to deal with these debts we are hindering urgent
readjustments among our debtors and accomplishing nothing for ourselves. I
think it is fair for the Congress to assume that the executive branch of
the Government would adopt no major policy in dealing with these matters
which would conflict with the purpose of Congress in authorizing the loans,
certainly not without asking congressional approval, but there are minor
problems incident to prudent loan transactions and the safeguarding of our
interests which can not even be attempted without this authorization. It
will be helpful to ourselves and it will improve conditions among our
debtors if funding and the settlement of defaulted interest may be
negotiated.

The previous Congress, deeply concerned in behalf of our merchant marine,
in 1920 enacted the existing shipping law, designed for the upbuilding of
the American merchant marine. Among other things provided to encourage our
shipping on the world's seas, the Executive was directed to give notice of
the termination of all existing commercial treaties in order to admit of
reduced duties on imports carried in American bottoms. During the life of
the act no Executive has complied with this order of the Congress. When the
present administration came into responsibility it began an early inquiry
into the failure to execute the expressed purpose of the Jones Act. Only
one conclusion has been possible. Frankly, Members of House and Senate,
eager its I am to join you in the making of an American merchant marine
commensurate with our commerce, the denouncement of our commercial
treaties would involve us in a chaos of trade relationships and add
indescribably to the confusion of the already disordered commercial world.
Our power to do so is not disputed, but power and ships, without comity of
relationship, will not give us the expanded trade which is inseparably
linked with a great merchant marine. Moreover, the applied reduction of
duty, for which the treaty denouncements were necessary, encouraged only
the carrying of dutiable imports to our shores, while the tonnage which
unfurls the flag on the seas is both free and dutiable, and the cargoes
which make it nation eminent in trade are outgoing, rather than incoming.

It is not my thought to lay the problem before you in detail today. It is
desired only to say to you that the executive branch of the Government,
uninfluenced by the protest of any nation, for none has been made, is well
convinced that your proposal, highly intended and heartily supported here,
is so fraught with difficulties and so marked by tendencies to discourage
trade expansion, that I invite your tolerance of noncompliance for only a
few weeks until a plan may be presented which contemplates no greater draft
upon the Public Treasury, and which, though yet too crude to offer it
to-day, gives such promise of expanding our merchant marine, that it will
argue its own approval. It is enough to say to-day that we are so possessed
of ships, and the American intention to establish it merchant marine is so
unalterable, that a plain of reimbursement, at no other cost than is
contemplated in the existing act, will appeal to the pride and encourage
the hope of all the American people.

There is before you the completion of the enactment of what has been termed
a "permanent" tariff law, the word "permanent" being used to distinguish
it from the emergency act which the Congress expedited early in the
extraordinary session, and which is the law today. I can not too strongly
urge in early completion of this necessary legislation It is needed to
stabilize our industry at home; it is essential to make more definite our
trade relations abroad. More, it is vital to the preservation of many of
our own industries which contribute so notably to the very lifeblood of our
Nation.

There is now, and there always will be, a storm of conflicting opinion
about any tariff revision. We can not go far wrong when we base our tariffs
on the policy of preserving the productive activities which enhance
employment and add to our national prosperity.

Again comes the reminder that we must not be unmindful of world conditions,
that peoples are struggling for industrial rehabilitation and that we can
not dwell in industrial and commercial exclusion and at the same time do
the just thing in aiding world reconstruction and readjustment. We do not
seek a selfish aloofness, and we could not profit by it, were it possible.
We recognize the necessity of buying wherever we sell, and the permanency
of trade lies in its acceptable exchanges. In our pursuit of markets we
must give as well as receive. We can not sell to others who do not produce,
nor can we buy unless we produce at home. Sensible of every obligation of
humanity, commerce and finance, linked as they are in the present world
condition, it is not to be argued that we need destroy ourselves to be
helpful to others. With all my heart I wish restoration to the peoples
blighted by the awful World War, but the process of restoration does not
lie in our acceptance of like conditions. It were better to, remain on firm
ground, strive for ample employment and high standards of wage at home, and
point the way to balanced budgets, rigid economies, and resolute, efficient
work as the necessary remedies to cure disaster.

Everything relating to trade, among ourselves and among nations, has been
expanded, excessive, inflated, abnormal, and there is a madness in finance
which no American policy alone will cure. We are a creditor Nation, not by
normal processes, but made so by war. It is not an unworthy selfishness to
seek to save ourselves, when the processes of that salvation are not only
not denied to others, but commended to them. We seek to undermine for
others no industry by which they subsist; we are obligated to permit the
undermining of none of our own which make for employment and maintained
activities.

Every contemplation, it little matters in which direction one turns,
magnifies the difficulty of tariff legislation, but the necessity of the
revision is magnified with it. Doubtless we are justified in seeking it.
More flexible policy than we have provided heretofore. I hope a way will be
found to make for flexibility and elasticity, so that rates may be adjusted
to meet unusual and changing conditions which can not be accurately
anticipated. There are problems incident to unfair practices, and to
exchanges which madness in money have made almost unsolvable. I know of no
manner in which to effect this flexibility other than the extension of the
powers of the Tariff Commission so that it can adapt itself to it
scientific and wholly just administration of the law.

I am not unmindful of the constitutional difficulties. These can be met by
giving authority to the Chief Executive, who could proclaim-additional
duties to meet conditions which the Congress may designate.

At this point I must disavow any desire to enlarge the Executive's powers
or add to the responsibilities of the office. They are already too large.
If there were any other plan I would prefer it.

The grant of authority to proclaim would necessarily bring the Tariff
Commission into new and enlarged activities, because no Executive could
discharge such a duty except upon the information acquired and
recommendations made by this commission. But the plan is feasible, and the
proper functioning of the board would give its it better administration of
a defined policy than ever can be made possible by tariff duties prescribed
without flexibility.

There is a manifest difference of opinion about the merits of American
valuation. Many nations have adopted delivery valuation as the basis for
collecting duties; that is, they take the cost of the imports delivered at
the port of entry as the basis for levying duty. It is no radical
departure, in view of varying conditions and the disordered state of money
values, to provide for American valuation, but there can not be ignored the
danger of such a valuation, brought to the level of our own production
costs, making our tariffs prohibitive. It might do so in many instances
where imports ought to be encouraged. I believe Congress ought well
consider the desirability of the only promising alternative, namely, a
provision authorizing proclaimed American valuation, under prescribed
conditions, on any given list of articles imported.

In this proposed flexibility, authorizing increases to meet conditions so
likely to change, there should also be provision for decreases. A rate may
be just to-day, and entirely out of proportion six months from to-day. If
our tariffs are to be made equitable, and not necessarily burden our
imports and hinder our trade abroad, frequent adjustment will be necessary
for years to come. Knowing the impossibility of modification by act of
Congress for any one or a score of lines without involving a long array of
schedules, I think we shall go a long ways toward stabilization, if there
is recognition of the Tariff Commission's fitness to recommend urgent
changes by proclamation.

I am sure about public opinion favoring the early determination of our
tariff policy. There have been reassuring signs of a business revival from
the deep slump which all the world has been experiencing. Our unemployment,
which gave its deep concern only a few weeks ago, has grown encouragingly
less, and new assurances and renewed confidence will attend the
congressional declaration that American industry will be held secure.

Much has been said about the protective policy for ourselves making it
impossible for our debtors to discharge their obligations to us. This is a
contention not now pressing for decision. If we must choose between a
people in idleness pressing for the payment of indebtedness, or a people
resuming the normal ways of employment and carrying the credit, let us
choose the latter. Sometimes we appraise largest the human ill most vivid
in our minds. We have been giving, and are giving now, of our influence and
appeals to minimize the likelihood of war and throw off the crushing
burdens of armament. It is all very earnest, with a national soul
impelling. But a people unemployed, and gaunt with hunger, face a situation
quite as disheartening as war, and our greater obligation to-day is to do
the Government's part toward resuming productivity and promoting fortunate
and remunerative employment.

Something more than tariff protection is required by American agriculture.
To the farmer has come the earlier and the heavier burdens of readjustment.
There is actual depression in our agricultural industry, while agricultural
prosperity is absolutely essential to the general prosperity of the
country.

Congress has sought very earnestly to provide relief. It has promptly given
such temporary relief as has been possible, but the call is insistent for
the permanent solution. It is inevitable that large crops lower the prices
and short crops advance them. No legislation can cure that fundamental law.
But there must be some economic solution for the excessive variation in
returns for agricultural production.

It is rather shocking to be told, and to have the statement strongly
supported, that 9,000,000 bales of cotton, raised on American plantations
in a given year, will actually be worth more to the producers than
13,000,000 bales would have been. Equally shocking is the statement that
700,000,000 bushels of wheat, raised by American farmers, would bring them
more money than a billion bushels. Yet these are not exaggerated
statements. In a world where there are tens of millions who need food and
clothing which they can not get, such a condition is sure to indict the
social system which makes it possible.

In the main the remedy lies in distribution and marketing. Every proper
encouragement should be given to the cooperative marketing programs. These
have proven very helpful to the cooperating communities in Europe. In
Russia the cooperative community has become the recognized bulwark of law
and order, and saved individualism from engulfment in social paralysis.
Ultimately they will be accredited with the salvation of the Russian
State.

There is the appeal for this experiment. Why not try it? No one challenges
the right of the farmer to a larger share of the consumer's pay for his
product, no one disputes that we can not live without the farmer. He is
justified in rebelling against the transportation cost. Given a fair
return for his labor, he will have less occasion to appeal for financial
aid; and given assurance that his labors shall not be in vain, we reassure
all the people of a production sufficient to meet our National requirement
and guard against disaster.

The base of the pyramid of civilization which rests upon the soil is
shrinking through the drift of population from farm to city. For a
generation we have been expressing more or less concern about this
tendency. Economists have warned and statesmen have deplored. We thought
for at time that modern conveniences and the more intimate contact would
halt the movement, but it has gone steadily on. Perhaps only grim necessity
will correct it, but we ought to find a less drastic remedy.

The existing scheme of adjusting freight rates hits been favoring the
basing points, until industries are attracted to some centers and repelled
from others. A great volume of uneconomic and wasteful transportation has
attended, and the cost increased accordingly. The grain-milling and
meat-packing industries afford ample illustration, and the attending
concentration is readily apparent. The menaces in concentration are not
limited to the retardingly influences on agriculture. Manifestly the.
conditions and terms of railway transportation ought not be permitted to
increase this undesirable tendency. We have a just pride in our great
cities, but we shall find a greater pride in the Nation, which has it
larger distribution of its population into the country, where comparatively
self-sufficient smaller communities may blend agricultural and
manufacturing interests in harmonious helpfulness and enhanced good
fortune. Such a movement contemplates no destruction of things wrought, of
investments made, or wealth involved. It only looks to a general policy of
transportation of distributed industry, and of highway construction, to
encourage the spread of our population and restore the proper balance
between city and country. The problem may well have your earnest
attention.

It has been perhaps the proudest claim of our American civilization that in
dealing with human relationships it has constantly moved toward such
justice in distributing the product of human energy that it has improved
continuously the economic status of the mass of people. Ours has been a
highly productive social organization. On the way up from the elemental
stages of society we have eliminated slavery and serfdom and are now far on
the way to the elimination of poverty.

Through the eradication of illiteracy and the diffusion of education
mankind has reached a stage where we may fairly say that in the United
States equality of opportunity has been attained, though all are not
prepared to embrace it. There is, indeed, a too great divergence between
the economic conditions of the most and the least favored classes in the
community. But even that divergence has now come to the point where we
bracket the very poor and the very rich together as the least fortunate
classes. Our efforts may well be directed to improving the status of both.

While this set of problems is commonly comprehended under the general
phrase "Capital and labor," it is really vastly broader. It is a question
of social and economic organization. Labor has become a large contributor,
through its savings, to the stock of capital; while the people who own the
largest individual aggregates of capital are themselves often hard and
earnest laborers. Very often it is extremely difficult to draw the line of
demarcation between the two groups; to determine whether a particular
individual is entitled to be set down as laborer or as capitalist. In a
very large proportion of cases he is both, and when he is both he is the
most useful citizen.

The right of labor to organize is just as fundamental and necessary as is
the right of capital to organize. The right of labor to negotiate, to deal
with and solve its particular problems in an organized way, through its
chosen agents, is just as essential as is the right of capital to organize,
to maintain corporations, to limit the liabilities of stockholders. Indeed,
we have come to recognize that the limited liability of the citizen as a
member of a labor organization closely parallels the limitation of
liability of the citizen as a stockholder in a corporation for profit.
Along this line of reasoning we shall make the greatest progress toward
solution of our problem of capital and labor.

In the case of the corporation which enjoys the privilege of limited
liability of stockholders, particularly when engaged in in the public
service, it is recognized that the outside public has a large concern
which must be protected; and so we provide regulations, restrictions, and
in some cases detailed supervision. Likewise in the case of labor
organizations, we might well apply similar and equally well-defined
principles of regulation and supervision in order to conserve the public's
interests as affected by their operations.

Just as it is not desirable that a corporation shall be allowed to impose
undue exactions upon the public, so it is not desirable that a labor
organization shall be permitted to exact unfair terms of employment or
subject the public to actual distresses in order to enforce its terms.
Finally, just as we are earnestly seeking for procedures whereby to adjust
and settle political differences between nations without resort to war, so
we may well look about for means to settle the differences between
organized capital and organized labor without resort to those forms of
warfare which we recognize under the name of strikes, lockouts, boycotts,
and the like.

As we have great bodies of law carefully regulating the organization and
operations of industrial and financial corporations, as we have treaties
and compacts among nations which look to the settlement of differences
without the necessity of conflict in arms, so we might well have plans of
conference, of common counsel, of mediation, arbitration, and judicial
determination in controversies between labor and capital. To accomplish
this would involve the necessity to develop a thoroughgoing code of
practice in dealing with such affairs It might be well to frankly set forth
the superior interest of the community as a whole to either the labor group
or the capital group. With rights, privileges, immunities, and modes of
organization thus carefully defined, it should be possible to set up
judicial or quasi judicial tribunals for the consideration and
determination of all disputes which menace the public welfare.

In an industrial society such as ours the strike, the lockout, and the
boycott are as much out of place and as disastrous in their results as is
war or armed revolution in the domain of politics. The same disposition to
reasonableness, to conciliation, to recognition of the other side's point
of view, the same provision of fair and recognized tribunals and processes,
ought to make it possible to solve the one set of questions its easily as
the other. I believe the solution is possible.

The consideration of such a policy would necessitate the exercise of care
and deliberation in the construction of a code and a charter of elemental
rights, dealing with the relations of employer and employee. This
foundation in the law, dealing with the modern conditions of social and
economic life, would hasten the building of the temple of peace in industry
which a rejoicing nation would acclaim.

After each war, until the last, the Government has been enabled to give
homes to its returned soldiers, and a large part of our settlement and
development has attended this generous provision of land for the Nation's
defenders.

There is yet unreserved approximately 200,000,000 acres in the public
domain, 20,000,000 acres of which are known to be susceptible of
reclamation and made fit for homes by provision for irrigation.

The Government has been assisting in the development of its remaining
lands, until the estimated increase in land values in the irrigated
sections is full $500,000,000 and the crops of 1920 alone on these lands
are estimated to exceed $100,000,000. Under the law authorization these
expenditures for development the advances are to be returned and it would
be good business for the Government to provide for the reclamation of the
remaining 20,000,000 acres, in addition to expediting the completion of
projects long under way.

Under what is known as the coal and gas lease law, applicable also to
deposits of phosphates and other minerals on the public domain, leases are
now being made on the royalty basis, and are producing large revenues to
the Government. Under this legislation, 10 per centum of all royalties is
to be paid directly to the Federal Treasury, and of the remainder 50 per
centum is to be used for reclamation of arid lands by irrigation, and 40
per centum is to be paid to the States, in which the operations are
located, to be used by them for school and road purposes.

These resources are so vast, and the development is affording so reliable a
basis of estimate, that the Interior Department expresses the belief that
ultimately the present law will add in royalties and payments to the
treasuries of the Federal Government and the States containing these public
lands a total of $12,000,000,000. This means, of course, an added wealth of
many times that sum. These prospects seem to afford every justification of
Government advances in reclamation and irrigation.

Contemplating the inevitable and desirable increase of population, there is
another phase of reclamation full worthy of consideration. There are
79,000,000 acres of swamp and cut-over lands which may be reclaimed and
made as valuable as any farm lands we possess. These acres are largely
located in Southern States, and the greater proportion is owned by the
States or by private citizens. Congress has a report of the survey of this
field for reclamation, and the feasibility is established. I gladly commend
Federal aid, by way of advances, where State and private participation is
assured.

Home making is one of the greater benefits which government can bestow.
Measures are pending embodying this sound policy to which we may well
adhere. It is easily possible to make available permanent homes which will
provide, in turn, for prosperous American families, without injurious
competition with established activities, or imposition on wealth already
acquired.

While we are thinking of promoting the fortunes of our own people I am sure
there is room in the sympathetic thought of America for fellow human beings
who are suffering and dying of starvation in Russia. A severe drought in
the Valley of the Volga has plunged 15,000,000 people into grievous famine.
Our voluntary agencies are exerting themselves to the utmost to save the
lives of children in this area, but it is now evident that unless relief is
afforded the loss of life will extend into many millions. America can not
be deaf to such a call as that.

We do not recognize the government of Russia, nor tolerate the propaganda
which emanates therefrom, but we do not forget the traditions of Russian
friendship. We may put aside our consideration of all international
politics and fundamental differences in government. The big thing is the
call of the suffering and the dying. Unreservedly I recommend the
appropriation necessary to supply the American Relief Administration with
10,000,000 bushels of corn and 1,000,000 bushels of seed grains, not alone
to halt the wave of death through starvation, but to enable spring planting
in areas where the seed grains have been exhausted temporarily to stem
starvation.

The American Relief Administration is directed in Russia by former officers
of our own armies, and has fully demonstrated its ability to transport and
distribute relief through American hands without hindrance or loss. The
time has come to add the Government's support to the wonderful relief
already wrought out of the generosity of the American private purse.

I am not unaware that we have suffering and privation at home. When it
exceeds the capacity for the relief within the States concerned, it will
have Federal consideration. It seems to me we should be indifferent to our
own heart promptings, and out of accord with the spirit which acclaims the
Christmastide, if we do not give out of our national abundance to lighten
this burden of woe upon a people blameless and helpless in famine's peril.

There are it full score of topics concerning which it would be becoming to
address you, and on which I hope to make report at a later time. I have
alluded to the things requiring your earlier attention. However, I can not
end this limited address without a suggested amendment to the organic law.

Many of us belong to that school of thought which is hesitant about
altering the fundamental law. I think our tax problems, the tendency of
wealth to seek nontaxable investment, and the menacing increase of public
debt, Federal, State and municipal-all justify a proposal to change the
Constitution so as to end the issue of nontaxable bonds. No action can
change the status of the many billions outstanding, but we can guard
against future encouragement of capital's paralysis, while a halt in the
growth of public indebtedness would be beneficial throughout our whole
land.

Such a change in the Constitution must be very thoroughly considered before
submission. There ought to be known what influence it will have on the
inevitable refunding of our vast national debt, how it will operate on the
necessary refunding of State and municipal debt, how the advantages of
Nation over State and municipality, or the contrary, may be avoided.
Clearly the States would not ratify to their own apparent disadvantage. I
suggest the consideration because the drift of wealth into nontaxable
securities is hindering the flow of large capital to our industries,
manufacturing, agricultural, and carrying, until we are discouraging the
very activities which make our wealth.

Agreeable to your expressed desire and in complete accord with the purposes
of the executive branch of the Government, there is in Washington, as you
happily know, an International Conference now most earnestly at work on
plans for the limitation of armament, a naval holiday, and the just
settlement of problems which might develop into causes of international
disagreement.

It is easy to believe a world-hope is centered on this Capital City. A most
gratifying world-accomplishment is not improbable.

***

State of the Union Address
Warren Harding
December 8, 1922

MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS:

So many problems are calling for solution that a recital of all of them, in
the face of the known limitations of a short session of Congress, would
seem to lack sincerity of purpose. It is four years since the World War
ended, but the inevitable readjustment of the social and economic order is
not more than barely begun. There is no acceptance of pre-war conditions
anywhere in the world. In a very general way humanity harbors individual
wishes to go on with war-time compensation for production, with pre-war
requirements in expenditure. In short, everyone, speaking broadly, craves
readjustment for everybody except himself, while there can be no just and
permanent readjustment except when all participate.

The civilization which measured its strength of genius and the power of
science and the resources of industries, in addition to testing the limits
of man power and the endurance and heroism of men and women--that same
civilization is brought to its severest test in restoring a tranquil order
and committing humanity to the stable ways of peace.

If the sober and deliberate appraisal of pre-war civilization makes it seem
a worth-while inheritance, then with patience and good courage it will be
preserved. There never again will be precisely the old order; indeed, I
know of no one who thinks it to be desirable For out of the old order came
the war itself, and the new order, established and made secure, never will
permit its recurrence.

It is no figure of speech to say we have come to the test of Our
civilization. The world has been passing--is today passing through of a
great crisis. The conduct of war itself is not more difficult than the
solution of the problems which necessarily follow. I am not speaking at
this moment of the problem in its wider aspect of world rehabilitation or
of international relationships. The reference is to our own social,
financial, and economic problems at home. These things are not to be
considered solely as problems apart from all international relationship,
but every nation must be able to carry on for itself, else its
international relationship will have scant importance.

Doubtless our own people have emerged from the World War tumult less
impaired than most belligerent powers; probably we have made larger
progress toward reconstruction. Surely we have been fortunate in
diminishing unemployment, and our industrial and business activities, which
are the lifeblood of our material existence, have been restored as in no
other reconstruction period of like length in the history of the world. Had
we escaped the coal and railway strikes, which had no excuse for their
beginning and less justification for their delayed settlement, we should
have done infinitely better. But labor was insistent on holding to the war
heights, and heedless forces of reaction sought the pre-war levels, and
both were wrong. In the folly of conflict our progress was hindered, and
the heavy cost has not yet been fully estimated. There can be neither
adjustment nor the penalty of the failure to readjust in which all do not
somehow participate.

The railway strike accentuated the difficulty of the American farmer. The
first distress of readjustment came to the farmer, and it will not be a
readjustment fit to abide until he is relieved. The distress brought to the
farmer does not affect him alone. Agricultural ill fortune is a national
ill fortune. That one-fourth of our population which produces the food of
the Republic and adds so largely to our export commerce must participate in
the good fortunes of the Nation, else there is none worth retaining.

Agriculture is a vital activity in our national life. In it we had our
beginning, and its westward march with the star of the empire has reflected
the growth of the Republic. It has its vicissitudes which no legislation
will prevent, its hardships for which no law can provide escape. But the
Congress can make available to the farmer the financial facilities which
have been built up under Government aid and supervision for other
commercial and industrial enterprises. It may be done on the same solid
fundamentals and make the vitally important agricultural industry more
secure, and it must be done.

This Congress already has taken cognizance of the misfortune which
precipitate deflation brought to American agriculture. Your measures of
relief and the reduction of the Federal reserve discount rate undoubtedly
saved the country from widespread disaster. The very proof of helpfulness
already given is the strongest argument for the permanent establishment of
widened credits, heretofore temporarily extended through the War Finance
Corporation.

The Farm Loan Bureau, which already has proven its usefulness through the
Federal land banks, may well have its powers enlarged to provide ample farm
production credits as well as enlarged land credits. It is entirely
practical to create a division in the Federal land banks to deal with
production credits, with the limitations of time so adjusted to the farm
turnover as the Federal reserve system provides for the turnover in the
manufacturing and mercantile world. Special provision must be made for
live-stock production credits, and the limit of land loans may be safely
enlarged. Various measures are pending before you, and the best judgment of
Congress ought to be expressed in a prompt enactment at the present
session.

But American agriculture needs more than added credit facilities. The
credits will help to solve the pressing problems growing out of
war-inflated land values and the drastic deflation of three years ago, but
permanent and deserved agricultural good fortune depends on better and
cheaper transportation.

Here is an outstanding problem, demanding the most rigorous consideration
of the Congress and the country. It has to do with more than agriculture.
It provides the channel for the flow of the country's commerce. But the
farmer is particularly hard hit. His market, so affected by the world
consumption, does not admit of the price adjustment to meet carrying
charges. In the last half of the year now closing the railways, broken in
carrying capacity because of motive power and rolling stock out of order,
though insistently declaring to the contrary, embargoed his shipments or
denied him cars when fortunate markets were calling. Too frequently
transportation failed while perishable products were turning from possible
profit to losses counted in tens of millions.

I know of no problem exceeding in importance this one of transportation. In
our complex and interdependent modern life transportation is essential to
our very existence. Let us pass for the moment the menace in the possible
paralysis of such service as we have and note the failure, for whatever
reason, to expand our transportation to meet the Nation's needs.

The census of 1880 recorded a population of 50,000,000. In two decades more
we may reasonably expect to count thrice that number. In the three decades
ending in 1920 the country's freight by rail increased from 631,000,000
tons to 2,234,000,000 tons; that is to say, while our population was
increasing, less than 70 per cent, the freight movement increased over 250
per cent.

We have built 40 per cent of the world's railroad mileage, and yet find it
inadequate to our present requirements. When we contemplate the inadequacy
of to-day it is easy to believe that the next few decades will witness the
paralysis of our transportation-using social scheme or a complete
reorganization on some new basis. Mindful of the tremendous costs of
betterments, extensions, and expansions, and mindful of the staggering
debts of the world to-day, the difficulty is magnified. Here is a problem
demanding wide vision and the avoidance of mere makeshifts. No matter what
the errors of the past, no matter how we acclaimed construction and then
condemned operations in the past, we have the transportation and the honest
investment in the transportation which sped us on to what we are, and we
face conditions which reflect its inadequacy to-day, its greater inadequacy
to-morrow, and we contemplate transportation costs which much of the
traffic can not and will not continue to pay.

Manifestly, we have need to begin on plans to coordinate all transportation
facilities. We should more effectively connect up our rail lines with our
carriers by sea. We ought to reap some benefit from the hundreds of
millions expended on inland waterways, proving our capacity to utilize as
well as expend. We ought to turn the motor truck into a railway feeder and
distributor instead of a destroying competitor.

It would be folly to ignore that we live in a motor age. The motor car
reflects our standard of living and gauges the speed of our present-day
life. It long ago ran down Simple Living, and never halted to inquire about
the prostrate figure which fell as its victim. With full recognition of
motor-car transportation we must turn it to the most practical use. It can
not supersede the railway lines, no matter how generously we afford it
highways out of the Public Treasury. If freight traffic by motor were
charged with its proper and proportionate share of highway construction, we
should find much of it wasteful and more costly than like service by rail.
Yet we have paralleled the railways, a most natural line of construction,
and thereby taken away from the agency of expected service much of its
profitable traffic, which the taxpayers have been providing the highways,
whose cost of maintenance is not yet realized.

The Federal Government has a right to inquire into the wisdom of this
policy, because the National Treasury is contributing largely to this
highway construction. Costly highways ought to be made to serve as feeders
rather than competitors of the railroads, and the motor truck should become
a coordinate factor in our great distributing system.

This transportation problem can not be waived aside. The demand for lowered
costs on farm products and basic materials can not be ignored. Rates
horizontally increased, to meet increased wage outlays during the war
inflation, are not easily reduced. When some very moderate wage reductions
were effected last summer there was a 5 per cent horizontal reduction in
rates. I sought at that time, in a very informal way, to have the railway
managers go before the Interstate Commerce Commission and agree to a
heavier reduction on farm products and coal and other basic commodities,
and leave unchanged the freight tariffs which a very large portion of the
traffic was able to bear. Neither the managers nor the commission tile@@
suggestion, so we had the horizontal reduction saw fit to adopt too slight
to be felt by the higher class cargoes and too little to benefit the heavy
tonnage calling most loudly for relief.

Railways are not to be expected to render the most essential service in our
social organization without a air return on capital invested, but the
Government has gone so far in the regulation of rates and rules of
operation that it has the responsibility of pointing the way to the reduced
freight costs so essential to our national welfare.

Government operation does not afford the cure. It was Government operation
which brought us to the very order of things against which we now rebel,
and we are still liquidating the costs of that supreme folly.

Surely the genius of the railway builders has not become extinct among the
railway managers. New economies, new efficiencies in cooperation must be
found. The fact that labor takes 50 to 60 per cent of total railway
earnings makes limitations within which to effect economies very difficult,
but the demand is no less insistent on that account.

Clearly the managers are without that intercarrier, cooperative
relationship so highly essential to the best and most economical operation.
They could not function in harmony when the strike threatened the paralysis
of all railway transportation. The relationship of the service to public
welfare, so intimately affected by State and Federal regulation, demands
the effective correlation and a concerted drive to meet an insistent and
justified public demand.

The merger of lines into systems, a facilitated interchange of freight
cars, the economic use of terminals, and the consolidation of facilities
are suggested ways of economy and efficiency.

I remind you that Congress provided a Joint Commission of Agricultural
Inquiry which made an exhaustive investigation of car service and
transportation, and unanimously recommended in its report of October 15,
1921, the pooling of freight cars under a central agency. This report well
deserves your serious consideration. I think well of the central agency,
which shall be a creation of the railways themselves, to provide, under the
jurisdiction of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the means for financing
equipment for carriers which are otherwise unable to provide their
proportion of car equipment adequate to transportation needs. This same
agency ought to point the way to every possible economy in maintained
equipment and the necessary interchanges in railway commerce.

In a previous address to the Congress I called to your attention the
insufficiency of power to enforce the decisions of the Railroad Labor
Board. Carriers have ignored its decisions, on the one hand, railway
workmen have challenged its decisions by a strike, on the other hand.

The intent of Congress to establish a tribunal to which railway labor and
managers may appeal respecting questions of wages and working conditions
can not be too strongly commended. It is vitally important that some such
agency should be a guaranty against suspended operation. The public must be
spared even the threat of discontinued service.

Sponsoring the railroads as we do, it is an obligation that labor shall be
assured the highest justice and every proper consideration of wage and
working conditions, but it is an equal obligation to see that no concerted
action in forcing demands shall deprive the public of the transportation
service essential to its very existence. It is now impossible to safeguard
public interest, because the decrees of the board are unenforceable against
either employer or employee.

The Labor Board itself is not so constituted as best to serve the public
interest. With six partisan members on a board of nine, three partisans
nominated by the employees and three by the railway managers, it is
inevitable that the partisan viewpoint is maintained throughout hearings
and in decisions handed down. Indeed, the few exceptions to a strictly
partisan expression in decisions thus far rendered have been followed by
accusations of betrayal of the partisan interests represented. Only the
public group of three is free to function in unbiased decisions. Therefore
the partisan membership may well be abolished, and decisions should be made
by an impartial tribunal.

I am well convinced that the functions of this tribunal could be much
better carried on here in Washington. Even were it to be continued as a
separate tribunal, there ought to be contact with the Interstate Commerce
Commission, which has supreme authority in the rate making to which wage
cost bears an indissoluble relationship Theoretically, a fair and living
wage must be determined quite apart from the employer's earning capacity,
but in practice, in the railway service, they are inseparable. The record
of advanced rates to meet increased wages, both determined by the
Government, is proof enough.

The substitution of a labor division in the Interstate Commerce Commission
made up from its membership, to hear and decide disputes relating to wages
and working conditions which have failed of adjustment by proper committees
created by the railways and their employees, offers a more effective plan.

It need not be surprising that there is dissatisfaction over delayed
hearings and decisions by the present board when every trivial dispute is
carried to that tribunal. The law should require the railroads and their
employees to institute means and methods to negotiate between themselves
their constantly arising differences, limiting appeals to the Government
tribunal to disputes of such character as are likely to affect the public
welfare.

This suggested substitution will involve a necessary increase in the
membership of the commission, probably four, to constitute the labor
division. If the suggestion appeals to the Congress, it will be well to
specify that the labor division shall be constituted of representatives of
the four rate-making territories, thereby assuring a tribunal conversant
with the conditions which obtain in the different ratemaking sections of
the country.

I wish I could bring to you the precise recommendation for the prevention
of strikes which threaten the welfare of the people and menace public
safety. It is an impotent civilization and an inadequate government which
lacks the genius and the courage to guard against such a menace to public
welfare as we experienced last summer. You were aware of the Government's
great concern and its futile attempt to aid in an adjustment. It will
reveal the inexcusable obstinacy which was responsible for so much distress
to the country to recall now that, though all disputes are not yet
adjusted, the many settlements which have been made were on the terms which
the Government proposed in mediation.

Public interest demands that ample power shall be conferred upon the. labor
tribunal, whether it is the present board or the suggested substitute, to
require its rulings to be accepted by both parties to a disputed question.

Let there be no confusion about the purpose of the suggested conferment of
power to make decisions effective. There can be no denial of constitutional
rights of either railway workmen or railway managers. No man can be denied
his right to labor when and how he chooses, or cease to labor when he so
elects, but, since the Government assumes to safeguard his interests while
employed in an essential public service, the security of society itself
demands his retirement from the service shall not be so timed and related
as to effect the destruction of that service. This vitally essential public
transportation service, demanding so much of brain and brawn, so much for
efficiency and security, ought to offer the most attractive working
conditions and the highest of wages paid to workmen in any employment.

In essentially every branch, from track repairer to the man at the
locomotive throttle, the railroad worker is responsible for the safety of
human lives and the care of vast property. His high responsibility might
well rate high his pay within the limits the traffic will bear; but the
same responsibility, plus governmental protection, may justly deny him and
his associates a withdrawal from service without a warning or under
circumstances which involve the paralysis of necessary transportation. We
have assumed so great a responsibility in necessary regulation that we
unconsciously have assumed the responsibility for maintained service;
therefore the lawful power for the enforcement of decisions is necessary
to sustain the majesty of government and to administer to the public
welfare.

During its longer session the present Congress enacted a new tariff law.
The protection of the American standards of living demanded the insurance
it provides against the distorted conditions of world commerce The framers
of the law made provision for a certain flexibility of customs duties,
whereby it is possible to readjust them as developing conditions may
require. The enactment has imposed a large responsibility upon the
Executive, but that responsibility will be discharged with a broad
mindfulness of the whole business situation. The provision itself admits
either the possible fallibility of rates or their unsuitableness to
changing conditions. I believe the grant of authority may be promptly and
discreetly exercised, ever mindful of the intent and purpose to safeguard
American industrial activity, and at the same time prevent the exploitation
of the American consumer and keep open the paths of such liberal exchanges
as do not endanger our own productivity.

No one contemplates commercial aloofness nor any other aloofness
contradictory to the best American traditions or loftiest human purposes.
Our fortunate capacity for comparative self-containment affords the firm
foundation on which to build for our own security, and a like foundation on
which to build for a future of influence and importance in world commerce.
Our trade expansion must come of capacity and of policies of righteousness
and reasonableness in till our commercial relations.

Let no one assume that our provision for maintained good fortune at home,
and our unwillingness to assume the correction of all the ills of the
world, means a reluctance to cooperate with other peoples or to assume
every just obligation to promote human advancement anywhere in the world.

War made its a creditor Nation. We did not seek an excess possession of the
world's gold, and we have neither desire to profit Unduly by its possession
nor permanently retain it. We do not seek to become an international
dictator because of its power.

The voice of the United States has a respectful hearing in international
councils, because we have convinced the world that we have no selfish ends
to serve, no old grievances to avenge, no territorial or other greed to
satisfy. But the voice being heard is that of good counsel, not of
dictation. It is the voice of sympathy and fraternity and helpfulness,
seeking to assist but not assume for the United States burdens which
nations must bear for themselves. We would rejoice to help rehabilitate
currency systems and facilitate all commerce which does not drag us to the
very levels of those we seek to lift up.

While I have everlasting faith in our Republic, it would be folly, indeed,
to blind ourselves to our problems at home. Abusing the hospitality of our
shores are the advocates of revolution, finding their deluded followers
among those who take on the habiliments of an American without knowing an
American soul. There is the recrudescence of hyphenated Americanism which
we thought to have been stamped out when we committed the Nation, life and
soul, to the World War.

There is a call to make the alien respect our institutions while he
accepts our hospitality. There is need to magnify the American viewpoint to
the alien who seeks a citizenship among us. There is need to magnify the
national viewpoint to Americans throughout the land. More there is a demand
for every living being in the United States to respect and abide by the
laws of the Republic. Let men who are rending the moral fiber of the
Republic through easy contempt for the prohibition law, because they think
it restricts their personal liberty, remember that they set the example and
breed a contempt for law which will ultimately destroy the Republic.

Constitutional prohibition has been adopted by the Nation. It is the
supreme law of the land. In plain speaking, there are conditions relating
to its enforcement which savor of nation-wide scandal. It is the most
demoralizing factor in our public life.

Most of our people assumed that the adoption of the eighteenth amendment
meant the elimination of the question from our politics. On the contrary,
it has been so intensified as an issue that many voters are disposed to
make all political decisions with reference to this single question. It is
distracting the public mind and prejudicing the judgment of the
electorate.

The day is unlikely to come when the eighteenth amendment will be repealed.
The fact may as well be recognized and our course adapted accordingly. If
the statutory provisions for its enforcement are contrary to deliberate
public opinion, which I do not believe the rigorous and literal enforcement
will concentrate public attention on any requisite modification. Such a
course, conforms with the law and saves the humiliation of the Government
and the humiliation of our people before the world, and challenges the
destructive forces engaged in widespread violation, official corruption and
individual demoralization.

The eighteenth amendment involves the concurrent authority of State and
Federal Governments, for the enforcement of the policy it defines. A
certain lack of definiteness, through division of responsibility is thus
introduced. In order to bring about a full understanding of duties and
responsibilities as thus distributed, I purpose to invite the governors of
the States and Territories, at an early opportunity, to a conference with
the Federal Executive authority. Out of the full and free considerations
which will thus be possible, it is confidently believed, will emerge a more
adequate, comprehension of the whole problem, and definite policies of
National and State cooperation in administering the laws.

There are pending bills for the registration of the alien who has come to
our shores. I wish the passage of such an act might be expedited. Life amid
American opportunities is worth the cost of registration if it is worth the
seeking, and the Nation has the right to know who are citizens in the
making or who live among us anti share our advantages while seeking to
undermine our cherished institutions. This provision will enable us to
guard against the abuses in immigration, checking the undesirable whose
irregular Willing is his first violation of our laws. More, it will
facilitate the needed Americanizing of those who mean to enroll as fellow
citizens.

Before enlarging the immigration quotas we had better provide registration
for aliens, those now here or continually pressing for admission, and
establish our examination boards abroad, to make sure of desirables only.
By the examination abroad we could end the pathos at our ports, when men
and women find our doors closed, after long voyages and wasted savings,
because they are unfit for admission It would be kindlier and safer to tell
them before they embark.

Our program of admission and treatment of immigrants is very intimately
related to the educational policy of the Republic With illiteracy estimated
at front two-tenths of 1 per cent to less than 2 per cent in 10 of the
foremost nations of Europe it rivets our attention to it serious problem
when we are reminded of a 6 per cent illiteracy in the United States. The
figures are based on the test which defines an Illiterate as one having no
schooling whatever. Remembering the wide freedom of our public schools
with compulsory attendance in many States in the Union, one is convinced
that much of our excessive illiteracy comes to us from abroad, and the
education of the immigrant becomes it requisite to his Americanization. It
must be done if he is fittingly to exercise the duties as well as enjoy the
privileges of American citizenship. Here is revealed the special field for
Federal cooperation in furthering education.

From the very beginning public education has been left mainly in the hands
of the States. So far as schooling youth is concerned the policy has been
justified, because no responsibility can be so effective as that of the
local community alive to its task. I believe in the cooperation of the
national authority to stimulate, encourage, and broaden the work of the
local authorities. But it is the especial obligation of the Federal
Government to devise means and effectively assist in the education of the
newcomer from foreign lands, so that the level of American education may be
made the highest that is humanly possible.

Closely related to this problem of education is the abolition of child
labor. Twice Congress has attempted the correction of the evils incident to
child employment. The decision of the Supreme Court has put this problem
outside the proper domain of Federal regulation until the Constitution is
so amended as to give the Congress indubitable authority. I recommend the
submission of such an amendment.

We have two schools of thought relating to amendment of the Constitution.
One need not be committed to the belief that amendment is weakening the
fundamental law, or that excessive amendment is essential to meet every
ephemeral whim. We ought to amend to meet the demands of the people when
sanctioned by deliberate public opinion.

One year ago I suggested the submission of an amendment so that we may
lawfully restrict the issues of tax-exempt securities, and I renew that
recommendation now. Tax-exempt securities are drying up the sources of
Federal taxation and they are encouraging unproductive and extravagant
expenditures by States and municipalities. There is more than the menace in
mounting public debt, there is the dissipation of capital which should be
made available to the needs of productive industry. The proposed amendment
will place the State and Federal Governments and all political subdivisions
on an exact equality, and will correct the growing menace of public
borrowing, which if left unchecked may soon threaten the stability of our
institutions.

We are so vast and so varied in our national interests that scores of
problems are pressing for attention. I must not risk the wearying of your
patience with detailed reference.

Reclamation and irrigation projects, where waste land may be made available
for settlement and productivity, are worthy of your favorable
consideration.

When it is realized that we are consuming our timber four times as rapidly
as we are growing it, we must encourage the greatest possible cooperation
between the Federal Government, the various States, and the owners of
forest lands, to the end that protection from fire shall be made more
effective and replanting encouraged.

The fuel problem is under study now by a very capable fact-finding
commission, and any attempt to deal with the coal problem, of such deep
concern to the entire Nation, must await the report of the commission.

There are necessary studies of great problems which Congress might well
initiate. The wide spread between production costs and prices which
consumers pay concerns every citizen of the Republic. It contributes very
largely to the unrest in agriculture and must stand sponsor for much
against which we inveigh in that familiar term--the high cost of living.

No one doubts the excess is traceable to the levy of the middleman, but it
would be unfair to charge him with all responsibility before we appraise
what is exacted of him by our modernly complex life. We have attacked the
problem on one side by the promotion of cooperative marketing, and we might
well inquire into the benefits of cooperative buying. Admittedly, the
consumer is much to blame himself, because of his prodigal expenditure and
his exaction of service, but Government might well serve to point the way
of narrowing the spread of price, especially between the production of food
and its consumption.

A superpower survey of the eastern industrial region has recently been
completed, looking to unification of steam, water, and electric powers, and
to a unified scheme of power distribution. The survey proved that vast
economies in tonnage movement of freights, and in the efficiency of the
railroads, would be effected if the superpower program were adopted. I am
convinced that constructive measures calculated to promote such an
industrial development--I am tempted to say, such an industrial
revolution-would be well worthy the careful attention and fostering
interest of the National Government.

The proposed survey of a plan to draft all the resources of the Republic,
human and material, for national defense may well have your approval. I
commended such a program in case of future war, in the inaugural address.
of March 4, 1921, and every experience in the adjustment and liquidation of
war claims and the settlement of war obligations persuades me we ought to
be prepared for such universal call to armed defense.

I bring you no apprehension of war. The world is abhorrent of it, and our
own relations are not only free from every threatening cloud, but we have
contributed our larger influence toward making armed conflict less likely.

Those who assume that we played our part in the World War and later took
ourselves aloof and apart, unmindful of world obligations, give scant
credit to the helpful part we assume in international relationships.

Whether all nations signatory ratify all the treaties growing out of the
Washington Conference on Limitation of Armament or some withhold approval,
the underlying policy of limiting naval armament has the sanction of the
larger naval powers, and naval competition is suspended. Of course,
unanimous ratification is much to be desired.

The four-power pact, which abolishes every probability of war on the
Pacific, has brought new confidence in a maintained peace, and I can well
believe it might be made a model for like assurances wherever in the world
any common interests are concerned.

We have had expressed the hostility of the American people to a
supergovernment or to any commitment where either a council or an assembly
of leagued powers may chart our course. Treaties of armed alliance can have
no likelihood of American sanction, but we believe in respecting the rights
of nations, in the value of conference and consultation, in the
effectiveness of leaders of nations looking each other in the face ace
before resorting to the arbitrament of arms.

It has been our fortune both to preach and promote international
understanding. The influence of the United States in bringing near the
settlement of an ancient dispute between South American nations is added
proof of the glow of peace in ample understanding. In Washington to-day are
met the delegates of the Central American nations, gathered at the table of
international understanding, to stabilize their Republics and remove every
vestige of disagreement. They are met here by our invitation, not in our
aloofness, and they accept our hospitality because they have faith in our
unselfishness and believe in our helpfulness. Perhaps we are selfish in
craving their confidence and friendship, but such a selfishness we proclaim
to the world, regardless of hemisphere, or seas dividing.

I would like the Congress and the people of the Nation to believe that in a
firm and considerate way we are insistent on American rights wherever they
may be questioned, and deny no rights of others in the assertion of our
own. Moreover we are cognizant of the world's struggles for full
readjustment and rehabilitation, and we have shirked no duty which comes of
sympathy, or fraternity, or highest fellowship among nations. Every
obligation consonant with American ideals and sanctioned under our form of
government is willingly met. When we can not support we do not demand. Our
constitutional limitations do not forbid the exercise of a moral influence,
the measure of which is not less than the high purposes we have sought to
serve.

After all there is less difference about the part this great Republic shall
play in furthering peace and advancing humanity than in the manner of
playing it. We ask no one to assume responsibility for us; we assume no
responsibility which others must bear for themselves, unless nationality is
hopelessly swallowed up in internationalism.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 6, 1923

Since the close of the last Congress the Nation has lost President Harding.
The world knew his kindness and his humanity, his greatness and his
character. He has left his mark upon history. He has made justice more
certain and peace more secure. The surpassing tribute paid to his memory as
he was borne across the continent to rest at last at home revealed the
place he held in the hearts of the American people. But this is not the
occasion for extended reference to the man or his work. In this presence,
among these who knew and loved him, that is unnecessary. But we who were
associated with him could not resume together the functions of our office
without pausing for a moment, and in his memory reconsecrating ourselves to
the service of our country. He is gone. We remain. It is our duty, under
the inspiration of his example, to take up the burdens which he was
permitted to lay down, and to develop and support the wise principles of
government which he represented.

FOREIGN AFFAIRS

For us peace reigns everywhere. We desire to perpetuate it always by
granting full justice to others and requiring of others full justice to
ourselves.

Our country has one cardinal principle to maintain in its foreign policy.
It is an American principle. It must be an American policy. We attend to
our own affairs, conserve our own strength, and protect the interests of
our own citizens; but we recognize thoroughly our obligation to help
others, reserving to the decision of our own Judgment the time, the place,
and the method. We realize the common bond of humanity. We know the
inescapable law of service.

Our country has definitely refused to adopt and ratify the covenant of the
League of Nations. We have not felt warranted in assuming the
responsibilities which its members have assumed. I am not proposing any
change in this policy; neither is the Senate. The incident, so far as we
are concerned, is closed. The League exists as a foreign agency. We hope it
will be helpful. But the United States sees no reason to limit its own
freedom and independence of action by joining it. We shall do well to
recognize this basic fact in all national affairs and govern ourselves
accordingly.

WORLD COURT

Our foreign policy has always been guided by two principles. The one is the
avoidance of permanent political alliances which would sacrifice our proper
independence. The other is the peaceful settlement of controversies between
nations. By example and by treaty we have advocated arbitration. For nearly
25 years we have been a member of The Hague Tribunal, and have long sought
the creation of a permanent World Court of Justice. I am in full accord
with both of these policies. I favor the establishment of such a court
intended to include the whole world. That is, and has long been, an
American policy.

Pending before the Senate is a proposal that this Government give its
support to the Permanent Court of International Justice, which is a new and
somewhat different plan. This is not a partisan question. It should not
assume an artificial importance. The court is merely a convenient
instrument of adjustment to which we could go, but to which we could not
be brought. It should be discussed with entire candor, not by a political
but by a judicial method, without pressure and without prejudice.
Partisanship has no place in our foreign relations. As I wish to see a
court established, and as the proposal presents the only practical plan on
which many nations have ever agreed, though it may not meet every desire, I
therefore commend it to the favorable consideration of the Senate, with the
proposed reservations clearly indicating our refusal to adhere to the
League of Nations.

RUSSIA

Our diplomatic relations, lately so largely interrupted, are now being
resumed, but Russia presents notable difficulties. We have every desire to
see that great people, who are our traditional friends, restored to their
position among the nations of the earth. We have relieved their pitiable
destitution with an enormous charity. Our Government offers no objection
to the carrying on of commerce by our citizens with the people of Russia.
Our Government does not propose, however, to enter into relations with
another regime which refuses to recognize the sanctity of international
obligations. I do not propose to barter away for the privilege of trade any
of the cherished rights of humanity. I do not propose to make merchandise
of any American principles. These rights and principles must go wherever
the sanctions of our Government go.

But while the favor of America is not for sale, I am willing to make very
large concessions for the purpose of rescuing the people of Russia. Already
encouraging evidences of returning to the ancient ways of society can be
detected. But more are needed. Whenever there appears any disposition to
compensate our citizens who were despoiled, and to recognize that debt
contracted with our Government, not by the Czar, but by the newly formed
Republic of Russia; whenever the active spirit of enmity to our
institutions is abated; whenever there appear works mete for repentance;
our country ought to be the first to go to the economic and moral rescue of
Russia. We have every desire to help and no desire to injure. We hope the
time is near at hand when we can act.

DEBTS

The current debt and interest due from foreign Governments, exclusive of
the British debt of $4,600,000,000, is about $7,200,000,000. I do not favor
the cancellation of this debt, but I see no objection to adjusting it in
accordance with the principle adopted for the British debt. Our country
would not wish to assume the role of an oppressive creditor, but would
maintain the principle that financial obligations between nations are
likewise moral obligations which international faith and honor require
should be discharged.

Our Government has a liquidated claim against Germany for the expense of
the army of occupation of over $255,000,000. Besides this, the Mixed Claims
Commission have before them about 12,500 claims of American citizens,
aggregating about $1,225,000,000. These claims have already been reduced by
a recent decision, but there are valid claims reaching well toward
$500,000,000. Our thousands of citizens with credits due them of hundreds
of millions of dollars have no redress save in the action of our
Government. These are very substantial interests, which it is the duty of
our Government to protect as best it can. That course I propose to pursue.

It is for these reasons that we have a direct interest in the economic
recovery of Europe. They are enlarged by our desire for the stability of
civilization and the welfare of humanity. That we are making sacrifices to
that end none can deny. Our deferred interest alone amounts to a million
dollars every day. But recently we offered to aid with our advice and
counsel. We have reiterated our desire to see France paid and Germany
revived. We have proposed disarmament. We have earnestly sought to compose
differences and restore peace. We shall persevere in well-doing, not by
force, but by reason.

FOREIGN PAPERS

Under the law the papers pertaining to foreign relations to be printed are
transmitted as a part of this message. Other volumes of these papers will
follow.

FOREIGN SERVICE

The foreign service of our Government needs to be reorganized and
improved.

FISCAL CONDITION

Our main problems are domestic problems. Financial stability is the first
requisite of sound government. We can not escape the effect of world
conditions. We can not avoid the inevitable results of the economic
disorders which have reached all nations. But we shall diminish their harm
to us in proportion as we continue to restore our Government finances to a
secure and endurable position. This we can and must do. Upon that firm
foundation rests the only hope of progress and prosperity. From that source
must come relief for the people.

This is being, accomplished by a drastic but orderly retrenchment, which is
bringing our expenses within our means. The origin of this has been the
determination of the American people, the main support has been the courage
of those in authority, and the effective method has been the Budget System.
The result has involved real sacrifice by department heads, but it has been
made without flinching. This system is a law of the Congress. It represents
your will. It must be maintained, and ought to be strengthened by the
example of your observance. Without a Budget System there can be no fixed
responsibility and no constructive scientific economy.

This great concentration of effort by the administration and Congress has
brought the expenditures, exclusive of the self-supporting Post. Office
Department, down to three billion dollars. It is possible, in consequence,
to make a large reduction in the taxes of the people, which is the sole
object of all curtailment. This is treated at greater length in the Budget
message, and a proposed plan has been presented in detail in a statement by
the Secretary of the Treasury which has my unqualified approval. I
especially commend a decrease on earned incomes, and further abolition of
admission, message, and nuisance taxes. The amusement and educational
value of moving pictures ought not to be taxed. Diminishing charges against
moderate incomes from investment will afford immense relief, while a
revision of the surtaxes will not only provide additional money for capital
investment, thus stimulating industry and employing more but will not
greatly reduce the revenue from that source, and may in the future actually
increase it.

Being opposed to war taxes in time of peace, I am not in favor of
excess-profits taxes. A very great service could be rendered through
immediate enactment of legislation relieving the people of some of the
burden of taxation. To reduce war taxes is to give every home a better
chance.

For seven years the people have borne with uncomplaining courage the
tremendous burden of national and local taxation. These must both be
reduced. The taxes of the Nation must be reduced now as much as prudence
will permit, and expenditures must be reduced accordingly. High taxes reach
everywhere and burden everybody. They gear most heavily upon the poor. They
diminish industry and commerce. They make agriculture unprofitable. They
increase the rates on transportation. They are a charge on every necessary
of life. Of all services which the Congress can render to the country, I
have no hesitation in declaring t neglect it, to postpone it, to obstruct
it by unsound proposals, is to become unworthy of public confidence and
untrue to public trust. The country wants this measure to have the right of
way over an others.

Another reform which is urgent in our fiscal system is the abolition of the
right to issue tax-exempt securities. The existing system not only permits
a large amount of the wealth of the Notion to escape its just burden but
acts as a continual stimulant to municipal extravagance. This should be
prohibited by constitutional amendment. All the wealth of the Nation ought
to contribute its fair share to the expenses of the Nation.

TARIFF TAW

The present tariff law has accomplished its two main objects. It has
secured an abundant revenue and been productive of an abounding prosperity.
Under it the country has had a very large export and import trade. A
constant revision of the tariff by the Congress is disturbing and harmful.
The present law contains an elastic provision authorizing the President to
increase or decrease present schedules not in excess of 50 per centum to
meet the difference in cost of production at home and abroad. This does
not, to my mind, warrant a rewriting g of the whole law, but does mean, and
will be so administered, that whenever the required investigation shows
that inequalities of sufficient importance exist in any schedule, the power
to change them should and will be applied.

SHIPPING

The entire well being of our country is dependent upon transportation by
sea and land. Our Government during the war acquired a large merchant fleet
which should be transferred, as soon as possible, to private ownership and
operation under conditions which would secure two results: First, and of
prime importance, adequate means for national defense; second, adequate
service to American commerce. Until shipping conditions are such that our
fleet can be disposed of advantageously under these conditions, it will be
operated as economically as possible under such plans as may be devised
from time to time by the Shipping Board. We must have a merchant marine
which meets these requirements, and we shall have to pay the cost of its
service.

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

The time has come to resume in a moderate way the opening of our
intracoastal waterways; the control of flood waters of the Mississippi and
of the Colorado Rivers; the improvement of the waterways from the Great
Lakes toward the Gulf of Mexico; and the development of the great power and
navigation project of the St. Lawrence River, for which efforts are now
being made to secure the necessary treaty with Canada. These projects can
not all be undertaken at once, but all should have the immediate
consideration of the Congress and be adopted as fast as plans can be
matured and the necessary funds become available. This is not incompatible
with economy, for their nature does not require so much a public
expenditure as a capital investment which will be reproductive, as
evidenced by the marked increase in revenue from the Panama Canal. Upon
these projects depend much future industrial and agricultural progress.
They represent the protection of large areas from flood and the addition of
a great amount of cheap power and cheap freight by use of navigation, chief
of which is the bringing of ocean-going ships to the Great Lakes.

Another problem of allied character is the superpower development of the
Northeastern States, consideration of which is growing under the direction
of the Department of Commerce by joint conference with the local
authorities.

RAILROADS

Criticism of the railroad law has been directed, first, to the section
laying down the rule by which rates are fixed, and providing for payment to
the Government and use of excess earnings; second, to the method for the
adjustment of wage scales; and third, to the authority permitting
consolidations.

It has been erroneously assumed that the act undertakes to guarantee
railroad earnings. The law requires that rates should be just and
reasonable. That has always been the rule under which rates have been
fixed. To make a rate that does not yield a fair return results in
confiscation, and confiscatory rates are of course unconstitutional. Unless
the Government adheres to the rule of making a rate that will yield a fair
return, it must abandon rate making altogether. The new and important
feature of that part of the law is the recapture and redistribution of
excess rates. The constitutionality of this method is now before the
Supreme Court for adjudication. Their decision should be awaited before
attempting further legislation on this subject. Furthermore, the importance
of this feature will not be great if consolidation goes into effect.

The settlement of railroad labor disputes is a matter of grave public
concern. The Labor Board was established to protect the public in the
enjoyment of continuous service by attempting to insure justice between the
companies and their employees. It has been a great help, but is not
altogether satisfactory to the public, the employees, or the companies. If
a substantial agreement can be reached among the groups interested, there
should be no hesitation in enacting such agreement into law. If it is not
reached, the Labor Board may very well be left for the present to protect
the public welfare.

The law for consolidations is not sufficiently effective to be expeditious.
Additional legislation is needed giving authority for voluntary
consolidations, both regional and route, and providing Government machinery
to aid and stimulate such action, always subject to the approval of the
Interstate Commerce Commission. This should authorize the commission to
appoint committees for each proposed group, representing the public and the
component roads, with power to negotiate with individual security holders
for an exchange of their securities for those of the, consolidation on such
terms and conditions as the commission may prescribe for avoiding any
confiscation and preserving fair values. Should this permissive
consolidation prove ineffective after a limited period, the authority of
the Government will have to be directly invoked.

Consolidation appears to be the only feasible method for the maintenance of
an adequate system of transportation with an opportunity so to adjust
freight rates as to meet such temporary conditions as now prevail in some
agricultural sections. Competent authorities agree that an entire
reorganization of the rate structure for freight is necessary. This should
be ordered at once by the Congress.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

As no revision of the laws of the United States has been made since 1878, a
commission or committee should be created to undertake this work. The
Judicial Council reports that two more district judges are needed in the
southern district of New York, one in the northern district of Georgia, and
two more circuit judges in the Circuit Court of Appeals of the Eighth
Circuit. Legislation should be considered for this purpose.

It is desirable to expedite the hearing and disposal of cases. A
commission of Federal judges and lawyers should be created to recommend
legislation by which the procedure in the Federal trial courts may be
simplified and regulated by rules of court, rather than by statute; such
rules to be submitted to the Congress and to be in force until annulled or
modified by the Congress. The Supreme Court needs legislation revising and
simplifying the laws governing review by that court, and enlarging the
classes of cases of too little public importance to be subject to review.
Such reforms would expedite the transaction of the business of the courts.
The administration of justice is likely to fail if it be long delayed.

The National Government has never given adequate attention to its prison
problems. It ought to provide employment in such forms of production as can
be used by the Government, though not sold to the public in competition
with private business, for all prisoners who can be placed at work, and for
which they should receive a reasonable compensation, available for their
dependents.

Two independent reformatories are needed; one for the segregation of women,
and another for the segregation of young men serving their first sentence.

The administration of justice would be facilitated greatly by including in
the Bureau of Investigation of the Department of Justice a Division of
Criminal Identification, where there would be collected this information
which is now indispensable in the suppression of crime.

PROHIBITION

The prohibition amendment to the Constitution requires the Congress. and
the President to provide adequate laws to prevent its violation. It is my
duty to enforce such laws. For that purpose a treaty is being negotiated
with Great Britain with respect to the right of search of hovering
vessels. To prevent smuggling, the Coast Card should be greatly
strengthened, and a supply of swift power boats should be provided. The
major sources of production should be rigidly regulated, and every effort
should be made to suppress interstate traffic. With this action on the part
of the National Government, and the cooperation which is usually rendered
by municipal and State authorities, prohibition should be made effective.
Free government has no greater menace than disrespect for authority and
continual violation of law. It is the duty of a citizen not only to observe
the law but to let it be known that he is opposed to its violation.

THE NEGRO

Numbered among our population are some 12,000,000 colored people. Under our
Constitution their rights are just as sacred as those of any other citizen.
It is both a public and a private duty to protect those rights. The
Congress ought to exercise all its powers of prevention and punishment
against the hideous crime of lynching, of which the negroes are by no means
the sole sufferers, but for which they furnish a majority of the victims.

Already a considerable sum is appropriated to give the negroes vocational
training in agriculture. About half a million dollars is recommended for
medical courses at Howard University to help contribute to the education of
500 colored doctors needed each year. On account of the integration of
large numbers into industrial centers, it has been proposed that a
commission be created, composed of members from both races, to formulate a
better policy for mutual understanding and confidence. Such an effort is to
be commended. Everyone would rejoice in the accomplishment of the results
which it seeks. But it is well to recognize that these difficulties are to
a large extent local problems which must be worked out by the mutual
forbearance and human kindness of each community. Such a method gives much
more promise of a real remedy than outside interference.

CIVIL SERVICE

The maintenance and extension of the classified civil service is
exceedingly important. There are nearly 550,000 persons in the executive
civil service drawing about $700,000,000 of yearly compensation.
Four-fifths of these are in the classified service. This method of
selection of the employees of the United States is especially desirable for
the Post Office Department. The Civil Service Commission has recommended
that postmasters at first, second, and third class offices be classified.
Such action, accompanied by a repeal of the four-year term of office, would
undoubtedly be an improvement. I also recommend that the field force for
prohibition enforcement be brought within the classified civil service
without covering in the present membership. The best method for selecting
public servants is the merit system.

PUBLIC BUILDINGS

Many of the departments in Washington need better housing facilities. Some
are so crowded that their work is impeded, others are so scattered that
they lose their identity. While I do not favor at this time a general
public building law, I believe it is now necessary, in accordance with
plans already sanctioned for a unified and orderly system for the
development of this city, to begin the carrying out of those plans by
authorizing the erection of three or four buildings most urgently needed by
an annual appropriation of $5,000,000.

REGULATORY LEGISLATION

Cooperation with other maritime powers is necessary for complete protection
of our coast waters from pollution. Plans for this are under way, but
await certain experiments for refuse disposal. Meantime laws prohibiting
spreading oil and oil refuse from vessels in our own territorial waters
would be most helpful against this menace and should be speedily enacted.

Laws should be passed regulating aviation.

Revision is needed of the laws regulating radio interference.

Legislation and regulations establishing load liner, to provide safe
loading of vessels leaving our ports are necessary and recodification of
our navigation laws is vital.

Revision of procedure of the Federal Trade Commission will give more
constructive purpose to this department.

If our Alaskan fisheries are to be saved from destruction, there must be
further legislation declaring a general policy and delegating the authority
to make rules and regulations to an administrative body.

ARMY AND NAVY

For several years we have been decreasing the personnel of the Army and
Navy, and reducing their power to the danger point. Further reductions
should not be made. The Army is a guarantee of the security of our citizens
at home; the Navy is a guarantee of the security of our citizens abroad.
Both of these services should be strengthened rather than weakened.
Additional planes are needed for the Army, and additional submarines for
the Navy. The defenses of Panama must be perfected. We want no more
competitive armaments. We want no more war. But we want no weakness that
invites imposition. A people who neglect their national defense are putting
in jeopardy their national honor.

INSULAR POSSESSIONS

Conditions in the insular possessions on the whole have been good. Their
business has been reviving. They are being administered according to law.
That effort has the full support of the administration. Such
recommendations as may conic from their people or their governments should
have the most considerate attention.

EDUCATION AND WELFARE

Our National Government is not doing as much as it legitimately can do to
promote the welfare of the people. Our enormous material wealth, our
institutions, our whole form of society, can not be considered fully
successful until their benefits reach the merit of every individual. This
is not a suggestion that the Government should, or could, assume for the
people the inevitable burdens of existence. There is no method by which we
can either be relieved of the results of our own folly or be guaranteed a
successful life. There is an inescapable personal responsibility for the
development of character, of industry, of thrift, and of self-control.
These do not come from the Government, but from the people themselves. But
the Government can and should always be expressive of steadfast
determination, always vigilant, to maintain conditions under which these
virtues are most likely to develop and secure recognition and reward. This
is the American policy.

It is in accordance with this principle that we have enacted laws for the
protection of the public health and have adopted prohibition in narcotic
drugs and intoxicating liquors. For purposes of national uniformity we
ought to provide, by constitutional amendment and appropriate legislation,
for a limitation of child labor, and in all cases under the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Federal Government a minimum wage law for women, which
would undoubtedly find sufficient power of enforcement in the influence of
public opinion.

Having in mind that education is peculiarly a local problem, and that it
should always be pursued with the largest freedom of choice by students and
parents, nevertheless, the Federal Government might well give the benefit
of its counsel and encouragement more freely in this direction. If anyone
doubts the need of concerted action by the States of the Nation for this
purpose, it is only necessary to consider the appalling figures of
illiteracy representing a condition which does not vary much in all parts
of the Union. I do not favor the making of appropriations from the National
Treasury to be expended directly on local education, but I do consider it a
fundamental requirement of national activity which, accompanied by allied
subjects of welfare, is worthy of a separate department and a place in the
Cabinet. The humanitarian side of government should not be repressed, but
should be cultivated.

Mere intelligence, however, is not enough. Enlightenment must be
accompanied by that moral power which is the product of the home and of
rebellion. Real education and true welfare for the people rest inevitably
on this foundation, which the Government can approve and commend, but which
the people themselves must create.

IMMIGRATION

American institutions rest solely on good citizenship. They were created by
people who had a background of self-government. New arrivals should be
limited to our capacity to absorb them into the ranks of good citizenship.
America must be kept American. For this purpose, it is necessary to
continue a policy of restricted immigration. It would be well to make such
immigration of a selective nature with some inspection at the source, and
based either on a prior census or upon the record of naturalization. Either
method would insure the admission of those with the largest capacity and
best intention of becoming citizens. I am convinced that our present
economic and social conditions warrant a limitation of those to be
admitted. We should find additional safety in a law requiring the immediate
registration of all aliens. Those who do not want to be partakers of the
American spirit ought not to settle in America.

VETERANS

No more important duty falls on the Government of the United States than
the adequate care of its veterans. Those suffering disabilities incurred in
the service must have sufficient hospital relief and compensation. Their
dependents must be supported. Rehabilitation and vocational training must
be completed. All of this service must be clean, must be prompt and
effective, and it must be administered in a spirit of the broadest and
deepest human sympathy. If investigation reveals any present defects of
administration or need Of legislation, orders will be given for the
immediate correction of administration, and recommendations for legislation
should be given the highest preference.

At present there are 9,500 vacant beds in Government hospitals, I recommend
that all hospitals be authorized at once to receive and care for, without
hospital pay, the veterans of all wars needing such care, whenever there
are vacant beds, and that immediate steps be taken to enlarge and build new
hospitals to serve all such cases.

The American Legion will present to the Congress a legislative program
too extensive for detailed discussion here. It is a carefully matured plan.
While some of it I do not favor, with much of it I am in hearty accord, and
I recommend that a most painstaking effort be made to provide remedies for
any defects in the administration of the present laws which their
experience has revealed. The attitude of the Government toward these
proposals should be one of generosity. But I do not favor the granting of a
bonus.

COAL

The cost of coal has become unbearably high. It places a great burden on
our industrial and domestic life. The public welfare requires a reduction
in the price of fuel. With the enormous deposits in existence, failure of
supply ought not to be tolerated. Those responsible for the conditions in
this industry should undertake its reform and free it from any charge of
profiteering.

The report of the Coal Commission will be before the Congress. It comprises
all the facts. It represents the mature deliberations and conclusions of
the best talent and experience that ever made a national survey of the
production and distribution of fuel. I do not favor Government ownership or
operation of coal mines. The need is for action under private ownership
that will secure greater continuity of production and greater public
protection. The Federal Government probably has no peacetime authority to
regulate wages, prices, or profits in coal at the mines or among dealers,
but by ascertaining and publishing facts it can exercise great influence.

The source of the difficulty in the bituminous coal fields is the
intermittence of operation which causes great waste of both capital and
labor. That part of the report dealing with this problem has much
significance, and is suggestive of necessary remedies. By amending, the car
rules, by encouraging greater unity of ownership, and possibly by
permitting common selling agents for limited districts on condition that
they accept adequate regulations and guarantee that competition between
districts be unlimited, distribution, storage, and continuity ought to be
improved.

The supply of coal must be constant. In case of its prospective
interruption, the President should have authority to appoint a commission
empowered to deal with whatever emergency situation might arise, to aid
conciliation and voluntary arbitration, to adjust any existing or
threatened controversy between the employer and the employee when
collective bargaining fails, and by controlling distribution to prevent
profiteering in this vital necessity. This legislation is exceedingly
urgent, and essential to the exercise of national authority for the
protection of the people. Those who undertake the responsibility of
management or employment in this industry do so with the full knowledge
that the public interest is paramount, and that to fail through any motive
of selfishness in its service is such a betrayal of duty as warrants
uncompromising action by the Government.

REORGANIZATION

A special joint committee has been appointed to work out a plan for a
reorganization of the different departments and bureaus of the Government
more scientific and economical than the present system. With the exception
of the consolidation of the War and Navy Departments and some minor
details, the plan has the general sanction of the President and the
Cabinet. It is important that reorganization be enacted into law at the
present session.

AGRICULTURE

Aided by the sound principles adopted by the Government, the business of
the country has had an extraordinary revival. Looked at as a whole, the
Nation is in the enjoyment of remarkable prosperity. Industry and commerce
are thriving. For the most tart agriculture is successful, eleven staples
having risen in value from about $5,300,000,000 two years ago to about.
$7,000,000,000 for the current year. But range cattle are still low in
price, and some sections of the wheat area, notably Minnesota, North
Dakota, and on west, have many cases of actual distress. With his products
not selling on a parity with the products of industry, every sound remedy
that can be devised should be applied for the relief of the farmer. He
represents a character, a type of citizenship, and a public necessity that
must be preserved and afforded every facility for regaining prosperity.

The distress is most acute among those wholly dependent upon one crop..
Wheat acreage was greatly expanded and has not yet been sufficiently
reduced. A large amount is raised for export, which has to meet the
competition in the world market of large amounts raised on land much
cheaper and much more productive.

No complicated scheme of relief, no plan for Government fixing of prices,
no resort to the public Treasury will be of any permanent value in
establishing agriculture. Simple and direct methods put into operation by
the farmer himself are the only real sources for restoration.

Indirectly the farmer must be relieved by a reduction of national and local
taxation. He must be assisted by the reorganization of the freight-rate
structure which could reduce charges on his production. To make this fully
effective there ought to be railroad consolidations. Cheaper fertilizers
must be provided.

He must have organization. His customer with whom he exchanges products o
he farm for those of industry is organized, labor is organized, business is
organized, and there is no way for agriculture to meet this unless it, too,
is organized. The acreage of wheat is too large. Unless we can meet the
world market at a profit, we must stop raising for export. Organization
would help to reduce acreage. Systems of cooperative marketing created by
the farmers themselves, supervised by competent management, without doubt
would be of assistance, but, the can not wholly solve the problem. Our
agricultural schools ought to have thorough courses in the theory of
organization and cooperative marketing.

Diversification is necessary. Those farmers who raise their living on their
land are not greatly in distress. Such loans as are wisely needed to assist
buying stock and other materials to start in this direction should be
financed through a Government agency as a temporary and emergency
expedient.

The remaining difficulty is the disposition of exportable wheat. I do not
favor the permanent interference of the Government in this problem. That
probably would increase the trouble by increasing production. But it seems
feasible to provide Government assistance to exports, and authority should
be given the War Finance Corporation to grant, in its discretion, the most
liberal terms of payment for fats and grains exported for the direct
benefit of the farm.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The Government is undertaking to develop a great water-power project known
as Muscle Shoals, on which it has expended many million dollars. The work
is still going on. Subject to the right to retake in time of war, I
recommend that this property with a location for auxiliary steam plant and
rights of way be sold. This would end the present burden of expense and
should return to the Treasury the largest price possible to secure.

While the price is an important element, there is another consideration
even more compelling. The agriculture of the Nation needs a greater supply
and lower cost of fertilizer. This is now imported in large quantities. The
best information I can secure indicates that present methods of power
production would not be able profitably to meet the price at which these
imports can be sold. To obtain a supply from this water power would require
long and costly experimentation to perfect a process for cheap production.
Otherwise our purpose would fail completely. It seems desirable, therefore,
in order to protect and promote the public welfare, to have adequate
covenants that such experimentation be made and carried on to success. The
great advantage of low-priced nitrates must be secured for the direct
benefit of the farmers and the indirect benefit of the public in time of
peace, and of the Government in time of war. If this main object be
accomplished, the amount of money received for the property is not a
primary or major consideration.

Such a solution will involve complicated negotiations, and there is no
authority for that purpose. I therefore recommend that the Congress
appoint a small joint committee to consider offers, conduct negotiations,
and report definite recommendations.

RECLAMATION

By reason of many contributing causes, occupants of our reclamation
projects are in financial difficulties, which in some cases are acute.
Relief should be granted by definite authority of law empowering the
Secretary of the Interior in his discretion to suspend, readjust, and
reassess all charges against water users. This whole question is being
considered by experts. You will have the advantage of the facts and
conclusions which they may develop. This situation, involving a Government
investment of more than $135,000,000, and affecting more than 30,000 water
users, is serious. While relief which is necessary should be granted, yet
contracts with the Government which can be met should be met. The
established general policy of these projects should not be abandoned for
any private control.

HIGHWAYS AND FORESTS

Highways and reforestation should continue to have the interest and support
of the Government. Everyone is anxious for good highways. I have made a
liberal proposal in the Budget for the continuing payment to the States by
the Federal Government of its share for this necessary public improvement.
No expenditure of public money contributes so much to the national wealth
as for building good roads.

Reforestation has an importance far above the attention it usually secures.
A special committee of the Senate is investigating this need, and I shall
welcome a constructive policy based on their report.

It is 100 years since our country announced the Monroe doctrine. This
principle has been ever since, and is now, one of the main foundations of
our foreign relations. It must be maintained. But in maintaining it we must
not be forgetful that a great change has taken place. We are no longer a
weak Nation, thinking mainly of defense, dreading foreign imposition. We
are great and powerful. New powers bring new responsibilities. Our ditty
then was to protect ourselves. Added to that, our duty now is to help give
stability to the world. We want idealism. We want that vision which lifts
men and nations above themselves. These are virtues by reason of their own
merit. But they must not be cloistered; they must not be impractical; they
must not be ineffective.

The world has had enough of the curse of hatred and selfishness, of
destruction and war. It has had enough of the wrongful use of material
power. For the healing of the nations there must be good will and charity,
confidence and peace. The time has come for a more practical use of moral
power, and more reliance upon the principle that right makes its own might.
Our authority among the nations must be represented by justice and mercy.
It is necessary not only to have faith, but to make sacrifices for our
faith. The spiritual forces of the world make all its final determinations.
It is with these voices that America should speak. Whenever they declare a
righteous purpose there need be no doubt that they will be heard. America
has taken her place in the world as a Republic--free, independent,
powerful. The best service that can be rendered to humanity is the
assurance that this place will be maintained.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 3, 1924

To the Congress of the United States:

The present state of the Union, upon which it is customary for the
President to report to the Congress under the provisions of the
Constitution, is such that it may be regarded with encouragement and
satisfaction by every American. Our country is almost unique in its ability
to discharge fully and promptly all its obligations at home and abroad, and
provide for all its inhabitants an increase in material resources, in
intellectual vigor and in moral power. The Nation holds a position
unsurpassed in all former human experience. This does not mean that we do
not have any problems. It is elementary that the increasing breadth of our
experience necessarily increases the problems of our national life. But it
does mean that if all will but apply ourselves industriously and honestly,
we have ample powers with which to meet our problems and provide for I heir
speedy solution. I do not profess that we can secure an era of perfection
in human existence, but we can provide an era of peace and prosperity,
attended with freedom and justice and made more and more satisfying by the
ministrations of the charities and humanities of life.

Our domestic problems are for the most part economic. We have our enormous
debt to pay, and we are paying it. We have the high cost of government to
diminish, and we are diminishing it. We have a heavy burden of taxation to
reduce, and we are reducing it. But while remarkable progress has been made
in these directions, the work is yet far from accomplished. We still owe
over $21,000,000,000, the cost of the National Government is still about
$3,500,000,000, and the national taxes still amount to about $27 for each
one of our inhabitants. There yet exists this enormous field for the
application of economy.

In my opinion the Government can do more to remedy the economic ills of the
people by a system of rigid economy in public expenditure than can be
accomplished through any other action. The costs of our national and local
governments combined now stand at a sum close to $100 for each inhabitant
of the land. A little less than one-third of this is represented by
national expenditure, and a little more than two-thirds by local
expenditure. It is an ominous fact that only the National Government is
reducing its debt. Others are increasing theirs at about $1,000,000,000
each year. The depression that overtook business, the disaster experienced
in agriculture, the lack of employment and the terrific shrinkage in all
values which our country experienced in a most acute form in 1920, resulted
in no small measure from the prohibitive taxes which were then levied on
all productive effort. The establishment of a system of drastic economy in
public expenditure, which has enabled us to pay off about one-fifth of the
national debt since 1919, and almost cut in two the national tax burden
since 1921, has been one of the main causes in reestablishing a prosperity
which has come to include within its benefits almost every one of our
inhabitants. Economy reaches everywhere. It carries a blessing to
everybody.

The fallacy of the claim that the costs of government are borne by the rich
and those who make a direct contribution to the National Treasury can not
be too often exposed. No system has been devised, I do not think any system
could be devised, under which any person living in this country could
escape being affected by the cost of our government. It has a direct effect
both upon the rate and the purchasing power of wages. It is felt in the
price of those prime necessities of existence, food, clothing, fuel and
shelter. It would appear to be elementary that the more the Government
expends the more it must require every producer to contribute out of his
production to the Public Treasury, and the less he will have for his own
benefit. The continuing costs of public administration can be met in only
one way--by the work of the people. The higher they become, the more the
people must work for the Government. The less they are, the more the people
can work for themselves.

The present estimated margin between public receipts and expenditures for
this fiscal year is very small. Perhaps the most important work that this
session of the Congress can do is to continue a policy of economy and
further reduce the cost of government, in order that we may have a
reduction of taxes for the next fiscal year. Nothing is more likely to
produce that public confidence which is the forerunner and the mainstay of
prosperity, encourage and enlarge business opportunity with ample
opportunity for employment at good wages, provide a larger market for
agricultural products, and put our country in a stronger position to be
able to meet the world competition in trade, than a continuing policy of
economy. Of course necessary costs must be met, proper functions of the
Government performed, and constant investments for capital account and
reproductive effort must be carried on by our various departments. But the
people must know that their Government is placing upon them no unnecessary
burden.

TAXES

Everyone desires a reduction of taxes, and there is a great preponderance
of sentiment in favor of taxation reform. When I approved the present tax
law, I stated publicly that I did so in spite of certain provisions which I
believed unwise and harmful. One of the most glaring of these was the
making public of the amounts assessed against different income-tax payers.
Although that damage has now been done, I believe its continuation to be
detrimental To the public welfare and bound to decrease public revenues, so
that it ought to be repealed.

Anybody can reduce taxes, but it is not so easy to stand in the gap and
resist the passage of increasing appropriation bills which would make tax
reduction impossible. It will be very easy to measure the strength of the
attachment to reduced taxation by the power with which increased
appropriations are resisted. If at the close of the present session the
Congress has kept within the budget which I propose to present, it will
then be possible to have a moderate amount of tax reduction and all the tax
reform that the Congress may wish for during the next fiscal year. The
country is now feeling the direct stimulus which came from the passage of
the last revenue bill, and under the assurance of a reasonable system of
taxation there is every prospect of an era of prosperity of unprecedented
proportions. But it would be idle to expect any such results unless
business can continue free from excess profits taxation and be accorded a
system of surtaxes at rates which have for their object not the punishment
of success or the discouragement of business, but the production of the
greatest amount of revenue from large incomes. I am convinced that the
larger incomes of the country would actually yield more revenue to the
Government if the basis of taxation were scientifically revised downward.
Moreover the effect of the present method of this taxation is to increase
the cost of interest on productive enterprise and to increase the burden
of rent. It is altogether likely that such reduction would so encourage and
stimulate investment that it would firmly establish our country in the
economic leadership of the world.

WATERWAYS

Meantime our internal development should go on. Provision should be made
for flood control of such rivers as the Mississippi and the Colorado, and
for the opening up of our inland waterways to commerce. Consideration is
due to the project of better navigation from the Great Lakes to the Gulf.
Every effort is being made to promote an agreement with Canada to build
the, St. Lawrence waterway. There are pending before the Congress bills for
further development of the Mississippi Basin, for the taking over of the
Cape Cod Canal in accordance with a moral obligation which seems to have
been incurred during the war, and for the improvement of harbors on both
the Pacific and the Atlantic coasts. While this last should be divested of
some of its projects and we must proceed slowly, these bills in general
have my approval. Such works are productive of wealth and in the long run
tend to a reduction of the tax burden.

RECLAMATION

Our country has a well defined policy of reclamation established under
statutory authority. This policy should be continued and made a
self-sustaining activity administered in a manner that will meet local
requirements and bring our and lands into a profitable state of cultivation
as fast as there is a market for their products. Legislation is pending
based on the report of the Fact Finding Commission for the proper relief of
those needing extension of time in which to meet their payments on
irrigated land, and for additional amendments and reforms of our
reclamation laws, which are all exceedingly important and should be enacted
at once.

No more important development has taken place in the last year than the
beginning of a restoration of agriculture to a prosperous condition. We
must permit no division of classes in this country, with one occupation
striving to secure advantage over another. Each must proceed under open
opportunities and with a fair prospect of economic equality. The Government
can not successfully insure prosperity or fix prices by legislative fiat.
Every business has its risk and its times of depression. It is well known
that in the long run there will be a more even prosperity and a more
satisfactory range of prices under the natural working out of economic laws
than when the Government undertakes the artificial support of markets and
industries. Still we can so order our affairs, so protect our own people
from foreign competition, so arrange our national finances, so administer
our monetary system, so provide for the extension of credits, so improve
methods of distribution, as to provide a better working machinery for the
transaction of the business of the Nation with the least possible friction
and loss. The Government has been constantly increasing its efforts in
these directions for the relief and permanent establishment of agriculture
on a sound and equal basis with other business.

It is estimated that the value of the crops for this harvest year may reach
$13,000,000,000, which is an increase of over $3,000,000,000 in three
years. It compares with $7,100,000,000 in 1913, and if we make deduction
from the figures of 1924 for the comparatively decreased value of the
dollar, the yield this year still exceeds 1913 in purchasing power by over
$1,000,000,000, and in this interval there has been no increase in the
number of farmers. Mostly by his own effort the farmer has decreased the
cost of production. A marked increase in the price of his products and some
decrease in the price of his supplies has brought him about to a parity
with the rest of the Nation. The crop area of this season is estimated at
370,000,000 acres, which is a decline of 3,000,000 acres from last year,
and 6,000,000 acres from 1919. This has been a normal and natural
application of economic laws, which has placed agriculture on a foundation
which is undeniably sound and beginning to be satisfactory.

A decrease in the world supply of wheat has resulted in a very large
increase in the price of that commodity. The position of all agricultural
products indicates a better balanced supply, but we can not yet conclude
that agriculture is recovered from the effects of the war period or that it
is permanently on a prosperous basis. The cattle industry has not yet
recovered and in some sections has been suffering from dry weather. Every
effort must be made both by Government activity and by private agencies to
restore and maintain agriculture to a complete normal relationship with
other industries.

It was on account of past depression, and in spite of present more
encouraging conditions, that I have assembled an Agricultural Conference
made up of those who are representative of this great industry in both its
operating and economic sides. Everyone knows that the great need of the
farmers is markets. The country is not suffering on the side of production.
Almost the entire difficulty is on the side of distribution. This reaches
back, of course, to unit costs and diversification, and many allied
subjects. It is exceedingly intricate, for our domestic and foreign trade,
transportation and banking, and in fact our entire economic system, are
closely related to it. In time for action at this session, I hope to report
to the Congress such legislative remedies as the conference may recommend.
An appropriation should be made to defray their necessary expenses.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The production of nitrogen for plant food in peace and explosives in war is
more and more important. It is one of the chief sustaining elements of
life. It is estimated that soil exhaustion each year is represented by
about 9,000,000 tons and replenishment by 5,450,000 tons. The deficit of
3,550,000 tons is reported to represent the impairment of 118,000,000 acres
of farm lands each year.

To meet these necessities the Government has been developing a water power
project at Muscle Shoals to be equipped to produce nitrogen for explosives
and fertilizer. It is my opinion that the support of agriculture is the
chief problem to consider in connection with this property. It could by no
means supply the present needs for nitrogen, but it would help and its
development would encourage bringing other water powers into like use.

Several offers have been made for the purchase of this property. Probably
none of them represent final terms. Much costly experimentation is
necessary to produce commercial nitrogen. For that reason it is a field
better suited to private enterprise than to Government operation. I should
favor a sale of this property, or long-time lease, tinder rigid guaranties
of commercial nitrogen production at reasonable prices for agricultural
use. There would be a surplus of power for many years over any possibility
of its application to a developing manufacture of nitrogen. It may be found
advantageous to dispose of the right to surplus power separately with such
reservations as will allow its gradual withdrawal and application to
nitrogen manufacture. A subcommittee of the Committees on Agriculture
should investigate this field and negotiate with prospective purchasers. If
no advantageous offer be made, the development should continue and the
plant should be dedicated primarily to the production of materials for the
fertilization of the soil.

RAILWAYS

The railways during the past year have made still further progress in
recuperation from the war, with large rains in efficiency and ability
expeditiously to handle the traffic of the country. We have now passed
through several periods of peak traffic without the car shortages which so
frequently in the past have brought havoc to our agriculture and
industries. The condition of many of our great freight terminals is still
one of difficulty and results in imposing, large costs on the public for
inward-bound freight, and on the railways for outward-bound freight. Owing
to the growth of our large cities and the great increase in the volume of
traffic, particularly in perishables, the problem is not only difficult of
solution, but in some cases not wholly solvable by railway action alone.

In my message last year I emphasized the necessity for further legislation
with a view to expediting the consolidation of our rail ways into larger
systems. The principle of Government control of rates and profits, now
thoroughly imbedded in our governmental attitude toward natural monopolies
such as the railways, at once eliminates the need of competition by small
units as a method of rate adjustment. Competition must be preserved as a
stimulus to service, but this will exist and can be increased tinder
enlarged systems. Consequently the consolidation of the railways into
larger units for the purpose of securing the substantial values to the
public which will come from larger operation has been the logical
conclusion of Congress in its previous enactments, and is also supported by
the best opinion in the country. Such consolidation will assure not only a
greater element of competition as to service, but it will afford economy in
operation, greater stability in railway earnings, and more economical
financing. It opens large possibilities of better equalization of rates
between different classes of traffic so as to relieve undue burdens upon
agricultural products and raw materials generally, which are now not
possible without ruin to small units owing to the lack of diversity of
traffic. It would also tend to equalize earnings in such fashion as to
reduce the importance of section 15A, at which criticism, often misapplied,
has been directed. A smaller number of units would offer less difficulties
in labor adjustments and would contribute much to the, solution of terminal
difficulties.

The consolidations need to be carried out with due regard to public
interest and to the rights and established life of various communities in
our country. It does not seem to me necessary that we endeavor to
anticipate any final plan or adhere to an artificial and unchangeable
project which shall stipulate a fixed number of systems, but rather we
ought to approach the problem with such a latitude of action that it can be
worked out step by step in accordance with a comprehensive consideration of
public interest. Whether the number of ultimate systems shall be more or
less seems to me can only be determined by time and actual experience in
the development of such consolidations.

Those portions of the present law contemplating consolidations ore not,
sufficiently effective in producing expeditious action and need
amplification of the authority of the Interstate Commerce Commission,
particularly in affording a period for voluntary proposals to the
commission and in supplying Government pressure to secure action after the
expiration of such a period.

There are other proposals before Congress for amending the transportation
acts. One of these contemplates a revision of the method of valuation for
rate-making purposes to be followed by a renewed valuation of the railways.
The valuations instituted by the Interstate Commerce Commission 10 years
ago have not yet been completed. They have cost the Government an enormous
sum, and they have imposed great expenditure upon the railways, most of
which has in effect come out of the public in increased rates. This work
should not be abandoned or supplanted until its results are known and can
be considered.

Another matter before the Congress is legislation affecting the labor
sections of the transportation act. Much criticism has been directed at the
workings of this section and experience has shown that some useful
amendment could be made to these provisions.

It would be helpful if a plan could be adopted which, while retaining the
practice of systematic collective bargaining with conciliation voluntary
arbitration of labor differences, could also provide simplicity in
relations and more direct local responsibility of employees and managers.
But such legislation will not meet the requirements of the situation unless
it recognizes the principle that t e public has a right to the
uninterrupted service of transportation, and therefore a right to be heard
when there is danger that the Nation may suffer great injury through the
interruption of operations because of labor disputes. If these elements are
not comprehended in proposed legislation, it would be better to gain
further experience with the present organization for dealing with these
questions before undertaking a change.

SHIPPING BOARD

The form of the organization of the Shipping Board was based originally on
its functions as a semi judicial body in regulation of rates. During the
war it was loaded with enormous administrative duties. It has been
demonstrated time and again that this form of organization results in
indecision, division of opinion and administrative functions, which make a
wholly inadequate foundation for the conduct of a great business
enterprise. The first principle in securing the objective set out by
Congress in building up the American merchant marine upon the great trade
routes and subsequently disposing of it into private operation can not
proceed with effectiveness until the entire functions of the board are
reorganized. The immediate requirement is to transfer into the Emergency
Fleet, Corporation the whole responsibility of operation of the fleet and
other property, leaving to the Shipping Board solely the duty of
determining certain major policies which require deliberative action.

The procedure under section 28 of the merchant marine act has created great
difficulty and threatened friction during the past 12 months. Its attempted
application developed not only great opposition from exporters,
particularly as to burdens that may be imposed upon agricultural products,
but also great anxiety in the different seaports as to the effect upon
their relative rate structures. This trouble will certainly recur if action
is attempted under this section. It is uncertain in some of its terms and
of great difficulty in interpretation.

It is my belief that action under this section should be suspended until
the Congress can reconsider the entire question in the light of the
experience that has been developed since its enactment.

NATIONAL ELECTIONS

Nothing is so fundamental to the integrity of a republican form of
government as honesty in all that relates to the conduct of elections. I am
of the opinion that the national laws governing the choice of members of
the Congress should be extended to include appropriate representation of
the respective parties at the ballot box ant equality of representation on
the various registration boards, wherever they exist.

THE JUDICIARY

The docket of the Supreme Court is becoming congested. At the opening term
last year it had 592 cases, while this year it had 687 cases. Justice long
delayed is justice refused. Unless the court be given power by preliminary
and summary consideration to determine the importance of cases, and by
disposing of those which are not of public moment reserve its time for the
more extended consideration of the remainder, the congestion of the docket
is likely to increase. It is also desirable that Supreme Court should have
power to improve and reform procedure in suits at law in the Federal courts
through the adoption of appropriate rules. The Judiciary Committee of the
Senate has reported favorably upon two bills providing for these reforms
which should have the immediate favorable consideration of the Congress.

I further recommend that provision be made for the appointment of a
commission, to consist of two or three members of the Federal judiciary and
as many members of the bar, to examine the present criminal code of
procedure and recommend to the Congress measures which may reform and
expedite court procedure in the administration and enforcement of our
criminal laws.

PRISON REFORM

Pending before the Congress is a bill which has already passed one House
providing for a reformatory to which could be committed first offenders and
young men for the purpose of segregating them from contact with banned
criminals and providing them with special training in order to reestablish
in them the power to pursue a law-abiding existence in the social and
economic life of the Nation. This is a matter of so much importance as to
warrant the early attention of the present session. Further provision
should also be made, for a like reason, for a separate reformatory for
women.

NATIONAL POLICE BUREAU

Representatives of the International Police Conference will bring to t e
attention of the Congress a proposal for the establishment of a national
police bureau. Such action would provide a central point for gathering,
compiling, and later distributing to local police authorities much
information which would be helpful in the prevention and detection of
crime. I believe this bureau is needed, and I recommend favorable
consideration of this proposal.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA WELFARE

The welfare work of the District of Columbia is administered by several
different boards dealing with charities and various correctional efforts.
It would be an improvement if this work were consolidated and placed under
the direction of a single commission.

FRENCH SPOLIATION CLAIMS

During the last session of the Congress legislation was introduced looking
to the payment of the remaining claims generally referred to as the French
spoliation claims. The Congress has provided for the payment of many
similar claims. Those that remain unpaid have been long pending. The
beneficiaries thereunder have every reason to expect payment. These claims
have been examined by the Court of Claims and their validity and amount
determined. The United States ought to pay its debts. I recommend action by
the Congress which will permit of the payment of these remaining claims.

THE WAGE EARNER

Two very important policies have been adopted by this country which, while
extending their benefits also in other directions, have been of the utmost
importance to the wage earners. One of these is the protective tariff,
which enables our people to live according to a better standard and receive
a better rate of compensation than any people, any time, anywhere on earth,
ever enjoyed. This saves the American market for the products of the
American workmen. The other is a policy of more recent origin and seeks to
shield our wage earners from the disastrous competition of a great influx
of foreign peoples. This has been done by the restrictive immigration law.
This saves the American job for the American workmen. I should like to see
the administrative features of this law rendered a little more humane for
the purpose of permitting those already here a greater latitude in securing
admission of members of their own families. But I believe this law in
principle is necessary and sound, and destined to increase greatly the
public welfare. We must maintain our own economic position, we must defend
our own national integrity.

It is gratifying to report that the progress of industry, the enormous
increase in individual productivity through labor-saving devices, and the
high rate of wages have all combined to furnish our people in general with
such an abundance not only of the necessaries but of the conveniences of
life that we are by a natural evolution solving our problems of economic
and social justice.

THE NEGRO

These developments have brought about a very remarkable improvement in the
condition of the negro race. Gradually, but surely, with the almost
universal sympathy of those among whom they live, the colored people are
working out their own destiny. I firmly believe that it is better for all
concerned that they should be cheerfully accorded their full constitutional
rights, that they should be protected from all of those impositions to
which, from their position, they naturally fall a prey, especially from the
crime of lynching and that they should receive every encouragement to
become full partakers in all the blessings of our common American
citizenship.

CIVIL SERVICE

The merit system has long been recognized as the correct basis for
employment in our, civil service. I believe that first second, and third
class postmasters, and without covering in the present membership the
field force of prohibition enforcement, should be brought within the
classified service by statute law. Otherwise the Executive order of one
administration is changed by the Executive order of another administration,
and little real progress is made. Whatever its defects, the merit system is
certainly to be preferred to the spoils system.

DEPARTMENTAL REORGANIZATION

One way to save public money would be to pass the pending bill for the
reorganization of the various departments. This project has been pending
for some time, and has had the most careful consideration of experts and
the thorough study of a special congressional committee. This legislation
is vital as a companion piece to the Budget law. Legal authority for a
thorough reorganization of the Federal structure with some latitude of
action to the Executive in the rearrangement of secondary functions would
make for continuing economy in the shift of government activities which
must follow every change in a developing country. Beyond this many of the
independent agencies of the Government must be placed under responsible
Cabinet officials, if we are to have safeguards of efficiency, economy, and
probity.

ARMY AND NAVY

Little has developed in relation to our national defense which needs
special attention. Progress is constantly being made in air navigation and
requires encouragement and development. Army aviators have made a
successful trip around the world, for which I recommend suitable
recognition through provisions for promotion, compensation, and retirement.
Under the direction of the Navy a new Zeppelin has been successfully
brought from Europe across the Atlantic to our own country.

Due to the efficient supervision of the Secretary of War the Army of the
United States has been organized with a small body of Regulars and a
moderate National Guard and Reserve. The defense test of September 12
demonstrated the efficiency of the operating plans. These methods and
operations are well worthy of congressional support.

Under the limitation of armaments treaty a large saving in outlay and a
considerable decrease in maintenance of the Navy has been accomplished. We
should maintain the policy of constantly working toward the full treaty
strength of the Navy. Careful investigation is being made in this
department of the relative importance of aircraft, surface and submarine
vessels, in order that we may not fail to take advantage of all modern
improvements for our national defense. A special commission also is
investigating the problem of petroleum oil for the Navy, considering the
best policy to insure the future supply of fuel oil and prevent the
threatened drainage of naval oil reserves. Legislative action is required
to carry on experiments in oil shale reduction, as large deposits of this
type have been set aside for the use of the Navy.

We have been constantly besought to engage in competitive armaments.
Frequent reports will reach us of the magnitude of the military equipment
of other, nations. We shall do well to be little impressed by such reports
or such actions. Any nation undertaking to maintain a military
establishment with aggressive and imperialistic designs will find itself
severely handicapped in the economic development of the world. I believe
thoroughly in the Army and Navy, in adequate defense and preparation. But I
am opposed to any policy of competition in building and maintaining land or
sea armaments.

Our country has definitely relinquished the old standard of dealing with
other countries by terror and force, and is definitely committed to the new
standard of dealing with them through friendship and understanding. This
new policy should be constantly kept in mind by the guiding forces of the
Army and Navy, by the. Congress and by the country at large. I believe it
holds a promise of great benefit to humanity. I shall resist any attempt to
resort to the old methods and the old standards. I am especially solicitous
that foreign nations should comprehend the candor and sincerity with which
we have adopted this position. While we propose to maintain defensive and
supplementary police forces by land and sea, and to train them through
inspections and maneuvers upon appropriate occasions in order to maintain
their efficiency, I wish every other nation to understand that this does
not express any unfriendliness or convey any hostile intent. I want the
armed forces of America to be considered by all peoples not as enemies but
as friends as the contribution which is made by this country for the
maintenance of the peace and security of the world.

VETERANS

With the authorization for general hospitalization of the veterans of all
wars provided during the present year, the care and treatment of those who
have served their country in time of peril and the attitude of the
Government toward them is not now so much one of needed legislation as one
of careful, generous and humane administration. It will ever be recognized
that their welfare is of the first concern and always entitled to the most
solicitous consideration oil the part of their fellow citizens. They are
organized in various associations, of which the chief and most
representative is the American Legion. Through its officers the Legion will
present to the Congress numerous suggestions for legislation. They cover
such a wide variety of subjects that it is impossible to discuss them
within the scope of this message. With many of the proposals I join in
hearty approval and commend them all to the sympathetic investigation and
consideration of the Congress.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

At no period in the past 12 years have our foreign relations been in such a
satisfactory condition as they are at the present time. Our actions in the
recent months have greatly strengthened the American policy of permanent
peace with independence. The attitude which our Government took and
maintained toward an adjustment of European reparations, by pointing out
that it wits not a political but a business problem, has demonstrated its
wisdom by its actual results. We desire to see Europe restored that it may
resume its productivity in the increase of industry and its support in the
advance of civilization. We look with great gratification at the hopeful
prospect of recuperation in Europe through the Dawes plan. Such assistance
as can be given through the action of the public authorities and of our
private citizens, through friendly counsel and cooperation, and through
economic and financial support, not for any warlike effort but for
reproductive enterprise, not to provide means for unsound government
financing but to establish sound business administration should be
unhesitatingly provided.

Ultimately nations, like individuals, can not depend upon each other but
must depend upon themselves. Each one must work out its own salvation. We
have every desire to help. But with all our resources we are powerless to
save unless our efforts meet with a constructive response. The situation in
our own country and all over the world is one Chat can be improved only by
bard work and self-denial. It is necessary to reduce expenditures, increase
savings and liquidate debts. It is in this direction that there lies the
greatest hope of domestic tranquility and international peace. Our own
country ought to finish the leading example in this effort. Our past
adherence to this policy, our constant refusal to maintain a military
establishment that could be thought to menace the security of others, our
honorable dealings with other nations whether great or small, has left us
in the almost constant enjoyment of peace.

It is not necessary to stress the general desire of all the people of this
country for the promotion of peace. It is the leading principle of all our
foreign relations. We have on every occasion tried to cooperate to this end
in all ways that were consistent with our proper independence and our
traditional policies. It will be my constant effort to maintain these
principles, and to reinforce them by all appropriate agreements and
treaties. While we desire always to cooperate and to help, we are equally
determined to be independent and free. Right and truth and justice and
humanitarian efforts will have the moral support of this country all over
the world. But we do not wish to become involved in the political
controversies of others. Nor is the country disposed to become a member of
the League of Nations or to assume the obligations imposed by its
covenant.

INTERNATIONAL COURT

America has been one of the foremost nations in advocating tribunals for
the settlement of international disputes of a justiciable character. Our
representatives took a leading in those conferences which resulted in the
establishment of e ague Tribunal, and later in providing for a Permanent
Court of International Justice. I believe it would be for the advantage of
this country and helpful to the stability of other nations for us to adhere
to the protocol establishing, that court upon the conditions stated in the
recommendation which is now before the Senate, and further that our country
shall not be bound by advisory opinions which may be, rendered by the court
upon questions which we have not voluntarily submitted for its judgment.
This court would provide a practical and convenient tribunal before which
we could go voluntarily, but to which we could not be summoned, for a
determination of justiciable questions when they fail to be resolved by
diplomatic negotiations.

DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE

Many times I have expressed my desire to see the work of the Washington
Conference on Limitation of Armaments appropriately supplemented by further
agreements for a further reduction M for the purpose of diminishing the
menace and waste of the competition in preparing instruments of
international war. It has been and is my expectation that we might
hopefully approach other great powers for further conference on this
subject as soon as the carrying out of the present reparation plan as the
established and settled policy of Europe has created a favorable
opportunity. But on account of proposals which have already been made by
other governments for a European conference, it will be necessary to wait
to see what the outcome of their actions may be. I should not wish to
propose or have representatives attend a conference which would contemplate
commitments opposed to the freedom of action we desire to maintain
unimpaired with respect to our purely domestic policies.

INTERNATIONAL LAW

Our country should also support efforts which are being made toward the
codification of international law. We can look more hopefully, in the first
instance, for research and studies that are likely to be productive of
results, to a cooperation among representatives of the bar and members of
international law institutes and societies, than to a conference of those
who are technically representative of their respective governments,
although, when projects have been developed, they must go to the
governments for their approval. These expert professional studies are going
on in certain quarters and should have our constant encouragement and
approval.

OUTLAW OF WAR

Much interest has of late been manifested in this country in the discussion
of various proposals to outlaw aggressive war. I look with great sympathy
upon the examination of this subject. It is in harmony with the traditional
policy of our country, which is against aggressive war and for the
maintenance of permanent and honorable peace. While, as I have said, we
must safeguard our liberty to deal according to our own judgment with our
domestic policies, we can not fail to view with sympathetic interest all
progress to this desired end or carefully to study the measures that may be
proposed to attain it.

LATIN AMERICA

While we are desirous of promoting peace in every quarter of the globe, we
have a special interest in the peace of this hemisphere. It is our constant
desire that all causes of dispute in this area may be tranquilly and
satisfactorily adjusted. Along with our desire for peace is the earnest
hope for the increased prosperity of our sister republics of Latin America,
and our constant purpose to promote cooperation with them which may be
mutually beneficial and always inspired by the most cordial friendships.

FOREIGN DEBTS

About $12,000,000,000 is due to our Government from abroad, mostly from
European Governments. Great Britain, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania and Poland
have negotiated settlements amounting close to $5,000,000,000. This
represents the funding of over 42 per cent of the debt since the creation
of the special Foreign Debt Commission. As the life of this commission is
about to expire, its term should be extended. I am opposed to the
cancellation of these debts and believe it for the best welfare of the
world that they should be liquidated and paid as fast as possible. I do not
favor oppressive measures, but unless money that is borrowed is repaid
credit can not be secured in time of necessity, and there exists besides a
moral obligation which our country can not ignore and no other country can
evade. Terms and conditions may have to conform to differences in the
financial abilities of the countries concerned, but the principle that each
country should meet its obligation admits of no differences and is of
universal application.

It is axiomatic that our country can not stand still. It would seem to be
perfectly plain from recent events that it is determined to go forward. But
it wants no pretenses, it wants no vagaries. It is determined to advance in
an orderly, sound and common-sense way. It does not propose to abandon the
theory of the Declaration that the people have inalienable rights which no
majority and no power of government can destroy. It does not propose to
abandon the practice of the Constitution that provides for the protection
of these rights. It believes that within these limitations, which are
imposed not by the fiat of man but by the law of the Creator,
self-government is just and wise. It is convinced that it will be
impossible for the people to provide their own government unless they
continue to own their own property.

These are the very foundations of America. On them has been erected a
Government of freedom and equality, of justice and mercy, of education and
charity. Living under it and supporting it the people have come into great
possessions on the material and spiritual sides of life. I want to continue
in this direction. I know that the Congress shares with me that desire. I
want our institutions to be more and more expressive of these principles. I
want the people of all the earth to see in the American flag the symbol of
a Government which intends no oppression at home and no aggression abroad,
which in the spirit of a common brotherhood provides assistance in time of
distress.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 8, 1925

Members of the Congress:

In meeting the constitutional requirement of informing the Congress upon
the state of the Union, it is exceedingly gratifying to report that the
general condition is one of progress and prosperity. Here and there are
comparatively small and apparently temporary difficulties needing
adjustment and improved administrative methods, such as are always to be
expected, but in the fundamentals of government and business the results
demonstrate that we are going in the right direction. The country does not
appear to require radical departures from the policies already adopted so
much as it needs a further extension of these policies and the improvement
of details. The age of perfection is still in the somewhat distant future,
but it is more in danger of being retarded by mistaken Government activity
than it is from lack of legislation. We are by far the most likely to
accomplish permanent good if we proceed with moderation.

In our country the people are sovereign and independent, and must accept
the resulting responsibilities. It is their duty to support themselves and
support the Government. That is the business of the Nation, whatever the
charity of the Nation may require. The functions which the Congress are to
discharge are not those of local government but of National Government. The
greatest solicitude should be exercised to prevent any encroachment upon
the rights of the States or their various political subdivisions. Local
self-government is one of our most precious possessions. It is the greatest
contributing factor to the stability strength liberty, and progress of the
Nation. It ought not to be in ringed by assault or undermined by purchase.
It ought not to abdicate its power through weakness or resign its authority
through favor. It does not at all follow that because abuses exist it is
the concern of the Federal Government to attempt the r reform.

Society is in much more danger from encumbering the National Government
beyond its wisdom to comprehend, or its ability to administer, than from
leaving the local communities to bear their own burdens and remedy their
own evils. Our local habit and custom is so strong, our variety of race and
creed is so great the Federal authority is so tenuous, that the area within
which it can function successfully is very limited. The wiser policy is to
leave the localities, so far as we can, possessed of their own sources of
revenue and charged with their own obligations.

GOVERNMENT ECONOMY

It is a fundamental principle of our country that the people are sovereign.
While they recognize the undeniable authority of the state, they have
established as its instrument a Government of limited powers. They hold
inviolate in their own hands the jurisdiction over their own freedom and
the ownership of their own property. Neither of these can be impaired
except by due process of law. The wealth of our country is not public
wealth, but private wealth. It does not belong to the Government, it
belongs to the people. The Government has no justification in taking
private Property except for a public purpose. It is always necessary to
keep these principles in mind in the laying of taxes and in the making of
appropriations. No right exists to levy on a dollar, or to order the
expenditure of a dollar, of the money of the people, except for a necessary
public purpose duly authorized by the Constitution. The power over the
purse is the power over liberty.

That is the legal limitation within which the Congress can act, How it
will, proceed within this limitation is always a question of policy. When
the country is prosperous and free from debt, when the rate of taxation is
low, opportunity exists for assuming new burdens and undertaking new
enterprises. Such a condition now prevails only to a limited extent. All
proposals for assuming new obligations ought to be postponed, unless they
are reproductive capital investments or are such as are absolutely
necessary at this time. We still have an enormous debt of over
$20,000,000,000, on which the interest and sinking-fund requirements are
$1,320,000,000. Our appropriations for the Pension Office and the Veterans'
Bureau are $600,000,000. The War and Navy Departments call for
$642,000,000. Other requirements, exclusive of the Post Office which is
virtually self-sustaining, brought the appropriations for the current year
up to almost $3,100,060,000. This shows an expenditure of close to $30 for
every inhabitant of our country. For the average family of five it means a
tax, directly or indirectly paid, of about $150 for national purposes
alone. The local tax adds much more. These enormous expenditures ought not
to be increased, but through every possible effort they ought to be
reduced.

Only one of these great items can be ultimately extinguished. That is the
item of our war debt. Already this has been reduced to about
$6,000,000,000, which means an annual saving in interest of close to
$250,000,000. The present interest charge is about $820,000,000 yearly. It
would seem to be obvious that the sooner this debt can be retired the more
the taxpayers will save in interest and the easier it will be to secure
funds with which to prosecute needed running expenses, constructions, and
improvements. This item of $820,000,000 for interest is a heavy charge on
all the people of the country, and it seems to me that we might well
consider whether it is not greatly worth while to dispense with it as early
as possible by retiring the principal debt which it is required to serve.

It has always been our policy to retire our debts. That of the
Revolutionary War period, notwithstanding the additions made in 1812, was
paid by 1835. and the Civil War debt within 23 years. Of the amount already
paid, over $1,000,000,000 is a reduction in cash balances. That source is
exhausted. Over one and two-thirds billions of dollars was derived from
excess receipts. Tax reduction eliminates that. The sale of surplus war
materials has been another element of our income. That is practically
finished. With these eliminated, the reduction of the debt has been only
about $500,000,000 each year, not an excessive sum on so large a debt.

Proposals have been made to extend the payment over a period of 62 years.
If $1,000,000,000 is paid at the end of 20 years, the cost to the taxpayers
is the principal and, if the interest is 4% per cent, a total of
$1,850,000,000. If the same sum is paid at the end of 62 years, the cost is
$3,635,000,000, or almost double. Here is another consideration: Compared
with its purchasing power in 1913, the dollar we borrowed represented but
52 cents. As the value of our dollar increases, due to the falling prices
of commodities, the burden of our debt increases. It has now risen to 631/2
cents. The taxpayer will be required to produce nearly twice the amount of
commodities to pay his debt if the dollar returns to the 1913 value. The
more we pay while prices are high, the easier it will be.

Deflation of government after a war period is slower than deflation of
business, where curtailment is either prompt and effective or disaster
follows. There is room for further economy in the cost of the Federal
Government, but a co n of current expenditures with pre-war expenditures is
not able to the efficiency with which Government business is now being
done. The expenditures of 19161 the last pre-war year, were $742,000,000,
and in 1925 over $3,500,000,000, or nearly five times as great. If we
subtract expenditures for debt retirements and interest, veterans' relief,
increase of pensions, and other special outlays, consisting of refunds,
trust investments, and like charges, we find that the general expenditures
of the Government in 1925 were slightly more than twice as large as in
1916.

As prices in 1925 were approximately 40 per cent higher than in 1916, the
cost of the same Government must also have increased. But the Government is
not the same. It is more expensive to collect the much greater revenue
necessary and to administer our great debt. We have given enlarged and
improved services to agriculture and commerce. Above all, America has grown
in population and wealth. Government expenditures must always share in
this growth. Taking into account the factors I have mentioned, I believe
that present Federal expenses are not far out of line with pre-war
expenses. We have nearly accomplished the deflation.

This does not mean that further economies will not come. As we reduce our
debt our interest charges decline. There are many details yet to correct.
The real improvement, however, must come not from additional curtailment of
expenses, but by a more intelligent, more ordered spending. Our economy
must be constructive. While we should avoid as far as possible increases in
permanent current expenditures, oftentimes a capital outlay like internal
improvements will result in actual constructive saving. That is economy in
its best sense. It is an avoidance of waste that there may be the means for
an outlay to-day which will bring larger returns to-morrow. We should
constantly engage in scientific studies of our future requirements and
adopt an orderly program for their service. Economy is the method by which
we prepare to-day to afford the improvements of to-morrow.

A mere policy of economy without any instrumentalities for putting it into
operation would be very ineffective. The Congress has wisely set up the
Bureau of the Budget to investigate and inform the President what
recommendations he ought to make for current appropriations. This gives a
centralized authority where a general and comprehensive understanding can
be reached of the sources of income and the most equitable distribution of
expenditures. How well it has worked is indicated by the fact that the
departmental estimates for 1922, before the budget law, were $4,068,000,000
while the Budget estimates for 1927 are $3,156,000,000. This latter figure
shows the reductions in departmental estimates for the coming year made
possible by the operation of the Budget system that the Congress has
provided.

But it is evidently not enough to have care in making appropriations
without any restraint upon expenditure. The Congress has provided that
check by establishing the office of Comptroller General.

The purpose of maintaining the Budget Director and the Comptroller General
is to secure economy and efficiency in Government expenditure. No better
method has been devised for the accomplishment of that end. These offices
can not be administered in all the various details without making some
errors both of fact and of judgment. But the important consideration
remains that these are the instrumentalities of the Congress and that no
other plan has ever been adopted which was so successful in promoting
economy and efficiency. The Congress has absolute authority over the
appropriations and is free to exercise its judgment, as the evidence may
warrant, in increasing or decreasing budget recommendations. But it ought
to resist every effort to weaken or break down this most beneficial system
of supervising appropriations and expenditures. Without it all the claim of
economy would be a mere pretense.

TAXATION

The purpose of reducing expenditures is to secure a reduction in taxes.
That purpose is about to be realized. With commendable promptness the Ways
and Means Committee of the House has undertaken in advance of the meeting
of the Congress to frame a revenue act. As the bill has proceeded through
the committee it has taken on a nonpartisan character, and both Republicans
and Democrats have joined in a measure which embodies many sound principles
of tax reform. The bill will correct substantially the economic defects
injected into the revenue act of 1924, as well as many which have remained
as war-time legacies. In its present form it should provide sufficient
revenue for the Government.

The excessive surtaxes have been reduced, estate tax rates are restored to
more reasonable figures, with every prospect of withdrawing from the field
when the States have had the opportunity to correct the abuses in their own
inheritance tax laws, the gift tax and publicity section are to be repealed
many miscellaneous taxes are lowered or abandoned, and the Board of Tax
Appeals and the administrative features of the law are improved and
strengthened. I approve of the bill in principle. In so far as income-tax
exemptions are concerned, it seems, to me the committee has gone as far as
it is Safe to go and somewhat further than I should have gone. Any further
extension along these lines would, in my opinion, impair the integrity of
our income-tax system.

I am advised that the bill will be through the House by Christmas. For
this prompt action the country call thank the good sense of the Ways and
Means Committee in framing an economic measure upon economic
considerations. If this attitude continues to be reflected through the
Congress, the taxpayer will have his relief by the time his March 15th
installment of income taxes is due. Nonpartisan effort means certain, quick
action. Determination of a revenue law definitely, promptly and solely as a
revenue law, is one of the greatest gifts a legislature can bestow upon its
constituents. I commend the example of file Ways and Means Committee. If
followed, it will place sound legislation upon the books in time to give
the taxpayers the full benefit of tax reduction next year. This means that
the bill should reach me prior to March 15.

All these economic results are being sought not to benefit the rich, but to
benefit the people. They are for the purpose of encouraging industry in
order that employment may be plentiful. They seek to make business good in
order that wages may be good. They encourage prosperity in order that
poverty may be banished from the home. They, seek to lay the foundation
which, through increased production, may, give the people a more bountiful
supply of the necessaries of life, afford more leisure for the improvement
of the mind, the appreciation of the arts of music and literature,
sculpture and painting, and the beneficial enjoyment of outdoor sports and
recreation, enlarge the resources which minister to charity and by all
these means attempting to strengthen the spiritual life of the Nation.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

The policy of our foreign relations, casting aside any suggestion of force,
rests solely on the foundation of peace, good will, and good works. We have
sought, in our intercourse with other nations, better understandings
through conference and exchange of views its befits beings endowed with
reason. The results have been the gradual elimination of disputes, the
settlement of controversies, and the establishment of a firmer friendship
between America and the rest of the world that has ever existed tit any
previous time.

The example of this attitude has not been without its influence upon other
countries. Acting upon it, an adjustment was made of the difficult problem
of reparations. This was the second step toward peace in Europe. It paved
the way for the agreements which were drawn up at the Locarno Conference.
When ratified, these will represent the third step toward peace. While they
do not of themselves provide an economic rehabilitation, which is necessary
for the progress of Europe, by strengthening the guarantees of peace they
diminish the need for great armaments. If the energy which now goes into
military effort is transferred to productive endeavor it will greatly
assist economic progress.

The Locarno agreements were made by the, European countries directly
interested without any formal intervention of America, although on July 3
I publicly advocated such agreements in an address made in Massachusetts.
We have consistently refrained from intervening except when our help has
been sought and we have felt it could be effectively given, as in the
settlement of reparations and the London Conference. These recent Locarno
agreements represent the success of this policy which we have been
insisting ought to be adopted, of having European countries settle their
own political problems without involving this country. This beginning seems
to demonstrate that this policy is sound. It is exceedingly gratifying to
observe this progress, both in its method and in its result promises so
much that is beneficial to the world.

When these agreements are finally adopted, they will provide guarantees of
peace that make the present prime reliance upon force in some parts of
Europe very much less necessary. The natural corollary to these treaties
should be further international contracts for the limitation of armaments.
This work was successfully begun at the Washington Conference. Nothing was
done at that time concerning land forces because of European objection. Our
standing army has been reduced to around 118,000, about the necessary
police force for 115,000,000 people. We are not proposing to increase it,
nor is it supposable that any foreign country looks with the slightest
misapprehension upon our land forces. They do not menace anybody. They are
rather a protection to everybody.

The question of disarming upon land is so peculiarly European in its
practical aspects that our country would look with particular gratitude
upon any action which those countries might take to reduce their own
military forces. This is in accordance with our policy of not intervening
unless the European powers are unable to agree and make request for our
assistance. Whenever they are able to agree of their own accord it is
especially gratifying to its, and such agreements may be sure of our
sympathetic support.

It seems clear that it is the reduction of armies rather than of navies
that is of the first importance to the world at the present time. We shall
look with great satisfaction upon that effort and give it our approbation
and encouragement. If that can be settled, we may more easily consider
further reduction and limitation of naval armaments. For that purpose our
country has constantly through its Executive, and through repeated acts of
Congress, indicated its willingness to call such a conference. Under
congressional sanction it would seem to be wise to participate in any
conference of the great powers for naval limitation of armament proposed
upon such conditions that it would hold a fair promise of being effective.
The general policy of our country is for disarmament, and it ought not to
hesitate to adopt any practical plan that might reasonably be expected to
succeed. But it would not care to attend a conference which from its
location or constituency would in all probability prove futile.

In the further pursuit, of strengthening the bonds of peace and good will
we have joined with other nations in an international conference held at
Geneva and signed an agreement which will be laid before the Senate for
ratification providing suitable measures for control and for publicity in
international trade in arms, ammunition, and implements of war, and also
executed a protocol providing for a prohibition of the use of poison gas in
war, in accordance with the principles of Article 5 of the treaty relating
thereto signed at the Washington Conference. We are supporting the Pan
American efforts that are being made toward the codification of
international law, and looking with sympathy oil the investigations
conducted under philanthropic auspices of the proposal to agreements
outlawing war. In accordance with promises made at the Washington
Conference, we have urged the calling of and are now represented at the
Chinese Customs Conference and on the Commission on Extraterritoriality,
where it will be our policy so far as possible to meet the, aspirations of
China in all ways consistent with the interests of the countries involved.

COURT OF INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE

Pending before the Senate for nearly three years is the proposal to adhere
to the protocol establishing the Permanent Court of International Justice.
A well-established line of precedents mark America's effort to effect the
establishment of it court of this nature.. We took a leading part in laying
the foundation on which it rests in the establishment of The Hague Court of
Arbitration. It is that tribunal which nominates the judges who are elected
by the Council and Assembly of the League of Nations.

The proposal submitted to the Senate was made dependent upon four
conditions, the first of which is that by supporting the court we do not
assume any obligations under the league; second, that we may participate
upon an equality with other States in the election of judges; third, that
the Congress shall determine what part of the expenses we shall bear;
fourth, that the statute creating the court shall not be amended without
out consent; and to these I have proposed an additional condition to the
effect that we are not to be bound by advisory opinions rendered without
our consent.

The court appears to be independent of the league. It is true the judges
are elected by the Assembly and Council, but they are nominated by the
Court of Arbitration, which we assisted to create and of which we are a
part. The court was created by it statute, so-called, which is really a
treaty made among some forty-eight different countries, that might properly
be called a constitution of the court. This statute provides a method by
which the judges are chosen so that when the Court of Arbitration
nominates them and the Assembly and Council of the League elect them, they
are not acting as instruments of the Court of Arbitration or instruments of
the league, but as instruments of the statute.

This will be even more apparent if our representatives sit with the members
of the council and assembly in electing the judges. It is true they are
paid through the league though not by the league, but by the countries
which are members of the league and by our country if we accept the
protocol. The judges are paid by the league only in the same sense that it
could be said United States judges are paid by the Congress. The court
derives all its authority from the statute and is so completely independent
of the league that it could go on functioning if the league were disbanded,
at least until the terms of the judges expired.

The most careful provisions are made in the statute as to the
qualifications of judges. Those who make the nominations are recommended to
consult with their highest court of justice, their law schools and
academies. The judges must be persons of high moral character, qualified to
hold the highest judicial offices in that country, or be jurisconsults of
recognized competence in international law. It must be assumed that these
requirements will continue to be carefully met, and with America joining
the countries already concerned it is difficult to comprehend how human
ingenuity could better provide for the establishment of a court which would
maintain its independence. It has to be recognized that independence is to
a considerable extent a matter of ability, character, and personality. Some
effort was made in the early beginnings to interfere with the independence
of our Supreme Court. It did not succeed because of the quality of the men
who made up that tribunal.

It does not seem that the authority to give advisory opinions interferes
with the independence of the court. Advisory opinions in and of themselves
are not harmful, but may be used in such a way as to be very beneficial
because they undertake to prevent injury rather than merely afford a remedy
after the injury has been done. As a principle that only implies that the
court shall function when proper application is made to it. Deciding the
question involved upon issues submitted for an advisory opinion does not
differ materially from deciding the question involved upon issues submitted
by contending parties. Up to the present time the court has given an
advisory opinion when it judged it had jurisdiction, and refused to give
one when it judged it did not have jurisdiction. Nothing in the work of the
court has yet been an indication that this is an impairment of its
independence or that its practice differs materially from the giving of
like opinions under the authority of the constitutions of several of our
States.

No provision of the statute seems to me to give this court any authority to
be a political rather than a judicial court. We have brought cases in this
country before our courts which, when they have been adjudged to be
political, have been thereby dismissed. It is not improbable that political
questions will be submitted to this court, but again up to the present time
the court has refused to pass on political questions and our support would
undoubtedly have a tendency to strengthen it in that refusal.

We are not proposing to subject ourselves to any compulsory jurisdiction.
If we support the court, we can never be obliged to submit any case which
involves our interests for its decision. Our appearance before it would
always be voluntary, for the purpose of presenting a case which we had
agreed might be presented. There is no more danger that others might bring
cases before the court involving our interests which we did not wish to
have brought, after we have adhered, and probably not so much, than there
would be of bringing such cases if we do not adhere. I think that we would
have the same legal or moral right to disregard such a finding in the one
case that we would in the other.

If we are going to support any court, it will not be one that we have set
up alone or which reflects only our ideals. Other nations have their
customs and their institutions, their thoughts and their methods of life.
If a court is going to be international, its composition will have to yield
to what is good in all these various elements. Neither will it be possible
to support a court which is exactly perfect, or under which we assume
absolutely no obligations. If we are seeking that opportunity, we might as
well declare that we are opposed to supporting any court. If any agreement
is made, it will be because it undertakes to set up a tribunal which can do
some of the things that other nations wish to have done. We shall not find
ourselves bearing a disproportionate share of the world's burdens by our
adherence, and we may as well remember that there is absolutely no escape
for our country from bearing its share of the world's burdens in any case.
We shall do far better service to ourselves and to others if we admit this
and discharge our duties voluntarily, than if we deny it and are forced to
meet the same obligations unwillingly.

It is difficult to imagine anything that would be more helpful to the world
than stability, tranquility and international justice. We may say that we
are contributing to these factors independently, but others less
fortunately located do not and can not make a like contribution except
through mutual cooperation. The old balance of power, mutual alliances, and
great military forces were not brought bout by any mutual dislike for
independence, but resulted from the domination of circumstances. Ultimately
they were forced on us. Like all others engaged in the war whatever we said
as a matter of fact we joined an alliance, we became a military power, we
impaired our independence. We have more at stake than any one else in
avoiding a repetition of that calamity. Wars do not, spring into existence.
They arise from small incidents and trifling irritations which can be
adjusted by an international court. We can contribute greatly to the
advancement of our ideals by joining with other nations in maintaining such
a tribunal.

FOREIGN DEBTS

Gradually, settlements have been made which provide for the liquidation of
debts due to our Government from foreign governments. Those made with Great
Britain, Finland, Hungary Lithuania, and Poland have already been approved
by the Congress. Since the adjournment, further agreements have been
entered into with Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Latvia, Estonia, Italy, and
Rumania. These 11 nations, which have already made settlements, represent
$6,419,528,641 of the original principal of the loans. The principal sums
without interest, still pending, are the debt of France, of $3,340,000,000;
Greece, $15,000,000; Yugoslavia, $.51,000,000; Liberia, $26,000; Russia,
$192,000,000, which those at present in control have undertaken, openly to
repudiate; Nicaragua, $84,000, which is being paid currently; and Austria,
$24,000,000, on which by act of Congress a moratorium of 20 years has been
granted. The only remaining sum is $12,000,000, due from Armenia, which has
now ceased to exist as an independent nation.

In accordance with the settlements made, the amount of principal and
interest which is to be paid to the United States under these agreements
aggregate $15,200,688,253.93. It is obvious that the remaining settlements,
which will undoubtedly be made, will bring this sum up to an amount which
will more than equal the principal due on our present national debt. While
these settlements are very large in the aggregate, it has been felt that
the terms granted were in all cases very generous. They impose no undue
burden and are mutually beneficial in the observance of international faith
and the improvement of international credit.

Every reasonable effort will be made to secure agreements for liquidation
with the remaining countries, whenever they are in such condition that they
can be made. Those which have already been negotiated under the bipartisan
commission established by the Congress have been made only after the most
thoroughgoing and painstaking investigation, continued for a long time
before meeting with the representatives of the countries concerned. It is
believed that they represent in each instance the best that can be done and
the wisest settlement that can be secured. One very important result is the
stabilization of foreign currency, making exchange assist rather than
embarrass our trade. Wherever sacrifices have been made of money, it will
be more than amply returned in better understanding and friendship, while
in so far as these adjustments will contribute to the financial stability
of the debtor countries, to their good order, prosperity, and progress,
they represent hope of improved trade relations and mutual contributions to
the civilization of the world.

ALIEN PROBLEM

Negotiations are progressing among the interested parties in relation to
the final distribution of the assets in the hands of the Alien Property
Custodian. Our Government and people are interested as creditors; the
German Government and people are interested as debtors and owners of the
seized property. Pending the outcome of these negotiations, I do not
recommend any affirmative legislation. For the present we should continue
in possession of this property which we hold as security for the settlement
of claims due to our people and our Government.

IMMIGRATION

While not enough time has elapsed to afford a conclusive demonstration,
such results as have been secured indicate that our immigration law is on
the whole beneficial. It is undoubtedly a protection to the wage earners of
this country. The situation should however, be carefully surveyed, in order
to ascertain whether it is working a needless hardship upon our own
inhabitants. If it deprives them of the comfort and society of those bound
to them by close family ties, such modifications should be adopted as will
afford relief, always in accordance with the principle that our Government
owes its first duty to our own people and that no alien, inhabitant of
another country, has any legal rights whatever under our Constitution and
laws. It is only through treaty, or through residence here that such rights
accrue. But we should not, however, be forgetful of the obligations of a
common humanity.

While our country numbers among its best citizens many of those of foreign
birth, yet those who now enter in violation of our laws by that very act
thereby place themselves in a class of undesirables. Investigation
reveals that any considerable number are coming here in defiance of our
immigration restrictions, it will undoubtedly create the necessity for the
registration of all aliens. We ought to have no prejudice against an alien
because he is an alien. The standard which we apply to our inhabitants is
that of manhood, not place of birth. Restrictive immigration is to a large
degree for economic purposes. It is applied in order that we may not have a
larger annual increment of good people within our borders than we can weave
into our economic fabric in such a way as to supply their needs without
undue injury to ourselves.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Never before in time of peace has our country maintained so large and
effective a military force as it now has. The Army, Navy, Marine Corps,
National Guard, and Organized Reserves represent a strength of about
558,400 men. These forces are well trained, well equipped, and high in
morale.

A sound selective service act giving broad authority for the mobilization
in time of peril of all the resources of the country, both persons and
materials, is needed to perfect our defense policy in accordance with our
ideals of equality. The provision for more suitable housing to be paid for
out of funds derived from the sale of excess lands, pending before the last
Congress, ought to be brought forward and passed. Reasonable replacements
ought to be made to maintain a sufficient ammunition reserve.

The Navy has the full treaty tonnage of capital ships. Work is going
forward in modernizing the older ones, building aircraft carriers,
additional fleet submarines, and fast scout cruisers, but we are carefully
avoiding anything that might be construed as a competition in armaments
with other nations. The joint Army and Navy maneuvers at Hawaii, followed
by the cruise of a full Battle Fleet to Australia and New Zealand, were
successfully carried out. These demonstrations revealed a most satisfactory
condition of the ships and the men engaged.

Last year at my suggestion the General Board of the Navy made an
investigation and report on the relation of aircraft to warships. As a
result authorizations and appropriations were made for more scout cruisers
and fleet submarines and for completing aircraft carriers and equipping
them with necessary planes. Additional training in aviation was begun at
the Military and Naval Academies. A method of coordination and cooperation
of the Army and Navy and the principal aircraft builders is being
perfected. At the suggestion of the Secretaries of War and Navy I appointed
a special board to make a further study of the problem of aircraft.

The report of the Air Board ought to be reassuring to the country,
gratifying to the service and satisfactory to the Congress. It is
thoroughly complete and represents the mature thought of the best talent in
the country. No radical change in organization of the service seems
necessary. The Departments of War, Navy, and Commerce should each be
provided with an additional assistant secretary, not necessarily with
statutory duties but who would be available under the direction of the
Secretary to give especial attention to air navigation. We must have an air
strength worthy of America. Provision should be made for two additional
brigadier generals for the Army Air Service. Temporary rank corresponding
to their duties should be awarded to active flying officers in both Army
and Navy.

Aviation is of great importance both for national defense and commercial
development. We ought to proceed in its improvement by the necessary
experiment and investigation. Our country is not behind in this art. It has
made records for speed and for the excellence of its planes. It ought to go
on maintaining its manufacturing plants capable of rapid production, giving
national assistance to the la in out of airways, equipping itself with a
moderate number of planes and keeping an air force trained to the highest
efficiency.

While I am a thorough believer in national defense and entirely committed
to the policy of adequate preparation, I am just as thoroughly opposed to
instigating or participating in a policy of competitive armaments. Nor does
preparation mean a policy of militarizing. Our people and industries are
solicitous for the cause of 0111, country, and have great respect for the
Army and Navy and foil the uniform worn by the men who stand ready at all
times for our protection to encounter the dangers and perils necessary to
military service, but all of these activities are to be taken not in behalf
of aggression but in behalf of peace. They are the instruments by which we
undertake to do our part to promote good will and support stability among
all peoples.

VETERANS

If any one desires to estimate the esteem in which the veterans of America
are held by their fellow citizens, it is but necessary to remember that the
current budget calls for an expenditure of about $650,000.000 in their
behalf. This is nearly the amount of the total cost of the National
Government, exclusive of the post office, before we entered the last war.

At the two previous sessions of Congress legislation affecting veterans'
relief was enacted and the law liberalized. This legislation brought into
being a number of new provisions tending more nearly to meet the needs of
our veterans, as well as afford the necessary authority to perfect the
administration of these laws.

Experience with the new legislation so far has clearly demonstrated its
constructive nature. It has increased the benefits received by many and has
made eligible for benefits many others. Direct disbursements to the veteran
or his dependents exceeding $21,000,000 have resulted, which otherwise
would not have been made. The degree of utilization of our hospitals has
increased through making facilities available to the incapacitated veteran
regardless of service origin of the disability. This new legislation also
has brought about a marked improvement of service to the veteran.

The organizations of ex-service men have proposed additional legislative
changes which you will consider, but until the new law and the
modifications made at the last session of Congress are given a more
thorough test further changes in the basic law should be few and made only
after careful though sympathetic consideration.

The principal work now before the Veterans' Bureau is the perfection of its
organization and further improvements in service. Some minor legislative
changes are deemed necessary to enable the bureau to retain that high grade
of professional talent essential in handling the problems of the bureau.
Such changes as tend toward the improvement of service and the carrying
forward to completion of the hospital construction program are recommended
for the consideration of the proper committees of Congress.

With the enormous outlay that is now being made in behalf of the veterans
and their dependents, with a tremendous war debt still requiring great
annual expenditure, with the still high rate of taxation, while every
provision should be made for the relief of the disabled and the necessary
care of dependents, the Congress may well consider whether the financial
condition of the Government is not such that further bounty through the
enlargement of general pensions and other emoluments ought not to be
postponed.

AGRICULTURE

No doubt the position of agriculture as a whole has very much improved
since the depression of three and four years ago. But there are many
localities and many groups of individuals, apparently through no fault of
their own, sometimes due to climatic conditions and sometimes to the
prevailing price of a certain crop, still in a distressing condition. This
is probably temporary, but it is none the less acute. National Government
agencies, the Departments of Agriculture and Commerce, the Farm Loan Board,
the intermediate credit banks, and the Federal Reserve Board are all
cooperating to be of assistance and relief. On the other hand, there are
localities and individuals who have had one of their most prosperous years.
The general price level is fair, but here again there are exceptions both
ways, some items being poor while others are excellent. In spite of a
lessened production the farm income for this year will be about the same as
last year and much above the three preceding years.

Agriculture is a very complex industry. It does not consist of one problem,
but of several. They can not be solved at one stroke. They have to be met
in different ways, and small gains are not to be despised.

It has appeared from all the investigations that I have been able to make
that the farmers as a whole are determined to maintain the independence of
their business. They do not wish to have meddling on the part of the
Government or to be placed under the inevitable restrictions involved in
any system of direct or indirect price-fixing, which would result from
permitting the Government to operate in the agricultural markets. They are
showing a very commendable skill in organizing themselves to transact their
own business through cooperative marketing, which will this year turn over
about $2,500,000,000, or nearly one-fifth of the total agricultural
business. In this they are receiving help from the Government. The
Department of Agriculture should be strengthened in this facility, in order
to be able to respond when these marketing associations want help. While
it ought not to undertake undue regulation, it should be equipped to give
prompt information on crop prospects, supply, demand, current receipts,
imports, exports, and prices.

A bill embodying these principles, which has been drafted under the advice
and with the approval of substantially all the leaders and managers in the
cooperative movement, will be presented to the Congress for its enactment.
Legislation should also be considered to provide for leasing the
unappropriated public domain for grazing purposes and adopting a uniform
policy relative to grazing on the public lands and in the national
forests.

A more intimate relation should be established between agriculture and the
other business activities of the Nation. They are mutually dependent and
can each advance their own prosperity most by advancing the prosperity of
the other. Meantime the Government will continue those activities which
have resulted in an unprecedented amount of legislation and the pouring out
of great sums of money during the last five years. The work for good roads,
better land and water transportation, increased support for agricultural
education, extension of credit facilities through the Farm Loan Boards and
the intermediate credit banks, the encouragement of orderly marketing and a
repression of wasteful speculation, will all be continued.

Following every other depression, after a short period the price of farm
produce has taken and maintained the lead in the advance. This advance had
reached a climax before the war. Everyone will recall the discussion that
went on for four or five years prior to 1914 concerning the high cost of
living. This history is apparently beginning to repeat itself. While
wholesale prices of other commodities have been declining, farm prices have
been increasing. There is every reason to suppose that a new era in
agricultural prosperity lies just before us, which will probably be
unprecedented.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The problem of Muscle Shoals seems to me to have assumed a place all out of
proportion with its real importance. It probably does not represent in
market value much more than a first-class battleship, yet it has been
discussed in the Congress over a period of years and for months at a time.
It ought to be developed for the production of nitrates primarily, and
incidentally for power purposes. This would serve defensive, agricultural,
and industrial purposes. I am in favor of disposing of this property to
meet these purposes. The findings of the special commission will be
transmitted to the Congress for their information. I am convinced that the
best possible disposition can be made by direct authorization of the
Congress. As a means of negotiation I recommend the immediate appointment
of a small joint special committee chosen from the appropriate general
standing committees of the House and Senate to receive bids, which when
made should be reported with recommendations as to acceptance, upon which a
law should be enacted, effecting a sale to the highest bidder who will
agree to carry out these purposes.

If anything were needed to demonstrate the almost utter incapacity of the
National Government to deal directly with an industrial and commercial
problem, it has been provided by our experience with this property. We have
expended vast fortunes, we have taxed everybody, but we are unable to
secure results, which benefit anybody. This property ought, to be
transferred to private management under conditions which will dedicate it
to the public purpose for which it was conceived.

RECLAMATION

The National Government is committed to a policy of reclamation and
irrigation which it desires to establish on a sound basis and continue in
the interest of the localities concerned. Exhaustive studies have recently
been made of Federal reclamation, which have resulted in improving the
projects and adjusting many difficulties. About one third of the projects
is in good financial condition, another third can probably be made
profitable, while the other third is under unfavorable conditions. The
Congress has already provided for a survey which will soon be embodied in a
report. That ought to suggest a method of relief which will make
unnecessary further appeals to the Congress. Unless this can be done,
Federal reclamation will be considerably retarded. With the greatly
increased cost of construction and operation, it has become necessary to
plan in advance, by community organization and selective agriculture,
methods sufficient to repay these increasing outlays.

The human and economic interests of the farmer citizens suggest that the
States should be required to exert some effort and assume some
responsibility, especially in the intimate, detailed, and difficult work of
securing settlers and developing farms which directly profit them, but only
indirectly and remotely can reimburse the Nation. It is believed that the
Federal Government should continue to be the agency for planning and
constructing the great undertakings needed to regulate and bring into use
the rivers the West, many of which are interstate in character, but the
detailed work of creating agricultural communities and a rural civilization
on the land made ready for reclamation ought to be either transferred to
the State in its entirety or made a cooperative effort of the State and
Federal Government.

SHIPPING

The maintenance of a merchant marine is of the utmost importance for
national defense and the service of our commerce. We have a large number of
ships engaged in that service. We also have a surplus supply, costly to
care for, which ought to be sold. All the investigations that have been
made under my direction, and those which have been prosecuted
independently, have reached the conclusion that the fleet should be under
the direct control of a single executive head, while the Shipping Board
should exercise its judicial and regulatory functions in Accordance with
its original conception. The report of Henry G. Dalton, a business man of
broad experience, with a knowledge of shipping, made to me after careful
investigation, will be transmitted for the information of the Congress, the
studies pursued under the direction of the United States Chamber of
Commerce will also be accessible, and added to these will be the report of
the special committee of the House.

I do not advocate the elimination of regional considerations, but it has
become apparent that without centralized executive action the management of
this great business, like the management of any other great business, will
flounder in incapacity and languish under a division of council. A plain
and unmistakable reassertion of this principle of unified control, which I
have always been advised was the intention of the Congress to apply, is
necessary to increase the efficiency of our merchant fleet.

COAL

The perennial conflict in the coal industry is still going on to the great
detriment of the wage earners, the owners, and especially to the public.
With deposits of coal in this country capable of supplying its needs for
hundreds of years, inability to manage and control this great resource for
the benefit of all concerned is very close to a national economic failure.
It has been the subject of repeated investigation and reiterated
recommendation. Yet the industry seems never to have accepted modern
methods of adjusting differences between employers and employees. The
industry could serve the public much better and become subject to a much
more effective method of control if regional consolidations and more
freedom in the formation of marketing associations, under the supervision
of the Department of Commerce, were permitted.

At the present time the National Government has little or no authority to
deal with this vital necessity of the life of the country. It has permitted
itself to remain so powerless that its only attitude must be humble
supplication. Authority should be lodged with the President and the
Departments of Commerce and Labor, giving them power to deal with an
emergency. They should be able to appoint temporary boards with authority
to call for witnesses and documents, conciliate differences, encourage
arbitration, and in case of threatened scarcity exercise control over
distribution. Making the facts public under these circumstances through a
statement from an authoritative source would be of great public benefit.
The report of the last coal commission should be brought forward,
reconsidered, and acted upon.

PROHIBITION

Under the orderly processes of our fundamental institutions the
Constitution was lately amended providing for national prohibition. The
Congress passed an act for its enforcement, and similar acts have been
provided by most of the States. It is the law of the land. It is the duty
of all who come under its, jurisdiction to observe the spirit of that law,
and it is the duty of the Department of Justice and the Treasury Department
to enforce it. Action to prevent smuggling, illegal transportation in
interstate commerce, abuse in the use of permits, and existence of sources
of supply for illegal traffic is almost entirely imposed upon the Federal
Government.

Through treaties with foreign governments and increased activities of the
Coast Guard, revenue agents, district attorneys and enforcement agents
effort is being made to prevent these violations. But the Constitution also
puts a concurrent duty on the States. We need their active and energetic
cooperation, the vigilant action of their police, and the jurisdiction of
their courts to assist in enforcement. I request of the people observance,
of the public officers continuing efforts for enforcement, and of the
Congress favorable action on the budget recommendation for the prosecution
of this work.

WATERWAY DEVELOPMENT

For many years our country has been employed in plans and M for the
development of our intracoastal and inland waterways. This work along our
coast is an important adjunct to our commerce. It will be carried on,
together with the further opening up of our harbors, as our resources
permit. The Government made an agreement during the war to take over the
Cape Cod Canal, under which the owners made valuable concessions. This
pledged faith of the Government ought to be redeemed.

Two other main fields are under consideration. One is the Great Lakes and
St. Lawrence, including the Erie Canal. This includes stabilizing the lake
level, and is both a waterway and power project. A joint commission of the
United States and Canada is working on plans and surveys which will not be
completed until next April. No final determination can be made, apparently,
except under treaty as to the participation of both countries. The other is
the Mississippi River stem. This is almost entirely devoted to navigation.
Work on the Ohio River will be completed in about three years. A modern
channel connecting Chicago, New Orleans, Kansas City, and Pittsburgh should
be laid out and work on the tributaries prosecuted. Some work is being done
of a preparatory nature along the Missouri, and large expenditures are
being made yearly in the lower reaches of the Mississippi and its
tributaries which contribute both to flood control and navigation.
Preliminary measures are being taken on the Colorado River project, which
is exceedingly important for flood control, irrigation, power development,
and water supply to the area concerned. It would seem to be very doubtful,
however, whether it is practical to secure affirmative action of the
Congress, except under a Joint agreement of the several States.

The Government has already expended large sums upon scientific research and
engineering investigation in promotion of this Colorado River project. The
actual progress has been retarded for many years by differences among the
seven States in the basin over their relative water rights and among
different groups as to methods. In an attempt to settle the primary
difficulty of the water rights, Congress authorized the Colorado River
Commission which agreed on November 24, 1922, upon an interstate compact to
settle these rights, subject to the ratification of the State legislatures
and Congress. All seven States except Arizona at one time ratified, the
Arizona Legislature making certain reservations which failed to meet the
approval of the governor. Subsequently an attempt was made to establish the
compact upon a six-State basis, but in this case California imposed
reservations. There appears to be no division of opinion upon the major
principles of the compact, but difficulty in separating contentions to
methods of development from the discussion of it. It is imperative that
flood control be undertaken for California and Arizona. preparation made
for irrigation, for power, and for domestic water.

Some or all of these questions are combined in every proposed development.
The Federal Government is interested in some of these phases, State
governments and municipalities and irrigation districts in others, and
private corporations in still others. Because of all this difference of
view it is most desirable that Congress should consider the creation of
some agency that will be able to determine methods of improvement solely
upon economic and engineering facts, that would be authorized to negotiate
and settle, subject to the approval of Congress, the participation, rights,
and obligations of each group in any particular works. Only by some such
method can early construction be secured.

WATER POWER

Along with the development of navigation should go every possible
encouragement for the development of our water power. While steam still
plays a dominant part, this is more and more becoming an era of
electricity. Once installed, the cost is moderate, has not tended greatly
to increase, and is entirely free from the unavoidable dirt and
disagreeable features attendant upon the burning of coal. Every facility
should be extended for the connection of the various units into a
superpower plant, capable at all times of a current increasing uniformity
over the entire system.

RAILROADS

The railroads throughout the country are in a fair state of prosperity.
Their service is good and their supply of cars is abundant. Their condition
would be improved and the public better served by a system of
consolidations. I recommend that the Congress authorize such consolidations
tinder the supervision of the Interstate Commerce Commission, with power to
approve or disapprove when proposed parts are excluded or new parts added.
I am informed that the railroad managers and their employees have reached a
substantial agreement as to what legislation is necessary to regulate and
improve their relationship. Whenever they bring forward such proposals,
which seem sufficient also to protect the interests of the public, they
should be enacted into law.

It is gratifying to report that both the railroad managers and railroad
employees are providing boards for the mutual adjustment of differences in
harmony with the principles of conference, conciliation, and arbitration.
The solution of their problems ought to be an example to all other
industries. Those who ask the protections of civilization should be ready
to use the methods of civilization.

A strike in modern industry has many of the aspects of war in the modern
world. It injures labor and it injures capital. If the industry involved is
a basic one, it reduces the necessary economic surplus and, increasing the
cost of living, it injures the economic welfare and general comfort of the
whole people. It also involves a deeper cost. It tends to embitter and
divide the community into warring classes and thus weakens the unity and
power of our national life.

Labor can make no permanent gains at the cost of the general welfare. All
the victories won by organized labor in the past generation have been won
through the support of public opinion. The manifest inclination of the
managers and employees of the railroads to adopt a policy of action in
harmony with these principles marks a new epoch in our industrial life.

OUTLYING POSSESSIONS

The time has come for careful investigation of the expenditures and success
of the laws by which we have undertaken to administer our outlying
possessions. A very large amount of money is being expended for
administration in Alaska. It appears so far out of proportion to the number
of inhabitants and the amount of production as to indicate cause for
thorough investigation. Likewise consideration should be given to the
experience under the law which governs the Philippines. From such reports
as reach me there are indications that more authority should be given to
the Governor General, so that he will not be so dependent upon the local
legislative body to render effective our efforts to set an example of the,
sound administration and good government, which is so necessary for the
preparation of the Philippine people for self-government under ultimate
independence. If they are to be trained in these arts, it is our duty to
provide for them the best that there is.

RETIREMENT OF JUDGES

The act of March 3, 1911, ought to be amended so that the term of years of
service of judges of any court of the United States requisite for
retirement with pay shall be computed to include not only continuous but
aggregate service.

MOTHERS' AID

The Government ought always to be alert on the side of the humanities. It
Ought to encourage provisions for economic justice for the defenseless. It
ought to extend its relief through its national and local agencies, as may
be appropriate in each case, to the suffering and the needy. It ought to be
charitable.

Although more than 40 of our States have enacted measures in aid of
motherhood, the District of Columbia is still without such a law. A
carefully considered bill will be presented, which ought to have most
thoughtful consideration in order that the Congress may adopt a measure
which will be hereafter a model for all parts of the Union.

CIVIL SERVICE

In 1883 the Congress passed the civil service act, which from a modest
beginning of 14,000 employees has grown until there are now 425,000 in the
classified service. This has removed the clerical force of the Nation from
the wasteful effects of the spoils system and made it more stable and
efficient. The time has come to consider classifying all postmasters,
collectors of customs, collectors of internal revenue, and prohibition
agents, by an act covering in those at present in office, except when
otherwise provided by Executive order.

The necessary statistics are now being gathered to form the basis of a
valuation of the civil service retirement fund based on current conditions
of the service. It is confidently expected that this valuation will be
completed in time to be made available to the Congress during the present
session. It will afford definite knowledge of existing, and future
liabilities under the present law and determination OF liabilities under
any proposed change in the present law. We should have this information
before creating further obligations for retirement annuities which will
become liabilities to be met in the future from the money of the taxpayer.

The classification act of 1923, with the subsequent legislative action
providing for adjustment of the compensation of field service positions,
has operated materially to improve employment conditions in the Federal
service. The administration of the act is in the hands of an impartial
board, functioning without the necessity of a direct appropriation. It
would be inadvisable at this time to place in other hands the
administration of this act.

FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION

The proper function of the Federal Trade Commission is to supervise and
correct those practices in commerce which are detrimental to fair
competition. In this it performs a useful function and should be continued
and supported. It was designed also to be a help to honest business. In my
message to the Sixty-eighth Congress I recommended that changes in the
procedure then existing be made. Since then the commission by its own
action has reformed its rules, giving greater speed and economy in the
disposal of its cases and full opportunity for those accused to be heard.
These changes are improvements and, if necessary, provision should be made
for their permanency.

REORGANIZATION

No final action has yet been taken on the measure providing for the
reorganization of the various departments. I therefore suggest that this
measure, which will be of great benefit to the efficient and economical
administration of the business of the Government, be brought forward and
passed.

THE NEGRO

Nearly one-tenth of our population consists of the Negro race. The progress
which they have made in all the arts of civilization in the last 60 years
is almost beyond belief. Our country has no more loyal citizens. But they
do still need sympathy, kindness, and helpfulness. They need reassurance
that the requirements of the Government and society to deal out to them
even-handed justice will be met. They should be protected from all violence
and supported in the peaceable enjoyment of the fruits of their labor.
Those who do violence to them should be punished for their crimes. No other
course of action is worthy of the American people.

Our country has many elements in its population, many different modes of
thinking and living, all of which are striving in their own way to be loyal
to the high ideals worthy of the crown of American citizenship. It is
fundamental of our institutions that they seek to guarantee to all our
inhabitants the right to live their own lives under the protection of the
public law. This does not include any license to injure others materially,
physically, morally, to Incite revolution, or to violate the established
customs which have long had the sanction of enlightened society.

But it does mean the full right to liberty and equality before the law
without distinction of race or creed. This condition can not be granted to
others, or enjoyed by ourselves, except by the application of the principle
of broadest tolerance. Bigotry is only another name for slavery. It reduces
to serfdom not only those against whom it is directed, but also those who
seek to apply it. An enlarged freedom can only be secured by the
application of the golden rule. No other utterance ever presented such a
practical rule of life.

CONCLUSION

It is apparent that we are reaching into an era of great general
prosperity. It will continue only so long as we shall use it properly.
After all, there is but a fixed quantity of wealth in this country at any
fixed time. The only way that we can all secure more of it is to create
more. The element of time enters into production, If the people have
sufficient moderation and contentment to be willing to improve their
condition by the process of enlarging production, eliminating waste, and
distributing equitably, a prosperity almost without limit lies before its.
If the people are to be dominated by selfishness, seeking immediate riches
by nonproductive speculation and by wasteful quarreling over the returns
from industry, they will be confronted by the inevitable results of
depression and privation. If they will continue industrious and thrifty,
contented with fair wages and moderate profits, and the returns which
accrue from the development of oar natural resources, our prosperity will
extend itself indefinitely.

In all your deliberations you should remember that the purpose of
legislation is to translate principles into action. It is an effort to have
our country be better by doing better. Because the thoughts and ways of
people are firmly fixed and not easily changed, the field within which
immediate improvement can be secured is very narrow. Legislation can
provide opportunity. Whether it is taken advantage of or not depends upon
the people themselves. The Government of the United States has been created
by the people. It is solely responsible to them. It will be most successful
if it is conducted solely for their benefit. All its efforts would be of
little avail unless they brought more justice, more enlightenment, more
happiness and prosperity into the home. This means an opportunity to
observe religion, secure education, and earn a living under a reign of law
and order. It is the growth and improvement of the material and spiritual
life of the Nation. We shall not be able to gain these ends merely by our
own action. If they come at all, it will be because we have been willing to
work in harmony with the abiding purpose of a Divine Providence.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 7, 1926

Members of the Congress:

In reporting to the Congress the state of the Union, I find it impossible
to characterize it other than one of general peace and prosperity. In some
quarters our diplomacy is vexed with difficult and as yet unsolved
problems, but nowhere are we met with armed conflict. If some occupations
and areas are not flourishing, in none does there remain any acute chronic
depression. What the country requires is not so much new policies as a
steady continuation of those which are already being crowned with such
abundant success. It can not be too often repeated that in common with all
the world we are engaged in liquidating the war.

In the present short session no great amount of new legislation is
possible, but in order to comprehend what is most desirable some survey of
our general situation is necessary. A large amount of time is consumed in
the passage of appropriation bills. If each Congress in its opening session
would make appropriations to continue for two years, very much time would
be saved which could either be devoted to a consideration of the general
needs of the country or would result in decreasing the work of legislation.
ECONOMY

Our present state of prosperity has been greatly promoted by three
important causes, one of which is economy, resulting in reduction and
reform in national taxation. Another is the elimination of many kinds of
waste. The third is a general raising of the standards of efficiency. This
combination has brought the perfectly astonishing result of a reduction in
the index price of commodities and an increase in the index rate of wages.
We have secured a lowering of the cost to produce and a raising of the
ability to consume. Prosperity resulting from these causes rests on the
securest of all foundations. It gathers strength from its own progress.

In promoting this progress the chief part which the National Government
plays lies in the field of economy. Whatever doubts may have been
entertained as to the necessity of this policy and the beneficial results
which would accrue from it to all the people of the Nation, its wisdom must
now be considered thoroughly demonstrated. It may not have appeared to be a
novel or perhaps brilliant conception, but it has turned out to be
preeminently sound. It has not failed to work. It has surely brought
results. It does not have to be excused as a temporary expedient adopted as
the lesser evil to remedy some abuse, it is not a palliative seeking to
treat symptoms, but a major operation for the, eradication at the source of
a large number of social diseases.

Nothing is easier than the expenditure of public money. It does not appear
to belong to anybody. The temptation is overwhelming to bestow it on
somebody. But the results of extravagance are ruinous. The property of the
country, like the freedom of the country, belongs to the people of the
country. They have not empowered their Government to take a dollar of it
except for a necessary public purpose. But if the Constitution conferred
such right, sound economics would forbid it. Nothing is more, destructive
of the progress of the Nation than government extravagance. It means an
increase in the burden of taxation, dissipation of the returns from
enterprise, a decrease in the real value of wages, with ultimate stagnation
and decay. The whole theory of our institutions is based on the liberty and
independence of the individual. He is dependent on himself for support and
therefore entitled to the rewards of his own industry. He is not to be
deprived of what he earns that others may be benefited by what they do not
earn. What he saves through his private effort is not to be wasted by
Government extravagance.

Our national activities have become so vast that it is necessary to
scrutinize each item of public expenditure if we are to apply the principle
of economy. At the last session we made an immediate increase in the annual
budget of more than $100,000,000 in benefits conferred on the veterans of
three wars, public buildings, and river and harbor improvement. Many
projects are being broached requiring further large outlays. I am convinced
that it would be greatly for the welfare of the country if we avoid at the
present session all commitments except those of the most pressing nature.
From a reduction of the debt and taxes will accrue a wider benefit to all
the people of this country than from embarking on any new enterprise. When
our war debt is decreased we shall have resources for expansion. Until that
is accomplished we should confine ourselves to expenditures of the most
urgent necessity.

The Department of Commerce has performed a most important function in
making plans and securing support of all kinds of national enterprise for
the elimination of waste. Efficiency has been greatly promoted through good
management and the constantly increasing cooperation of the wage earners
throughout the whole realm of private business. It is my opinion that this
whole development has been predicated on the foundation of a protective
tariff.

TAX REDUCTION

As a result of economy of administration by the Executive and of
appropriation by the Congress, the end of this fiscal year will leave a
surplus in the Treasury estimated at $383,000,000. Unless otherwise
ordered, such surplus is used for the retirement of the war debt. A bond
which can be retired today for 100 cents will cost the people 104 1/4
cents to retire a year from now. While I favor a speedy reduction of the
debt as already required by law and in accordance with the promises made to
the holders of our Liberty bonds when they were issued, there is no reason
why a balanced portion of surplus revenue should not be applied to a
reduction of taxation. It can not be repeated too often that the enormous
revenues of this Nation could not be collected without becoming a charge on
all the people whether or not they directly pay taxes. Everyone who is
paying or the bare necessities of fool and shelter and clothing, without
considering the better things of life, is indirectly paying a national tax.
The nearly 20,000,000 owners of securities, the additional scores of
millions of holders of insurance policies and depositors in savings banks,
are all paying a national tax. Millions of individuals and corporations are
making a direct contribution to the National Treasury which runs from 11/2
to 25 per cent of their income, besides a number of special requirements,
like automobile and admission taxes. Whenever the state of the Treasury
will permit, I believe in a reduction of taxation. I think the taxpayers
are entitled to it. But I am not advocating tax reduction merely for the
benefit of the taxpayer; I am advocating it for the benefit of the
country.

If it appeared feasible, I should welcome permanent tax reduction at this
time. The estimated surplus, however, for June 30, 1928, is not much larger
than is required in a going business of nearly $4,000,000,000. We have had
but a few months' experience under the present revenue act and shall need
to know what is developed by the returns of income produced under it, which
are not required t o be made until about the time this session terminates,
and what the economic probabilities of the country are in the latter part
of 1927, before we can reach any justifiable conclusion as to permanent tax
reduction. Moreover the present surplus results from many nonrecurrent
items. Meantime, it is possible to grant some real relief by a simple
measure making reductions in the payments which accrue on the 15th of March
and June, 1927. I am very strongly of the conviction that this is so much a
purely business matter that it ought not to be dealt with in a partisan
spirit. The Congress has already set the notable example of treating tax
problems without much reference to party, which might well be continued.
What I desire to advocate most earnestly is relief for the country from
unnecessary tax burdens. We can not secure that if we stop to engage in a
partisan controversy. As I do not think any change in the special taxes, or
tiny permanent reduction is practical, I therefore urge both parties of the
House Ways and Means Committee to agree on a bill granting the temporary
relief which I have indicated. Such a reduction would directly affect
millions of taxpayers, release large sums for investment in new enterprise,
stimulating industrial production and agricultural consumption, and
indirectly benefiting every family in the whole country. These are my
convictions stated with full knowledge that it is for the Congress to
decide whether they judge it best to make such a reduction or leave the
surplus for the present year to be applied to retirement of the war debt.
That also is eventually tax reduction.

PROTECTIVE TARIFF

It is estimated that customs receipts for the present fiscal year will
exceed $615,000,000, the largest which were ever secured from that source.
The value of our imports for the last fiscal year was $4,466,000,000, an
increase of more than 71 per cent since the present tariff law went into
effect. Of these imports about 65 per cent, or, roughly, $2,900,000,000,
came in free of duty, which means that the United States affords a
duty-free market to other countries almost equal in value to the total
imports of Germany and greatly exceeding the total imports of France. We
have admitted a greater volume of free imports than any other country
except England.

We are, therefore, levying duties on about $1,550,000,000 of imports.
Nearly half of this, or $700,000,000, is subject to duties for the
protection of agriculture and have their origin in countries other than
Europe. They substantially increased the prices received by our farmers for
their produce. About $300,000.000 more is represented by luxuries such as
costly rugs, furs, precious stones, etc. This leaves only about
$550,000,000 of our imports under a schedule of duties which is in general
under consideration when there is discussion of lowering the tariff. While
the duties on this small portion, representing only about 12 per cent of
our imports, undoubtedly represent the difference between a fair degree of
prosperity or marked depression to many of our industries and the
difference between good pay and steady work or wide unemployment to many of
our wage earners, it is impossible to conceive how other countries or our
own importers could be greatly benefited if these duties are reduced. Those
who are starting an agitation for a reduction of tariff duties, partly at
least for the benefit of those to whom money has been lent abroad, ought to
know that there does not seem to be a very large field within the area of
our imports in which probable reductions would be advantageous to foreign
goods. Those who wish to benefit foreign producers are much more likely to
secure that result by continuing the present enormous purchasing power
which comes from our prosperity that increased our imports over 71
per cent in four years than from any advantages that are likely to accrue
from a general tariff reduction.

AGRICULTURE

The important place which agriculture holds in the economic and social life
of the Nation can not be overestimated. The National Government is
justified in putting forth every effort to make the open country a
desirable place to live. No condition meets this requirement which fails to
supply a fair return on labor expended and capital invested. While some
localities and some particular crops furnish exceptions, in general
agriculture is continuing to make progress in recovering from the
depression of 1921 and 1922. Animal products and food products are in a
more encouraging position, while cotton, due to the high prices of past
years supplemented by ideal weather conditions, has been stimulated to a
point of temporary over production. Acting on the request of the cotton
growing interests, appointed a committee to assist in carrying out their
plans. As it result of this cooperation sufficient funds have been pledged
to finance the storage and carrying of 4,000,000 bales of cotton. Whether
those who own the cotton are willing to put a part of their stock into this
plan depends on themselves. The Federal Government has cooperated in
providing ample facilities. No method of meeting the situation would be
adequate which does not contemplate a reduction of about one-third in the
acreage for the coming year. The responsibility for making the plan
effective lies with those who own and finance cotton and cotton lands.

The Department of Agriculture estimates the net income of agriculture for
the year 1920-21 at only $375,000,000; for 1924-25, $2,656,000,000; for
1925-26, $2,757,000,000. This increase has been brought about in part by
the method already referred to, of Federal tax reduction, the elimination
of waste, and increased efficiency in industry. The wide gap that existed a
few years ago between the index price of agricultural products and the
index price of other products has been gradually closing up, though the
recent depression in cotton has somewhat enlarged it. Agriculture had on
the whole been going higher while industry had been growing lower.
Industrial and commercial activities, being carried on for the most part by
corporations, are taxed at a much higher rate than farming, which is
carried on by individuals. This will inevitably make industrial commodity
costs high while war taxation lasts. It is because of this circumstance
that national tax reduction has a very large indirect benefit upon the
farmer, though it can not relieve him from the very great burden of the
local taxes which he pays directly. We have practically relieved the farmer
of any Federal income tax.

There is agreement on all sides that some portions of our agricultural
industry have lagged behind other industries in recovery from the war and
that further improvement in methods of marketing of agricultural products
is most desirable. There is belief also that the Federal Government can
further contribute to these ends beyond the many helpful measures taken
during the last five years through the different acts of Congress for
advancing the interests of the farmers.

The packers and stockyards act,

Establishing of the intermediate credit banks for agricultural purposes,

The Purnell Act for agricultural research,

The Capper-Volstead Cooperative Marketing Act,

The cooperative marketing act of 1926,

Amendments to the warehousing act,

The enlargement of the activities of the Department of Agriculture,

Enlargement of the scope of loans by the Farm Loan Board,

The tariff on agricultural products,

The large Federal expenditure in improvement of waterways and highways,

The reduction of Federal taxes, in all comprise a great series of
governmental actions in the advancement of the special interest of
agriculture.

In determination of what further measures may be undertaken it seems to me
there are certain pitfalls which must be avoided and our test in avoiding
them should be to avoid disaster to the farmer himself.

Acting upon my recommendation, the Congress has ordered the interstate
Commerce Commission to investigate the freight-rate structure, directing
that such changes shall be made in freight rates as will promote freedom of
movement of agricultural products. Railroad consolidation which I am
advocating would also result in a situation where rates could be made more
advantageous for farm produce, as has recently been done in the revision of
rates on fertilizers in the South. Additional benefit will accrue from the
development of our inland waterways. The Mississippi River system carries a
commerce of over 50,000,000 tons at a saving of nearly $18,000,000
annually. The Inland Waterways Corporation operates boats on 2,500 miles of
navigable streams and through its relation with 165 railroads carries
freight into and out of 45 States of the Union. During the past six months
it has handled over 1,000,000 bushels of grain monthly and by its lower
freight rates has raised the price of such grain to the farmer probably
21/2 cents to 3 cents a bushel. The highway system on which the Federal
Government expends about $85,000,000 a year is of vital importance to the
rural regions.

The advantages to be derived from a more comprehensive and less expensive
system of transportation for agriculture ought to be supplemented by
provision for an adequate supply of fertilizer at a lower cost than it is
at present obtainable. This advantage we are attempting to secure by the
proposed development at Muscle Shoals, and there are promising experiments
being made in synthetic chemistry for the production of nitrates.

A survey should be made of the relation of Government grazing lands to the
livestock industry. Additional legislation is desirable more definitely to
establish the place of grazing in the administration of the national
forests, properly subordinated to their functions of producing timber and
conserving the water supply. Over 180,000,000 acres of grazing lands are
still pastured as commons in the public domain with little or no
regulation. This has made their use so uncertain that it has contributed
greatly to the instability of the livestock industry. Very little of this
land is suited to settlement or private ownership. Some plan ought to be
adopted for its use in grazing, corresponding broadly to that already
successfully applied to the national forests.

The development of sound and strong cooperative associations is of
fundamental importance to our agriculture. It is encouraging to note,
therefore, that a vigorous and healthy growth in the cooperative movement
is continuing. Cooperative associations reporting to the Department of
Agriculture at the end of 1925 had on their membership rolls a total of
2,700,000 producers. Their total business in 1925 amounted to approximately
$2,400,000,000, compared with $635,800,000 in 1915. Legislative action to
assist cooperative associations and supplement their efforts was passed at
the last session of Congress. Important credit measures were also provided
by Congress in 1923 which have been of inestimable value to the cooperative
associations. Although the Federal credit agencies have served agriculture
well, I think it may be possible to broaden and strengthen the service of
these institutions.

Attention is again directed to the surplus problem of agriculture by the
present cotton situation. Surpluses often affect prices of various farm
commodities in a disastrous manner, and the problem urgently demands a
solution. Discussions both in and out of Congress during the past few years
have given us a better understanding of the subject, and it is my hope that
out of the various proposals made the basis will be found for a sound and
effective solution upon which agreement can be reached. In my opinion
cooperative marketing associations will be important aids to the ultimate
solution of the problem. It may well be, however, that additional measures
will be needed to supplement their efforts. I believe all will agree that
such measures should not conflict with the best interests of the
cooperatives, but rather assist and strengthen them. In working out this
problem to any sound conclusion it is necessary to avoid putting the
Government into the business of production or marketing or attempting to
enact legislation for the purpose of price fixing. The farmer does not
favor any attempted remedies that partake of these elements. He has a
sincere and candid desire for assistance. If matched by an equally sincere
and candid consideration of the different remedies proposed a sound
measure of relief ought to result. It is unfortunate that no general
agreement has been reached by the various agricultural interests upon any
of the proposed remedies. Out of the discussion of various proposals which
can be had before the Committees of Agriculture some measure ought to be
perfected which would be generally satisfactory.

Due to the emergency arising from a heavy tropical storm in southern
Florida, I authorized the Secretary of Agriculture to use certain funds in
anticipation of legislation to enable the farmers in that region to plant
their crops. The department will present a bill ratifying the loans which
were made for this purpose.

Federal legislation has been adopted authorizing the cooperation of the
Government with States and private owners in the protection of forest lands
from fire. This preventive measure is of such great importance that I have
recommended for it an increased appropriation.

Another preventive measure of great economic and sanitary importance is the
eradication of tuberculosis in cattle. Active work is now in progress in
one-fourth of the counties of the United States to secure this result. Over
12,000,000 cattle have been under treatment, and the average degree of
infection has fallen from 4.9 per cent to 2.8 per cent. he Federal
Government is making substantial expenditures for this purpose.

Serious damage is threatened to the corn crop by the European corn borer.
Since 1917 it has spread from eastern New England westward into Indiana and
now covers about 100,000 square miles. It is one of the most formidable
pests because it spreads rapidly and is exceedingly difficult of control.
It has assumed a menace that is of national magnitude and warrants the
Federal Government in extending its cooperation to the State and local
agencies which are attempting to prevent its further spread and secure its
eradication.

The whole question of agriculture needs most careful consideration. In the
past few years the Government has given this subject more attention than
any other and has held more consultations in relation to it than on any
other subject. While the Government is not to be blamed for failure to
perform the impossible, the agricultural regions are entitled to know that
they have its constant solicitude and sympathy. Many of the farmers are
burdened with debts and taxes which they are unable to carry. We are
expending in this country many millions of dollars each year to increase
farm production. We ought now to put more emphasis on the question of farm
marketing. If a sound solution of a permanent nature can be found for this
problem, the Congress ought not to hesitate to adopt it.

DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES

In previous messages I have referred to the national importance of the
proper development of our water resources. The great projects of extension
of the Mississippi system, the protection an development of the lower
Colorado River, are before Congress, and I have previously commented upon
them. I favor the necessary legislation to expedite these projects.
Engineering studies are being made for connecting the Great Lakes with the
North Atlantic either through an all-American canal or by way of the St.
Lawrence River. These reports will undoubtedly be before the Congress
during its present session. It is unnecessary to dwell upon the great
importance of such a waterway not only to our mid-continental basin but to
the commerce and development of practically the whole Nation. Our river and
harbor improvement should be continued in accordance with the present
policy. Expenditure of this character is compatible with economy; it is in
the nature of capital investment. Work should proceed on the basic trunk
lines if this work is to be a success. If the country will be content to be
moderate and patient and permit improvements to be made where they will do
the greatest general good, rather than insisting on expenditures at this
time on secondary projects, our internal Waterways can be made a success.
If proposes legislation results in a gross manifestation of local
jealousies and selfishness, this program can not be carried out. Ultimately
we can take care of extensions, but our first effort should be confined to
the main arteries.

Our inland commerce has been put to great inconvenience and expense by
reason of the lowering of the water level of the Great Lakes. This is an
international problem on which competent engineers are making reports. Out
of their study it is expected that a feasible method will be developed for
raising the level to provide relief for our commerce and supply water for
drainage. Whenever a practical plan is presented it ought to be speedily
adopted.

RECLAMATION

It is increasingly evident that the Federal Government must in the future
take a leading part in the impounding of water for conservation with
incidental power for the development of the irrigable lands of the and
region. The unused waters of the West are found mainly in large rivers.
Works to store and distribute these have such magnitude and cost that they
are not attractive to private enterprise. Water is the irreplaceable
natural resource. Its precipitation can not be increased. Its storage on
the higher reaches of streams, to meet growing needs, to be used repeatedly
as it flows toward the seas, is a practical and prudent business policy.

The United States promises to follow the course of older irrigation
countries, where recent important irrigation developments have been carried
out as national undertakings. It is gratifying, therefore, that conditions
on Federal reclamation projects have become satisfactory. The gross value
of crop, grown with water from project works increased from $110,000,000
in 1924 to $131,000,000 in 1925. The adjustments made last year by Congress
relieved irrigators from paying construction costs on unprofitable land,
and by so doing inspired new hope and confidence in ability to meet the
payments required. Construction payments by water users last year were the
largest in the history of the bureau.

The anticipated reclamation fund will be fully absorbed for a number of
years in the completion of old projects and the construction of projects
inaugurated in the past three years. We should, however, continue to
investigate and study the possibilities of a carefully planned development
of promising projects, logically of governmental concern because of their
physical magnitude, immense cost, and the interstate and international
problems involved. Only in this way may we be fully prepared to meet
intelligently the needs of our fast-growing population in the years to
come.

TRANSPORTATION

It would be difficult to conceive of any modern activity which contributes
more to the necessities and conveniences of life than transportation.
Without it our present agricultural production and practically all of our
commerce would be completely prostrated. One of the large contributing
causes to the present highly satisfactory state of our economic condition
is the prompt and dependable service, surpassing all our previous records,
rendered by the railroads. This power has been fostered by the spirit of
cooperation between Federal and State regulatory commissions. To render
this service more efficient and effective and to promote a more scientific
regulation, the process of valuing railroad properties should be simplified
and the primary valuations should be completed as rapidly as possible. The
problem of rate reduction would be much simplified by a process of railroad
consolidations. This principle has already been adopted as Federal law.
Experience has shown that a more effective method must be provided. Studies
have already been made and legislation introduced seeking to promote this
end. It would be of great advantage if it could be taken up at once and
speedily enacted. The railroad systems of the country and the convenience
of all the people are waiting on this important decision.

MERCHANT MARINE

It is axiomatic that no agricultural and industrial country can get the
full benefit of its own advantages without a merchant marine. We have been
proceeding under the act of Congress that contemplates the establishment of
trade routes to be ultimately transferred to private ownership and
operation. Due to temporary conditions abroad and at home we have a large
demand just now for certain types of freight vessels. Some suggestion has
been made for new construction. I do not feel that we are yet warranted in
entering, that field. Such ships as we might build could not be sold after
they are launched for anywhere near what they would cost. We have expended
over $250,000,000 out of the public Treasury in recent years to make up the
losses of operation, not counting the depreciation or any cost whatever of
our capital investment. The great need of our merchant marine is not for
more ships but for more freight.

Our merchants are altogether too indifferent about using American ships for
the transportation of goods which they send abroad or bring home. Some of
our vessels necessarily need repairs, which should be made. I do not
believe that the operation of our fleet is as economical and efficient as
it could be made if placed under a single responsible head, leaving the
Shipping Board free to deal with general matters of policy and regulation.

RADIO LEGISLATION

The Department of Commerce has for some years urgently presented the
necessity for further legislation in order to protect radio listeners from
interference between broadcasting stations and to carry out other
regulatory functions. Both branches of Congress at the last session passed
enactments intended to effect such regulation, but the two bills yet remain
to be brought into agreement and final passage.

Due to decisions of the courts, the authority of the department under the
law of 1912 has broken down; many more stations have been operating than
can be accommodated within the limited number of wave lengths available;
further stations are in course of construction; many stations have departed
from the scheme of allocation set down by the department, and the whole
service of this most important public function has drifted into such chaos
as seems likely, if not remedied, to destroy its great value. I most
urgently recommend that this legislation should be speedily enacted.

I do not believe it is desirable to set up further independent agencies in
the Government. Rather I believe it advisable to entrust the important
functions of deciding who shall exercise the privilege of radio
transmission and under what conditions, the assigning of wave lengths and
determination of power, to a board to be assembled whenever action on such
questions becomes necessary. There should be right of appeal to the courts
from the decisions of such board. The administration of the decisions of
the board and the other features of regulation and promotion of radio in
the public interest, together with scientific research, should remain in
the Department of Commerce. Such an arrangement makes for more expert, more
efficient, and more economical administration that an independent agency or
board, whose duties, after initial stages, require but little attention, in
which administrative functions are confused with semijudicial functions and
from which of necessity there must be greatly increased personnel and
expenditure.

THE WAGE EARNER

The great body of our people are made up of wage earners. Several hundred
thousands of them are on the pay rolls of the United States Government.
Their condition very largely is fixed by legislation. We have recently
provided increases in compensation under a method of reclassification and
given them the advantage of a liberal retirement system as a support for
their declining years. Most of them are under the merit system, which is a
guaranty of their intelligence, and the efficiency of their service is a
demonstration of their loyalty. The Federal Government should continue to
set a good example for all other employers.

In the industries the condition of the wage earner has steadily improved.
The 12-hour day is almost entirely unknown. Skilled labor is well
compensated. But there are unfortunately a multitude of workers who have
not yet come to share in the general prosperity of the Nation. Both the
public authorities and private enterprise should be solicitous to advance
the welfare of this class. The Federal Government has been seeking to
secure this end through a protective tariff, through restrictive
immigration, through requiring safety devices for the prevention of
accidents, through the granting of workman's compensation, through civilian
vocational rehabilitation and education, through employment information
bureaus, and through such humanitarian relief as was provided in the
maternity and infancy legislation. It is a satisfaction to report that a
more general condition of contentment exists among wage earners and the
country is more free from labor disputes than it has been for years. While
restrictive immigration has been adopted in part for the benefit of the
wage earner, and in its entirety for the benefit of the country, it ought
not to cause a needless separation of families and dependents from their
natural source of support contrary to the dictates of humanity.

BITUMINOUS COAL

No progress appears to have been made within large areas of the bituminous
coal industry toward creation of voluntary machinery by which greater
assurance can be given to the public of peaceful adjustment of wage
difficulties such as has been accomplished in the anthracite industry. This
bituminous industry is one of primary necessity and bears a great
responsibility to the Nation for continuity of supplies. As the wage
agreements in the unionized section of the industry expire on April 1 next,
and as conflicts may result which may imperil public interest, and have for
many years often called for action of the Executive in protection of the
public, I again recommend the passage of such legislation as will assist
the Executive in dealing with such emergencies through a special temporary
board of conciliation and mediation and through administrative agencies for
the purpose of distribution of coal and protection of the consumers of coal
from profiteering. At present the Executive is not only without authority
to act but is actually prohibited by law from making any expenditure to
meet the emergency of a coal famine.

JUDICIARY

The Federal courts hold a high position in the administration of justice in
the world. While individual judicial officers have sometimes been subjected
to just criticism, the courts as a whole have maintained an exceedingly
high standard. The Congress may well consider the question of supplying
fair salaries and conferring upon the Supreme Court the same rule-making
power on the law side of the district courts that they have always
possessed on the equity side. A bill is also pending providing for
retirement after a certain number of years of service, although they have
not been consecutive, which should have your favorable consideration. These
faithful servants of the Government are about the last that remain to be
provided for in the postwar readjustments.

BANKING

There has been pending in Congress for nearly three years banking
legislation to clarify the national bank act and reasonably to increase the
powers of the national banks. I believe that within the limitation of sound
banking principles Congress should now and for the future place the
national banks upon a fair equality with their competitors, the State
banks, and I trust that means may be found so that the differences on
branch-banking legislation between the Senate and the House of
Representatives may be settled along sound lines and the legislation
promptly enacted.

It would be difficult to overestimate the service which the Federal reserve
system has already rendered to the country. It is necessary only to recall
the chaotic condition of our banking organization at the time the Federal
reserve system was put into operation. The old system consisted of a vast
number of independent banking units, with scattered bank reserves which
never could be mobilized in times of greatest need. In spite of vast
banking resources, there was no coordination of reserves or any credit
elasticity. As a consequence, a strain was felt even during crop-moving
periods and when it was necessary to meet other seasonal and regularly
recurring needs.

The Federal reserve system is not a panacea for all economic or financial
ills. It can not prevent depression in certain industries which are
experiencing overexpansion of production or contraction of their markets.
Its business is to furnish adequate credit and currency facilities. This it
has succeeded in doing, both during the war and in the more difficult
period of deflation and readjustment which followed. It enables us to look
to the future with confidence and to make plans far ahead, based on the
belief that the Federal reserve system will exercise a steadying influence
on credit conditions and thereby prevent tiny sudden or severe reactions
from the period of prosperity which we are now enjoying. In order that
these plans may go forward, action should be taken at the present session
on the question of renewing the banks' charters and thereby insuring a
continuation of the policies and present usefulness of the Federal reserve
system.

FEDERAL REGULATION

I am in favor of reducing, rather than expanding, Government bureaus which
seek to regulate and control the business activities of the people.
Everyone is aware that abuses exist and will exist so long as we are
limited by human imperfections. Unfortunately, human nature can not be
changed by an act of the legislature. When practically the sole remedy for
many evils lies in the necessity of the people looking out for themselves
and reforming their own abuses, they will find that they are relying on a
false security if the Government assumes to hold out the promise that it is
looking out for them and providing reforms for them. This principle is
preeminently applicable to the National Government. It is too much assumed
that because an abuse exists it is the business of the National Government
to provide a remedy. The presumption should be that it is the business of
local and State governments. Such national action results in encroaching
upon the salutary independence of the States and by undertaking to
supersede their natural authority fills the land with bureaus and
departments which are undertaking to do what it is impossible for them to
accomplish and brings our whole system of government into disrespect and
disfavor. We ought to maintain high standards. We ought to punish
wrongdoing. Society has not only the privilege but the absolute duty of
protecting itself and its individuals. But we can not accomplish this end
by adopting a wrong method. Permanent success lies in local, rather than
national action. Unless the locality rises to its own requirements, there
is an almost irresistible impulse for the National Government to intervene.
The States and the Nation should both realize that such action is to be
adopted only as a last resort.

THE NEGRO

The social well-being of our country requires our constant effort for the
amelioration of race prejudice and the extension to all elements of equal
opportunity and equal protection under the laws which are guaranteed by
the. Constitution. The Federal Government especially is charged with this
obligation in behalf of the colored people of the Nation. Not only their
remarkable progress, their devotion and their loyalty, but, our duty to
ourselves under our claim that we are an enlightened people requires us to
use all our power to protect them from the crime of lynching. Although
violence of this kind has very much decreased, while any of it remains we
can not justify neglecting to make every effort to eradicate it by law.

The education of the colored race under Government encouragement is
proceeding successfully and ought to have continuing support. An increasing
need exists for properly educated and trained medical skill to be devoted
to the service of this race.

INSULAR POSSESSIONS

This Government holds in sacred trusteeship islands which it has acquired
in the East and West Indies. In all of them the people are more prosperous
than at any previous time. A system of good roads, education, and general
development is in progress. The people are better governed than ever before
and generally content.

In the Philippine Islands Maj. Gen. Leonard Wood has been Governor General
for five years and has administered his office with tact and ability
greatly to the success of the Filipino people. These are a proud and
sensitive race, who are making such progress with our cooperation that we
can view the results of this experiment with great satisfaction. As we are
attempting to assist this race toward self-government, we should look upon
their wishes with great respect, granting their requests immediately when
they are right, yet maintaining a frank firmness in refusing when they are
wrong. We shall measure their progress in no small part by their acceptance
of the terms of the organic law under which the islands are governed and
their faithful observance of its provisions. Need exists for clarifying the
duties of the auditor and declaring them to be what everyone had supposed
they were. We have placed our own expenditures under the supervision of the
Comptroller General. It is not likely that the expenditures in the
Philippine Islands need less supervision than our own. The Governor General
is hampered in his selection of subordinates by the necessity of securing a
confirmation, which has oftentimes driven him to the expediency of using
Army officers in work for which civilian experts would be much better
fitted. Means should be provided for this and such other purposes as he may
require out of the revenue which this Government now turns back to the
Philippine treasury.

In order that these possessions might stiffer no seeming neglect, I have
recently sent Col. Carmi A. Thompson to the islands to make a survey in
cooperation with the Governor General to suggest what might be done to
improve conditions. Later, I may make a more extended report including
recommendations. The economic development of the islands is very important.
They ought not to be turned back to the people until they are both
politically fitted for self-government and economically independent. Large
areas are adaptable to the production of rubber. No one contemplates any
time in the future either under the present or a more independent form of
government when we should not assume some responsibility for their defense.
For their economic advantage, for the employment of their people, and as a
contribution to our power of defense which could not be carried on without
rubber, I believe this industry should be encouraged. It is especially
adapted to the Filipino people themselves, who might cultivate it
individually on a small acreage. It could be carried on extensively by
American capital in a way to furnish employment at good wages. I am opposed
to the promotion of any policy that does not provide for absolute freedom
on the part of the wage earners and do not think we should undertake to
give power for large holdings of land in the islands against the opposition
of the people of the locality. Any development of the islands must be
solely with the first object of benefiting the people of the islands. At an
early day, these possessions should be taken out from under all military
control and administered entirely on the civil side of government.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Our policy of national defense is not one of making war, but of insuring
peace. The land and sea force of America, both in its domestic and foreign
implications, is distinctly a peace force. It is an arm of the police power
to guarantee order and the execution of the law at home and security to our
citizens abroad. No self-respecting nation would neglect to provide an army
and navy proportionate to its population, the extent of its territory, and
the dignity of the place which it occupies in the world. When it is
considered that no navy in the world, with one exception, approaches ours
and none surpasses it, that our Regular Army of about 115,000 men is the
equal of any other like number of troops, that our entire permanent and
reserve land and sea force trained and training consists of a personnel of
about 610,000, and that our annual appropriations are about $680,000,000 a
year, expended under the direction of an exceedingly competent staff, it
can not be said that our country is neglecting its national defense. It is
true that a cult of disparagement exists, but that candid examination made
by the Congress through its various committees has always reassured the
country and demonstrated that it is maintaining the most adequate defensive
forces in these present years that it has ever supported in time of peace.

This general policy should be kept in effect. Here and there temporary
changes may be made in personnel to meet requirements in other directions.
Attention should be given to submarines, cruisers, and air forces.
Particular points may need strengthening, but as a whole our military power
is sufficient.

The one weak place in the whole line is our still stupendous war debt. In
any modern campaign the dollars are the shock troops. With a depleted
treasury in the rear, no army can maintain itself in the field. A country
loaded with debt is a country devoid of the first line of defense. Economy
is the handmaid of preparedness. If we wish to be able to defend ourselves
to the full extent of our power in the future, we shall discharge as soon
as possible the financial burden of the last war. Otherwise we would face a
crisis with a part of our capital resources already expended.

The amount and kind of our military equipment is preeminently a question
for the decision of the Congress, after giving due consideration to the
advice of military experts and the available public revenue. Nothing is
more laudable than the cooperation of the agricultural and industrial
resources of the country for the purpose of supplying the needs of national
defense. In time of peril the people employed in these interests
volunteered in a most self-sacrificing way, often at the nominal charge of
a dollar a year. But the Army and Navy are not supported for the benefit of
supply concerns; supply concerns are supported for the benefit of the Army
and Navy. The distribution of orders on what is needed from different
concerns for the purpose of keeping up equipment and organization is
perfectly justified, but any attempt to prevail upon the Government to
purchase beyond its needs ought not to be tolerated. It is eminently fair
that those who deal with the Government should do so at a reasonable
profit. However, public money is expended not that some one may profit by
it, but in order to serve a public purpose.

While our policy of national defense will proceed in order that we may be
independent and self-sufficient, I am opposed to engaging in any attempt at
competitive armaments. No matter how much or how little some other country
may feel constrained to provide, we can well afford to set the example, not
of being dictated to by others, but of adopting our own standards. We are
strong enough to pursue that method, which will be a most wholesome model
for the rest of the world. We are eminently peaceful, but we are by no
means weak. While we submit our differences with others, not to the
adjudication of force, but of reason, it is not because we are unable to
defend our rights. While we are doing our best to eliminate all resort to
war for the purpose of settling disputes, we can not but remember that the
peace we now enjoy had to be won by the sword and that if the rights of our
country are to be defended we can not rely for that purpose upon anyone but
ourselves. We can not shirk the responsibility, which is the first
requisite of all government, of preserving its own integrity and
maintaining the rights of its own citizens. It is only in accordance with
these principles that we can establish any lasting foundations for an
honorable and permanent peace.

It is for these reasons that our country, like any other country, proposes
to provide itself with an army and navy supported by a merchant marine. Yet
these are not for competition with any other power. For years we have
besought nations to disarm. We have recently expressed our willingness at
Geneva to enter into treaties for the limitation of all types of warships
according to the ratio adopted at the Washington Conference. This offer is
still pending. While we are and shall continue to be armed it is not as a
menace, but rather a common assurance of tranquility to all the peaceloving
people of the world. For us to do any less would be to disregard our
obligations, evade our responsibilities, and jeopardize our national honor.

VETERANS

This country, not only because it is bound by honor but because of the
satisfaction derived from it, has always lavished its bounty upon its
veterans. For years a service pension has been bestowed upon the Grand Army
on reaching a certain age. Like provision has been made for the survivors
of the Spanish War. A liberal future compensation has been granted to all
the veterans of the World War. But it is in the case of the, disabled and
the dependents that the Government exhibits its greatest solicitude. This
work is being well administered by the Veterans' Bureau. The main
unfinished feature is that of hospitalization. This requirement is being
rapidly met. Various veteran bodies will present to you recommendations
which should have your careful consideration. At the last session we
increased our annual expenditure for pensions and relief on account of the
veterans of three wars. While I approve of proper relief for all suffering,
I do not favor any further extension of our pension system at this time.

ALIEN PROPERTY

We still have in the possession of the Government the alien property. It
has always been the policy of America to hold that private enemy property
should not be confiscated in time of war. This principle we have
scrupulously observed. As this property is security for the claims of our
citizens and our Government, we can not relinquish it without adequate
provision for their reimbursement. Legislation for the return of this
property, accompanied by suitable provisions for the liquidation of the
claims of our citizens and our Treasury, should be adopted. If our
Government releases to foreigners the security which it holds for
Americans, it must at the same time provide satisfactory safeguards for
meeting American claims.

PROHIBITION

The duly authorized public authorities of this country have made
prohibition the law of the land. Acting under the Constitution the Congress
and the legislatures of practically all the, States have adopted
legislation for its enforcement. Some abuses have arisen which require
reform. Under the law the National Government has entrusted to the Treasury
Department the especial duty of regulation and enforcement. Such
supplementary legislation as it requires to meet existing conditions should
be carefully and speedily enacted. Failure to support the Constitution and
observe the law ought not to be tolerated by public opinion. Especially
those in public places, who have taken their oath to support the
Constitution, ought to be most scrupulous in its observance. Officers of
the Department of Justice throughout the country should be vigilant in
enforcing the law, but local authorities, which had always been mainly
responsible for the enforcement of law in relation to intoxicating liquor,
ought not to seek evasion by attempting to shift the burden wholly upon the
Federal agencies. Under the Constitution the States are jointly charged
with the Nation in providing for the enforcement of the prohibition
amendment. Some people do not like the amendment, some do not like other
parts of the Constitution, some do not like any of it. Those who entertain
such sentiments have a perfect right to seek through legal methods for a
change. But for any of our inhabitants to observe such parts of the
Constitution as they like, while disregarding others, is a doctrine that
would break down all protection of life and property and destroy the
American system of ordered liberty.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

The foreign policy of this Government is well known. It is one of peace
based on that mutual respect that arises from mutual regard for
international rights and the discharge of international obligations. It is
our purpose to promote understanding and good will between ourselves and
all other people. The American people are altogether lacking in an
appreciation of the tremendous good fortune that surrounds their
international position. We have no traditional enemies. We are not
embarrassed over any disputed territory. We have no possessions that are
coveted by others; they have none that are coveted by us. Our borders are
unfortified. We fear no one; no one fears us. All the world knows that the
whole extent of our influence is against war and in favor of peace, against
the use of force and in favor of negotiation, arbitration, and adjudication
as a method of adjusting international differences. We look with disfavor
upon all aggressive warfare. We are strong enough so that no one can charge
us with weakness if we are slow to anger. Our place is sufficiently
established so that we need not be sensitive over trifles. Our resources,
are large enough so that we can afford to be generous. At the same time we
are a nation among nations and recognize a responsibility not only to
ourselves, but in the interests of a stable and enlightened civilization,
to protect and defend the international rights of our Government and our
citizens.

It is because of our historical detachment and the generations of
comparative indifference toward it by other nations that our public is
inclined to consider altogether too seriously the reports that we are
criticized abroad. We never had a larger foreign trade than at the present
time. Our good offices were never more sought and the necessity for our
assistance and cooperation was never more universally declared in any time
of peace. We know that the sentiments which we entertain toward all other
nations are those of the most sincere friendship and good will and of all
unbounded desire to help, which we are perfectly willing to have judged by
their fruits. In our efforts to adjust our international obligations we
have met with a response which, when everything is considered, I believe
history will record as a most remarkable and gratifying demonstration of
the sanctity with which civilized nations undertake to discharge their
mutual obligations. Debt settlements have been negotiated with practically
all of those who owed us and all finally adjusted but two, which are, in
process of ratification. When we consider the real sacrifice that will be
necessary on the part of other nations, considering all their
circumstances, to meet their agreed payments, we ought to hold them in
increased admiration and respect. It is true that we have extended to them
very generous treatment, but it is also true that they have agreed to repay
its all that we loaned to them and some interest.

A special conference on the Chinese customs tariff provided for by the
treaty between the nine powers relating to the Chinese customs tariff
signed at Washington on February 6, 1922, was called by the Chinese
Government to meet at Peking, on October 26, 1925. We participated in this
conference through fully empowered delegates and, with good will,
endeavored to cooperate with the other participating powers with a view to
putting into effect promises made to China at the Washington conference,
and considering any reasonable proposal that might be made by the Chinese
Government for the revision of the treaties on the subject of China's
tariff. With these aims in view the American delegation at the outset of
the conference proposed to put into effect the surtaxes provided for by the
Washington treaty and to proceed immediately to the negotiation of a
treaty, which, among other things, was to make provision for the abolition
of taxes collected on goods in transit, remove the tariff restrictions in
existing treaties, and put into effect the national tariff law of China.

Early in April of the present year the central Chinese Government was
ousted from power by opposing warring factions. It became impossible under
the circumstances to continue the negotiations. Finally, on July 3, the
delegates of the foreign powers, including those of the United States,
issued a statement expressing their unanimous and earnest desire to proceed
with the work of the conference at the earliest possible moment when the
delegates of the Chinese Government are in a position to resume discussions
with the foreign delegates of the problems before the conference. We are
prepared to resume the negotiations thus interrupted whenever a Government
representing the Chinese people and acting on their behalf presents itself.
The fact that constant warfare between contending Chinese factions has
rendered it impossible to bring these negotiations to a successful
conclusion is a matter of deep regret. Throughout these conflicts we have
maintained a position of the most careful neutrality. Our naval vessels in
Asiatic waters, pursuant to treaty rights, have been used only for the
protection of American citizens.

Silas H. Strawn, Esq., was sent to China as American commissioner to
cooperate with commissioners of the other powers in the establishment of a
commission to inquire into the present practice of extraterritorial
jurisdiction in China, with a view to reporting to the Governments of the
several powers their findings of fact in regard to these matters. The
commission commenced its work in January, 1926, and agreed upon a joint
report which was signed on September 16, 1926. The commission's report has
been received and is being studied with a view to determining our future
policy in regard to the question of extraterritorial privileges under
treaties between the United States and China.

The Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference met at Geneva on
May 18 and its work has been proceeding almost continuously since that
date. It would be premature to attempt to form a judgment as to the
progress that has been made. The commission has had before it a
comprehensive list of questions touching upon all aspects of the question
of the limitation of armament. In the commission's discussions many
differences of opinion have developed. However, I am hopeful that at least
some measure of agreement will be reached as the discussions continue. The
American representation on the commission has consistently tried to be
helpful, and has kept before it the practical objective to which the
commission is working, namely, actual agreements for the limitation of
armaments. Our representatives will continue their work in that direction.

One of the most encouraging features of the commission's work thus far has
been the agreement in principle among the naval experts of a majority of
the powers parties to the Washington treaty limiting naval armament upon
methods and standards for the comparison and further limitation of naval
armament. It is needless to say that at the proper time I shall be prepared
to proceed along practical lines to the conclusion of agreements carrying
further the work begun at the Washington Conference in 1921.

DEPARTMENT REPORTS

Many important subjects which it is impossible even to mention in the short
space of an annual message you will find fully discussed in the
departmental reports. A failure to include them here is not to be taken as
indicating any lack of interest, but only a disinclination to state
inadequately what has been much better done in other documents.

THE CAPITAL CITY

We are embarking on an ambitious building program for the city of
Washington. The Memorial Bridge is under way with all that it holds for use
and beauty. New buildings are soon contemplated. This program should
represent the best that exists in the art and science of architecture. Into
these structures which must be considered as of a permanent nature ought to
go the aspirations of the Nation, its ideals expressed in forms of beauty.
If our country wishes to compete with others, let it not be in the support
of armaments but in the making of a beautiful capital city. Let it express
the soul of America. Whenever an American is at the seat of his Government,
however traveled and cultured he may be, he ought to find a city of stately
proportion, symmetrically laid out and adorned with the best that there is
in architecture, which would arouse his imagination and stir his patriotic
pride. In the coming years Washington should be not only the art center of
our own country but the art center of the world. Around it should center
all that is best in science, in learning, in letters, and in art. These are
the results that justify the creation of those national resources with
which we have been favored.

AMERICAN IDEALS

America is not and must not be a country without ideals. They are useless
if they are only visionary; they are only valuable if they are practical. A
nation can not dwell constantly on the mountain tops. It has to be
replenished and sustained through the ceaseless toil of the less inspiring
valleys. But its face ought always to be turned upward, its vision ought
always to be fixed on high.

We need ideals that can be followed in daily life, that can be translated
into terms of the home. We can not expect to be relieved from toil, but we
do expect to divest it of degrading conditions. Work is honorable; it is
entitled to an honorable recompense. We must strive mightily, but having
striven there is a defect in our political and social system if we are not
in general rewarded with success. To relieve the land of the burdens that
came from the war, to release to the individual more of the fruits of his
own industry, to increase his earning capacity and decrease his hours of
labor, to enlarge the circle of his vision through good roads and better
transportation, to lace before him the opportunity for education both in
science and in art, to leave him free to receive the inspiration of
religion, all these are ideals which deliver him from the servitude of the
body and exalt him to the service of the soul. Through this emancipation
from the things that are material, we broaden our dominion over the things
that are spiritual.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 6, 1927

Members of the Congress:

It is gratifying to report that for the fourth consecutive year the state
of the Union in general is good. We are at peace. The country as a whole
has had a prosperity never exceeded. Wages are at their highest range,
employment is plentiful. Some parts of agriculture and industry have
lagged; some localities have suffered from storm and flood. But such losses
have been absorbed without serious detriment to our great economic
structure. Stocks of goods are moderate and a wholesome caution is
prevalent. Rates of interest for industry, agriculture, and government have
been reduced. Savers and investors are providing capital for new
construction in industry and public works. The purchasing power of
agriculture has increased. If the people maintain that confidence which
they are entitled to have in themselves, in each other, and in America, a
comfortable prosperity will continue.

CONSTRUCTIVE ECONOMY

Without constructive economy in Government expenditures we should not now
be enjoying these results or these prospects. Because we are not now
physically at war, some people are disposed to forget that our war debt
still remains. The Nation must make financial sacrifices, accompanied by a
stern self-denial in public expenditures, until we have conquered the
disabilities of our public finance. While our obligation to veterans and
dependents is large and continuing, the heavier burden of the national debt
is being steadily eliminated. At the end of this fiscal year it will be
reduced from about $26,600,000,000 to about $17,975,000,000. Annual
interest, including war savings, will have been reduced from $1,055,000,000
to $670,0001,000. The sacrifices of the people, the economy of the
Government, are showing remarkable results. They should be continued for
the purpose of relieving the Nation of the burden of interest and debt and
releasing revenue for internal improvements and national development.

Not only the amount, but the rate, of Government interest has been reduced.
Callable bonds have been refunded and paid, so that during this year the
average rate of interest on the present public debt for the first time fell
below 4 per cent. Keeping the credit of the Nation high is a tremendously
profitable operation.

TAX REDUCTION

The immediate fruit of economy and the retirement of the public debt is tax
reduction. The annual saving in interest between 1925 and 1929 is
$212,000,000. Without this no bill to relieve the taxpayers would be worth
proposing. The three measures already enacted leave our Government revenues
where they are not oppressive. Exemptions, have been increased until
115,000,000 people make but 2,500,000 individual taxable returns, so that
further reduction should be mainly for the purpose of removing
inequalities. The Secretary of the Treasury has recommended a measure which
would give us a much better balanced system of taxation and without
oppression produce sufficient revenue. It has my complete support.

Unforeseen contingencies requiring money are always arising. Our probable
surplus for June 30, 1929, is small. A slight depression in business would
greatly reduce our revenue because of our present method of taxation. The
people ought to take no selfish attitude of pressing for removing moderate
and fair taxes which might produce a deficit. We must keep our budget
balanced for each year. That is the corner stone of our national credit,
the trifling price we pay to command the lowest rate of interest of any
great power in the world. Any surplus can be applied to debt reduction, and
debt reduction is tax reduction. Under the present circumstances it would
be far better to leave the rates as they are than to enact a bill carrying
the peril of a deficit. This is not a problem to be approached in a narrow
or partisan spirit. All of those who participate in finding a reasonable
solution will be entitled to participate in any credit that accrues from it
without regard to party. The Congress has already demonstrated that tax
legislation can be removed from purely political consideration into the
realm of patriotic business principles.

Any bill for tax reduction should be written by those who are responsible
for raising, managing, and expending the finances of the Government. If
special interests, too often selfish, always uninformed of the national
needs as a whole, with hired agents using their proposed beneficiaries as
engines of propaganda, are permitted to influence the withdrawal of their
property from taxation, we shall have a law that is unbalanced and unjust,
bad for business, bad for the country, probably resulting in a deficit,
with disastrous financial Consequences. The Constitution has given the
Members of the Congress sole authority to decide what tax measures shall be
presented for approval. While welcoming information from any quarter, the
Congress should continue to exercise its own judgment in a matter so vital
and important to all the interests of the country as taxation.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Being a nation relying not on force, but on fair dealing and good will, to
maintain peace with others, we have provided a moderate military force in a
form adapted solely to defense. It should be continued with a very generous
supply of officers and with the present base of personnel, subject to
fluctuations which may be temporarily desirable.

The five-year program for our air forces is in keeping with this same
policy and commensurate with the notable contributions of America to the
science of aeronautics. The provisions of the law lately enacted are being
executed as fast as the practical difficulties of an orderly and stable
development permit.

While our Army is small, prudence requires that it should be kept in a high
state of efficiency and provided with such supplies as would permit of its
immediate expansion. The garrison ration has lately been increased.
Recommendations for an appropriation of $6,166,000 for new housing made to
the previous Congress failed to pass. While most of the Army is well
housed, some of it which is quartered in wartime training camps is becoming
poorly housed. In the past three years $12,533,000 have been appropriated
for reconstruction and repairs, and an authorization has been approved of
$22,301,000 for new housing, under which $8,070,000 has already been
appropriated. A law has also been passed, complying with the request of the
War Department, allocating funds received from the sale of buildings and
land for housing purposes. The work, however, is not completed, so that
other appropriations are being recommended.

Our Navy is likewise a weapon of defense. We have a foreign commerce and
ocean lines of trade unsurpassed by any other country. We have outlying
territory in the two great oceans and long stretches of seacoast studded
with the richest cities in the world. We are responsible for the protection
of a large population and the greatest treasure ever bestowed upon any
people. We are charged with an international duty of defending the Panama
Canal. To meet these responsibilities we need a very substantial sea
armament. It needs aircraft development, which is being provided under the
five-year program. It needs submarines as soon as the department decides
upon the best type of construction. It needs airplane carriers and a
material addition to its force of cruisers. We can plan for the future and
begin a moderate building program.

This country has put away the Old World policy of competitive armaments. It
can never be relieved of the responsibility of adequate national defense.
We have one treaty secured by an unprecedented attitude of generosity on
our part for a limitation in naval armament. After most careful
preparation, extending over months, we recently made every effort to secure
a three-power treaty to the same end. We were granted much cooperation by
Japan, but we were unable to come to an agreement with Great Britain. While
the results of the conference were of considerable value, they were mostly
of a negative character. We know now that no agreement can be reached which
will be inconsistent with a considerable building program on our part. We
are ready and willing to continue the preparatory investigations on the
general subject of limitation of armaments which have been started under
the auspices of the League of Nations.

We have a considerable cruiser tonnage, but a part of it is obsolete.
Everyone knew that had a three-power agreement been reached it would have
left us with the necessity of continuing our building program. The failure
to agree should not cause us to build either more or less than we otherwise
should. Any future treaty of limitation will call on us for more ships. We
should enter on no competition. We should refrain from no needful program.
It should be made clear to all the world that lacking a definite agreement,
the attitude of any other country is not to be permitted to alter our own
policy. It should especially be demonstrated that propaganda will not cause
us to change our course. Where there is no treaty limitation, the size of
the Navy which America is to have will be solely for America to determine.
No outside influence should enlarge it or diminish it. But it should be
known to all that our military power holds no threat of aggrandizement. It
is a guaranty of peace and security at home, and when it goes abroad it is
an instrument for the protection of the legal rights of our citizens under
international law, a refuge in time of disorder, and always the servant of
world peace. Wherever our flag goes the rights of humanity increase.

MERCHANT MARINE

The United States Government fleet is transporting a large amount of
freight and reducing its drain on the Treasury. The Shipping Board is
constantly under pressure, to which it too often yields, to protect private
interests, rather than serve the public welfare. More attention should be
given to merchant ships as an auxiliary of the Navy. The possibility of
including their masters and crews in the Naval Reserve, with some
reasonable compensation, should be thoroughly explored as a method of
encouraging private operation of shipping. Public operation is not a
success. No investigation, of which I have caused several to be made, has
failed to report that it could not succeed or to recommend speedy transfer
to private ownership. Our exporters and importers are both indifferent
about using American ships. It should be our policy to keep our present
vessels in repair and dispose of them as rapidly as possible, rather than
undertake any new construction. Their operation is a burden on the National
Treasury, for which we are not receiving sufficient benefits.

COMMERCIAL AVIATION

A rapid growth is taking place in aeronautics. The Department of Commerce
has charge of the inspection and licensing system and the construction of
national airways. Almost 8,000 miles are already completed and about 4,000
miles more contemplated. Nearly 4,400 miles are now equipped and over 3,000
miles more will have lighting and emergency landing fields by next July.
Air mail contracts are expected to cover 24 of these lines. Daily airway
flying is nearly 15,000 miles and is expected to reach 25,000 miles early
next year.

Flights for other purposes exceed 22,000 miles each day. Over 900 airports,
completed and uncompleted, have been laid out. The demand for aircraft has
greatly increased. The policy already adopted by the Congress is producing
the sound development of this coming industry.

WESTERN HEMISPHERE AIR MAIL

Private enterprise is showing much interest in opening up aviation service
to Mexico and Central and South America. We are particularly solicitous to
have the United States take a leading part in this development. It is
understood that the governments of our sister countries would be willing to
cooperate. Their physical features, the undeveloped state of their
transportation, make an air service especially adaptable to their usage.
The Post Office Department should be granted power to make liberal
long-term contracts for carrying our mail, and authority should be given to
the Army and the Navy to detail aviators and planes to cooperate with
private enterprise in establishing such mail service with the consent of
the countries concerned. A committee of the Cabinet will later present a
report on this subject.

GOOD ROADS

The importance and benefit of good roads is more and more coming to be
appreciated. The National Government has been making liberal contributions
to encourage their construction. The results and benefits have been very
gratifying. National participation, however, should be confined to
trunk-line systems. The national tax on automobiles is now nearly
sufficient to meet this outlay. This tax is very small, and on low-priced
cars is not more than $2 or $3 each year.

While the advantage of having good roads is very large, the desire for
improved highways is not limited to our own country. It should and does
include all the Western Hemisphere. The principal points in Canada are
already accessible. We ought to lend our encouragement in any way we can
for more good roads to all the principal points in this hemisphere south of
the Rio Grande. It has been our practice to supply these countries with
military and naval advisers, when they have requested it, to assist them in
national defense. The arts of peace are even more important to them and to
us. Authority should be given by law to provide them at their request with
engineering advisers for the construction of roads and bridges. In some of
these countries already wonderful progress is being made in road building,
but the engineering features are often very exacting and the financing
difficult. Private interests should look with favor on all reasonable loans
sought by these countries to open such main lines of travel.

This general subject has been promoted by the Pan American Congress of
Highways, which will convene again at Rio de Janeiro in July, 1928. It is
desirable that the Congress should provide for the appointment of delegates
to represent the Government of the United States.

CUBAN PARCEL POST

We have a temporary parcel-post convention with Cuba. The advantage of it
is all on our side. During 1926 we shipped twelve times as many parcels,
weighing twenty-four times as much, as we received. This convention was
made on the understanding that we would repeal an old law prohibiting the
importation of cigars and cigarettes in quantities less than 3,000 enacted
in 1866 to discourage smuggling, for which it has long been unnecessary.
This law unjustly discriminates against an important industry of Cuba. Its
repeal has been recommended by the Treasury and Post Office Departments.
Unless this is done our merchants and railroads will find themselves
deprived of this large parcel-post business after the 1st of next March,
the date of the expiration of the convention, which has been extended upon
the specific understanding that it would expire at that time unless this
legislation was enacted. We purchase large quantities of tobacco made in
Cuba. It is not probable that our purchases would be any larger if this law
was repealed, while it would be an advantage to many other industries in
the United States.

INSULAR POSSESSIONS

Conditions in the Philippine Islands have been steadily improved.
Contentment and good order prevail. Roads, irrigation works, harbor
improvements, and public buildings are being constructed. Public education
and sanitation have been advanced. The Government is in a sound financial
condition. These immediate results were especially due to the
administration of Gov. Gen. Leonard Wood. The six years of his governorship
marked a distinct improvement in the islands and rank as one of the
outstanding accomplishments of this distinguished man. His death is a loss
to the Nation and the islands.

Greater progress could be made, more efficiency could be put into
administration, if the Congress would undertake to expend, through its
appropriating power, all or a part of the customs revenues which are now
turned over to the Philippine treasury. The powers of the auditor of the
islands also need revision and clarification. The government of the islands
is about 98 per cent in the hands of the Filipinos. An extension of the
policy of self-government will be hastened by the demonstration on their
part of their desire and their ability to carry out cordially and
efficiently the provisions of the organic law enacted by the Congress for
the government of the islands. It would be well for a committee of the
Congress to visit the islands every two years.

A fair degree of progress is being made in Porto Rico. Its agricultural
products are increasing; its treasury position, which has given much
concern, shows improvement. I am advised by the governor that educational
facilities are still lacking. Roads are being constructed, which he
represents are the first requisite for building schoolhouses. The loyalty
of the island to the United States is exceedingly gratifying. A memorial
will be presented to you requesting authority to have the governor elected
by the people of Porto Rico. This was never done in the case of our own
Territories. It is admitted that education outside of the towns is as yet
very deficient. Until it has progressed further the efficiency of the
government and the happiness of the people may need the guiding hand of an
appointed governor. As it is not contemplated that any change should be
made immediately, the general subject may well have the thoughtful study of
the Congress.

PANAMA CANAL

The number of commercial ships passing through the Panama Canal has
increased from 3,967 in 1923 to 5,475 in 1927. The total amount of tolls
turned into the Treasury is over $166,000,000, while all the operations of
the canal have yielded a surplus of about $80,000,000. In order to provide
additional storage of water and give some control over the floods of the
Chagres River, it is proposed to erect a dam to cost about $12,000,000 at
Alhajuela. It will take some five years to complete this work.

AGRICULTURE

The past year has seen a marked improvement in the general condition of
agriculture. Production is better balanced and without acute shortage or
heavy surplus. Costs have been reduced and the average output of the worker
increased. The level of farm prices has risen while others have fallen, so
that the purchasing power of the farmer is approaching a normal figure. The
individual farmer is entitled to great credit for the progress made since
1921. He has adjusted his production and through cooperative organizations
and other methods improved his marketing. He is using authenticated facts
and employing sound methods which other industries are obliged to use to
secure stability and prosperity. The old-fashioned haphazard system is
being abandoned, economics are being applied to ascertain the best adapted
unit of land, diversification is being promoted, and scientific methods are
being used in production, and business principles in marketing.

Agriculture has not fully recovered from postwar depression. The fact is
that economic progress never marches forward in a straight line. It goes in
waves. One part goes ahead, while another halts and another recedes.
Everybody wishes agriculture to prosper. Any sound and workable proposal to
help the farmer will have the earnest support of the Government. Their
interests are not all identical. Legislation should assist as many
producers in as many regions as possible. It should be the aim to assist
the farmer to work out his own salvation socially and economically. No plan
will be of any permanent value to him which does not leave him standing on
his own foundation.

In the past the Government has spent vast sums to bring land under
cultivation. It is apparent that this has reached temporarily the
saturation point. We have had a surplus of production and a poor market for
land, which has only lately shown signs of improvement. The main problem
which is presented for solution is one of dealing with a surplus of
production. It is useless to propose a temporary expedient. What is needed
is permanency and stability. Government price fixing is known to be unsound
and bound to result in disaster. A Government subsidy would work out in the
same way. It can not be sound for all of the people to hire some of the
people to produce a crop which neither the producers nor the rest of the
people want.

Price fixing and subsidy will both increase the surplus, instead of
diminishing it. Putting the Government directly into business is merely a
combination of subsidy and price fixing aggravated by political pressure.
These expedients would lead logically to telling the farmer by law what and
how much he should plant and where he should plant it, and what and how
much he should sell and where he should sell it. The most effective means
of dealing with surplus crops is to reduce the surplus acreage. While this
can not be done by the individual farmer, it can be done through the
organizations already in existence, through the information published by
the Department of Agriculture, and especially through banks and others who
supply credit refusing to finance an acreage manifestly too large.

It is impossible to provide by law for an assured success and prosperity
for all those who engage in farming. If acreage becomes overextended, the
Government can not assume responsibility for it. The Government can,
however, assist cooperative associations and other organizations in orderly
marketing and handling a surplus clearly due to weather and seasonal
conditions, in order to save the producer from preventable loss. While it
is probably impossible to secure this result at a single step, and much
will have to be worked out by trial and rejection, a beginning could be
made by setting up a Federal board or commission of able and experienced
men in marketing, granting equal advantages under this board to the various
agricultural commodities and sections of the country, giving encouragement
to the cooperative movement in agriculture, and providing a revolving loan
fund at a moderate rate of interest for the necessary financing. Such
legislation would lay the foundation for a permanent solution of the
surplus problem.

This is not a proposal to lend more money to the farmer, who is already
fairly well financed, but to lend money temporarily to experimental
marketing associations which will no doubt ultimately be financed by the
regularly established banks, as were the temporary operations of the War
Finance Corporation. Cooperative marketing especially would be provided
with means of buying or building physical properties.

The National Government has almost entirely relieved the farmer from income
taxes by successive tax reductions, but State and local taxes have
increased, putting on him a grievous burden. A policy of rigid economy
should be applied to State and local expenditures. This is clearly within
the legislative domain of the States. The Federal Government has also
improved our banking structure and system of agricultural credits. The
farmer will be greatly benefited by similar action in many States. The
Department of Agriculture is undergoing changes in organization in order
more completely to separate the research and regulatory divisions, that
each may be better administered. More emphasis is being placed on the
research program, not only by enlarging the appropriations for State
experiment stations but by providing funds for expanding the research work
of the department. It is in this direction that much future progress can be
expected.

THE PROTECTIVE TARIFF

The present tariff rates supply the National Treasury with well over
$600,000,000 of annual revenue. Yet, about 65 per cent of our imports come
in duty free. Of the remaining 35 per cent of imports on which duties are
laid about 23 per cent consists of luxuries and agricultural products, and
the balance of about 12 per cent, amounting, to around $560,000,000 is made
up of manufactures and merchandise. As no one is advocating any material
reduction in the rates on agriculture or luxuries, it is only the
comparatively small amount of about $560,000,000 of other imports that are
really considered in any discussion of reducing tariff rates. While this
amount, duty free, would be large enough seriously to depress many lines of
business in our own country, it is of small importance when spread over the
rest of the world.

It is often stated that a reduction of tariff rates on industry would
benefit agriculture. It would be interesting to know to what commodities it
is thought this could be applied. Everything the farmer uses in farming is
already on the free list. Nearly everything he sells is protected. It would
seem to be obvious that it is better for the country to have the farmer
raise food to supply the domestic manufacturer than the foreign
manufacturer. In one case our country would have only the farmer; in the
other it would have the farmer and the manufacturer. Assuming that Europe
would have more money if it sold us larger amounts of merchandise, it is
not certain it would consume more food, or, if it did, that its purchases
would be made in this country. Undoubtedly it would resort to the cheapest
market, which is by no means ours. The largest and best and most profitable
market for the farmer in the world is our own domestic market. Any great
increase in manufactured imports means the closing of our own plants.
Nothing would be worse for agriculture.

Probably no one expects a material reduction in the rates on manufactures
while maintaining the rates on agriculture. A material reduction in either
would be disastrous to the farmer. It would mean a general shrinkage of
values, a deflation of prices, a reduction of wages, a general depression
carrying our people down to the low standard of living in our competing
countries. It is obvious that this would not improve but destroy our market
for imports, which is best served by maintaining our present high
purchasing power under which in the past five years imports have increased
63 per cent.

FARM LOAN SYSTEM

It is exceedingly important that the Federal land and joint-stock land
banks should furnish the best possible service for agriculture. Certain
joint-stock banks have fallen into improper and unsound practices,
resulting in the indictment of the officials of three of them. More money
has been provided for examinations, and at the instance of the Treasury
rules and regulations of the Federal Farm Board have been revised. Early
last May three of its members resigned. Their places were filled with men
connected with the War Finance Corporation. Eugene Meyer being designated
as Farm Loan Commissioner. The new members have demonstrated their ability
in the field of agricultural finance in the extensive operations of he War
Finance Corporation. Three joint-stock banks have gone into receivership.
It is necessary to preserve the public confidence in this system in order
to find a market for their bonds. A recent flotation was made at a record
low rate of 4 per cent. Careful supervision is absolutely necessary to
protect the investor and enable these banks to exercise their chief
function in serving agriculture.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The last year has seen considerable changes in the problem of Muscle
Shoals. Development of other methods show that nitrates can probably be
produced at less cost than by the use of hydroelectric power. Extensive
investigation made by the Department of War indicates that the nitrate
plants on this project are of little value for national defense and can
probably be disposed of within two years. The oxidation part of the plants,
however, should be retained indefinitely. This leaves this project mostly
concerned with power. It should, nevertheless, continue to be dedicated to
agriculture. It is probable that this desire can be best served by
disposing of the plant and applying the revenues received from it to
research for methods of more economical production of concentrated
fertilizer and to demonstrations and other methods of stimulating its use
on the farm. But in disposing of the property preference should be given to
proposals to use all or part of it for nitrate production and fertilizer
manufacturing.

FLOOD CONTROL

For many years the Federal Government has been building a system of dikes
along the Mississippi River for protection against high water. During the
past season the lower States were overcome by a most disastrous flood. Many
thousands of square miles were inundated a great many lives were lost, much
livestock was drowned, and a very heavy destruction of property was
inflicted upon the inhabitants. The American Red Cross at once went to the
relief of the stricken communities. Appeals for contributions have brought
in over $17,000,000. The Federal Government has provided services,
equipment, and supplies probably amounting to about $7,000,000 more.
Between $5,000,000 and $10,000,000 in addition have been provided by local
railroads, the States, and their political units. Credits have been
arranged by the Farm Loan Board, and three emergency finance corporations
with a total capital of $3,000,000 have insured additional resources to the
extent of $12,000,000. Through these means the 700,000 people in the
flooded areas have been adequately supported. Provision has been made to
care for those in need until after the 1st of January.

The Engineering Corps of the Army has contracted to close all breaks in the
dike system before the next season of high water. A most thorough and
elaborate survey of the whole situation has been made and embodied in a
report with recommendations for future flood control, which will be
presented to the Congress. The carrying out of their plans will necessarily
extend over a series of years. They will call for a raising and
strengthening of the dike system with provision for emergency spillway's
and improvements for the benefit of navigation.

Under the present law the land adjacent to the dikes has paid one-third of
the cost of their construction. This has been a most extraordinary
concession from the plan adopted in relation to irrigation, where the
general rule has been that the land benefited should bear the entire
expense. It is true, of course, that the troublesome waters do not
originate on the land to be reclaimed, but it is also true that such waters
have a right of way through that section of the country and the land there
is charged with that easement. It is the land of this region that is to be
benefited. To say that it is unable to bear any expense of reclamation is
the same thing as saying that it is not worth reclaiming. Because of
expenses incurred and charges already held against this land, it seems
probable that some revision will have to be made concerning the proportion
of cost which it should bear. But it is extremely important that it should
pay enough so that those requesting improvements will be charged with some
responsibility for their cost, and the neighborhood where works are
constructed have a pecuniary interest in preventing waste and extravagance
and securing a wise and economical expenditure of public funds.

It is necessary to look upon this emergency as a national disaster. It has
been so treated from its inception. Our whole people have provided with
great generosity for its relief. Most of the departments of the Federal
Government have been engaged in the same effort. The governments of the
afflicted areas, both State and municipal, can not be given too high praise
for the courageous and helpful way in which they have come to the rescue of
the people. If the sources directly chargeable can not meet the demand, the
National Government should not fail to provide generous relief. This,
however, does not mean restoration. The Government is not an insurer of its
citizens against the hazard of the elements. We shall always have flood and
drought, heat and cold, earthquake and wind, lightning and tidal wave,
which are all too constant in their afflictions. The Government does not
undertake to reimburse its citizens for loss and damage incurred under such
circumstances. It is chargeable, however, with the rebuilding of public
works and the humanitarian duty of relieving its citizens from distress.

The people in the flooded area and their representatives have approached
this problem in the most generous and broad-minded way. They should be met
with a like spirit on the part of the National government. This is all one
country. The public needs of each part must be provided for by the public
at large. No required relief should be refused. An adequate plan should be
adopted to prevent a recurrence of this disaster in order that the people
may restore to productivity and comfort their fields and their towns.

Legislation by this Congress should be confined to our principal and most
pressing problem, the lower Mississippi, considering tributaries only so
far as they materially affect the main flood problem. A definite Federal
program relating to our waterways was proposed when the last Congress
authorized a comprehensive survey of all the important streams of the
country in order to provide for their improvement, including flood control,
navigation, power, and irrigation. Other legislation should wait pending a
report on this survey. The recognized needs of the Mississippi should not
be made a vehicle for carrying other projects. All proposals for
development should stand on their own merits. Any other method would result
in ill-advised conclusions, great waste of money, and instead of promoting
would delay the orderly and certain utilization of our water resources.

Very recently several of the New England States have suffered somewhat
similarly from heavy rainfall and high water. No reliable estimate of
damage has yet been computed, but it is very large to private and public
property. The Red Cross is generously undertaking what is needed for
immediate relief, repair and reconstruction of houses, restocking of
domestic animals, and food, clothing, and shelter. A considerable sum of
money will be available through the regular channels in the Department of
Agriculture for reconstruction of highways. It may be necessary to grant
special aid for this purpose. Complete reports of what is required will
undoubtedly be available early in the session.

INLAND NAVIGATION

The Congress in its last session authorized the general improvements
necessary to provide the Mississippi waterway system with better
transportation. Stabilization of the levels of the Great Lakes and their
opening to the sea by an effective shipway remain to be considered. Since
the last session the Board of Engineers of the War Department has made a
report on the proposal for a canal through the State of New York, and the
Joint Board of Engineers, representing Canada and the United States, has
finished a report on the St. Lawrence River. Both of these boards conclude
that the St. Lawrence project is cheaper, affords a more expeditious method
of placing western products in European markets, and will cost less to
operate. The State Department has requested the Canadian Government to
negotiate treaties necessary to provide for this improvement. It will also
be necessary to secure an agreement with Canada to put in works necessary
to prevent fluctuation in the levels of the Great Lakes.

Legislation is desirable for the construction of a dam at Boulder Canyon on
the Colorado River, primarily as a method of flood control and irrigation.
A secondary result would be a considerable power development and a source
of domestic water supply for southern California. Flood control is clearly
a national problem, and water supply is a Government problem, but every
other possibility should be exhausted before the Federal Government becomes
engaged in the power business. The States which are interested ought to
reach mutual agreement. This project is in reality their work. If they wish
the Federal Government to undertake it, they should not hesitate to make
the necessary concessions to each other. This subject is fully discussed in
the annual report of the Secretary of the Interior. The Columbia River
Basin project is being studied and will be one to be considered at some
future time.

The Inland Waterways Corporation is proving successful and especially
beneficial to agriculture. A survey is being made to determine its future
needs. It has never been contemplated that if inland rivers were opened to
navigation it would then be necessary for the Federal Government to provide
the navigation. Such a request is very nearly the equivalent of a
declaration that their navigation is not profitable, that the commodities
which they are to carry can be taken at a cheaper rate by some other
method, in which case the hundreds of millions of dollars proposed to be
expended for opening rivers to navigation would be not only wasted, but
would entail further constant expenditures to carry the commodities of
private persons for less than cost.

The policy is well established that the Government should open public
highways on land and on water, but for use of the public in their private
capacity. It has put on some demonstration barge lines, but always with the
expectation that if they prove profitable they would pass into private
hands and if they do not prove profitable they will be withdrawn. The
problems of transportation over inland waterways should be taken up by
private enterprise, so that the public will have the advantage of
competition in service. It is expected that some of our lines can be sold,
some more demonstration work done, and that with the completion of the Ohio
project a policy of private operation can be fully developed.

PROHIBITION

After more than two generations of constant debate, our country adopted a
system of national prohibition under all the solemnities involved in an
amendment to the Federal Constitution. In obedience to this mandate the
Congress and the States, with one or two notable exceptions, have passed
required laws for its administration and enforcement. This imposes upon the
citizenship of the country, and especially on all public officers, not only
the duty to enforce, but the obligation to observe the sanctions of this
constitutional provision and its resulting laws. If this condition could be
secured, all question concerning prohibition would cease. The Federal
Government is making every effort to accomplish these results through
careful organization, large appropriations, and administrative effort.
Smuggling has been greatly cut down, the larger sources of supply for
illegal sale have been checked, and by means of injunction and criminal
prosecution the process of enforcement is being applied. The same vigilance
on the part of local governments would render these efforts much more
successful. The Federal authorities propose to discharge their obligation
for enforcement to the full extent of their ability.

THE NEGRO

History does not anywhere record so much progress made in the same length
of time as that which has been accomplished by the Negro race in the United
States since the Emancipation Proclamation. They have come up from slavery
to be prominent in education, the professions, art, science, agriculture,
banking, and commerce. It is estimated that 50,000 of them are on the
Government pay rolls, drawing about $50,000,000 each year. They have been
the recipients of presidential appointments and their professional ability
has arisen to a sufficiently high plane so that they have been intrusted
with the entire management and control of the great veterans hospital at
Tuskegee, where their conduct has taken high rank. They have shown that
they have been worthy of all the encouragement which they have received.
Nevertheless, they are too often subjected to thoughtless and inconsiderate
treatment, unworthy alike of the white or colored races. They have
especially been made the target of the foul crime of lynching. For several
years these acts of unlawful violence had been diminishing. In the last
year they have shown an increase. Every principle of order and law and
liberty is opposed to this crime. The Congress should enact any legislation
it can under the Constitution to provide for its elimination.

AMERICAN INDIAN

The condition of the American Indian has much improved in recent years.
Full citizenship was bestowed upon them on June 2, 1924, and appropriations
for their care and advancement have been increased. Still there remains
much to be done.

Notable increases in appropriations for the several major functions
performed by the Department of the Interior on behalf of the Indians have
marked the last five years. In that time, successive annual increases in
appropriations for their education total $1,804,325; for medical care,
$578,000; and for industrial advancement, $205,000; or $2,582,325 more than
would have been spent in the same period on the basis of appropriations for
1923 and the preceding years.

The needs along health, educational, industrial and social lines however,
are great, and the Budget estimates for 1929 include still further
increases for Indian administration.

To advance the time when the Indians may become self-sustaining, it is my
belief that the Federal Government should continue to improve the
facilities for their care, and as rapidly as possible turn its
responsibility over to the States.

COAL

Legislation authorizing a system of fuel administration and the appointment
by the President of a Board of Mediation and Conciliation in case of actual
or threatened interruption of production is needed. The miners themselves
are now seeking information and action from the Government, which could
readily be secured through such a board. It is believed that a thorough
investigation and reconsideration of this proposed policy by the Congress
will demonstrate that this recommendation is sound and should be adopted.

PETROLEUM CONSERVATION

The National Government is undertaking to join in the formation of a
cooperative committee of lawyers, engineers, and public officers, to
consider what legislation by the States or by the Congress can be adopted
for the preservation and conservation of our supply of petroleum. This has
come to be one of the main dependencies for transportation and power so
necessary to our agricultural and industrial life. It is expected the
report of this committee will be available for later congressional action.
Meantime, the requirement that the Secretary of the Interior should make
certain leases of land belonging to the Osage Indians, in accordance with
the act of March 3, 1921, should be repealed. The authority to lease should
be discretionary, in order that the property of the Indians way not be
wasted and the public suffer a future lack of supply.

ALIEN PROPERTY

Under treaty the property held by the Alien Property Custodian was to be
retained until suitable provision had been made for the satisfaction of
American claims. While still protecting the American claimants, in order to
afford every possible accommodation to the nationals of the countries whose
property was held, the Congress has made liberal provision for the return
of a larger part of the property. All trusts under $10,000 were returned in
full, and partial returns were made on the others. The total returned was
approximately $350,000,000.

There is still retained, however, about $250,000,000. The Mixed Claims
Commission has made such progress in the adjudication of claims that
legislation can now be enacted providing for the return of the property,
which should be done under conditions which will protect our Government and
our claimants. Such a measure will be proposed, and I recommend its
enactment.

RAILROAD CONSOLIDATION

In order to increase the efficiency of transportation and decrease its cost
to the shipper, railroad consolidation must be secured. Legislation is
needed to simplify the necessary procedure to secure such agreements and
arrangements for consolidation, always under the control and with the
approval of the Interstate Commerce Commission. Pending this, no adequate
or permanent reorganization can be made of the freight-rate structure.
Meantime, both agriculture and industry are compelled to wait for needed
relief. This is purely a business question, which should be stripped of all
local and partisan bias and decided on broad principles and its merits in
order to promote the public welfare. A large amount of new construction and
equipment, which will furnish employment for labor and markets for
commodities of both factory and farm, wait on the decision of this
important question. Delay is holding back the progress of our country.

Many of the same arguments are applicable to the consolidation of the
Washington traction companies.

VETERANS

The care which this country has lavished on its veterans is known of all
men. The yearly outlay for this purpose is about $750,000,000, or about the
cost of running the Federal Government, outside of the Post Office
Department, before the World War. The Congress will have before it
recommendations of the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, and
other like organizations, which should receive candid consideration. We
should continue to foster our system of compensation and rehabilitation,
and provide hospitals and insurance. The magnitude of the undertaking is
already so large that all requests calling for further expenditure should
have the most searching scrutiny. Our present system of pensions is already
sufficiently liberal. It was increased by the last Congress for Civil and
Spanish War veterans and widows and for some dependents.

It has been suggested that the various governmental agencies now dealing
with veterans' relief be consolidated. This would bring many advantages. It
is recommended that the proper committees of the Congress make a thorough
survey of this subject, in order to determine if legislation to secure such
consolidation is desirable.

EDUCATION

For many years it has been the policy of the Federal Government to
encourage and foster the cause of education. Large sums of money are
annually appropriated to carry on vocational training. Many millions go
into agricultural schools. The general subject is under the immediate
direction of a Commissioner of Education. While this subject is strictly a
State and local function, it should continue to have the encouragement of
the National Government. I am still of the opinion that much good could be
accomplished through the establishment of a Department of Education and
Relief, into which would be gathered all of these functions under one
directing member of the Cabinet.

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

Industrial relations have never been more peaceful. In recent months they
have suffered from only one serious controversy. In all others difficulties
have been adjusted, both management and labor wishing to settle
controversies by friendly agreement rather than by compulsion. The welfare
of women and children is being especially guarded by our Department of
Labor. Its Children's Bureau is in cooperation with 26 State boards and 80
juvenile courts.

Through its Bureau of Immigration it has been found that medical
examination abroad has saved prospective immigrants from much hardship.
Some further legislation to provide for reuniting families when either the
husband or the wife is in this country, and granting more freedom for the
migration of the North American Indian tribes is desirable.

The United States Employment Service has enabled about 2,000,000 men and
women to gain paying positions in the last fiscal year. Particular
attention has been given to assisting men past middle life and in providing
field labor for harvesting agricultural crops. This has been made possible
in part through the service of the Federal Board for Vocational Education,
which is cooperating with the States in a program to increase the technical
knowledge and skill of the wage earner.

PUBLIC BUILDINGS

Construction is under way in the country and ground has been broken for
carrying out a public-building program for Washington. We have reached a
time when not only the conveniences but the architectural beauty of the
public buildings of the Capital City should be given much attention. It
will be necessary to purchase further land and provide the required
continuing appropriations.

HISTORICAL CELEBRATIONS

Provision is being made to commemorate the two hundredth anniversary of the
birth of George Washington. Suggestion has been made for the construction
of a memorial road leading from the Capital to Mount Vernon, which may well
have the consideration of the Congress, and the commission intrusted with
preparations for the celebration will undoubtedly recommend publication of
the complete writings of Washington and a series of writings by different
authors relating to him.

February 25, 1929. is the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the
capture of Fort Sackville, at Vincennes, in the State of Indiana. This
eventually brought into the Union what was known as the Northwest
Territory, embracing the region north of the Ohio River between the
Alleghenies and the Mississippi River. This expedition was led by George
Rogers Clark. His heroic character and the importance of his victory are
too little known and understood. They gave us not only this Northwest
Territory but by means of that the prospect of reaching the Pacific. The
State of Indiana is proposing to dedicate the site of Fort Sackville as a
national shrine. The Federal Government may well make some provision for
the erection under its own management of a fitting memorial at that point.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

It is the policy of the United States to promote peace. We are a peaceful
people and committed to the settling of disputes by amicable adjustment
rather than by force. We have believed that peace can best be secured by a
faithful observance on our part of the principles of international law,
accompanied by patience and conciliation, and requiring of others a like
treatment for ourselves. We have lately had some difference with Mexico
relative to the injuries inflicted upon our nationals and their property
within that country. A firm adherence to our rights and a scrupulous
respect for the sovereignty of Mexico, both in accordance with the law of
nations, coupled with patience and forbearance, it is hoped will resolve
all our differences without interfering with the friendly relationship
between the two Governments.

We have been compelled to send naval and marine forces to China to protect
the lives and property of our citizens. Fortunately their simple presence
there has been sufficient to prevent any material loss of life. But there
has been considerable loss of property. That unhappy country is torn by
factions and revolutions which bid fair to last for an indefinite period.
Meanwhile we are protecting our citizens and stand ready to cooperate with
any government which may emerge in promoting the welfare of the people of
China. They have always had our friendship, and they should especially
merit our consideration in these days of their distraction and distress.

We were confronted by similar condition on a small scale in Nicaragua. Our
marine and naval forces protected our citizens and their property and
prevented a heavy sacrifice of life and the destruction of that country by
a reversion to a state of revolution. Henry L. Stimson, former Secretary of
War, was sent there to cooperate with our diplomatic and military officers
in effecting a settlement between the contending parties. This was done on
the assurance that we would cooperate in restoring a state of peace where
our rights would be protected by giving our assistance in the conduct of
the next presidential election, which occurs in a few months. With this
assurance the population returned to their peacetime pursuits, with the
exception of some small roving bands of outlaws.

In general, our relations with other countries can be said to have improved
within the year. While having a due regard for our own affairs, the
protection of our own rights, and the advancement of our own people, we can
afford to be liberal toward others. Our example has become of great
importance in the world. It is recognized that we are independent,
detached, and can and do take a disinterested position in relation to
international affairs. Our charity embraces the earth. Our trade is far
flung. Our financial favors are widespread. Those who are peaceful and
law-abiding realize that not only have they nothing to fear from us, but
that they can rely on our moral support. Proposals for promoting the peace
of the world will have careful consideration. But we are not a people who
are always seeking for a sign. We know that peace comes from honesty and
fair dealing, from moderation, and a generous regard for the rights of
others. The heart of the Nation is more important than treaties. A spirit
of generous consideration is a more certain defense than great armaments.
We should continue to promote peace by our example, and fortify it by such
international covenants against war as we are permitted under our
Constitution to make.

AMERICAN PROGRESS

Our country has made much progress. But it has taken, and will continue to
take, much effort. Competition will be keen, the temptation to selfishness
and arrogance will be severe, the provocations to deal harshly with weaker
peoples will be many. All of these are embraced in the opportunity for true
greatness. They will be overbalanced by cooperation by generosity, and a
spirit of neighborly kindness. The forces of the universe are taking
humanity in that direction. In doing good, in walking humbly, in sustaining
its own people in ministering to other nations, America will work out its
own mighty destiny.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 4, 1928

To the Congress of the United States:

No Congress of the United States ever assembled, on surveying the state of
the Union, has met with a more pleasing prospect than that which appears at
the present time. In the domestic field there is tranquility and
contentment, harmonious relations between management and wage earner,
freedom from industrial strife, and the highest record of years of
prosperity. In the foreign field there is peace, the good will which comes
from mutual understanding, and the knowledge that the problems which a
short time ago appeared so ominous are yielding to the touch of manifest
friendship. The great wealth created by our enterprise and industry, and
saved by our economy, has had the widest distribution among our own people,
and has gone out in a steady stream to serve the charity and the business
of the world. The requirements of existence have passed beyond the standard
of necessity into the region of luxury. Enlarging production is consumed by
an increasing demand at home and an expanding commerce abroad. The country
can regard the present with satisfaction and anticipate the future with
optimism.

The main source of these unexampled blessings lies in the integrity and
character of the American people. They have had great faith, which they
have supplemented with mighty works. They have been able to put trust in
each other and trust in their Government. Their candor in dealing with
foreign governments has commanded respect and confidence. Yet these
remarkable powers would have been exerted almost in vain without the
constant cooperation and careful administration of the Federal Government.

We have been coming into a period which may be fairly characterized as a
conservation of our national resources. Wastefulness in public business and
private enterprise has been displaced by constructive economy. This has
been accomplished by bringing our domestic and foreign relations more and
more under a reign of law. A rule of force has been giving way to a rule of
reason. We have substituted for the vicious circle of increasing
expenditures, increasing tax rates, and diminishing profits the charmed
circle of diminishing expenditures, diminishing tax rates, and increasing
profits.

Four times we have made a drastic revision of our internal revenue system,
abolishing many taxes and substantially reducing almost all others. Each
time the resulting stimulation to business has so increased taxable incomes
and profits that a surplus has been reduced. One-third of the national
debt has been paid, while much of the other two-thirds has been refunded at
lower rates, and these savings of interest and constant economies have
enabled us to repeat the satisfying process of more tax reductions. Under
this sound and healthful encouragement the national income has increased
nearly 50 per cent, until it is estimated to stand well over
$90,000,000,000. It gas been a method which has performed the seeming
miracle of leaving a much greater percentage of earnings in the hands of
the taxpayers with scarcely any diminution of the Government revenue. That
is constructive economy in the highest degree. It is the corner stone of
prosperity. It should not fail to be continued.

This action began by the application of economy to public expenditure. If
it is to be permanent, it must be made so by the repeated application of
economy. There is no surplus on which to base further tax revision at this
time. Last June the estimates showed a threatened deficit for the current
fiscal year of $94,000,000. Under my direction the departments began saving
all they could out of their present appropriations. The last tax reduction
brought an encouraging improvement in business, beginning early in
October, which will also increase our revenue. The combination of economy
and good times now indicates a surplus of about $37,000,000. This is a
margin of less than I percent on out, expenditures and makes it obvious
that the Treasury is in no condition to undertake increases in expenditures
to be made before June 30. It is necessary therefore during the present
session to refrain from new appropriations for immediate outlay, or if such
are absolutely required to provide for them by new revenue; otherwise, we
shall reach the end of the year with the unthinkable result of an unbalanced
budget. For the first time during my term of office we face that
contingency. I am certain that the Congress would not pass and I should not
feel warranted in approving legislation which would involve us in that
financial disgrace.

On the whole the finances of the Government are most satisfactory. Last
year the national debt was reduced about $906,000,000. The refunding and
retirement of the second and third Liberty loans have just been brought to
a successful conclusion, which will save about $75,000,000 a year in
interest. The unpaid balance has been arranged in maturities convenient
for carrying out our permanent debt-paying Program.

The enormous savings made have not been at the expense of any legitimate
public need. The Government plant has been kept up and many improvements
are tinder way, while its service is fully manned and the general
efficiency of operation has increased. We have been enabled to undertake
many new enterprises. Among these are the adjusted compensation of the
veterans of the World War, which is costing us $112,000,000 a year;
amortizing our liability to the civil service retirement funds,
$20,000,000; increase of expenditures for rivers and harbors including
flood control, $43,000,000; public buildings, $47,000,000. In 1928 we spent
$50,000,000 in the adjustment of war claims and alien property. These are
examples of a large list of items.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

When we turn from our domestic affairs to our foreign relations, we
likewise perceive peace and progress. The Sixth International Conference of
American States was held at Habana last winter. It contributed to a better
understanding and cooperation among the nations'. Eleven important
conventions were signed and 71 resolutions passed. Pursuant to the plan
then adopted, this Government has invited the other 20 nations of this
hemisphere to it conference on conciliation and arbitration, which meets in
Washington on December 10. All the nations have accepted and the
expectation is justified that important progress will be made in methods
for resolving international differences by means of arbitration.

During the year we have signed 11 new arbitration treaties, and 22 more are
tinder negotiation.

NICARAGUA

When a destructive and bloody revolution lately broke out in Nicaragua, at
the earnest and repeated entreaties of its Government I dispatched our
Marine forces there to protect the lives and interests of our citizens. To
compose the contending parties, I sent there Col. Henry L. Stimson, former
Secretary of War and now Governor General of the Philippine Islands, who
secured an agreement that warfare should cease, a national election should
be held and peace should be restored. Both parties conscientiously carried
out this agreement, with the exception of a few bandits who later mostly
surrendered or left the country. President Diaz appointed Brig. Gen. Frank
R. McCoy, United States Army, president of the election board, which
included also one member of each political party.

A free and fair election has been held and has worked out so successfully
that both parties have joined in requesting like cooperation from this
country at the election four years hence, to which I have refrained from
making any commitments, although our country must be gratified at such an
exhibition of success and appreciation.

Nicaragua is regaining its prosperity and has taken a long step in the
direction of peaceful self-government.

TACNA-ARICA

The long-standing differences between Chile and Peru have been sufficiently
composed so that diplomatic relations have been resumed by the exchange of
ambassadors. Negotiations are hopefully proceeding as this is written for
the final adjustment of the differences over their disputed territory.

MEXICO

Our relations with Mexico are on a more satisfactory basis than at any time
since their revolution. Many misunderstandings have been resolved and the
most frank and friendly negotiations promise a final adjustment of all
unsettled questions. It is exceedingly gratifying that Ambassador Morrow
has been able to bring our two neighboring countries, which have so many
interests in common, to a position of confidence in each other and of
respect for mutual sovereign rights.

CHINA

The situation in China which a few months ago was so threatening as to call
for the dispatch of a large additional force has, been much composed. The
Nationalist Government has established itself over the country and
promulgated a new organic law announcing a program intended to promote the
political and economic welfare of the people. We have recognized this
Government, encouraged its progress, and have negotiated a treaty
restoring to China complete tariff autonomy and guaranteeing our citizens
against discriminations. Our trade in that quarter is increasing and our
forces are being reduced.

GREEK AND AUSTRIAN DEBTS

Pending before the Congress is a recommendation for the settlement of the
Greek debt and the Austrian debt. Both of these are comparatively small and
our country can afford to be generous. The rehabilitation of these
countries awaits their settlement. There would also be advantages to our
trade. We could scarcely afford to be the only nation that refuses the
relief which Austria seeks. The Congress has already granted Austria a
long-time moratorium, which it is understood will be waived and immediate
payments begun on her debt on the same basis which we have extended to
other countries.

PEACE TREATY

One of the most important treaties ever laid before the Senate of the
United States will be that which the 15 nations recently signed at Paris,
and to which 44 other nations have declared their intention to adhere,
renouncing war as a national policy and agreeing to resort only to peaceful
means for the adjustment of international differences. It is the most
solemn declaration against war, the most positive adherence to peace, that
it is possible for sovereign nations to make. It does not supersede our
inalienable sovereign right and duty of national defense or undertake to
commit us before the event to any mode of action which the Congress might
decide to be wise if ever the treaty should be broken. But it is a new
standard in the world around which can rally the informed and enlightened
opinion of nations to prevent their governments from being forced into
hostile action by the temporary outbreak of international animosities. The
observance of this covenant, so simple and so straightforward, promises more
for the peace of the world than any other agreement ever negotiated among
the nations.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

The first duty of our Government to its own citizens and foreigners within
its borders is the preservation of order. Unless and until that duty is met
a government is not even eligible for recognition among the family of
nations. The advancement of world civilization likewise is dependent upon
that order among the people of different countries which we term peace. To
insure our citizens against the infringement of their legal rights at home
and abroad, to preserve order, liberty, and peace by making the law
supreme, we have an Army and a Navy.

Both of these are organized for defensive purposes. Our Army could not be
much reduced, but does not need to be increased. Such new housing and
repairs as are necessary are tinder way and the 6-year program in aviation
is being put into effect in both branches of our service.

Our Navy, according to generally accepted standards, is deficient in
cruisers. We have 10 comparatively new vessels, 22 that are old, and 8 to
be built. It is evident that renewals and replacements must be provided.
This matter was thoroughly canvassed at the last session of the Congress
and does not need restatement. The bill before the Senate with the
elimination of the time clause should be passed. We have no intention of
competing with any other country. This building program is for necessary
replacements and to meet our needs for defense.

The cost of national defense is stupendous. It has increased $118,000,000
in the past four years. The estimated expenditure for 1930 is $668,000,000.
While this is made up of many items it is, after all, mostly dependent upon
numbers. Our defensive needs do not can for any increase in the number of
men in the Army or the Navy. We have reached the limit of what we ought to
expend for that purpose.

I wish to repeat again for the benefit of the timid and the suspicious that
this country is neither militaristic nor imperialistic. Many people at home
and abroad, who constantly make this charge, are the same ones who are even
more solicitous to have us extend assistance to foreign countries. When
such assistance is granted, the inevitable result is that we have foreign
interests. For us to refuse the customary support and protection of such
interests would be in derogation of the sovereignty of this Nation. Our
largest foreign interests are in the British Empire, France, and Italy.
Because we are constantly solicitous for those interests, I doubt if anyone
would suppose that those countries feel we harbor toward them any
militaristic or imperialistic design. As for smaller countries, we
certainly do not want any of them. We are more anxious than they are to have
their sovereignty respected. Our entire influence is in behalf of their
independence. Cuba stands as a witness to our adherence to this principle.

The position of this Government relative to the limitation of armaments,
the results already secured, and the developments up to the present time
are so well known to the Congress that they do not require any restatement.

VETERANS

The magnitude of our present system of veterans' relief is without
precedent, and the results have been far-reaching. For years a service
pension has been granted to the Grand Army and lately to the survivors of
the Spanish-American War. At the time we entered the World War however,
Congress departed from the usual pension system followed by our
Government. Eleven years have elapsed since our laws were first enacted,
initiating a system of compensation, rehabilitation, hospitalization, and
insurance for the disabled of the World War and their dependents. The
administration of all the laws concerning relief has been a difficult
task, but it can safely be stated that these measures have omitted nothing
in their desire to deal generously and humanely. We should continue to
foster this system and provide all the facilities necessary for adequate
care. It is the conception of our Government that the pension roll is an
honor roll. It should include all those who are justly entitled to its
benefits, but exclude all others.

Annual expenditures for all forms of veterans' relief now approximate
$765,000,000, and are increasing from year to year. It is doubtful if the
peak of expenditures will be reached even under present legislation for
sonic time yet to come. Further amendments to the existing law will be
suggested by the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars of the
United States, the Disabled American Veterans of the World War, and other
like organizations, and it may be necessary for administrative purposes, or
in order to remove some existing inequalities in the present law, to make
further changes. I am sure that such recommendations its may be submitted
to the Congress will receive your careful consideration. But because of the
vast expenditure now being made, each year, with every assurance that it
will increase, and because of the great liberality of the existing law, the
proposal of any additional legislation dealing with this subject should
receive most searching scrutiny from the Congress.

You are familiar with the suggestion that the various public agencies now
dealing with matters of veterans' relief be consolidated in one Government
department. Some advantages to this plan seem apparent, especially in the
simplification of administration find in the opportunity of bringing about
a greater uniformity in the application of veterans' relief. I recommend
that a survey be made by the proper committees of Congress dealing with
this subject, in order to determine whether legislation to secure this
consolidation is desirable.

AGRICULTURE

The past year has been marked by notable though not uniform improvement in
agriculture. The general purchasing power of farm products and the volume
of production have advanced. This means not only further progress, in
overcoming the price disparity into which agriculture was plunged in
1920-21, but also increased efficiency on the part of farmers and a
well-grounded confidence in the future of agriculture.

The livestock industry has attained the best balance for many years and is
prospering conspicuously. Dairymen, beef producers, and poultrymen are
receiving substantially larger returns than last year. Cotton, although
lower in price than at this time last year, was produced in greater volume
and the prospect for cotton incomes is favorable. But progress is never
uniform in a vast and highly diversified agriculture or industry. Cash
grains, hay, tobacco, and potatoes will bring somewhat smaller returns this
year than last. Present indications are, however, that the gross farm
income will be somewhat larger than in the crop year 1927-28, when the
total was $12,253,000,000. The corresponding figure for 1926-27 was
$12,127,000,000, and in 1925-26, $12,670,000,000. Still better results
would have been secured this year had there not been an undue increase in
the production of certain crops. This is particularly true of potatoes,
which have sold at an unremunerative price, or at a loss, as a direct
result of overexpansion of acreage.

The present status of agriculture, although greatly improved over that of a
few years ago, bespeaks the need of further improvement which calls for
determined effort of farmers themselves, encouraged and assisted by wise
public policy. The Government has been, and must continue to be, alive to
the needs of agriculture.

In the past eight years more constructive legislation of direct benefit to
agriculture has been adopted than during any other period. The Department
of Agriculture has been broadened and reorganized to insure greater
efficiency. The department is laying greater stress on the economic and
business phases of agriculture. It is lending every possible assistance to
cooperative marketing associations. Regulatory and research work have been
segregated in order that each field may be served more effectively.

I can not too strongly commend, in the field of fact finding, the research
work of the Department of Agriculture and the State experiment stations.
The department now receives annually $4,000,000 more for research than in
1921. In addition, the funds paid to the States for experimentation
purposes under the Purnell Act constitute an annual increase in Federal
payments to State agricultural experiment stations of $2,400,000 over the
amount appropriated in 1921. The program of support for research may wisely
be continued and expanded. Since 1921 we have appropriated nearly an
additional $2,000,000 for extension work, and this sum is to be increased
next year under authorization by the Capper-Ketcham Act.

THE SURPLUS PROBLEM

While these developments in fundamental research, regulation, and
dissemination of agricultural information are of distinct help to
agriculture, additional effort is needed. The surplus problem demands
attention. As emphasized in my last message, the Government should assume
no responsibility in normal times for crop surplus clearly due to
overextended acreage. The Government should, however, provide reliable
information as a guide to private effort; and in this connection fundamental
research on prospective supply and demand, as a guide to production and
marketing, should be encouraged. Expenditure of public funds to bring in
more new land should have most searching scrutiny, so long as our farmers
face unsatisfactory prices for crops and livestock produced on land already
under cultivation.

Every proper effort should be made to put land to uses for which it is
adapted. The reforestation of land best suited for timber production is
progressing and should be encouraged, and to this end the forest taxation
inquiry was instituted to afford a practical guide for public policy.
Improvement has been made in grazing regulation in the forest reserves, not
only to protect the ranges, but to preserve the soil from erosion. Similar
action is urgently needed to protect other public lands which are now
overgrazed and rapidly eroding.

Temporary expedients, though sometimes capable of appeasing the demands of
the moment, can not permanently solve the surplus problem and might
seriously aggravate it. Hence putting the Government directly into
business, subsidies, and price fixing, and the alluring promises of
political action as a substitute for private initiative, should be
avoided.

The Government should aid in promoting orderly marketing and in handling
surpluses clearly due to weather and seasonal conditions. As a beginning
there should be created a Federal farm board consisting of able and
experienced men empowered to advise producers' associations in establishing
central agencies or stabilization corporations to handle surpluses, to seek
wore economical means of merchandising, and to aid the producer in securing
returns according to the a14 of his product. A revolving loan fund should
be provided for the necessary financing until these agencies shall have
developed means of financing their operations through regularly constituted
credit institutions. Such a bill should carry authority for raising the
money, by loans or otherwise, necessary to meet the expense, as the
Treasury has no surplus.

Agriculture has lagged behind industry in achieving that unity of effort
which modern economic life demands. The cooperative movement, which is
gradually building the needed organization, is in harmony with public
interest and therefore merits public encouragement.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATES

Important phases of public policy related to agriculture lie within the
sphere of the States. While successive reductions in Federal taxes have
relieved most farmers of direct taxes to the National Government, State and
local levies have become a serious burden. This problem needs immediate and
thorough study with a view to correction at the earliest possible moment.
It will have to be made largely by the States themselves.

COMMERCE

It is desirable that the Government continue its helpful attitude toward
American business. The activities of the Department of Commerce have
contributed largely to the present satisfactory position
in our international trade, which has reached about $9,000,000,000
annually. There should be no slackening of effort in that direction. It is
also important that the department's assistance to domestic commerce be
continued. There is probably no way in which the Government can aid sound
economic progress more effectively than by cooperation with our business
men to reduce wastes in distribution.

COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICS

Continued progress in civil aviation is most gratifying. Demands for
airplanes and motors have taxed both the industry and the licensing and
inspection service of the Department of Commerce to their capacity. While
the compulsory licensing provisions of the air commerce act apply only to
equipment and personnel engaged in interstate and foreign commerce, a
Federal license may be procured by anyone possessing the necessary
qualifications. State legislation, local airport regulations, and insurance
requirements make such a license practically indispensable. This results in
uniformity of regulation and increased safety in operation, which are
essential to aeronautical development. Over 17,000 young men and women have
now applied for Federal air pilot's licenses or permits. More than 80 per
cent of them applied during the past year.

Our national airway system exceeds 14,000 miles in length and has 7,500
miles lighted for night operations. Provision has been made for lighting
4,000 miles more during the current fiscal year and equipping an equal
mileage with radio facilities. Three-quarters of our people are now served
by these routes. With the rapid growth of air mail, express, and passenger
service, this new transportation medium is daily becoming a more important
factor in commerce. It is noteworthy that this development has taken place
without governmental subsidies. Commercial passenger flights operating on
schedule have reached 13,000 miles per day.

During the next fortnight this Nation will entertain the nations of the
world in a celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the first
successful airplane flight. The credit for this epoch-making achievement
belongs to a citizen of our own country, Orville Wright.

CUBAN PARCEL POST

I desire to repeat my recommendation of an earlier message, that Congress
enact the legislation necessary to make permanent the Parcel Post
Convention with Cuba, both as a facility to American commerce and as a
measure of equity to Cuba in the one class of goods which that country can
send here by parcel post without detriment to our own trade.

"MAINE" BATTLESHIP MEMORIAL

When I attended the Pan American Conference at Habana, the President of
Cuba showed me a marble statue made from the original memorial that was
overturned by a storm after it was erected on the Cuban shore to the memory
of the men who perished in the destruction of the battleship Maine. As a
testimony of friendship and appreciation of the Cuban Government and people
he most generously offered to present this to the United States, and I
assured him of my pleasure in accepting it. There is no location in the
White House for placing so large and heavy a structure, and I therefore
urge the Congress to provide by law for some locality where it can be
set up.

RAILROADS

In previous annual messages I have suggested the enactment of laws to
promote railroad consolidation with the view of increasing the efficiency
of transportation and lessening its cost to the public. While,
consolidations can and should be made under the present law until it is
changed, vet the provisions of the act of 1920 have not been found fully
adequate to meet the needs of other methods of consolidation. Amendments
designed to remedy these defects have been considered at length by the
respective committees of Congress and a bill was reported out late in the
last session which I understand has the approval in principle of the
Interstate Commerce Commission. It is to be hoped that this legislation may
be enacted at an early date.

Experience has shown that the interstate commerce law requires definition
and clarification in several other respects, some of which have been
pointed out by the Interstate Commerce Commission in its annual reports to
the Congress. It will promote the public interest to have the Congress give
early consideration to the recommendations there made.

MERCHANT MARINE

The cost of maintaining the United States Government merchant fleet has
been steadily reduced. We have established American flag lines in foreign
trade where they had never before existed as a means of promoting commerce
and as a naval auxiliary. There have been sold to private American capital
for operation within the past few years 14 of these lines, which, under the
encouragement of the recent legislation passed by the Congress, give
promise of continued successful operation. Additional legislation from time
to time may be necessary to promote future advancement under private
control.

Through the cooperation of the Post Office Department and the Shipping
Board long-term contracts are being made with American steamship lines for
carrying mail, which already promise the construction of 15 to 20 new
vessels and the gradual reestablishment of the American merchant marine as
a private enterprise. No action of the National Government has been so
beneficial to our shipping. The cost is being absorbed to a considerable
extent by the disposal of unprofitable lines operated by the Shipping
Board, for which the new law has made a market. Meanwhile it should be our
policy to maintain necessary strategic lines under the Government operation
until they can be transferred to private capital.

INTER-AMERICAN HIGHWAY

In my message last year I expressed the view that we should lend our
encouragement for more good roads to all the principal points on this
hemisphere South of the Rio Grande. My view has not changed.

The Pan American Union has recently indorsed it. In some of the countries
to the south a great deal of progress is being made in road building. In,
Others engineering features are often exacting and financing difficult. As
those countries enter upon programs for road building we should be ready to
contribute from our abundant experience to make their task easier of
accomplishment. I prefer not to go into civil life to accomplish this end.
We already furnish military and naval advisors, and following this
precedent we could draw competent men from these same sources and from the
Department of Agriculture.

We should provide our southern neighbors, if they request it, with such
engineer advisors for the construction of roads and bridges. Private
interests should look with favor upon all reasonable loans sought by
these countries to open main lines of travel. Such assistance should be
given especially to any project for a highway designed to connect all the
countries on this hemisphere and thus facilitate, intercourse and closer
relations among, them.

AIR MAIL SERVICE

The friendly relations and the extensive, commercial intercourse with the
Western Hemisphere to the south of us are being further cemented by the
establishment and extension of air-mail routes. We shall soon have one from
Key West, Fla., over Cuba, Haiti, and Santo Domingo to San Juan, P. R.,
where it will connect with another route to Trinidad. There will be another
route from Key West to the Canal Zone, where connection will be made with a
route across the northern coast of South America to Paramaribo. This will
give us a circle around the Caribbean under our own control. Additional
connections will be made at Colon with a route running down the west coast
of South America as far as Conception, Chile, and with the French air mail
at Paramaribo running down the eastern coast of South America. The air
service already spans our continent, with laterals running to Mexico and
Canada, and covering a daily flight of over 28,000 miles, with an average
cargo of 15 000 pounds.

WATERWAYS

Our river and harbor improvements are proceeding with vigor. In the past
few years Ave have increased the appropriation for this regular work
$28,000,000, besides what is to be expended on flood control. The total
appropriation for this year was over $91,000,000. The Ohio River is almost
ready for opening; work on the Missouri and other rivers is under way. In
accordance with the Mississippi flood law Army engineers are making
investigations and surveys on other streams throughout the country with a
view to flood control, navigation, waterpower, and irrigation. Our barrier
lines are being operated under generous appropriations, and negotiations
are developing relative to the St. Lawrence waterway. To Secure the largest
benefits from all these waterways joint rates must be established with the
railroads, preferably by agreement, but otherwise as a result of
congressional action.

We have recently passed several river and harbor bills. The work ordered by
the Congress not, yet completed, will cost about $243,

000,000, besides the hundreds of millions to be spent on the Mississippi
flood way. Until we can see our way out of this expense no further river
and harbor legislation should be passed, as expenditures to put it into
effect would be four or five years away.

IRRIGATION OF ARID LANDS

For many years the Federal Government has been committed to the wise policy
of reclamation and irrigation. While it has met with some failures due to
unwise selection of projects and lack of thorough soil surveys, so that
they could not be placed on a sound business basis, on the whole the
service has been of such incalculable benefit in so many States that no one
would advocate its abandonment. The program to which we are already
committed, providing for the construction of new projects authorized by
Congress and the completion of old projects, will tax the resources of the
reclamation fund over a period of years. The high cost of improving and
equipping farms adds to the difficulty of securing settlers for vacant
farms on federal projects.

Readjustments authorized by the reclamation relief act of May 25, 1926,
have given more favorable terms of repayment to settlers. These new
financial arrangements and the general prosperity on irrigation projects
have resulted in increased collections by the Department of the Interior of
charges due the reclamation fund. Nevertheless, the demand for still
smaller yearly payments on some projects continues. These conditions should
have consideration in connection with any proposed new projects.

COLORADO RIVER

For several years the Congress has considered the erection of a dam on the
Colorado River for flood-control, irrigation, and domestic water purposes,
all of which ma properly be considered as Government functions. There would
be an incidental creation of water power which could be used for generating
electricity. As private enterprise can very well fill this field, there is
no need for the Government to go into it. It is unfortunate that the States
interested in this water have been unable to agree among themselves.
Nevertheless, any legislation should give every possible safeguard to the
present and prospective rights of each of them.

The Congress will have before it, the detailed report of a special board
appointed to consider the engineering and economic feasibility of this
project. From the short summary which I have seen of it, 11 judge they
consider the engineering problems can be met at somewhat increased cost
over previous estimates. They prefer the Black Canyon site. On the economic
features they are not so clear and appear to base their conclusions on many
conditions which can not be established with certainty. So far as I can
judge, however, from the summary, their conclusions appear sufficiently
favorable, so that I feel warranted in recommending a measure which will
protect the rights of the States, discharge the necessary Government
functions, and leave the electrical field to private enterprise.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The development of other methods of producing nitrates will probably render
this plant less important for that purpose than formerly. But we have it,
and I am told it still provides a practical method of making nitrates for
national defense and farm fertilizers. By dividing the property into its
two component parts of power and nitrate plants it would be possible to
dispose of the power, reserving the right to any concern that wished to
make nitrates to use any power that might be needed for that purpose. Such
a disposition of the power plant can be made that will return in rental
about $2,000,000 per year. If the Congress would giant the Secretary of War
authority to lease the nitrate plant on such terms as would insure the
largest production of nitrates, the entire property could begin to
function. Such a division, I am aware, has never seemed to appeal to the
Congress. I should also gladly approve a bill granting authority to lease
the entire property for the production of nitrates.

I wish to avoid building another dam at public expense. Future operators
should provide for that themselves. But if they were to be required to
repay the cost of such dam with the prevailing commercial rates for
interest, this difficulty will be considerably lessened. Nor do I think
this property should be made a vehicle for putting the United States
Government indiscriminately into the private and retail field of power
distribution and nitrate sales.

CONSERVATION

The practical application of economy to the resources of the country calls
for conservation. This does not mean that every resource should not be
developed to its full degree, but it means that none of them should be
wasted. We have a conservation board working on our oil problem. This is of
the utmost importance to the future well-being of our people in this age of
oil-burning engines and the general application of gasoline to
transportation. The Secretary of the Interior should not be compelled to
lease oil lands of the Osage Indians when the market is depressed and the
future supply is in jeopardy.

While the area of lands remaining in public ownership is small, compared
with the vast area in private ownership, the natural resources of those in
public ownership are of immense present and future value. This is
particularly trite as to minerals and water power. The proper bureaus have
been classifying these resources to the end that they may be conserved.
Appropriate estimates are being submitted, in the Budget, for the further
prosecution of this important work.

IMMIGRATION

The policy of restrictive immigration should be maintained. Authority
should be granted the Secretary of Labor to give immediate preference to
learned professions and experts essential to new industries. The reuniting
of families should be expedited. Our immigration and naturalization laws
might well be codified.

WAGE EARNER

In its economic life our country has rejected the long accepted law of a
limitation of the wage fund, which led to pessimism and despair because it
was the doctrine of perpetual poverty, and has substituted for it the
American conception that the only limit to profits and wages is production,
which is the doctrine of optimism and hope because it leads to prosperity.
Here and there the councils of labor are still darkened by the theory that
only by limiting individual production can there be any assurance of
permanent employment for increasing numbers, but in general, management and
wage earner alike have become emancipated from this doom and have entered a
new era in industrial thought which has unleashed the productive capacity
of the individual worker with an increasing scale of wages and profits, the
end of which is not yet. The application of this theory accounts for our
widening distribution of wealth. No discovery ever did more to increase the
happiness and prosperity of the people.

Since 1922 increasing production has increased wages in general 12.9 per
cent, while in certain selected trades they have run as high as 34.9 per
cent and 38 per cent. Even in the boot and shoe shops the increase is over
5 per cent and in woolen mills 8.4 per cent, although these industries have
not prospered like others. As the rise in living costs in this period is
negligible, these figures represent real wage increases.

The cause of constructive economy requires that the Government should
cooperate with private interests to eliminate the waste arising from
industrial accidents. This item, with all that has been done to reduce it,
still reaches enormous proportions with great suffering to the workman and
great loss to the country.

WOMEN AND CHILDREN

The Federal Government should continue its solicitous care for the
8,500,000 women wage earners and its efforts in behalf of public health,
which is reducing infant mortality and improving the bodily and mental
condition of our citizens.

CIVIL SERVICE

The most marked change made in the civil service of the Government in the
past eight years relates to the increase in salaries. The Board of
Actuaries on the retirement act shows by its report, that July 1, 1921 the
average salary of the 330,047 employees subject to the act was $1,307,
while on June 30, 1927, the average salary of the corresponding 405,263
was $1,969. This was an increase in six years of nearly 53 per cent. On top
of this was the generous increase made at the last session of the Congress
generally applicable to Federal employees and another bill increasing the
pay in certain branches of the Postal Service beyond the large increase
which was made three years ago. This raised the average level from $1,969
to $2,092, making an increase in seven years of over 63 per cent. While it
is well known that in the upper brackets the pay in the Federal
service is much smaller than in private employment, in the lower brackets,
ranging well up over $3,000, it is much higher. It is higher not only in
actual money paid, but in privileges granted, a vacation of 30 actual
working days, or 5 weeks each year, with additional time running in some
departments as high as 30 days for sick leave and the generous provisions
of the retirement act. No other body of public servants ever occupied such
a fortunate position.

EDUCATION

Through the Bureau of Education of the Department of the Interior the
Federal Government, acting in an informative and advisory capacity, has
rendered valuable service. While this province belongs peculiarly to the
States, yet the promotion of education and efficiency in educational
methods is a general responsibility of the Federal Government. A survey of
negro colleges and universities in the United States has just been
completed by the Bureau of Education through funds provided by the
institutions themselves and through private sources. The present status of
negro higher education was determined and recommendations were made for its
advancement. This was one of the numerous cooperative undertakings of the
bureau. Following the invitation of the Association of Land Grant Colleges
and Universities, he Bureau of Education now has under way the survey of
agricultural colleges, authorized by Congress. The purpose of the survey is
to ascertain the accomplishments, the status, and the future objectives of
this type of educational training. It is now proposed to undertake a survey
of secondary schools, which educators insist is timely and essential.

PUBLIC BUILDINGS

We, have laid out a public building program for the District of Columbia
and the country at large running into hundreds of millions of dollars.
Three important structures and one annex are already, under way and one
addition has been completed in the City of Washington. in the country sites
have been acquired, many buildings are in course of construction, and some
are already completed. Plans for all this work are being prepared in order
that it may be carried forward as rapidly as possible. This is the greatest
building program ever assumed by this Nation. It contemplates structures of
utility and of beauty. When it reaches completion the people will be well
served and the Federal city will be supplied with the most beautiful and
stately public buildings which adorn any capital in the world.

THE AMERICAN INDIAN

The administration of Indian affairs has been receiving intensive study for
several years. The Department of the Interior has been able to provide
better supervision of health, education, and industrial advancement of this
native race through additional funds provided by the Congress. The present
cooperative arrangement existing between the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
the Public Health Service should be extended. The Government's
responsibility to the American Indian has been acknowledged by annual
increases in appropriations to fulfill its obligations to them and to
hasten the time when Federal supervision of their affairs may be properly
and safely terminated. The movement in Congress and in some of the State
legislatures for extending responsibility in Indian affairs to States
should be encouraged. A complete participation by the Indian in our
economic life is the end to be desired.

THE NEGRO

For 65 years now our negro Population has been under the peculiar care and
solicitude of the National Government. The progress which they have made in
education and the professions, in wealth and in the arts of civilization,
affords one of the most remarkable incidents in this period of world
history. They have demonstrated their ability to partake of the advantages
of our institutions and to benefit by a free and more and more independent
existence. Whatever doubt there may have been of their capacity to assume,
the status granted to them by the Constitution of this Union is being
rapidly dissipated. Their cooperation in the life of the Nation is
constantly enlarging.

Exploiting the Negro problem for political ends is being abandoned and
their protection is being increased by those States in which their
percentage of population is largest. Every encouragement should be extended
for t le development of the race. The colored people have been the victims
of the crime of lynching, which has in late years somewhat decreased. Some
parts of the South already have wholesome laws for its restraint and
punishment. Their example might well be followed by other States, and by
such immediate remedial legislation as the Federal Government can extend
under the Constitution.

PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

Under the guidance of Governor General Stimson the economic and political
conditions of the Philippine Islands have been raised to a standard never
before surpassed. The cooperation between his administration and the people
of the islands is complete and harmonious. It would be an advantage if
relief from double taxation could be granted by the Congress to our
citizens doing business in the islands.

PORTO RICO

Due to the terrific storm that swept Porto Rico last September, the people
of that island suffered large losses. The Red Cross and the War Department
went to their rescue. The property loss is being, retrieved. Sugar,
tobacco, citrus fruit, and coffee, all suffered damage. The first three can
largely look after themselves. The coffee growers will need some
assistance, which should be extended strictly on a business basis, and
only after most careful investigation. The people of Porto Rico are not
asking for charity.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

It is desirable that all the legal activities of the Government be
consolidated under the supervision of the Attorney General. In
1870 it was felt necessary to create the Department of Justice for this
purpose. During the intervening period, either through legislation creating
law officers or departmental action, additional legal positions not under
the supervision of the Attorney General have been provided until there are
now over 900. Such a condition is as harmful to the interest of the
Government now as it was in 1870, and should be corrected by appropriate
legislation.

SPECIAL GOVERNMENT COUNSEL

In order to prosecute the oil cases, I suggested and the Congress enacted a
law providing for the appointment of two special counsel. They have pursued
their work with signal ability, recovering all the leased lands besides
nearly $30,000,000 in money, and nearly $17,000,000 in other property. They
find themselves hampered by a statute, which the Attorney General construes
as applying to them, prohibiting their appearing for private clients before
any department. For this reason, one has been compelled to resign. No good
result is secured by the application of this rule to these counsel, and as
Mr. Roberts has consented to take reappointment if the rule is abrogated I
recommend the passage of an amendment to the law creating their office
exempting them from the general rule against taking other cases involving
the Government.

PROHIBITION

The country has duly adopted the eighteenth amendment. Those who object to
it have the right to advocate its modification or repeal. Meantime, it is
binding upon the National and State Governments and all our inhabitants.
The Federal enforcement bureau is making every effort to prevent
violations, especially through smuggling, manufacture, and transportation,
and to prosecute generally all violations for which it can secure evidence.
It is bound to continue this policy. Under the terms of the Constitution,
however, the obligation is equally on the States to exercise the power
which they have through the executive, legislative, judicial, and police
branches of their governments in behalf of enforcement. The Federal
Government is doing and will continue to do all it can in this direction
and is entitled to the active cooperation of the States.

CONCLUSION

The country is in the midst of an era of prosperity more extensive and of
peace more permanent than it has ever before experienced. But, having
reached this position, we should not fail to comprehend that it can easily
be lost. It needs more effort for its support than the less exalted places
of the world. We shall not be permitted to take our case, but shall
continue to be required to spend our days in unremitting toil. The actions
of the Government must command the confidence of the country. Without this,
our prosperity would be lost. We must extend to other countries the largest
measure of generosity, moderation, and patience. In addition to dealing
justly, we can well afford to walk humbly.

The end of government is to keep open the opportunity for a more
abundant life. Peace and prosperity are not finalities; they are only
methods. It is too easy under their influence for a nation to become
selfish and degenerate. This test has come to the United States. Our
country has been provided with the resources with which it can enlarge its
intellectual, moral, and spiritual life. The issue is in the hands of the
people. Our faith in man and God is the justification for the belief in our
continuing success.

***

State of the Union Address
Herbert Hoover
December 3, 1929

To the Senate and House of Representatives:

The Constitution requires that the President "shall, from time to time,
give to the Congress information of the state of the Union, and recommend
to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and
expedient." In complying with that requirement I wish to emphasize that
during the past year the Nation has continued to grow in strength; our
people have advanced in comfort; we have gained in knowledge; the education
of youth has been more widely spread; moral and spiritual forces have been
maintained; peace has become more assured. The problems with which we are
confronted are the problems of growth and of progress. In their solution we
have to determine the facts, to develop the relative importance to be
assigned to such facts, to formulate a common judgment upon them, and to
realize solutions in spirit of conciliation.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

We are not only at peace with all the world, but the foundations for future
peace are being substantially strengthened. To promote peace is our
long-established policy. Through the Kellogg-Briand pact a great moral
standard has been raised in the world. By it fifty-four nations have
covenanted to renounce war and to settle all disputes by pacific means.
Through it a new world outlook has been inaugurated which has profoundly
affected the foreign policies of nations. Since its inauguration we have
initiated new efforts not only in the organization of the machinery of
peace but also to eliminate dangerous forces which produce controversies
amongst nations.

In January, 1926, the Senate gave its consent to adherence to the Court of
International Justice with certain reservations. In September of this year
the statute establishing the court has, by the action of the nations
signatory, been amended to meet the Senate's reservations and to go even
beyond those reservations to make clear that the court is a true
international court of justice. I believe it will be clear to everyone that
no controversy or question in which this country has or claims an interest
can be passed on by the court without our consent at the time the question
arises. The doubt about advisory opinions has been completely safeguarded.
Our adherence to the International Court is, as now constituted, not the
slightest step toward entry into the League of Nations. As I have before
indicated, I shall direct that our signature be affixed to the protocol of
adherence and shall submit it for the approval of the Senate with a special
message at some time when it is convenient to deal with it.

In the hope of reducing friction in the world, and with the desire that we
may reduce the great economic burdens of naval armament, we have joined in
conference with Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan to be held in
London in January to consider the further limitation and reduction of naval
arms. We hold high hopes that success may attend this effort.

At the beginning of the present administration the neighboring State of
Mexico was best with domestic insurrection. We maintained the embargo upon
the shipment of arms to Mexico but permitted the duly constituted
Government to procure supplies from our surplus war stocks. Fortunately,
the Mexican Government by its own strength successfully withstood the
insurrection with but slight damage. Opportunity of further peaceful
development is given to that country. At the request of the Mexican
Government, we have since lifted the embargo on shipment of arms
altogether. The two governments have taken further steps to promote
friendly relationships and so solve our differences. Conventions prolonging
for a period of two years the life of the general and special claims
commissions have been concluded.

In South America we are proud to have had part in the settlement of the
long-standing dispute between Chile and Peru in the disposal of the
question of Tacna-Arica.

The work of the commission of inquiry and conciliation between Bolivia and
Paraguay, in which a representative of this Government participated, has
successfully terminated an incident which seemed to threaten war. The
proposed plan for final settlement as suggested by the neutral governments
is still under consideration.

This Government has continued its efforts to act as a mediator in boundary
difficulties between Guatemala and Honduras.

A further instance of profound importance in establishing good will was the
inauguration of regular air mail service between the United States and
Caribbean, Central American, and South American countries.

We still have marines on foreign soil--in Nicaragua, Haiti, and China. In
the large sense we do not wish to be represented abroad in such manner.
About 1,600 marines remain in Nicaragua at the urgent request of that
government and the leaders of all parties pending the training of a
domestic constabulary capable of insuring tranquility. We have already
reduced these forces materially and we are anxious to withdraw them further
as the situation warrants. In Haiti we have about 700 marines, but it is a
much more difficult problem, the solution of which is still obscure. If
Congress approves, I shall dispatch a commission to Haiti to review and
study the matter in an endeavor to arrive at some more definite policy than
at present. Our forces in China constitute 2,605 men, which we hope also
further to reduce to the normal legation guard.

It is my desire to establish more firmly our understanding and
relationships with the Latin American countries by strengthening the
diplomatic missions to those countries. It is my hope to secure men long
experienced in our Diplomatic Service, who speak the languages of the
peoples to whom they are accredited, as chiefs of our diplomatic missions
in these States. I shall send to the Senate at an early date the
nominations of several such men.

The Congress has by numerous wise and foresighted acts in the past few
years greatly strengthened the character of our representation abroad. It
has made liberal provision for the establishment of suitable quarters for
our foreign staffs in the different countries. In order, however, that we
may further develop the most effective force in this, one of the most
responsible functions of our Government, I shall recommend to the Congress
more liberal appropriations for the work of the State Department. I know of
no expenditure of public money from which a greater economic and moral
return can come to us than by assuring the most effective conduct of our
foreign relations.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

To preserve internal order and freedom from encroachment is the first
purpose of government. Our Army and Navy are being maintained in a most
efficient state under officers of high intelligence and zeal. The extent
and expansion of their numbers and equipment as at present authorized are
ample for this purpose.

We can well be deeply concerned, however, at the growing expense. From a
total expenditure for national defense purposes in 1914 of $267,000,000, it
naturally rose with the Great War, but receded again to $612,000,000 in
1924, when again it began to rise until during the current fiscal year the
expenditures will reach to over $730,000,000, excluding all civilian
services of those departments. Programs now authorized will carry it to
still larger figures in future years. While the remuneration paid to our
soldiers and sailors is justly at a higher rate than that of any other
country in the world, and while the cost of subsistence is higher, yet the
total of our expenditures is in excess of those of the most highly
militarized nations of the world.

Upon the conference shortly to be held in London will depend such
moderation as we can make in naval expenditure. If we shall be compelled to
undertake the naval construction implied in the Washington arms treaty as
well as other construction which would appear to be necessary if no
international agreement can be completed, we shall be committed during the
next six years to a construction expenditure of upward of $1,200,000,000
besides the necessary further increase in costs for annual upkeep.

After 1914 the various Army contingents necessarily expanded to the end of
the Great War and then receded to the low point in 1924, when expansion
again began. In 1914 the officers and men in our regular forces, both Army
and Navy, were about 164,000, in 1924 there were about 256,000, and in 1929
there were about 250,000. Our citizens' army, however, including the
National Guard and other forms of reserves, increase these totals up to
about 299,000 in 1914, about 672,000 in 1924, and about 728,000 in 1929.

Under the Kellogg pact we have undertaken never to use war as an instrument
of national policy. We have, therefore, undertaken by covenant to use these
equipments solely for defensive purposes. From a defense point of view our
forces should be proportioned to national need and should, therefore, to
some extent be modified by the prospects of peace, which were never
brighter than to-day.

It should be borne in mind that the improvement in the National Guard by
Federal support begun in 1920 has definitely strengthened our national
security by rendering them far more effective than ever heretofore. The
advance of aviation has also greatly increased our effectiveness in
defense. In addition to the very large program of air forces which we are
maintaining in the Army and Navy, there has been an enormous growth of
commercial aviation. This has provided unanticipated reserves in
manufacturing capacity and in industrial and air personnel, which again
adds to our security.

I recommend that Congress give earnest consideration to the possibilities
of prudent action which will give relief from our continuously mounting
expenditures.

FINANCES OF THE GOVERNMENT

The finances of the Government are in sound condition. I shall submit the
detailed evidences and the usual recommendations in the special Budget
message. I may, however, summarize our position. The public debt on June 30
this year stood at $16,931,000,000, compared to the maximum in August,
1919, of $26,596,000,000. Since June 30 it has been reduced by a further
$238,000,000. In the Budget to be submitted the total appropriations
recommended for the fiscal year 1931 are $3,830,445,231, as compared to
$3,976,141,651 for the present fiscal year. The present fiscal year,
however, includes $150,000,000 for the Federal Farm Board, as to which no
estimate can as yet be determined for 1931.

Owing to the many necessary burdens assumed by Congress in previous years
which now require large outlays, it is with extreme difficulty that we
shall be able to keep the expenditures for the next fiscal year within the
bounds of the present year. Economies in many directions have permitted
some accommodation of pressing needs, the net result being an increase, as
shown above, of about one-tenth of 1 per cent above the present fiscal
year. We can not fail to recognize the obligations of the Government in
support of the public welfare but we must coincidentally bear in mind the
burden of taxes and strive to find relief through some tax reduction. Every
dollar so returned fertilizes the soil of prosperity.

TAX REDUCTION

The estimate submitted to me by the Secretary of the Treasury and the
Budget Director indicates that the Government will close the fiscal year
1930 with a surplus of about $225,000,000 and the fiscal year 1931 with a
surplus of about $123,000,000. Owing to unusual circumstances, it has been
extremely difficult to estimate future revenues with accuracy.

I believe, however, that the Congress will be fully justified in giving the
benefits of the prospective surpluses to the taxpayers, particularly as
ample provision for debt reduction has been made in both years through the
form of debt retirement from ordinary revenues. In view of the uncertainty
in respect of future revenues and the comparatively small size of the
indicated surplus in 1931, relief should take the form of a provisional
revision of tax rates.

I recommend that the normal income tax rates applicable to the incomes of
individuals for the calendar year 1929 be reduced from 5, 3, and 1 1/2;
per cent, to 4, 2, and 1/2; per cent, and that the tax on the income of
corporations for the calendar year 1929 be reduced from 12 to 11 per cent.
It is estimated that this will result in a reduction of $160,000,000 in
income taxes to be collected during the calendar year 1930. The loss in
revenue will be divided approximately equally between the fiscal years 1930
and 1931. Such a program will give a measure of tax relief to the maximum
number of taxpayers, with relatively larger benefits to taxpayers with
small or moderate incomes.

FOREIGN DEBTS

The past year has brought us near to completion of settlements of the
indebtedness of foreign governments to the United States.

The act of Congress approved February 4, 1929, authorized the settlement
with the Government of Austria along lines similar to the terms of
settlement offered by that Government to its other relief creditors. No
agreement has yet been concluded with that government, but the form of
agreement has been settled and its execution only awaits the Government of
Austria securing the assent by all the other relief creditors of the terms
offered. The act of Congress approved February 14, 1929, authorized the
settlement with the Government of Greece, and an agreement was concluded on
May 10, 1929.

The Government of France ratified the agreement with us on July 27, 1929.
This agreement will shortly be before the Congress and I recommend its
approval.

The only indebtedness of foreign governments to the United States now
unsettled is that of Russia and Armenia.

During the past year a committee of distinguished experts under American
leadership submitted a plan looking to a revision of claims against Germany
by the various Governments. The United States denied itself any
participation in the war settlement of general reparations and our claims
are comparatively small in amount. They arise from costs of the army of
occupation and claims of our private citizens for losses under awards from
the Mixed Claims Commission established under agreement with the German
Government. In finding a basis for settlement it was necessary for the
committee of experts to request all the Governments concerned to make some
contribution to the adjustment and we have felt that we should share a
proportion of the concessions made.

The State and Treasury Departments will be in a position shortly to submit
for your consideration a draft of an agreement to be executed between the
United States and Germany providing for the payments of these revised
amounts. A more extensive statement will be submitted at that time.

The total amount of indebtedness of the various countries to the United
States now funded is $11,579,465,885. This sum was in effect provided by
the issue of United States Government bonds to our own people. The payments
of the various Governments to us on account of principal and interest for
1930 are estimated at a total of about $239,000,000, for 1931 at about
$236,000,000, for 1932 at about $246,000,000. The measure of American
compromise in these settlements may be appreciated from the fact that our
taxpayers are called upon to find annually about $475,000,000 in interest
and in addition to redeem the principal of sums borrowed by the United
States Government for these purposes.

ALIEN ENEMY PROPERTY

The wise determination that this property seized in war should be returned
to its owners has proceeded with considerable rapidity. Of the original
seized cash and property (valued at a total of about $625,000,000), all but
$111,566,700 has been returned. Most of the remainder should be disposed of
during the next year.

GENERAL ECONOMIC SITUATION

The country has enjoyed a large degree of prosperity and sound progress
during the past year with a steady improvement in methods of production and
distribution and consequent advancement in standards of living. Progress
has, of course, been unequal among industries, and some, such as coal,
lumber, leather, and textiles, still lag behind. The long upward trend of
fundamental progress, however, gave rise to over-optimism as to profits,
which translated itself into a wave of uncontrolled speculation in
securities, resulting in the diversion of capital from business to the
stock market and the inevitable crash. The natural consequences have been a
reduction in the consumption of luxuries and semi-necessities by those who
have met with losses, and a number of persons thrown temporarily out of
employment. Prices of agricultural products dealt in upon the great markets
have been affected in sympathy with the stock crash.

Fortunately, the Federal reserve system had taken measures to strengthen
the position against the day when speculation would break, which together
with the strong position of the banks has carried the whole credit system
through the crisis without impairment. The capital which has been hitherto
absorbed in stock-market loans for speculative purposes is now returning to
the normal channels of business. There has been no inflation in the prices
of commodities; there has been no undue accumulation of goods, and foreign
trade has expanded to a magnitude which exerts a steadying influence upon
activity in industry and employment.

The sudden threat of unemployment and especially the recollection of the
economic consequences of previous crashes under a much less secured
financial system created unwarranted pessimism and fear. It was recalled
that past storms of similar character had resulted in retrenchment of
construction, reduction of wages, and laying off of workers. The natural
result was the tendency of business agencies throughout the country to
pause in their plans and proposals for continuation and extension of their
businesses, and this hesitation unchecked could in itself intensify into a
depression with widespread unemployment and suffering.

I have, therefore, instituted systematic, voluntary measures of cooperation
with the business institutions and with State and municipal authorities to
make certain that fundamental businesses of the country shall continue as
usual, that wages and therefore consuming power shall not be reduced, and
that a special effort shall be made to expand construction work in order to
assist in equalizing other deficits in employment. Due to the enlarged
sense of cooperation and responsibility which has grown in the business
world during the past few years the response has been remarkable and
satisfactory. We have canvassed the Federal Government and instituted
measures of prudent expansion in such work that should be helpful, and upon
which the different departments will make some early recommendations to
Congress.

I am convinced that through these measures we have reestablished
confidence. Wages should remain stable. A very large degree of industrial
unemployment and suffering which would otherwise have occurred has been
prevented. Agricultural prices have reflected the returning confidence. The
measures taken must be vigorously pursued until normal conditions are
restored.

AGRICULTURE

The agricultural situation is improving. The gross farm income as estimated
by the Department of Agriculture for the crop season 1926-27 was
$12,100,000,000; for 1927-28 it was $12,300,000,000; for 1928-29 it was
$12,500,000,000; and estimated on the basis of prices since the last
harvest the value of the 1929-30 crop would be over $12,650,000,000. The
slight decline in general commodity prices during the past few years
naturally assists the farmers' buying power.

The number of farmer bankruptcies is very materially decreased below
previous years. The decline in land values now seems to be arrested and
rate of movement from the farm to the city has been reduced. Not all
sections of agriculture, of course, have fared equally, and some areas have
suffered from drought. Responsible farm leaders have assured me that a
large measure of confidence is returning to agriculture and that a feeling
of optimism pervades that industry.

The most extensive action for strengthening the agricultural industry ever
taken by any government was inaugurated through the farm marketing act of
June 15 last. Under its provisions the Federal Farm Board has been
established, comprised of men long and widely experienced in agriculture
and sponsored by the farm organizations of the country. During its short
period of existence the board has taken definite steps toward a more
efficient organization of agriculture, toward the elimination of waste in
marketing, and toward the upbuilding of farmers' marketing organizations on
sounder and more efficient lines. Substantial headway has been made in the
organization of four of the basic commodities--grain, cotton, livestock,
and wool. Support by the board to cooperative marketing organizations and
other board activities undoubtedly have served to steady the farmers'
market during the recent crisis and have operated also as a great stimulus
to the cooperative organization of agriculture. The problems of the
industry are most complex, and the need for sound organization is
imperative. Yet the board is moving rapidly along the lines laid out for it
in the act, facilitating the creation by farmers of farmer-owned and
farmer-controlled organizations and federating them into central
institutions, with a view to increasing the bargaining power of
agriculture, preventing and controlling surpluses, and mobilizing the
economic power of agriculture.

THE TARIFF

The special session of Congress was called to expedite the fulfillment of
party pledges of agricultural relief and the tariff. The pledge of farm
relief has been carried out. At that time I stated the principles upon
which I believed action should be taken in respect to the tariff: "An
effective tariff upon agricultural products, that will compensate the
farmer's higher costs and higher standards of living, has a dual purpose.
Such a tariff not only protects the farmer in our domestic market but it
also stimulates him to diversify his crops and to grow products that he
could not otherwise produce, and thus lessens his dependence upon exports
to foreign markets. The great expansion of production abroad under the
conditions I have mentioned renders foreign competition in our export
markets increasingly serious. It seems but natural, therefore, that the
American farmer, having been greatly handicapped in his foreign market by
such competition from the younger expanding countries, should ask that
foreign access to our domestic market should be regulated by taking into
account the differences in our costs of production.

"In considering the tariff for other industries than agriculture, we find
that there have been economic shifts necessitating a readjustment of some
of the tariff schedules. Seven years of experience under the tariff bill
enacted in 1922 have demonstrated the wisdom of Congress in the enactment
of that measure. On the whole it has worked well. In the main our wages
have been maintained at high levels; our exports and imports have steadily
increased; with some exceptions our manufacturing industries have been
prosperous. Nevertheless, economic changes have taken place during that
time which have placed certain domestic products at a disadvantage and new
industries have come into being, all of which create the necessity for some
limited changes in the schedules and in the administrative clauses of the
laws as written in 1922.

"It would seem to me that the test of necessity for revision is, in the
main, whether there has been a substantial slackening of activity in an
industry during the past few years, and a consequent decrease of employment
due to insurmountable competition in the products of that industry. It is
not as if we were setting up a new basis of protective duties. We did that
seven years ago. What we need to remedy now is whatever substantial loss of
employment may have resulted from shifts since that time.

"In determining changes in our tariff we must not fail to take into account
the broad interests of the country as a whole, and such interests include
our trade relations with other countries." No condition has arisen in my
view to change these principles stated at the opening of the special
session. I am firmly of the opinion that their application to the pending
revision will give the country the kind of a tariff law it both needs and
wants. It would be most helpful if action should be taken at an early
moment, more especially at a time when business and agriculture are both
cooperating to minimize future uncertainties. It is just that they should
know what the rates are to be.

Even a limited revision requires the consideration and readjustment of many
items. The exhaustive inquiries and valuable debate from men representative
of all parts of the country which is needed to determine the detailed rates
must necessarily be accomplished in the Congress. However perfectly this
rate structure may be framed at any given time, the shifting of economic
forces which inevitably occurs will render changes in some items desirable
between the necessarily long intervals of congressional revision.
Injustices are bound to develop, such as were experienced by the dairymen,
the flaxseed producers, the glass industry, and others, under the 1922
rates. For this reason, I have been most anxious that the broad principle
of the flexible tariff as provided in the existing law should be preserved
and its delays in action avoided by more expeditious methods of determining
the costs of production at home and abroad, with executive authority to
promulgate such changes upon recommendation of the Tariff Commission after
exhaustive investigation. Changes by the Congress in the isolated items
such as those to which I have referred would have been most unlikely both
because of the concentrations of oppositions in the country, who could see
no advantage to their own industry or State, and because of the difficulty
of limiting consideration by the Congress to such isolated cases.

There is no fundamental conflict between the interests of the farmer and
the worker. Lowering of the standards of living of either tends to destroy
the other. The prosperity of one rests upon the well-being of the other.
Nor is there any real conflict between the East and the West or the North
and the South in the United States. The complete interlocking of economic
dependence, the common striving for social and spiritual progress, our
common heritage as Americans, and the infinite web of national sentiment,
have created a solidarity in a great people unparalleled in all human
history. These invisible bonds should not and can not be shattered by
differences of opinion growing out of discussion of a tariff.

PUBLIC BUILDINGS

Under the provisions of various acts of Congress $300,000,000 has been
authorized for public buildings and the land upon which to construct them,
being $75,000,000 for the District of Columbia and $225,000,000 for the
country at large. Excluding $25,000,000 which is for the acquisition of
land in the so-called "triangle" in this city, this public building
legislation provides for a five-year program for the District of Columbia
and between an eight and nine year program for the country at large. Of
this sum approximately $27,400,000 was expended up to June 30 last, of
which $11,400,000 has been expended in the District and $16,000,000
outside.

Even this generous provision for both the District of Columbia and the
country is insufficient For most pressing governmental needs. Expensive
rents and inadequate facilities are extravagance and not economy. In the
District even after the completion of these projects we shall have fully
20,000 clerks housed in rented and temporary war buildings which can last
but a little longer.

I therefore recommend that consideration should be given to the extension
of authorizations both for the country at large and for the District of
Columbia again distributed over a term of years. A survey of the need in
both categories has been made by the Secretary of the Treasury and the
Postmaster General. It would be helpful in the present economic situation
if such steps were taken as would enable early construction work.

An expedition and enlargement of the program in the District would bring
about direct economies in construction by enabling the erection of
buildings in regular sequence. By maintaining a stable labor force in the
city, contracts can be made on more advantageous terms.

The earlier completion of this program which is an acknowledged need would
add dignity to the celebration in 1932 of the two hundredth anniversary of
the birth of President Washington.

In consideration of these projects which contribute so much to dignify the
National Capital I should like to renew the suggestion that the Fine Arts
Commission should be required to pass upon private buildings which are
proposed for sites facing upon public buildings and parks. Without such
control much of the effort of the Congress in beautification of the Capital
will be minimized.

THE WATERWAYS AND FLOOD CONTROL

The development of inland waterways has received new impulse from the
completion during this year of the canalization of the Ohio to a uniform
9-foot depth. The development of the other segments of the Mississippi
system should be expedited and with this in view I am recommending an
increase in appropriations for rivers and harbors from $50,000,000 to
$55,000,000 per annum which, together with about $4,000,000 per annum
released by completion of the Ohio, should make available after providing
for other river and harbor works a sum of from $25,000,000 to $30,000,000
per annum for the Mississippi system and thus bring it to early
completion.

Conflict of opinion which has arisen over the proposed floodway from the
Arkansas River to the Gulf of Mexico via the Atchafalaya River has led me
to withhold construction upon this portion of the Mississippi flood control
plan until it could be again reviewed by the engineers for any further
recommendation to Congress. The other portions of the project are being
vigorously prosecuted and I have recommended an increase in appropriations
for this from $30,000,000 of the present year to $35,000,000 during the
next fiscal year.

Expansion of our intracoastal waterways to effective barge depths is well
warranted. We are awaiting the action of Canada upon the St. Lawrence
waterway project.

HIGHWAYS

There are over 3,000,000 miles of legally established highways in the
United States, of which about 10 per cent are included in the State highway
systems, the remainder being county and other local roads. About 626,000
miles have been improved with some type of surfacing, comprising some 63
per cent of the State highway systems and 16 per cent of the local roads.
Of the improved roads about 102,000 miles are hard surfaced, comprising
about 22 per cent of the State highway systems and about 8 per cent of the
local roads.

While proper planning should materially reduce the listed mileage of public
roads, particularly in the agricultural districts, and turn these roads
back to useful purposes, it is evident that road construction must be a
long-continued program. Progress in improvement is about 50,000 miles of
all types per annum, of which some 12,000 miles are of the more durable
types. The total expenditures of Federal, State, and local governments last
year for construction and maintenance assumed the huge total of
$1,660,000,000.

Federal aid in the construction of the highway systems in conjunction with
the States has proved to be beneficial and stimulating. We must ultimately
give consideration to the increase of our contribution to these systems,
particularly with a view to stimulating the improvement of farm-to-market
roads.

POST OFFICE

Our Post Office deficit has now increased to over $80,000,000 a year, of
which perhaps $14,000,000 is due to losses on ocean mail and air mail
contracts. The department is making an exhaustive study of the sources of
the deficit with view to later recommendation to Congress in respect to
it.

The Post Office quarters are provided in part by the Federal construction,
in part by various forms of rent and lease arrangements. The practice has
grown up in recent years of contracting long term leases under which both
rent and amortization principal cost of buildings is included. I am advised
that fully 40 per cent could be saved from many such rent and lease
agreements even after allowing interest on the capital required at the
normal Government rate. There are also many objectionable features to some
of these practices. The provision of adequate quarters for the Post Office
should be put on a sound basis.

A revision of air mail rates upon a more systematic and permanent footing
is necessary. The subject is under study, and if legislation should prove
necessary the subject will be presented to the Congress. In the meantime I
recommend that the Congress should consider the desirability of authorizing
further expansion of the South American services.

COMMERCIAL AVIATION

During the past year progress in civil aeronautics has been remarkable.
This is to a considerable degree due to the wise assistance of the Federal
Government through the establishment and maintenance of airways by the
Department of Commerce and the mail contracts from the Post Office
Department. The Government-improved airways now exceed 25,000 miles--more
than 14,000 miles of which will be lighted and equipped for night-flying
operations by the close of the current year. Airport construction through
all the States is extremely active. There are now 1,000 commercial and
municipal airports in operation with an additional 1,200 proposed for early
development.

Through this assistance the Nation is building a sound aviation system,
operated by private enterprise. Over 6,400 planes are in commercial use,
and 9,400 pilots are licensed by the Government. Our manufacturing capacity
has risen to 7,500 planes per annum. The aviation companies have increased
regular air transportation until it now totals 90,000 miles per
day--one-fourth of which is flown by night. Mail and express services now
connect our principal cities, and extensive services for passenger
transportation have been inaugurated, and others of importance are
imminent. American air lines now reach into Canada and Mexico, to Cuba,
Porto Rico, Central America, and most of the important countries of South
America.

RAILWAYS

As a whole, the railroads never were in such good physical and financial
condition, and the country has never been so well served by them. The
greatest volume of freight traffic ever tendered is being carried at a
speed never before attained and with satisfaction to the shippers.
Efficiencies and new methods have resulted in reduction in the cost of
providing freight transportation, and freight rates show a continuous
descending line from the level enforced by the World War.

We have, however, not yet assured for the future that adequate system of
transportation through consolidations which was the objective of the
Congress in the transportation act. The chief purpose of consolidation is
to secure well-balanced systems with more uniform and satisfactory rate
structure, a more stable financial structure, more equitable distribution
of traffic, greater efficiency, and single-line instead of multiple-line
hauls. In this way the country will have the assurance of better service
and ultimately at lower and more even rates than would otherwise be
attained. Legislation to simplify and expedite consolidation methods and
better to protect public interest should be enacted.

Consideration should also be given to relief of the members of the
Commission from the necessity of detailed attention to comparatively
inconsequential matters which, under the existing law, must receive their
direct and personal consideration. It is in the public interest that the
members of the Commission should not be so pressed by minor matters that
they have inadequate time for investigation and consideration of the larger
questions committed to them for solution. As to many of these minor
matters, the function of the Commission might well be made revisory, and
the primary responsibility delegated to subordinate officials after the
practice long in vogue in the executive departments.

MERCHANT MARINE

Under the impulse of the merchant marine act of 1928 the transfer to
private enterprise of the Government-owned steamship lines is going forward
with increasing success. The Shipping Board now operates about 18 lines,
which is less than half the number originally established, and the estimate
of expenditures for the coming fiscal year is based upon reduction in
losses on Government lines by approximately one-half. Construction loans
have been made to the amount of approximately $75,000,000 out of the
revolving fund authorized by Congress and have furnished an additional aid
to American shipping and further stimulated the building of vessels in
American yards.

Desirous of securing the full values to the Nation of the great effort to
develop our merchant marine by the merchant marine act soon after the
inauguration of the present administration, I appointed an
interdepartmental committee, consisting of the Secretary of Commerce, as
chairman, the Secretary of the Navy, the Postmaster General, and the
chairman of the Shipping Board, to make a survey of the policies being
pursued under the act of 1928 in respect of mail contracts; to inquire into
its workings and to advise the Postmaster General in the administration of
the act.

In particular it seemed to me necessary to determine if the result of the
contracts already let would assure the purpose expressed in the act, "to
further develop an American merchant marine, to assure its permanence in
the transportation of the foreign trade of the United States, and for other
purposes," and to develop a coordinated policy by which these purposes may
be translated into actualities.

In review of the mail contracts already awarded it was found that they
aggregated 25 separate awards imposing a governmental obligation of a
little over $12,000,000 per annum. Provision had been imposed in five of
the contracts for construction of new vessels with which to replace and
expand services. These requirements come to a total of 12 vessels in the
10-year period, aggregating 122,000 tons. Some other conditions in the
contracts had not worked out satisfactorily.

That study has now been substantially completed and the committee has
advised the desirability and the necessity of securing much larger
undertakings as to service and new construction in future contracts. The
committee at this time is recommending the advertising of 14 additional
routes, making substantial requirements for the construction of new vessels
during the life of each contract recommended. A total of 40 new vessels
will be required under the contracts proposed, about half of which will be
required to be built during the next three years. The capital cost of this
new construction will be approximately $250,000,000, involving
approximately 460,000 gross tons. Should bidders be found who will make
these undertakings, it will be necessary to recommend to Congress an
increase in the authorized expenditure by the Post Office of about
$5,500,000 annually. It will be most advantageous to grant such an
authority.

A conflict as to the administration of the act has arisen in the contention
of persons who have purchased Shipping Board vessels that they are entitled
to mail contracts irrespective of whether they are the lowest bidder, the
Post Office, on the other hand, being required by law to let contracts in
that manner. It is urgent that Congress should clarify this situation.

THE BANKING SYSTEM

It is desirable that Congress should consider the revision of some portions
of the banking law.

The development of "group" and "chain" banking presents many new problems.
The question naturally arises as to whether if allowed to expand without
restraint these methods would dangerously concentrate control of credit,
and whether they would not in any event seriously threaten one of the
fundamentals of the American credit system--which is that credit which is
based upon banking deposits should be controlled by persons within those
areas which furnish these deposits and thus be subject to the restraints of
local interest and public opinion in those areas. To some degree, however,
this movement of chain or group banking is a groping for stronger support
to the banks and a more secure basis for these institutions.

The growth in size and stability of the metropolitan banks is in marked
contrast to the trend in the country districts, with its many failures and
the losses these failures have imposed upon the agricultural community.

The relinquishment of charters of national banks in great commercial
centers in favor of State charters indicates that some conditions surround
the national banks which render them unable to compete with State banks;
and their withdrawal results in weakening our national banking system.

It has been proposed that permission should be granted to national banks to
engage in branch banking of a nature that would preserve within limited
regions the local responsibility and the control of such credit
institutions.

All these subjects, however, require careful investigation, and it might be
found advantageous to create a joint commission embracing Members of the
Congress and other appropriate Federal officials for subsequent report.

ELECTRICAL POWER REGULATION

The Federal Power Commission is now comprised of three Cabinet officers,
and the duties involved in the competent conduct of the growing
responsibilities of this commission far exceed the time and attention which
these officials can properly afford from other important duties. I
recommended that authority be given for the appointment of full-time
commissioners to replace them.

It is also desirable that the authority of the commission should be
extended to certain phases of power regulation. The nature of the electric
utilities industry is such that about 90 per cent of all power generation
and distribution is intrastate in character, and most of the States have
developed their own regulatory systems as to certificates of convenience,
rates, and profits of such utilities. To encroach upon their authorities
and responsibilities would be an encroachment upon the rights of the
States. There are cases, however, of interstate character beyond the
jurisdiction of the States. To meet these cases it would be most desirable
if a method could be worked out by which initial action may be taken
between the commissions of the States whose joint action should be made
effective by the Federal Power Commission with a reserve to act on its own
motion in case of disagreement or nonaction by the States.

THE RADIO COMMISSION

I recommend the reorganization of the Radio Commission into a permanent
body from its present temporary status. The requirement of the present law
that the commissioners shall be appointed from specified zones should be
abolished and a general provision made for their equitable selection from
different parts of the country. Despite the effort of the commissioners,
the present method develops a public insistence that the commissioners are
specially charged with supervision of radio affairs in the zone from which
each is appointed. As a result there is danger that the system will
degenerate from a national system into five regional agencies with varying
practices, varying policies, competitive tendencies, and consequent failure
to attain its utmost capacity for service to the people as a whole.

MUSCLE SHOALS

It is most desirable that this question should be disposed of. Under
present conditions the income from these plants is less than could
otherwise be secured for its use, and more especially the public is not
securing the full benefits which could be obtained from them.

It is my belief that such parts of these plants as would be useful and the
revenues from the remainder should be dedicated for all time to the farmers
of the United States for investigation and experimentation on a commercial
scale in agricultural chemistry. By such means advancing discoveries of
science can be systematically applied to agricultural need, and development
of the chemical industry of the Tennessee Valley can be assured.

I do not favor the operation by the Government of either power or
manufacturing business except as an unavoidable by-product of some other
major public purpose.

Any form of settlement of this question will imply entering upon a contract
or contracts for the lease of the plants either as a whole or in parts and
the reservation of facilities, products, or income for agricultural
purposes. The extremely technical and involved nature of such contracts
dealing with chemical and electrical enterprises, added to the unusual
difficulties surrounding these special plants, and the rapid commercial
changes now in progress in power and synthetic nitrogen manufacture, lead
me to suggest that Congress create a special commission, not to investigate
and report as in the past, but with authority to negotiate and complete
some sort of contract or contracts on behalf of the Government, subject, of
course, to such general requirements as Congress may stipulate.

BOULDER DAM

The Secretary of the Interior is making satisfactory progress in
negotiation of the very complex contracts required for the sale of the
power to be generated at this project. These contracts must assure the
return of all Government outlays upon the project. I recommend that the
necessary funds be appropriated for the initiation of this work as soon as
the contracts are in the hands of Congress.

CONSERVATION

Conservation of national resources is a fixed policy of the Government.
Three important questions bearing upon conservation of the public lands
have become urgent.

Conservation of our oil and gas resources against future need is a national
necessity. The working of the oil permit system in development of oil and
gas resources on the public domain has been subject to great abuse. I
considered it necessary to suspend the issuance of such permits and to
direct the review of all outstanding permits as to compliance of the
holders with the law. The purpose was not only to end such abuse but to
place the Government in position to review the entire subject.

We are also confronted with a major problem in conservation due to the
overgrazing on public lands. The effect of overgrazing (which has now
become general) is not only to destroy the ranges but by impairing the
ground coverage seriously to menace the water supply in many parts of the
West through quick run-off, spring floods, and autumn drought.

We have a third problem of major dimensions in the reconsideration of our
reclamation policy. The inclusion of most of the available lands of the
public domain in existing or planned reclamation projects largely completes
the original purpose of the Reclamation Service. There still remains the
necessity for extensive storage of water in the arid States which renders
it desirable that we should give a wider vision and purpose to this
service.

To provide for careful consideration of these questions and also of better
division of responsibilities in them as between the State and Federal
Governments, including the possible transfer to the States for school
purposes of the lands unreserved for forests, parks, power, minerals, etc.,
I have appointed a Commission on Conservation of the Public Domain, with a
membership representing the major public land States and at the same time
the public at large. I recommend that Congress should authorize a moderate
sum to defray their expenses.

SOCIAL SERVICE

The Federal Government provides for an extensive and valuable program of
constructive social service, in education, home building, protection to
women and children, employment, public health, recreation, and many other
directions.

In a broad sense Federal activity in these directions has been confined to
research and dissemination of information and experience, and at most to
temporary subsidies to the States in order to secure uniform advancement in
practice and methods. Any other attitude by the Federal Government will
undermine one of the most precious possessions of the American people; that
is, local and individual responsibility. We should adhere to this policy.

Federal officials can, however, make a further and most important
contribution by leadership in stimulation of the community and voluntary
agencies, and by extending Federal assistance in organization of these
forces and bringing about cooperation among them.

As an instance of this character, I have recently, in cooperation with the
Secretaries of Interior and Labor, laid the foundations of an exhaustive
inquiry into the facts precedent to a nation-wide White House conference on
child health and protection. This cooperative movement among interested
agencies will impose no expense upon the Government. Similar nation-wide
conferences will be called in connection with better housing and recreation
at a later date.

In view of the considerable difference of opinion as to the policies which
should be pursued by the Federal Government with respect to education, I
have appointed a committee representative of the important educational
associations and others to investigate and present recommendations. In
cooperation with the Secretary of the Interior, I have also appointed a
voluntary committee of distinguished membership to assist in a nation-wide
movement for abolition of illiteracy.

I have recommended additional appropriations for the Federal employment
service in order that it may more fully cover its cooperative work with
State and local services. I have also recommended additional appropriations
for the Women's and Children's Bureaus for much needed research as to facts
which I feel will prove most helpful.

PUBLIC HEALTH

The advance in scientific discovery as to disease and health imposes new
considerations upon us. The Nation as a whole is vitally interested in the
health of all the people; in protection from spread of contagious disease;
in the relation of physical and mental disabilities to criminality; and in
the economic and moral advancement which is fundamentally associated with
sound body and mind. The organization of preventive measures and health
education in its personal application is the province of public health
service. Such organization should be as universal as public education. Its
support is a proper burden upon the taxpayer. It can not be organized with
success, either in its sanitary or educational phases, except under public
authority. It should be based upon local and State responsibility, but I
consider that the Federal Government has an obligation of contribution to
the establishment of such agencies.

In the practical working out of organization, exhaustive experiment and
trial have demonstrated that the base should be competent organization of
the municipality, county, or other local unit. Most of our municipalities
and some 400 rural counties out of 3,000 now have some such unit
organization. Where highly developed, a health unit comprises at least a
physician, sanitary engineer, and community nurse with the addition, in
some cases, of another nurse devoted to the problems of maternity and
children. Such organization gives at once a fundamental control of
preventive measures and assists in community instruction. The Federal
Government, through its interest in control of contagion, acting through
the United States Public Health Service and the State agencies, has in the
past and should in the future concern itself with this development,
particularly in the many rural sections which are unfortunately far behind
in progress. Some parts of the funds contributed under the Sheppard-Towner
Act through the Children's Bureau of the Department of Labor have also
found their way into these channels.

I recommend to the Congress that the purpose of the Sheppard-Towner Act
should be continued through the Children's Bureau for a limited period of
years; and that the Congress should consider the desirability of confining
the use of Federal funds by the States to the building up of such county or
other local units, and that such outlay should be positively coordinated
with the funds expended through the United States Public Health Service
directed to other phases of the same county or other local unit
organization. All funds appropriated should of course be applied through
the States, so that the public health program of the county or local unit
will be efficiently coordinated with that of the whole State.

FEDERAL PRISONS

Closely related to crime conditions is the administration of the Federal
prison system. Our Federal penal institutions are overcrowded, and this
condition is daily becoming worse. The parole and probation systems are
inadequate. These conditions make it impossible to perform the work of
personal reconstruction of prisoners so as to prepare them for return to
the duties of citizenship. In order to relieve the pressing evils I have
directed the temporary transfer of the Army Disciplinary Barracks at
Leavenworth to the Department of Justice for use as a Federal prison. Not
only is this temporary but it is inadequate for present needs.

We need some new Federal prisons and a reorganization of our probation and
parole systems; and there should be established in the Department of
Justice a Bureau of Prisons with a sufficient force to deal adequately with
the growing activities of our prison institutions. Authorization for the
improvements should be given speedily, with initial appropriations to allow
the construction of the new institutions to be undertaken at once.
IMMIGRATION

Restriction of immigration has from every aspect proved a sound national
policy. Our pressing problem is to formulate a method by which the limited
number of immigrants whom we do welcome shall be adapted to our national
setting and our national needs.

I have been opposed to the basis of the quotas now in force and I have
hoped that we could find some practical method to secure what I believe
should be our real national objective; that is, fitness of the immigrant as
to physique, character, training, and our need of service. Perhaps some
system of priorities within the quotas could produce these results and at
the same time enable some hardships in the present system to be cleared up.
I recommend that the Congress should give the subject further study, in
which the executive departments will gladly cooperate with the hope of
discovering such method as will more fully secure our national necessities.
VETERANS

It has been the policy of our Government almost from its inception to make
provision for the men who have been disabled in defense of our country.
This policy should be maintained. Originally it took the form of land
grants and pensions. This system continued until our entry into the World
War. The Congress at that time inaugurated a new plan of compensation,
rehabilitation, hospitalization, medical care and treatment, and insurance,
whereby benefits were awarded to those veterans and their immediate
dependents whose disabilities were attributable to their war service. The
basic principle in this legislation is sound.

In a desire to eliminate all possibilities of injustice due to difficulties
in establishing service connection of disabilities, these principles have
been to some degree extended. Veterans whose diseases or injuries have
become apparent within a brief period after the war are now receiving
compensation; insurance benefits have been liberalized. Emergency officers
are now receiving additional benefits. The doors of the Government's
hospitals have been opened to all veterans, even though their diseases or
injuries were not the result of their war service. In addition adjusted
service certificates have been issued to 3,433,300 veterans. This in itself
will mean an expenditure of nearly $3,500,000,000 before 1945, in addition
to the $600,000,000 which we are now appropriating annually for our
veterans' relief.

The administration of all laws concerning the veterans and their dependents
has been upon the basis of dealing generously, humanely, and justly. While
some inequalities have arisen, substantial and adequate care has been given
and justice administered. Further improvement in administration may require
some amendment from time to time to the law, but care should be taken to
see that such changes conform to the basic principles of the legislation.

I am convinced that we will gain in efficiency, economy, and more uniform
administration and better definition of national policies if the Pension
Bureau, the National Home for Volunteer Soldiers, and the Veterans' Bureau
are brought together under a single agency. The total appropriations to
these agencies now exceed $800,000,000 per annum.

CIVIL SERVICE

Approximately four-fifths of all the employees in the executive civil
service now occupy positions subject to competitive examination under the
civil service law.

There are, however, still commanding opportunities for extending the
system. These opportunities lie within the province of Congress and not the
President. I recommend that a further step be taken by authorization that
appointments of third-class postmasters be made under the civil service
law.

DEPARTMENTAL REORGANIZATION

This subject has been under consideration for over 20 years. It was
promised by both political parties in the recent campaign. It has been
repeatedly examined by committees and commissions--congressional,
executive, and voluntary. The conclusions of these investigations have been
unanimous that reorganization is a necessity of sound administration; of
economy; of more effective governmental policies and of relief to the
citizen from unnecessary harassment in his relations with a multitude of
scattered governmental agencies. But the presentation of any specific plan
at once enlivens opposition from every official whose authority may be
curtailed or who fears his position is imperiled by such a result; of
bureaus and departments which wish to maintain their authority and
activities; of citizens and their organizations who are selfishly
interested, or who are inspired by fear that their favorite bureau may, in
a new setting, be less subject to their influence or more subject to some
other influence.

It seems to me that the essential principles of reorganization are two in
number. First, all administrative activities of the same major purpose
should be placed in groups under single-headed responsibility; second, all
executive and administrative functions should be separated from boards and
commissions and placed under individual responsibility, while
quasi-legislative and quasi-judicial and broadly advisory functions should
be removed from individual authority and assigned to boards and
commissions. Indeed, these are the fundamental principles upon which our
Government was founded, and they are the principles which have been adhered
to in the whole development of our business structure, and they are the
distillation of the common sense of generations.

For instance, the conservation of national resources is spread among eight
agencies in five departments. They suffer from conflict and overlap. There
is no proper development and adherence to broad national policies and no
central point where the searchlight of public opinion may concentrate
itself. These functions should be grouped under the direction of some such
official as an assistant secretary of conservation. The particular
department or cabinet officer under which such a group should be placed is
of secondary importance to the need of concentration. The same may be said
of educational services, of merchant marine aids, of public works, of
public health, of veterans' services, and many others, the component parts
of which are widely scattered in the various departments and independent
agencies. It is desirable that we first have experience with these
different groups in action before we create new departments. These may be
necessary later on.

With this background of all previous experience I can see no hope for the
development of a sound reorganization of the Government unless Congress be
willing to delegate its authority over the problem (subject to defined
principles) to the Executive, who should act upon approval of a joint
committee of Congress or with the reservation of power of revision by
Congress within some limited period adequate for its consideration.
PROHIBITION

The first duty of the President under his oath of office is to secure the
enforcement of the laws. The enforcement of the laws enacted to give effect
to the eighteenth amendment is far from satisfactory and this is in part
due to the inadequate organization of the administrative agencies of the
Federal Government. With the hope of expediting such reorganization, I
requested on June 6 last that Congress should appoint a joint committee to
collaborate with executive agencies in preparation of legislation. It would
be helpful if it could be so appointed. The subject has been earnestly
considered by the Law Enforcement Commission and the administrative
officials of the Government. Our joint conclusions are that certain steps
should be taken at once. First, there should be an immediate concentration
of responsibility and strengthening of enforcement agencies of the Federal
Government by transfer to the Department of Justice of the Federal
functions of detection and to a considerable degree of prosecution, which
are now lodged in the Prohibition Bureau in the Treasury; and at the same
time the control of the distribution of industrial alcohol and legalized
beverages should remain in the Treasury. Second, provision should be made
for relief of congestion in the Federal courts by modifying and simplifying
the procedure for dealing with the large volume of petty prosecutions under
various Federal acts. Third, there should be a codification of the laws
relating to prohibition to avoid the necessity which now exists of
resorting to more than 25 statutes enacted at various times over 40 years.
Technical defects in these statutes that have been disclosed should be
cured. I would add to these recommendations the desirability of
reorganizing the various services engaged in the prevention of smuggling
into one border patrol under the Coast Guard. Further recommendations upon
the subject as a whole will be developed after further examination by the
Law Enforcement Commission, but it is not to be expected that any criminal
law will ever be fully enforced so long as criminals exist.

The District of Columbia should be the model of city law enforcement in the
Nation. While conditions here are much better than in many other cities,
they are far from perfect, and this is due in part to the congestion of
criminal cases in the Supreme Court of the District, resulting in long
delays. Furthermore, there is need for legislation in the District
supplementing the national prohibition act, more sharply defining and
enlarging the duties and powers of the District Commissioners and the
police of the District, and opening the way for better cooperation in the
enforcement of prohibition between the District officials and the
prohibition officers of the Federal Government. It is urgent that these
conditions be remedied.

LAW ENFORCEMENT AND OBSERVANCE

No one will look with satisfaction upon the volume of crime of all kinds
and the growth of organized crime in our country. We have pressing need so
to organize our system of administering criminal justice as to establish
full vigor and effectiveness. We need to reestablish faith that the highest
interests of our country are served by insistence upon the swift and
even-handed administration of justice to all offenders, whether they be
rich or poor. That we shall effect improvement is vital to the preservation
of our institutions. It is the most serious issue before our people.

Under the authority of Congress I have appointed a National Commission on
Law Observance and Enforcement, for an exhaustive study of the entire
problem of the enforcement of our laws and the improvement of our judicial
system, including the special problems and abuses growing out of the
prohibition laws. The commission has been invited to make the widest
inquiry into the shortcomings of the administration of justice and into the
causes and remedies for them. It has organized its work under subcommittees
dealing with the many contributory causes of our situation and has enlisted
the aid of investigators in fields requiring special consideration. I am
confident that as a result of its studies now being carried forward it will
make a notable contribution to the solution of our pressing problems.

Pending further legislation, the Department of Justice has been striving to
weed out inefficiency wherever it exists, to stimulate activity on the part
of its prosecuting officers, and to use increasing care in examining into
the qualifications of those appointed to serve as prosecutors. The
department is seeking systematically to strengthen the law enforcement
agencies week by week and month by month, not by dramatic displays but by
steady pressure; by removal of negligent officials and by encouragement and
assistance to the vigilant. During the course of these efforts it has been
revealed that in some districts causes contributing to the congestion of
criminal dockets, and to delays and inefficiency in prosecutions, have been
lack of sufficient forces in the offices of United States attorneys, clerks
of courts, and marshals. These conditions tend to clog the machinery of
justice. The last conference of senior circuit judges has taken note of
them and indorsed the department's proposals for improvement. Increases in
appropriations are necessary and will be asked for in order to reenforce
these offices.

The orderly administration of the law involves more than the mere machinery
of law enforcement. The efficient use of that machinery and a spirit in our
people in support of law are alike essential. We have need for improvement
in both. However much we may perfect the mechanism, still if the citizen
who is himself dependent upon some laws for the protection of all that he
has and all that he holds dear, shall insist on selecting the particular
laws which he will obey, he undermines his own safety and that of his
country. His attitude may obscure, but it can not conceal, the ugly truth
that the lawbreaker, whoever he may be, is the enemy of society. We can no
longer gloss over the unpleasant reality which should be made vital in the
consciousness of every citizen, that he who condones or traffics with
crime, who is indifferent to it and to the punishment of the criminal, or
to the lax performance of official duty, is himself the most effective
agency for the breakdown of society.

Law can not rise above its source in good citizenship--in what right-minded
men most earnestly believe and desire. If the law is upheld only by
Government officials, then all law is at an end. Our laws are made by the
people themselves; theirs is the right to work for their repeal; but until
repeal it is an equal duty to observe them and demand their enforcement.

I have been gratified at the awakening sense of this responsibility in our
citizens during the past few months, and gratified that many instances have
occurred which refuted the cynicism which has asserted that our system
could not convict those who had defied the law and possessed the means to
resist its execution. These things reveal a moral awakening both in the
people and in officials which lies at the very foundation of the rule of
law.

CONCLUSION

The test of the rightfulness of our decisions must be whether we have
sustained and advanced the ideals of the American people; self-government
in its foundations of local government; justice whether to the individual
or to the group; ordered liberty; freedom from domination; open opportunity
and equality of opportunity; the initiative and individuality of our
people; prosperity and the lessening of poverty; freedom of public opinion;
education; advancement of knowledge; the growth of religious spirit; the
tolerance of all faiths; the foundations of the home and the advancement of
peace.

The White House,

December 3, 1929

***

State of the Union Address
Herbert Hoover
December 2, 1930

To the Senate and House of Representatives:

I have the honor to comply with the requirement of the Constitution that I
should lay before the Congress information as to the state of the Union,
and recommend consideration of such measures as are necessary and
expedient.

Substantial progress has been made during the year in national peace and
security; the fundamental strength of the Nation's economic life is
unimpaired; education and scientific discovery have made advances; our
country is more alive to its problems of moral and spiritual welfare.

ECONOMIC SITUATION

During the past 12 months we have suffered with other Nations from economic
depression.

The origins of this depression lie to some extent within our own borders
through a speculative period which diverted capital and energy into
speculation rather than constructive enterprise. Had overspeculation in
securities been the only force operating, we should have seen recovery many
months ago, as these particular dislocations have generally readjusted
themselves.

Other deep-seated causes have been in action, however, chiefly the
world-wide overproduction beyond even the demand of prosperous times for
such important basic commodities as wheat, rubber, coffee, sugar, copper,
silver, zinc, to some extent cotton, and other raw materials. The
cumulative effects of demoralizing price falls of these important
commodities in the process of adjustment of production to world consumption
have produced financial crises in many countries and have diminished the
buying power of these countries for imported goods to a degree which
extended the difficulties farther afield by creating unemployment in all
the industrial nations. The political agitation in Asia; revolutions in
South America and political unrest in some European States; the methods of
sale by Russia of her increasing agricultural exports to European markets;
and our own drought--have all contributed to prolong and deepen the
depression.

In the larger view the major forces of the depression now lie outside of
the United States, and our recuperation has been retarded by the
unwarranted degree of fear and apprehension created by these outside
forces.

The extent of the depression is indicated by the following approximate
percentages of activity during the past three months as compared with the
highly prosperous year of 1928:

Value of department-store sales - 93% of 1928

Volume of manufacturing production - 80% of 1928

Volume of mineral production - 90% of 1928

Volume of factory employment - 84% of 1928

Total of bank deposits - 105% of 1928

Wholesale prices--all commodities - 83% of 1928

Cost of living - 94% of 1928

Various other indexes indicate total decrease of activity from 1928 of from
15 to 20 per cent.

There are many factors which give encouragement for the future. The fact
that we are holding from 80 to 85 per cent of our normal activities and
incomes; that our major financial and industrial institutions have come
through the storm unimpaired; that price levels of major commodities have
remained approximately stable for some time; that a number of industries
are showing signs of increasing demand; that the world at large is
readjusting itself to the situation; all reflect grounds for confidence. We
should remember that these occasions have been met many times before, that
they are but temporary, that our country is to-day stronger and richer in
resources, in equipment, in skill, than ever in its history. We are in an
extraordinary degree self-sustaining, we will overcome world influences and
will lead the march of prosperity as we have always done hitherto.

Economic depression can not be cured by legislative action or executive
pronouncement. Economic wounds must be healed by the action of the cells of
the economic body--the producers and consumers themselves. Recovery can be
expedited and its effects mitigated by cooperative action. That cooperation
requires that every individual should sustain faith and courage; that each
should maintain his self-reliance; that each and every one should search
for methods of improving his business or service; that the vast majority
whose income is unimpaired should not hoard out of fear but should pursue
their normal living and recreations; that each should seek to assist his
neighbors who may be less fortunate; that each industry should assist its
own employees; that each community and each State should assume its full
responsibilities for organization of employment and relief of distress with
that sturdiness and independence which built a great Nation.

Our people are responding to these impulses in remarkable degree. The best
contribution of government lies in encouragement of this voluntary
cooperation in the community. The Government, National, State, and local,
can join with the community in such programs and do its part. A year ago I,
together with other officers of the Government, initiated extensive
cooperative measures throughout the country.

The first of these measures was an agreement of leading employers to
maintain the standards of wages and of labor leaders to use their influence
against strife. In a large sense these undertakings have been adhered to
and we have not witnessed the usual reductions of wages which have always
heretofore marked depressions. The index of union wage scales shows them to
be today fully up to the level of any of the previous three years. In
consequence the buying power of the country has been much larger than would
otherwise have been the case. Of equal importance the Nation has had
unusual peace in industry and freedom from the public disorder which has
characterized previous depressions.

The second direction of cooperation has been that our governments,
National, State, and local, the industries and business so distribute
employment as to give work to the maximum number of employees.

The third direction of cooperation has been to maintain and even extend
construction work and betterments in anticipation of the future. It has
been the universal experience in previous depressions that public works and
private construction have fallen off rapidly with the general tide of
depression. On this occasion, however, the increased authorization and
generous appropriations by the Congress and the action of States and
municipalities have resulted in the expansion of public construction to an
amount even above that in the most prosperous years. In addition the
cooperation of public utilities, railways, and other large organizations
has been generously given in construction and betterment work in
anticipation of future need. The Department of Commerce advises me that as
a result, the volume of this type of construction work, which amounted to
roughly $6,300,000,000 in 1929, instead of decreasing will show a total of
about $7,000,000,000 for 1930. There has, of course, been a substantial
decrease in the types of construction which could not be undertaken in
advance of need.

The fourth direction of cooperation was the organization in such States and
municipalities, as was deemed necessary, of committees to organize local
employment, to provide for employment agencies, and to effect relief of
distress.

The result of magnificent cooperation throughout the country has been that
actual suffering has been kept to a minimum during the past 12 months, and
our unemployment has been far less in proportion than in other large
industrial countries. Some time ago it became evident that unemployment
would continue over the winter and would necessarily be added to from
seasonal causes and that the savings of workpeople would be more largely
depleted. We have as a Nation a definite duty to see that no deserving
person in our country suffers from hunger or cold. I therefore set up a
more extensive organization to stimulate more intensive cooperation
throughout the country. There has been a most gratifying degree of
response, from governors, mayors, and other public officials, from welfare
organizations, and from employers in concerns both large and small. The
local communities through their voluntary agencies have assumed the duty of
relieving individual distress and are being generously supported by the
public.

The number of those wholly out of employment seeking for work was
accurately determined by the census last April as about 2,500,000. The
Department of Labor index of employment in the larger trades shows some
decrease in employment since that time. The problem from a relief point of
view is somewhat less than the published estimates of the number of
unemployed would indicate. The intensive community and individual efforts
in providing special employment outside the listed industries are not
reflected in the statistical indexes and tend to reduce such published
figures. Moreover, there is estimated to be a constant figure at all times
of nearly 1,000,000 unemployed who are not without annual income but
temporarily idle in the shift from one job to another. We have an average
of about three breadwinners to each two families, so that every person
unemployed does not represent a family without income. The view that the
relief problems are less than the gross numbers would indicate is confirmed
by the experience of several cities, which shows that the number of
families in distress represents from 10 to 20 per cent of the number of the
calculated unemployed. This is not said to minimize the very real problem
which exists but to weigh its actual proportions.

As a contribution to the situation the Federal Government is engaged upon
the greatest program of waterway, harbor, flood control, public building,
highway, and airway improvement in all our history. This, together with
loans to merchant shipbuilders, improvement of the Navy and in military
aviation, and other construction work of the Government will exceed
$520,000,000 for this fiscal year. This compares with $253,000,000 in the
fiscal year 1928. The construction works already authorized and the
continuation of policies in Government aid will require a continual
expenditure upwards of half a billion dollars annually.

I favor still further temporary expansion of these activities in aid to
unemployment during this winter. The Congress will, however, have presented
to it numbers of projects, some of them under the guise of, rather than the
reality of, their usefulness in the increase of employment during the
depression. There are certain commonsense limitations upon any expansions
of construction work. The Government must not undertake works that are not
of sound economic purpose and that have not been subject to searching
technical investigation, and which have not been given adequate
consideration by the Congress. The volume of construction work in the
Government is already at the maximum limit warranted by financial prudence
as a continuing policy. To increase taxation for purposes of construction
work defeats its own purpose, as such taxes directly diminish employment in
private industry. Again any kind of construction requires, after its
authorization, a considerable time before labor can be employed in which to
make engineering, architectural, and legal preparations. Our immediate
problem is the increase of employment for the next six months, and new
plans which do not produce such immediate result or which extend
commitments beyond this period are not warranted.

The enlarged rivers and harbors, public building, and highway plans
authorized by the Congress last session, however, offer an opportunity for
assistance by the temporary acceleration of construction of these programs
even faster than originally planned, especially if the technical
requirements of the laws which entail great delays could be amended in such
fashion as to speed up acquirements of land and the letting of contracts.

With view, however, to the possible need for acceleration, we, immediately
upon receiving those authorities from the Congress five months ago, began
the necessary technical work in preparation for such possible eventuality.
I have canvassed the departments of the Government as to the maximum amount
that can be properly added to our present expenditure to accelerate all
construction during the next six months, and I feel warranted in asking the
Congress for an appropriation of from $100,000,000 to $150,000,000 to
provide such further employment in this emergency. In connection therewith
we need some authority to make enlarged temporary advances of
Federal-highway aid to the States.

I recommend that this appropriation be made distributable to the different
departments upon recommendation of a committee of the Cabinet and approval
by the President. Its application to works already authorized by the
Congress assures its use in directions of economic importance and to public
welfare. Such action will imply an expenditure upon construction of all
kinds of over $650,000,000 during the next twelve months.

AGRICULTURE

The world-wide depression has affected agriculture in common with all other
industries. The average price of farm produce has fallen to about 80 per
cent of the levels of 1928. This average is, however, greatly affected by
wheat and cotton, which have participated in world-wide overproduction and
have fallen to about 60 per cent of the average price of the year 1928.
Excluding these commodities, the prices of all other agricultural products
are about 84 per cent of those of 1928. The average wholesale prices of
other primary goods, such as nonferrous metals, have fallen to 76 per cent
of 1928.

The price levels of our major agricultural commodities are, in fact, higher
than those in other principal producing countries, due to the combined
result of the tariff and the operations of the Farm Board. For instance,
wheat prices at Minneapolis are about 30 per cent higher than at Winnipeg,
and at Chicago they are about 20 per cent higher than at Buenos Aires. Corn
prices at Chicago are over twice as high as at Buenos Aires. Wool prices
average more than 80 per cent higher in this country than abroad, and
butter is 30 per cent higher in New York City than in Copenhagen.

Aside from the misfortune to agriculture of the world-wide depression we
have had the most severe drought. It has affected particularly the States
bordering on the Potomac, Ohio, and Lower Mississippi Rivers, with some
areas in Montana, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas. It has found its major
expression in the shortage of pasturage and a shrinkage in the corn crop
from an average of about 2,800,000,000 bushels to about 2,090,000,000
bushels.

On August 14 I called a conference of the governors of the most acutely
affected States, and as a result of its conclusions I appointed a national
committee comprising the heads of the important Federal agencies under the
chairmanship of the Secretary of Agriculture. The governors in turn have
appointed State committees representative of the farmers, bankers, business
men, and the Red Cross, and subsidiary committees have been established in
most of the acutely affected counties. Railway rates were reduced on feed
and livestock in and out of the drought areas, and over 50,000 cars of such
products have been transported under these reduced rates. The Red Cross
established a preliminary fund of $5,000,000 for distress relief purposes
and established agencies for its administration in each county. Of this
fund less than $500,000 has been called for up to this time as the need
will appear more largely during the winter. The Federal Farm Loan Board has
extended its credit facilities, and the Federal Farm Board has given
financial assistance to all affected cooperatives.

In order that the Government may meet its full obligation toward our
countrymen in distress through no fault of their own, I recommend that an
appropriation should be made to the Department of Agriculture to be loaned
for the purpose of seed and feed for animals. Its application should as
hitherto in such loans be limited to a gross amount to any one individual,
and secured upon the crop.

The Red Cross can relieve the cases of individual distress by the
sympathetic assistance of our people.

FINANCES OF THE GOVERNMENT

I shall submit the detailed financial position of the Government with
recommendations in the usual Budget message. I will at this time, however,
mention that the Budget estimates of receipts and expenditures for the
current year were formulated by the Treasury and the Budget Bureau at a
time when it was impossible to forecast the severity of the business
depression and have been most seriously affected by it. At that time a
surplus of about $123,000,000 was estimated for this fiscal year and tax
reduction which affected the fiscal year to the extent of $75,000,000 was
authorized by the Congress, thus reducing the estimated surplus to about
$48,000,000. Closely revised estimates now made by the Treasury and the
Bureau of the Budget of the tax, postal, and other receipts for the current
fiscal year indicate a decrease of about $430,000,000 from the estimate of
a year ago, of which about $75,000,000 is due to tax reduction, leaving
about $355,000,000 due to the depression. Moreover, legislation enacted by
Congress subsequent to the submission of the Budget enlarging Federal
construction work to expand employment and for increase in veterans'
services and other items, have increased expenditures during the current
fiscal year by about $225,000,000.

Thus the decrease of $430,000,000 in revenue and the increase of
$225,000,000 in expenditure adversely change the original Budget situation
by about $655,000,000. This large sum is offset by the original estimated
surplus a year ago of about $123,000,000, by the application of
$185,000,000 of interest payments upon the foreign debt to current
expenditures, by arrangements of the Farm Board through repayments, etc.,
in consequence of which they reduced their net cash demands upon the
Treasury by $100,000,000 in this period, and by about $67,000,000 economies
and deferments brought about in the Government, thus reducing the practical
effect of the change in the situation to an estimated deficit of about
$180,000,000 for the present fiscal year. I shall make suggestions for
handling the present-year deficit in the Budget message, but I do not favor
encroachment upon the statutory reduction of the public debt.

While it will be necessary in public interest to further increase
expenditures during the current fiscal year in aid to unemployment by
speeding up construction work and aid to the farmers affected by the
drought, I can not emphasize too strongly the absolute necessity to defer
any other plans for increase of Government expenditures. The Budget for
1932 fiscal year indicates estimated expenditure of about $4,054,000,000,
including postal deficit. The receipts are estimated at about
$4,085,000,000 if the temporary tax reduction of last year be discontinued,
leaving a surplus of only about $30,000,000. Most rigid economy is
therefore necessary to avoid increase in taxes.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Our Army and Navy are being maintained at a high state of efficiency, under
officers of high training and intelligence, supported by a devoted
personnel of the rank and file. The London naval treaty has brought
important economies in the conduct of the Navy. The Navy Department will
lay before the committees of the Congress recommendations for a program of
authorization of new construction which should be initiated in the fiscal
year of 1932.

LEGISLATION

This is the last session of the Seventy-first Congress. During its previous
sittings it has completed a very large amount of important legislation,
notably: The establishment of the Federal Farm Board; fixing congressional
reapportionment; revision of the tariff, including the flexible provisions
and a reorganization of the Tariff Commission; reorganization of the Radio
Commission; reorganization of the Federal Power Commission; expansion of
Federal prisons; reorganization of parole and probation system in Federal
prisons; expansion of veterans' hospitals; establishment of disability
allowances to veterans; consolidation of veteran activities; consolidation
and strengthening of prohibition enforcement activities in the Department
of Justice; organization of a Narcotics Bureau; large expansion of rivers
and harbors improvements; substantial increase in Federal highways;
enlargement of public buildings construction program; and the ratification
of the London naval treaty.

The Congress has before it legislation partially completed in the last
sitting in respect to Muscle Shoals, bus regulation, relief of congestion
in the courts, reorganization of border patrol in prevention of smuggling,
law enforcement in the District of Columbia, and other subjects.

It is desirable that these measures should be completed.

The short session does not permit of extensive legislative programs, but
there are a number of questions which, if time does not permit action, I
recommend should be placed in consideration by the Congress, perhaps
through committees cooperating in some instances with the Federal
departments, with view to preparation for subsequent action. Among them are
the following subjects:

ELECTRICAL POWER

I have in a previous message recommended effective regulation of interstate
electrical power. Such regulation should preserve the independence and
responsibility of the States.

RAILWAYS

We have determined upon a national policy of consolidation of the railways
as a necessity of more stable and more economically operated
transportation. Further legislation is necessary to facilitate such
consolidation. In the public interest we should strengthen the railways
that they may meet our future needs.

ANTITRUST LAWS

I recommend that the Congress institute an inquiry into some aspects of the
economic working of these laws. I do not favor repeal of the Sherman Act.
The prevention of monopolies is of most vital public importance.
Competition is not only the basis of protection to the consumer but is the
incentive to progress. However, the interpretation of these laws by the
courts, the changes in business, especially in the economic effects upon
those enterprises closely related to the use of the natural resources of
the country, make such an inquiry advisable. The producers of these
materials assert that certain unfortunate results of wasteful and
destructive use of these natural resources together with a destructive
competition which impoverishes both operator and worker can not be remedied
because of the prohibitive interpretation of the antitrust laws. The
well-known condition of the bituminous coal industry is an illustration.
The people have a vital interest in the conservation of their natural
resources; in the prevention of wasteful practices; in conditions of
destructive competition which may impoverish the producer and the wage
earner; and they have an equal interest in maintaining adequate
competition. I therefore suggest that an inquiry be directed especially to
the effect of the workings of the antitrust laws in these particular fields
to determine if these evils can be remedied without sacrifice of the
fundamental purpose of these laws.

CAPITAL-GAINS TAX

It is urged by many thoughtful citizens that the peculiar economic effect
of the income tax on so-called capital gains at the present rate is to
enhance speculative inflation and likewise impede business recovery. I
believe this to be the case and I recommend that a study be made of the
economic effects of this tax and of its relation to the general structure
of our income tax law.

IMMIGRATION

There is need for revision of our immigration laws upon a more limited and
more selective basis, flexible to the needs of the country.

Under conditions of current unemployment it is obvious that persons coming
to the United States seeking work would likely become either a direct or
indirect public charge. As a temporary measure the officers issuing visas
to immigrants have been, in pursuance of the law, instructed to refuse
visas to applicants likely to fall into this class. As a result the visas
issued have decreased from an average of about 24,000 per month prior to
restrictions to a rate of about 7,000 during the last month. These are
largely preferred persons under the law. Visas from Mexico are about 250
per month compared to about 4,000 previous to restrictions. The whole
subject requires exhaustive reconsideration.

DEPORTATION OF ALIEN CRIMINALS

I urge the strengthening of our deportation laws so as to more fully rid
ourselves of criminal aliens. Furthermore, thousands of persons have
entered the country in violation of the immigration laws. The very method
of their entry indicates their objectionable character, and our law-abiding
foreign-born residents suffer in consequence. I recommend that the Congress
provide methods of strengthening the Government to correct this abuse.

POST OFFICE

Due to deferment of Government building over many years, previous
administrations had been compelled to enter upon types of leases for
secondary facilities in large cities, some of which were objectionable as
representing too high a return upon the value of the property. To prevent
the occasion for further uneconomic leasing I recommend that the Congress
authorize the building by the Government of its own facilities.

VETERANS

The Nation has generously expanded its care for veterans. The consolidation
of all veterans' activities into the Veterans' Administration has produced
substantial administrative economies. The consolidation also brings
emphasis to the inequalities in service and allowances. The whole subject
is under study by the administrator, and I recommend it should also be
examined by the committees of the Congress.

SOCIAL SERVICE

I urge further consideration by the Congress of the recommendations I made
a year ago looking to the development through temporary Federal aid of
adequate State and local services for the health of children and the
further stamping out of communicable disease, particularly in the rural
sections. The advance of scientific discovery, methods, and social thought
imposes a new vision in these matters. The drain upon the Federal Treasury
is comparatively small. The results both economic and moral are of the
utmost importance.

GENERAL

It is my belief that after the passing of this depression, when we can
examine it in retrospect, we shall need to consider a number of other
questions as to what action may be taken by the Government to remove
Possible governmental influences which make for instability and to better
organize mitigation of the effect of depression. It is as yet too soon to
constructively formulate such measures.

There are many administrative subjects, such as departmental
reorganization, extension of the civil service, readjustment of the postal
rates, etc., which at some appropriate time require the attention of the
Congress.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

Our relations with foreign countries have been maintained upon a high basis
of cordiality and good will.

During the past year the London naval pact was completed, approved by the
Senate, and ratified by the governments concerned. By this treaty we have
abolished competition in the building of warships, have established the
basis of parity of the United States with the strongest of foreign powers,
and have accomplished a substantial reduction in war vessels.

During the year there has been an extended political unrest in the world.
Asia continues in disturbed condition, and revolutions have taken place in
Brazil, Argentina, Peru, and Bolivia. Despite the jeopardy to our citizens
and their property which naturally arises in such circumstances, we have,
with the cooperation of the governments concerned, been able to meet all
such instances without friction.

We have resumed normal relations with the new Governments of Brazil,
Argentina, Peru, and Bolivia immediately upon evidence that they were able
to give protection to our citizens and their property, and that they
recognized their international obligations.

A commission which was supported by the Congress has completed its
investigation and reported upon our future policies in respect to Haiti and
proved of high value in securing the acceptance of these policies. An
election has been held and a new government established. We have replaced
our high commissioner by a minister and have begun the gradual withdrawal
of our activities with view to complete retirement at the expiration of the
present treaty in 1935.

A number of arbitration and conciliation treaties have been completed or
negotiated during the year, and will be presented for approval by the
Senate.

I shall, in a special message, lay before the Senate the protocols covering
the statutes of the World Court which have been revised to accord with the
sense of previous Senate reservations.

The White House,

December 2, 1930

***

State of the Union Address
Herbert Hoover
December 8, 1931

To the Senate and House of Representatives:

It is my duty under the Constitution to transmit to the Congress
information on the state of the Union and to recommend for its
consideration necessary and expedient measures.

The chief influence affecting the state of the Union during the past year
has been the continued world-wide economic disturbance. Our national
concern has been to meet the emergencies it has created for us and to lay
the foundations for recovery.

If we lift our vision beyond these immediate emergencies we find
fundamental national gains even amid depression. In meeting the problems of
this difficult period, we have witnessed a remarkable development of the
sense of cooperation in the community. For the first time in the history of
our major economic depressions there has been a notable absence of public
disorders and industrial conflict. Above all there is an enlargement of
social and spiritual responsibility among the people. The strains and
stresses upon business have resulted in closer application, in saner
policies, and in better methods. Public improvements have been carried out
on a larger scale than even in normal times. The country is richer in
physical property, in newly discovered resources, and in productive
capacity than ever before. There has been constant gain in knowledge and
education; there has been continuous advance in science and invention;
there has been distinct gain in public health. Business depressions have
been recurrent in the life of our country and are but transitory. The
Nation has emerged from each of them with increased strength and virility
because of the enlightenment they have brought, the readjustments and the
larger understanding of the realities and obligations of life and work
which come from them.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Both our Army and Navy have been maintained in a high state of efficiency.
The ability and devotion of both officers and men sustain the highest
traditions of the service. Reductions and postponements in expenditure of
these departments to meet the present emergency are being made without
reducing existing personnel or impairing the morale of either
establishment.

The agreement between the leading naval powers for limitation of naval
armaments and establishment of their relative strength and thus elimination
of competitive building also implies for ourselves the gradual expansion of
the deficient categories in our Navy to the parities provided in those
treaties. However, none of the other nations, parties to these agreements,
is to-day maintaining the full rate of construction which the treaty size
of fleets would imply.

Although these agreements secured the maximum reduction of fleets which it
was at that time possible to attain, I am hopeful that the naval powers,
party to these agreements, will realize that establishment of relative
strength in itself offers opportunity for further reduction without injury
to any of them. This would be the more possible if pending negotiations are
successful between France and Italy. If the world is to regain its
standards of life, it must further decrease both naval and other arms. The
subject will come before the General Disarmament Conference which meets in
Geneva on February 2.

FOREIGN AFFAIRS

We are at peace with the world. We have cooperated with other nations to
preserve peace. The rights of our citizens abroad have been protected.

The economic depression has continued and deepened in every part of the
world during the past year. In many countries political instability,
excessive armaments, debts, governmental expenditures, and taxes have
resulted in revolutions, in unbalanced budgets and monetary collapse and
financial panics, in dumping of goods upon world markets, and in diminished
consumption of commodities.

Within two years there have been revolutions or acute social disorders in
19 countries, embracing more than half the population of the world. Ten
countries have been unable to meet their external obligations. In 14
countries, embracing a quarter of the world's population, former monetary
standards have been temporarily abandoned. In a number of countries there
have been acute financial panics or compulsory restraints upon banking.
These disturbances have many roots in the dislocations from the World War.
Every one of them has reacted upon us. They have sharply affected the
markets and prices of our agricultural and industrial products. They have
increased unemployment and greatly embarrassed our financial and credit
system.

As our difficulties during the past year have plainly originated in large
degree from these sources, any effort to bring about our own recuperation
has dictated the necessity of cooperation by us with other nations in
reasonable effort to restore world confidence and economic stability.

Cooperation of our Federal reserve system and our banks with the central
banks in foreign countries has contributed to localize and ameliorate a
number of serious financial crises or moderate the pressures upon us and
thus avert disasters which would have affected us.

The economic crisis in Germany and Central Europe last June rose to the
dimensions of a general panic from which it was apparent that without
assistance these nations must collapse. Apprehensions of such collapse had
demoralized our agricultural and security markets and so threatened other
nations as to impose further dangers upon us. But of highest importance was
the necessity of cooperation on our part to relieve the people of Germany
from imminent disasters and to maintain their important relations to
progress and stability in the world. Upon the initiative of this Government
a year's postponement of reparations and other intergovernmental debts was
brought about. Upon our further initiative an agreement was made by
Germany's private creditors providing for an extension of such credits
until the German people can develop more permanent and definite forms of
relief.

We have continued our policy of withdrawing our marines from Haiti and
Nicaragua.

The difficulties between China and Japan have given us great concern, not
alone for the maintenance of the spirit of the Kellogg-Briand Pact, but for
the maintenance of the treaties to which we are a party assuring the
territorial integrity of China. It is our purpose to assist in finding
solutions sustaining the full spirit of those treaties.

I shall deal at greater length with our foreign relations in a later
message.

THE DOMESTIC SITUATION

Many undertakings have been organized and forwarded during the past year to
meet the new and changing emergencies which have constantly confronted us.

Broadly the community has cooperated to meet the needs of honest distress,
and to take such emergency measures as would sustain confidence in our
financial system and would cushion the violence of liquidation in industry
and commerce, thus giving time for orderly readjustment of costs,
inventories, and credits without panic and widespread bankruptcy. These
measures have served those purposes and will promote recovery.

In these measures we have striven to mobilize and stimulate private
initiative and local and community responsibility. There has been the least
possible Government entry into the economic field, and that only in
temporary and emergency form. Our citizens and our local governments have
given a magnificent display of unity and action, initiative and patriotism
in solving a multitude of difficulties and in cooperating with the Federal
Government.

For a proper understanding of my recommendations to the Congress it is
desirable very briefly to review such activities during the past year.

The emergencies of unemployment have been met by action in many directions.
The appropriations for the continued speeding up of the great Federal
construction program have provided direct and indirect aid to employment
upon a large scale. By organized unity of action, the States and
municipalities have also maintained large programs of public improvement.
Many industries have been prevailed upon to anticipate and intensify
construction. Industrial concerns and other employers have been organized
to spread available work amongst all their employees, instead of
discharging a portion of them. A large majority have maintained wages at as
high levels as the safe conduct of their business would permit. This course
has saved us from industrial conflict and disorder which have characterized
all previous depressions. Immigration has been curtailed by administrative
action. Upon the basis of normal immigration the decrease amounts to about
300,000 individuals who otherwise would have been added to our
unemployment. The expansion of Federal employment agencies under
appropriations by the Congress has proved most effective. Through the
President's organization for unemployment relief, public and private
agencies were successfully mobilized last winter to provide employment and
other measures against distress. Similar organization gives assurance
against suffering during the coming winter. Committees of leading citizens
are now active at practically every point of unemployment. In the large
majority they have been assured the funds necessary which, together with
local government aids, will meet the situation. A few exceptional
localities will be further organized. The evidence of the Public Health
Service shows an actual decrease of sickness and infant and general
mortality below normal years. No greater proof could be adduced that our
people have been protected from hunger and cold and that the sense of
social responsibility in the Nation has responded to the need of the
unfortunate.

To meet the emergencies in agriculture the loans authorized by Congress for
rehabilitation in the drought areas have enabled farmers to produce
abundant crops in those districts. The Red Cross undertook and
magnificently administered relief for over 2,500,000 drought sufferers last
winter. It has undertaken this year to administer relief to 100,000
sufferers in the new drought area of certain Northwest States. The action
of the Federal Farm Board in granting credits to farm cooperatives saved
many of them from bankruptcy and increased their purpose and strength. By
enabling farm cooperatives to cushion the fall in prices of farm products
in 1930 and 1931 the Board secured higher prices to the farmer than would
have been obtained otherwise, although the benefits of this action were
partially defeated by continued world overproduction. Incident to this
action the failure of a large number of farmers and of country banks was
averted which could quite possibly have spread into a major disaster. The
banks in the South have cooperated with the Farm Board in creation of a
pool for the better marketing of accumulated cotton. Growers have been
materially assisted by this action. Constant effort has been made to reduce
overproduction in relief of agriculture and to promote the foreign buying
of agricultural products by sustaining economic stability abroad.

To meet our domestic emergencies in credit and banking arising from the
reaction to acute crisis abroad the National Credit Association was set up
by the banks with resources of $500,000,000 to support sound banks against
the frightened withdrawals and hoarding. It is giving aid to reopen solvent
banks which have been closed. Federal officials have brought about many
beneficial unions of banks and have employed other means which have
prevented many bank closings. As a result of these measures the hoarding
withdrawals which had risen to over $250,000,000 per week after the British
crisis have substantially ceased.

FURTHER MEASURES

The major economic forces and weaknesses at home and abroad have now been
exposed and can be appraised, and the time is ripe for forward action to
expedite our recovery.

Although some of the causes of our depression are due to speculation,
inflation of securities and real estate, unsound foreign investments, and
mismanagement of financial institutions, yet our self-contained national
economy, with its matchless strength and resources, would have enabled us
to recover long since but for the continued dislocations, shocks, and
setbacks from abroad.

Whatever the causes may be, the vast liquidation and readjustments which
have taken place have left us with a large degree of credit paralysis,
which together with the situation in our railways and the conditions
abroad, are now the outstanding obstacles to recuperation. If we can put
our financial resources to work and can ameliorate the financial situation
in the railways, I am confident we can make a large measure of recovery
independent of the rest of the world. A strong America is the highest
contribution to world stability.

One phase of the credit situation is indicated in the banks. During the
past year banks, representing 3 per cent of our total deposits have been
closed. A large part of these failures have been caused by withdrawals for
hoarding, as distinguished from the failures early in the depression where
weakness due to mismanagement was the larger cause of failure. Despite
their closing, many of them will pay in full. Although such withdrawals
have practically ceased, yet $1,100,000,000 of currency was previously
withdrawn which has still to return to circulation. This represents a large
reduction of the ability of our banks to extend credit which would
otherwise fertilize industry and agriculture. Furthermore, many of our
bankers, in order to prepare themselves to meet possible withdrawals, have
felt compelled to call in loans, to refuse new credits, and to realize upon
securities, which in turn has demoralized the markets. The paralysis has
been further augmented by the steady increase in recent years of the
proportion of bank assets invested in long-term securities, such as
mortgages and bonds. These securities tend to lose their liquidity in
depression or temporarily to fall in value so that the ability of the banks
to meet the shock of sudden withdrawal is greatly lessened and the
restriction of all kinds of credit is thereby increased. The continuing
credit paralysis has operated to accentuate the deflation and liquidation
of commodities, real estate, and securities below any reasonable basis of
values.

All of this tends to stifle business, especially the smaller units, and
finally expresses itself in further depression of prices and values, in
restriction on new enterprise, and in increased unemployment.

The situation largely arises from an unjustified lack of confidence. We
have enormous volumes of idle money in the banks and in hoarding. We do not
require more money or working capital--we need to put what we have to
work.

The fundamental difficulties which have brought about financial strains in
foreign countries do not exist in the United States. No external drain on
our resources can threaten our position, because the balance of
international payments is in our favor; we owe less to foreign countries
than they owe to us; our industries are efficiently organized; our currency
and bank deposits are protected by the greatest gold reserve in history.

Our first step toward recovery is to reestablish confidence and thus
restore the flow of credit which is the very basis of our economic life. We
must put some steel beams in the foundations of our credit structure. It is
our duty to apply the full strength of our Government not only to the
immediate phases, but to provide security against shocks and the repetition
of the weaknesses which have been proven.

The recommendations which I here lay before the Congress are designed to
meet these needs by strengthening financial, industrial, and agricultural
life through the medium of our existing institutions, and thus to avoid the
entry of the Government into competition with private business.

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE

The first requirement of confidence and of economic recovery is financial
stability of the United States Government. I shall deal with fiscal
questions at greater length in the Budget message. But I must at this time
call attention to the magnitude of the deficits which have developed and
the resulting necessity for determined and courageous policies. These
deficits arise in the main from the heavy decrease in tax receipts due to
the depression and to the increase in expenditure on construction in aid to
unemployment, aids to agriculture, and upon services to veterans.

During the fiscal year ending June 30 last we incurred a deficit of about
$903,000,000, which included the statutory reduction of the debt and
represented an increase of the national debt by $616,000,000. Of this,
however, $153,000,000 is offset by increased cash balances.

In comparison with the fiscal year 1928 there is indicated a fall in
Federal receipts for the present fiscal year amounting to $1,683,000,000,
of which $1,034,000,000 is in individual and corporate income taxes alone.
During this fiscal year there will be an increased expenditure, as compared
to 1928, on veterans of $255,000,000, and an increased expenditure on
construction work which may reach $520,000,000. Despite large economies in
other directions, we have an indicated deficit, including the statutory
retirement of the debt, of $2,123,000,000, and an indicated net debt
increase of about $1,711,000,000.

The Budget for the fiscal year beginning July 1 next, after allowing for
some increase of taxes under the present laws and after allowing for
drastic reduction in expenditures, still indicates a deficit of
$1,417,000,000. After offsetting the statutory debt retirements this would
indicate an increase in the national debt for the fiscal year 1933 of about
$921,000,000.

Several conclusions are inevitable. We must have insistent and determined
reduction in Government expenses. We must face a temporary increase in
taxes. Such increase should not cover the whole of these deficits or it
will retard recovery. We must partially finance the deficit by borrowing.
It is my view that the amount of taxation should be fixed so as to balance
the Budget for 1933 except for the statutory debt retirement. Such
Government receipts would assure the balance of the following year's budget
including debt retirement. It is my further view that the additional
taxation should be imposed solely as an emergency measure terminating
definitely two years from July 1 next. Such a basis will give confidence in
the determination of the Government to stabilize its finance and will
assure taxpayers of its temporary character. Even with increased taxation,
the Government will reach the utmost safe limit of its borrowing capacity
by the expenditures for which we are already obligated and the
recommendations here proposed. To go further than these limits in either
expenditures, taxes, or borrowing will destroy confidence, denude commerce
and industry of its resources, jeopardize the financial system, and
actually extend unemployment and demoralize agriculture rather than relieve
it.

FEDERAL LAND BANKS

I recommend that the Congress authorize the subscription by the Treasury of
further capital to the Federal land banks to be retired as provided in the
original act, or when funds are available, and that repayments of such
capital be treated as a fund available for further subscriptions in the
same manner. It is urgent that the banks be supported so as to stabilize
the market values of their bonds and thus secure capital for the farmers at
low rates, that they may continue their services to agriculture and that
they may meet the present situation with consideration to the farmers.

DEPOSITS IN CLOSED BANKS

A method should be devised to make available quickly to depositors some
portion of their deposits in closed banks as the assets of such banks may
warrant. Such provision would go far to relieve distress in a multitude of
families, would stabilize values in many communities, and would liberate
working capital to thousands of concerns. I recommend that measures be
enacted promptly to accomplish these results and I suggest that the
Congress should consider the development of such a plan through the Federal
Reserve Banks.

HOME-LOAN DISCOUNT BANKS

I recommend the establishment of a system of home-loan discount banks as
the necessary companion in our financial structure of the Federal Reserve
Banks and our Federal Land Banks. Such action will relieve present
distressing pressures against home and farm property owners. It will
relieve pressures upon and give added strength to building and loan
associations, savings banks, and deposit banks, engaged in extending such
credits. Such action would further decentralize our credit structure. It
would revive residential construction and employment. It would enable such
loaning institutions more effectually to promote home ownership. I
discussed this plan at some length in a statement made public November 14,
last. This plan has been warmly indorsed by the recent National Conference
upon Home Ownership and Housing, whose members were designated by the
governors of the States and the groups interested.

RECONSTRUCTION FINANCE CORPORATION

In order that the public may be absolutely assured and that the Government
may be in position to meet any public necessity, I recommend that an
emergency Reconstruction Corporation of the nature of the former War
Finance Corporation should be established. It may not be necessary to use
such an instrumentality very extensively. The very existence of such a
bulwark will strengthen confidence. The Treasury should be authorized to
subscribe a reasonable capital to it, and it should be given authority to
issue its own debentures. It should be placed in liquidation at the end of
two years. Its purpose is that by strengthening the weak spots to thus
liberate the full strength of the Nation's resources. It should be in
position to facilitate exports by American agencies; make advances to
agricultural credit agencies where necessary to protect and aid the
agricultural industry; to make temporary advances upon proper securities to
established industries, railways, and financial institutions which can not
otherwise secure credit, and where such advances will protect the credit
structure and stimulate employment. Its functions would not overlap those
of the National Credit Corporation.

FEDERAL RESERVE ELIGIBILITY

On October 6th I issued a statement that I should recommend to the Congress
an extension during emergencies of the eligibility provisions in the
Federal reserve act. This statement was approved by a representative
gathering of the Members of both Houses of the Congress, including members
of the appropriate committees. It was approved by the officials of the
Treasury Department, and I understand such an extension has been approved
by a majority of the governors of the Federal reserve banks. Nothing should
be done which would lower the safeguards of the system.

The establishment of the mortgage-discount banks herein referred to will
also contribute to further reserve strength in the banks without
inflation.

BANKING LAWS

Our people have a right to a banking system in which their deposits shall
be safeguarded and the flow of credit less subject to storms. The need of a
sounder system is plainly shown by the extent of bank failures. I recommend
the prompt improvement of the banking laws. Changed financial conditions
and commercial practices must be met. The Congress should investigate the
need for separation between different kinds of banking; an enlargement of
branch banking under proper restrictions; and the methods by which enlarged
membership in the Federal reserve system may be brought about.

POSTAL SAVINGS BANKS

The Postal Savings deposits have increased from about $200,000,000 to about
$550,000,000 during the past year. This experience has raised important
practical questions in relation to deposits and investments which should
receive the attention of the Congress.

RAILWAYS

The railways present one of our immediate and pressing problems. They are
and must remain the backbone of our transportation system. Their prosperity
is interrelated with the prosperity of all industries. Their fundamental
service in transportation, the volume of their employment, their buying
power for supplies from other industries, the enormous investment in their
securities, particularly their bonds, by insurance companies, savings
banks, benevolent and other trusts, all reflect their partnership in the
whole economic fabric. Through these institutions the railway bonds are in
a large sense the investment of every family. The well-maintained and
successful operation and the stability of railway finances are of primary
importance to economic recovery. They should have more effective
opportunity to reduce operating costs by proper consolidation. As their
rates must be regulated in public interest, so also approximate regulation
should be applied to competing services by some authority. The methods of
their regulation should be revised. The Interstate Commerce Commission has
made important and far-reaching recommendations upon the whole subject,
which I commend to the early consideration of the Congress.

ANTITRUST LAWS

In my message of a year ago I commented on the necessity of congressional
inquiry into the economic action of the antitrust laws. There is wide
conviction that some change should be made especially in the procedure
under these laws. I do not favor their repeal. Such action would open wide
the door to price fixing, monopoly, and destruction of healthy competition.
Particular attention should be given to the industries rounded upon natural
resources, especially where destructive competition produces great wastes
of these resources and brings great hardships upon operators, employees,
and the public. In recent years there has been continued demoralization in
the bituminous coal, oil, and lumber industries. I again commend the matter
to the consideration of the Congress.

UNEMPLOYMENT

As an aid to unemployment the Federal Government is engaged in the greatest
program of public-building, harbor, flood-control, highway, waterway,
aviation, merchant and naval ship construction in all history. Our
expenditures on these works during this calendar year will reach about
$780,000,000 compared with $260,000,000 in 1928. Through this increased
construction, through the maintenance of a full complement of Federal
employees, and through services to veterans it is estimated that the
Federal taxpayer is now directly contributing to the livelihood of
10,000,000 of our citizens.

We must avoid burdens upon the Government which will create more
unemployment in private industry than can be gained by further expansion of
employment by the Federal Government. We can now stimulate employment and
agriculture more effectually and speedily through the voluntary measures in
progress, through the thawing out of credit, through the building up of
stability abroad, through the home loan discount banks, through an
emergency finance corporation and the rehabilitation of the railways and
other such directions.

I am opposed to any direct or indirect Government dole. The breakdown and
increased unemployment in Europe is due in part to such practices. Our
people are providing against distress from unemployment in true American
fashion by a magnificent response to public appeal and by action of the
local governments.

GENERAL LEGISLATION

There are many other subjects requiring legislative action at this session
of the Congress. I may list the following among them:

VETERANS' SERVICES

The law enacted last March authorizing loans of 50 per cent upon
adjusted-service certificates has, together with the loans made under
previous laws, resulted in payments of about $1,260,000,000. Appropriations
have been exhausted. The Administrator of Veterans' Affairs advises that a
further appropriation of $200,000,000 is required at once to meet the
obligations made necessary by existing legislation.

There will be demands for further veterans' legislation; there are
inequalities in our system of veterans' relief; it is our national duty to
meet our obligations to those who have served the Nation. But our present
expenditure upon these services now exceeds $1,000,000,000 per annum. I am
opposed to any extension of these expenditures until the country has
recovered from the present situation.

ELECTRICAL-POWER REGULATION

I have recommended in previous messages the effective regulation of
interstate electrical power as the essential function of the reorganized
Federal Power Commission. I renew the recommendation. It is urgently needed
in public protection.

MUSCLE SHOALS

At my suggestion, the Governors and Legislatures of Alabama and Tennessee
selected three members each for service on a committee to which I appointed
a representative of the farm organizations and two representatives of the
War Department for the purpose of recommending a plan for the disposal of
these properties which would be in the interest of the people of those
States and the agricultural industry throughout the country. I shall
transmit the recommendations to the Congress.

REORGANIZATION OF FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS

I have referred in previous messages to the profound need of further
reorganization and consolidation of Federal administrative functions to
eliminate overlap and waste, and to enable coordination and definition of
Government policies now wholly impossible in scattered and conflicting
agencies which deal with parts of the same major function. I shall lay
before the Congress further recommendations upon this subject, particularly
in relation to the Department of the Interior. There are two directions of
such reorganization, however, which have an important bearing upon the
emergency problems with which we are confronted.

SHIPPING BOARD

At present the Shipping Board exercises large administrative functions
independent of the Executive. These administrative functions should be
transferred to the Department of Commerce, in keeping with that single
responsibility which has been the basis of our governmental structure since
its foundation. There should be created in that department a position of
Assistant Secretary for Merchant Marine, under whom this work and the
several bureaus having to do with merchant marine may be grouped.

The Shipping Board should be made a regulatory body acting also in advisory
capacity on loans and policies, in keeping with its original conception.
Its regulatory powers should be amended to include regulation of coastwise
shipping so as to assure stability and better service. It is also worthy of
consideration that the regulation of rates and services upon the inland
waterways should be assigned to such a reorganized board.

REORGANIZATION OF PUBLIC WORKS ADMINISTRATION

I recommend that all building and construction activities of the Government
now carried on by many departments be consolidated into an independent
establishment under the President to be known as the "Public Works
Administration" directed by a Public Works Administrator. This agency
should undertake all construction work in service to the different
departments of the Government (except naval and military work). The
services of the Corps of Army Engineers should be delegated in rotation for
military duty to this administration in continuation of their supervision
of river and harbor work. Great economies, sounder policies, more effective
coordination to employment, and expedition in all construction work would
result from this consolidation.

LAW ENFORCEMENT

I shall present some recommendations in a special message looking to the
strengthening of criminal-law enforcement and improvement in judicial
procedure connected therewith.

INLAND WATERWAY AND HARBOR IMPROVEMENT

These improvements are now proceeding upon an unprecedented scale. Some
indication of the volume of work in progress is conveyed by the fact that
during the current year over 380,000,000 cubic yards of material have been
moved--an amount equal to the entire removal in the construction of the
Panama Canal. The Mississippi waterway system, connecting Chicago, Kansas
City, Pittsburgh, and New Orleans, will be in full operation during 1933.
Substantial progress is being made upon the projects of the upper Missouri,
upper Mississippi, etc.

Negotiations are now in progress with Canada for the construction of the
St. Lawrence Waterway.

THE TARIFF

Wages and standards of living abroad have been materially lowered during
the past year. The temporary abandonment of the gold standard by certain
countries has also reduced their production costs compared to ours.
Fortunately any increases in the tariff which may be necessary to protect
agriculture and industry from these lowered foreign costs, or decreases in
items which may prove to be excessive, may be undertaken at any time by the
Tariff Commission under authority which it possesses by virtue of the
tariff act of 1930. The commission during the past year has reviewed the
rates upon over 254 items subject to tariff. As a result of vigorous and
industrious action, it is up to date in the consideration of pending
references and is prepared to give prompt attention to any further
applications. This procedure presents an orderly method for correcting
inequalities. I am opposed to any general congressional revision of the
tariff. Such action would disturb industry, business, and agriculture. It
would prolong the depression.

IMMIGRATION AND DEPORTATION

I recommend that immigration restriction now in force under administrative
action be placed upon a more definite basis by law. The deportation laws
should be strengthened. Aliens lawfully in the country should be protected
by the issuance of a certificate of residence.

PUBLIC HEALTH

I again call attention to my previous recommendations upon this subject,
particularly in its relation to children. The moral results are of the
utmost importance.

CONCLUSION

It is inevitable that in these times much of the legislation proposed to
the Congress and many of the recommendations of the Executive must be
designed to meet emergencies. In reaching solutions we must not jeopardize
those principles which we have found to be the basis of the growth of the
Nation. The Federal Government must not encroach upon nor permit local
communities to abandon that precious possession of local initiative and
responsibility. Again, just as the largest measure of responsibility in the
government of the Nation rests upon local self-government, so does the
largest measure of social responsibility in our country rest upon the
individual. If the individual surrenders his own initiative and
responsibilities, he is surrendering his own freedom and his own liberty.
It is the duty of the National Government to insist that both the local
governments and the individual shall assume and bear these responsibilities
as a fundamental of preserving the very basis of our freedom.

Many vital changes and movements of vast proportions are taking place in
the economic world. The effect of these changes upon the future can not be
seen clearly as yet. Of this, however, we are sure: Our system, based upon
the ideals of individual initiative and of equality of opportunity, is not
an artificial thing. Rather it is the outgrowth of the experience of
America, and expresses the faith and spirit of our people. It has carried
us in a century and a half to leadership of the economic world. If our
economic system does not match our highest expectations at all times, it
does not require revolutionary action to bring it into accord with any
necessity that experience may prove. It has successfully adjusted itself to
changing conditions in the past. It will do so again. The mobility of our
institutions, the richness of our resources, and the abilities of our
people enable us to meet them unafraid. It is a distressful time for many
of our people, but they have shown qualities as high in fortitude, courage,
and resourcefulness as ever in our history. With that spirit, I have faith
that out of it will come a sounder life, a truer standard of values, a
greater recognition of the results of honest effort, and a healthier
atmosphere in which to rear our children. Ours must be a country of such
stability and security as can not fail to carry forward and enlarge among
all the people that abundant life of material and spiritual opportunity
which it has represented among all nations since its beginning.

The White House,

December 8, 1931

***

State of the Union Address
Herbert Hoover
December 6, 1932

To the Senate and House of Representatives:

In accord with my constitutional duty, I transmit herewith to the Congress
information upon the state of the Union together with recommendation of
measures for its consideration.

Our country is at peace. Our national defense has been maintained at a high
state of effectiveness. All of the executive departments of the Government
have been conducted during the year with a high devotion to public
interest. There has been a far larger degree of freedom from industrial
conflict than hitherto known. Education and science have made further
advances. The public health is to-day at its highest known level. While we
have recently engaged in the aggressive contest of a national election, its
very tranquillity and the acceptance of its results furnish abundant proof
of the strength of our institutions.

In the face of widespread hardship our people have demonstrated daily a
magnificent sense of humanity, of individual and community responsibility
for the welfare of the less fortunate. They have grown in their conceptions
and organization for cooperative action for the common welfare.

In the provision against distress during this winter, the great private
agencies of the country have been mobilized again; the generosity of our
people has again come into evidence to a degree in which all America may
take great pride. Likewise the local authorities and the States are engaged
everywhere in supplemental measures of relief. The provisions made for
loans from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, to States that have
exhausted their own resources, guarantee that there should be no hunger or
suffering from cold in the country. The large majority of States are
showing a sturdy cooperation in the spirit of the Federal aid.

The Surgeon General, in charge of the Public Health Service, furnishes me
with the following information upon the state of public health:

MORTALITY RATE PER 1,000 OF POPULATION ON AN ANNUAL BASIS FROM
REPRESENTATIVE STATES - General - Infant

First 9 months of-- - -

1928 - 11.9 - 67.8

1929 - 12.0 - 65.8

1930 - 11.4 - 62.0

1931 - 11.2 - 60.0

1932 - 10.6 - 55.0

The sickness rates from data available show the same trends. These facts
indicate the fine endeavor of the agencies which have been mobilized for
care of those in distress.

ECONOMIC SITUATION

The unparalleled world-wide economic depression has continued through the
year. Due to the European collapse, the situation developed during last
fall and winter into a series of most acute crises. The unprecedented
emergency measures enacted and policies adopted undoubtedly saved the
country from economic disaster. After serving to defend the national
security, these measures began in July to show their weight and influence
toward improvement of conditions in many parts of the country. The
following tables of current business indicators show the general economic
movement during the past eleven months.

MONTHLY BUSINESS INDICES WITH SEASONAL VARIATIONS ELIMINATED

Year and Month - Industrial Production - Factory Employment - Freight-car
loadings - Department Store sales, value - Exports, value - Imports, value
- Building Contracts, all types - Industrial Electric power consumption

1931 - - - - - - - -

December - 74 - 69.4 - 69 - 81 - 46 - 48 - 38 - 89.1

1932 - - - - - - - -

January - 72 - 68.1 - 64 - 78 - 39 - 42 - 31 - 93.9

February - 69 - 67.8 - 62 - 78 - 45 - 41 - 27 - 98.8

March - 67 - 66.4 - 61 - 72 - 41 - 37 - 26 - 88.0

April - 63 - 64.3 - 59 - 80 - 38 - 36 - 27 - 82.2

May - 60 - 62.1 - 54 - 73 - 37 - 34 - 26 - 82.0

June - 59 - 60.0 - 52 - 71 - 34 - 36 - 27 - 78.1

July - 58 - 58.3 - 51 - 67 - 32 - 27 - 27 - 79.2

August - 60 - 58.8 - 51 - 66 - 31 - 29 - 30 - 73.5

September - 66 - 60.3 - 54 - 70 - 33 - 32 - 30 - 84.0

October - 66 - 61.1 - 57 - 70 - 33 - 32 - 29 - 84.4

The measures and policies which have procured this turn toward recovery
should be continued until the depression is passed, and then the emergency
agencies should be promptly liquidated. The expansion of credit facilities
by the Federal Reserve System and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
has been of incalculable value. The loans of the latter for reproductive
works, and to railways for the creation of employment; its support of the
credit structure through loans to banks, insurance companies, railways,
building and loan associations, and to agriculture has protected the
savings and insurance policies of millions of our citizens and has relieved
millions of borrowers from duress; they have enabled industry and business
to function and expand. The assistance given to Farm Loan Banks, the
establishment of the Home Loan Banks and Agricultural Credit
Associations--all in their various ramifications have placed large sums of
money at the disposal of the people in protection and aid. Beyond this, the
extensive organization of the country in voluntary action has produced
profound results.

The following table indicates direct expenditures of the Federal Government
in aid to unemployment, agriculture, and financial relief over the past
four years. The sums applied to financial relief multiply themselves many
fold, being in considerable measure the initial capital supplied to the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation, Farm Loan Banks, etc., which will be
recovered to the Treasury.

- Public works (1) - Agricultural relief and financial loans

Fiscal year ending June 30 - -

1930 - $410,420,000 - $156,100,000

1931 - 574,870,000 - 196,700,000

1932 - 655,880,000 - 772,700,000

1933 - 717,260,000 - 52,000,000 -

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 3, 1934

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Senators and Representatives in Congress:

I come before you at the opening of the Regular Session of the 73d
Congress, not to make requests for special or detailed items of
legislation; I come, rather, to counsel with you, who, like myself, have
been selected to carry out a mandate of the whole people, in order that
without partisanship you and I may cooperate to continue the restoration of
our national wellbeing and, equally important, to build on the ruins of the
past a new structure designed better to meet the present problems of modern
civilization.

Such a structure includes not only the relations of industry and
agriculture and finance to each other but also the effect which all of
these three have on our individual citizens and on the whole people as a
Nation.

Now that we are definitely in the process of recovery, lines have been
rightly drawn between those to whom this recovery means a return to old
methods--and the number of these people is small--and those for whom
recovery means a reform of many old methods, a permanent readjustment of
many of our ways of thinking and therefore of many of our social and
economic arrangements. . . . .

Civilization cannot go back; civilization must not stand still. We have
undertaken new methods. It is our task to perfect, to improve, to alter
when necessary, but in all cases to go forward. To consolidate what we are
doing, to make our economic and social structure capable of dealing with
modern life is the joint task of the legislative, the judicial, and the
executive branches of the national Government.

Without regard to party, the overwhelming majority of our people seek a
greater opportunity for humanity to prosper and find happiness. They
recognize that human welfare has not increased and does not increase
through mere materialism and luxury, but that it does progress through
integrity, unselfishness, responsibility and justice.

In the past few months, as a result of our action, we have demanded of many
citizens that they surrender certain licenses to do as they please in
their business relationships; but we have asked this in exchange for the
protection which the State can give against exploitation by their fellow
men or by combinations of their fellow men.

I congratulate this Congress upon the courage, the earnestness and the
efficiency with which you met the crisis at the Special Session. It was
your fine understanding of the national problem that furnished the example
which the country has so splendidly followed. I venture to say that the
task confronting the First Congress of 1789 was no greater than your own.

I shall not attempt to set forth either the many phases of the crisis which
we experienced last March, or the many measures which you and I undertook
during the Special Session that we might initiate recovery and reform.

It is sufficient that I should speak in broad terms of the results of our
common counsel. The credit of the Government has been fortified by drastic
reduction in the cost of its permanent agencies through the Economy Act.

With the twofold purpose of strengthening the whole financial structure and
of arriving eventually at a medium of exchange which over the years will
have less variable purchasing and debt paying power for our people than
that of the past, I have used the authority granted me to purchase all
American-produced gold and silver and to buy additional gold in the world
markets. Careful investigation and constant study prove that in the matter
of foreign exchange rates certain of our sister Nations find themselves so
handicapped by internal and other conditions that they feel unable at this
time to enter into stabilization discussion based on permanent and
world-wide objectives.

The overwhelming majority of the banks, both national and State, which
reopened last spring, are in sound condition and have been brought within
the protection of Federal insurance. In the case of those banks which were
not permitted to reopen, nearly six hundred million dollars of frozen
deposits are being restored to the depositors through the assistance of the
national Government.

We have made great strides toward the objectives of the National Industrial
Recovery Act, for not only have several millions of our unemployed been
restored to work, but industry is organizing itself with a greater
understanding that reasonable profits can be earned while at the same time
protection can be assured to guarantee to labor adequate pay and proper
conditions of work. Child labor is abolished. Uniform standards of hours
and wages apply today to 95 percent of industrial employment within the
field of the National Industrial Recovery Act. We seek the definite end of
preventing combinations in furtherance of monopoly and in restraint of
trade, while at the same time we seek to prevent ruinous rivalries within
industrial groups which in many cases resemble the gang wars of the
underworld and in which the real victim in every case is the public
itself.

Under the authority of this Congress, we have brought the component parts
of each industry together around a common table, just as we have brought
problems affecting labor to a common meeting ground. Though the machinery,
hurriedly devised, may need readjustment from time to time, nevertheless I
think you will agree with me that we have created a permanent feature of
our modernized industrial structure and that it will continue under the
supervision but not the arbitrary dictation of Government itself.

You recognized last spring that the most serious part of the debt burden
affected those who stood in danger of losing their farms and their homes. I
am glad to tell you that refinancing in both of these cases is proceeding
with good success and in all probability within the financial limits set by
the Congress.

But agriculture had suffered from more than its debts. Actual experience
with the operation of the Agricultural Adjustment Act leads to my belief
that thus far the experiment of seeking a balance between production and
consumption is succeeding and has made progress entirely in line with
reasonable expectations toward the restoration of farm prices to parity. I
continue in my conviction that industrial progress and prosperity can only
be attained by bringing the purchasing power of that portion of our
population which in one form or another is dependent upon agriculture up to
a level which will restore a proper balance between every section of the
country and between every form of work.

In this field, through carefully planned flood control, power development
and land-use policies in the Tennessee Valley and in other, great
watersheds, we are seeking the elimination of waste, the removal of poor
lands from agriculture and the encouragement of small local industries,
thus furthering this principle of a better balanced national life. We
recognize the great ultimate cost of the application of this rounded policy
to every part off the Union. Today we are creating heavy obligations to
start the work because of the great unemployment needs of the moment. I
look forward, however, to the time in the not distant future, when annual
appropriations, wholly covered by current revenue, will enable the work to
proceed under a national plan. Such a national plan will, in a generation
or two, return many times the money spent on it; more important, it will
eliminate the use of inefficient tools, conserve and increase natural
resources, prevent waste, and enable millions of our people to take better
advantage of the opportunities which God has given our country.

I cannot, unfortunately, present to you a picture of complete optimism
regarding world affairs.

The delegation representing the United States has worked in close
cooperation with the other American Republics assembled at Montevideo to
make that conference an outstanding success. We have, I hope, made it clear
to our neighbors that we seek with them future avoidance of territorial
expansion and of interference by one Nation in the internal affairs of
another. Furthermore, all of us are seeking the restoration of commerce in
ways which will preclude the building up of large favorable trade balances
by any one Nation at the expense of trade debits on the part of other
Nations.

In other parts of the world, however, fear of immediate or future
aggression and with it the spending of vast sums on armament and the
continued building up of defensive trade barriers prevent any great
progress in peace or trade agreements. I have made it clear that the United
States cannot take part in political arrangements in Europe but that we
stand ready to cooperate at any time in practicable measures on a world
basis looking to immediate reduction of armaments and the lowering of the
barriers against commerce.

I expect to report to you later in regard to debts owed the Government and
people of this country by the Governments and peoples of other countries.
Several Nations, acknowledging the debt, have paid in small part; other
Nations have failed to pay. One Nation--Finland--has paid the installments
due this country in full.

Returning to home problems, we have been shocked by many notorious examples
of injuries done our citizens by persons or groups who have been living off
their neighbors by the use of methods either unethical or criminal.

In the first category--a field which does not involve violations of the
letter of our laws--practices have been brought to light which have shocked
those who believed that we were in the past generation raising the ethical
standards of business. They call for stringent preventive or regulatory
measures. I am speaking of those individuals who have evaded the spirit and
purpose of our tax laws, of those high officials of banks or corporations
who have grown rich at the expense of their stockholders or the public, of
those reckless speculators with their own or other people's money whose
operations have injured the values of the farmers' crops and the savings
of the poor.

In the other category, crimes of organized banditry, coldblooded shooting,
lynching and kidnapping have threatened our security.

These violations of ethics and these violations of law call on the strong
arm of Government for their immediate suppression; they call also on the
country for an aroused public opinion.

The adoption of the Twenty-first Amendment should give material aid to the
elimination of those new forms of crime which came from the illegal traffic
in liquor.

I shall continue to regard it as my duty to use whatever means may be
necessary to supplement State, local and private agencies for the relief of
suffering caused by unemployment. With respect to this question, I have
recognized the dangers inherent in the direct giving of relief and have
sought the means to provide not mere relief, but the opportunity for useful
and remunerative work. We shall, in the process of recovery, seek to move
as rapidly as possible from direct relief to publicly supported work and
from that to the rapid restoration of private employment.

It is to the eternal credit of the American people that this tremendous
readjustment of our national life is being accomplished peacefully, without
serious dislocation, with only a minimum of injustice and with a great,
willing spirit of cooperation throughout the country.

Disorder is not an American habit. Self-help and self-control are the
essence of the American tradition--not of necessity the form of that
tradition, but its spirit. The program itself comes from the American
people.

It is an integrated program, national in scope. Viewed in the large, it is
designed to save from destruction and to keep for the future the genuinely
important values created by modern society. The vicious and wasteful parts
of that society we could not save if we wished; they have chosen the way of
self-destruction. We would save useful mechanical invention, machine
production, industrial efficiency, modern means of communication, broad
education. We would save and encourage the slowly growing impulse among
consumers to enter the industrial market place equipped with sufficient
organization to insist upon fair prices and honest sales.

But the unnecessary expansion of industrial plants, the waste of natural
resources, the exploitation of the consumers of natural monopolies, the
accumulation of stagnant surpluses, child labor, and the ruthless
exploitation of all labor, the encouragement of speculation with other
people's money, these were consumed in the fires that they themselves
kindled; we must make sure that as we reconstruct our life there be no soil
in which such weeds can grow again.

We have plowed the furrow and planted the good seed; the hard beginning is
over. If we would reap the full harvest, we must cultivate the soil where
this good seed is sprouting and the plant is reaching up to mature growth.

A final personal word. I know that each of you will appreciate that. I am
speaking no mere politeness when I assure you how much I value the fine
relationship that we have shared during these months of hard and incessant
work. Out of these friendly contacts we are, fortunately, building a strong
and permanent tie between the legislative and executive branches of the
Government. The letter of the Constitution wisely declared a separation,
but the impulse of common purpose declares a union. In this spirit we join
once more in serving the American people.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 7, 1943

Mr. Vice President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Seventy-eighth Congress:

This Seventy-eighth Congress assembles in one of the great moments in the
history of the Nation. The past year was perhaps the most crucial for
modern civilization; the coming year will be filled with violent conflicts--
yet with high promise of better things.

We must appraise the events of 1942 according to their relative importance;
we must exercise a sense of proportion.

First in importance in the American scene has been the inspiring proof of
the great qualities of our fighting men. They have demonstrated these
qualities in adversity as well as in victory. As long as our flag flies
over this Capitol, Americans will honor the soldiers, sailors, and marines
who fought our first battles of this war against overwhelming odds the
heroes, living and dead, of Wake and Bataan and Guadalcanal, of the Java
Sea and Midway and the North Atlantic convoys. Their unconquerable spirit
will live forever.

By far the largest and most important developments in the whole world-wide
strategic picture of 1942 were the events of the long fronts in Russia:
first, the implacable defense of Stalingrad; and, second, the offensives by
the Russian armies at various points that started in the latter part of
November and which still roll on with great force and effectiveness.

The other major events of the year were: the series of Japanese advances in
the Philippines, the East Indies, Malaya, and Burma; the stopping of that
Japanese advance in the mid-Pacific, the South Pacific, and the Indian
Oceans; the successful defense of the Near East by the British
counterattack through Egypt and Libya; the American-British occupation of
North Africa. Of continuing importance in the year 1942 were the unending
and bitterly contested battles of the convoy routes, and the gradual
passing of air superiority from the Axis to the United Nations.

The Axis powers knew that they must win the war in 1942--or eventually lose
everything. I do not need to tell you that our enemies did not win the war
in 1942.

In the Pacific area, our most important victory in 1942 was the air and
naval battle off Midway Island. That action is historically important
because it secured for our use communication lines stretching thousands of
miles in every direction. In placing this emphasis on the Battle of Midway,
I am not unmindful of other successful actions in the Pacific, in the air
and on land and afloat--especially those on the Coral Sea and New Guinea
and in the Solomon Islands. But these actions were essentially defensive.
They were part of the delaying strategy that characterized this phase of
the war.

During this period we inflicted steady losses upon the enemy--great losses
of Japanese planes and naval vessels, transports and cargo ships. As early
as one year ago, we set as a primary task in the war of the Pacific a
day-by-day and week-by-week and month-by-month destruction of more Japanese
war materials than Japanese industry could replace. Most certainly, that
task has been and is being performed by our fighting ships and planes. And
a large part of this task has been accomplished by the gallant crews of our
American submarines who strike on the other side of the Pacific at Japanese
ships--right up at the very mouth of the harbor of Yokohama.

We know that as each day goes by, Japanese strength in ships and planes is
going down and down, and American strength in ships and planes is going up
and up. And so I sometimes feel that the eventual outcome can now be put on
a mathematical basis. That will become evident to the Japanese people
themselves when we strike at their own home islands, and bomb them
constantly from the air.

And in the attacks against Japan, we shall be joined with the heroic people
of China--that great people whose ideals of peace are so closely akin to our
own. Even today we are flying as much lend-lease material into China as
ever traversed the Burma Road, flying it over mountains 17,000 feet high,
flying blind through sleet and snow. We shall overcome all the formidable
obstacles, and get the battle equipment into China to shatter the power of
our common enemy. From this war, China will realize the security, the
prosperity and the dignity, which Japan has sought so ruthlessly to
destroy.

The period of our defensive attrition in the Pacific is drawing to a close.
Now our aim is to force the Japanese to fight. Last year, we stopped them.
This year, we intend to advance.

Turning now to the European theater of war, during this past year it was
clear that our first task was to lessen the concentrated pressure on the
Russian front by compelling Germany to divert part of her manpower and
equipment to another theater of war. After months of secret planning and
preparation in the utmost detail, an enormous amphibious expedition was
embarked for French North Africa from the United States and the United
Kingdom in literally hundreds of ships. It reached its objectives with very
small losses, and has already produced an important effect upon the whole
situation of the war. It has opened to attack what Mr. Churchill well
described as "the under-belly of the Axis," and it has removed the always
dangerous threat of an Axis attack through West Africa against the South
Atlantic Ocean and the continent of South America itself.

The well-timed and splendidly executed offensive from Egypt by the British
Eighth Army was a part of the same major strategy of the United Nations.

Great rains and appalling mud and very limited communications have delayed
the final battles of Tunisia. The Axis is reinforcing its strong positions.
But I am confident that though the fighting will be tough, when the final
Allied assault is made, the last vestige of Axis power will be driven from
the whole of the south shores of the Mediterranean.

Any review of the year 1942 must emphasize the magnitude and the diversity
of the military activities in which this Nation has become engaged. As I
speak to you, approximately one and a half million of our soldiers,
sailors, marines, and fliers are in service outside of our continental
limits, all through the world. Our merchant seamen, in addition, are
carrying supplies to them and to our allies over every sea lane.

Few Americans realize the amazing growth of our air strength, though I am
sure our enemy does. Day in and day out our forces are bombing the enemy
and meeting him in combat on many different fronts in every part of the
world. And for those who question the quality of our aircraft and the
ability of our fliers, I point to the fact that, in Africa, we are shooting
down two enemy planes to every one we lose, and in the Pacific and the
Southwest Pacific we are shooting them down four to one.

We pay great tribute--the tribute of the United States of America--to the
fighting men of Russia and China and Britain and the various members of the
British Commonwealth--the millions of men who through the years of this war
have fought our common enemies, and have denied to them the world conquest
which they sought.

We pay tribute to the soldiers and fliers and seamen of others of the
United Nations whose countries have been overrun by Axis hordes.

As a result of the Allied occupation of North Africa, powerful units of the
French Army and Navy are going into action. They are in action with the
United Nations forces. We welcome them as allies and as friends. They join
with those Frenchmen who, since the dark days of June, 1940, have been
fighting valiantly for the liberation of their stricken country.

We pay tribute to the fighting leaders of our allies, to Winston Churchill,
to Joseph Stalin, and to the Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek. Yes, there is a
very great unanimity between the leaders of the United Nations. This unity
is effective in planning and carrying out the major strategy of this war
and in building up and in maintaining the lines of supplies.

I cannot prophesy. I cannot tell you when or where the United Nations are
going to strike next in Europe. But we are going to strike--and strike
hard. I cannot tell you whether we are going to hit them in Norway, or
through the Low Countries, or in France, or through Sardinia or Sicily, or
through the Balkans, or through Poland--or at several points
simultaneously. But I can tell you that no matter where and when we strike
by land, we and the British and the Russians will hit them from the air
heavily and relentlessly. Day in and day out we shall heap tons upon tons
of high explosives on their war factories and utilities and seaports.

Hitler and Mussolini will understand now the enormity of their
miscalculations--that the Nazis would always have the advantage of superior
air power as they did when they bombed Warsaw, and Rotterdam, and London
and Coventry. That superiority has gone--forever.

Yes, the Nazis and the Fascists have asked for it--and they are going to get
it.

Our forward progress in this war has depended upon our progress on the
production front.

There has been criticism of the management and conduct of our war
production. Much of this self-criticism has had a healthy effect. It has
spurred us on. It has reflected a normal American impatience to get on with
the job. We are the kind of people who are never quite satisfied with
anything short of miracles.

But there has been some criticism based on guesswork and even on malicious
falsification of fact. Such criticism creates doubts and creates fears, and
weakens our total effort.

I do not wish to suggest that we should be completely satisfied with our
production progress today, or next month, or ever. But I can report to you
with genuine pride on what has been accomplished in 1942.

A year ago we set certain production goals for 1942 and for 1943. Some
people, including some experts, thought that we had pulled some big figures
out of a hat just to frighten the Axis. But we had confidence in the
ability of our people to establish new records. And that confidence has
been justified.

Of course, we realized that some production objectives would have to be
changed--some of them adjusted upward, and others downward; some items
would be taken out of the program altogether, and others added. This was
inevitable as we gained battle experience, and as technological
improvements were made.

Our 1942 airplane production and tank production fell short,
numerically--stress the word numerically of the goals set a year ago.
Nevertheless, we have plenty of reason to be proud of our record for 1942.
We produced 48,000 military planes--more than the airplane production of
Germany, Italy, and Japan put together. Last month, in December, we
produced 5,500 military planes and the rate is rapidly rising. Furthermore,
we must remember that as each month passes by, the averages of our types
weigh more, take more man-hours to make, and have more striking power.

In tank production, we revised our schedule--and for good and sufficient
reasons. As a result of hard experience in battle, we have diverted a
portion of our tank-producing capacity to a stepped-up production of new,
deadly field weapons, especially self-propelled artillery.

Here are some other production figures:

In 1942, we produced 56,000 combat vehicles, such as tanks and
self-propelled artillery.

In 1942, we produced 670,000 machine guns, six times greater than our
production in 1941 and three times greater than our total production during
the year and a half of our participation in the first World War.

We produced 21,000 anti-tank guns, six times greater than our 1941
production.

We produced ten and a quarter billion rounds of small-arms ammunition, five
times greater than our 1941 production and three times greater than our
total production in the first World War.

We produced 181 million rounds of artillery ammunition, twelve times
greater than our 1941 production and ten times greater than our total
production in the first World War.

I think the arsenal of democracy is making good.

These facts and figures that I have given will give no great aid and
comfort to the enemy. On the contrary, I can imagine that they will give
him considerable discomfort. I suspect that Hitler and Tojo will find it
difficult to explain to the German and Japanese people just why it is that
"decadent, inefficient democracy" can produce such phenomenal quantities of
weapons and munitions--and fighting men.

We have given the lie to certain misconceptions--which is an extremely
polite word--especially the one which holds that the various blocs or
groups within a free country cannot forego their political and economic
differences in time of crisis and work together toward a common goal.

While we have been achieving this miracle of production, during the past
year our armed forces have grown from a little over 2,000,000 to 7,000,000.
In other words, we have withdrawn from the labor force and the farms some
5,000,000 of our younger workers. And in spite of this, our farmers have
contributed their share to the common effort by producing the greatest
quantity of food ever made available during a single year in all our
history.

I wonder is there any person among us so simple as to believe that all this
could have been done without creating some dislocations in our normal
national life, some inconveniences, and even some hardships?

Who can have hoped to have done this without burdensome Government
regulations which are a nuisance to everyone--including those who have the
thankless task of administering them?

We all know that there have been mistakes--mistakes due to the inevitable
process of trial and error inherent in doing big things for the first time.
We all know that there have been too many complicated forms and
questionnaires. I know about that. I have had to fill some of them out
myself.

But we are determined to see to it that our supplies of food and other
essential civilian goods are distributed on a fair and just basis--to rich
and poor, management and labor, farmer and city dweller alike. We are
determined to keep the cost of living at a stable level. All this has
required much information. These forms and questionnaires represent an
honest and sincere attempt by honest and sincere officials to obtain this
information.

We have learned by the mistakes that we have made.

Our experience will enable us during the coming year to improve the
necessary mechanisms of wartime economic controls, and to simplify
administrative procedures. But we do not intend to leave things so lax that
loopholes will be left for cheaters, for chiselers, or for the manipulators
of the black market.

Of course, there have been disturbances and inconveniences--and even
hardships. And there will be many, many more before we finally win. Yes,
1943 will not be an easy year for us on the home front. We shall feel in
many ways in our daily lives the sharp pinch of total war.

Fortunately, there are only a few Americans who place appetite above
patriotism. The overwhelming majority realize that the food we send abroad
is for essential military purposes, for our own and Allied fighting forces,
and for necessary help in areas that we occupy.

We Americans intend to do this great job together. In our common labors we
must build and fortify the very foundation of national unity--confidence in
one another.

It is often amusing, and it is sometimes politically profitable, to picture
the City of Washington as a madhouse, with the Congress and the
Administration disrupted with confusion and indecision and general
incompetence.

However--what matters most in war is results. And the one pertinent fact is
that after only a few years of preparation and only one year of warfare, we
are able to engage, spiritually as well as physically, in the total waging
of a total war.

Washington may be a madhouse--but only in the sense that it is the Capital
City of a Nation which is fighting mad. And I think that Berlin and Rome
and Tokyo, which had such contempt for the obsolete methods of democracy,
would now gladly use all they could get of that same brand of madness.

And we must not forget that our achievements in production have been
relatively no greater than those of the Russians and the British and the
Chinese who have developed their own war industries under the incredible
difficulties of battle conditions. They have had to continue work through
bombings and blackouts. And they have never quit.

We Americans are in good, brave company in this war, and we are playing our
own, honorable part in the vast common effort.

As spokesmen for the United States Government, you and I take off our hats
to those responsible for our American production--to the owners, managers,
and supervisors, to the draftsmen and the engineers, and to the workers--
men and women--in factories and arsenals and shipyards and mines and mills
and forests--and railroads and on highways.

We take off our hats to the farmers who have faced an unprecedented task of
feeding not only a great Nation but a great part of the world.

We take off our hats to all the loyal, anonymous, untiring men and women
who have worked in private employment and in Government and who have
endured rationing and other stringencies with good humor and good will.

Yes, we take off our hats to all Americans who have contributed so
magnificently to our common cause.

I have sought to emphasize a sense of proportion in this review of the
events of the war and the needs of the war.

We should never forget the things we are fighting for. But, at this
critical period of the war, we should confine ourselves to the larger
objectives and not get bogged down in argument over methods and details.

We, and all the United Nations, want a decent peace and a durable peace. In
the years between the end of the first World War and the beginning of the
second World War, we were not living under a decent or a durable peace.

I have reason to know that our boys at the front are concerned with two
broad aims beyond the winning of the war; and their thinking and their
opinion coincide with what most Americans here back home are mulling over.
They know, and we know, that it would be inconceivable--it would, indeed, be
sacrilegious--if this Nation and the world did not attain some real,
lasting good out of all these efforts and sufferings and bloodshed and
death.

The men in our armed forces want a lasting peace, and, equally, they want
permanent employment for themselves, their families, and their neighbors
when they are mustered out at the end of the war.

Two years ago I spoke in my Annual Message of four freedoms. The blessings
of two of them--freedom of speech and freedom of religion--are an essential
part of the very life of this Nation; and we hope that these blessings will
be granted to all men everywhere.

'The people at home, and the people at the front, are wondering a little
about the third freedom--freedom from want. To them it means that when they
are mustered out, when war production is converted to the economy of peace,
they will have the right to expect full employment--full employment for
themselves and for all able-bodied men and women in America who want to
work.

They expect the opportunity to work, to run their farms, their stores, to
earn decent wages. They are eager to face the risks inherent in our system
of free enterprise.

They do not want a postwar America which suffers from undernourishment or
slums--or the dole. They want no get-rich-quick era of bogus "prosperity"
which will end for them in selling apples on a street corner, as happened
after the bursting of the boom in 1929.

When you talk with our young men and our young women, you will find they
want to work for themselves and for their families; they consider that they
have the right to work; and they know that after the last war their fathers
did not gain that right.

When you talk with our young men and women, you will find that with the
opportunity for employment they want assurance against the evils of all
major economic hazards--assurance that will extend from the cradle to the
grave. And this great Government can and must provide this assurance.

I have been told that this is no time to speak of a better America after
the war. I am told it is a grave error on my part.

I dissent.

And if the security of the individual citizen, or the family, should become
a subject of national debate, the country knows where I stand.

I say this now to this Seventy-eighth Congress, because it is wholly
possible that freedom from want--the right of employment, the right of
assurance against life's hazards--will loom very large as a task of America
during the coming two years.

I trust it will not be regarded as an issue--but rather as a task for all of
us to study sympathetically, to work out with a constant regard for the
attainment of the objective, with fairness to all and with injustice to
none.

In this war of survival we must keep before our minds not only the evil
things we fight against but the good things we are fighting for. We fight
to retain a great past--and we fight to gain a greater future.

Let us remember, too, that economic safety for the America of the future is
threatened unless a greater economic stability comes to the rest of the
world. We cannot make America an island in either a military or an economic
sense. Hitlerism, like any other form of crime or disease, can grow from
the evil seeds of economic as well as military feudalism.

Victory in this war is the first and greatest goal before us. Victory in
the peace is the next. That means striving toward the enlargement of the
security of man here and throughout the world--and, finally, striving for
the fourth freedom--freedom from fear.

It is of little account for any of us to talk of essential human needs, of
attaining security, if we run the risk of another World War in ten or
twenty or fifty years. That is just plain common sense. Wars grow in size,
in death and destruction, and in the inevitability of engulfing all
Nations, in inverse ratio to the shrinking size of the world as a result of
the conquest of the air. I shudder to think of what will happen to
humanity, including ourselves, if this war ends in an inconclusive peace,
and another war breaks out when the babies of today have grown to fighting
age.

Every normal American prays that neither he nor his sons nor his grandsons
will be compelled to go through this horror again.

Undoubtedly a few Americans, even now, think that this Nation can end this
war comfortably and then climb back into an American hole and pull the hole
in after them.

But we have learned that we can never dig a hole so deep that it would be
safe against predatory animals. We have also learned that if we do not pull
the fangs of the predatory animals of this world, they will multiply and
grow in strength--and they will be at our throats again once more in a
short generation.

Most Americans realize more clearly than ever before that modern war
equipment in the hands of aggressor Nations can bring danger overnight to
our own national existence or to that of any other Nation--or island--or
continent.

It is clear to us that if Germany and Italy and Japan--or any one of them--
remain armed at the end of this war, or are permitted to rearm, they will
again, and inevitably, embark upon an ambitious career of world conquest.
They must be disarmed and kept disarmed, and they must abandon the
philosophy, and the teaching of that philosophy, which has brought so much
suffering to the world.

After the first World War we tried to achieve a formula for permanent
peace, based on a magnificent idealism. We failed. But, by our failure, we
have learned that we cannot maintain peace at this stage of human
development by good intentions alone.

Today the United Nations are the mightiest military coalition in all
history. They represent an overwhelming majority of the population of the
world. Bound together in solemn agreement that they themselves will not
commit acts of aggression or conquest against any of their neighbors, the
United Nations can and must remain united for the maintenance of peace by
preventing any attempt to rearm in Germany, in Japan, in Italy, or in any
other Nation which seeks to violate the Tenth Commandment--"Thou shalt not
covet."

There are cynics, there are skeptics who say it cannot be done. The
American people and all the freedom-loving peoples of this earth are now
demanding that it must be done. And the will of these people shall
prevail.

The very philosophy of the Axis powers is based on a profound contempt for
the human race. If, in the formation of our future policy, we were guided
by the same cynical contempt, then we should be surrendering to the
philosophy of our enemies, and our victory would turn to defeat.

The issue of this war is the basic issue between those who believe in
mankind and those who do not--the ancient issue between those who put their
faith in the people and those who put their faith in dictators and tyrants.
There have always been those who did not believe in the people, who
attempted to block their forward movement across history, to force them
back to servility and suffering and silence.

The people have now gathered their strength. They are moving forward in
their might and power--and no force, no combination of forces, no trickery,
deceit, or violence, can stop them now. They see before them the hope of
the world--a decent, secure, peaceful life for men everywhere.

I do not prophesy when this war will end.

But I do believe that this year of 1943 will give to the United Nations a
very substantial advance along the roads that lead to Berlin and Rome and
Tokyo.

I tell you it is within the realm of possibility that this Seventy-eighth
Congress may have the historic privilege of helping greatly to save the
world from future fear.

Therefore, let us all have confidence, let us redouble our efforts.

A tremendous, costly, long-enduring task in peace as well as in war is
still ahead of us.

But, as we face that continuing task, we may know that the state of this
Nation is good--the heart of this Nation is sound--the spirit of this Nation
is strong--the faith of this Nation is eternal.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 11, 1944

To the Congress:

This Nation in the past two years has become an active partner in the
world's greatest war against human slavery.

We have joined with like-minded people in order to defend ourselves in a
world that has been gravely threatened with gangster rule.

But I do not think that any of us Americans can be content with mere
survival. Sacrifices that we and our allies are making impose upon us all a
sacred obligation to see to it that out of this war we and our children
will gain something better than mere survival.

We are united in determination that this war shall not be followed by
another interim which leads to new disaster--that we shall not repeat the
tragic errors of ostrich isolationism--that we shall not repeat the excesses
of the wild twenties when this Nation went for a joy ride on a roller
coaster which ended in a tragic crash.

When Mr. Hull went to Moscow in October, and when I went to Cairo and
Teheran in November, we knew that we were in agreement with our allies in
our common determination to fight and win this war. But there were many
vital questions concerning the future peace, and they were discussed in an
atmosphere of complete candor and harmony.

In the last war such discussions, such meetings, did not even begin until
the shooting had stopped and the delegates began to assemble at the peace
table. There had been no previous opportunities for man-to-man discussions
which lead to meetings of minds. The result was a peace which was not a
peace.

That was a mistake which we are not repeating in this war.

And right here I want to address a word or two to some suspicious souls who
are fearful that Mr. Hull or I have made "commitments" for the future which
might pledge this Nation to secret treaties, or to enacting the role of
Santa Claus.

To such suspicious souls--using a polite terminology--I wish to say that Mr.
Churchill, and Marshal Stalin, and Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek are all
thoroughly conversant with the provisions of our Constitution. And so is
Mr. Hull. And so am I.

Of course we made some commitments. We most certainly committed ourselves
to very large and very specific military plans which require the use of all
Allied forces to bring about the defeat of our enemies at the earliest
possible time.

But there were no secret treaties or political or financial commitments.

The one supreme objective for the future, which we discussed for each
Nation individually, and for all the United Nations, can be summed up in
one word: Security.

And that means not only physical security which provides safety from
attacks by aggressors. It means also economic security, social security,
moral security--in a family of Nations.

In the plain down-to-earth talks that I had with the Generalissimo and
Marshal Stalin and Prime Minister Churchill, it was abundantly clear that
they are all most deeply interested in the resumption of peaceful progress
by their own peoples--progress toward a better life. All our allies want
freedom to develop their lands and resources, to build up industry, to
increase education and individual opportunity, and to raise standards of
living.

All our allies have learned by bitter experience that real development will
not be possible if they are to be diverted from their purpose by repeated
wars--or even threats of war.

China and Russia are truly united with Britain and America in recognition
of this essential fact:

The best interests of each Nation, large and small, demand that all
freedom-loving Nations shall join together in a just and durable system of
peace. In the present world situation, evidenced by the actions of Germany,
Italy, and Japan, unquestioned military control over disturbers of the
peace is as necessary among Nations as it is among citizens in a community.
And an equally basic essential to peace is a decent standard of living for
all individual men and women and children in all Nations. Freedom from fear
is eternally linked with freedom from want.

There are people who burrow through our Nation like unseeing moles, and
attempt to spread the suspicion that if other Nations are encouraged to
raise their standards of living, our own American standard of living must
of necessity be depressed.

The fact is the very contrary. It has been shown time and again that if the
standard of living of any country goes up, so does its purchasing power--
and that such a rise encourages a better standard of living in neighboring
countries with whom it trades. That is just plain common sense--and it is
the kind of plain common sense that provided the basis for our discussions
at Moscow, Cairo, and Teheran.

Returning from my journeyings, I must confess to a sense of "let-down" when
I found many evidences of faulty perspective here in Washington. The faulty
perspective consists in overemphasizing lesser problems and thereby
underemphasizing the first and greatest problem.

The overwhelming majority of our people have met the demands of this war
with magnificent courage and understanding. They have accepted
inconveniences; they have accepted hardships; they have accepted tragic
sacrifices. And they are ready and eager to make whatever further
contributions are needed to win the war as quickly as possible--if only
they are given the chance to know what is required of them.

However, while the majority goes on about its great work without complaint,
a noisy minority maintains an uproar of demands for special favors for
special groups. There are pests who swarm through the lobbies of the
Congress and the cocktail bars of Washington, representing these special
groups as opposed to the basic interests of the Nation as a whole. They
have come to look upon the war primarily as a chance to make profits for
themselves at the expense of their neighbors--profits in money or in terms
of political or social preferment.

Such selfish agitation can be highly dangerous in wartime. It creates
confusion. It damages morale. It hampers our national effort. It muddies
the waters and therefore prolongs the war.

If we analyze American history impartially, we cannot escape the fact that
in our past we have not always forgotten individual and selfish and
partisan interests in time of war--we have not always been united in purpose
and direction. We cannot overlook the serious dissensions and the lack of
unity in our war of the Revolution, in our War of 1812, or in our War
Between the States, when the survival of the Union itself was at stake.

In the first World War we came closer to national unity than in any
previous war. But that war lasted only a year and a half, and increasing
signs of disunity began to appear during the final months of the conflict.

In this war, we have been compelled to learn how interdependent upon each
other are all groups and sections of the population of America.

Increased food costs, for example, will bring new demands for wage
increases from all war workers, which will in turn raise all prices of all
things including those things which the farmers themselves have to buy.
Increased wages or prices will each in turn produce the same results. They
all have a particularly disastrous result on all fixed income groups.

And I hope you will remember that all of us in this Government represent
the fixed income group just as much as we represent business owners,
workers, and farmers. This group of fixed income people includes: teachers,
clergy, policemen, firemen, widows and minors on fixed incomes, wives and
dependents of our soldiers and sailors, and old-age pensioners. They and
their families add up to one-quarter of our one hundred and thirty million
people. They have few or no high pressure representatives at the Capitol.
In a period of gross inflation they would be the worst sufferers.

If ever there was a time to subordinate individual or group selfishness to
the national good, that time is now. Disunity at home--bickerings,
self-seeking partisanship, stoppages of work, inflation, business as usual,
politics as usual, luxury as usual these are the influences which can
undermine the morale of the brave men ready to die at the front for us
here.

Those who are doing most of the complaining are not deliberately striving
to sabotage the national war effort. They are laboring under the delusion
that the time is past when we must make prodigious sacrifices--that the war
is already won and we can begin to slacken off. But the dangerous folly of
that point of view can be measured by the distance that separates our
troops from their ultimate objectives in Berlin and Tokyo--and by the sum of
all the perils that lie along the way.

Overconfidence and complacency are among our deadliest enemies. Last
spring--after notable victories at Stalingrad and in Tunisia and against the
U-boats on the high seas--overconfidence became so pronounced that war
production fell off. In two months, June and July, 1943, more than a
thousand airplanes that could have been made and should have been made were
not made. Those who failed to make them were not on strike. They were
merely saying, "The war's in the bag--so let's relax."

That attitude on the part of anyone--Government or management or labor--can
lengthen this war. It can kill American boys.

Let us remember the lessons of 1918. In the summer of that year the tide
turned in favor of the allies. But this Government did not relax. In fact,
our national effort was stepped up. In August, 1918, the draft age limits
were broadened from 21-31 to 18-45. The President called for "force to the
utmost," and his call was heeded. And in November, only three months later,
Germany surrendered.

That is the way to fight and win a war--all out--and not with half-an-eye on
the battlefronts abroad and the other eye-and-a-half on personal, selfish,
or political interests here at home.

Therefore, in order to concentrate all our energies and resources on
winning the war, and to maintain a fair and stable economy at home, I
recommend that the Congress adopt:

(1) A realistic tax law--which will tax all unreasonable profits, both
individual and corporate, and reduce the ultimate cost of the war to our
sons and daughters. The tax bill now under consideration by the Congress
does not begin to meet this test.

(2) A continuation of the law for the renegotiation of war contracts--which
will prevent exorbitant profits and assure fair prices to the Government.
For two long years I have pleaded with the Congress to take undue profits
out of war.

(3) A cost of food law--which will enable the Government (a) to place a
reasonable floor under the prices the farmer may expect for his production;
and (b) to place a ceiling on the prices a consumer will have to pay for
the food he buys. This should apply to necessities only; and will require
public funds to carry out. It will cost in appropriations about one percent
of the present annual cost of the war.

(4) Early reenactment of the stabilization statute of October, 1942. This
expires June 30, 1944, and if it is not extended well in advance, the
country might just as well expect price chaos by summer.

We cannot have stabilization by wishful thinking. We must take positive
action to maintain the integrity of the American dollar.

(5) A national service law--which, for the duration of the war, will
prevent strikes, and, with certain appropriate exceptions, will make
available for war production or for any other essential services every
able-bodied adult in this Nation.

These five measures together form a just and equitable whole. I would not
recommend a national service law unless the other laws were passed to keep
down the cost of living, to share equitably the burdens of taxation, to
hold the stabilization line, and to prevent undue profits.

The Federal Government already has the basic power to draft capital and
property of all kinds for war purposes on a basis of just compensation.

As you know, I have for three years hesitated to recommend a national
service act. Today, however, I am convinced of its necessity. Although I
believe that we and our allies can win the war without such a measure, I am
certain that nothing less than total mobilization of all our resources of
manpower and capital will guarantee an earlier victory, and reduce the toll
of suffering and sorrow and blood.

I have received a joint recommendation for this law from the heads of the
War Department, the Navy Department, and the Maritime Commission. These are
the men who bear responsibility for the procurement of the necessary arms
and equipment, and for the successful prosecution of the war in the field.
They say:

"When the very life of the Nation is in peril the responsibility for
service is common to all men and women. In such a time there can be no
discrimination between the men and women who are assigned by the Government
to its defense at the battlefront and the men and women assigned to
producing the vital materials essential to successful military operations.
A prompt enactment of a National Service Law would be merely an expression
of the universality of this responsibility."

I believe the country will agree that those statements are the solemn
truth.

National service is the most democratic way to wage a war. Like selective
service for the armed forces, it rests on the obligation of each citizen to
serve his Nation to his utmost where he is best qualified.

It does not mean reduction in wages. It does not mean loss of retirement
and seniority rights and benefits. It does not mean that any substantial
numbers of war workers will be disturbed in their present jobs. Let these
facts be wholly clear.

Experience in other democratic Nations at war--Britain, Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand--has shown that the very existence of national service
makes unnecessary the widespread use of compulsory power. National service
has proven to be a unifying moral force based on an equal and comprehensive
legal obligation of all people in a Nation at war.

There are millions of American men and women who are not in this war at
all. It is not because they do not want to be in it. But they want to know
where they can best do their share. National service provides that
direction. It will be a means by which every man and woman can find that
inner satisfaction which comes from making the fullest possible
contribution to victory.

I know that all civilian war workers will be glad to be able to say many
years hence to their grandchildren: "Yes, I, too, was in service in the
great war. I was on duty in an airplane factory, and I helped make hundreds
of fighting planes. The Government told me that in doing that I was
performing my most useful work in the service of my country."

It is argued that we have passed the stage in the war where national
service is necessary. But our soldiers and sailors know that this is not
true. We are going forward on a long, rough road--and, in all journeys, the
last miles are the hardest. And it is for that final effort--for the total
defeat of our enemies--that we must mobilize our total resources. The
national war program calls for the employment of more people in 1944 than
in 1943.

It is my conviction that the American people will welcome this win-the-war
measure which is based on the eternally just principle of "fair for one,
fair for all."

It will give our people at home the assurance that they are standing
four-square behind our soldiers and sailors. And it will give our enemies
demoralizing assurance that we mean business--that we, 130,000,000
Americans, are on the march to Rome, Berlin, and Tokyo.

I hope that the Congress will recognize that, although this is a political
year, national service is an issue which transcends politics. Great power
must be used for great purposes.

As to the machinery for this measure, the Congress itself should determine
its nature--but it should be wholly nonpartisan in its make-up.

Our armed forces are valiantly fulfilling their responsibilities to our
country and our people. Now the Congress faces the responsibility for
taking those measures which are essential to national security in this the
most decisive phase of the Nation's greatest war.

Several alleged reasons have prevented the enactment of legislation which
would preserve for our soldiers and sailors and marines the fundamental
prerogative of citizenship--the right to vote. No amount of legalistic
argument can becloud this issue in the eyes of these ten million American
citizens. Surely the signers of the Constitution did not intend a document
which, even in wartime, would be construed to take away the franchise of
any of those who are fighting to preserve the Constitution itself.

Our soldiers and sailors and marines know that the overwhelming majority of
them will be deprived of the opportunity to vote, if the voting machinery
is left exclusively to the States under existing State laws--and that there
is no likelihood of these laws being changed in time to enable them to vote
at the next election. The Army and Navy have reported that it will be
impossible effectively to administer forty-eight different soldier voting
laws. It is the duty of the Congress to remove this unjustifiable
discrimination against the men and women in our armed forces--and to do it
as quickly as possible.

It is our duty now to begin to lay the plans and determine the strategy for
the winning of a lasting peace and the establishment of an American
standard of living higher than ever before known. We cannot be content, no
matter how high that general standard of living may be, if some fraction of
our people--whether it be one-third or one-fifth or one-tenth--is ill-fed,
ill-clothed, ill housed, and insecure.

This Republic had its beginning, and grew to its present strength, under
the protection of certain inalienable political rights--among them the right
of free speech, free press, free worship, trial by jury, freedom from
unreasonable searches and seizures. They were our rights to life and
liberty.

As our Nation has grown in size and stature, however--as our industrial
economy expanded--these political rights proved inadequate to assure us
equality in the pursuit of happiness.

We have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual
freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence.
"Necessitous men are not free men." People who are hungry and out of a job
are the stuff of which dictatorships are made.

In our day these economic truths have become accepted as self-evident. We
have accepted, so to speak, a second Bill of Rights under which a new basis
of security and prosperity can be established for all regardless of
station, race, or creed.

Among these are:

The right to a useful and remunerative job in the industries or shops or
farms or mines of the Nation;

The right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and
recreation;

The right of every farmer to raise and sell his products at a return which
will give him and his family a decent living;

The right of every businessman, large and small, to trade in an atmosphere
of freedom from unfair competition and domination by monopolies at home or
abroad;

The right of every family to a decent home;

The right to adequate medical care and the opportunity to achieve and enjoy
good health;

The right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old age,
sickness, accident, and unemployment;

The right to a good education.

All of these rights spell security. And after this war is won we must be
prepared to move forward, in the implementation of these rights, to new
goals of human happiness and well-being.

America's own rightful place in the world depends in large part upon how
fully these and similar rights have been carried into practice for our
citizens. For unless there is security here at home there cannot be lasting
peace in the world.

One of the great American industrialists of our day--a man who has rendered
yeoman service to his country in this crisis--recently emphasized the grave
dangers of "rightist reaction" in this Nation. All clear-thinking
businessmen share his concern. Indeed, if such reaction should develop--if
history were to repeat itself and we were to return to the so-called
"normalcy" of the 1920's--then it is certain that even though we shall have
conquered our enemies on the battlefields abroad, we shall have yielded to
the spirit of Fascism here at home.

I ask the Congress to explore the means for implementing this economic bill
of rights--for it is definitely the responsibility of the Congress so to
do. Many of these problems are already before committees of the Congress in
the form of proposed legislation. I shall from time to time communicate
with the Congress with respect to these and further proposals. In the event
that no adequate program of progress is evolved, I am certain that the
Nation will be conscious of the fact.

Our fighting men abroad--and their families at home--expect such a program
and have the right to insist upon it. It is to their demands that this
Government should pay heed rather than to the whining demands of selfish
pressure groups who seek to feather their nests while young Americans are
dying.

The foreign policy that we have been following--the policy that guided us at
Moscow, Cairo, and Teheran--is based on the common sense principle which was
best expressed by Benjamin Franklin on July 4, 1776: "We must all hang
together, or assuredly we shall all hang separately."

I have often said that there are no two fronts for America in this war.
There is only one front. There is one line of unity which extends from the
hearts of the people at home to the men of our attacking forces in our
farthest outposts. When we speak of our total effort, we speak of the
factory and the field, and the mine as well as of the battleground--we
speak of the soldier and the civilian, the citizen and his Government.

Each and every one of us has a solemn obligation under God to serve this
Nation in its most critical hour--to keep this Nation great--to make this
Nation greater in a better world.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 6, 1945

To the Congress:

In considering the State of the Union, the war and the peace that is to
follow are naturally uppermost in the minds of all of us.

This war must be waged--it is being waged--with the greatest and most
persistent intensity. Everything we are and have is at stake. Everything we
are and have will be given. American men, fighting far from home, have
already won victories which the world will never forget.

We have no question of the ultimate victory. We have no question of the
cost. Our losses will be heavy.

We and our allies will go on fighting together to ultimate total victory.

We have seen a year marked, on the whole, by substantial progress toward
victory, even though the year ended with a setback for our arms, when the
Germans launched a ferocious counter-attack into Luxembourg and Belgium
with the obvious objective of cutting our line in the center.

Our men have fought with indescribable and unforgettable gallantry under
most difficult conditions, and our German enemies have sustained
considerable losses while failing to obtain their objectives.

The high tide of this German effort was reached two days after Christmas.
Since then we have reassumed the offensive, rescued the isolated garrison
at Bastogne, and forced a German withdrawal along the whole line of the
salient. The speed with which we recovered from this savage attack was
largely possible because we have one supreme commander in complete control
of all the Allied armies in France. General Eisenhower has faced this
period of trial with admirable calm and resolution and with steadily
increasing success. He has my complete confidence.

Further desperate attempts may well be made to break our lines, to slow our
progress. We must never make the mistake of assuming that the Germans are
beaten until the last Nazi has surrendered.

And I would express another most serious warning against the poisonous
effects of enemy propaganda.

The wedge that the Germans attempted to drive in western Europe was less
dangerous in actual terms of winning the war than the wedges which they are
continually attempting to drive between ourselves and our allies.

Every little rumor which is intended to weaken our faith in our allies is
like an actual enemy agent in our midst--seeking to sabotage our war
effort. There are, here and there, evil and baseless rumors against the
Russians--rumors against the British--rumors against our own American
commanders in the field.

When you examine these rumors closely, you will observe that every one of
them bears the same trade-mark--"Made in Germany."

We must resist this divisive propaganda--we must destroy it--with the same
strength and the same determination that our fighting men are displaying as
they resist and destroy the panzer divisions.

In Europe, we shall resume the attack and--despite temporary setbacks here
or there--we shall continue the attack relentlessly until Germany is
completely defeated.

It is appropriate at this time to review the basic strategy which has
guided us through three years of war, and which will lead, eventually, to
total victory.

The tremendous effort of the first years of this war was directed toward
the concentration of men and supplies in the various theaters of action at
the points where they could hurt our enemies most.

It was an effort--in the language of the military men--of deployment of our
forces. Many battles--essential battles--were fought; many victories--vital
victories--were won. But these battles and these victories were fought and
won to hold back the attacking enemy, and to put us in positions from which
we and our allies could deliver the final, decisive blows.

In the beginning our most important military task was to prevent our
enemies--the strongest and most violently aggressive powers that ever have
threatened civilization--from winning decisive victories. But even while we
were conducting defensive, delaying actions, we were looking forward to the
time when we could wrest the initiative from our enemies and place our
superior resources of men and materials into direct competition with them.

It was plain then that the defeat of either enemy would require the massing
of overwhelming forces--ground, sea, and air--in positions from which we
and our allies could strike directly against the enemy homelands and
destroy the Nazi and Japanese war machines.

In the case of Japan, we had to await the completion of extensive
preliminary operations--operations designed to establish secure supply lines
through the Japanese outer-zone defenses. This called for overwhelming sea
power and air power--supported by ground forces strategically employed
against isolated outpost garrisons.

Always--from the very day we were attacked--it was right militarily as well
as morally to reject the arguments of those shortsighted people who would
have had us throw Britain and Russia to the Nazi wolves and concentrate
against the Japanese. Such people urged that we fight a purely defensive
war against Japan while allowing the domination of all the rest of the
world by Nazism and Fascism.

In the European theater the necessary bases for the massing of ground and
air power against Germany were already available in Great Britain. In the
Mediterranean area we could begin ground operations against major elements
of the German Army as rapidly as we could put troops in the field, first in
North Africa and then in Italy.

Therefore, our decision was made to concentrate the bulk of our ground and
air forces against Germany until her utter defeat. That decision was based
on all these factors; and it was also based on the realization that, of our
two enemies, Germany would be more able to digest quickly her conquests,
the more able quickly to convert the manpower and resources of her
conquered territory into a war potential.

We had in Europe two active and indomitable allies--Britain and the Soviet
Union--and there were also the heroic resistance movements in the occupied
countries, constantly engaging and harassing the Germans. We cannot forget
how Britain held the line, alone, in 1940 and 1941; and at the same time,
despite ferocious bombardment from the air, built up a tremendous armaments
industry which enabled her to take the offensive at El Alamein in 1942.

We cannot forget the heroic defense of Moscow and Leningrad and Stalingrad,
or the tremendous Russian offensives of 1943 and 1944 which destroyed
formidable German armies.

Nor can we forget how, for more than seven long years, the Chinese people
have been sustaining the barbarous attacks of the Japanese and containing
large enemy forces on the vast areas of the Asiatic mainland.

In the future we must never forget the lesson that we have learned--that we
must have friends who will work with us in peace as they have fought at our
side in war.

As a result of the combined effort of the Allied forces, great military
victories were achieved in 1944: The liberation of France, Belgium, Greece,
and parts of The Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Yugoslavia, and
Czechoslovakia; the surrender of Rumania and Bulgaria; the invasion of
Germany itself and Hungary; the steady march through the Pacific islands to
the Philippines, Guam, and Saipan; and the beginnings of a mighty air
offensive against the Japanese islands.

Now, as this Seventy-ninth Congress meets, we have reached the most
critical phase of the war.

The greatest victory of the last year was, of course, the successful breach
on June 6, 1944, of the German "impregnable" seawall of Europe and the
victorious sweep of the Allied forces through France and Belgium and
Luxembourg--almost to the Rhine itself.

The cross-channel invasion of the Allied armies was the greatest amphibious
operation in the history of the world. It overshadowed all other operations
in this or any other war in its immensity. Its success is a tribute to the
fighting courage of the soldiers who stormed the beaches--to the sailors
and merchant seamen who put the soldiers ashore and kept them supplied--and
to the military and naval leaders who achieved a real miracle of planning
and execution. And it is also a tribute to the ability of two Nations,
Britain and America, to plan together, and work together, and fight
together in perfect cooperation and perfect harmony.

This cross-channel invasion was followed in August by a second great
amphibious operation, landing troops in southern France. In this, the same
cooperation and the same harmony existed between the American, French, and
other Allied forces based in North Africa and Italy.

The success of the two invasions is a tribute also to the ability of many
men and women to maintain silence, when a few careless words would have
imperiled the lives of hundreds of thousands, and would have jeopardized
the whole vast undertakings.

These two great operations were made possible by success in the Battle of
the Atlantic.

Without this success over German submarines, we could not have built up our
invasion forces or air forces in Great Britain, nor could we have kept a
steady stream of supplies flowing to them after they had landed in France.

The Nazis, however, may succeed in improving their submarines and their
crews. They have recently increased their U-boat activity. The Battle of
the Atlantic--like all campaigns in this war--demands eternal vigilance. But
the British, Canadian, and other Allied navies, together with our own, are
constantly on the alert.

The tremendous operations in western Europe have overshadowed in the public
mind the less spectacular but vitally important Italian front. Its place in
the strategic conduct of the war in Europe has been obscured, and--by some
people unfortunately--underrated.

It is important that any misconception on that score be corrected--now.

What the Allied forces in Italy are doing is a well-considered part in our
strategy in Europe, now aimed at only one objective--the total defeat of
the Germans. These valiant forces in Italy are continuing to keep a
substantial portion of the German Army under constant pressure--including
some 20 first-line German divisions and the necessary supply and transport
and replacement troops--all of which our enemies need so badly elsewhere.

Over very difficult terrain and through adverse weather conditions, our
Fifth Army and the British Eighth Army--reinforced by units from other
United Nations, including a brave and well equipped unit of the Brazilian
Army--have, in the past year, pushed north through bloody Cassino and the
Anzio beachhead, and through Rome until now they occupy heights overlooking
the valley of the Po.

The greatest tribute which can be paid to the courage and fighting ability
of these splendid soldiers in Italy is to point out that although their
strength is about equal to that of the Germans they oppose, the Allies have
been continuously on the offensive.

That pressure, that offensive, by our troops in Italy will continue.

The American people--and every soldier now fighting in the Apennines--should
remember that the Italian front has not lost any of the importance which it
had in the days when it was the only Allied front in Europe.

In the Pacific during the past year, we have conducted the fastest-moving
offensive in the history of modern warfare. We have driven the enemy back
more than 3,000 miles across the Central Pacific. A year ago, our conquest
of Tarawa was a little more than a month old.

A year ago, we were preparing for our invasion of Kwajalein, the second of
our great strides across the Central Pacific to the Philippines.

A year ago, General MacArthur was still fighting in New Guinea almost 1,500
miles from his present position in the Philippine Islands.

We now have firmly established bases in the Mariana Islands, from which our
Super fortresses bomb Tokyo itself--and will continue to blast Japan in
ever-increasing numbers.

Japanese forces in the Philippines have been cut in two. There is still
hard fighting ahead--costly fighting. But the liberation of the Philippines
will mean that Japan has been largely cut off from her conquests in the
East Indies.

The landing of our troops on Leyte was the largest amphibious operation
thus far conducted in the Pacific.

Moreover, these landings drew the Japanese Fleet into the first great sea
battle which Japan has risked in almost two years. Not since the night
engagements around Guadalcanal in November-December, 1942, had our Navy
been able to come to grips with major units of the Japanese Fleet. We had
brushed against their fleet in the first battle of the Philippine Sea in
June, 1944, but not until last October were we able really to engage a
major portion of the Japanese Navy in actual combat. The naval engagement
which raged for three days was the heaviest blow ever struck against
Japanese sea power.

As a result of that battle, much of what is left of the Japanese Fleet has
been driven behind the screen of islands that separates the Yellow Sea, the
China Sea, and the Sea of Japan from the Pacific.

Our Navy looks forward to any opportunity which the lords of the Japanese
Navy will give us to fight them again.

The people of this Nation have a right to be proud of the courage and
fighting ability of the men in the armed forces--on all fronts. They also
have a right to be proud of American leadership which has guided their sons
into battle.

The history of the generalship of this war has been a history of teamwork
and cooperation, of skill and daring. Let me give you one example out of
last year's operations in the Pacific.

Last September Admiral Halsey led American naval task forces into
Philippine waters and north to the East China Sea, and struck heavy blows
at Japanese air and sea power.

At that time it was our plan to approach the Philippines by further stages,
taking islands which we may call A, C, and E. However, Admiral Halsey
reported that a direct attack on Leyte appeared feasible. When General
MacArthur received the reports from Admiral Halsey's task forces, he also
concluded that it might be possible to attack the Japanese in the
Philippines directly--bypassing islands A, C, and E.

Admiral Nimitz thereupon offered to make available to General MacArthur
several divisions which had been scheduled to take the intermediate
objectives. These discussions, conducted at great distances, all took place
in one day.

General MacArthur immediately informed the Joint Chiefs of Staff here in
Washington that he was prepared to initiate plans for an attack on Leyte in
October. Approval of the change in plan was given on the same day.

Thus, within the space of 24 hours, a major change of plans was
accomplished which involved Army and Navy forces from two different
theaters of operations--a change which hastened the liberation of the
Philippines and the final day of victory--a change which saved lives which
would have been expended in the capture of islands which are now
neutralized far behind our lines.

Our over-all strategy has not neglected the important task of rendering all
possible aid to China. Despite almost insuperable difficulties, we
increased this aid during 1944. At present our aid to China must be
accomplished by air transport--there is no other way. By the end of 1944,
the Air Transport Command was carrying into China a tonnage of supplies
three times as great as that delivered a year ago, and much more, each
month, than the Burma Road ever delivered at its peak.

Despite the loss of important bases in China, the tonnage delivered by air
transport has enabled General Chennault's Fourteenth Air Force, which
includes many Chinese flyers, to wage an effective and aggressive campaign
against the Japanese. In 1944 aircraft of the Fourteenth Air Force flew
more than 35,000 sorties against the Japanese and sank enormous tonnage of
enemy shipping, greatly diminishing the usefulness of the China Sea lanes.

British, Dominion, and Chinese forces together with our own have not only
held the line in Burma against determined Japanese attacks but have gained
bases of considerable importance to the supply line into China.

The Burma campaigns have involved incredible hardship, and have demanded
exceptional fortitude and determination. The officers and men who have
served with so much devotion in these far distant jungles and mountains
deserve high honor from their countrymen.

In all of the far-flung operations of our own armed forces--on land, and sea
and in the air--the final job, the toughest job, has been performed by the
average, easy-going, hard-fighting young American, who carries the weight
of battle on his own shoulders.

It is to him that we and all future generations of Americans must pay
grateful tribute.

But--it is of small satisfaction to him to know that monuments will be
raised to him in the future. He wants, he needs, and he is entitled to
insist upon, our full and active support--now.

Although unprecedented production figures have made possible our victories,
we shall have to increase our goals even more in certain items.

Peak deliveries of supplies were made to the War Department in December,
1943. Due in part to cutbacks, we have not produced as much since then.
Deliveries of Army supplies were down by 15 percent by July, 1944, before
the upward trend was once more resumed.

Because of increased demands from overseas, the Army Service Forces in the
month of October, 1944, had to increase its estimate of required production
by 10 percent. But in November, one month later, the requirements for 1945
had to be increased another 10 percent, sending the production goal well
above anything we have yet attained. Our armed forces in combat have
steadily increased their expenditure of medium and heavy artillery
ammunition. As we continue the decisive phases of this war, the munitions
that we expend will mount day by day.

In October, 1944, while some were saying the war in Europe was over, the
Army was shipping more men to Europe than in any previous month of the
war.

One of the most urgent immediate requirements of the armed forces is more
nurses. Last April the Army requirement for nurses was set at 50,000.
Actual strength in nurses was then 40,000. Since that time the Army has
tried to raise the additional 10,000. Active recruiting has been carried
on, but the net gain in eight months has been only 2,000. There are now
42,000 nurses in the Army.

Recent estimates have increased the total number needed to 60,000. That
means that 18,000 more nurses must be obtained for the Army alone and the
Navy now requires 2,000 additional nurses.

The present shortage of Army nurses is reflected in undue strain on the
existing force. More than a thousand nurses are now hospitalized, and part
of this is due to overwork. The shortage is also indicated by the fact that
11 Army hospital units have been sent overseas without their complement of
nurses. At Army hospitals in the United States there is only 1 nurse to 26
beds, instead of the recommended 1 to 15 beds.

It is tragic that the gallant women who have volunteered for service as
nurses should be so overworked. It is tragic that our wounded men should
ever want for the best possible nursing care.

The inability to get the needed nurses for the Army is not due to any
shortage of nurses; 280,000 registered nurses are now practicing in this
country. It has been estimated by the War Manpower Commission that 27,000
additional nurses could be made available to the armed forces without
interfering too seriously with the needs of the civilian population for
nurses.

Since volunteering has not produced the number of nurses required, I urge
that the Selective Service Act be amended to provide for the induction of
nurses into the armed forces. The need is too pressing to await the outcome
of further efforts at recruiting.

The care and treatment given to our wounded and sick soldiers have been the
best known to medical science. Those standards must be maintained at all
costs. We cannot tolerate a lowering of them by failure to provide adequate
nursing for the brave men who stand desperately in need of it.

In the continuing progress of this war we have constant need for new types
of weapons, for we cannot afford to fight the war of today or tomorrow with
the weapons of yesterday. For example, the American Army now has developed
a new tank with a gun more powerful than any yet mounted on a fast-moving
vehicle. The Army will need many thousands of these new tanks in 1945.

Almost every month finds some new development in electronics which must be
put into production in order to maintain our technical superiority--and in
order to save lives. We have to work every day to keep ahead of the enemy
in radar. On D-Day, in France, with our superior new equipment, we located
and then put out of operation every warning set which the Germans had along
the French coast.

If we do not keep constantly ahead of our enemies in the development of new
weapons, we pay for our backwardness with the life's blood of our sons.

The only way to meet these increased needs for new weapons and more of them
is for every American engaged in war work to stay on his war job--for
additional American civilians, men and women, not engaged in essential
work, to go out and get a war job. Workers who are released because their
production is cut back should get another job where production is being
increased. This is no time to quit or change to less essential jobs.

There is an old and true saying that the Lord hates a quitter. And this
Nation must pay for all those who leave their essential jobs--or all those
who lay down on their essential jobs for nonessential reasons.
And--again--that payment must be made with the life's blood of our sons.

Many critical production programs with sharply rising needs are now
seriously hampered by manpower shortages. The most important Army needs are
artillery ammunition, cotton duck, bombs, tires, tanks, heavy trucks, and
even B-29's. In each of these vital programs, present production is behind
requirements.

Navy production of bombardment ammunition is hampered by manpower
shortages; so is production for its huge rocket program. Labor shortages
have also delayed its cruiser and carrier programs, and production of
certain types of aircraft.

There is critical need for more repair workers and repair parts; this Jack
delays the return of damaged fighting ships to their places in the fleet,
and prevents ships now in the fighting line from getting needed
overhauling.

The pool of young men under 26 classified as I-A is almost depleted.
Increased replacements for the armed forces will take men now deferred who
are at work in war industry. The armed forces must have an assurance of a
steady flow of young men for replacements. Meeting this paramount need will
be difficult, and will also make it progressively more difficult to attain
the 1945 production goals.

Last year, after much consideration, I recommended that the Congress adopt
a national service act as the most efficient and democratic way of insuring
full production for our war requirements. This recommendation was not
adopted.

I now again call upon the Congress to enact this measure for the total
mobilization of all our human resources for the prosecution of the war. I
urge that this be done at the earliest possible moment.

It is not too late in the war. In fact, bitter experience has shown that in
this kind of mechanized warfare where new weapons are constantly being
created by our enemies and by ourselves, the closer we come to the end of
the war, the more pressing becomes the need for sustained war production
with which to deliver the final blow to the enemy.

There are three basic arguments for a national service law:

First, it would assure that we have the right numbers of workers in the
right places at the right times.

Second, it would provide supreme proof to all our fighting men that we are
giving them what they are entitled to, which is nothing less than our total
effort.

And, third, it would be the final, unequivocal answer to the hopes of the
Nazis and the Japanese that we may become halfhearted about this war and
that they can get from us a negotiated peace.

National service legislation would make it possible to put ourselves in a
position to assure certain and speedy action in meeting our manpower
needs.

It would be used only to the extent absolutely required by military
necessities. In fact, experience in Great Britain and in other Nations at
war indicates that use of the compulsory powers of national service is
necessary only in rare instances.

This proposed legislation would provide against loss of retirement and
seniority rights and benefits. It would not mean reduction in wages.

In adopting such legislation, it is not necessary to discard the voluntary
and cooperative processes which have prevailed up to this time. This
cooperation has already produced great results. The contribution of our
workers to the war effort has been beyond measure. We must build on the
foundations that have already been laid and supplement the measures now in
operation, in order to guarantee the production that may be necessary in
the critical period that lies ahead.

At the present time we are using the inadequate tools at hand to do the
best we can by such expedients as manpower ceilings, and the use of
priority and other powers, to induce men and women to shift from
non-essential to essential war jobs.

I am in receipt of a joint letter from the Secretary of War and the
Secretary of the Navy, dated January 3, 1945, which says:

"With the experience of three years of war and after the most thorough
consideration, we are convinced that it is now necessary to carry out the
statement made by the Congress in the joint resolutions declaring that a
state of war existed with Japan and Germany: That 'to bring the conflict to
a successful conclusion, all of the resources of the country are hereby
pledged by the Congress of the United States.'

"In our considered judgment, which is supported by General Marshall and
Admiral King, this requires total mobilization of our manpower by the
passage of a national war service law. The armed forces need this
legislation to hasten the day of final victory, and to keep to a minimum
the cost in lives.

"National war service, the recognition by law of the duty of every citizen
to do his or her part in winning the war, will give complete assurance that
the need for war equipment will be filled. In the coming year we must
increase the output of many weapons and supplies on short notice. Otherwise
we shall not keep our production abreast of the swiftly changing needs of
war. At the same time it will be necessary to draw progressively many men
now engaged in war production to serve with the armed forces, and their
places in war production must be filled promptly. These developments will
require the addition of hundreds of thousands to those already working in
war industry. We do not believe that these needs can be met effectively
under present methods.

"The record made by management and labor in war industry has been a notable
testimony to the resourcefulness and power of America. The needs are so
great, nevertheless, that in many instances we have been forced to recall
soldiers and sailors from military duty to do work of a civilian character
in war production, because of the urgency of the need for equipment and
because of inability to recruit civilian labor."

Pending action by the Congress on the broader aspects of national service,
I recommend that the Congress immediately enact legislation which will be
effective in using the services of the 4,000,000 men now classified as IV-F
in whatever capacity is best for the war effort.

In the field of foreign policy, we propose to stand together with the
United Nations not for the war alone but for the victory for which the war
is fought.

It is not only a common danger which unites us but a common hope. Ours is
an association not of Governments but of peoples--and the peoples' hope is
peace. Here, as in England; in England, as in Russia; in Russia, as in
China; in France, and through the continent of Europe, and throughout the
world; wherever men love freedom, the hope and purpose of the people are
for peace--a peace that is durable and secure.

It will not be easy to create this peoples' peace. We delude ourselves if
we believe that the surrender of the armies of our enemies will make the
peace we long for. The unconditional surrender of the armies of our enemies
is the first and necessary step--but the first step only.

We have seen already, in areas liberated from the Nazi and the Fascist
tyranny, what problems peace will bring. And we delude ourselves if we
attempt to believe wishfully that all these problems can be solved
overnight.

The firm foundation can be built--and it will be built. But the continuance
and assurance of a living peace must, in the long run, be the work of the
people themselves.

We ourselves, like all peoples who have gone through the difficult
processes of liberation and adjustment, know of our own experience how
great the difficulties can be. We know that they are not difficulties
peculiar to any continent or any Nation. Our own Revolutionary War left
behind it, in the words of one American historian, "an eddy of lawlessness
and disregard of human life." There were separatist movements of one kind
or another in Vermont, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky, and
Maine. There were insurrections, open or threatened, in Massachusetts and
New Hampshire. These difficulties we worked out for ourselves as the
peoples of the liberated areas of Europe, faced with complex problems of
adjustment, will work out their difficulties for themselves.

Peace can be made and kept only by the united determination of free and
peace-loving peoples who are willing to work together--willing to help one
another--willing to respect and tolerate and try to understand one another's
opinions and feelings.

The nearer we come to vanquishing our enemies the more we inevitably become
conscious of differences among the victors.

We must not let those differences divide us and blind us to our more
important common and continuing interests in winning the war and building
the peace.

International cooperation on which enduring peace must be based is not a
one-way street.

Nations like individuals do not always see alike or think alike, and
international cooperation and progress are not helped by any Nation
assuming that it has a monopoly of wisdom or of virtue.

In the future world the misuse of power, as implied in the term "power
politics," must not be a controlling factor in international relations.
That is the heart of the principles to which we have subscribed. We cannot
deny that power is a factor in world politics any more than we can deny its
existence as a factor in national politics. But in a democratic world, as
in a democratic Nation, power must be linked with responsibility, and
obliged to defend and justify itself within the framework of the general
good.

Perfectionism, no less than isolationism or imperialism or power politics,
may obstruct the paths to international peace. Let us not forget that the
retreat to isolationism a quarter of a century ago was started not by a
direct attack against international cooperation but against the alleged
imperfections of the peace.

In our disillusionment after the last war we preferred international
anarchy to international cooperation with Nations which did not see and
think exactly as we did. We gave up the hope of gradually achieving a
better peace because we had not the courage to fulfill our responsibilities
in an admittedly imperfect world.

We must not let that happen again, or we shall follow the same tragic road
again--the road to a third world war.

We can fulfill our responsibilities for maintaining the security of our own
country only by exercising our power and our influence to achieve the
principles in which we believe and for which we have fought.

In August, 1941, Prime Minister Churchill and I agreed to the principles of
the Atlantic Charter, these being later incorporated into the Declaration
by United Nations of January 1, 1942. At that time certain isolationists
protested vigorously against our right to proclaim the principles--and
against the very principles themselves. Today, many of the same people are
protesting against the possibility of violation of the same principles.

It is true that the statement of principles in the Atlantic Charter does
not provide rules of easy application to each and every one of this
war-torn world's tangled situations. But it is a good and a useful thing--
it is an essential thing--to have principles toward which we can aim.

And we shall not hesitate to use our influence--and to use it now--to secure
so far as is humanly possible the fulfillment of the principles of the
Atlantic Charter. We have not shrunk from the military responsibilities
brought on by this war. We cannot and will not shrink from the political
responsibilities which follow in the wake of battle.

I do not wish to give the impression that all mistakes can be avoided and
that many disappointments are not inevitable in the making of peace. But we
must not this time lose the hope of establishing an international order
which will be capable of maintaining peace and realizing through the years
more perfect justice between Nations.

To do this we must be on our guard not to exploit and exaggerate the
differences between us and our allies, particularly with reference to the
peoples who have been liberated from Fascist tyranny. That is not the way
to secure a better settlement of those differences or to secure
international machinery which can rectify mistakes which may be made.

I should not be frank if I did not admit concern about many situations--the
Greek and Polish for example. But those situations are not as easy or as
simple to deal with as some spokesmen, whose sincerity I do not question,
would have us believe. We have obligations, not necessarily legal, to the
exiled Governments, to the underground leaders, and to our major allies who
came much nearer the shadows than we did.

We and our allies have declared that it is our purpose to respect the right
of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live
and to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who have
been forcibly deprived of them. But with internal dissension, with many
citizens of liberated countries still prisoners of war or forced to labor
in Germany, it is difficult to guess the kind of self-government the people
really want.

During the interim period, until conditions permit a genuine expression of
the people's will, we and our allies have a duty, which we cannot ignore,
to use our influence to the end that no temporary or provisional
authorities in the liberated countries block the eventual exercise of the
peoples' right freely to choose the government and institutions under
which, as freemen, they are to live.

It is only too easy for all of us to rationalize what we want to believe,
and to consider those leaders we like responsible and those we dislike
irresponsible. And our task is not helped by stubborn partisanship, however
understandable on the part of opposed internal factions.

It is our purpose to help the peace-loving peoples of Europe to live
together as good neighbors, to recognize their common interests and not to
nurse their traditional grievances against one another.

But we must not permit the many specific and immediate problems of
adjustment connected with the liberation of Europe to delay the
establishment of permanent machinery for the maintenance of peace. Under
the threat of a common danger, the United Nations joined together in war to
preserve their independence and their freedom. They must now join together
to make secure the independence and freedom of all peace-loving states, so
that never again shall tyranny be able to divide and conquer.

International peace and well-being, like national peace and well-being,
require constant alertness, continuing cooperation, and organized effort.

International peace and well-being, like national peace and well-being, can
be secured only through institutions capable of life and growth.

Many of the problems of the peace are upon us even now while the conclusion
of the war is still before us. The atmosphere of friendship and mutual
understanding and determination to find a common ground of common
understanding, which surrounded the conversations at Dumbarton Oaks, gives
us reason to hope that future discussions will succeed in developing the
democratic and fully integrated world security system toward which these
preparatory conversations were directed.

We and the other United Nations are going forward, with vigor and
resolution, in our efforts to create such a system by providing for it
strong and flexible institutions of joint and cooperative action.

The aroused conscience of humanity will not permit failure in this supreme
endeavor.

We believe that the extraordinary advances in the means of
intercommunication between peoples over the past generation offer a
practical method of advancing the mutual understanding upon which peace and
the institutions of peace must rest, and it is our policy and purpose to
use these great technological achievements for the common advantage of the
world.

We support the greatest possible freedom of trade and commerce.

We Americans have always believed in freedom of opportunity, and equality
of opportunity remains one of the principal objectives of our national
life. What we believe in for individuals, we believe in also for Nations.
We are opposed to restrictions, whether by public act or private
arrangement, which distort and impair commerce, transit, and trade.

We have house-cleaning of our own to do in this regard. But it is our hope,
not only in the interest of our own prosperity but in the interest of the
prosperity of the world, that trade and commerce and access to materials
and markets may be freer after this war than ever before in the history of
the world.

One of the most heartening events of the year in the international field
has been the renaissance of the French people and the return of the French
Nation to the ranks of the United Nations. Far from having been crushed by
the terror of Nazi domination, the French people have emerged with stronger
faith than ever in the destiny of their country and in the soundness of the
democratic ideals to which the French Nation has traditionally contributed
so greatly.

During her liberation, France has given proof of her unceasing
determination to fight the Germans, continuing the heroic efforts of the
resistance groups under the occupation and of all those Frenchmen
throughout the world who refused to surrender after the disaster of 1940.

Today, French armies are again on the German frontier, and are again
fighting shoulder to shoulder with our sons.

Since our landings in Africa, we have placed in French hands all the arms
and material of war which our resources and the military situation
permitted. And I am glad to say that we are now about to equip large new
French forces with the most modern weapons for combat duty.

In addition to the contribution which France can make to our common
victory, her liberation likewise means that her great influence will again
be available in meeting the problems of peace.

We fully recognize France's vital interest in a lasting solution of the
German problem and the contribution which she can make in achieving
international security. Her formal adherence to the declaration by United
Nations a few days ago and the proposal at the Dumbarton Oaks discussions,
whereby France would receive one of the five permanent seats in the
proposed Security Council, demonstrate the extent to which France has
resumed her proper position of strength and leadership.

I am clear in my own mind that, as an essential factor in the maintenance
of peace in the future, we must have universal military training after this
war, and I shall send a special message to the Congress on this subject.

An enduring peace cannot be achieved without a strong America--strong in
the social and economic sense as well as in the military sense.

In the State of the Union message last year I set forth what I considered
to be an American economic bill of rights.

I said then, and I say now, that these economic truths represent a second
bill of rights under which a new basis of security and prosperity can be
established for all--regardless of station, race, or creed.

Of these rights the most fundamental, and one on which the fulfillment of
the others in large degree depends, is the "right to a useful and
remunerative job in the industries or shops or farms or mines of the
Nation." In turn, others of the economic rights of American citizenship,
such as the right to a decent home, to a good education, to good medical
care, to social security, to reasonable farm income, will, if fulfilled,
make major contributions to achieving adequate levels of employment.

The Federal Government must see to it that these rights become
realities--with the help of States, municipalities, business, labor, and
agriculture.

We have had full employment during the war. We have had it because the
Government has been ready to buy all the materials of war which the country
could produce--and this has amounted to approximately half our present
productive capacity.

After the war we must maintain full employment with Government performing
its peacetime functions. This means that we must achieve a level of demand
and purchasing power by private consumers--farmers, businessmen, workers,
professional men, housewives--which is sufficiently high to replace wartime
Government demands; and it means also that we must greatly increase our
export trade above the prewar level.

Our policy is, of course, to rely as much as possible on private enterprise
to provide jobs. But the American people will not accept mass unemployment
or mere makeshift work. There will be need for the work of everyone willing
and able to work--and that means close to 60,000,000 jobs.

Full employment means not only jobs--but productive jobs. Americans do not
regard jobs that pay substandard wages as productive jobs.

We must make sure that private enterprise works as it is supposed to work--
on the basis of initiative and vigorous competition, without the stifling
presence of monopolies and cartels.

During the war we have guaranteed investment in enterprise essential to the
war effort. We should also take appropriate measures in peacetime to secure
opportunities for new small enterprises and for productive business
expansion for which finance would otherwise be unavailable.

This necessary expansion of our peacetime productive capacity will require
new facilities, new plants, and new equipment.

It will require large outlays of money which should be raised through
normal investment channels. But while private capital should finance this
expansion program, the Government should recognize its responsibility for
sharing part of any special or abnormal risk of loss attached to such
financing.

Our full-employment program requires the extensive development of our
natural resources and other useful public works. The undeveloped resources
of this continent are still vast. Our river-watershed projects will add new
and fertile territories to the United States. The Tennessee Valley
Authority, which was constructed at a cost of $750,000,000--the cost of
waging this war for less than 4 days--was a bargain. We have similar
opportunities in our other great river basins. By harnessing the resources
of these river basins, as we have in the Tennessee Valley, we shall provide
the same kind of stimulus to enterprise as was provided by the Louisiana
Purchase and the new discoveries in the West during the nineteenth
century.

If we are to avail ourselves fully of the benefits of civil aviation, and
if we are to use the automobiles we can produce, it will be necessary to
construct thousands of airports and to overhaul our entire national highway
system.

The provision of a decent home for every family is a national necessity, if
this country is to be worthy of its greatness--and that task will itself
create great employment opportunities. Most of our cities need extensive
rebuilding. Much of our farm plant is in a state of disrepair. To make a
frontal attack on the problems of housing and urban reconstruction will
require thoroughgoing cooperation between industry and labor, and the
Federal, State, and local Governments.

An expanded social security program, and adequate health and education
programs, must play essential roles in a program designed to support
individual productivity and mass purchasing power. I shall communicate
further with the Congress on these subjects at a later date.

The millions of productive jobs that a program of this nature could bring
are jobs in private enterprise. They are jobs based on the expanded demand
for the output of our economy for consumption and investment. Through a
program of this character we can maintain a national income high enough to
provide for an orderly retirement of the public debt along with reasonable
tax reduction.

Our present tax system geared primarily to war requirements must be revised
for peacetime so as to encourage private demand.

While no general revision of the tax structure can be made until the war
ends on all fronts, the Congress should be prepared to provide tax
modifications at the end of the war in Europe, designed to encourage
capital to invest in new enterprises and to provide jobs. As an integral
part of this program to maintain high employment, we must, after the war is
over, reduce or eliminate taxes which bear too heavily on consumption.

The war will leave deep disturbances in the world economy, in our national
economy, in many communities, in many families, and in many individuals. It
will require determined effort and responsible action of all of us to find
our way back to peacetime, and to help others to find their way back to
peacetime--a peacetime that holds the values of the past and the promise of
the future.

If we attack our problems with determination we shall succeed. And we must
succeed. For freedom and peace cannot exist without security.

During the past year the American people, in a national election,
reasserted their democratic faith.

In the course of that campaign various references were made to "strife"
between this Administration and the Congress, with the implication, if not
the direct assertion, that this Administration and the Congress could never
work together harmoniously in the service of the Nation.

It cannot be denied that there have been disagreements between the
legislative and executive branches--as there have been disagreements during
the past century and a half.

I think we all realize too that there are some people in this Capital City
whose task is in large part to stir up dissension, and to magnify normal
healthy disagreements so that they appear to be irreconcilable conflicts.

But--I think that the over-all record in this respect is eloquent: The
Government of the United States of America--all branches of it--has a good
record of achievement in this war.

The Congress, the Executive, and the Judiciary have worked together for the
common good.

I myself want to tell you, the Members of the Senate and of the House of
Representatives, how happy I am in our relationships and friendships. I
have not yet had the pleasure of meeting some of the new Members in each
House, but I hope that opportunity will offer itself in the near future.

We have a great many problems ahead of us and we must approach them with
realism and courage.

This new year of 1945 can be the greatest year of achievement in human
history.

Nineteen forty-five can see the final ending of the Nazi-Fascist reign of
terror in Europe.

Nineteen forty-five can see the closing in of the forces of retribution
about the center of the malignant power of imperialistic Japan.

Most important of all--1945 can and must see the substantial beginning of
the organization of world peace. This organization must be the fulfillment
of the promise for which men have fought and died in this war. It must be
the justification of all the sacrifices that have been made--of all the
dreadful misery that this world has endured.

We Americans of today, together with our allies, are making history--and I
hope it will be better history than ever has been made before.

We pray that we may be worthy of the unlimited opportunities that God has
given us.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 4, 1935

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Senate and of the House of
Representatives:

The Constitution wisely provides that the Chief Executive shall report to
the Congress on the state of the Union, for through you, the chosen
legislative representatives, our citizens everywhere may fairly judge the
progress of our governing. I am confident that today, in the light of the
events of the past two years, you do not consider it merely a trite phrase
when I tell you that I am truly glad to greet you and that I look forward
to common counsel, to useful cooperation, and to genuine friendships
between us.

We have undertaken a new order of things; yet we progress to it under the
framework and in the spirit and intent of the American Constitution. We
have proceeded throughout the Nation a measurable distance on the road
toward this new order. Materially, I can report to you substantial benefits
to our agricultural population, increased industrial activity, and profits
to our merchants. Of equal moment, there is evident a restoration of that
spirit of confidence and faith which marks the American character. Let him,
who, for speculative profit or partisan purpose, without just warrant would
seek to disturb or dispel this assurance, take heed before he assumes
responsibility for any act which slows our onward steps.

Throughout the world, change is the order of the day. In every Nation
economic problems, long in the making, have brought crises of many kinds
for which the masters of old practice and theory were unprepared. In most
Nations social justice, no longer a distant ideal, has become a definite
goal, and ancient Governments are beginning to heed the call.

Thus, the American people do not stand alone in the world in their desire
for change. We seek it through tested liberal traditions, through processes
which retain all of the deep essentials of that republican form of
representative government first given to a troubled world by the United
States.

As the various parts in the program begun in the Extraordinary Session of
the 73rd Congress shape themselves in practical administration, the unity
of our program reveals itself to the Nation. The outlines of the new
economic order, rising from the disintegration of the old, are apparent. We
test what we have done as our measures take root in the living texture of
life. We see where we have built wisely and where we can do still better.

The attempt to make a distinction between recovery and reform is a narrowly
conceived effort to substitute the appearance of reality for reality
itself. When a man is convalescing from illness, wisdom dictates not only
cure of the symptoms, but also removal of their cause.

It is important to recognize that while we seek to outlaw specific abuses,
the American objective of today has an infinitely deeper, finer and more
lasting purpose than mere repression. Thinking people in almost every
country of the world have come to realize certain fundamental difficulties
with which civilization must reckon. Rapid changes--the machine age, the
advent of universal and rapid communication and many other new factors--have
brought new problems. Succeeding generations have attempted to keep pace by
reforming in piecemeal fashion this or that attendant abuse. As a result,
evils overlap and reform becomes confused and frustrated. We lose sight,
from time to time, of our ultimate human objectives.

Let us, for a moment, strip from our simple purpose the confusion that
results from a multiplicity of detail and from millions of written and
spoken words.

We find our population suffering from old inequalities, little changed by
vast sporadic remedies. In spite of our efforts and in spite of our talk,
we have not weeded out the over privileged and we have not effectively
lifted up the underprivileged. Both of these manifestations of injustice
have retarded happiness. No wise man has any intention of destroying what
is known as the profit motive; because by the profit motive we mean the
right by work to earn a decent livelihood for ourselves and for our
families.

We have, however, a clear mandate from the people, that Americans must
forswear that conception of the acquisition of wealth which, through
excessive profits, creates undue private power over private affairs and, to
our misfortune, over public affairs as well. In building toward this end we
do not destroy ambition, nor do we seek to divide our wealth into equal
shares on stated occasions. We continue to recognize the greater ability of
some to earn more than others. But we do assert that the ambition of the
individual to obtain for him and his a proper security, a reasonable
leisure, and a decent living throughout life, is an ambition to be
preferred to the appetite for great wealth and great power.

I recall to your attention my message to the Congress last June in which I
said: "among our objectives I place the security of the men, women and
children of the Nation first." That remains our first and continuing task;
and in a very real sense every major legislative enactment of this Congress
should be a component part of it.

In defining immediate factors which enter into our quest, I have spoken to
the Congress and the people of three great divisions:

1. The security of a livelihood through the better use of the national
resources of the land in which we live.

2. The security against the major hazards and vicissitudes of life.

3. The security of decent homes.

I am now ready to submit to the Congress a broad program designed
ultimately to establish all three of these factors of security--a program
which because of many lost years will take many future years to fulfill.

A study of our national resources, more comprehensive than any previously
made, shows the vast amount of necessary and practicable work which needs
to be done for the development and preservation of our natural wealth for
the enjoyment and advantage of our people in generations to come. The sound
use of land and water is far more comprehensive than the mere planting of
trees, building of dams, distributing of electricity or retirement of
sub-marginal land. It recognizes that stranded populations, either in the
country or the city, cannot have security under the conditions that now
surround them.

To this end we are ready to begin to meet this problem--the intelligent care
of population throughout our Nation, in accordance with an intelligent
distribution of the means of livelihood for that population. A definite
program for putting people to work, of which I shall speak in a moment, is
a component part of this greater program of security of livelihood through
the better use of our national resources.

Closely related to the broad problem of livelihood is that of security
against the major hazards of life. Here also, a comprehensive survey of
what has been attempted or accomplished in many Nations and in many States
proves to me that the time has come for action by the national Government.
I shall send to you, in a few days, definite recommendations based on these
studies. These recommendations will cover the broad subjects of
unemployment insurance and old age insurance, of benefits for children,
form others, for the handicapped, for maternity care and for other aspects
of dependency and illness where a beginning can now be made.

The third factor--better homes for our people--has also been the subject of
experimentation and study. Here, too, the first practical steps can be made
through the proposals which I shall suggest in relation to giving work to
the unemployed.

Whatever we plan and whatever we do should be in the light of these three
clear objectives of security. We cannot afford to lose valuable time in
haphazard public policies which cannot find a place in the broad outlines
of these major purposes. In that spirit I come to an immediate issue made
for us by hard and inescapable circumstance--the task of putting people to
work. In the spring of 1933 the issue of destitution seemed to stand apart;
today, in the light of our experience and our new national policy, we find
we can put people to work in ways which conform to, initiate and carry
forward the broad principles of that policy.

The first objectives of emergency legislation of 1933 were to relieve
destitution, to make it possible for industry to operate in a more rational
and orderly fashion, and to put behind industrial recovery the impulse of
large expenditures in Government undertakings. The purpose of the National
Industrial Recovery Act to provide work for more people succeeded in a
substantial manner within the first few months of its life, and the Act has
continued to maintain employment gains and greatly improved working
conditions in industry.

The program of public works provided for in the Recovery Act launched the
Federal Government into a task for which there was little time to make
preparation and little American experience to follow. Great employment has
been given and is being given by these works.

More than two billions of dollars have also been expended in direct relief
to the destitute. Local agencies of necessity determined the recipients of
this form of relief. With inevitable exceptions the funds were spent by
them with reasonable efficiency and as a result actual want of food and
clothing in the great majority of cases has been overcome.

But the stark fact before us is that great numbers still remain
unemployed.

A large proportion of these unemployed and their dependents have been
forced on the relief rolls. The burden on the Federal Government has grown
with great rapidity. We have here a human as well as an economic problem.
When humane considerations are concerned, Americans give them precedence.
The lessons of history, confirmed by the evidence immediately before me,
show conclusively that continued dependence upon relief induces a spiritual
and moral disintegration fundamentally destructive to the national fibre.
To dole out relief in this way is to administer a narcotic, a subtle
destroyer of the human spirit. It is inimical to the dictates of sound
policy. It is in violation of the traditions of America. Work must be found
for able-bodied but destitute workers.

The Federal Government must and shall quit this business of relief.

I am not willing that the vitality of our people be further sapped by the
giving of cash, of market baskets, of a few hours of weekly work cutting
grass, raking leaves or picking up .papers in the public parks. We must
preserve not only the bodies of the unemployed from destitution but also
their self-respect, their self-reliance and courage and determination. This
decision brings me to the problem of what the Government should do with
approximately five million unemployed now on the relief rolls.

About one million and a half of these belong to the group which in the past
was dependent upon local welfare efforts. Most of them are unable for one
reason or another to maintain themselves independently--for the most part,
through no fault of their own. Such people, in the days before the great
depression, were cared for by local efforts--by States, by counties, by
towns, by cities, by churches and by private welfare agencies. It is my
thought that in the future they must be cared for as they were before. I
stand ready through my own personal efforts, and through the public
influence of the office that I hold, to help these local agencies to get
the means necessary to assume this burden.

The security legislation which I shall propose to the Congress will, I am
confident, be of assistance to local effort in the care of this type of
cases. Local responsibility can and will be resumed, for, after all, common
sense tells us that the wealth necessary for this task existed and still
exists in the local community, and the dictates of sound administration
require that this responsibility be in the first instance a local one.
There are, however, an additional three and one half million employable
people who are on relief. With them the problem is different and the
responsibility is different. This group was the victim of a nation-wide
depression caused by conditions which were not local but national. The
Federal Government is the only governmental agency with sufficient power
and credit to meet this situation. We have assumed this task and we shall
not shrink from it in the future. It is a duty dictated by every
intelligent consideration of national policy to ask you to make it possible
for the United States to give employment to all of these three and one half
million employable people now on relief, pending their absorption in a
rising tide of private employment.

It is my thought that with the exception of certain of the normal public
building operations of the Government, all emergency public works shall be
united in a single new and greatly enlarged plan.

With the establishment of this new system we can supersede the Federal
Emergency Relief Administration with a coordinated authority which will be
charged with the orderly liquidation of our present relief activities and
the substitution of a national chart for the giving of work.

This new program of emergency public employment should be governed by a
number of practical principles.

(1) All work undertaken should be useful--not just for a day, or a year,
but useful in the sense that it affords permanent improvement in living
conditions or that it creates future new wealth for the Nation.

(2) Compensation on emergency public projects should be in the form of
security payments which should be larger than the amount now received as a
relief dole, but at the same time not so large as to encourage the
rejection of opportunities for private employment or the leaving of private
employment to engage in Government work.

(3) Projects should be undertaken on which a large percentage of direct
labor can be used.

(4) Preference should be given to those projects which will be
self-liquidating in the sense that there is a reasonable expectation that
the Government will get its money back at some future time.

(5) The projects undertaken should be selected and planned so as to compete
as little as possible with private enterprises. This suggests that if it
were not for the necessity of giving useful work to the unemployed now on
relief, these projects in most instances would not now be undertaken.

(6) The planning of projects would seek to assure work during the coming
fiscal year to the individuals now on relief, or until such time as private
employment is available. In order to make adjustment to increasing private
employment, work should be planned with a view to tapering it off in
proportion to the speed with which the emergency workers are offered
positions with private employers.

(7) Effort should be made to locate projects where they will serve the
greatest unemployment needs as shown by present relief rolls, and the broad
program of the National Resources Board should be freely used for guidance
in selection. Our ultimate objective being the enrichment of human lives,
the Government has the primary duty to use its emergency expenditures as
much as possible to serve those who cannot secure the advantages of private
capital.

Ever since the adjournment of the 73d Congress, the Administration has been
studying from every angle the possibility and the practicability of new
forms of employment. As a result of these studies I have arrived at certain
very definite convictions as to the amount of money that will be necessary
for the sort of public projects that I have described. I shall submit these
figures in my budget message. I assure you now they will be within the
sound credit of the Government.

The work itself will cover a wide field including clearance of slums, which
for adequate reasons cannot be undertaken by private capital; in rural
housing of several kinds, where, again, private capital is unable to
function; in rural electrification; in the reforestation of the great
watersheds of the Nation; in an intensified program to prevent soil erosion
and to reclaim blighted areas; in improving existing road systems and in
constructing national highways designed to handle modern traffic; in the
elimination of grade crossings; in the extension and enlargement of the
successful work of the Civilian Conservation Corps; in non-Federal works,
mostly self-liquidating and highly useful to local divisions of Government;
and on many other projects which the Nation needs and cannot afford to
neglect.

This is the method which I propose to you in order that we may better meet
this present-day problem of unemployment. Its greatest advantage is that it
fits logically and usefully into the long-range permanent policy of
providing the three types of security which constitute as a whole an
American plan for the betterment of the future of the American people.

I shall consult with you from time to time concerning other measures of
national importance. Among the subjects that lie immediately before us are
the consolidation of Federal regulatory administration over all forms of
transportation, the renewal and clarification of the general purposes of
the National Industrial Recovery Act, the strengthening of our facilities
for the prevention, detection and treatment of crime and criminals, the
restoration of sound conditions in the public utilities field through
abolition of the evil features of holding companies, the gradual tapering
off of the emergency credit activities of Government, and improvement in
our taxation forms and methods.

We have already begun to feel the bracing effect upon our economic system
of a restored agriculture. The hundreds of millions of additional income
that farmers are receiving are finding their way into the channels of
trade. The farmers' share of the national income is slowly rising. The
economic facts justify the widespread opinion of those engaged in
agriculture that our provisions for maintaining a balanced production give
at this time the most adequate remedy for an old and vexing problem. For
the present, and especially in view of abnormal world conditions,
agricultural adjustment with certain necessary improvements in methods
should continue.

It seems appropriate to call attention at this time to the fine spirit
shown during the past year by our public servants. I cannot praise too
highly the cheerful work of the Civil Service employees, and of those
temporarily working for the Government. As for those thousands in our
various public agencies spread throughout the country who, without
compensation, agreed to take over heavy responsibilities in connection with
our various loan agencies and particularly in direct relief work, I cannot
say too much. I do not think any country could show a higher average of
cheerful and even enthusiastic team-work than has been shown by these men
and women.

I cannot with candor tell you that general international relationships
outside the borders of the United States are improved. On the surface of
things many old jealousies are resurrected, old passions aroused; new
strivings for armament and power, in more than one land, rear their ugly
heads. I hope that calm counsel and constructive leadership will provide
the steadying influence and the time necessary for the coming of new and
more practical forms of representative government throughout the world
wherein privilege and power will occupy a lesser place and world welfare a
greater.

I believe, however, that our own peaceful and neighborly attitude toward
other Nations is coming to be understood and appreciated. The maintenance
of international peace is a matter in which we are deeply and unselfishly
concerned. Evidence of our persistent and undeniable desire to prevent
armed conflict has recently been more than once afforded.

There is no ground for apprehension that our relations with any Nation will
be otherwise than peaceful. Nor is there ground for doubt that the people
of most Nations seek relief from the threat and burden attaching to the
false theory that extravagant armament cannot be reduced and limited by
international accord.

The ledger of the past year shows many more gains than losses. Let us not
forget that, in addition to saving millions from utter destitution, child
labor has been for the moment outlawed, thousands of homes saved to their
owners and most important of all, the morale of the Nation has been
restored. Viewing the year 1934 as a whole, you and I can agree that we
have a generous measure of reasons for giving thanks.

It is not empty optimism that moves me to a strong hope in the coming year.
We can, if we will, make 1935 a genuine period of good feeling, sustained
by a sense of purposeful progress. Beyond the material recovery, I sense a
spiritual recovery as well. The people of America are turning as never
before to those permanent values that are not limited to the physical
objectives of life. There are growing signs of this on every hand. In the
face of these spiritual impulses we are sensible of the Divine Providence
to which Nations turn now, as always, for guidance and fostering care.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 3, 1936

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Senate and of the House of
Representatives:

We are about to enter upon another year of the responsibility which the
electorate of the United States has placed in our hands. Having come so
far, it is fitting that we should pause to survey the ground which we have
covered and the path which lies ahead.

On the fourth day of March, 1933, on the occasion of taking the oath of
office as President of the United States, I addressed the people of our
country. Need I recall either the scene or the national circumstances
attending the occasion? The crisis of that moment was almost exclusively a
national one. In recognition of that fact, so obvious to the millions in
the streets and in the homes of America, I devoted by far the greater part
of that address to what I called, and the Nation called, critical days
within our own borders.

You will remember that on that fourth of March, 1933, the world picture was
an image of substantial peace. International consultation and widespread
hope for the bettering of relations between the Nations gave to all of us a
reasonable expectation that the barriers to mutual confidence, to increased
trade, and to the peaceful settlement of disputes could be progressively
removed. In fact, my only reference to the field of world policy in that
address was in these words: "I would dedicate this Nation to the policy of
the good neighbor--the neighbor who resolutely respects himself and, because
he does so, respects the rights of others--a neighbor who respects his
obligations and respects the sanctity of his agreements in and with a world
of neighbors."

In the years that have followed, that sentiment has remained the dedication
of this Nation. Among the Nations of the great Western Hemisphere the
policy of the good neighbor has happily prevailed. At no time in the four
and a half centuries of modern civilization in the Americas has there
existed--in any year, in any decade, in any generation in all that time--a
greater spirit of mutual understanding, of common helpfulness, and of
devotion to the ideals of serf-government than exists today in the
twenty-one American Republics and their neighbor, the Dominion of Canada.
This policy of the good neighbor among the Americas is no longer a hope, no
longer an objective remaining to be accomplished. It is a fact, active,
present, pertinent and effective. In this achievement, every American
Nation takes an understanding part. There is neither war, nor rumor of war,
nor desire for war. The inhabitants of this vast area, two hundred and
fifty million strong, spreading more than eight thousand miles from the
Arctic to the Antarctic, believe in, and propose to follow, the policy of
the good neighbor. They wish with all their heart that the rest of the
world might do likewise.

The rest of the world--Ah! there is the rub.

Were I today to deliver an Inaugural Address to the people of the United
States, I could not limit my comments on world affairs to one paragraph.
With much regret I should be compelled to devote the greater part to world
affairs. Since the summer of that same year of 1933, the temper and the
purposes of the rulers of many of the great populations in Europe and in
Asia have not pointed the way either to peace or to good-will among men.
Not only have peace and good-will among men grown more remote in those
areas of the earth during this period, but a point has been reached where
the people of the Americas must take cognizance of growing ill-will, of
marked trends toward aggression, of increasing armaments, of shortening
tempers--a situation which has in it many of the elements that lead to the
tragedy of general war.

On those other continents many Nations, principally the smaller peoples, if
left to themselves, would be content with their boundaries and willing to
solve within themselves and in cooperation with their neighbors their
individual problems, both economic and social. The rulers of those Nations,
deep in their hearts, follow these peaceful and reasonable aspirations of
their peoples. These rulers must remain ever vigilant against the
possibility today or tomorrow of invasion or attack by the rulers of other
peoples who fail to subscribe to the principles of bettering the human race
by peaceful means.

Within those other Nations--those which today must bear the primary,
definite responsibility for jeopardizing world peace--what hope lies? To
say the least, there are grounds for pessimism. It is idle for us or for
others to preach that the masses of the people who constitute those Nations
which are dominated by the twin spirits of autocracy and aggression, are
out of sympathy with their rulers, that they are allowed no opportunity to
express themselves, that they would change things if they could.

That, unfortunately, is not so clear. It might be true that the masses of
the people in those Nations would change the policies of their Governments
if they could be allowed full freedom and full access to the processes of
democratic government as we understand them. But they do not have that
access; lacking it they follow blindly and fervently the lead of those who
seek autocratic power.

Nations seeking expansion, seeking the rectification of injustices
springing from former wars, or seeking outlets for trade, for population or
even for their own peaceful contributions to the progress of civilization,
fail to demonstrate that patience necessary to attain reasonable and
legitimate objectives by peaceful negotiation or by an appeal to the finer
instincts of world justice.

They have therefore impatiently reverted to the old belief in the law of
the sword, or to the fantastic conception that they, and they alone, are
chosen to fulfill a mission and that all the others among the billion and a
half of human beings in the world must and shall learn from and be subject
to them.

I recognize and you will recognize that these words which I have chosen
with deliberation will not prove popular in any Nation that chooses to fit
this shoe to its foot. Such sentiments, however, will find sympathy and
understanding in those Nations where the people themselves are honestly
desirous of peace but must constantly align themselves on one side or the
other in the kaleidoscopic jockeying for position which is characteristic
of European and Asiatic relations today. For the peace-loving Nations, and
there are many of them, find that their very identity depends on their
moving and moving again on the chess board of international politics.

I suggested in the spring of 1933 that 85 or 90 percent of all the people
in the world were content with the territorial limits of their respective
Nations and were willing further to reduce their armed forces if every
other Nation in the world would agree to do likewise.

That is equally true today, and it is even more true today that world peace
and world good-will are blocked by only 10 or 15 percent of the world's
population. That is why efforts to reduce armies have thus far not only
failed, but have been met by vastly increased armaments on land and in the
air. That is why even efforts to continue the existing limits on naval
armaments into the years to come show such little current success.

But the policy of the United States has been clear and consistent. We have
sought with earnestness in every possible way to limit world armaments and
to attain the peaceful solution of disputes among all Nations.

We have sought by every legitimate means to exert our moral influence
against repression, against intolerance, against autocracy and in favor of
freedom of expression, equality before the law, religious tolerance and
popular rule.

In the field of commerce we have undertaken to encourage a more reasonable
interchange of the world's goods. In the field of international finance we
have, so far as we are concerned, put an end to dollar diplomacy, to money
grabbing, to speculation for the benefit of the powerful and the rich, at
the expense of the small and the poor.

As a consistent part of a clear policy, the United States is following a
twofold neutrality toward any and all Nations which engage in wars that are
not of immediate concern to the Americas. First, we decline to encourage
the prosecution of war by permitting belligerents to obtain arms,
ammunition or implements of war from the United States. Second, we seek to
discourage the use by belligerent Nations of any and all American products
calculated to facilitate the prosecution of a war in quantities over and
above our normal exports of them in time of peace.

I trust that these objectives thus clearly and unequivocally stated will be
carried forward by cooperation between this Congress and the President.

I realize that I have emphasized to you the gravity of the situation which
confronts the people of the world. This emphasis is justified because of
its importance to civilization and therefore to the United States. Peace is
jeopardized by the few and not by the many. Peace is threatened by those
who seek selfish power. The world has witnessed similar eras--as in the
days when petty kings and feudal barons were changing the map of Europe
every fortnight, or when great emperors and great kings were engaged in a
mad scramble for colonial empire. We hope that we are not again at the
threshold of such an era. But if face it we must, then the United States
and the rest of the Americas can play but one role: through a well-ordered
neutrality to do naught to encourage the contest, through adequate defense
to save ourselves from embroilment and attack, and through example and all
legitimate encouragement and assistance to persuade other Nations to return
to the ways of peace and good-will.

The evidence before us clearly proves that autocracy in world affairs
endangers peace and that such threats do not spring from those Nations
devoted to the democratic ideal. If this be true in world affairs, it
should have the greatest weight in the determination of domestic policies.

Within democratic Nations the chief concern of the people is to prevent the
continuance or the rise of autocratic institutions that beget slavery at
home and aggression abroad. Within our borders, as in the world at large,
popular opinion is at war with a power-seeking minority.

That is no new thing. It was fought out in the Constitutional Convention of
1787. From time to time since then, the battle has been continued, under
Thomas Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson.

In these latter years we have witnessed the domination of government by
financial and industrial groups, numerically small but politically dominant
in the twelve years that succeeded the World War. The present group of
which I speak is indeed numerically small and, while it exercises a large
influence and has much to say in the world of business, it does not, I am
confident, speak the true sentiments of the less articulate but more
important elements that constitute real American business.

In March, 1933, I appealed to the Congress of the United States and to the
people of the United States in a new effort to restore power to those to
whom it rightfully belonged. The response to that appeal resulted in the
writing of a new chapter in the history of popular government. You, the
members of the Legislative branch, and I, the Executive, contended for and
established a new relationship between Government and people.

What were the terms of that new relationship? They were an appeal from the
clamor of many private and selfish interests, yes, an appeal from the
clamor of partisan interest, to the ideal of the public interest.
Government became the representative and the trustee of the public
interest. Our aim was to build upon essentially democratic institutions,
seeking all the while the adjustment of burdens, the help of the needy, the
protection of the weak, the liberation of the exploited and the genuine
protection of the people's property.

It goes without saying that to create such an economic constitutional
order, more than a single legislative enactment was called for. We, you in
the Congress and I as the Executive, had to build upon a broad base. Now,
after thirty-four months of work, we contemplate a fairly rounded whole. We
have returned the control of the Federal Government to the City of
Washington.

To be sure, in so doing, we have invited battle. We have earned the hatred
of entrenched greed. The very nature of the problem that we faced made it
necessary to drive some people from power and strictly to regulate others.
I made that plain when I took the oath of office in March, 1933. I spoke of
the practices of the unscrupulous money-changers who stood indicted in the
court of public opinion. I spoke of the rulers of the exchanges of
mankind's goods, who failed through their own stubbornness and their own
incompetence. I said that they had admitted their failure and had
abdicated.

Abdicated? Yes, in 1933, but now with the passing of danger they forget
their damaging admissions and withdraw their abdication.

They seek the restoration of their selfish power. They offer to lead us
back round the same old corner into the same old dreary street.

Yes, there are still determined groups that are intent upon that very
thing. Rigorously held up to popular examination, their true character
presents itself. They steal the livery of great national constitutional
ideals to serve discredited special interests. As guardians and trustees
for great groups of individual stockholders they wrongfully seek to carry
the property and the interests entrusted to them into the arena of partisan
politics. They seek--this minority in business and industry--to control and
often do control and use for their own purposes legitimate and highly
honored business associations; they engage in vast propaganda to spread
fear and discord among the people--they would "gang up" against the people's
liberties.

The principle that they would instill into government if they succeed in
seizing power is well shown by the principles which many of them have
instilled into their own affairs: autocracy toward labor, toward
stockholders, toward consumers, toward public sentiment. Autocrats in
smaller things, they seek autocracy in bigger things. "By their fruits ye
shall know them."

If these gentlemen believe, as they say they believe, that the measures
adopted by this Congress and its predecessor, and carried out by this
Administration, have hindered rather than promoted recovery, let them be
consistent. Let them propose to this Congress the complete repeal of these
measures. The way is open to such a proposal.

Let action be positive and not negative. The way is open in the Congress of
the United States for an expression of opinion by yeas and nays. Shall we
say that values are restored and that the Congress will, therefore, repeal
the laws under which we have been bringing them back? Shall we say that
because national income has grown with rising prosperity, we shall repeal
existing taxes and thereby put off the day of approaching a balanced budget
and of starting to reduce the national debt? Shall we abandon the
reasonable support and regulation of banking? Shall we restore the dollar
to its former gold content?

Shall we say to the farmer, "The prices for your products are in part
restored. Now go and hoe your own row?"

Shall we say to the home owners, "We have reduced your rates of interest.
We have no further concern with how you keep your home or what you pay for
your money. That is your affair?"

Shall we say to the several millions of unemployed citizens who face the
very problem of existence, of getting enough to eat, "We will withdraw from
giving you work. We will turn you back to the charity of your communities
and those men of selfish power who tell you that perhaps they will employ
you if the Government leaves them strictly alone?"

Shall we say to the needy unemployed, "Your problem is a local one except
that perhaps the Federal Government, as an act of mere generosity, will be
willing to pay to your city or to your county a few grudging dollars to
help maintain your soup kitchens?"

Shall we say to the children who have worked all day in the factories,
"Child labor is a local issue and so are your starvation wages; something
to be solved or left unsolved by the jurisdiction of forty-eight States?"

Shall we say to the laborer, "Your right to organize, your relations with
your employer have nothing to do with the public interest; if your employer
will not even meet with you to discuss your problems and his, that is none
of our affair?"

Shall we say to the unemployed and the aged, "Social security lies not
within the province of the Federal Government; you must seek relief
elsewhere?"

Shall we say to the men and women who live in conditions of squalor in
country and in city, "The health and the happiness of you and your children
are no concern of ours?"

Shall we expose our population once more by the repeal of laws which
protect them against the loss of their honest investments and against the
manipulations of dishonest speculators? Shall we abandon the splendid
efforts of the Federal Government to raise the health standards of the
Nation and to give youth a decent opportunity through such means as the
Civilian Conservation Corps?

Members of the Congress, let these challenges be met. If this is what these
gentlemen want, let them say so to the Congress of the United States. Let
them no longer hide their dissent in a cowardly cloak of generality. Let
them define the issue. We have been specific in our affirmative action. Let
them be specific in their negative attack.

But the challenge faced by this Congress is more menacing than merely a
return to the past--bad as that would be. Our resplendent economic autocracy
does not want to return to that individualism of which they prate, even
though the advantages under that system went to the ruthless and the
strong. They realize that in thirty-four months we have built up new
instruments of public power. In the hands of a people's Government this
power is wholesome and proper. But in the hands of political puppets of an
economic autocracy such power would provide shackles for the liberties of
the people. Give them their way and they will take the course of every
autocracy of the past--power for themselves, enslavement for the public.

Their weapon is the weapon of fear. I have said, "The only thing we have to
fear is fear itself." That is as true today as it was in 1933. But such
fear as they instill today is not a natural fear, a normal fear; it is a
synthetic, manufactured, poisonous fear that is being spread subtly,
expensively and cleverly by the same people who cried in those other days,
"Save us, save us, lest we perish."

I am confident that the Congress of the United States well understands the
facts and is ready to wage unceasing warfare against those who seek a
continuation of that spirit of fear. The carrying out of the laws of the
land as enacted by the Congress requires protection until final
adjudication by the highest tribunal of the land. The Congress has the
right and can find the means to protect its own prerogatives.

We are justified in our present confidence. Restoration of national income,
which shows continuing gains for the third successive year, supports the
normal and logical policies under which agriculture and industry are
returning to full activity. Under these policies we approach a balance of
the national budget. National income increases; tax receipts, based on that
income, increase without the levying of new taxes. That is why I am able to
say to this, the Second Session of the 74th Congress, that it is my belief
based on existing laws that no new taxes, over and above the present taxes,
are either advisable or necessary.

National income increases; employment increases. Therefore, we can look
forward to a reduction in the number of those citizens who are in need.
Therefore, also, we can anticipate a reduction in our appropriations for
relief.

In the light of our substantial material progress, in the light of the
increasing effectiveness of the restoration of popular rule, I recommend to
the Congress that we advance; that we do not retreat. I have confidence
that you will not fail the people of the Nation whose mandate you have
already so faithfully fulfilled.

I repeat, with the same faith and the same determination, my words of March
4, 1933: "We face the arduous days that lie before us in the warm courage
of national unity; with a clear consciousness of seeking old and precious
moral values; with a clean satisfaction that comes from the stern
performance of duty by old and young alike. We aim at the assurance of a
rounded and permanent national life. We do not distrust the future of
essential democracy."

I cannot better end this message on the state of the Union than by
repeating the words of a wise philosopher at whose feet I sat many, many
years ago.

"What great crises teach all men whom the example and counsel of the brave
inspire is the lesson: Fear not, view all the tasks of life as sacred, have
faith in the triumph of the ideal, give daily all that you have to give, be
loyal and rejoice whenever you find yourselves part of a great ideal
enterprise. You, at this moment, have the honor to belong to a generation
whose lips are touched by fire. You live in a land that now enjoys the
blessings of peace. But let nothing human be wholly alien to you. The human
race now passes through one of its great crises. New ideas, new issues--a
new call for men to carry on the work of righteousness, of charity, of
courage, of patience, and of loyalty. . . . However memory bring back this
moment to your minds, let it be able to say to you: That was a great
moment. It was the beginning of a new era. . . . This world in its crisis
called for volunteers, for men of faith in life, of patience in service, of
charity and of insight. I responded to the call however I could. I
volunteered to give myself to my Master--the cause of humane and brave
living. I studied, I loved, I labored, unsparingly and hopefully, to be
worthy of my generation."

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 6, 1937

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Congress of the United States:

For the first time in our national history a President delivers his Annual
Message to a new Congress within a fortnight of the expiration of his term
of office. While there is no change in the Presidency this year, change
will occur in future years. It is my belief that under this new
constitutional practice, the President should in every fourth year, in so
far as seems reasonable, review the existing state of our national affairs
and outline broad future problems, leaving specific recommendations for
future legislation to be made by the President about to be inaugurated.

At this time, however, circumstances of the moment compel me to ask your
immediate consideration of: First, measures extending the life of certain
authorizations and powers which, under present statutes, expire within a
few weeks; second, an addition to the existing Neutrality Act to cover
specific points raised by the unfortunate civil strife in Spain; and,
third, a deficiency appropriation bill for which I shall submit estimates
this week.

In March, 1933, the problems which faced our Nation and which only our
national Government had the resources to meet were more serious even than
appeared on the surface.

It was not only that the visible mechanism of economic life had broken
down. More disturbing was the fact that long neglect of the needs of the
underprivileged had brought too many of our people to the verge of doubt as
to the successful adaptation of our historic traditions to the complex
modern world. In that lay a challenge to our democratic form of Government
itself.

Ours was the task to prove that democracy could be made to function in the
world of today as effectively as in the simpler world of a hundred years
ago. Ours was the task to do more than to argue a theory. The times
required the confident answer of performance to those whose instinctive
faith in humanity made them want to believe that in the long run democracy
would prove superior to more extreme forms of Government as a process of
getting action when action was wisdom, without the spiritual sacrifices
which those other forms of Government exact.

That challenge we met. To meet it required unprecedented activities under
Federal leadership to end abuses, to restore a large measure of material
prosperity, to give new faith to millions of our citizens who had been
traditionally taught to expect that democracy would provide continuously
wider opportunity and continuously greater security in a world where
science was continuously making material riches more available to man.

In the many methods of attack with which we met these problems, you and I,
by mutual understanding and by determination to cooperate, helped to make
democracy succeed by refusing to permit unnecessary disagreement to arise
between two of our branches of Government. That spirit of cooperation was
able to solve difficulties of extraordinary magnitude and ramification with
few important errors, and at a cost cheap when measured by the immediate
necessities and the eventual results.

I look forward to a continuance of that cooperation in the next four years.
I look forward also to a continuance of the basis of that cooperation--
mutual respect for each other's proper sphere of functioning in a democracy
which is working well, and a common-sense realization of the need for play
in the joints of the machine.

On that basis, it is within the right of the Congress to determine which of
the many new activities shall be continued or abandoned, increased or
curtailed.

On that same basis, the President alone has the responsibility for their
administration. I find that this task of Executive management has reached
the point where our administrative machinery needs comprehensive
overhauling. I shall, therefore, shortly address the Congress more fully in
regard to modernizing and improving the Executive branch of the
Government.

That cooperation of the past four years between the Congress and the
President has aimed at the fulfillment of a twofold policy: first, economic
recovery through many kinds of assistance to agriculture, industry and
banking; and, second, deliberate improvement in the personal security and
opportunity of the great mass of our people.

The recovery we sought was not to be merely temporary. It was to be a
recovery protected from the causes of previous disasters. With that aim in
view--to prevent a future similar crisis--you and I joined in a series of
enactments--safe banking and sound currency, the guarantee of bank deposits,
protection for the investor in securities, the removal of the threat of
agricultural surpluses, insistence on collective bargaining, the outlawing
of sweat shops, child labor and unfair trade practices, and the beginnings
of security for the aged and the worker.

Nor was the recovery we sought merely a purposeless whirring of machinery.
It is important, of course, that every man and woman in the country be able
to find work, that every factory run, that business and farming as a whole
earn profits. But Government in a democratic Nation does not exist solely,
or even primarily, for that purpose.

It is not enough that the wheels turn. They must carry us in the direction
of a greater satisfaction in life for the average man. The deeper purpose
of democratic government is to assist as many of its citizens as possible,
especially those who need it most, to improve their conditions of life, to
retain all personal liberty which does not adversely affect their
neighbors, and to pursue the happiness which comes with security and an
opportunity for recreation and culture.

Even with our present recovery we are far from the goal of that deeper
purpose. There are far-reaching problems still with us for which democracy
must find solutions if it is to consider itself successful.

For example, many millions of Americans still live in habitations which not
only fail to provide the physical benefits of modern civilization but breed
disease and impair the health of future generations. The menace exists not
only in the slum areas of the very large cities, but in many smaller cities
as well. It exists on tens of thousands of farms, in varying degrees, in
every part of the country.

Another example is the prevalence of an un-American type of tenant farming.
I do not suggest that every farm family has the capacity to earn a
satisfactory living on its own farm. But many thousands of tenant farmers,
indeed most of them, with some financial assistance and with some advice
and training, can be made self-supporting on land which can eventually
belong to them. The Nation would be wise to offer them that chance instead
of permitting them to go along as they do now, year after year, with
neither future security as tenants nor hope of ownership of their homes nor
expectation of bettering the lot of their children.

Another national problem is the intelligent development of our social
security system, the broadening of the services it renders, and practical
improvement in its operation. In many Nations where such laws are in
effect, success in meeting the expectations of the community has come
through frequent amendment of the original statute.

And, of course, the most far-reaching and the most inclusive problem of all
is that of unemployment and the lack of economic balance of which
unemployment is at once the result and the symptom. The immediate question
of adequate relief for the needy unemployed who are capable of performing
useful work, I shall discuss with the Congress during the coming months.
The broader task of preventing unemployment is a matter of long-range
evolutionary policy. To that we must continue to give our best thought and
effort. We cannot assume that immediate industrial and commercial activity
which mitigates present pressures justifies the national Government at this
time in placing the unemployment problem in a filing cabinet of finished
business.

Fluctuations in employment are tied to all other wasteful fluctuations in
our mechanism of production and distribution. One of these wastes is
speculation. In securities or commodities, the larger the volume of
speculation, the wider become the upward and downward swings and the more
certain the result that in the long run there will be more losses than
gains in the underlying wealth of the community.

And, as is now well known to all of us, the same net loss to society comes
from reckless overproduction and monopolistic underproduction of natural
and manufactured commodities.

Overproduction, underproduction and speculation are three evil sisters who
distill the troubles of unsound inflation and disastrous deflation. It is
to the interest of the Nation to have Government help private enterprise to
gain sound general price levels and to protect those levels from wide
perilous fluctuations. We know now that if early in 1931 Government had
taken the steps which were taken two and three years later, the depression
would never have reached the depths of the beginning of 1933.

Sober second thought confirms most of us in the belief that the broad
objectives of the National Recovery Act were sound. We know now that its
difficulties arose from the fact that it tried to do too much. For example,
it was unwise to expect the same agency to regulate the length of working
hours, minimum wages, child labor and collective bargaining on the one hand
and the complicated questions of unfair trade practices and business
controls on the other.

The statute of N.R.A. has been outlawed. The problems have not. They are
still with us.

That decent conditions and adequate pay for labor, and just return for
agriculture, can be secured through parallel and simultaneous action by
forty-eight States is a proven impossibility. It is equally impossible to
obtain curbs on monopoly, unfair trade practices and speculation by State
action alone. There are those who, sincerely or insincerely, still cling to
State action as a theoretical hope. But experience with actualities makes
it clear that Federal laws supplementing State laws are needed to help
solve the problems which result from modern invention applied in an
industrialized Nation which conducts its business with scant regard to
State lines.

During the past year there has been a growing belief that there is little
fault to be found with the Constitution of the United States as it stands
today. The vital need is not an alteration of our fundamental law, but an
increasingly enlightened view with reference to it. Difficulties have grown
out of its interpretation; but rightly considered, it can be used as an
instrument of progress, and not as a device for prevention of action.

It is worth our while to read and reread the preamble of the Constitution,
and Article I thereof which confers the legislative powers upon the
Congress of the United States. It is also worth our while to read again the
debates in the Constitutional Convention of one hundred and fifty years
ago. From such reading, I obtain the very definite thought that the members
of that Convention were fully aware that civilization would raise problems
for the proposed new Federal Government, which they themselves could not
even surmise; and that it was their definite intent and expectation that a
liberal interpretation in the years to come would give to the Congress the
same relative powers over new national problems as they themselves gave to
the Congress over the national problems of their day.

In presenting to the Convention the first basic draft of the Constitution,
Edmund Randolph explained that it was the purpose "to insert essential
principles only, lest the operation of government should be clogged by
rendering those provisions permanent and unalterable which ought to be
accommodated to times and events."

With a better understanding of our purposes, and a more intelligent
recognition of our needs as a Nation, it is not to be assumed that there
will be prolonged failure to bring legislative and judicial action into
closer harmony. Means must be found to adapt our legal forms and our
judicial interpretation to the actual present national needs of the largest
progressive democracy in the modern world.

That thought leads to a consideration of world problems. To go no further
back than the beginning of this century, men and women everywhere were
seeking conditions of life very different from those which were customary
before modern invention and modern industry and modern communications had
come into being. The World war, for all of its tragedy, encouraged these
demands, and stimulated action to fulfill these new desires.

Many national Governments seemed unable adequately to respond; and, often
with the improvident assent of the masses of the people themselves, new
forms of government were set up with oligarchy taking the place of
democracy. In oligarchies, militarism has leapt forward, while in those
Nations which have retained democracy, militarism has waned.

I have recently visited three of our sister Republics in South America. The
very cordial receptions with which I was greeted were in tribute to
democracy. To me the outstanding observation of that visit was that the
masses of the peoples of all the Americas are convinced that the democratic
form of government can be made to succeed and do not wish to substitute for
it any other form of government. They believe that democracies are best
able to cope with the changing problems of modern civilization within
themselves, and that democracies are best able to maintain peace among
themselves.

The Inter-American Conference, operating on these fundamental principles of
democracy, did much to assure peace in this Hemisphere. Existing peace
machinery was improved. New instruments to maintain peace and eliminate
causes of war were adopted. Wider protection of the interests of the
American Republics in the event of war outside the Western Hemisphere was
provided. Respect for, and observance of, international treaties and
international law were strengthened. Principles of liberal trade policies,
as effective aids to the maintenance of peace, were reaffirmed. The
intellectual and cultural relationships among American Republics were
broadened as a part of the general peace program.

In a world unhappily thinking in terms of war, the representatives of
twenty-one Nations sat around a table, in an atmosphere of complete
confidence and understanding, sincerely discussing measures for maintaining
peace. Here was a great and a permanent achievement directly affecting the
lives and security of the two hundred and fifty million human beings who
dwell in this Western Hemisphere. Here was an example which must have a
wholesome effect upon the rest of the world.

In a very real sense, the Conference in Buenos Aires sent forth a message
on behalf of all the democracies of the world to those Nations which live
otherwise. Because such other Governments are perhaps more spectacular, it
was high time for democracy to assert itself.

Because all of us believe that our democratic form of government can cope
adequately with modern problems as they arise, it is patriotic as well as
logical for us to prove that we can meet new national needs with new laws
consistent with an historic constitutional framework clearly intended to
receive liberal and not narrow interpretation.

The United States of America, within itself, must continue the task of
making democracy succeed.

In that task the Legislative branch of our Government will, I am confident,
continue to meet the demands of democracy whether they relate to the
curbing of abuses, the extension of help to those who need help, or the
better balancing of our interdependent economies.

So, too, the Executive branch of the Government must move forward in this
task, and, at the same time, provide better management for administrative
action of all kinds.

The Judicial branch also is asked by the people to do its part in making
democracy successful. We do not ask the Courts to call non-existent powers
into being, but we have a right to expect that conceded powers or those
legitimately implied shall be made effective instruments for the common
good.

The process of our democracy must not be imperiled by the denial of
essential powers of free government.

Your task and mine is not ending with the end of the depression. The people
of the United States have made it clear that they expect us to continue our
active efforts in behalf of their peaceful advancement.

In that spirit of endeavor and service I greet the 75th Congress at the
beginning of this auspicious New Year.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 3, 1938

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Senate and of the House of
Representatives:

In addressing the Congress on the state of the Union present facts and
future hazards demand that I speak clearly and earnestly of the causes
which underlie events of profound concern to all.

In spite of the determination of this Nation for peace, it has become clear
that acts and policies of nations in other parts of the world have
far-reaching effects not only upon their immediate neighbors but also on
us.

I am thankful that I can tell you that our Nation is at peace. It has been
kept at peace despite provocations which in other days, because of their
seriousness, could well have engendered war. The people of the United
States and the Government of the United States have shown capacity for
restraint and a civilized approach to the purposes of peace, while at the
same time we maintain the integrity inherent in the sovereignty of
130,000,000 people, lest we weaken or destroy our influence for peace and
jeopardize the sovereignty itself.

It is our traditional policy to live at peace with other nations. More than
that, we have been among the leaders in advocating the use of pacific
methods of discussion and conciliation in international differences. We
have striven for the reduction of military forces.

But in a world of high tension and disorder, in a world where stable
civilization is actually threatened, it becomes the responsibility of each
nation which strives for peace at home and peace with and among others to
be strong enough to assure the observance of those fundamentals of peaceful
solution of conflicts which are the only ultimate basis for orderly
existence.

Resolute in our determination to respect the rights of others, and to
command respect for the rights of ourselves, we must keep ourselves
adequately strong in self-defense.

There is a trend in the world away from the observance both of the letter
and the spirit of treaties. We propose to observe, as we have in the past,
our own treaty obligations to the limit; but we cannot be certain of
reciprocity on the part of others.

Disregard for treaty obligations seems to have followed the surface trend
away from the democratic representative form of government. It would seem,
therefore, that world peace through international agreements is most safe
in the hands of democratic representative governments--or, in other words,
peace is most greatly jeopardized in and by those nations where democracy
has been discarded or has never developed.

I have used the words "surface trend," for I still believe that civilized
man increasingly insists and in the long run will insist on genuine
participation in his own government. Our people believe that over the years
democracies of the world will survive, and that democracy will be restored
or established in those nations which today know it not. In that faith lies
the future peace of mankind.

At home, conditions call for my equal candor. Events of recent months are
new proof that we cannot conduct a national government after the practice
of 1787, or 1837 or 1887, for the obvious reason that human needs and human
desires are infinitely greater, infinitely more difficult to meet than in
any previous period in the life of our Republic. Hitherto it has been an
acknowledged duty of government to meet these desires and needs: nothing
has occurred of late to absolve the Congress, the Courts or the President
from that task. It faces us as squarely, as insistently, as in March,
1933.

Much of trouble in our own lifetime has sprung from a long period of
inaction--from ignoring what fundamentally was happening to us, and from a
time-serving unwillingness to face facts as they forced themselves upon
us.

Our national life rests on two nearly equal producing forces, agriculture
and industry, each employing about one-third of our citizens. The other
third transports and distributes the products of the first two, or performs
special services for the whole.

The first great force, agriculture--and with it the production of timber,
minerals and other natural resources--went forward feverishly and
thoughtlessly until nature rebelled and we saw deserts encroach, floods
destroy, trees disappear and soil exhausted.

At the same time we have been discovering that vast numbers of our farming
population live in a poverty more abject than that of many of the farmers
of Europe whom we are wont to call peasants; that the prices of our
products of agriculture are too often dependent on speculation by
non-farming groups; and that foreign nations, eager to become
self-sustaining or ready to put virgin land under the plough are no longer
buying our surpluses of cotton and wheat and lard and tobacco and fruit as
they had before.

Since 1933 we have knowingly faced a choice of three remedies. First, to
cut our cost of farm production below that of other nations--an obvious
impossibility in many crops today unless we revert to human slavery or its
equivalent.

Second, to make the government the guarantor of farm prices and the
underwriter of excess farm production without limit--a course which would
bankrupt the strongest government in the world in a decade.

Third, to place the primary responsibility directly on the farmers
themselves, under the principle of majority rule, so that they may decide,
with full knowledge of the facts of surpluses, scarcities, world markets
and domestic needs, what the planting of each crop should be in order to
maintain a reasonably adequate supply which will assure a minimum adequate
price under the normal processes of the law of supply and demand.

That means adequacy of supply but not glut. It means adequate reserves
against the day of drought. It is shameless misrepresentation to call this
a policy of scarcity. It is in truth insurance before the fact, instead of
government subsidy after the fact.

Any such plan for the control of excessive surpluses and the speculation
they bring has two enemies. There are those well meaning theorists who harp
on the inherent right of every free born American to do with his land what
he wants--to cultivate it well--or badly; to conserve his timber by cutting
only the annual increment thereof--or to strip it clean, let fire burn the
slash, and erosion complete the ruin; to raise only one crop--and if that
crop fails, to look for food and support from his neighbors or his
government.

That, I assert is not an inherent right of citizenship. For if a man farms
his land to the waste of the soil or the trees, he destroys not only his
own assets but the Nation's assets as well. Or if by his methods he makes
himself, year after year, a financial hazard of the community and the
government, he becomes not only a social problem but an economic menace.
The day has gone by when it could be claimed that government has no
interest in such ill-considered practices and no right through
representative methods to stop them.

The other group of enemies is perhaps less well-meaning. It includes those
who for partisan purposes oppose each and every practical effort to help
the situation, and also those who make money from undue fluctuations in
crop prices.

I gladly note that measures which seek to initiate a government program for
a balanced agriculture are now in conference between the two Houses of the
Congress. In their final consideration, I hope for a sound consistent
measure which will keep the cost of its administration within the figure of
current government expenditures in aid of agriculture. The farmers of this
Nation know that a balanced output can be put into effect without excessive
cost and with the cooperation of the great majority of them.

If this balance can be created by an all-weather farm program, our farm
population will soon be assured of relatively constant purchasing power.
From this will flow two other practical results: the consuming public will
be protected against excessive food and textile prices, and the industries
of the Nation and their workers will find a steadier demand for wares sold
to the agricultural third of our people.

To raise the purchasing power of the farmer is, however, not enough. It
will not stay raised if we do not also raise the purchasing power of that
third of the Nation which receives its income from industrial employment.
Millions of industrial workers receive pay so low that they have little
buying power. Aside from the undoubted fact that they thereby suffer great
human hardship, they are unable to buy adequate food and shelter, to
maintain health or to buy their share of manufactured goods.

We have not only seen minimum wage and maximum hour provisions prove their
worth economically and socially under government auspices in 1933, 1934 and
1935, but the people of this country, by an overwhelming vote, are in favor
of having the Congress--this Congress--put a floor below which industrial
wages shall not fall, and a ceiling beyond which the hours of industrial
labor shall not rise.

Here again let us analyze the opposition. A part of it is sincere in
believing that an effort thus to raise the purchasing power of lowest paid
industrial workers is not the business of the Federal Government. Others
give "lip service" to a general objective, but do not like any specific
measure that is proposed. In both cases it is worth our while to wonder
whether some of these opponents are not at heart opposed to any program for
raising the wages of the underpaid or reducing the hours of the
overworked.

Another group opposes legislation of this type on the ground that cheap
labor will help their locality to acquire industries and outside capital,
or to retain industries which today are surviving only because of existing
low wages and long hours. It has been my thought that, especially during
these past five years, this Nation has grown away from local or sectional
selfishness and toward national patriotism and unity. I am disappointed by
some recent actions and by some recent utterances which sound like the
philosophy of half a century ago.

There are many communities in the United States where the average family
income is pitifully low. It is in those communities that we find the
poorest educational facilities and the worst conditions of health. Why? It
is not because they are satisfied to live as they do. It is because those
communities have the lowest per capita wealth and income; therefore, the
lowest ability to pay taxes; and, therefore, inadequate functioning of
local government.

Such communities exist in the East, in the Middle West, in the Far West,
and in the South. Those who represent such areas in every part of the
country do their constituents ill service by blocking efforts to raise
their incomes, their property values and, therefore, their whole scale of
living. In the long run, the profits from Child labor, low pay and overwork
enure not to the locality or region where they exist but to the absentee
owners who have sent their capital into these exploited communities to
gather larger profits for themselves. Indeed, new enterprises and new
industries which bring permanent wealth will come more readily to those
communities which insist on good pay and reasonable hours, for the simple
reason that there they will find a greater industrial efficiency and
happier workers.

No reasonable person seeks a complete uniformity in wages in every part of
the United States; nor does any reasonable person seek an immediate and
drastic change from the lowest pay to the highest pay. We are seeking, of
course, only legislation to end starvation wages and intolerable hours;
more desirable wages are and should continue to be the product of
collective bargaining.

Many of those who represent great cities have shown their understanding of
the necessity of helping the agricultural third of the Nation. I hope that
those who represent constituencies primarily agricultural will not
underestimate the importance of extending like aid to the industrial
third.

Wage and hour legislation, therefore, is a problem which is definitely
before this Congress for action. It is an essential part of economic
recovery. It has the support of an overwhelming majority of our people in
every walk of life. They have expressed themselves through the ballot box.

Again I revert to the increase of national purchasing power as an
underlying necessity of the day. If you increase that purchasing power for
the farmers and for the industrial workers, especially for those in both
groups who have least of it today, you will increase the purchasing power
of the final third of our population--those who transport and distribute the
products of farm and factory, and those of the professions who serve all
groups. I have tried to make clear to you, and through you to the people of
the United States, that this is an urgency which must be met by complete
and not by partial action.

If it is met, if the purchasing power of the Nation as a whole--in other
words, the total of the Nation's income--can be still further increased,
other happy results will flow from such increase.

We have raised the Nation's income from thirty-eight billion dollars in the
year 1932 to about sixty-eight billion dollars in the year 1937. Our goal,
our objective is to raise it to ninety or one hundred billion dollars.

We have heard much about a balanced budget, and it is interesting to note
that many of those who have pleaded for a balanced budget as the sole need
now come to me to plead for additional government expenditures at the
expense of unbalancing the budget. As the Congress is fully aware, the
annual deficit, large for several years, has been declining the last fiscal
year and this. The proposed budget for 1939, which I shall shortly send to
the Congress, will exhibit a further decrease in the deficit, though not a
balance between income and outgo.

To many who have pleaded with me for an immediate balancing of the budget,
by a sharp curtailment or even elimination of government functions, I have
asked the question: "What present expenditures would you reduce or
eliminate?" And the invariable answer has been "that is not my business--I
know nothing of the details, but I am sure that it could be done." That is
not what you or I would call helpful citizenship.

On only one point do most of them have a suggestion. They think that relief
for the unemployed by the giving of work is wasteful, and when I pin them
down I discover that at heart they are actually in favor of substituting a
dole in place of useful work. To that neither I nor, I am confident, the
Senators and Representatives in the Congress will ever consent.

I am as anxious as any banker or industrialist or business man or investor
or economist that the budget of the United States Government be brought
into balance as quickly as possible. But I lay down certain conditions
which seem reasonable and which I believe all should accept.

The first condition is that we continue the policy of not permitting any
needy American who can and is willing to work to starve because the Federal
Government does not provide the work.

The second is that the Congress and the Executive join hands in eliminating
or curtailing any Federal activity which can be eliminated or curtailed or
even postponed without harming necessary government functions or the safety
of the Nation from a national point of view.

The third is to raise the purchasing power of the Nation to the point that
the taxes on this purchasing power--or, in other words, on the Nation's
income--will be sufficient to meet the necessary expenditures of the
national government.

I have hitherto stated that, in my judgment, the expenditures of the
national government cannot be cut much below seven billion dollars a year
without destroying essential functions or letting people starve. That sum
can be raised and will be cheerfully provided by the American people, if we
can increase the Nation's income to a point well beyond the present level.

This does not mean that as the Nation's income goes up the Federal
expenditures should rise in proportion. On the contrary, the Congress and
the Executive should use every effort to hold the normal Federal
expenditures to approximately the present level, thus making it possible,
with an increase in the Nation's income and the resulting increase in tax
receipts, not only to balance future budgets but to reduce the debt.

In line with this policy fall my former recommendations for the
reorganization and improvement of the administrative structure of the
government, both for immediate Executive needs and for the planning of
future national needs. I renew those recommendations.

In relation to tax changes, three things should be kept in mind. First, the
total sum to be derived by the Federal Treasury must not be decreased as a
result of any changes in schedules. Second, abuses by individuals or
corporations designed to escape tax-paying by using various methods of
doing business, corporate and otherwise--abuses which we have sought, with
great success, to end--must not be restored. Third, we should rightly change
certain provisions where they are proven to work definite hardship,
especially on the small business men of the Nation. But, speculative income
should not be favored over earned income.

It is human nature to argue that this or that tax is responsible for every
ill. It is human nature on the part of those who pay graduated taxes to
attack all taxes based on the principle of ability to pay. These are the
same complainants who for a generation blocked the imposition of a
graduated income tax. They are the same complainants who would impose the
type of flat sales tax which places the burden of government more on those
least able to pay and less on those most able to pay.

Our conclusion must be that while proven hardships should be corrected,
they should not be corrected in such a way as to restore abuses already
terminated or to shift a greater burden to the less fortunate.

This subject leads naturally into the wider field of the public attitude
toward business. The objective of increasing the purchasing power of the
farming third, the industrial third and the service third of our population
presupposes the cooperation of what we call capital and labor.

Capital is essential; reasonable earnings on capital are essential; but
misuse of the powers of capital or selfish suspension of the employment of
capital must be ended, or the capitalistic system will destroy itself
through its own abuses.

The overwhelming majority of business men and bankers intend to be good
citizens. Only a small minority have displayed poor citizenship by engaging
in practices which are dishonest or definitely harmful to society. This
statement is straightforward and true. No person in any responsible place
in the Government of the United States today has ever taken any position
contrary to it.

But, unfortunately for the country, when attention is called to, or attack
is made on specific misuses of capital, there has been a deliberate purpose
on the part of the condemned minority to distort the criticism into an
attack on all capital. That is wilful deception but it does not long
deceive.

If attention is called to, or attack made on, certain wrongful business
practices, there are those who are eager to call it "an attack on all
business." That, too, is wilful deception that will not long deceive. Let
us consider certain facts:

There are practices today which most people believe should be ended. They
include tax avoidance through corporate and other methods, which I have
previously mentioned; excessive capitalization, investment write-ups and
security manipulations; price rigging and collusive bidding in defiance of
the spirit of the antitrust laws by methods which baffle prosecution under
the present statutes. They include high-pressure salesmanship which creates
cycles of overproduction within given industries and consequent recessions
in production until such time as the surplus is consumed; the use of patent
laws to enable larger corporations to maintain high prices and withhold
from the public the advantages of the progress of science; unfair
competition which drives the smaller producer out of business locally,
regionally or even on a national scale; intimidation of local or state
government to prevent the enactment of laws for the protection of labor by
threatening to move elsewhere; the shifting of actual production from one
locality or region to another in pursuit of the cheapest wage scale.

The enumeration of these abuses does not mean that business as a whole is
guilty of them. Again, it is deception that will not long deceive to tell
the country that an attack on these abuses is an attack on business.

Another group of problems affecting business, which cannot be termed
specific abuses, gives us food for grave thought about the future.
Generically such problems arise out of the concentration of economic
control to the detriment of the body politic--control of other people's
money, other people's labor, other people's lives.

In many instances such concentrations cannot be justified on the ground of
operating efficiency, but have been created for the sake of securities
profits, financial control, the suppression of competition and the ambition
for power over others. In some lines of industry a very small numerical
group is in such a position of influence that its actions are of necessity
followed by the other units operating in the same field.

That such influences operate to control banking and finance is equally
true, in spite of the many efforts, through Federal legislation, to take
such control out of the hands of a small group. We have but to talk with
hundreds of small bankers throughout the United States to realize that
irrespective of local conditions, they are compelled in practice to accept
the policies laid down by a small number of the larger banks in the Nation.
The work undertaken by Andrew Jackson and Woodrow Wilson is not finished
yet.

The ownership of vast properties or the organization of thousands of
workers creates a heavy obligation of public service. The power should not
be sought or sanctioned unless the responsibility is accepted as well. The
man who seeks freedom from such responsibility in the name of individual
liberty is either fooling himself or trying to cheat his fellow men. He
wants to eat the fruits of orderly society without paying for them.

As a Nation we have rejected any radical revolutionary program. For a
permanent correction of grave weaknesses in our economic system we have
relied on new applications of old democratic processes. It is not necessary
to recount what has been accomplished in preserving the homes and
livelihood of millions of workers on farms and in cities, in reconstructing
a sound banking and credit system, in reviving trade and industry, in
reestablishing security of life and property. All we need today is to look
upon the fundamental, sound economic conditions to know that this business
recession causes more perplexity than fear on the part of most people and
to contrast our prevailing mental attitude with the terror and despair of
five years ago.

Furthermore, we have a new moral climate in America. That means that we ask
business and finance to recognize that fact, to cure such inequalities as
they can cure without legislation but to join their government in the
enactment of legislation where the ending of abuses and the steady
functioning of our economic system calls for government assistance. The
Nation has no obligation to make America safe either for incompetent
business men or for business men who fail to note the trend of the times
and continue the use of machinery of economics and practices of finance as
outworn as the cotton spindle of 1870.

Government can be expected to cooperate in every way with the business of
the Nation provided the component parts of business abandon practices which
do not belong to this day and age, and adopt price and production policies
appropriate to the times.

In regard to the relationship of government to certain processes of
business, to which I have referred, it seems clear to me that existing laws
undoubtedly require reconstruction. I expect, therefore, to address the
Congress in a special message on this subject, and I hope to have the help
of business in the efforts of government to help business.

I have spoken of labor as another essential in the three great groups of
the population in raising the Nation's income. Definite strides in
collective bargaining have been made and the right of labor to organize has
been nationally accepted. Nevertheless in the evolution of the process
difficult situations have arisen in localities and among groups.
Unfortunate divisions relating to jurisdiction among the workers themselves
have retarded production within given industries and have, therefore,
affected related industries. The construction of homes and other buildings
has been hindered in some localities not only by unnecessarily high prices
for materials but also by certain hourly wage scales.

For economic and social reasons our principal interest for the near future
lies along two lines: first, the immediate desirability of increasing the
wages of the lowest paid groups in all industry; and, second, in thinking
in terms of regularizing the work of the individual worker more greatly
through the year--in other words, in thinking more in terms of the worker's
total pay for a period of a whole year rather than in terms of his
remuneration by the hour or by the day.

In the case of labor as in the case of capital, misrepresentation of the
policy of the government of the United States is deception which will not
long deceive. In both cases we seek cooperation. In every case power and
responsibility must go hand in hand.

I have spoken of economic causes which throw the Nation's income out of
balance; I have spoken of practices and abuses which demand correction
through the cooperation of capital and labor with the government. But no
government can help the destinies of people who insist in putting sectional
and class consciousness ahead of general weal. There must be proof that
sectional and class interests are prepared more greatly than they are today
to be national in outlook.

A government can punish specific acts of spoliation; but no government can
conscript cooperation. We have improved some matters by way of remedial
legislation. But where in some particulars that legislation has failed we
cannot be sure whether it fails because some of its details are unwise or
because it is being sabotaged. At any rate, we hold our objectives and our
principles to be sound. We will never go back on them.

Government has a final responsibility for the well-being of its
citizenship. If private cooperative endeavor fails to provide work for
willing hands and relief for the unfortunate, those suffering hardship from
no fault of their own have a right to call upon the Government for aid; and
a government worthy of its name must make fitting response.

It is the opportunity and the duty of all those who have faith in
democratic methods as applied in industry, in agriculture and in business,
as well as in the field of politics, to do their utmost to cooperate with
government--without regard to political affiliation, special interests or
economic prejudices--in whatever program may be sanctioned by the chosen
representatives of the people.

That presupposes on the part of the representatives of the people, a
program, its enactment and its administration.

Not because of the pledges of party programs alone, not because of the
clear policies of the past five years, but chiefly because of the need of
national unity in ending mistakes of the past and meeting the necessities
of today, we must carry on. I do not propose to let the people down.

I am sure the Congress of the United States will not let the people down.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 4, 1939

Mr. Vice President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Senate and the Congress:

In Reporting on the state of the nation, I have felt it necessary on
previous occasions to advise the Congress of disturbance abroad and of the
need of putting our own house in order in the face of storm signals from
across the seas. As this Seventy-sixth Congress opens there is need for
further warning.

A war which threatened to envelop the world in flames has been averted; but
it has become increasingly clear that world peace is not assured.

All about us rage undeclared wars--military and economic. All about us grow
more deadly armaments--military and economic. All about us are threats of
new aggression military and economic.

Storms from abroad directly challenge three institutions indispensable to
Americans, now as always. The first is religion. It is the source of the
other two--democracy and international good faith.

Religion, by teaching man his relationship to God, gives the individual a
sense of his own dignity and teaches him to respect himself by respecting
his neighbors.

Democracy, the practice of self-government, is a covenant among free men to
respect the rights and liberties of their fellows.

International good faith, a sister of democracy, springs from the will of
civilized nations of men to respect the rights and liberties of other
nations of men.

In a modern civilization, all three--religion, democracy and international
good faith--complement and support each other.

Where freedom of religion has been attacked, the attack has come from
sources opposed to democracy. Where democracy has been overthrown, the
spirit of free worship has disappeared. And where religion and democracy
have vanished, good faith and reason in international affairs have given
way to strident ambition and brute force.

An ordering of society which relegates religion, democracy and good faith
among nations to the background can find no place within it for the ideals
of the Prince of Peace. The United States rejects such an ordering, and
retains its ancient faith.

There comes a time in the affairs of men when they must prepare to defend,
not their homes alone, but the tenets of faith and humanity on which their
churches, their governments and their very civilization are founded. The
defense of religion, of democracy and of good faith among nations is all
the same fight. To save one we must now make up our minds to save all.

We know what might happen to us of the United States if the new
philosophies of force were to encompass the other continents and invade our
own. We, no more than other nations, can afford to be surrounded by the
enemies of our faith and our humanity. Fortunate it is, therefore, that in
this Western Hemisphere we have, under a common ideal of democratic
government, a rich diversity of resources and of peoples functioning
together in mutual respect and peace.

That Hemisphere, that peace, and that ideal we propose to do our share in
protecting against storms from any quarter. Our people and our resources
are pledged to secure that protection. From that determination no American
flinches.

This by no means implies that the American Republics disassociate
themselves from the nations of other continents. It does not mean the
Americas against the rest of the world. We as one of the Republics
reiterate our willingness to help the cause of world peace. We stand on our
historic offer to take counsel with all other nations of the world to the
end that aggression among them be terminated, that the race of armaments
cease and that commerce be renewed.

But the world has grown so small and weapons of attack so swift that no
nation can be safe in its will to peace so long as any other powerful
nation refuses to settle its grievances at the council table.

For if any government bristling with implements of war insists on policies
of force, weapons of defense give the only safety.

In our foreign relations we have learned from the past what not to do. From
new wars we have learned what we must do.

We have learned that effective timing of defense, and the distant points
from which attacks may be launched are completely different from what they
were twenty years ago.

We have learned that survival cannot be guaranteed by arming after the
attack begins--for there is new range and speed to offense.

We have learned that long before any overt military act, aggression begins
with preliminaries of propaganda, subsidized penetration, the loosening of
ties of good will, the stirring of prejudice and the incitement to
disunion.

We have learned that God-fearing democracies of the world which observe the
sanctity of treaties and good faith in their dealings with other nations
cannot safely be indifferent to international lawlessness anywhere. They
cannot forever let pass, without effective protest, acts of aggression
against sister nations--acts which automatically undermine all of us.

Obviously they must proceed along practical, peaceful lines. But the mere
fact that we rightly decline to intervene with arms to prevent acts of
aggression does not mean that we must act as if there were no aggression at
all. Words may be futile, but war is not the only means of commanding a
decent respect for the opinions of mankind. There are many methods short of
war, but stronger and more effective than mere words, of bringing home to
aggressor governments the aggregate sentiments of our own people.

At the very least, we can and should avoid any action, or any lack of
action, which will encourage, assist or build up an aggressor. We have
learned that when we deliberately try to legislate neutrality, our
neutrality laws may operate unevenly and unfairly--may actually give aid to
an aggressor and deny it to the victim. The instinct of self-preservation
should warn us that we ought not to let that happen any more.

And we have learned something else--the old, old lesson that probability of
attack is mightily decreased by the assurance of an ever ready defense.
Since 1931, nearly eight years ago, world events of thunderous import have
moved with lightning speed. During these eight years many of our people
clung to the hope that the innate decency of mankind would protect the
unprepared who showed their innate trust in mankind. Today we are all
wiser--and sadder.

Under modern conditions what we mean by "adequate defense"--a policy
subscribed to by all of us--must be divided into three elements. First, we
must have armed forces and defenses strong enough to ward off sudden attack
against strategic positions and key facilities essential to ensure
sustained resistance and ultimate victory. Secondly, we must have the
organization and location of those key facilities so that they may be
immediately utilized and rapidly expanded to meet all needs without danger
of serious interruption by enemy attack.

In the course of a few days I shall send you a special message making
recommendations for those two essentials of defense against danger which we
cannot safely assume will not come.

If these first two essentials are reasonably provided for, we must be able
confidently to invoke the third element, the underlying strength of
citizenship--the self-confidence, the ability, the imagination and the
devotion that give the staying power to see things through.

A strong and united nation may be destroyed if it is unprepared against
sudden attack. But even a nation well armed and well organized from a
strictly military standpoint may, after a period of time, meet defeat if it
is unnerved by self-distrust, endangered by class prejudice, by dissension
between capital and labor, by false economy and by other unsolved social
problems at home.

In meeting the troubles of the world we must meet them as one people--with a
unity born of the fact that for generations those who have come to our
shores, representing many kindreds and tongues, have been welded by common
opportunity into a united patriotism. If another form of government can
present a united front in its attack on a democracy, the attack must and
will be met by a united democracy. Such a democracy can and must exist in
the United States.

A dictatorship may command the full strength of a regimented nation. But
the united strength of a democratic nation can be mustered only when its
people, educated by modern standards to know what is going on and where
they are going, have conviction that they are receiving as large a share of
opportunity for development, as large a share of material success and of
human dignity, as they have a right to receive.

Our nation's program of social and economic reform is therefore a part of
defense, as basic as armaments themselves.

Against the background of events in Europe, in Africa and in Asia during
these recent years, the pattern of what we have accomplished since 1933
appears in even clearer focus.

For the first time we have moved upon deep-seated problems affecting our
national strength and have forged national instruments adequate to meet
them.

Consider what the seemingly piecemeal struggles of these six years add up
to in terms of realistic national preparedness.

We are conserving and developing natural resources--land, water power,
forests.

We are trying to provide necessary food, shelter and medical care for the
health of our population.

We are putting agriculture--our system of food and fibre supply--on a
sounder basis.

We are strengthening the weakest spot in our system of industrial supply--
its long smouldering labor difficulties.

We have cleaned up our credit system so that depositor and investor alike
may more readily and willingly make their capital available for peace or
war.

We are giving to our youth new opportunities for work and education.

We have sustained the morale of all the population by the dignified
recognition of our obligations to the aged, the helpless and the needy.

Above all, we have made the American people conscious of their
interrelationship and their interdependence. They sense a common destiny
and a common need of each other. Differences of occupation, geography, race
and religion no longer obscure the nation's fundamental unity in thought
and in action.

We have our difficulties, true--but we are a wiser and a tougher nation than
we were in 1929, or in 1932.

Never have there been six years of such far-flung internal preparedness in
our history. And this has been done without any dictator's power to
command, without conscription of labor or confiscation of capital, without
concentration camps and without a scratch on freedom of speech, freedom of
the press or the rest of the Bill of Rights.

We see things now that we could not see along the way. The tools of
government which we had in 1933 are outmoded. We have had to forge new
tools for a new role of government operating in a democracy--a role of new
responsibility for new needs and increased responsibility for old needs,
long neglected.

Some of these tools had to be roughly shaped and still need some machining
down. Many of those who fought bitterly against the forging of these new
tools welcome their use today. The American people, as a whole, have
accepted them. The Nation looks to the Congress to improve the new
machinery which we have permanently installed, provided that in the process
the social usefulness of the machinery is not destroyed or impaired.

All of us agree that we should simplify and improve laws if experience and
operation clearly demonstrate the need. For instance, all of us want better
provision for our older people under our social security legislation. For
the medically needy we must provide better care.

Most of us agree that for the sake of employer and employee alike we must
find ways to end factional labor strife and employer-employee disputes.

Most of us recognize that none of these tools can be put to maximum
effectiveness unless the executive processes of government are
revamped--reorganized, if you will--into more effective combination. And
even after such reorganization it will take time to develop administrative
personnel and experience in order to use our new tools with a minimum of
mistakes. The Congress, of course, needs no further information on this.

With this exception of legislation to provide greater government
efficiency, and with the exception of legislation to ameliorate our
railroad and other transportation problems, the past three Congresses have
met in part or in whole the pressing needs of the new order of things.

We have now passed the period of internal conflict in the launching of our
program of social reform. Our full energies may now be released to
invigorate the processes of recovery in order to preserve our reforms, and
to give every man and woman who wants to work a real job at a living wage.

But time is of paramount importance. The deadline of danger from within and
from without is not within our control. The hour-glass may be in the hands
of other nations. Our own hour-glass tells us that we are off on a race to
make democracy work, so that we may be efficient in peace and therefore
secure in national defense.

This time element forces us to still greater efforts to attain the full
employment of our labor and our capital.

The first duty of our statesmanship is to bring capital and man-power
together.

Dictatorships do this by main force. By using main force they apparently
succeed at it--for the moment. However we abhor their methods, we are
compelled to admit that they have obtained substantial utilization of all
their material and human resources. Like it or not, they have solved, for a
time at least, the problem of idle men and idle capital. Can we compete
with them by boldly seeking methods of putting idle men and idle capital
together and, at the same time, remain within our American way of life,
within the Bill of Rights, and within the bounds of what is, from our point
of view, civilization itself?

We suffer from a great unemployment of capital. Many people have the idea
that as a nation we are overburdened with debt and are spending more than
we can afford. That is not so. Despite our Federal Government expenditures
the entire debt of our national economic system, public and private
together, is no larger today than it was in 1929, and the interest thereon
is far less than it was in 1929.

The object is to put capital--private as well as public--to work.

We want to get enough capital and labor at work to give us a total turnover
of business, a total national income, of at least eighty billion dollars a
year. At that figure we shall have a substantial reduction of unemployment;
and the Federal Revenues will be sufficient to balance the current level of
cash expenditures on the basis of the existing tax structure. That figure
can be attained, working within the framework of our traditional profit
system.

The factors in attaining and maintaining that amount of national income are
many and complicated.

They include more widespread understanding among business men of many
changes which world conditions and technological improvements have brought
to our economy over the last twenty years--changes in the interrelationship
of price and volume and employment, for example--changes of the kind in
which business men are now educating themselves through excellent
opportunities like the so-called "monopoly investigation."

They include a perfecting of our farm program to protect farmers' income
and consumers' purchasing power from alternate risks of crop gluts and crop
shortages.

They include wholehearted acceptance of new standards of honesty in our
financial markets.

They include reconcilement of enormous, antagonistic interests--some of them
long in litigation--in the railroad and general transportation field.

They include the working out of new techniques--private, state and
federal--to protect the public interest in and to develop wider markets for
electric power.

They include a revamping of the tax relationships between federal, state
and local units of government, and consideration of relatively small tax
increases to adjust inequalities without interfering with the aggregate
income of the American people.

They include the perfecting of labor organization and a universal
ungrudging attitude by employers toward the labor movement, until there is
a minimum of interruption of production and employment because of disputes,
and acceptance by labor of the truth that the welfare of labor itself
depends on increased balanced out-put of goods.

To be immediately practical, while proceeding with a steady evolution in
the solving of these and like problems, we must wisely use
instrumentalities, like Federal investment, which are immediately available
to us.

Here, as elsewhere, time is the deciding factor in our choice of remedies.

Therefore, it does not seem logical to me, at the moment we seek to
increase production and consumption, for the Federal Government to consider
a drastic curtailment of its own investments.

The whole subject of government investing and government income is one
which may be approached in two different ways.

The first calls for the elimination of enough activities of government to
bring the expenses of government immediately into balance with income of
government. This school of thought maintains that because our national
income this year is only sixty billion dollars, ours is only a sixty
billion dollar country; that government must treat it as such; and that
without the help of government, it may some day, somehow, happen to become
an eighty billion dollar country.

If the Congress decides to accept this point of view, it will logically
have to reduce the present functions or activities of government by
one-third. Not only will the Congress have to accept the responsibility for
such reduction; but the Congress will have to determine which activities
are to be reduced.

Certain expenditures we cannot possibly reduce at this session, such as the
interest on the public debt. A few million dollars saved here or there in
the normal or in curtailed work of the old departments and commissions will
make no great saving in the Federal budget. Therefore, the Congress would
have to reduce drastically some of certain large items, very large items,
such as aids to agriculture and soil conservation, veterans' pensions,
flood control, highways, waterways and other public works, grants for
social and health security, Civilian Conservation Corps activities, relief
for the unemployed, or national defense itself.

The Congress alone has the power to do all this, as it is the appropriating
branch of the government.

The other approach to the question of government spending takes the
position that this Nation ought not to be and need not be only a sixty
billion dollar nation; that at this moment it has the men and the resources
sufficient to make it at least an eighty billion dollar nation. This school
of thought does not believe that it can become an eighty billion dollar
nation in the near future if government cuts its operations by one-third.
It is convinced that if we were to try it, we would invite disaster--and
that we would not long remain even a sixty billion dollar nation. There are
many complicated factors with which we have to deal, but we have learned
that it is unsafe to make abrupt reductions at any time in our net
expenditure program.

By our common sense action of resuming government activities last spring,
we have reversed a recession and started the new rising tide of prosperity
and national income which we are now just beginning to enjoy.

If government activities are fully maintained, there is a good prospect of
our becoming an eighty billion dollar country in a very short time. With
such a national income, present tax laws will yield enough each year to
balance each year's expenses.

It is my conviction that down in their hearts the American public--industry,
agriculture, finance--want this Congress to do whatever needs to be done to
raise our national income to eighty billion dollars a year.

Investing soundly must preclude spending wastefully. To guard against
opportunist appropriations, I have on several occasions addressed the
Congress on the importance of permanent long-range planning. I hope,
therefore, that following my recommendation of last year, a permanent
agency will be set up and authorized to report on the urgency and
desirability of the various types of government investment.

Investment for prosperity can be made in a democracy.

I hear some people say, "This is all so complicated. There are certain
advantages in a dictatorship. It gets rid of labor trouble, of
unemployment, of wasted motion and of having to do your own thinking."

My answer is, "Yes, but it also gets rid of some other things which we
Americans intend very definitely to keep--and we still intend to do our own
thinking."

It will cost us taxes and the voluntary risk of capital to attain some of
the practical advantages which other forms of government have acquired.

Dictatorship, however, involves costs which the American people will never
pay: The cost of our spiritual values. The cost of the blessed right of
being able to say what we please. The cost of freedom of religion. The cost
of seeing our capital confiscated. The cost of being cast into a
concentration camp. The cost of being afraid to walk down the street with
the wrong neighbor. The cost of having our children brought up, not as free
and dignified human beings, but as pawns molded and enslaved by a machine.

If the avoidance of these costs means taxes on my income; if avoiding these
costs means taxes on my estate at death, I would bear those taxes willingly
as the price of my breathing and my children breathing the free air of a
free country, as the price of a living and not a dead world.

Events abroad have made it increasingly clear to the American people that
dangers within are less to be feared than dangers from without. If,
therefore, a solution of this problem of idle men and idle capital is the
price of preserving our liberty, no formless selfish fears can stand in the
way.

Once I prophesied that this generation of Americans had a rendezvous with
destiny. That prophecy comes true. To us much is given; more is expected.

This generation will "nobly save or meanly lose the last best hope of
earth. . . . The way is plain, peaceful, generous, just--a way which if
followed the world will forever applaud and God must forever bless."

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 3, 1940

Mr. Vice President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Senate and the House of
Representatives:

I wish each and every one of you a very happy New Year.

As the Congress reassembles, the impact of war abroad makes it natural to
approach "the state of the union" through a discussion of foreign affairs.

But it is important that those who hear and read this message should in no
way confuse that approach with any thought that our Government is
abandoning, or even overlooking, the great significance of its domestic
policies.

The social and economic forces which have been mismanaged abroad until they
have resulted in revolution, dictatorship and war are the same as those
which we here are struggling to adjust peacefully at home.

You are well aware that dictatorships--and the philosophy of force that
justifies and accompanies dictatorships--have originated in almost every
case in the necessity for drastic action to improve internal conditions in
places where democratic action for one reason or another has failed to
respond to modern needs and modern demands.

It was with far-sighted wisdom that the framers of our Constitution brought
together in one magnificent phrase three great concepts--"common defense,"
"general welfare" and "domestic tranquility."

More than a century and a half later we, who are here today, still believe
with them that our best defense is the promotion of our general welfare and
domestic tranquillity.

In previous messages to the Congress I have repeatedly warned that, whether
we like it or not, the daily lives of American citizens will, of necessity,
feel the shock of events on other continents. This is no longer mere
theory; because it has been definitely proved to us by the facts of
yesterday and today.

To say that the domestic well-being of one hundred and thirty million
Americans is deeply affected by the well-being or the ill-being of the
populations of other nations is only to recognize in world affairs the
truth that we all accept in home affairs.

If in any local unit--a city, county, State or region--low standards of
living are permitted to continue, the level of the civilization of the
entire nation will be pulled downward.

The identical principle extends to the rest of the civilized world. But
there are those who wishfully insist, in innocence or ignorance or both,
that the United States of America as a self-contained unit can live happily
and prosperously, its future secure, inside a high wall of isolation while,
outside, the rest of Civilization and the commerce and culture of mankind
are shattered.

I can understand the feelings of those who warn the nation that they will
never again consent to the sending of American youth to fight on the soil
of Europe. But, as I remember, nobody has asked them to consent--for nobody
expects such an undertaking.

The overwhelming majority of our fellow citizens do not abandon in the
slightest their hope and their expectation that the United States will not
become involved in military participation in these wars.

I can also understand the wishfulness of those who oversimplify the whole
situation by repeating that all we have to do is to mind our own business
and keep the nation out of war. But there is a vast difference between
keeping out of war and pretending that this war is none of our business.

We do not have to go to war with other nations, but at least we can strive
with other nations to encourage the kind of peace that will lighten the
troubles of the world, and by so doing help our own nation as well.

I ask that all of us everywhere think things through with the single aim of
how best to serve the future of our own nation. I do not mean merely its
future relationship with the outside world. I mean its domestic future as
well--the work, the security, the prosperity, the happiness, the life of all
the boys and girls in the United States, as they are inevitably affected by
such world relationships. For it becomes clearer and clearer that the
future world will be a shabby and dangerous place to live in--yes, even for
Americans to live in--if it is ruled by force in the hands of a few.

Already the crash of swiftly moving events over the earth has made us all
think with a longer view. Fortunately, that thinking cannot be controlled
by partisanship. The time is long past when any political party or any
particular group can curry or capture public favor by labeling itself the
"peace party" or the "peace bloc." That label belongs to the whole United
States and to every right thinking man, woman and child within it.

For out of all the military and diplomatic turmoil, out of all the
propaganda, and counter-propaganda of the present conflicts, there are two
facts which stand out, and which the whole world acknowledges.

The first is that never before has the Government of the United States of
America done so much as in our recent past to establish and maintain the
policy of the Good Neighbor with its sister nations.

The second is that in almost every nation in the world today there is a
true public belief that the United States has been, and will continue to
be, a potent and active factor in seeking the reestablishment of world
peace.

In these recent years we have had a clean record of peace and good-will. It
is an open book that cannot be twisted or defamed. It is a record that must
be continued and enlarged.

So I hope that Americans everywhere will work out for themselves the
several alternatives which lie before world civilization, which necessarily
includes our own.

We must look ahead and see the possibilities for our children if the rest
of the world comes to be dominated by concentrated force alone--even though
today we are a very great and a very powerful nation.

We must look ahead and see the effect on our own future if all the small
nations of the world have their independence snatched from them or become
mere appendages to relatively vast and powerful military systems.

We must look ahead and see the kind of lives our children would have to
lead if a large part of the rest of the world were compelled to worship a
god imposed by a military ruler, or were forbidden to worship God at all;
if the rest of the world were forbidden to read and hear the facts--the
daily news of their own and other nations--if they were deprived of the
truth that makes men free.

We must look ahead and see the effect on our future generations if world
trade is controlled by any nation or group of nations which sets up that
control through military force.

It is, of course, true that the record of past centuries includes
destruction of many small nations, the enslavement of peoples, and the
building of empires on the foundation of force. But wholly apart from the
greater international morality which we seek today, we recognize the
practical fact that with modern weapons and modern conditions, modern man
can no longer lead a civilized life if we are to go back to the practice of
wars and conquests of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

Summing up this need of looking ahead, and in words of common sense and
good American citizenship. I hope that we shall have fewer American
ostriches in our midst. It is not good for the ultimate health of ostriches
to bury their heads in the sand.

Only an ostrich would look upon these wars through the eyes of cynicism or
ridicule.

Of course, the peoples of other nations have the right to choose their own
form of Government. But we in this nation still believe that such choice
should be predicated on certain freedoms which we think are essential
everywhere. We know that we ourselves shall never be wholly safe at home
unless other governments recognize such freedoms.

Twenty-one American Republics, expressing the will of two hundred and fifty
million people to preserve peace and freedom in this Hemisphere, are
displaying a unanimity of ideals and practical relationships which gives
hope that what is being done here can be done on other continents. We in
all the Americas are coming to the realization that we can retain our
respective nationalities without, at the same time, threatening the
national existence of our neighbors.

Such truly friendly relationships, for example, permit us to follow our own
domestic policies with reference to our agricultural products, while at the
same time we have the privilege of trying to work out mutual assistance
arrangements for a world distribution of world agricultural surpluses.

And we have been able to apply the same simple principle to many
manufactured products--surpluses of which must be sold in the world export
markets if we intend to continue a high level of production and
employment.

For many years after the World War blind economic selfishness in most
countries, including our own, resulted in a destructive mine-field of trade
restrictions which blocked the channels of commerce among nations. Indeed,
this policy was one of the contributing causes of existing wars. It dammed
up vast unsalable surpluses, helping to bring about unemployment and
suffering in the United States and everywhere else.

To point the way to break up that log-jam our Trade Agreements Act was
passed--based upon a policy of equality of treatment among nations and of
mutually profitable arrangements of trade.

It is not correct to infer that legislative powers have been transferred
from the Congress to the Executive Branch of the Government. Everyone
recognizes that general tariff legislation is a Congressional function; but
we know that, because of the stupendous task involved in the fashioning and
the passing of a general tariff law, it is advisable to provide at times of
emergency some flexibility to make the general law adjustable to quickly
changing conditions.

We are in such a time today. Our present trade agreement method provides a
temporary flexibility and is, therefore, practical in the best sense. It
should be kept alive to serve our trade interests--agricultural and
industrial--in many valuable ways during the existing wars.

But what is more important, the Trade Agreements Act should be extended as
an indispensable part of the foundation of any stable and enduring peace.

The old conditions of world trade made for no enduring peace; and when the
time comes, the United States must use its influence to open up the trade
channels of the world, in all nations, in order that no one nation need
feel compelled in later days to seek by force of arms what it can well gain
by peaceful conference. For that purpose, too, we need the Trade Agreements
Act even more today than when it was passed.

I emphasize the leadership which this nation can take when the time comes
for a renewal of world peace. Such an influence will be greatly weakened if
this Government becomes a dog in the manger of trade selfishness.

The first President of the United States warned us against entangling
foreign alliances. The present President of the United States subscribes to
and follows that precept.

I hope that most of you will agree that trade cooperation with the rest of
the world does not violate that precept in any way.

Even as through these trade agreements we prepare to cooperate in a world
that wants peace, we must likewise be prepared to take care of ourselves if
the world cannot attain peace.

For several years past we have been compelled to strengthen our own
national defense. That has created a very large portion of our Treasury
deficits. This year in the light of continuing world uncertainty, I am
asking the Congress for Army and Navy increases which are based not on
panic but on common sense. They are not as great as enthusiastic alarmists
seek. They are not as small as unrealistic persons claiming superior
private information would demand.

As will appear in the annual budget tomorrow, the only important increase
in any part of the budget is the estimate for national defense. Practically
all other important items show a reduction. But you know, you can't eat
your cake and have it too. Therefore, in the hope that we can continue in
these days of increasing economic prosperity to reduce the Federal deficit,
I am asking the Congress to levy sufficient additional taxes to meet the
emergency spending for national defense.

Behind the Army and Navy, of course, lies our ultimate line of defense--"the
general welfare" of our people. We cannot report, despite all the progress
that we have made in our domestic problems--despite the fact that production
is back to 1929 levels--that all our problems are solved. The fact of
unemployment of millions of men and women remains a symptom of a number of
difficulties in our economic system not yet adjusted.

While the number of the unemployed has decreased very greatly, while their
immediate needs for food and clothing--as far as the Federal Government is
concerned--have been largely met, while their morale has been kept alive by
giving them useful public work, we have not yet found a way to employ the
surplus of our labor which the efficiency of our industrial processes has
created.

We refuse the European solution of using the unemployed to build up
excessive armaments which eventually result in dictatorships and war. We
encourage an American way--through an increase of national income which is
the only way we can be sure will take up the slack. Much progress has been
made; much remains to be done.

We recognize that we must find an answer in terms of work and opportunity.

The unemployment problem today has become very definitely a problem of
youth as well as of age. As each year has gone by hundreds of thousands of
boys and girls have come of working age. They now form an army of unused
youth. They must be an especial concern of democratic Government.

We must continue, above all things, to look for a solution of their special
problem. For they, looking ahead to life, are entitled to action on our
part and not merely to admonitions of optimism or lectures on economic
laws.

Some in our midst have sought to instill a feeling of fear and defeatism in
the minds of the American people about this problem.

To face the task of finding jobs faster than invention can take them
away--is not defeatism. To warble easy platitudes that if we would only go
back to ways that have failed, everything would be all right--is not
courage.

In 1933 we met a problem of real fear and real defeatism. We faced the
facts--with action and not with words alone.

The American people will reject the doctrine of fear, confident that in the
'thirties we have been building soundly a new order of things, different
from the order of the 'twenties. In this dawn of the decade of the
'forties, with our program of social improvement started, we will continue
to carry on the processes of recovery, so as to preserve our gains and
provide jobs at living wages.

There are, of course, many other items of great public interest which could
be enumerated in this message--the continued conservation of our natural
resources, the improvement of health and of education, the extension of
social security to larger groups, the freeing of large areas from
restricted transportation discriminations, the extension of the merit
system and many others.

Our continued progress in the social and economic field is important not
only for the significance of each part of it but for the total effect which
our program of domestic betterment has upon that most valuable asset of a
nation in dangerous times--its national unity.

The permanent security of America in the present crisis does not lie in
armed force alone. What we face is a set of world-wide forces of
disintegration--vicious, ruthless, destructive of all the moral, religious
and political standards which mankind, after centuries of struggle, has
come to cherish most.

In these moral values, in these forces which have made our nation great, we
must actively and practically reassert our faith.

These words--"national unity"--must not be allowed to be come merely a
high-sounding phrase, a vague generality, a pious hope, to which everyone
can give lip-service. They must be made to have real meaning in terms of
the daily thoughts and acts of every man, woman and child in our land
during the coming year and during the years that lie ahead.

For national unity is, in a very real and a very deep sense, the
fundamental safeguard of all democracy.

Doctrines that set group against group, faith against faith, race against
race, class against class, fanning the fires of hatred in men too
despondent, too desperate to think for themselves, were used as
rabble-rousing slogans on which dictators could ride to power. And once in
power they could saddle their tyrannies on whole nations and on their
weaker neighbors.

This is the danger to which we in America must begin to be more alert. For
the apologists for foreign aggressors, and equally those selfish and
partisan groups at home who wrap themselves in a false mantle of
Americanism to promote their own economic, financial or political
advantage, are now trying European tricks upon us, seeking to muddy the
stream of our national thinking, weakening us in the face of danger, by
trying to set our own people to fighting among themselves. Such tactics are
what have helped to plunge Europe into war. We must combat them, as we
would the plague, if American integrity and American security are to be
preserved. We cannot afford to face the future as a disunited people.

We must as a united people keep ablaze on this continent the flames of
human liberty, of reason, of democracy and of fair play as living things to
be preserved for the better world that is to come.

Overstatement, bitterness, vituperation, and the beating of drums have
contributed mightily to ill-feeling and wars between nations. If these
unnecessary and unpleasant actions are harmful in the international field,
if they have hurt in other parts of the world, they are also harmful in the
domestic scene. Peace among ourselves would seem to have some of the
advantage of peace between us and other nations. In the long run history
amply demonstrates that angry controversy surely wins less than calm
discussion.

In the spirit, therefore, of a greater unselfishness, recognizing that the
world--including the United States of America--passes through perilous
times, I am very hopeful that the closing session of the Seventy-sixth
Congress will consider the needs of the nation and of humanity with
calmness, with tolerance and with cooperative wisdom.

May the year 1940 be pointed to by our children as another period when
democracy justified its existence as the best instrument of government yet
devised by mankind.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 6, 1941

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Seventy-seventh Congress:

I address you, the Members of the Seventy-seventh Congress, at a moment
unprecedented in the history of the Union. I use the word "unprecedented,"
because at no previous time has American security been as seriously
threatened from without as it is today.

Since the permanent formation of our Government under the Constitution, in
1789, most of the periods of crisis in our history have related to our
domestic affairs. Fortunately, only one of these--the four-year War Between
the States--ever threatened our national unity. Today, thank God, one
hundred and thirty million Americans, in forty-eight States, have forgotten
points of the compass in our national unity.

It is true that prior to 1914 the United States often had been disturbed by
events in other Continents. We had even engaged in two wars with European
nations and in a number of undeclared wars in the West Indies, in the
Mediterranean and in the Pacific for the maintenance of American rights and
for the principles of peaceful commerce. But in no case had a serious
threat been raised against our national safety or our continued
independence.

What I seek to convey is the historic truth that the United States as a
nation has at all times maintained clear, definite opposition, to any
attempt to lock us in behind an ancient Chinese wall while the procession
of civilization went past. Today, thinking of our children and of their
children, we oppose enforced isolation for ourselves or for any other part
of the Americas.

That determination of ours, extending over all these years, was proved, for
example, during the quarter century of wars following the French
Revolution.

While the Napoleonic struggles did threaten interests of the United States
because of the French foothold in the West Indies and in Louisiana, and
while we engaged in the War of 1812 to vindicate our right to peaceful
trade, it is nevertheless clear that neither France nor Great Britain, nor
any other nation, was aiming at domination of the whole world.

In like fashion from 1815 to 1914--ninety-nine years--no single war in
Europe or in Asia constituted a real threat against our future or against
the future of any other American nation.

Except in the Maximilian interlude in Mexico, no foreign power sought to
establish itself in this Hemisphere; and the strength of the British fleet
in the Atlantic has been a friendly strength. It is still a friendly
strength.

Even when the World War broke out in 1914, it seemed to contain only small
threat of danger to our own American future. But, as time went on, the
American people began to visualize what the downfall of democratic nations
might mean to our own democracy.

We need not overemphasize imperfections in the Peace of Versailles. We need
not harp on failure of the democracies to deal with problems of world
reconstruction. We should remember that the Peace of 1919 was far less
unjust than the kind of "pacification" which began even before Munich, and
which is being carried on under the new order of tyranny that seeks to
spread over every continent today. The American people have unalterably set
their faces against that tyranny.

Every realist knows that the democratic way of life is at this moment
being directly assailed in every part of the world--assailed either by
arms, or by secret spreading of poisonous propaganda by those who seek to
destroy unity and promote discord in nations that are still at peace.

During sixteen long months this assault has blotted out the whole pattern
of democratic life in an appalling number of independent nations, great and
small. The assailants are still on the march, threatening other nations,
great and small.

Therefore, as your President, performing my constitutional duty to "give to
the Congress information of the state of the Union," I find it, unhappily,
necessary to report that the future and the safety of our country and of
our democracy are overwhelmingly involved in events far beyond our
borders.

Armed defense of democratic existence is now being gallantly waged in four
continents. If that defense fails, all the population and all the resources
of Europe, Asia, Africa and Australasia will be dominated by the
conquerors. Let us remember that the total of those populations and their
resources in those four continents greatly exceeds the sum total of the
population and the resources of the whole of the Western Hemisphere--many
times over.

In times like these it is immature--and incidentally, untrue--for anybody to
brag that an unprepared America, single-handed, and with one hand tied
behind its back, can hold off the whole world.

No realistic American can expect from a dictator's peace international
generosity, or return of true independence, or world disarmament, or
freedom of expression, or freedom of religion--or even good business.

Such a peace would bring no security for us or for our neighbors. "Those,
who would give up essential liberty to purchase a little temporary safety,
deserve neither liberty nor safety."

As a nation, we may take pride in the fact that we are softhearted; but we
cannot afford to be soft-headed.

We must always be wary of those who with sounding brass and a tinkling
cymbal preach the "ism" of appeasement.

We must especially beware of that small group of selfish men who would clip
the wings of the American eagle in order to feather their own nests.

I have recently pointed out how quickly the tempo of modern warfare could
bring into our very midst the physical attack which we must eventually
expect if the dictator nations win this war.

There is much loose talk of our immunity from immediate and direct invasion
from across the seas. Obviously, as long as the British Navy retains its
power, no such danger exists. Even if there were no British Navy, it is not
probable that any enemy would be stupid enough to attack us by landing
troops in the United States from across thousands of miles of ocean, until
it had acquired strategic bases from which to operate.

But we learn much from the lessons of the past years in Europe--particularly
the lesson of Norway, whose essential seaports were captured by treachery
and surprise built up over a series of years.

The first phase of the invasion of this Hemisphere would not be the landing
of regular troops. The necessary strategic points would be occupied by
secret agents and their dupes--and great numbers of them are already here,
and in Latin America.

As long as the aggressor nations maintain the offensive, they--not we--will
choose the time and the place and the method of their attack.

That is why the future of all the American Republics is today in serious
danger.

That is why this Annual Message to the Congress is unique in our history.

That is why every member of the Executive Branch of the Government and
every member of the Congress faces great responsibility and great
accountability.

The need of the moment is that our actions and our policy should be devoted
primarily--almost exclusively--to meeting this foreign peril. For all our
domestic problems are now a part of the great emergency.

Just as our national policy in internal affairs has been based upon a
decent respect for the rights and the dignity of all our fellow men within
our gates, so our national policy in foreign affairs has been based on a
decent respect for the rights and dignity of all nations, large and small.
And the justice of morality must and will win in the end.

Our national policy is this:

First, by an impressive expression of the public will and without regard to
partisanship, we are committed to all-inclusive national defense.

Second, by an impressive expression of the public will and without regard
to partisanship, we are committed to full support of all those resolute
peoples, everywhere, who are resisting aggression and are thereby keeping
war away from our Hemisphere. By this support, we express our determination
that the democratic cause shall prevail; and we strengthen the defense and
the security of our own nation.

Third, by an impressive expression of the public will and without regard to
partisanship, we are committed to the proposition that principles of
morality and considerations for our own security will never permit us to
acquiesce in a peace dictated by aggressors and sponsored by appeasers. We
know that enduring peace cannot be bought at the cost of other people's
freedom.

In the recent national election there was no substantial difference between
the two great parties in respect to that national policy. No issue was
fought out on this line before the American electorate. Today it is
abundantly evident that American citizens everywhere are demanding and
supporting speedy and complete action in recognition of obvious danger.

Therefore, the immediate need is a swift and driving increase in our
armament production.

Leaders of industry and labor have responded to our summons. Goals of speed
have been set. In some cases these goals are being reached ahead of time;
in some cases we are on schedule; in other cases there are slight but not
serious delays; and in some cases--and I am sorry to say very important
cases--we are all concerned by the slowness of the accomplishment of our
plans.

The Army and Navy, however, have made substantial progress during the past
year. Actual experience is improving and speeding up our methods of
production with every passing day. And today's best is not good enough for
tomorrow.

I am not satisfied with the progress thus far made. The men in charge of
the program represent the best in training, in ability, and in patriotism.
They are not satisfied with the progress thus far made. None of us will be
satisfied until the job is done.

No matter whether the original goal was set too high or too low, our
objective is quicker and better results. To give you two illustrations:

We are behind schedule in turning out finished airplanes; we are working
day and night to solve the innumerable problems and to catch up.

We are ahead of schedule in building warships but we are working to get
even further ahead of that schedule.

To change a whole nation from a basis of peacetime production of implements
of peace to a basis of wartime production of implements of war is no small
task. And the greatest difficulty comes at the beginning of the program,
when new tools, new plant facilities, new assembly lines, and new ship ways
must first be constructed before the actual materiel begins to flow
steadily and speedily from them.

The Congress, of course, must rightly keep itself informed at all times of
the progress of the program. However, there is certain information, as the
Congress itself will readily recognize, which, in the interests of our own
security and those of the nations that we are supporting, must of needs be
kept in confidence.

New circumstances are constantly begetting new needs for our safety. I
shall ask this Congress for greatly increased new appropriations and
authorizations to carry on what we have begun.

I also ask this Congress for authority and for funds sufficient to
manufacture additional munitions and war supplies of many kinds, to be
turned over to those nations which are now in actual war with aggressor
nations.

Our most useful and immediate role is to act as an arsenal for them as well
as for ourselves. They do not need man power, but they do need billions of
dollars worth of the weapons of defense.

The time is near when they will not be able to pay for them all in ready
cash. We cannot, and we will not, tell them that they must surrender,
merely because of present inability to pay for the weapons which we know
they must have.

I do not recommend that we make them a loan of dollars with which to pay
for these weapons--a loan to be repaid in dollars.

I recommend that we make it possible for those nations to continue to
obtain war materials in the United States, fitting their orders into our
own program. Nearly all their materiel would, if the time ever came, be
useful for our own defense.

Taking counsel of expert military and naval authorities, considering what
is best for our own security, we are free to decide how much should be kept
here and how much should be sent abroad to our friends who by their
determined and heroic resistance are giving us time in which to make ready
our own defense.

For what we send abroad, we shall be repaid within a reasonable time
following the close of hostilities, in similar materials, or, at our
option, in other goods of many kinds, which they can produce and which we
need.

Let us say to the democracies: "We Americans are vitally concerned in your
defense of freedom. We are putting forth our energies, our resources and
our organizing powers to give you the strength to regain and maintain a
free world. We shall send you, in ever-increasing numbers, ships, planes,
tanks, guns. This is our purpose and our pledge."

In fulfillment of this purpose we will not be intimidated by the threats of
dictators that they will regard as a breach of international law or as an
act of war our aid to the democracies which dare to resist their
aggression. Such aid is not an act of war, even if a dictator should
unilaterally proclaim it so to be.

When the dictators, if the dictators, are ready to make war upon us, they
will not wait for an act of war on our part. They did not wait for Norway
or Belgium or the Netherlands to commit an act of war.

Their only interest is in a new one-way international law, which lacks
mutuality in its observance, and, therefore, becomes an instrument of
oppression.

The happiness of future generations of Americans may well depend upon how
effective and how immediate we can make our aid felt. No one can tell the
exact character of the emergency situations that we may be called upon to
meet. The Nation's hands must not be tied when the Nation's life is in
danger.

We must all prepare to make the sacrifices that the emergency--almost as
serious as war itself--demands. Whatever stands in the way of speed and
efficiency in defense preparations must give way to the national need.

A free nation has the right to expect full cooperation from all groups. A
free nation has the right to look to the leaders of business, of labor, and
of agriculture to take the lead in stimulating effort, not among other
groups but within their own groups.

The best way of dealing with the few slackers or trouble makers in our
midst is, first, to shame them by patriotic example, and, if that fails, to
use the sovereignty of Government to save Government.

As men do not live by bread alone, they do not fight by armaments alone.
Those who man our defenses, and those behind them who build our defenses,
must have the stamina and the courage which come from unshakable belief in
the manner of life which they are defending. The mighty action that we are
calling for cannot be based on a disregard of all things worth fighting
for.

The Nation takes great satisfaction and much strength from the things which
have been done to make its people conscious of their individual stake in
the preservation of democratic life in America. Those things have toughened
the fibre of our people, have renewed their faith and strengthened their
devotion to the institutions we make ready to protect.

Certainly this is no time for any of us to stop thinking about the social
and economic problems which are the root cause of the social revolution
which is today a supreme factor in the world.

For there is nothing mysterious about the foundations of a healthy and
strong democracy. The basic things expected by our people of their
political and economic systems are simple. They are:

Equality of opportunity for youth and for others.

Jobs for those who can work.

Security for those who need it.

The ending of special privilege for the few.

The preservation of civil liberties for all.

The enjoyment of the fruits of scientific progress in a wider and
constantly rising standard of living.

These are the simple, basic things that must never be lost sight of in the
turmoil and unbelievable complexity of our modern world. The inner and
abiding strength of our economic and political systems is dependent upon
the degree to which they fulfill these expectations.

Many subjects connected with our social economy call for immediate
improvement.

As examples:

We should bring more citizens under the coverage of old-age pensions and
unemployment insurance.

We should widen the opportunities for adequate medical care.

We should plan a better system by which persons deserving or needing
gainful employment may obtain it.

I have called for personal sacrifice. I am assured of the willingness of
almost all Americans to respond to that call.

A part of the sacrifice means the payment of more money in taxes. In my
Budget Message I shall recommend that a greater portion of this great
defense program be paid for from taxation than we are paying today. No
person should try, or be allowed, to get rich out of this program; and the
principle of tax payments in accordance with ability to pay should be
constantly before our eyes to guide our legislation.

If the Congress maintains these principles, the voters, putting patriotism
ahead of pocketbooks, will give you their applause.

In the future days, which we seek to make secure, we look forward to a
world founded upon four essential human freedoms.

The first is freedom of speech and expression--everywhere in the world.

The second is freedom of every person to worship God in his own
way--everywhere in the world.

The third is freedom from want--which, translated into world terms, means
economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy
peacetime life for its inhabitants--everywhere in the world.

The fourth is freedom from fear--which, translated into world terms, means a
world-wide reduction of armaments to such a point and in such a thorough
fashion that no nation will be in a position to commit an act of physical
aggression against any neighbor--anywhere in the world.

That is no vision of a distant millennium. It is a definite basis for a
kind of world attainable in our own time and generation. That kind of world
is the very antithesis of the so-called new order of tyranny which the
dictators seek to create with the crash of a bomb.

To that new order we oppose the greater conception--the moral order. A good
society is able to face schemes of world domination and foreign revolutions
alike without fear.

Since the beginning of our American history, we have been engaged in
change--in a perpetual peaceful revolution--a revolution which goes on
steadily, quietly adjusting itself to changing conditions--without the
concentration camp or the quick-lime in the ditch. The world order which we
seek is the cooperation of free countries, working together in a friendly,
civilized society.

This nation has placed its destiny in the hands and heads and hearts of its
millions of free men and women; and its faith in freedom under the guidance
of God. Freedom means the supremacy of human rights everywhere. Our support
goes to those who struggle to gain those rights or keep them. Our strength
is our unity of purpose. To that high concept there can be no end save
victory.

***

State of the Union Address
Franklin D. Roosevelt
January 6, 1942

In fulfilling my duty to report upon the State of the Union, I am proud to
say to you that the spirit of the American people was never higher than it
is today--the Union was never more closely knit together--this country was
never more deeply determined to face the solemn tasks before it.

The response of the American people has been instantaneous, and it will be
sustained until our security is assured.

Exactly one year ago today I said to this Congress: "When the dictators. . .
are ready to make war upon us, they will not wait for an act of war on
our part. . . . They--not we--will choose the time and the place and the
method of their attack."

We now know their choice of the time: a peaceful Sunday morning--December
7, 1941.

We know their choice of the place: an American outpost in the Pacific.

We know their choice of the method: the method of Hitler himself.

Japan's scheme of conquest goes back half a century. It was not merely a
policy of seeking living room: it was a plan which included the subjugation
of all the peoples in the Far East and in the islands of the Pacific, and
the domination of that ocean by Japanese military and naval control of the
western coasts of North, Central, and South America.

The development of this ambitious conspiracy was marked by the war against
China in 1894; the subsequent occupation of Korea; the war against Russia
in 1904; the illegal fortification of the mandated Pacific islands
following 1920; the seizure of Manchuria in 1931; and the invasion of China
in 1937.

A similar policy of criminal conquest was adopted by Italy. The Fascists
first revealed their imperial designs in Libya and Tripoli. In 1935 they
seized Abyssinia. Their goal was the domination of all North Africa, Egypt,
parts of France, and the entire Mediterranean world.

But the dreams of empire of the Japanese and Fascist leaders were modest in
comparison with the gargantuan aspirations of Hitler and his Nazis. Even
before they came to power in 1933, their plans for that conquest had been
drawn. Those plans provided for ultimate domination, not of any one section
of the world, but of the whole earth and all the oceans on it.

When Hitler organized his Berlin-Rome-Tokyo alliance, all these plans of
conquest became a single plan. Under this, in addition to her own schemes
of conquest, Japan's role was obviously to cut off our supply of weapons of
war to Britain, and Russia and China--weapons which increasingly were
speeding the day of Hitler's doom. The act of Japan at Pearl Harbor was
intended to stun us--to terrify us to such an extent that we would divert
our industrial and military strength to the Pacific area, or even to our
own continental defense.

The plan has failed in its purpose. We have not been stunned. We have not
been terrified or confused. This very reassembling of the Seventy-seventh
Congress today is proof of that; for the mood of quiet, grim resolution
which here prevails bodes ill for those who conspired and collaborated to
murder world peace.

That mood is stronger than any mere desire for revenge. It expresses the
will of the American people to make very certain that the world will never
so suffer again.

Admittedly, we have been faced with hard choices. It was bitter, for
example, not to be able to relieve the heroic and historic defenders of
Wake Island. It was bitter for us not to be able to land a million men in a
thousand ships in the Philippine Islands.

But this adds only to our determination to see to it that the Stars and
Stripes will fly again over Wake and Guam. Yes, see to it that the brave
people of the Philippines will be rid of Japanese imperialism; and will
live in freedom, security, and independence.

Powerful and offensive actions must and will be taken in proper time. The
consolidation of the United Nations' total war effort against our common
enemies is being achieved.

That was and is the purpose of conferences which have been held during the
past two weeks in Washington, and Moscow and Chungking. That is the primary
objective of the declaration of solidarity signed in Washington on January
1, 1942, by 26 Nations united against the Axis powers.

Difficult choices may have to be made in the months to come. We do not
shrink from such decisions. We and those united with us will make those
decisions with courage and determination.

Plans have been laid here and in the other capitals for coordinated and
cooperative action by all the United Nations--military action and economic
action. Already we have established, as you know, uni