you
won't catch me in any such snare.

CAPTAIN. Do you think that I would want to be responsible for
another man's child, if I were convinced of your guilt?

LAURA. No, I'm sure you wouldn't, and that's what makes me know you
lied just now when you said that you would forgive me beforehand.

CAPTAIN. [Rises]. Laura, save me and my reason. You don't seem to
understand what I say. If the child is not mine I have no control
over her and don't want to have any, and that is precisely what you
do want, isn't it? But perhaps you want even more--to have power
over the child, but still have me to support you.

LAURA. Power, yes! What has this whole life and death struggle been
for but power?

CAPTAIN. To me it has meant more. I do not believe in a hereafter;
the child was my future life. That was my conception of
immortality, and perhaps the only one that has any analogy in
reality. If you take that away from me, you cut off my life.

LAURA. Why didn't we separate in time?

CAPTAIN. Because the child bound us together; but the link became a
chain. And how did it happen; how? I have never thought about this,
but now memories rise up accusingly, condemningly perhaps. We had
been married two years, and had no children; you know why. I fell
ill and lay at the point of death. During a conscious interval of
the fever I heard voices out in the drawing-room. It was you and
the lawyer talking about the fortune that I still possessed. He
explained that you could inherit nothing because we had no
children, and he asked you if you were expecting to become a
mother. I did not hear your reply. I recovered and we had a child.
Who is its father?

LAURA. You.

CAPTAIN. No, I am not. Here is a buried crime that begins to
stench, and what a hellish crime! You women have been compassionate
enough to free the black slaves, but you have kept the white ones.
I have worked and slaved for you, your child, your mother, your
servants; I have sacrificed promotion and career; I have endured
torture, flaggellation, sleeplessness, worry for your sake, until
my hair has grown gray; and all that you might enjoy a life without
care, and when you grew old, enjoy life over again in your child. I
have borne everything without complaint, because I thought myself
the father of your child. This is the commonest kind of theft, the
most brutal slavery. I have had seventeen years of penal servitude
and have been innocent. What can you give me in return for that?

LAURA. Now you are quite mad.

CAPTAIN. That is your hope!--And I see how you have labored to
conceal your crime. I sympathized with you because I did not
understand your grief. I have often lulled your evil conscience to
rest when I thought I was driving away morbid thoughts. I have
heard you cry out in your sleep and not wanted to listen. I
remember now night before last--Bertha's birthday--it was between
two and three in the morning, and I was sitting up reading; you
shrieked, "Don't, don't!" as if someone were strangling you; I
knocked on the wall--I didn't want to hear any more. I have had my
suspicions for a long time but I did not dare to hear them
confirmed. All this I have suffered for you. What will you do for
me?

LAURA. What can I do? I will swear by God and all I hold sacred
that you are Bertha's father.

CAPTAIN. What use is that when you have often said that a mother
can and ought to commit any crime for her child? I implore you as a
wounded man begs for a death blow, to tell me all. Don't you see
I'm as helpless as a child? Don't you hear me complaining as to a
mother? Won't you forget that I am a man, that I am a soldier who
can tame men and beasts with a word? Like a sick man I only ask for
compassion. I lay down the tokens of my power and implore you to
have mercy on my life.

[Laura approaches him and lays her hand on his brow.]

LAURA. What! You are crying, man!

CAPTAIN. Yes, I am crying although I am a man. But has not a man
eyes! Has not a man hands, limbs, senses, thoughts, passions? Is he
not fed with the wine food, hurt by the same weapons, warmed and
cooled by the same summer and winter as a woman? If you prick us do
we not bleed? If you tickle us do we not laugh? And if you poison
us, do we not die? Why shouldn't a man complain, a soldier weep?
Because it is unmanly? Why is it unmanly?

LAURA. Weep then, my child, as if you were with your mother once
more. Do you remember when I first came into your life, I was like
a second mother? Your great strong body needed nerves; you were a
giant child that had either come too early into the world, or
perhaps was not wanted at all.

CAPTAIN. Yes, that's how it was. My father's and my mother's will
was against my coming into the world, and consequently I was born
without a will. I thought I was completing myself when you and I
became one, and therefore you were allowed to rule, and I, the
commander at the barracks and before the troops, became obedient to
you, grew through you, looked up to you as to it more highly-gifted
being, listened to you as if I had been your undeveloped child.

LAURA. Yes, that's the way it was, and therefore I loved you as my
child. But you know, you must have seen, when the nature of your
feelings changed and you appeared as my lover that I blushed, and
your embraces were joy that was followed by a remorseful conscience
as if my blood were ashamed. The mother became the mistress. Ugh!

CAPTAIN. I saw it, but I did not understand. I believed you
despised me for my unmanliness, and I wanted to win you as a woman
by being a man.

LAURA. Yes, but there was the mistake. The mother was your friend,
you see, but the woman was your enemy, and love between the sexes
is strife. Do not think that I gave myself; I did not give, but I
took--what I wanted. But you had one advantage. I felt that, and I
wanted you to feel it.

CAPTAIN. You always had the advantage. You could hypnotize me when
I was wide awake, so that I neither saw nor heard, but merely
obeyed; you could give me a raw potato and make me imagine it was a
peach; you could force me to admire your foolish caprices as though
they were strokes of genius. You could have influenced me to crime,
yes, even to mean, paltry deeds. Because you lacked intelligence,
instead of carrying out my ideas you acted on your own judgment.
But when at last I awoke, I realized that my honor had been
corrupted and I wanted to blot out the memory by a great deed, an
achievement, a discovery, or an honorable suicide. I wanted to go
to war, but was not permitted. It was then that I threw myself into
science. And now when I was about to reach out my hand to gather in
its fruits, you chop off my arm. Now I am dishonored and can live
no longer, for a man cannot live without honor.

LAURA. But a woman?

CAPTAIN. Yes, for she has her children, which he has not. But, like
the rest of mankind, we lived our lives unconscious as children,
full of imagination, ideals, and illusions, and then we awoke; it
was all over. But we awoke with our feet on the pillow, and he who
waked us was himself a sleep-walker. When women grow old and cease
to be women, they get beards on their chins; I wonder what men get
when they grow old and cease to be men. Those who crowed were no
longer cocks but capons, and the pullets answered their call, so
that when we thought the sun was about to rise we found ourselves
in the bright moon light amid ruins, just as in the good old times.
It had only been a little morning slumber with wild dreams, and
there was no awakening.

LAURA. Do you know, you should have been a poet!

CAPTAIN. Who knows.

LAURA. Now I am sleepy, so if you have any more fantastic visions
keep them till to-morrow.

CAPTAIN. First, a word more about realities. Do you hate me?

LAURA. Yes, sometimes, when you are a man.

CAPTAIN. This is like race hatred. If it is true that we are
descended from monkeys, at least it must be from two separate
species. We are certainly not like one another, are we?

LAURA. What do you mean to say by all this?

CAPTAIN. I feel that one of us must go under in this struggle.

LAURA. Which?

CAPTAIN. The weaker, of course.

LAURA. And the stronger will be in the right?

CAPTAIN. Always, since he has the power.

LAURA. Then I am in the right.

CAPTAIN. Have you the power already then?

LAURA. Yes, and a legal power with which I shall put you under the
control of a guardian.

CAPTAIN. Under a guardian?

LAURA. And then I shall educate my child without listening to your
fantastic notions.

CAPTAIN. And who will pay for the education when I am no longer
here?

LAURA. Your pension will pay for it.

CAPTAIN [Threateningly]. How can you have me put under a guardian?

LAURA [Takes out a letter]. With this letter of which an attested
copy is in the hands of the board of lunacy.

CAPTAIN. What letter?

LAURA [Moving backward toward the door left]. Yours! Your
declaration to the doctor that you are insane. [The Captain stares
at her in silence.] Now you have fulfilled your function as an
unfortunately necessary father and breadwinner, you are not needed
any longer and you must go. You must go, since you have realized
that my intellect is as strong as my will, and since you will not
stay and acknowledge it.

[The Captain goes to the table, seizes the lighted lamp and hurls
it at Laura, who disappears backward through the door.]

CURTAIN DROP.



ACT III.

[Same Scene. Another lamp on the table. The private door is
barricaded with a chair.]

LAURA [to Nurse]. Did he give you the keys?

NURSE. Give them to me, no! God help me, but I took them from the
master's clothes that Nöjd had out to brush.

LAURA. Oh, Nöjd is on duty today?

NURSE. Yes, Nöjd.

LAURA. Give me the keys.

NURSE. Yes, but this seems like downright stealing. Do you hear him
walking up there, Ma'am? Back and forth, back and forth.

LAURA. Is the door well barred?

NURSE. Oh, yes, it's barred well enough!

LAURA. Control your feelings, Margret. We must be calm if we are to
be saved. [Knock.] Who is it?

NURSE [Opens door to hall]. It is Nöjd.

LAURA. Let him come in.

NÖJD [Comes in]. A message from the Colonel.

LAURA. Give it to me [Reads] Ah!--Nöjd, have you taken all the
cartridges out of the guns and pouches?

NÖJD. Yes, Ma'am.

LAURA. Good, wait outside while I answer the Colonel's letter.
[Nöjd goes. Laura writes.]

NURSE. Listen. What in the world is he doing up there now?

LAURA. Be quiet while I write.

[The sound of sawing is heard.]

NURSE [Half to herself]. Oh, God have mercy on us all! Where will
this end!

LAURA. Here, give this to Nöjd. And my mother must not know
anything about all this. Do you hear?

[Nurse goes out, Laura opens drawers in desk and takes out papers.
The Pastor comes in, he takes a chair and sits near Laura by the
desk.]

PASTOR. Good evening, sister. I have been away all day, as you
know, and only just got back. Terrible things have been happening
here.

LAURA. Yes, brother, never have I gone through such a night and
such a day.

PASTOR. I see that you are none the worse for it all.

LAURA. No, God be praised, but think what might have happened!

PASTOR. Tell me one thing, how did it begin? I have heard so many
different versions.

LAURA. It began with his wild idea of not being Bertha's father,
and ended with his throwing the lighted lamp in my face.

PASTOR. But this is dreadful! It is fully developed insanity. And
what is to be done now?

LAURA. We must try to prevent further violence and the doctor has
sent to the hospital for a straightjacket. In the meantime I have
sent a message to the Colonel, and I am now trying to straighten
out the affairs of the household, which he has carried on in a most
reprehensible manner.

PASTOR. This is a deplorable story, but I have always expected
something of the sort. Fire and powder must end in an explosion.
What have you got in the drawer there?

LAURA [Has pulled out a drawer in the desk]. Look, he has hidden
everything here.

PASTOR [Looking into drawer]. Good Heavens, here is your doll and
here is your christening cap and Bertha's rattle; and your letters;
and the locket. [Wipes his eyes.] After all he must have loved you
very dearly, Laura. I never kept such things!

LAURA. I believe he used to love me, but time--time changes so many
things.

PASTOR. What is that big paper? The receipt for a grave! Yes,
better the grave than the lunatic asylum! Laura, tell me, are you
blameless in all this?

LAURA. I? Why should I be to blame because a man goes out of his
mind?

PASTOR. Well, well, I shan't say anything. After all, blood is
thicker than water.

LAURA. What do you dare to intimate?

PASTOR [Looking at her penetratingly]. Now, listen!

LAURA. Yes?

PASTOR. You can hardly deny that it suits you pretty well to be
able to educate your child as you wish?

LAURA. I don't understand.

PASTOR. How I admire you!

LAURA. Me? H'm!

PASTOR. And I am to become the guardian of that free-thinker! Do
you know I have always looked on him as a weed in our garden.

[Laura gives a short laugh, and then becomes suddenly serious.]

LAURA. And you dare say that to me--his wife?

PASTOR. You are strong, Laura, incredibly strong. You are like a
fox in a trap, you would rather gnaw off your own leg than let
yourself be caught! Like a master thief--no accomplice, not even
your own conscience. Look at yourself in the glass! You dare not!

LAURA. I never use a looking glass!

PASTOR. No, you dare not! Let me look at your hand. Not a tell-tale
blood stain, not a trace of insidious poison! A little innocent
murder that the law cannot reach, an unconscious crime--
unconscious! What a splendid idea! Do you hear how he is working up
there? Take care! If that man gets loose he will make short work of
you.

LAURA. You talk so much, you must have a bad conscience. Accuse me
if you can!

PASTOR. I cannot.

LAURA. You see! You cannot, and therefore I am innocent. You take
care of your ward, and I will take care of mine! Here's the doctor.

[Doctor comes in.]

LAURA [Rising]. Good evening, Doctor. You at least will help me,
won't you? But unfortunately there is not much that can be done. Do
you hear how he is carrying on up there? Are you convinced now?

DOCTOR. I am convinced that an act of violence has been committed,
but the question now is whether that act of violence can be
considered an outbreak of passion or madness.

PASTOR. But apart from the actual outbreak, you must acknowledge
that he has "fixed ideas."

DOCTOR. I think that your ideas, Pastor, are much more fixed.

PASTOR. My settled views about the highest things are--

DOCTOR. We'll leave settled views out of this. Madam, it rests with
you to decide whether your husband is guilty to the extent of
imprisonment and fine or should be put in an asylum! How do you
class his behavior?

LAURA. I cannot answer that now.

DOCTOR. That is to say you have no decided opinion as to what will
be most advantageous to the interests of the family? What do you
say, Pastor?

PASTOR. Well, there will be a scandal in either case. It is not
easy to say.

LAURA. But if he is only sentenced to a fine for violence, he will
be able to repeat the violence.

DOCTOR. And if he is sent to prison he will soon be out again.
Therefore we consider it most advantageous for all parties that he
should be immediately treated as insane. Where is the nurse?

LAURA. Why?

DOCTOR. She must put the straightjacket on the patient when I have
talked to him and given the order! But not before. I have--the--
garment out here. [Goes out into the hall rind returns with a large
bundle.] Please ask the nurse to come in here.

[Laura rings.]

PASTOR. Dreadful! Dreadful!

[Nurse comes in.]

DOCTOR [Takes out the straightjacket]. I want you to pay attention
to this. We want you to slip this jacket on the Captain, from
behind, you understand, when I find it necessary to prevent another
outbreak of violence. You notice it has very long sleeves to
prevent his moving and they are to be tied at the back. Here are
two straps that go through buckles which are afterwards fastened to
the arm of a chair or the sofa or whatever is convenient. Will you
do it?

NURSE. No, Doctor, I can't do that; I can't.

LAURA. Why don't you do it yourself, Doctor?

DOCTOR. Because the patient distrusts me. You, Madam, would seem to
be the one to do it, but I fear he distrusts even you.

[Laura's face changes for an instant.]

DOCTOR. Perhaps you, Pastor--

PASTOR. No, I must ask to be excused.

[Nöjd comes in.]

LAURA. Have you delivered the message already?

NÖJD. Yes, Madam.

DOCTOR. Oh, is it you, Nöjd? You know the circumstances here; you
know that the Captain is out of his mind and you must help us to
take care of him.

NÖJD. If there is anything I can do for the Captain, you may be
sure I will do it.

DOCTOR. You must put this jacket on him--

NURSE. No, he shan't touch him. Nöjd might hurt him. I would rather
do it myself, very, very gently. But Nöjd can wait outside and help
me if necessary. He can do that.

[There is loud knocking on the private door.]

DOCTOR. There he is! Put the jacket under your shawl on the chair,
and you must all go out for the time being and the Pastor and I
will receive him, for that door will not hold out many minutes. Now
go.

NURSE [Going out left.] The Lord help us!

[Laura locks desk, then goes out left. Nöjd goes out back. After a
moment the private door is forced open, with such violence that the
lock is broken and the chair is thrown into the middle of the room.
The Captain comes in with a pile of books under his arm, which he
puts on the table.]

CAPTAIN. The whole thing is to be read here, in every book. So I
wasn't out of my mind after all! Here it is in the Odyssey, book
first, verse 215, page 6 of the Upsala translation. It is
Telemachus speaking to Athene. "My mother indeed maintains that he,
Odysseus, is my father, but I myself know it not, for no man yet
hath known his own origin." And this suspicion is harbored by
Telemachus about Penelope, the most virtuous of women! Beautiful,
eh? And here we have the prophet Ezekiel: "The fool saith; behold
here is my father, but who can tell whose loins engendered him."
That's quite clear! And what have we here? The History of Russian
Literature by Mersläkow. Alexander Puschkin, Russia's greatest
poet, died of torture front the reports circulated about his wife's
unfaithfulness rather than by the bullet in his breast, from a
duel. On his death-bed he swore she was innocent. Ass, ass! How
could he swear to it? You see, I read my books. Ah, Jonas, art you
here? and the doctor, naturally. Have you heard what I answered
when an English lady complained about Irishmen who used to throw
lighted lamps in their wives' faces? "God, what women," I cried.
"Women," she gasped. "Yes, of course," I answered. "When things go
so far that a man, a man who loved and worshipped a woman, takes a
lighted lamp and throws it in her face, then one may know."

PASTOR. Know what?

CAPTAIN. Nothing. One never knows anything. One only believes.
Isn't that true, Jonas? One believes and then one is saved! Yes, to
be sure. No, I know that one can be damned by his faith. I know
that.

DOCTOR. Captain!

CAPTAIN. Silence! I don't want to talk to you; I won't listen to
you repeating their chatter in there, like a telephone! In there!
You know! Look here, Jonas; do you believe that you are the father
of your children? I remember that you had a tutor in your house who
had a handsome face, and the people gossiped about him.

PASTOR. Adolf, take care!

CAPTAIN. Grope under your toupee and feel if there are not two
bumps there. By my soul, I believe he turns pale! Yes, yes, they
will talk; but, good Lord, they talk so much. Still we are a lot of
ridiculous dupes, we married men. Isn't that true, Doctor? How was
it with your marriage bed? Didn't you have a lieutenant in the
house, eh? Wait a moment and I will make a guess--his name was--
[whispers in the Doctor's ear]. You see he turns pale, too! Don't
be disturbed. She is dead and buried and what is done can't be
undone. I knew him well, by the way, and he is now--look at me,
Doctor--No, straight in my eyes--a major in the cavalry! By God, if
I don't believe he has horns, too.

DOCTOR [Tortured]. Captain, won't you talk about something else?

CAPTAIN. Do you see? He immediately wants to talk of something else
when I mention horns.

PASTOR. Do you know, Adolf, that you are insane?

CAPTAIN. Yes; I know that well enough. But if I only had the
handling of your illustrious brains for awhile I'd soon have you
shut up, too! I am mad, but how did I become so? That doesn't
concern you, and it doesn't concern anyone. But you want to talk of
something else now. [Takes the photograph album from the table.]
Good Lord, that is my child! Mine? We can never know. Do you know
what we would have to do to make sure? First, one should marry to
get the respect of society, then be divorced soon after and become
lovers, and finally adopt the children. Then one would at least be
sure that they were one's adopted children. Isn't that right? But
how can all that help us now? What can keep me now that you have
taken my conception of immortality from me, what use is science and
philosophy to me when I have nothing to live for, what can I do
with life when I am dishonored? I grafted my right arm, half my
brain, half my marrow on another trunk, for I believed they would
knit themselves together and grow into a more perfect tree, and
then someone came with a knife and cut below the graft, and now I
am only half a tree. But the other half goes on growing with my arm
and half my brain, while I wither and die, for they were the best
parts I gave away. Now I want to die. Do with me as you will. I am
no more.

[Buries his head on his arms on table. The Doctor whispers to the
Pastor, and they go out through the door left. Soon after Bertha
comes in.]

BERTRA [Goes up to Captain]. Are you ill, Father?

CAPTAIN [Looks up dazed]. I?

BERTHA. Do you know what you have done? Do you know that you threw
the lamp at Mother?

CAPTAIN. Did I?

BERTHA. Yes, you did. Just think if she had been hurt.

CAPTAIN. What would that have mattered?

BERTHA. You are not my father when you talk like that.

CAPTAIN. What do you say? Am I not your father? How do you know
that? Who told you that? And who is your father, then? Who?

BERTHA. Not you at any rate.

CAPTAIN. Still not I? Who, then? Who? You seem to be well informed.
Who told you? That I should live to see my child come and tell me
to my face that I am not her father! But don't you know that you
disgrace your mother when you say that? Don't you know that it is
to her shame if it is so?

BERTHA. Don't say anything bad about Mother; do you hear?

CAPTAIN. No; you hold together, every one of you, against me! and
you have always done so.

BERTHA. Father!

CAPTAIN. Don't use that word again!

BERTHA. Father, father!

CAPTAIN [Draws her to him]. Bertha, dear, dear child, you are my
child! Yes, Yes; it cannot be otherwise. It is so. The other was
only sickly thoughts that come with the wind like pestilence and
fever. Look at me that I may see my soul in your eyes!--But I see
her soul, too! You have two souls and you love me with one and hate
me with the other. But you must only love me! You must have only
one soul, or you will never have peace, nor I either. You must have
only one mind, which is the child of my mind and one will, which is
my will.

BERTHA. But I don't want to, I want to be myself.

CAPTAIN. You must not. You see, I am a cannibal, and I want to eat
you. Your mother wanted to eat me, but she was not allowed to. I am
Saturn who ate his children because it had been prophesied that
they would eat him. To eat or be eaten! That is the question. If I
do not eat you, you will eat me, and you have already shown your
teeth! But don't be frightened my dear child; I won't harm you.
[Goes and takes a revolver from the wall.]

BERTHA [Trying to escape]. Help, Mother, help, he wants to kill me.

NURSE [Comes in]. Mr. Adolf, what is it?

CAPTAIN [Examining revolver]. Have you taken out the cartridges?

NURSE. Yes, I put them away when I was tidying up, but sit down and
be quiet and I'll get them out again!

[She takes the Captain by the arm and gets him into a chair, into
which he sinks feebly. Then she takes out the straitjacket and goes
behind the chair. Bertha slips out left.]

NURSE. Mr. Adolf, do you remember when you were my dear little boy
and I tucked you in at night and used to repeat: "God who holds his
children dear" to you, and do you remember how I used to get up in
the night and give you a drink, how I would light the candle and
tell you stories when you had bad dreams and couldn't sleep? Do you
remember all that?

CAPTAIN. Go on talking, Margret, it soothes my head so. Tell me
some more.

NURSE. O yes, but you must listen then! Do you remember when you
took the big kitchen knife and wanted to cut out boats with it, and
how I came in and had to get the knife away by fooling you? You
were just a little child who didn't understand, so I had to fool
you, for you didn't know that it was for your own good. "Give me
that snake," I said, "or it will bite you!" and then you let go of
the knife. [Takes the revolver out of the Captain's hand.] And then
when you had to be dressed and didn't want to, I had to coax you
and say that you should have a coat of gold and be dressed like a
prince. And then I took your little blouse that was just made of
green wool and held it in front of you and said: "In with both
arms," and then I said, "Now sit nice and still while I button it
down the back," [She puts the straightjacket on] and then I said,
"Get up now, and walk across the floor like a good boy so I can see
how it fits." [She leads him to the sofa.] And then I said, "Now
you must go to bed."

CAPTAIN. What did you say? Was I to go to bed when I was dressed--
damnation! what have you done to me? [Tries to get free.] Ah! you
cunning devil of a woman! Who would have thought you had so much
wit. [Lies down on sofa.] Trapped, shorn, outwitted, and not to be
able to die!

NURSE. Forgive me, Mr. Adolf, forgive me, but I wanted to keep you
from killing your child.

CAPTAIN. Why didn't you let me? You say life is hell and death the
kingdom of heaven, and children belong to heaven.

NURSE. How do you know what comes after death?

CAPTAIN. That is the only thing we do know, but of life we know
nothing! Oh, if one had only known from the beginning.

NURSE. Mr. Adolf, humble your hard heart and cry to God for mercy;
it is not yet too late. It was not too late for the thief on the
cross, when the Saviour said, "Today shalt thou be with me in
Paradise."

CAPTAIN. Are you croaking for a corpse already, you old crow?

[Nurse takes a hymnbook out of her pocket.]

CAPTAIN [Calls]. Nöjd, is Nöjd out there?

[Nöjd comes in.]

CAPTAIN. Throw this woman out! She wants to suffocate me with her
hymn-book. Throw her out of the window, or up the chimney, or
anywhere.

NÖJD. [Looks at Nurse]. Heaven help you, Captain, but I can't do
that, I can't. If it were only six men, but a woman!

CAPTAIN. Can't you manage one woman, eh?

NÖJD. Of course I can,--but--well, you see, it's queer, but one
never wants to lay hands on a woman.

CAPTAIN. Why not? Haven't they laid hands on me?

NÖJD. Yes, but I can't, Captain. It's just as if you asked me to
strike the Pastor. It's second nature, like religion, I can't!

[Laura comes in, she motions Nöjd to go.]

CAPTAIN. Omphale, Omphale! Now you play with the club while
Hercules spins your wool.

LAURA [Goes to sofa]. Adolf, look at me. Do you believe that I am
your enemy?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I do. I believe that you are all my enemies! My
mother was my enemy when she did not want to bring me into the
world because I was to be born with pain, and she robbed my
embryonic life of its nourishment, and made a weakling of me. My
sister was my enemy when she taught me that I must be submissive to
her. The first woman I embraced was my enemy, for she gave me ten
years of illness in return for the love I gave her. My daughter
became my enemy when she had to choose between me and you. And you,
my wife, you have been my arch enemy, because you never let up on
me till I lay here lifeless.

LAURA. I don't know that. I ever thought or even intended what you
think I did. It may be that a dim desire to get rid of you as an
obstacle lay at the bottom of it, and if you see any design in my
behavior, it is possible that it existed, although I was
unconscious of it. I have never thought how it all came about,
but it is the result of the course you yourself laid out, and
before God and my conscience I feel that I am innocent, even if I
am not. Your existence has lain like a stone on my heart--lain so
heavily that I tried to shake off the oppressive burden. This is
the truth, and if I have unconsciously struck you down, I ask your
forgiveness.

CAPTAIN. All that sounds plausible. But how does it help me? And
whose fault is it? Perhaps spiritual marriages! Formerly one
married a wife, now, one enters into partnership with a business
woman, or goes to live with a friend--and then one ruins the
partner, and dishonors the friend!--What has become of love,
healthy sensuous love? It died in the transformation. And what is
the result of this love in shares, payable to the bearer without
joint liability? Who is the bearer when the crash comes? Who is the
fleshly father of the spiritual child?

LAURA. And as for your suspicions about the child, they are
absolutely groundless.

CAPTAIN. That's just what makes it so horrible. If at least there
were any grounds for them, it would be something to get hold of, to
cling to. Now there are only shadows that hide themselves in the
bushes, and stick out their heads and grin; it is like fighting
with the air, or firing blank cartridges in a sham fight. A fatal
reality would have called forth resistance, stirred life and soul
to action; but now my thoughts dissolve into air, and my brain
grinds a void until it is on fire.--Put a pillow under my head,
and throw something over me, I am cold. I am terribly cold!

[Laura takes her shawl and spreads it over him. Nurse goes to get a
pillow.]

LAURA. Give me your hand, friend.

CAPTAIN. My band! The hand that you have bound! Omphale! Omphale!--
But I feel your shawl against my mouth; it is as warm and soft as
your arm, and it smells of vanilla, like your hair when you were
young! Laura, when you were young, and we walked in the birch
woods, with the primroses and the thrushes--glorious, glorious!
Think how beautiful life was, and what it is now. You didn't want
to have it like this, nor did I, and yet it happened. Who then
rules over life?

LAURA. God alone rules--

CAPTAIN. The God of strife then! Or the Goddess perhaps, nowadays.--
Take away the cat that is lying on me! Take it away!

[Nurse brings in a pillow and takes the shawl away.]

CAPTAIN. Give me my army coat!--Throw it over me! [Nurse gets the
coat and puts it over him.] Ah, my rough lion skin that, you wanted
to take away from me! Omphale! Omphale! You cunning woman, champion
of peace and contriver of man's disarmament. Wake, Hercules, before
they take your club away from you! You would wile our armor from us
too, and make believe that it is nothing but glittering finery. No,
it was iron, let me tell you, before it ever glittered. In olden
days the smith made the armor, now it is the needle woman. Omphale!
Omphale! Rude strength has fallen before treacherous weakness. Out
on you infernal woman, and damnation on your sex! [He raises
himself to spit but falls back on the sofa.] What have you given me
for a pillow, Margret? It is so hard, and so cold, so cold. Come
and sit near me. There. May I put my head on your knee? So!--This
is warm! Bend over me so that I can feel your breast! Oh, it is
sweet to sleep against a woman's breast, a mother's, or a
mistress's, but the mother's is sweetest.

LAURA. Would you like to see your child, Adolf?

CAPTAIN. My child? A man has no children, it is only woman who has
children, and therefore the future is hers when we die childless.
Oh, God, who holds his children dear!

NURSE. Listen, he is praying to God.

CAPTAIN. No, to you to put me to sleep, for I am tired, so tired.
Good night, Margret, and blessed be you among women.

[He raises himself, but falls with a cry on the nurses's lap. Laura
goes to left and calls the Doctor who comes in with the Pastor.]

LAURA. Help us, Doctor, if it isn't too late. Look, he has stopped
breathing.

DOCTOR [Feels the Captain's pulse.] It is a stroke.

PASTOR. Is he dead?

DOCTOR. No, he may yet cone back to life, but to what an awakening
we cannot tell.

PASTOR. "First death, and then the judgment."

DOCTOR. No judgment, and no accusations, you who believe that a God
shapes man's destiny must go to him about this.

NURSE. Ah, Pastor, with his last breath he prayed to God.

PASTOR [To Laura]. Is that true?

LAURA. It is.

DOCTOR. In that case, which I can understand as little as the cause
of his illness, my skill is at an end. You try yours now, Pastor.

LAURA. Is that all you have to say at this death-bed, Doctor?

DOCTOR. That is all! I know no more. Let him speak who knows more.

[Bertha comes in from left and runs to her mother.]

BERTHA. Mother, Mother!

LAURA. My child, my own child!

PASTOR. Amen.

CURTAIN.




COUNTESS JULIE

CHARACTERS

COUNTESS JULIE, twenty-five years old
JEAN, a valet, thirty
KRISTIN, a cook, thirty-five
FARM SERVANTS

The action takes place on Saint John's night, the mid-summer
festival surviving from pagan times.

COUNTESS JULIE

[SCENE.--A large kitchen. The ceiling and walls are partially
covered by draperies and greens. The back wall slants upward from
left side of scene. On back wall, left, are two shelves filled with
copper kettles, iron casseroles and tin pans. The shelves are
trimmed with fancy scalloped paper. To right of middle a large
arched entrance with glass doors through which one sees a fountain
with a statue of Cupid, syringa bushes in bloom and tall poplars.
To left corner of scene a large stove with hood decorated with
birch branches. To right, servants' dining table of white pine and
a few chairs. On the cud of table stands a Japanese jar filled with
syringa blossoms. The floor is strewn with juniper branches.]

[Near stove, an ice-box, sink and dish-table. A large old-fashioned
bell, hangs over the door, to left of door a speaking tube.]

[Kristin stands at stork engaged in cooking something. She wears a
light cotton dress and kitchen apron. Jean comes in wearing livery;
he carries a large pair of riding-boots with spurs, which he puts
on floor.]

JEAN. Tonight Miss Julie is crazy again, perfectly crazy.

KRISTIN. So--you're back at last.

JEAN. I went to the station with the Count and coming back I went
in to the barn and danced and then I discovered Miss Julie there
leading the dance with the gamekeeper. When she spied me, she
rushed right toward me and asked me to waltz, and then she waltzed
so--never in my life have I seen anything like it! Ah--she is crazy
tonight.

KRISTIN. She has always been. But never so much as in the last
fortnight, since her engagement was broken off.

JEAN. Yes, what about that gossip? He seemed like a fine fellow
although he wasn't rich! Ach! they have so much nonsense about
them. [Seats himself at table.] It's queer about Miss Julie though--
to prefer staying here at home among these people, eh, to going
away with her father to visit her relatives, eh?

KRISTIN. She's probably shamefaced about breaking off with her
intended.

JEAN. No doubt! but he was a likely sort just the same. Do you
know, Kristin, how it happened? I saw it, although I didn't let on.

KRISTIN. No--did you see it?

JEAN. Yes, indeed, I did. They were out in the stable yard one
evening and she was "training" him as she called it. Do you know
what happened? She made him leap over her riding whip, the way you
teach a dog to jump. He jumped it twice and got a lash each time;
but the third time he snatched the whip from her hand and broke it
into pieces. And then he vanished!

KRISTIN. Was that the way it happened? No, you don't say so!

JEAN. Yes, that's the way the thing happened. But what have you got
to give me that's good, Kristin?

KRISTIN. [She takes things from the pans on stove and serves them
to him.] Oh, it's only a bit of kidney that I cut out of the veal
steak for you.

JEAN [Smelling the food]. Splendid! My favorite delicacy. [Feeling
of plate]. But you might have warmed the plate.

KRISTIN. You're fussier than the Count, when you get started.
[Tweaks his hair.]

JEAN. Don't pull my hair! You know how sensitive I am.

KRISTIN. Oh--there, there! you know I was only loving you.

[Jean eats, and Kristin opens bottle of beer.]

JEAN. Beer on midsummer night--thank you, no! I have something
better than that myself. [Takes bottle of wine from drawer of
table.] Yellow seal, how's that? Now give me a glass--a wine glass
you understand, of course, when one drinks the genuine.

KRISTIN. [Fetches a glass. Then goes to stove and puts on
casserole.] Heaven help the woman who gets you for her husband.
Such a fuss budget!

JEAN. Oh, talk! You ought to be glad to get such a fine fellow as I
am. And I don't think it's done you any harm because I'm considered
your intended. [Tastes wine.] Excellent, very excellent! Just a
little too cold. [Warms glass with hands]. We bought this at Dijon.
It stood at four francs a litre in the bulk; then of course there
was the duty besides. What are you cooking now that smells so
infernally?

KRISTIN. Oh, it's some devil's mess that Miss Julie must have for
Diana.

JEAN. Take care of your words, Kristin. But why should you stand
there cooking for that damned dog on a holiday evening? Is it sick,
eh?

KRISTIN. Yes, it's sick. Diana sneaked out with the gatekeeper's
mongrels and now something is wrong. Miss Julie can't stand that.

JEAN. Miss Julie has a great deal of pride about some things--but
not enough about others! Just like her mother in her lifetime; she
thrived best in the kitchen or the stable, but she must always
drive tandem--never one horse! She would go about with soiled cuffs
but she had to have the Count's crest on her cuff buttons. And as
for Miss Julie, she doesn't take much care of her appearance
either. I should say she isn't refined. Why just now out there she
pulled the forester from Anna's side and asked him to dance with
her. We wouldn't do things that way. But when the highborn wish to
unbend they become vulgar. Splendid she is though! Magnificent!
Ah, such shoulders and--

KRISTIN. Oh, don't exaggerate. I've heard what Clara says who
dresses her sometimes, I have.

JEAN. Ha! Clara--you women are always jealous of each other. I
who've been out riding with her--!!! And such a dancer!

KRISTIN. Come now, Jean, don't you want to dance with me when I'm
through?

JEAN. Of course I want to.

KRISTIN. That is a promise?

JEAN. Promise! When I say I will do a thing I do it! Thanks for the
supper--it was excellent.

[Pushes cork in the bottle with a bang. Miss Julie appears in
doorway, speaking to someone outside.]

JULIE. I'll be back soon, but don't let things wait for me.

[Jean quickly puts bottle in table drawer and rises very
respectfully.]

[Enter Miss Julie and goes to Kristin.]

JULIE. Is it done?

[Kristin indicating Jean's presence.]

JEAN [Gallantly]. Have you secrets between you?

JULIE. [Flipping handkerchief in his face]. Curious, are you?

JEAN. How sweet that violet perfume is!

JULIE [Coquettishly]. Impudence! Do you appreciate perfumes too?
Dance--that you can do splendidly. [Jean looks towards the cooking
store]. Don't look. Away with you.

JEAN [Inquisitive but polite]. Is it some troll's dish that you are
both concocting for midsummer night? Something to pierce the future
with and evoke the face of your intended?

JULIE [Sharply]. To see him one must have sharp eyes. [To Kristin].
Put it into a bottle and cork it tight. Come now, Jean and dance a
schottische with me.

[Jean hesitates.]

JEAN. I don't wish to be impolite to anyone but--this dance I
promised to Kristin.

JULIE. Oh, she can have another--isn't that so, Kristin? Won't you
lend Jean to me.

KRISTIN. It's not for me to say, if Miss Julie is so gracious it's
not for me to say no. [To Jean]. Go you and be grateful for the
honor.

JEAN. Well said--but not wishing any offense I wonder if it is
prudent for Miss Julie to dance twice in succession with her
servant, especially as people are never slow to find meaning in--

JULIE [Breaking out]. In what? What sort of meaning? What were you
going to say?

JEAN [Taken aback]. Since Miss Julie does not understand I must
speak plainly. It may look strange to prefer one of your--
underlings--to others who covet the same honor--

JULIE. To prefer--what a thought! I, the lady of the house! I honor
the people with my presence and now that I feel like dancing I want
to have a partner who knows how to lead to avoid being ridiculous.

JEAN. As Miss Julie commands. I'm here to serve.

JULIE [Mildly]. You mustn't look upon that as a command. Tonight we
are all in holiday spirits--full of gladness and rank is flung
aside. So, give me your arm! Don't be alarmed, Kristin, I shall not
take your sweetheart away from you.

[Jean offers arm. They exit.]

[PANTOMIME.--Played as though the actress were really alone. Turns
her back to the audience when necessary. Does not look out into the
auditorium. Does not hurry as though fearing the audience might
grow restless. Soft violin music from the distance, schottische
time. Kristin hums with the music. She cleans the table; washes
plate, wipes it and puts it in the china closet. Takes off her
apron and then opens drawer of table and takes a small hand glass
and strands it against a flower pot on table. Lights a candle and
heats a hair pin with which she crimps her hair around her
forehead. After that she goes to door at back and listens. Then she
returns to table and sees the Countess' handkerchief, picks it up,
smells of it, then smooths it out and folds it. Enter Jean.]

JEAN. She is crazy I tell you! To dance like that! And the people
stand grinning at her behind the doors. What do you say to that,
Kristin?

KRISTIN. Oh, didn't I say she's been acting queer lately? But isn't
it my turn to dance now?

JEAN. You are not angry because I let myself be led by the
forelock?

KRISTIN. No, not for such a little thing. That you know well
enough. And I know my place too--

JEAN [Puts arm around her waist]. You're a pretty smart girl,
Kristin, and you ought to make a good wife.

[Enter Miss Julie.]

JULIE [Disagreeably surprised, but with forced gaiety]. You're a
charming cavalier to run away from your partner.

JEAN. On the contrary, Miss Julie, I have hastened to my neglected
one as you see.

JULIE [Changing subject]. Do you know, you dance wonderfully well!
But why are you in livery on a holiday night? Take it off
immediately.

JEAN. Will you excuse me--my coat hangs there. [Goes R. and takes
coat.]

JULIE. Does it embarrass you to change your coat in my presence?
Go to your room then--or else stay and I'll turn my back.

JEAN. With your permission, Miss Julie.

[Exit Jean R. One sees his arm as he changes coat.]

JULIE [To Kristin]. Is Jean your sweetheart, that he is so devoted?

KRISTIN. Sweetheart? Yes, may it please you. Sweetheart--that's
what they call it.

JULIE. Call it?

KRISTIN. Oh Miss Julie has herself had a sweetheart and--

JULIE. Yes, we were engaged--

KRISTIN. But it came to nothing.

[Enter Jean in black frock coat.]

JULIE. Tres gentil, Monsieur Jean, tres gentil.

JEAN. Vous voulez plaisanter, Mademoiselle.

JULIE. Et vous voulez parler francais? Where did you learn that?

JEAN. In Switzerland where I was butler in the largest hotel at
Lucerne.

JULIE. Why, you look like a gentleman in your frock coat. Charmant!
[Seats herself by table.]

JEAN. You flatter me!

JULIE. Flatter! [Picking him up on the word.]

JEAN. My natural modesty forbids me to believe that you could mean
these pleasant things that you say to a--such its I am--and
therefore I allowed myself to fancy that you overrate or, as it is
called, flatter.

JULIE. Where did you learn to use words like that? Have you
frequented the theatres much?

JEAN. I have frequented many places, I have!

JULIE. But you were born here in this neighborhood?

JEAN. My father was a deputy under the public prosecutor, and I saw
Miss Julie as a child--although she didn't see me!

JULIE. No, really?

JEAN. Yes, I remember one time in particular. But I mustn't talk
about that.

JULIE. Oh yes, do, when was it?

JEAN. No really--not now, another time perhaps.

JULIE. "Another time" is a good for nothing. Is it so dreadful
then?

JEAN. Not dreadful--but it goes against the grain. [Turns and
points to Kristin, who has fallen asleep in a chair near stove].
Look at her.

JULIE. She'll make a charming wife! Does she snore too?

JEAN. No, but she talks in her sleep.

JULIE [Cynically]. How do you know that she talks in her sleep?

JEAN [Boldly]. I have heard her.[Pause and they look at each
other.]

JULIE. Why don't you sit down?

JEAN. I can't allow myself to do so in your presence.

JULIE. But if I command you?

JEAN. Then I obey.

JULIE. Sit down then. But wait--can't you get me something to drink
first?

JEAN. I don't know what there is in the icebox. Nothing but beer,
probably.

JULIE. Is beer nothing? My taste is so simple that I prefer it to
wine.

[Jean takes out beer and serves it on plate.]

JEAN. Allow me.

JULIE. Won't you drink too?

JEAN. I am no friend to beer--but if Miss Julie commands.

JULIE [Gaily]. Commands! I should think as a polite cavalier you
might join your lady.

JEAN. Looking at it in that way you are quite right. [Opens another
bottle of beer and fills glass.]

JULIE. Give me a toast!

[Jean hesitates.]

JULIE [Mockingly]. Old as he is, I believe the man is bashful!

JEAN [On his knee with mock gallantry, raises glass]. A health to
my lady of the house!

JULIE. Bravo! Now you must kiss my slipper. Then the thing is
perfect.

[Jean hesitates and then seizes her foot and kisses it lightly.]

JULIE. Splendid! You should have been an actor.

JEAN [Rising]. But this mustn't go any further, Miss Julie. What if
someone should come in and see us?

JULIE. What harm would that do?

JEAN. Simply that it would give them a chance to gossip. And if
Miss Julie only knew how their tongues wagged just now--then--

JULIE. What did they say? Tell me. And sit down now.

JEAN [Sitting]. I don't wish to hurt you, but they used an
expression--threw hints of a certain kind--but you are not a child,
you can understand. When one sees a lady drinking alone with a man--
let alone a servant--at night--then--

JULIE. Then what? And for that matter, we are not alone. Kristin is
here.

JEAN. Sleeping! Yes.

JULIE. Then I shall wake her. [Rises]. Kristin, are you asleep?

KRISTIN. [In her sleep]. Bla--bla--bla--bla.

JULIE. Kristin! She certainly can sleep. [Goes to Kristin.]

KRISTIN. [In her sleep]. The Count's boots are polished--put on the
coffee--soon--soon--soon. Oh--h-h-h--puh! [Breathes heavily. Julie
takes her by the nose.]

JULIE. Won't you wake up?

JEAN [Sternly]. Don't disturb the sleeping.

JULIE [Sharply]. What?

JEAN. Anyone who has stood over the hot stove all day long is tired
when night comes. One should respect the weary.

JULIE. That's a kind thought--and I honor it. [Offers her hand.]
Thanks for the suggestion. Come out with me now and pick some
syringas.

[Kristin has awakened and goes to her room, right, in a sort of
sleep stupified way.]

JEAN. With Miss Julie?

JULIE. With me.

JEAN. But that wouldn't do--decidedly not.

JULIE. I don't understand you. Is it possible that you fancy that
I--

JEAN. No--not I, but people.

JULIE. What? That I'm in love with my coachman?

JEAN. I am not presumptuous, but we have seen instances--and with
the people nothing is sacred.

JULIE. I believe he is an aristocrat!

JEAN. Yes, I am.

JULIE. But I step down-- --

JEAN. Don't step down, Miss Julie. Listen to me--no one would
believe that you stepped down of your own accord; people always say
that one falls down.

JULIE. I think better of the people than you do. Come--and try
them--come!

[Dares him with a look.]

JEAN. Do you know that you are wonderful?

JULIE. Perhaps. But you are too. Everything is wonderful for that
matter. Life, people--everything. Everything is wreckage, that
drifts over the water until it sinks, sinks. I have the same dream
every now and then and at this moment I am reminded of it. I find
myself seated at the top of a high pillar and I see no possible way
to get down. I grow dizzy when I look down, but down I must. But
I'm not brave enough to throw myself; I cannot hold fast and I long
to fall--but I don't fall. And yet I can find no rest or peace
until I shall come down to earth; and if I came down to earth I
would wish myself down in the ground. Have you ever felt like that?

JEAN. No, I dream that I'm lying in a dark wood under a tall tree
and I would up--up to the top, where I can look far over the fair
landscape, where the sun is shining. I climb--climb, to plunder the
birds' nests up there where the golden eggs lie, but the tree trunk
is so thick, so smooth, and the first limb is so high! But I know
if I reached the first limb I should climb as though on a ladder,
to the top. I haven't reached it yet, but I shall reach it, if only
in the dream.

JULIE. Here I stand talking about dreams with you. Come now, just
out in the park.

[She offers her arm and they start.]

JEAN. We should sleep on nine midsummer flowers tonight and then
our dreams would come true.

[She turns, Jean quickly holds a hand over his eye.]

JULIE. What is it, something in your eye?

JEAN. Oh, it is nothing--just a speck. It will be all right in
a moment.

JULIE. It was some dust from my sleeve that brushed against you.
Now sit down and let me look for it. [Pulls him into a chair, looks
into his eye.] Now sit still, perfectly still. [Uses corner of her
handkerchief in his eye. Strikes his hand.] So--will you mind? I
believe you are trembling, strong man that you are. [Touching his
arm.] And such arms!

JEAN [Warningly.] Miss Julie!

JULIE. Yes, Monsieur Jean!

JEAN. Attention. Je ne suis qu'un homme!

JULIE. Will you sit Still! So, now it is gone! Kiss my hand and
thank me!

[Jean rises.]

JEAN. Miss Julie, listen to me. Kristin has gone to bed now--will
you listen to me--

JULIE. Kiss my hand first.

JEAN. Listen to me--

JULIE. Kiss my hand first.

JEAN. Yes, but blame yourself.

JULIE. For what?

JEAN. For what? Are you a child at twenty-five? Don't you know that
it is dangerous to play with fire?

JULIE. Not for me. I am insured!

JEAN. No, you are not. But even if you are, there is inflammable
material in the neighborhood.

JULIE. Might that be you?

JEAN. Yes, not because it is I, but because I'm a young man--

JULIE [Scornfully]. With a grand opportunity--what inconceivable
presumption! A Don Juan perhaps! Or a Joseph! On my soul, I believe
he is a Joseph!

JEAN. You do?

JULIE. Almost.

[Jean rushes towards her and tries to take her in his arms to kiss
her.]

JULIE [Gives him a box on the ear]. Shame on you.

JEAN. Are you in earnest, or fooling?

JULIE. In earnest.

JEAN. Then you were in earnest a moment ago, too. You play too
seriously with what is dangerous. Now I'm tired of playing and beg
to be excused that I may go on with my work. The Count must have
his boots in time, and it is long past midnight. [Jean picks up
boots.]

JULIE. Put those boots away.

JEAN. No, that is my work which it is my duty to do, but I was not
hired to be your play thing and that I shall never be. I think too
well of myself for that.

JULIE. You are proud.

JEAN. In some things--not in others.

JULIE. Were you ever in love?

JEAN. We do not use that word, but I have liked many girls. One
time I was sick because I couldn't have the one I wanted--sick,
you understand, like the princesses in the Arabian Nights who could
not eat nor drink for love sickness.

JULIE. Who was she? [Jean is silent.] Who was she?

JEAN. That you could not make me tell.

JULIE. Not if I ask you as an equal, as a--friend? Who was she?

JEAN. It was you!

[Julie seats herself.]

JULIE. How extravagant!

JEAN. Yes, if you will, it was ridiculous. That was the story I
hesitated to tell, but now I'm going to tell it. Do you know how
people in high life look from the under world? No, of course you
don't. They look like hawks and eagles whose backs one seldom sees,
for they soar up above. I lived in a hovel provided by the state,
with seven brothers and sisters and a pig; out on a barren stretch
where nothing grew, not even a tree, but from the window I could
see the Count's park walls with apple trees rising above them. That
was the garden of paradise; and there stood many angry angels with
flaming swords protecting it; but for all that I and other boys
found the way to the tree of life--now you despise me.

JULIE. Oh, all boys steal apples.

JEAN. You say that, but you despise me all the same. No matter! One
time I entered the garden of paradise--it was to weed the onion
beds with my mother! Near the orchard stood a Turkish pavilion,
shaded and overgrown with jessamine and honeysuckle. I didn't know
what it was used for and I had never seen anything so beautiful.
People passed in and out and one day--the door was left open. I
sneaked in and beheld walls covered with pictures of kings and
emperors and there were red-fringed curtains at the windows--now
you understand what I mean--I--[Breaks off a spray of syringes and
puts it to her nostrils.] I had never been in the castle and how my
thoughts leaped--and there they returned ever after. Little by
little the longing came over me to experience for once the pleasure
of--enfin, I sneaked in and was bewildered. But then I heard
someone coming--there was only one exit for the great folk, but for
me there was another, and I had to choose that. [Julie who has
taken the syringa lets it fall on table.] Once out I started to
run, scrambled through a raspberry hedge, rushed over a strawberry
bed and came to a stop on the rose terrace. For there I saw a
figure in a white dress and white slippers and stockings--it was
you! I hid under a heap of weeds, under, you understand, where the
thistles pricked me, and lay on the damp, rank earth. I gazed at
you walking among the roses. And I thought if it is true that the
thief on the cross could enter heaven and dwell among the angels it
was strange that a pauper child on God's earth could not go into
the castle park and play with the Countess' daughter.

JULIE [Pensively]. Do you believe that all poor children would have
such thoughts under those conditions?

JEAN [Hesitates, then in a positive voice]. That all poor children--
yes, of course, of course!

JULIE. It must be a terrible misfortune to be poor.

JEAN [With deep pain and great chagrin]. Oh, Miss Julie, a dog may
lie on the couch of a Countess, a horse may be caressed by a lady's
hand, but a servant--yes, yes, sometimes there is stuff enough in a
man, whatever he be, to swing himself up in the world, but how
often does that happen! But to return to the story, do you know
what I did? I ran down to the mill dam and threw myself in with my
clothes on--and was pulled out and got a thrashing. But the
following Sunday when all the family went to visit my grandmother I
contrived to stay at home; I scrubbed myself well, put on my best
dollies, such its they were, and went to church so that I might see
you. I saw you. Then I went home with my mind made up to put, an
cud to myself. But I wanted to do it beautifully and without pain.
Then I happened to remember that elderberry blossoms are poisonous.
I knew where there was a big elderberry bush in full bloom and I
stripped it of its riches and made a bed of it in the oat-bin. Have
you ever noticed how smooth and glossy oats are? As soft as a
woman's arm.--Well, I got in and let down the cover, fell asleep,
and when I awoke I was very ill, but didn't die--as you see. What I
wanted--I don't know. You were unattainable, but through the vision
of you I was made to realize how hopeless it was to rise above the
conditions of my birth.

JULIE. You tell it well! Were you ever at school?

JEAN. A little, but I have read a good deal and gone to the
theatres. And besides, I have always heard the talk of fine folks
and from them I have learned most.

JULIE. Do you listen then to what we are saying?

JEAN. Yes, indeed, I do. And I have heard much when I've been on
the coachbox. One time I heard Miss Julie and a lady--

JULIE. Oh, what was it you heard?

JEAN. Hm! that's not so easy to tell. But I was astonished and
could not understand where you had heard such things. Well, perhaps
at bottom there's not so much difference between people and--people.

JULIE. Oh, shame! We don't behave as you do when we are engaged.

JEAN. [Eyeing her]. Are you sure of that? It isn't worthwhile to
play the innocent with me.

JULIE. I gave my love to a rascal.

JEAN. That's what they always say afterward.

JULIE. Always?

JEAN. Always, I believe, as I have heard the expression many times
before under the same circumstances.

JULIE. What circumstances?

JEAN. Those we've been talking about. The last time I-- --

JULIE. Silence. I don't wish to hear any more.

JEAN. Well, then I beg to be excused so I may go to bed.

JULIE. Go to bed! On midsummer night?

JEAN. Yes, for dancing out there with that pack has not amused me.

JULIE. Then get the key for the boat and row me out over the lake.
I want to see the sun rise.

JEAN. Is that prudent?

JULIE. One would think that, you were afraid of your reputation.

JEAN. Why not? I don't want to be made ridiculous. I am not willing
to be driven out without references, now that I am going to settle
down. And I feel I owe something to Kristin.

JULIE. Oh, so it's Kristin now--

JEAN. Yes, but you too. Take my advice, go up and go to bed.

JULIE. Shall I obey you?

JEAN. For once--for your own sake. I beg of you. Night is crawling
along, sleepiness makes one irresponsible and the brain grows hot.
Go to your room. In fact--if I hear rightly some of the people are
coming for me. If they find us here--then you are lost.

[Chorus is heard approaching, singing.]

      "There came two ladies out of the woods
       Tridiridi-ralla tridiridi-ra.
       One of them had wet her foot,
       Tridiridi-ralla-la.

      "They talked of a hundred dollars,
       Tridiridi-ralla tridiridi-ra.
       But neither had hardly a dollar,
       Tridiridi-ralla-la.

      "The mitten I'm going to send you,
       Tridirichi-ralla tridiridi-ra.
       For another I'm going to jilt you,
       Tridiridi-ralla tridiridi-ra."

JULIE. I know the people and I love them and they respect me. Let
them come, you shall see.

JEAN. No, Miss Julie, they don't love you. They take your food and
spit upon your kindness, believe me. Listen to them, listen to what
they're singing! No! Don't listen!

JULIE [Listening]. What are they singing?

JEAN. It's something suggestive, about you and me.

JULIE. Infamous! Oh horrible! And how cowardly!

JEAN. The pack is always cowardly. And in such a battle one can
only run away.

JULIE. Run away? Where? We can't get out and we can't go to
Kristin.

JEAN. Into my room then. Necessity knows no law. You can depend on
me for I am your real, genuine, respectful friend.

JULIE. But think if they found you there.

JEAN. I will turn the key and if they try to break in I'll shoot.
Come--come!

JULIE. [Meaningly]. You promise me--?

JEAN. I swear ...

[She exits R. Jean follows her.]

[BALLET.--The farm folk enter in holiday dress with flowers in
their hats, a fiddler in the lead. They carry a keg of home-brewed
beer and a smaller keg of gin, both decorated with greens which are
placed on the table. They help themselves to glasses and drink.
Then they sing and dance a country dance to the melody of "There
came two ladies out of the woods." When that is over they go out,
singing.]

[Enter Julie alone, sees the havoc the visitors have made, clasps
her hands, takes out powder box and powders her face. Enter Jean
exuberant.]

JEAN. There, you see, and you heard them. Do you think it's
possible for us to remain here any longer?

JULIE. No, I don't. But what's to be done?

JEAN. Fly! Travel--far from here!

JULIE. Travel--yes--but where?

JEAN. To Switzerland--to the Italian lakes. You have never been
there?

JULIE. No--is it beautiful there?

JEAN. Oh, an eternal summer! Oranges, trees, laurels--oh!

JULIE. But what shall we do there?

JEAN. I'll open a first-class hotel for first-class patrons.

JULIE. Hotel?

JEAN. That is life--you shall see! New faces constantly, different
languages. Not a moment for boredom. Always something to do night
and day--the bell ringing, the trains whistling, the omnibus coming
and going and all the time the gold pieces rolling into the till--
that is life!

JULIE. Yes, that is life. And I--?

JEAN. The mistress of the establishment--the ornament of the house.
With your looks--and your manners--oh, it's a sure success!
Colossal! You could sit like a queen in the office and set the
slaves in action by touching an electric button. The guests line up
before your throne and shyly lay their riches on your desk. You
can't believe how people tremble when they get their bills--I can
salt the bills and you can sweeten them with your most bewitching
smile--ha, let us get away from here--[Takes a time table from his
pocket] immediately--by the next train. We can be at Malmö at
6.30, Hamburg at 8.40 tomorrow morning, Frankfort the day after
and at Como by the St. Gothard route in about--let me see, three
days. Three days!

JULIE. All that is well enough, but Jean--you must give me courage.
Take me in your arms and tell me that you love me.

JEAN [Hesitatingly]. I will--but I daren't--not again in this
house. I love you of course--do you doubt that?

JULIE [Shyly and with womanliness]. You! Say thou to me! Between us
there can be no more formality. Say thou.

JEAN. I can't--There must be formality between us--as long as we
are in this house. There is the memory of the past--and there is
the Count, your father. I have never known anyone else for whom I
have such respect. I need only to see his gloves lying in a chair
to feel my own insignificance. I have only to hear his bell to
start like a nervous horse--and now as I see his boots standing
there so stiff and proper I feel like bowing and scraping. [Gives
boots a kick]. Superstitions and prejudices taught in childhood
can't be uprooted in a moment. Let us go to a country that is it
republic where they'll stand on their heads for my coachman's
livery--on their heads shall they stand--but I shall not. I am
not, born to bow and scrape, for there's stuff in me--character. If
I only get hold of the first limb, you shall see me climb. I'm a
coachman today, but next year I shall be a proprietor, in two years
a gentleman of income; then for Roumania where I'll let them
decorate me and can, mark you, _can_ end a count!

JULIE. Beautiful, beautiful!

JEAN. Oh, in Roumania, one can buy a title cheap--and so you can be
a countess just the same--my countess!

JULIE. What do I care for all that--which I now cast behind me. Say
that you love me--else, what am I, without it?

JEAN. I'll say it a thousand times afterwards, but not here. Above
all, let us have no sentimentality now or everything will fall
through. We must look at this matter coldly like sensible people.
[Takes out a cigar and lights it.] Now sit down there and I'll sit
here and we'll take it over as if nothing had happened.

JULIE [Staggered]. Oh, my God, have you no feeling?

JEAN. I? No one living has more feeling than I but I can restrain
myself.

JULIE. A moment ago you could kiss my slipper and now--

JEAN [Harshly]. That was--then. Now we have other things to think
about.

JULIE. Don't speak harshly to me.

JEAN. Not harshly, but wisely. One folly has been committed--commit
no more. The Count may be here at any moment, and before he comes,
our fate must be settled. How do my plans for the future strike
you? Do you approve of them?

JULIE. They seem acceptable enough. But one question. For such a
great undertaking a large capital is necessary, have you that?

JEAN [Chewing his cigar]. I? To be sure. I have my regular
occupation, my unusual experience, my knowledge of different
languages--that is capital that counts, I should say.

JULIE. But with all that you could not buy a railway ticket.

JEAN. That's true, and for that reason I'm looking for a backer who
can furnish the funds.

JULIE. How can that be done at a moment's notice?

JEAN. That is for you to say, if you wish to be my companion.

JULIE. I can't--as I have nothing myself.

[A pause.]

JEAN. Then the whole matter drops-- --

JULIE. And-- --

JEAN. Things remain as they are.

JULIE. Do you think I could remain under this roof after----Do you
think I will allow the people to point at me in scorn, or that I
can ever look my father in the face again? Never! Take me away from
this humiliation and dishonor. Oh, what have I done! Oh, my God,
what have I done! [Weeping.]

JEAN. So, you are beginning in that tune now. What have you done?
The same as many before you.

JULIE. And now you despise me. I am falling! I am falling!

JEAN. Fall down to my level, I'll lift you up afterwards.

JULIE. What strange power drew me to you--the weak to the strong--
the falling to the rising, or is this love! This--love! Do you know
what love is?

JEAN. I? Yes! Do you think it's the first time?

JULIE. What language, what thoughts.

JEAN. I am what life has made me. Don't be nervous and play the
high and mighty, for now we are on the same level. Look here, my
little girl, let me offer you a glass of something extra fine.
[Opens drawer of table and takes out wine bottle, then fills
two glasses that have been already used.]

JULIE. Where did you get that wine?

JEAN. From the cellar.

JULIE. My father's Burgundy.

JEAN. What's the matter, isn't that good enough for the son-in-law?

JULIE. And I drink beer--I!

JEAN. That only goes to prove that your taste is poorer than mine.

JULIE. Thief!

JEAN. Do you intend to tattle?

JULIE. Oh ho! Accomplice to a house thief. Was I intoxicated--have
I been walking in my sleep this night--midsummer night, the night
for innocent play--

JEAN. Innocent, eh!

JULIE [Pacing back and forth]. Is there a being on earth so
miserable as I.

JEAN. Why are you, after such a conquest. Think of Kristin in
there, don't you think she has feelings too?

JULIE. I thought so a little while ago, but I don't any more. A
servant is a servant.

JEAN. And a whore is a whore.

JULIE [Falls on her knees with clasped hands]. Oh, God in heaven,
end my wretched life, save me from this mire into which I'm
sinking--Oh save me, save me.

JEAN. I can't deny that it hurts me to see you like this.

JULIE. And you who wanted to die for me.

JEAN. In the oat-bin? Oh, that was only talk.

JULIE. That is to say--a lie!

JEAN [Beginning to show sleepiness]. Er--er almost. I believe I
read something of the sort in a newspaper about a chimney-sweep
who made a death bed for himself of syringa blossoms in a wood-bin--
[laughs] because they were going to arrest him for non-support of
his children.

JULIE. So you are such a--

JEAN. What better could I have hit on! One must always be romantic
to capture a woman.

JULIE. Wretch! Now you have seen the eagle's back, and I suppose I
am to be the first limb--

JEAN. And the limb is rotten--

JULIE [Without seeming to hear]. And I am to be the hotel's
signboard--

JEAN. And I the hotel--

JULIE. And sit behind the desk and allure guests and overcharge
them--

JEAN. Oh, that'll be my business.

JULIE. That a soul can be so degraded!

JEAN. Look to your own soul.

JULIE. Lackey! Servant! Stand up when I speak.

JEAN. Don't you dare to moralize to me. Lackey, eh! Do you think
you have shown yourself finer than any maid-servant tonight?

JULIE [Crushed]. That is right, strike me, trample on me, I deserve
nothing better. I have done wrong, but help me now. Help me out of
this if there is any possible way.

JEAN [Softens somewhat]. I don't care to shirk my share of the
blame, but do you think any one of my position would ever have
dared to raise his eyes to you if you yourself had not invited it?
Even now I am astonished--

JULIE. And proud.

JEAN. Why not? Although I must confess that the conquest was too
easy to be exciting.

JULIE. Go on, strike me again--

JEAN [Rising]. No, forgive me, rather, for what I said. I do not
strike the unarmed, least of all, a woman. But I can't deny that
from a certain point of view it gives me satisfaction to know that
it is the glitter of brass, not gold, that dazzles us from below,
and that the eagle's back is grey like the rest of him. On the
other hand, I'm sorry to have to realize that all that I have
looked up to is not worth while, and it pains me to see you fallen
lower than your cook as it pains me to see autumn blossoms whipped
to pieces by the cold rain and transformed into--dirt!

JULIE. You speak as though you were already my superior.

JEAN. And so I am! For I can make you a countess and you could
never make me a count.

JULIE. But I am born of a count, that you can never be.

JEAN. That is true, but I can be the father of counts--if--

JULIE. But you are a thief--that I am not.

JEAN. There are worse things than that, and for that matter when I
serve in a house I regard myself as a member of the family, a child
of the house as it were. And one doesn't consider it theft if
children snoop a berry from full bushes. [With renewed passion].
Miss Julie, you are a glorious woman--too good for such as I. You
have been the victim of an infatuation and you want to disguise
this fault by fancying that you love me. But you do not--unless
perhaps my outer self attracts you. And then your love is no better
than mine. But I cannot be satisfied with that, and your real love
I can never awaken.

JULIE. Are you sure of that?

JEAN. You mean that we could get along with such an arrangement?
There's no doubt about my loving you--you are beautiful, you are
elegant--[Goes to her and takes her hand] accomplished, lovable
when you wish to be, and the flame that you awaken in man does not
die easily. [Puts arm around her.] You are like hot wine with
strong spices, and your lips--

[Tries to kiss her. Julie pulls herself away slowly.]

JULIE. Leave me--I'm not to be won this way.

JEAN. How then? Not with caresses and beautiful words? Not by
thoughts for the future, to save humiliation? How then?

JULIE. How? I don't know. I don't know! I shrink from you as I
would from a rat. But I cannot escape from you.

JEAN. Escape with me.

JULIE. Escape? Yes, we must escape.--But I'm so tired. Give me a
glass of wine. [Jean fills a glass with wine, Julie looks at her
watch.] We must talk it over first for we have still a little time
left.

[She empties the glass and puts it out for more.]

JEAN. Don't drink too much. It will go to your head.

JULIE. What harm will that do?

JEAN. What harm? It's foolish to get intoxicated. But what did you
want to say?

JULIE. We must go away, but we must talk first. That is, I must
speak, for until now you have done all the talking. You have told
me about your life--now I will tell you about mine, then we will
know each other through and through before we start on our
wandering together.

JEAN. One moment, pardon. Think well whether you won't regret
having told your life's secrets.

JULIE. Aren't you my friend?

JEAN. Yes. Sometimes. But don't depend on me.

JULIE. You only say that. And for that matter I have no secrets.
You see, my mother was not of noble birth. She was brought up with
ideas of equality, woman's freedom and all that. She had very
decided opinions against matrimony, and when my father courted her
she declared that she would never be his wife--but she did so for
all that. I came into the world against my mother's wishes, I
discovered, and was brought up like a child of nature by my mother,
and taught everything that a boy must know as well; I was to be an
example of a woman being as good as a man--I was made to go about
in boy's clothes and take care of the horses and harness and saddle
and hunt, and all such things; in fact, all over the estate women
servants were taught to do men's work, with the result that the
property came near being ruined--and so we became the laughing
stock of the countryside. At last my father must have awakened from
his bewitched condition, for he revolted, and ran things according
to his ideas. My mother became ill--what it was I don't know, but
she often had cramps and acted queerly--sometimes hiding in the
attic or the orchard, and would even be gone all night at times.
Then came the big fire which of course you have heard about. The
house, the stables--everything was burned, under circumstances that
pointed strongly to an incendiary, for the misfortune happened the
day after the quarterly insurance was due and the premiums sent in
by father were strangely delayed by his messenger so that they
arrived too late. [She fills a wine glass and drinks.]

JEAN. Don't drink any more.

JULIE. Oh, what does it matter? My father was utterly at a loss to
know where to get money to rebuild with. Then my mother suggested
that he try to borrow from a man who had been her friend in her
youth--a brick manufacturer here in the neighborhood. My father
made the loan, but wasn't allowed to pay any interest, which
suprised him. Then the house was rebuilt. [Julie drinks again.] Do
you know who burned the house?

JEAN. Her ladyship, your mother?

JULIE. Do you know who the brick manufacturer was?

JEAN. Your mother's lover?

JULIE. Do you know whose money it was?

JEAN. Just a moment, that I don't know.

JULIE. It was my mother's.

JEAN. The Count's--that is to say, unless there was a contract.

JULIE. There was no contract. My mother had some money which she
had not wished to have in my father's keeping and therefore, she
had entrusted it to her friend's care.

JEAN. Who kept it.

JULIE. Quite right--he held on to it. All this came to my father's
knowledge. He couldn't proceed against him, wasn't allowed to pay
his wife's friend, and couldn't prove that it was his wife's money.
That was my mother's revenge for his taking the reins of the
establishment into his own hands. At that time he was ready to
shoot himself. Gossip had it that he had tried and failed. Well, he
lived it down--and my mother paid full penalty for her misdeed.
Those were five terrible years for me, as you can fancy. I
sympathized with my father, but I took my mother's part, for I
didn't know the true circumstances. Through her I learned to
distrust and hate men, and I swore to her never to be a man's
slave.

JEAN. But you became engaged to the Lieutenant Governor.

JULIE. Just to make him my slave.

JEAN. But that he didn't care to be.

JULIE. He wanted to be, fast enough, but I grew tired of him.

JEAN. Yes--I noticed that--in the stable-yard!

JULIE. What do you mean?

JEAN. I saw how he broke the engagement.

JULIE. That's a lie. It was I who broke it. Did he say he broke it--
the wretch!

JEAN. I don't believe that he was a wretch. You hate men, Miss
Julie.

JULIE. Most of them. Sometimes one is weak--

JEAN. You hate me?

JULIE. Excessively. I could see you shot--

JEAN. Like a mad dog?

JULIE. Exactly!

JEAN. But there is nothing here to shoot with. What shall we do
then?

JULIE [Rousing herself].We must get away from here--travel.

JEAN. And torture each other to death?

JULIE. No--to enjoy, a few days, a week--as long as we can. And
then to die.

JEAN. Die! How silly. I think it's better to start the hotel.

JULIE [Not heeding him]. By the Lake of Como where the sun is
always shining, where the laurel is green at Christmas and the
oranges glow.

JEAN. The Lake of Como is it rain hole, I never saw any oranges
there except on fruit stands. But it's a good resort, and there are
many villas to rent to loving couples. That's a very paying
industry. You know why? They take leases for half a year at least,
but they usually leave in three weeks.

JULIE [Naively]. Why after three weeks?

JEAN. Why? They quarrel of course, but the rent must be paid all
the same. Then you re-let, and so one after another they come and
go, for there is plenty of love, although it doesn't last long.

JULIE. Then you don't want to die with me?

JEAN. I don't want to die at all, both because I enjoy living and
because I regard suicide as a crime to Him who has given us life.

JULIE. Then you believe in God?

JEAN. Yes. Of course I do, and I go to church every other Sunday--
But I'm tired of all this and I'm going to bed.

JULIE. Do you think I would allow myself to be satisfied with such
an ending? Do you know what a man owes to a woman he hits-- --

JEAN [Takes out a silver coin and throws it on the table]. Allow
me, I don't want to owe anything to anyone.

JULIE [Pretending not to notice the insult]. Do you know what the
law demands?

JEAN. I know that the law demands nothing of a woman who seduces a
man.

JULIE [Again not heeding him]. Do you see any way out of it but to
travel?--wed--and separate?

JEAN. And if I protest against this misalliance?

JULIE. Misalliance!

JEAN. Yes, for me. For you see I have a finer ancestry than you,
for I have no fire-bug in my family.

JULIE. How do you know?

JEAN. You can't prove the contrary. We have no family record except
that which the police keep. But your pedigree I have read in a book
on the drawing room table. Do you know who the founder of your
family was? It was a miller whose wife found favor with the king
during the Danish War. Such ancestry I have not.

JULIE. This is my reward for opening my heart to anyone so
unworthy, with whom I have talked about my family honor.

JEAN. Dishonor--yes, I said it. I told you not to drink because
then one talks too freely and one should never talk.

JULIE. Oh, how I repent all this. If at least you loved me!

JEAN. For the last time--what do you mean? Shall I weep, shall I
jump over your riding whip, shall I kiss you, lure you to Lake Como
for three weeks, and then--what do you want anyway? This is getting
tiresome. But that's the way it always is when you get mixed up in
women's affairs. Miss Julie, I see that you are unhappy, I know
that you suffer, but I can't understand you. Among my kind there is
no nonsense of this sort; we love as we play when work gives us
time. We haven't the whole day and night for it like you.

JULIE. You must be good to me and speak to me as though I were a
human being.

JEAN. Be one yourself. You spit on me and expect me to stand it.

JULIE. Help me, help me. Only tell me what to do--show me a way out
of this!

JEAN. In heaven's name, if I only knew myself.

JULIE. I have been raving, I have been mad, but is there no means
of deliverance?

JEAN. Stay here at home and say nothing. No one knows.

JULIE. Impossible. These people know it, and Kristin.

JEAN. They don't know it and could never suspect such a thing.

JULIE [Hesitating]. But--it might happen again.

JEAN. That is true.

JULIE. And the consequences?

JEAN [Frightened]. Consequences--where were my wits not to have
thought of that! There is only one thing to do. Get away from here
immediately. I can't go with you or they will suspect. You must go
alone--away from here--anywhere.

JULIE. Alone? Where? I cannot.

JEAN. You must--and before the Count returns. If you stay, we know
how it will be. If one has taken a false step it's likely to happen
again as the harm has already been done, and one grows more and
more daring until at last all is discovered. Write the Count
afterward and confess all--except that it was I. That he could
never guess, and I don't think he'll be so anxious to know who it
was, anyway.

JULIE. I will go if you'll go with me.

JEAN. Are you raving again? Miss Julie running away with her
coachman? All the papers would be full of it and that the Count
could never live through.

JULIE. I can't go--I can't stay. Help me, I'm so tired--so weary.
Command me, set me in motion--I can't think any more,--can't act--

JEAN. See now, what creatures you aristocrats are! Why do you
bristle up and stick up your noses as though you were the lords of
creation. Very well--I will command you! Go up and dress yourself
and see to it that you have travelling money and then come down.
[She hesitates.] Go immediately.

[She still hesitates. He takes her hand and leads her to door.]

JULIE. Speak gently to me, Jean.

JEAN. A command always sounds harsh. Feel it yourself now.

[Exit Julie.]

[Jean draws a sigh of relief, seats himself by the table, takes out
a notebook and pencil and counts aloud now and then until, Kristin
comes in, dressed for church.]

KRISTIN. My heavens, how it looks here. What's been going on?

JEAN. Oh, Miss Julie dragged in the people. Have you been sleeping
so soundly that you didn't hear anything?

KRISTIN. I've slept like a log.

JEAN. And already dressed for church!

KRISTIN. Ye-es, [Sleepily] didn't you promise to go to early
service with me?

JEAN. Yes, quite so, and there you have my stock and front. All
right.

[He seats himself. Kristin putting on his stock.]

JEAN [Sleepily]. What is the text today?

KRISTIN. St. John's Day! It is of course about the beheading of
John the Baptist.

JEAN. I'm afraid it will be terribly long drawn out--that. Hey,
you're choking me. I'm so sleepy, so sleepy.

KRISTIN. What have you been doing up all night? You are actually
green in the face.

JEAN. I have been sitting here talking to Miss Julie.

KRISTIN. Oh you don't know your place.

[Pause.]

JEAN. Listen, Kristin.

KRISTIN. Well?

JEAN. It's queer about her when you think it over.

KRISTIN. What is queer?

JEAN. The whole thing.

[Pause. Kristin looks at half empty glasses on table.]

KRISTIN. Have you been drinking together, too?

JEAN. Yes!

KRISTIN. For shame. Look me in the eye.

JEAN. Yes.

KRISTIN. Is it possible? Is it possible?

JEAN [After reflecting]. Yes, it is.

KRISTIN. Ugh! That I would never have believed. For shame, for
shame!

JEAN. You are not jealous of her?

KRISTIN. No, not of her. But if it had been Clara or Sophie--then I
would have scratched your eyes out. So that is what has happened--
how I can't understand! No, that wasn't very nice!

JEAN. Are you mad at her?

KRISTIN. No, but with you. That was bad of you, very bad. Poor
girl. Do you know what--I don't want to be here in this house any
longer where one cannot respect one's betters.

JEAN. Why should one respect them?

KRISTIN. Yes, you can say that, you are so smart. But I don't want
to serve people who behave so. It reflects on oneself, I think.

JEAN. Yes, but it's a comfort that they're not a bit better than
we.

KRISTIN. No, I don't, think so, for if they are not better there's
no use in our trying to better ourselves in this world. And to
think of the Count! Think of him who has had so much sorrow all his
days? No, I don't want to stay in this house any longer! And to
think of it being with such as you! If it had been the Lieutenant--

JEAN. What's that?

KRISTIN. Yes! He was good enough, to be sure, but there's a
difference between people just the same. No, this I can never
forget. Miss Julie who was always so proud and indifferent to men!
One never would believe that she would give herself--and to one
like you! She who was ready to have Diana shot because she would
run after the gatekeeper's mongrels. Yes, I say it--and here I
won't stay any longer and on the twenty-fourth of October I go my
way.

JEAN. And then?

KRISTIN. Well, as we've come to talk about it, it's high time you
looked around for something else, since we're going to get married.

JEAN. Well, what'll I look for? A married man couldn't get a place
like this.

KRISTIN. No, of course not. But you could take a gatekeeper's job
or look for it watchman's place in some factory. The government's
plums are few, but they are sure. And then the wife and children
get a pension--

JEAN [With a grimace]. That's all very fine--all that, but it's not
exactly in my line to think about dying for my wife and children
just now. I must confess that I have slightly different aspirations.

KRISTIN. Aspirations? Aspirations--anyway you have obligations.
Think of those, you.

JEAN. Don't irritate me with talk about my obligations. I know my
own business. [He listens.] We'll have plenty of time for all this
some other day. Go and get ready and we'll be off to church.

KRISTIN [Listening]. Who's that walking upstairs?

JEAN. I don't know--unless it's Clara.

KRISTIN [Starting to go]. It could never be the Count who has come
home without anyone hearing him?

JEAN [Frightened]. The Count! I can't believe that. He would have
rung the bell.

KRISTIN. God help us! Never have I been mixed up in anything like
this!

[Exit Kristin. The sun has risen and lights up the scene. Presently
the sunshine comes in through windows at an angle. Jean goes to
door and motions. Enter Julie, dressed for travelling, carrying a
small bird cage covered with a cloth, which she places on a chair.]

JULIE. I am ready!

JEAN. Hush, Kristin is stirring!

[Julie frightened and nervous throughout following scene.]

JULIE. Does she suspect anything?

JEAN. She knows nothing. But, good heavens, how you look!

JULIE. Why?

JEAN. You are pale as a ghost.

JULIE [Sighs]. Am I? Oh, the sun is rising, the sun!

JEAN. And now the troll's spell is broken.

JULIE. The trolls have indeed been at work this night. But, Jean,
listen--come with me, I have money enough.

JEAN. Plenty?

JULIE. Enough to start with. Go with me for I can't go alone--
today, midsummer day. Think of the stuffy train, packed in with the
crowds of people staring at one; the long stops at the stations
when one would be speeding away. No, I cannot, I cannot! And then
the memories, childhood's memories of midsummer day--the church
decorated with birch branches and syringa blossoms; the festive
dinner table with relations and friends, afternoon in the park,
music, dancing, flowers and games--oh, one may fly, fly, but
anguish and remorse follow in the pack wagon.

JEAN. I'll go with you--if we leave instantly--before it's too
late.

JULIE. Go and dress then. [She takes up bird cage.]

JEAN. But no baggage! That would betray us.

JULIE. Nothing but what we can take in the coupé.

[Jean has picked up his hat.]

JEAN. What have you there?

JULIE. It's only my canary. I cannot, will not, leave it behind.

JEAN. So we are to lug a bird cage with us. Are you crazy? Let go
of it.

JULIE. It is all I take from home. The only living creature that
cares for me. Don't be hard--let me take it with me.

JEAN. Let go the cage and don't talk so loud. Kristin will hear us.

JULIE. No, I will not leave it to strange hands. I would rather see
it dead.

JEAN. Give me the creature. I'll fix it.

JULIE. Yes, but don't hurt it. Don't--no, I cannot.

JEAN. Let go. I can.

JULIE [Takes the canary from cage]. Oh, my little siren. Must your
mistress part with you?

JEAN. Be so good as not to make a scene. Your welfare, your life,
is at stake. So--quickly. [Snatches bird from her and goes to
chopping block and takes up meat chopper]. You should have learned
how to chop off a chicken's head instead of shooting with a
revolver. [He chops off the bird's head]. Then you wouldn't swoon
at a drop of blood.

JULIE [Shrieks]. Kill me, too. Kill me! You who can butcher an
innocent bird without a tremble. Oh, how I shrink from you. I curse
the moment I first saw you. I curse the moment I was conceived in
my mother's womb.

JEAN. Come now! What good is your cursing, let's be off.

JULIE [Looks toward chopping block as though obsessed by thought of
the slain bird]. No, I cannot. I must see-- --hush, a carriage is
passing. Don't you think I can stand the sight of blood? You think
I am weak. Oh, I should like to see your blood flowing--to see your
brain on the chopping block, all your sex swimming in a sea of
blood. I believe I could drink out of your skull, bathe my feet in
your breast and eat your heart cooked whole. You think I am weak;
you believe that I love you because my life has mingled with yours;
you think that I would carry your offspring under my heart, and
nourish it with my blood--give birth to your child and take your
name! Hear, you, what are you called, what is your family name? But
I'm sure you have none. I should be "Mrs. Gate-Keeper," perhaps, or
"Madame Dumpheap." You dog with my collar on, you lackey with my
father's hallmark on your buttons. I play rival to my cook--oh--oh--
oh! You believe that I am cowardly and want to run away. No, now I
shall stay. The thunder may roll. My father will return--and find
his desk broken into--his money gone! Then he will ring--that bell.
A scuffle with his servant--then sends for the police--and then I
tell all--everything! Oh, it will be beautiful to have it all over
with--if only that were the end! And my father--he'll have a shock
and die, and then that will be the end. Then they will place his
swords across the coffin--and the Count's line is extinct. The
serf's line will continue in an orphanage, win honors in the gutter
and end in prison.

JEAN. Now it is the king's blood talking. Splendid, Miss Julie!
Only keep the miller in his sack.

[Enter Kristin with prayer-book in hand.]

JULIE [Hastening to Kristin and falls in her arms as though seeking
protection]. Help me, Kristin, help me against this man.

KRISTIN [Cold and unmoved]. What kind of performance is this for a
holy day morning? What does this mean--this noise and fuss?

JULIE. Kristin, you are a woman,--and my friend. Beware of this
wretch.

JEAN [A little embarrassed and surprised]. While the ladies are
arguing I'll go and shave myself.

[Jean goes, R.]

JULIE. You must understand me--you must listen to me.

KRISTIN. No--I can't understand all this bosh. Where may you be
going in your traveling dress?--and he had his hat on! Hey?

JULIE. Listen to me, Kristin, listen to me and I'll tell you
everything.

KRISTIN. I don't want to know anything--

JULIE. You must listen to me--

KRISTIN. What about? Is it that foolishness with Jean? That doesn't
concern me at all. That I won't be mixed up with, but if you're
trying to lure him to run away with you then we must put a stop to
it.

JULIE [Nervously]. Try to be calm now Kristin, and listen to me. I
can't stay here and Jean can't stay here. That being true, we must
leave-- --Kristin.

KRISTIN. Hm, hm!

JULIE [Brightening up]. But I have an idea--what if we three should
go--away--to foreign parts. To Switzerland and set up a hotel
together--I have money you see--and Jean and I would back the whole
thing, you could run the kitchen. Won't that be fine? Say yes, now--
and come with us--there everything would be arranged--say yes!
[Throws her arms around Kristin and coaxes her].

KRISTIN [Cold and reflecting]. Hm--hm!

JULIE [Presto tempo]. You leave never been out and traveled,
Kristin. You shall look about you in the world. Yon can't believe
how pleasant traveling on a train is--new faces continually, new
countries--and we'll go to Hamburg--and passing through we'll see
the zoological gardens--that you will like--then we'll go to the
theatre and hear the opera--and when we reach Munich there will be
the museum--there are Rubins and Raphaels and all the big painters
that you know--you have heard of Munich--where King Ludwig lived--
the King, you know, who went mad. Then we'll see his palace--a
palace like those in the Sagas--and from there it isn't far to
Switzerland--and the Alps, the Alps mind you with snow in
mid-summer. And there oranges grow and laurel--green all the year
round if--[Jean is seen in the doorway R. stropping his razor on
the strop which he holds between his teeth and left hand. He listens
and nods his head favorably now and then. Julie continues, tempo
prestissimo] And there we'll take a hotel and I'll sit taking the
cash while Jean greets the guests--goes out and markets writes
letters--that will be life, you may believe--then the train
whistles--then the omnibus comes--then a bell rings upstairs, then
in the restaurant--and then I make out the bills--and I can salt
them--you can't think how people tremble when they receive their
bill--and you--you can sit like a lady--of course you won't have
to stand over the stove--you can dress finely and neatly when you
show yourself to the people--and you with your appearance--Oh, I'm
not flattering, you can catch a husband some fine day--a rich Englishman
perhaps--they are so easy to--[Slowing up] to catch-- --Then we'll
be rich--and then we'll build a villa by Lake Como--to be sure it
rains sometimes--but [becoming languid] the sun must shine too
sometimes-- -- --although it seems dark-- -- --and if not--we can
at least travel homeward--and come back--here--or some other place.

KRISTIN. Listen now. Does Miss Julie believe in all this?

[Julie going to pieces.]

JULIE. Do I believe in it?

KRISTIN. Yes.

JULIE [Tired]. I don't know. I don't believe in anything any more.
[Sinks down on bench, and takes head in her hand on table.] In
nothing--nothing!

KRISTIN [Turns to R. and looks toward Jean]. So--you intended to
run away?

JEAN [Rather shamefaced comes forward and puts razor on table]. Run
away? That's putting it rather strong. You heard Miss Julie's
project, I think it might be carried out.

KRISTIN. Now listen to that! Was it meant that I should be her cook--

JEAN [Sharply]. Be so good as to use proper language when you speak
of your mistress.

KRISTIN. Mistress?

JEAN. Yes.

KRISTIN. No--hear! Listen to him!

JEAN. Yes, you listen--you need to, and talk less. Miss Julie is
your mistress and for the same reason that you do not respect her
now you should not respect yourself.

KRISTIN. I have always had so much respect for myself--

JEAN. That you never had any left for others!

KRISTIN. I have never lowered my position. Let any one say, if they
can, that the Count's cook has had anything to do with the riding
master or the swineherd. Let them come and say it!

JEAN. Yes, you happened to get a fine fellow. That was your good
luck.

KRISTIN. Yes, a fine fellow--who sells the Count's oats from his
stable.

JEAN. Is it for you to say anything--you who get a commission on
all the groceries and a bribe from the butcher?

KRISTIN. What's that?

JEAN. And you can't have respect for your master and mistress any
longer--you, you!

KRISTIN [Glad to change the subject]. Are you coming to church with
me? You need a good sermon for your actions.

JEAN. No, I'm not going to church today. You can go alone--and
confess your doings.

KRISTIN. Yes, that I shall do, and I shall return with so much
forgiveness that there will be enough for you too. The Savior
suffered and died on the cross for all our sins, and when we go to
Him in faith and a repentant spirit he takes our sins on Himself.

JULIE. Do you believe that, Kristin?

KRISTIN. That is my life's belief, as true as I stand here. And
that was my childhood's belief that I have kept since my youth,
Miss Julie. And where sin overflows, there mercy overflows also.

JULIE. Oh, if I only had your faith. Oh, if--

KRISTIN. Yes, but you see that is not given without God's
particular grace, and that is not allotted to all, that!

JULIE. Who are the chosen?

KRISTIN. That is the great secret of the Kingdom of Grace, and the
Lord has no respect for persons. But there the last shall be first.

JULIE. But then has he respect for the last--the lowliest person?

KRISTIN [Continuing]. It is easier for a camel to pass through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven.
That's the way it is, Miss Julie. However--now I am going--alone.
And on any way I shall stop in and tell the stable boy not to let
any horses go out in case any one wants to get away before the
Count comes home. Good bye.

[Exit Kristin.]

JEAN. Such a devil. And all this on account of your confounded
canary!

JULIE [Tired]. Oh, don't speak of the canary--do you see any way
out--any end to this?

JEAN [Thinking]. No.

JULIE. What would you do in my place?

JEAN. In your place--wait. As a noble lady, as a woman--fallen--I
don't know. Yes, now I know.

JULIE [She takes up razor from table and makes gestures saying]
This?

JEAN. Yes. But _I_ should not do it, mark you, for there is a
difference between us.

JULIE. Because you are a man and I am a woman? What other
difference is there?

JEAN. That very difference--of man and woman.

JULIE [Razor in hand]. I want to do it--but I can't. My father
couldn't either that time when he should have done it.

JEAN. No, he was right, not to do it--he had to avenge himself
first.

JULIE. And now my mother revenges herself again through me.

JEAN. Haven't you loved your father, Miss Julie?

JULIE. Yes, deeply. But I have probably hated him too, I must have--
without being aware of it. And it is due to my father's training
that I have learned to scorn my own sex. Between them both they
have made me half man, half woman. Whose is the fault for what has
happened--my father's? My mother's? My own? I haven't anything of
my own. I haven't a thought which was not nay father's--not a
passion that wasn't my mother's. And last of all from my betrothed
the idea that all people are equal. For that I now call him a
wretch. How can it be my own fault then? Throw the burden on Jesus
as Kristin did? No, I am too proud, too intelligent, thanks to my
father's teaching.-- --And that a rich man cannot enter the Kingdom
of Heaven--that is a lie, and Kristin, who has money in the savings
bank--she surely cannot enter there. Whose is the fault? What does
it concern us whose fault it is? It is I who must bear the burden
and the consequences.

JEAN. Yes, but-- --

[Two sharp rings on bell are heard. Julie starts to her feet. Jean
changes his coat.]

JEAN. The Count--has returned. Think if Kristin has-- [Goes up to
speaking tube and listens.]

JULIE. Now he has seen the desk!

JEAN [Speaking in the tube]. It is Jean, Excellency. [Listens].
Yes, Excellency. [Listens] .Yes, Excellency,--right away--
immediately, Excellency. Yes--in half an hour.

JULIE [In great agitation]. What did he say? In Heaven's name, what
did he say?

JEAN. He wants his boots and coffee in a half hour.

JULIE. In half an hour then. Oh, I'm so tired--I'm incapable of
feeling, not able to be sorry, not able to go, not able to stay,
not able to live--not able to die. Help me now. Command me--I will
obey like a dog. Do me this last service save my honor. Save his
name. You know what I have the will to do--but cannot do. You will
it and command me to execute your will.

JEAN. I don't know why--but now I can't either.--I don't understand
myself. It is absolutely as though this coat does it--but I can't
command you now. And since the Count spoke to me-- --I can't
account for it--but oh, it is that damned servant in my back--I
believe if the Count came in here now and told me to cut my throat
I would do it on the spot.

JULIE. Make believe you are he--and I you. You could act so well a
little while ago when you knelt at my feet. Then you were a
nobleman--or haven't you ever been at the theatre and seen the
hypnotist--[Jean nods] He says to his subject "Take the broom," and
he takes it; he says, "Sweep," and he sweeps.

JEAN. Then the subject must be asleep!

JULIE [Ecstatically]. I sleep already. The whole room is like smoke
before me--and you are like a tall black stove, like a man clad in
black clothes with a high hat; and your eyes gleam like the hot
coals when the fire is dying; and your face a white spot like
fallen ashes. [The sunshine is coming in through the windows and
falls on Jean. Julie rubs her hands as though warming them before a
fire]. It is so warm and good--and so bright and quiet!

JEAN [Takes razor and puts it in her hand]. There is the broom, go
now while it's bright--out to the hay loft--and--[He whispers in
her ear.]

JULIE [Rousing herself]. Thanks. And now I go to rest. But tell me
this--the foremost may receive the gift of Grace? Say it, even if
you don't believe it.

JEAN. The foremost? No, I can't say that. But wait, Miss Julie--you
are no longer among the foremost since you are of the lowliest.

JULIE. That's true, I am the lowliest--the lowliest of the lowly.
Oh, now I can't go. Tell me once more that I must go.

JEAN. No, now I cannot either--I cannot.

JULIE. And the first shall be last-- -- --

JEAN. Don't think. You take my strength from me, too, so that I
become cowardly.--What-- --I thought I heard the bell!-- -- No! To
be afraid of the sound of is bell! But it's not the bell--it's
someone behind the bell, the hand that sets the lull in motion--and
something else that sets the land in motion. But stop your cars,
stop your ears. Then he will only ring louder and keep on ringing
until it's answered--and then it is too late! Then come the police
and then--[Two loud rings on bell are heard, Jean falls in a heap
for a moment, but straightens up immediately.] It is horrible! But
there is no other way. Go!

[Countess Julie goes out resolutely.]

CURTAIN.




THE OUTLAW


CHARACTERS

THORFINN, Erl of Iceland
VALGERD, his wife
GUNLÖD, their daughter
GUNNAR, a Crusader
ORM, a minstrel, foster brother to Thorfinn
A THRALL
A MESSENGER

Action takes place in Iceland.

THE OUTLAW

[SCENE--A hut, door at back, window-holes, right and, left, closed
by big heavy wooden shutters. Wooden benches against walls, the
high bench, a sort of rude throne, at left. The uprights of this
high beach are carved with images of the gods Odin and Thor. From
the wall beams hang swords, battle axes and shields. Near the high
bench stands a harp. Gunlöd stands at an open window-hole peering
out; through the opening one gets a glimpse of the sea lighted by
the aurora borealis. Valgerd sits by the fire, which is in the
middle of the room, spinning.]

VALGERD. Close the window-hole.

[Gunlöd is silent.]

VALGERD. Gunlöd!

GUNLÖD. Did you speak, mother?

VALGERD. What are you doing?

GUNLÖD. I am watching the sea.

VALGERD. When will you learn to forget?

GUNLÖD. Take everything away from me but memories!

VALGERD. Look forward--not back.

GUNLÖD. Who reproaches the strong viking who looks back when he is
quitting his native strand?

VALGERD. You have had three winters to make your farewell.

GUNLÖD. You speak truly--three winters! For here never came a
summer!

VALGERD. When the floating ice melts, then shall spring be here.

GUNLÖD. The Northern Lights melt no ice.

VALGERD. Nor your tears.

GUNLÖD. You never saw me weep.

VALGERD. But I have heard you. As long as you do that, you are a
child.

GUNLÖD. I am not a child.

VALGERD. If you would be a woman, suffer in silence.

GUNLÖD. I'll cast sorrow from me, mother.

VALGERD. No, no--bury it, as your deepest treasure. The seed must
not lie on top of the earth if it would sprout and ripen. You have
a deep sorrow. It should bear great gladness--and great peace.

GUNLÖD [After a pause]. I shall forget.

VALGERD. Everything?

GUNLÖD. I shall try.

VALGERD. Can you forget your father's hardness?

GUNLÖD. That I have forgotten.

VALGERD. Can you forget that there was a time when your
fore-fathers' dwelling stood on Brövikens' strand? Where the south
wind sang in the oak wood when the ice-bound seas ran free--where
the hemlocks gave forth their fragrance and the finches twittered
among the linden trees--and Balder, the God of spring and joy,
lulled you to sleep on the green meadows? Can you forget all this,
while you listen to the sea gulls' plaints on these bare rocks and
cliffs, and the cold storms out of the north howl through the
stunted birches?

GUNLÖD. Yes!

VALGERD. Can you forget the friend of your childhood from whom your
father tore you to save you from the white Christ?

GUNLÖD [in desperation]. Yes, yes!

VALGERD. You are weeping.

GUNLÖD [Disturbed]. Some one is walking out there. Perhaps father
is coming home.

VALGERD. Will you bear in mind every day without tears that we now
dwell in the land of ice--fugitives from the kingdom of Svea and
hated here by the Christ-men? But we have suffered no loss of
greatness, although we have not been baptized and kissed the
bishop's hand. Have you ever spoken to any of the Christians since
we have been here?

GUNLÖD [After a pause]. No. Tell me, mother, is it true that father
is to be Erl here in Iceland, too?

VALGERD. Don't let that trouble you, child.

GUNLÖD. Then I'm afraid he will fare badly with the Christians.

VALGERD. You fear that?

GUNLÖD. Some one is out there.

VALGERD [Anxiously]. Did you see the ship lying in the inlet this
morning?

GUNLÖD. With heart-felt gladness!

VALGERD. Bore it the figure-head of Thorfinn?

GUNLÖD. That I could not make out.

VALGERD. Have a care, girl.

GUNLÖD. Is it tonight that I may go out?

VALGERD. Tomorrow--that you know well.

GUNLÖD Mother!

VALGERD [Going]. Mind the fire. [Valgerd goes.]

[Gunlöd looks after her mother, then cautiously takes from her
breast a crucifix, puts it on the high bench and falls on her
knees.]

GUNLÖD. Christ, Christ, forgive me the lie I told. [Springs up
noticing the images of the gods on the high bench.] No, I cannot
pray before these wicked images. [She looks for another place.]
Holy St. Olof, holy--oh, I can't remember how the bishop named her!
God! God! Cast me not into purgatory for this sin! I will repeat
the whole long prayer of the monks--credo, credo--in patrem--oh, I
have forgotten that too. I shall give five tall candles for the
altar of the mother of God the next time I go to the chapel--Credo,
in patrem omnipotentem--[Kissing the crucifix eagerly.]

[A song is heard outside the hut accompanied by a lyre.]

    A crusader went out to the Holy Land,
    O, Christ, take the maiden's soul in hand,
    And to your kingdom bring her!
    I'll return, mayhap, when the spruce trees bloom.

    Summers three he wanders far from thee,
    Where nightingales sing their delight,
    And masses he holds both day and night,
    At the holy sepulchre's chapel.
    I'll return, mayhap, when the spruce trees bloom.

    When the palm trees bud on Jordan's strand,
    Then makes he a prayer to God,
    That he may return to his native land,
    And press to his heart his love.
    I'll return, my love, when the spruce trees bloom.

GUNLÖD [At beginning of song springs up and then listens with more
and more agitation and eagerness. When the song is over she goes
toward door to bolt it, but so slowly that Gunnar is able to enter
before she slips the bolt. Gunnar is clad in the costume of a
crusader with a lyre swung across his shoulder.]

GUNNAR. Gunlöd! [They embrace. Gunlöd pulls away and goes toward
door.] You are afraid of me? What is it, Gunlöd?

GUNLÖD. You never took me in your arms before!

GUNNAR. We were children then!

GUNLÖD You are right--we were children then. What means that silver
falcon on your shield? I saw it on your ship's bow this morning,
too.

GUNNAR. You saw my ship--you knew my song, and you would have
barred the door against me! What am I to understand, Gunlöd?

GUNLÖD. Oh, ask me nothing! I am so unquiet of spirit but sit and
let me talk to you.

GUNNAR [Sits]. You are silent.

GUNLÖD. You are silent, too.

GUNNAR [Pulls her to his side]. Gunlöd, Gunlöd--has the snow fallen
so heavily that memories have been chilled even the mountains here
burst forth with fire--and you are cold as a snow wind--but speak--
speak! Why are you here in Iceland--and what has happened?

GUNLÖD. Terrible things--and more may follow if you stay here
longer.--[Springs up]. Go, before my father comes.

GUNNAR. Do you think I would leave you now--I, who have sought you
for long years? When I could not find you in the home land I went
to the wars against the Saracens to seek you the other side of the
grave. But my time had not yet come; when the fourth spring came, I
heard through wandering merchants that you were to be found here.
Now I have found you--and you wish me to leave you in this heathen
darkness.

GUNLÖD. I am not alone!

GUNNAR. Your father does not love you--your mother does not
understand you, and they are both heathen.

GUNLÖD. I have friends among the Christians.

GUNNAR. Then you have become a Christian, Gunlöd!--the holy virgin
has heard my prayer.

GUNLÖD. Yes, yes! Oh, let me kiss the cross you bear on your
shoulder--that you got at the holy sepulchre!

GUNNAR. Now I give you a brother Christian's kiss--the first,
Gunlöd, you have from me.

GUNLÖD. You must never kiss me again.

GUNNAR. But tell me, how did you become a Christian?

GUNLÖD. First I believed in my father--he was so strong; then I
believed in my mother--she was so good; last I believed in you--you
were so strong and good--and so beautiful; and when you went away--
I stood alone--myself I could never believe in--I was so weak; then
I thought of your God, whom you so often begged me to love--and I
prayed to Him.

GUNNAR. And the old gods--

GUNLÖD. I have never been able to believe in them--although my
father commanded me to do so--they are wicked.

GUNNAR. Who has taught you to pray? Who gave you the crucifix?

GUNLÖD. The bishop.

GUNNAR. And that no one knows?

GUNLÖD. No--I have had to lie to my mother and that troubles me.

GUNNAR. And your father hid you here so that the Christians should
not get you?

GUNLÖD. Yes--and now he is expected home from Norway with followers
as he is to be Erl of the island.

GUNNAR. God forbid!

GUNLÖD. Yes--yes--but you must not delay. He is expected home
tonight.

GUNNAR. Good--there beyond Hjärleif's headland lies my ship.--Out
to sea! There is a land wind, and before the first cock's crow we
shall be beyond pursuit.

GUNLÖD. Yes! Yes!

GUNNAR. Soon we should be at Ostergötland--where the summer is
still green--and there you shall live in my castle which I have
built where your father's house stood.

GUNLÖD. Does not that still stand?

GUNNAR. No--it was burned.

GUNLÖD. By the Christians?

GUNNAR. You are so passionate, Gunlöd!

GUNLÖD. I suffer to say I would rather be a heathen.

GUNNAR. What are you saying, girl!

GUNLÖD. [After a pause]. Forgive me, forgive me--I am in such a
wild mood--and when I see the Christians, who should be examples,
commit such deeds--

GUNNAR. Crush out that thought, Gunlöd--it is ungodly. Do you see
this wreath?

GUNLÖD. Where did you gather it?

GUNNAR. You recognize the flowers, Gunlöd?

GUNLÖD. They grew in my father's garden--may I keep them?

GUNNAR. Gladly--but, why do you care to have them when we are going
to journey there ourselves?

GUNLÖD. I shall look at them the long winter through--the hemlock
shall remind me of the green woods and the anemones of the blue
sky.

GUNNAR. And when they are withered--

GUNLÖD. Of that I do not think.

GUNNAR. Then go with me from this drear land--far away, and there
where our childhood was spent we will live as free as the birds
among the flowers and sunshine. There you shall not go in stealth
to the temple of the Lord when the bells tell you of the Sabbath.
Oh, you shall see the new chapel with its vaulted roof and high
pillared aisles. And hear the acolytes singing when the bishop
lights the incense on the high altar. There shall you solemnize the
God service with those of Christ and you shall feel you heart
cleansed of sin.

GUNLÖD. Shall I fly--leave my mother?

GUNNAR. She will forgive you some time.

GUNLÖD. But my father would call me cowardly and that I would
never allow.

GUNNAR. That you must endure for the sake of your belief.

GUNLÖD. Thorfinn's daughter was never cowardly.

GUNNAR. Your father does not love you, and he will hate you when he
knows of your conversion.

GUNLÖD. That he may do--but he shall never despise me.

GUNNAR. You surrender your love, Gunlöd.

GUNLÖD. Love!--I remember--there was a maiden--she had a friend who
went away--after, she was never again glad--she only sat sewing
silk and gold--what she was making no one knew--and when they asked
her she would only weep. And when they asked her why she wept, she
never answered--only wept. She grew pale of cheek and her mother
made ready her shroud.--Then there came an old woman and she said
it was love. Gunnar,--I never wept when you went away as father
says it is weak to shed tears; I never sewed silk and gold for that
my mother has never taught me to do--then had I not love?

GUNNAR. You have often thought of me during these years?

GUNLÖD. I have dreamed so often of you, and this morning when I
stood by the window where I linger so willingly and, gazing over
the sea, I saw your ship come up out of the east, I became unquiet
although I did not know it was your ship.

GUNNAR. Why do you gaze so willingly over the sea?

GUNLÖD. You ask many questions!

GUNNAR. Why did you want to close the door against me?

GUNLÖD. [Silent].

GUNNAR. Why didn't you close it?

GUNLÖD. [Silent].

GUNNAR. Why are you silent?

[Gunlöd bursts into tears.]

GUNNAR. You weep, Gunlöd, and you know why? I know,--you love!
[Takes her in his arms and kisses her.]

GUNLÖD. [Tearing herself away]. You must not kiss me! Go!

GUNNAR. Yes--and you shall go with me.

GUNLÖD. I do not care to be commanded by you--and I shall not obey.

GUNNAR. The volcano gives forth fire--and burns itself out!

GUNLÖD. You have destroyed my peace--forever! Go and let me forget
you.

GUNNAR. Do you know what the silver falcon with the ribbon stands
for? It is the symbol of the wild girl I shall tame.

GUNLÖD. [With force]. You! Go before I hate you!--No one yet has
bent my will!

GUNNAR. The wild fire of the viking's blood still burns in your
veins, but it shall be quenched. A day and a night shall I wait for
you. And you will come--mild as a dove seeking shelter, although
you now would fly above the clouds like a wild falcon. But I still
hold the ribbon in my hand--that is your love, which you cannot
tear away. When twilight falls again you will come. Till then,
farewell. [Goes to the door and stops.]

GUNLÖD. [Silent.]

GUNNAR. [Going.] Farewell.

GUNLÖD. We shall see, proud knight, who comes first. When this
garland shall bloom again, then shall I come. [Throws garland in
fire. She watches it burn in a thoughtful mood. When it is quite
burnt she breaks into tears again and falls on her knees.] God!
God! Soften my proud spirit! Oh, that he should leave me! [Hastens
to door. At same moment Valgerd enters, passes Gunlöd, and goes to
fire.]

VALGERD. Why did you not tend the fire?

GUNLÖD. [Silent.]

VALGERD [Putting her hand against Gunlöd's heart]. You have a
secret!

GUNLÖD. Yes, mother, yes.

VALGERD. Hide it well.

GUNLÖD. Oh, I must speak--I can't bear it any longer.

VALGERD. When saw you a mother who did not know a daughter's
secrets?

GUNLÖD. Who told you mine?

VALGERD [Harshly]. Dry your tears.

[A pause.]

GUNLÖD. Oh, let me go out--on the mountains--on the strand. It is
so stifling here.

VALGERD. Go up to the loft--and you can be alone. [Enter a thrall.]
What would you?

THRALL. The Erl's trumpets are heard beyond the rocks and the storm
is growing.

VALGERD. Has darkness fallen?

THRALL. Yes, and a terrible darkness it is.

[A pause.]

GUNLÖD. Send out a boat--two--as many as can be found.

THRALL. All the boats are out for the hunt.

GUNLÖD. Light beacon fires.

THRALL. All the fuel is so rain-soaked that we haven't had so much
as a twig on the hearth all the evening.

VALGERD. Away!

THRALL. How will it go with the Erl?

VALGERD. Does that concern you?

[Thrall goes.]

GUNLÖD. You have not forgotten your wrong!

VALGERD. Nor my revenge! One should not lay hands on the daughter
of an Erl!

GUNLÖD. So be it. Now your moment has come--take your revenge--I'll
show you how--like this. [Takes a lighted torch.] Put this torch in
the window-hole on the right and you wreck him. Put it in the left
and you save him--

VALGERD [Interrupts]. Give me the torch and leave me.

GUNLÖD. There is a sacrifice which can pacify your god's. Sacrifice
your revenge.

VALGERD. [Takes torch, hesitates, and goes quickly to left
window-hole and places it there. Trumpets are heard]. You struck
me, Thorfinn--I swore revenge--I shall humble you with a kind deed.

GUNLÖD [Unseen by Valgerd has entered and falls on her mother's
neck]. Thanks, mother.

VALGERD [Disconcerted]. Haven't you gone--

GUNLÖD. Now I shall go. [Gunlöd goes.]

VALGERD [Alone by the window-hole]. You shout for help, you mighty
man, who always helped yourself. [Trumpets are heard.] Where is now
your might--where is your kingdom--[A gust of wind blows out the
lighted torch. Valgerd, terribly frightened, takes torch and lights
it.] Oh, he will perish! What shall I do? Pray? To whom? Odin?
Njard? Ogir? I have called to them for four times ten years, but
never have they answered. I have sacrificed, but never have they
helped. Thou, God, however you may be called--Thou mighty one, who
bids the sun to rise and set, thou tremendous one who rules over
the winds and water--to you will I pray, to you will I sacrifice my
revenge if you will save him.

[Orm enters unnoticed.]

ORM. Good evening to you, Valgerd. Put on your cloak--the wind is
sharp.

VALGERD [Disconcerted, takes down torch and closes window-hole.]
Welcome, Orm.

ORM. Thanks.

VALGERD. How is it with you, Orm?

ORM. Tolerable enough---when one gets near the big logs.

VALGERD [Irritated]. How went the journey I mean?

ORM. That is a long saga.

VALGERD. Make it short.

ORM. Well, as you know, we fared to Norway, seeking men and timber.

VALGERD. Orm!

ORM. Valgerd!

VALGERD. You have not spoken a word of the Erl.

ORM. Have you asked a word about your mate?

VALGERD. Where is he? Lives he?

ORM. I know not.

VALGERD. You know not!--you, his foster brother? Where did you part
from him?

ORM. Far out in the gulf. It was merry out there you may believe.
You should have seen him swimming with my lyre in his hand. The
sea-weed was so tangled in his beard and hair that one was tempted
to believe that it was Neptune himself. Just then came a wave as
big as a house--

VALGERD. And then?

ORM. And then--I saw my lyre no more.

VALGERD. Orm! You jest while your lord and brother is perhaps
perishing out there! I command you--go at once and seek him! Do you
hear?

ORM. Why, what is the matter? You were never before so concerned
about your mate! You might find time to give me a drink of ale
before I go.

VALGERD. Warm your knees by the hearth. I shall go--and defy wind
and storm.

ORM. [Taking her hounds]. Woman, woman--after all, you are a woman!

VALGERD [Angry]. Let go my hand.

ORM. Now the Erl is saved!

VALGERD. Saved?

ORM. Yes, you have been given back to him--and that is his voice
now. [Goes.]

[Voices of Thorfinn and Orm are heard outside, Thorfinn laughing
loudly.]

VALGERD. The Erl comes--he laughs--that I have never heard before--
oh, there is something terrible approaching! [Wrings her hands.]

[Enter Thorfinn and Orm.]

THORFINN [Laughing]. That was a murderous sight--

ORM. Yes, I promise you!

VALGERD. Welcome home, mate.

THORFINN. Thanks, wife. Have you been out in the rain? Your eyes
are wet.

VALGERD. You are so merry!

THORFINN. Merry? Yes--yes.

VALGERD. What became of your ships?

ORM. They went to the bottom--all but one.

VALGERD [To Thorfinn]. And you can nevertheless be so gay?

THORFINN. Ho! Ho! Timber grows in plenty in the north!

ORM. Now perhaps we might have something life-giving.

THORFINN. Well said! Fetch some ale, wife, and let's be merry.

ORM. And we'll thank the gods who saved us.

THORFINN. When will you ever outgrow those sagas, Orm?

ORM. Why do you force your wife and daughter to believe in them?

THORFINN. Women folk should have gods.

ORM. Whom do you believe helped you out there in the storm?

THORFINN. I helped myself.

ORM. And yet you cried out to Ake-Thor when the big wave swallowed
you.

THORFINN. There you lie.

ORM. Orm never lies.

THORFINN. Orm is a poet!

ORM. Thorfinn must have swallowed too much sea water when he cried
for help to have such a bitter tongue.

THORFINN. Take care of your own tongue, Orm.

[Valgerd with drinking horns.]

VALGERD. Here, foster brothers, I drink to your oath of friendship
and better luck for your next voyage.

THORFINN. I forbid you to speak of that again. [They drink.
Thorfinn takes horn hastily from mouth and asks] Where is the
child?

VALGERD [Troubled]. She is in the loft.

THORFINN. Call her hither.

VALGERD. She's not well.

THORFINN [Looks sharply at Valgerd]. She shall--come!

VALGERD. You don't mean that.

THORFINN. Did you hear the word?

VALGERD. It is not your last.

THORFINN. A man has but one, though woman must always have the
last.

VALGERD [Weakly]. You mock me.

THORFINN. You are angry I believe.

VALGERD. You laugh so much tonight.

[Goes out.]

THORFINN. Orm! A thought comes to me.

ORM. If it's a great one you had better hide it. Great thoughts are
scarce these days.

THORFINN. Did you notice my wife?

ORM. I never notice other men's wives.

THORFINN. How kindly and mild she was.

ORM. She pitied you.

THORFINN. Pitied me?

ORM. Yes, because sorrow that laughs is the laughter of death, she
thought.

THORFINN. Woman cannot think.

ORM. No, not with her head, but with her heart. That's why she has
a smaller head but a bigger breast than we.

THORFINN. Forebodings of evil torture me.

ORM. Poor Thorfinn.

THORFINN. My child! Orm! When she comes do you bid her drink from
the horn to Asa-Odin.

ORM. The fox scents against, the wind. I understand.

THORFINN. Be ready--they come.

ORM. Be not hard with the child, Thorfinn, or you will have me to
reckon with.

[Valgerd and Gunlöd enter. The latter heavy with sleepiness.]

GUNLÖD. Welcome home, father.

THORFINN. Do you speak truthfully?

GUNLÖD. [Silent.]

THORFINN. You are ill, are you not?

GUNLÖD. I am not quite myself.

THORFINN. I fear so.

ORM [Waning a drinking horn over the fire]. Come, Gunlöd, and empty
this sacred horn to Odin who saved your father from shipwreck.

[All empty their horns except Gunlöd.]

THORFINN [Tremblingly]. Drink, Gunlöd.

[Gunlöd throws the horn on floor and goes to Thorfinn and buries
her head in his lap.]

GUNLÖD. Hear me, father. I am a Christian. Do with me what you
will--my soul you cannot destroy. God and the Saints will protect
it.

[Thorfinn is beside himself with grief and rage. Rises and pushes
Gunlöd away from him and tries to speak, but words fail him. Sits
on his high bench again in silence. Orm goes to the women and
speaks quietly to them. They go toward door. Suddenly Gunlöd
turns.]

GUNLÖD. No! I won't go. I must speak that you, my father, may not
go to the grave with a lie--for your whole life has been a lie! I
shall sacrifice the child's respect--love I have never felt--and
prove to you what terrible guilt you have gathered on your head.
Know then, you have taught me to hate--for when did you ever give
me love--you taught me to fear the great Erl Thorfinn and you have
succeeded, because I tremble before your harshness. I respect your
many scars and great deeds, but you never taught me to love my
father. You always thrust me away when I wanted to come to you--you
poisoned my soul and now you see God's punishment. You have made me
a criminal--for such I am at this moment, but it cannot be
otherwise. Why do you hate my belief? Because it is love and yours
is hate! Oh, father, father, I want to kiss the clouds from your
brow. I wanted to caress your white locks and make you forget the
sorrows that whitened them. I wanted to support you when your steps
began to falter--Oh! forget what I have said--open your arms [falls
on her knees] and take me to your heart. Look at me tenderly--just
once before it is too late. Speak one word--[springs to her feet]
Oh, your glance freezes me! You will not! I shall pray for power
to love you. [Bursts into tears and goes out, followed by Valgerd,
Orm goes forward to Thorfinn.]

THORFINN. Sing for me, Orm.

ORM. Orm sings nothing but lies.

THORFINN. Lie then.

ORM. Was the truth so bitter?

THORFINN. What do you say?

ORM. Never mind. You shall hear more from me later.

THORFINN. Orm, you are my friend!

ORM. H'm--of course!

THORFINN. I lack peace.

ORM. There are two ways to gain peace: one is never to do anything
one regrets--the other never to regret anything one does!

THORFINN. But if one has already done what one regrets?

ORM. Thorfinn! That is to say, you regret your harshness toward
your child?

THORFINN [Angry]. I regret nothing. And as far as the child is
concerned you had better hold your tongue!

ORM. Hear you, Thorfinn--have you ever thought about what your life
has been?

THORFINN. Thinking is for old women--doing has been my life.

ORM. What do you intend to do now?

THORFINN. What do I intend to do now?

ORM. Yes.

THORFINN [Shaken, is silent.]

ORM. You see how even a little thought struck you--think then if a
big thought should come. Why don't you dare to look back? Because
you are afraid of the sights you would see.

THORFINN. Let the past remain buried.

ORM. No, I shall tear the corpses from their graves and they shall
stare at you with their empty orbits until you quake with anguish
and fear--and you shall see that with all your strength you were
not a man.

THORFINN. What are you saying, madman?

ORM. Yes, shout--you are still a boy. Yes, you--I have seen big,
tall children with bushy beards and gray hairs and crooked backs as
well.

THORFINN. Hold your tongue, Orm.

ORM. Shout until the hut trembles--the truth you cannot shout down.

THORFINN. Silence, before I strike you!

ORM. Strike! Strike me to death--tear the tongue out of my mouth--
with copper trumpets shall the truth be blasted into your ears,
"Your life has been a lie."

THORFINN [With repressed anger and pain]. Orm, I beg of you--speak
no more.

ORM. Yes, Thorfinn, I shall speak. Feel how the earth trembles
under you. That means an earthquake! The whole earth trembles these
days, for she is about to give birth. She is to bring forth in dire
pain a glorious hero. Open your eyes and look. Do you see how the
east wars with the wes.? It is love's first conflict--the new bride
trembles under the elder's embraces, she struggles and suffers--but
soon she shall rejoice, and thousands of torches shall be lighted
and radiate peace and gladness, because he shall he born, the
young, the strong, the beautiful princeling, who shall rule over
all peoples and whose sceptre is called love and whose crown is
called light and whose name is the new age! Thorfinn! do you
remember the saga about Thor at Utgorda Loake? He lifted the cat so
high that the trolls turned pale; he drank so deep from the horn
that the trolls trembled--but when the old woman felled him to his
knees then the trolls laughed. It was the age that vanquished him,
and it is the age that you have warred against, and which has slain
you--it is the lord of the age, it is God who has crushed you.

THORFINN. I have never known any god but my own strength, and that
god I believe in!

ORM. You don't know him--you who have so long been lying at feud
with him. It was he who drove you from your native land, and you
thought you were escaping him. It was he who struck your ships to
splinters and swallowed up your treasures and ended your power. It
was he who tore your child from you--and you said you lacked peace!
It was he--[Messenger enters.]

MESSENGER. Are you the Erl Thorfinn.

THORFINN. I am.

MESSENGER. You committed the coast massacre at Reyd-fiord last
spring?

THORFINN [Undisturbed]. I did.

MESSENGER. You plundered and burned Hallfred at Thorvalla?

THORFINN. Yes.

MESSENGER. And then you disappeared.

THORFINN [Silent.]

MESSENGER. The Allting has now declared you an outlaw and
pronounced you a felon. Your house is to be burned to the ground,
and whomsoever will may take your life. Your enemies are at hand,
therefore fly while there is yet time--make your escape this night.

[Messenger goes out and there is a long pause.]

ORM. Do you know who that was?

THORFINN. You may well ask that.

ORM. It--was a messenger from that old woman who felled Thor--the
age!

THORFINN. You talk like an old woman.

ORM. This age does not want to use force, but you have violated it
and it strikes you.

THORFINN. This age cannot suffer strength, therefore it worships
weakness.

ORM. When you came to this island you swore peace. You have broken
your oath, you have violated your honor, therefore you must die
like a felon.

THORFINN. Do you too call me a felon?

ORM. Yes.

THORFINN. Would you dare to break an oath? Would you dare to in
called a felon?

ORM [Silent.]

THORFINN. Poor wretch! It is you who put shackles on me when I want
to fly! Like a snake you coil yourself around my legs. Let go of
me!

ORM. We have sworn the oath of foster-brothers.

THORFINN. I break it!

ORM. You cannot.

THORFINN. Then I'll kick you out of the way.

ORM. That will be our death.

THORFINN. Are you a man, Orm?

ORM. I've become a poet only.

THORFINN. Therefore you have become nothing.

ORM. I knew what I wanted, but I could not attain it. You could
attain anything, but did not know what you wanted.

THORFINN. Thanks for your song. Farewell.

ORM. Who will sing your death song?

THORFINN. The ravens no doubt.

ORM. Do you dare to die, Thorfinn?

THORFINN. I dare more! I dare to be forgotten!

ORM. You were always stronger than I. Farewell. We'll meet again.
[Orm goes out.]

THORFINN. Alone! Alone! Alone! [Pause.] I remember one autumn when
the equinoctial storm raged over England's sun my dragon ship was
wrecked and I was tossd up on the rocks alone. Afterward everything
grew calm. Oh, what long days and nights! Only the cloudless sky
above and endlessly the deep blue sea around me. Not a sound of any
living creature! Not even the gulls to wake me with their
screeching! Not even a breeze stirred the waves to lap against the
stones. It seemed as if I myself were dead! Loudly I talked and
shouted, but the sound of my voice frightened me, and thirst bound
my tongue. Only the even beat of my heart in my breast told me that
I was alive! But after a moment's listening I heard it no longer
and, trembling, I rose to my feet, and so it was each time until,
senseless, I swooned. When at last I revived I heard the slow beats
of a heart beside me and a deep breathing that was not mine, and
courage revived in my soul. I looked about--it was a seal seeking
rest; it gazed at me with its moist eyes as if filled with
compassion for me. Now I was no longer alone! I stretched out my
hand to caress its rough body; then it fled and I was doubly alone.
Again I am on the rocks! What do I fear? Yes, loneliness! What is
loneliness? It is I, myself! Who am I then to fear myself? Am I not
Erl Thorfinn, the strong, who has bowed thousands of wills to his?
Who never asked for friendship or love but himself bore his own
sorrows! No! No! I am another! And therefore Thorfinn the strong
fears Thorfinn the weak! Who stole my strength? Who struck me down?
Was it the sea? Have I not vanquished the sea three times ten
voyages? And it, has defeated me but once--but then to the death!
It was the stronger. It was a God. But who subdued the sea that
lately raged? Who? Who? Who? It was the stronger! Who are you then,
the stronger! Oh, answer, that I may believe! He does not answer!--
All is silent!--Again I hear my heart beating. Oh, help, help! I am
cold, I freeze--[Goes to door and calls Valgerd.]

[Enter a thrall.]

THRALL. You called, Master Erl?

THORFINN [Recovering himself]. You were mistaken.

THRALL. Yes, master.

THORFINN. How many men are we?

THRALL. Oh--half three score I think.

THORFINN. Are you afraid to die, thrall?

THRALL. How can I be when I believe that I shall be saved?

[Crosses himself.]

THORFINN. What does that mean?

THRALL. The bishop has taught us to do that.

THORFINN. I forgot that you are a Christian.

THRALL. Do you wish me to stay in your service when you are a
heathen?

THORFINN. I want to prove how little I respect their belief. We
must put double bolts on the north gate!

THRALL. Yes, Master, but the belief is stronger than a hundred
bolts.

THORFINN. Who questioned you? [Pause.] What happened when you
became Christians here on the island?

THRALL. Oh, it was easier than any one would think. They only
poured water on us and the bishop read from a big book and then
they gave us each a white shirt.

THORFINN. Tell the twelve strongest to take their new axes--do you
hear?

THRALL [Starting to go]. Yes, Master.

THORFINN. Wait. [Pause.] Do you remember what was written in that
big book?

THRALL. I don't remember much of it, but there was something about
two thieves who were hanged on crosses along with the Son of God.
But one of them went to heaven.

THORFINN. Did they pour water on him, too?

THRALL. The bishop didn't say.

THORFINN. Do you know whether there are any horses in the stable?

THRALL. They must be out at pasture--but I'll see. [Starts to go.]

THORFINN. You mustn't leave me--Stay. [Pause.] Could you die in
peace this night?

THRALL. Yes, if I only had time for a prayer first.

THORFINN. Does that bring peace to one?

THRALL. Oh, yes, Master.

THORFINN [Rises, takes up a goblet]. This you shall have if you
will pray for me.

THRALL. That's not enough.

THORFINN. You shall have ten, but if you ever tell of it--I'll take
your life.

THRALL. It would not help even if you gave me a hundred. You must
pray yourself.

THORFINN. I cannot, but. I command you to pray.

THRALL. I will obey--but you will see that it does not help.
[Praying.] Jesus Christ, have pity on this poor sinner who begs for
mercy.

THORFINN. That's a lie. I never begged for anything!

THRALL. You see now that it doesn't help.

THORFINN. Give me my armor and help me buckle.

THRALL [Helping]. You are not keeping still. I can't fasten the
buckles.

THORFINN. Wretch!

THRALL. But your whole body is shaking.

THORFINN. That's a lie!

[Valgerd and Gunlöd enter.]

THRALL. May I go now?

THORFINN. Go.

VALGERD [Coming forward]. You called me.

THORFINN. That's not true.

VALGERD. Your enemies are upon you.

THORFINN. What does that concern you?

VALGRED. Make ready. I have heard what has come to pass.

THORFINN. Then it is best that you [indicating both Valgerd and
Gunlöd] hide yourselves in the cellar passage.

[Another messenger enters.]

MESSENGER. Erl Thorfinn, we are here. Will you surrender to our
superior strength?

THORFINN [Silent.]

MESSENGER. You do not answer. Let the women go as we shall burn
your home. [Thorfinn is silent.] Your answer!

[Gunlöd who has been standing by the door, comes forward and takes
a battle axe from wall.]

GUNLÖD. I give you your answer! Ill must Erl Thorfinn have brought
up his daughter and little would his wife have loved him if they
should desert him now. Here is your answer. [Throws battle axe at
messenger's feet.]

MESSENGER. You are stronger than I thought, Thorfinn. For your
daughter's sake you shall have a chance to fall like a hero and not
as a felon. Make ready for open conflict--out on the field. [Goes
out.]

THORFINN [to Valgerd]. Out on you, cowardly, faithless woman, to
guard my treasure so ill! To make my child mine enemy.

GUNLÖD. O, my father, am I your enemy?

THORFINN. You are a Christian; but it is not too late yet. Will you
deny the white Christ?

GUNLÖD. Never! But I will follow you to death.

VALGERD. Thorfinn, you call me cowardly. I can suffer that, but
faithless--there you wrong me. I have not loved you as warmly as
the southern women are said to love, yet have I been faithful to
you throughout life and I have sworn to go with you in death--as is
the ancient custom. [Opens a trap door in floor.] Look, here have I
prepared my grave, here would I die under these smoky beams that
have witnessed my sorrows--and with those [points to the carved
images of Thor and Odin on uprights of high bench] who guided us
here. I want to go with the flames, and in the smoke shall my
spirit rise to Ginde to receive charity and peace.

GUNLÖD. And I to be alone afterward! Oh, let me follow you.

VALGERD. No, child, you are young. You may yet flourish in a milder
clime. But the old fir tree dies on its roots.

GUNLÖD. Father, father, you must not die. I will save you!

THORFINN. You?

GUNLÖD. Your kinsman Gunnar lies off Hjärleif's headland with his
men. Send one of the thralls to him by a roundabout route and he
will come.

THORFINN. So! It wax out of that well that you drew your courage.
Keep your help and go if you will.

GUNLÖD. You shall not think me a coward. I go with you, mother. You
cannot hinder me.

[Thorfinn goes to the door, trying to conceal his emotion.]

VALGERD. No! Stay, Thorfinn, and for once bare your big soul that I
may read its dim runics.

THORFINN. If you cannot interpret them now then may this runic
stone crumble to air unread.

VALGERD. You are not the hard stone you would seem. You have
feelings. Show them. Let them flow forth and you shall know peace!

THORFINN. My feelings are my heart's blood. Would you see it?

[The clatter of arms is heard outside which continues until
Thorfinn returns. Thorfinn starts to go out when he hears the
chatter.]

VALGERD. Oh, stay and say a word of farewell!

THORFINN. Woman, you tear down my strength with your feelings. Let
me go! The play has begun!

VALGERD. Say farewell, at least.

THORNFINN [Restraining his feelings with effort]. Farewell, child.
[Goes out.]

VALGERD. That man no one will bend.

GUNLÖD. God will!

VALGERD. His hardness is great.

GUNLÖD. God's mercy is greater!

VALGERD. Farewell, my child.

GUNLÖD. Do you dare leave me behind, alone?

VALGERD [Embracing Gunlöd]. Are you prepared?

GUNLÖD. The holy virgin prays for me.

VALGERD. I trust in the God of love.

GUNLÖD. And in the mother of God.

VALGERD. I know her not.

GUNLÖD. You must believe in her.

VALGERD. My belief is not your belief.

GUNLÖD [Embracing Valgerd]. Forgive me.

VALGERD. Now to your place.

[Gunlöd opens the wooden shutter at window-hole and looks out.
Valgerd takes it torch and places herself by the trap door in
floor.]

GUNLÖD. The strife is sharp.

VALGERD. Do you see the Erl?

GUNLÖD. He stands at the gate.

VALGERD. How fares he?

GUNLÖD. Everything falls before him.

VALGERD. Does he weary?

GUNLÖD. Still is he straight-- -- --See what terrible northern
lights.

VALGERD. Have many fallen?

GUNLÖD. I cannot tell. They are drawing away from the threshing
yard. Oh, the heavens are red as blood!

[Pause.]

VALGERD. Speak! What do you see?

GUNLÖD [With joy]. The silver falcon!

VALGERD. It's an ill-omen.

GUNLÖD. Father comes.

VALGERD. Is he wounded?

GUNLÖD. Oh, now he is falling!

VALGERD. Close the window-hole and trust in God.

GUNLÖD. No, not yet. A moment.

VALGRED. Are you afraid?

GUNLÖD [Going toward door]. No! No!

[The sounds of the conflict gradually die away.]

THORFINN [Comes in pale and wounded.] Stay!

[Valgerd goes towards him. Pause.]

THORFINN [On high bench]. Come here.

[Valgerd and Gunlöd go to him. Thorfinn caresses Gunlöd's hair,
kisses her forehead, then presses Valgerd's hand.]

THORFINN [Kissing Valgerd]. Now you see my heart's blood.

[Valgerd rises to get torch.]

VALGERD. Now is our parting over.

THORFINN. Stay and live with your child.

VALGERD. My oath!

THORFINN. My whole life has been a broken oath and yet I hope-- -- --
It is better to live-- -- --

[Orm comes in wounded. Stops at door.]

ORM. May I come?

THORFINN. Come.

ORM. Have you found peace now?

THORFINN [Caressing the woman]. Soon, soon!

ORM. Then we are ready for the journey.

THORFINN [Looks at Valgerd and Gunlöd]. Not yet.

ORM [Sits on bench]. Hurry if you want company.

THORFINN. Orm, are you a Christian?

ORM. You may ask indeed.

THORFINN. What are you then, riddle?

ORM. I was everything. I was nothing. I was a poet.

THORFINN. Do you believe in anything?

ORM. I've come to have a belief.

THORFINN. What gave it to you?

ORM. Doubt, misfortune, sorrow.

THORFINN [To Valgerd]. Valgerd, give me your hand, so. Hold fast--
tighter--you must not let go until--the end.

[Gunnar comes in and stops by door.]

THORFINN. Who comes?

GUNNAR. You know me!

THORFINN. I know your voice, but my eyes see you not.

GUNNAR. I am your kinsman, Gunnar.

THORFINN [After a pause]. Step forth.

[Gunnar remains where he is, looking questioningly at Gunlöd.]

THORFINN. Is he here?

[Gunlöd rises, goes with slow steps and bowed head to Gunnar. Takes
his hand and leads him to Thorfinn. They kneel.]

THORFINN [Putting hands on their heads]. Eternal-- -- -- Creating--
-- --God--
[Dies.]

CURTAIN.



THE STRONGER


CHARACTERS

MME. X., an actress, married
MLLE. Y., an actress, unmarried
A WAITRESS

THE STRONGER

[SCENE--The corner of a ladies' cafe. Two little iron tables, a red
velvet sofa, several chairs. Enter Mme. X., dressed in winter
clothes, carrying a Japanese basket on her arm.]

[MLLE. Y. sits with a half empty beer bottle before her, reading an
illustrated paper, which she changes later for another.]

MME. X. Good afternoon, Amelie. You're sitting here alone on
Christmas eve like a poor bachelor!

MLLE. Y. [Looks up, nods, and resumes her reading.]

MME. X. Do you know it really hurts me to see you like this, alone,
in a cafe, and on Christmas eve, too. It makes me feel as I did one
time when I saw a bridal party in a Paris restaurant, and the bride
sat reading a comic paper, while the groom played billiards with
the witnesses. Huh, thought I, with such a beginning, what will
follow, and what will be the end? He played billiards on his
wedding eve! [Mlle. Y. starts to speak]. And she read a comic
paper, you mean? Well, they are not altogether the same thing.

[A waitress enters, places a cup of chocolate before Mme. X. and
goes out.]

MME. X. You know what, Amelie! I believe you would have done better
to have kept him! Do you remember, I was the first to say "Forgive
him?" Do you remember that? You would be married now and have a
home. Remember that Christmas when you went out to visit your
fiance's parents in the country? How you gloried in the happiness
of home life and really longed to quit the theatre forever? Yes,
Amelie dear, home is the best of all, the theatre next and
children--well, you don't understand that.

MLLE. Y. [Looks up scornfully.]

[Mme. X. sips a few spoonfuls out of the cup, then opens her basket
and shows Christmas presents.]

MME. X. Now you shall see what I bought for my piggywigs. [Takes up
a doll.] Look at this! This is for Lisa, ha! Do you see how she can
roll her eyes and turn her head, eh? And here is Maja's popgun.
[Loads it and shoots at Mlle. Y.]

MLLE. Y. [Makes a startled gesture.]

MME. X. Did I frighten you? Do you think I would like to shoot you,
eh? On my soul, if I don't think you did! If you wanted to shoot
_me_ it wouldn't be so surprising, because I stood in your way--and
I know you can never forget that--although I was absolutely
innocent. You still believe I intrigued and got you out of the
Stora theatre, but I didn't. I didn't do that, although you think
so. Well, it doesn't make any difference what I say to you. You
still believe I did it. [Takes up a pair of embroidered slippers.]
And these are for my better half. I embroidered them myself--I
can't bear tulips, but he wants tulips on everything.

MLLE. Y. [Looks up ironically and curiously.]

MME. X. [Putting a hand in each slipper.] What little feet Bob has!
What? And you should see what a splendid stride he has! You've
never seen him in slippers! [Mlle. Y. laughs aloud.] Look! [She
makes the slippers walk on the table. Mlle. Y. laughs loudly.] And
when he is grumpy he stamps like this with his foot. "What! damn
those servants who can never learn to make coffee. Oh, now those
creatures haven't trimmed the lamp wick properly!" And then there
are draughts on the floor and his feet are cold. "Ugh, how cold it
is; the stupid idiots can never keep the fire going." [She rubs the
slippers together, one sole over the other.]

MLLE. Y. [Shrieks with laughter.]

MME. X. And then he comes home and has to hunt for his slippers
which Marie has stuck under the chiffonier--oh, but it's sinful to
sit here and make fun of one's husband this way when he is kind and
a good little man. You ought to have had such a husband, Amelie.
What are you laughing at? What? What? And you see he's true to me.
Yes, I'm sure of that, because he told me himself--what are you
laughing at?--that when I was touring in Norway that that brazen
Frêdêrique came and wanted to seduce him! Can you fancy anything so
infamous? [Pause.] I'd have torn her eyes out if she had come to
see him when I was at home. [Pause.] It was lucky that Bob told me
about it himself and that it didn't reach me through gossip.
[Pause.] But would you believe it, Frêdêrique wasn't the only one!
I don't know why, but the women are crazy about my husband. They
must think he has influence about getting them theatrical
engagements, because he is connected with the government. Perhaps
you were after him yourself. I didn't use to trust you any too
much. But now I know he never bothered his head about you, and you
always seemed to have a grudge against him someway.

[Pause. They look at each other in a puzzled way.]

MME. X. Come and see us this evening, Amelie, and show us that
you're not put out with us,--not put out with me at any rate. I
don't know, but I think it would be uncomfortable to have you for
an enemy. Perhaps it's because I stood in your way [rallentando]
or--I really--don't know why--in particular.

[Pause. Mlle. Y. stares at Mme. X curiously.]

MME. X [Thoughtfully]. Our acquaintance has been so queer. When I
saw you for the first time I was afraid of you, so afraid that I
didn't dare let you out of my sight; no matter when or where, I
always found myself near you--I didn't dare have you for an enemy,
so I became your friend. But there was always discord when you came
to our house, because I saw that my husband couldn't endure you,
and the whole thing seemed as awry to me as an ill-fitting gown--
and I did all I could to make him friendly toward you, but with no
success until you became engaged. Then came a violent friendship
between you, so that it looked all at once as though you both dared
show your real feelings only when you were secure--and then--how
was it later? I didn't get jealous--strange to say! And I remember
at the christening, when you acted as godmother, I made him kiss
you--he did so, and you became so confused--as it were; I didn't
notice it then--didn't think about it later, either--have never
thought about it until--now! [Rises suddenly.] Why are you silent?
You haven't said a word this whole time, but you have let me go on
talking! You have sat there, and your eyes have reeled out of me
all these thoughts which lay like raw silk in its cocoon--thoughts--
suspicious thoughts, perhaps. Let me see--why did you break your
engagement? Why do you never come to our house any more? Why won't
you come to see us tonight?

[Mlle. Y. appears as if about to speak.]

MME. X. Hush, you needn't speak--I understand it all! It was
because--and because--and because! Yes, yes! Now all the accounts
balance. That's it. Fie, I won't sit at the same table with you.
[Moves her things to another table.] That's the reason I had to
embroider tulips--which I hate--on his slippers, because you are
fond of tulips; that's why [Throws slippers on the floor] we go to
Lake Mälarn in the summer, because you don't like salt water;
that's why my boy is named Eskil--because it's your father's name;
that's why I wear your colors, read your authors, eat your favorite
dishes, drink your drinks--chocolate, for instance; that's why--oh--
my God--it's terrible, when I think about it; it's terrible.
Everything, everything came from you to me, even your passions.
Your soul crept into mine, like a worm into an apple, ate and ate,
bored and bored, until nothing was left but the rind and a little
black dust within. I wanted to get away from you, but I couldn't;
you lay like a snake and charmed me with your black eyes; I felt
that when I lifted my wings they only dragged me down; I lay in the
water with bound feet, and the stronger I strove to keep up the
deeper I worked myself down, down, until I sank to the bottom,
where you lay like a giant crab to clutch me in your claws--and
there I am lying now.

I hate you, hate you, hate you! And you only sit there silent--
silent and indifferent; indifferent whether it's new moon or waning
moon, Christmas or New Year's, whether others are happy or unhappy;
without power to hate or to love; as quiet as a stork by a rat
hole--you couldn't scent your prey and capture it, but you could
lie in wait for it! You sit here in your corner of the cafê--did
you know it's called "The Rat Trap" for you?--and read the papers
to see if misfortune hasn't befallen some one, to see if some one
hasn't been given notice at the theatre, perhaps; you sit here and
calculate about your next victim and reckon on your chances of
recompense like a pilot in a shipwreck. Poor Amelie, I pity you,
nevertheless, because I know you are unhappy, unhappy like one who
has been wounded, and angry because you are wounded. I can't be
angry with you, no matter how much I want to be--because you come
out the weaker one. Yes, all that with Bob doesn't trouble me. What
is that to me, after all? And what difference does it make whether
I learned to drink chocolate from you or some one else.
[Sips a spoonful from her cup.]

Besides, chocolate is very healthful. And if you taught me how to
dress--tant mieux!--that has only made me more attractive to my
husband; so you lost and I won there. Well, judging by certain
signs, I believe you have already lost him; and you certainly
intended that I should leave him--do as you did with your fiancê
and regret as you now regret; but, you see, I don't do that--we
mustn't be too exacting. And why should I take only what no one
else wants?

Perhaps, take it all in all, I am at this moment the stronger one.
You received nothing from me, but you gave me much. And now I seem
like a thief since you have awakened and find I possess what is
your loss. How could it be otherwise when everything is worthless
and sterile in your hands? You can never keep a man's love with
your tulips and your passions--but I can keep it. You can't learn
how to live from your authors, as I have learned. You have no
little Eskil to cherish, even if your father's name was Eskil. And
why are you always silent, silent, silent? I thought that was
strength, but perhaps it is because you have nothing to say!
Because you never think about anything! [Rises and picks up
slippers.]

Now I'm going home--and take the tulips with me--_your_ tulips! You
are unable to learn from another; you can't bend--therefore, you
broke like a dry stalk. But I won't break! Thank you, Amelie, for
all your good lessons. Thanks for teaching my husband how to love.
Now I'm going home to love him. [Goes.]









E-text prepared by Nicole Apostola



PLAYS:
     Comrades
     Facing Death
     Pariah
     Easter

by AUGUST STRINDBERG

Translated by Edith and Wärner Oland



CONTENTS

COMRADES
A Comedy in IV Acts.

FACING DEATH
A Play in I Act.

PARIAH
A Play in I Act.

EASTER
A Play in III Acts.



FOREWORD

August Strindberg died at Stockholm On May 14, 1912, just ten days
after the first of his plays given in English in the United States
had completed a month's engagement. This play was "The Father,"
which, on April 9, 1912, was produced at the Berkeley Theatre in
New York, the same little theatre that witnessed in 1894 the first
performance in this country of Ibsen's "Ghosts."

It happened that August Lindberg, the eminent Swedish actor and
friend of Strindberg [who, by the way, was the first producer of
"Ghosts" in any language], was visiting this country and came to
see a performance of "The Father." His enthusiasm over the
interpretation given Strindberg, in the English rendering of the
play as well as in the acting, led him to cable a congratulatory
message to Strindberg; and upon departing for Stockholm, he asked
for some of the many letters of appreciation from significant
sources which the production of "The Father" had called forth.
These he wished to give to Strindberg as further assurance "that he
has," to use Herr Lindberg's words, "the right representatives in
this country." It is gratifying to those who esteem it a rare
privilege to be the introducers of Strindberg's powerful dramatic
art to the American stage to know that he finally found his genius
recognized on this side of the ocean.

"Comrades," the first play in the present volume, belongs to the
same momentous creative period as "The Father" and "Countess
Julie," although there is little anecdotic history attaching to
this vigorous comedy. It was written in Denmark, where Strindberg,
after finishing "The Father" in Switzerland in 1887, went with his
family to live for two years, and was published March 21, 1888.

Although the scene of the comedy is laid in Paris, all the
characters are Swedish, which may be accounted for by the fact that
the feminist movement, of which "Comrades" is a delicious, stinging
satire, had been more agitated at that time in Scandinavia than
elsewhere. That Paris was chosen as a background for this group of
young artists and writers was probably reminiscent of the time, the
early eighties, when Strindberg with his wife and children left
Sweden and, after spending some time with a colony of artists not
far from Fontainebleau, came to Paris, where there were many
friends of other days, and established themselves in that "sad,
silent Passy," as Strindberg's own chronicle of those times reads.
There he took his walks in the deserted arcades of the empty
Trocadero Palace, back of which he lived; went to the Théâtre
Français, where he saw the great success of the day, and was
startled that "an undramatic bagatelle with threadbare scenery,
stale intrigues and superannuated theatrical tricks, could be
playing on the foremost stage of the world;" saw at the Palais de
l'Industrie the triennial exhibition of art works, "the crème de la
crème of three salons, and found not one work of consequence."
After some time he came to the conclusion that "the big city is not
the heart that drives the pulses," but that it is "the boil that
corrupts and poisons," and so betook himself and his family to
Switzerland, where they lived in the vicinity of Lake Leman, which
environment was made use of years later in the moving one-act play,
"Facing Death," presented herewith.

"Pariah," the other one-act play appearing in this volume, is the
generally recognized masterpiece of all the short one-act plays.
The dialogue is so concentrated that it seems as if not one line
could be cut without the whole structure falling to pieces, and in
these terse speeches a genius is revealed that, with something of
the divine touch, sounds the depths of the human heart and reveals
its inmost thoughts. "Pariah" was published in 1890 and "Facing
Death" in 1898.

The period of Strindberg's sojourn in Switzerland, 1884-87, was
most important in the evolution of the character and work of the
man who, throughout his career, was to engage himself so
penetratingly and passionately in the psychology of woman, and
love, and the problems of marriage, as to acquire the reputation,
undeserved though it was, of woman-hater. That this observation and
analysis of woman was not induced by natural antipathy to the sex,
nor by unhappiness in his own married experience, is made clear by
the facts of his life up to the time when such investigation was
undertaken. What, then, did sway him to such a choice of theme?
Examination of the data of this period from Strindberg's own annals
reveals the following influences: Ibsen from his Norwegian throne
had hailed woman and the laborer as the two rising ranks of
nobility, and Strindberg asked himself if this was ironic, as
usual, or prophetic. Feminine individualism was the cult of the
hour. The younger generation had, through the doctrines of
evolution, become atheistic. Strindberg tells of asking a young
writer how he could get along without God. "We have woman instead,"
was the reply. This was the last stage of Madonna worship! And how
had it happened that the new generation had replaced God with
woman? "God was the remotest source; when he failed they grasped
at the next, the mother. But then they should at least choose the
real mother, the real woman, before whom, no matter how strong his
spirit, man will always bow when she appears with her life-giving
attributes. But the younger generation had pronounced contempt for
the mother, and in her place had set up the loathsome, sterile,
degenerate amazon--the blue-stocking!"

Earnestly pondering these matters, Strindberg at length decided to
write a book about woman, a subject, he declares, which up to this
time he had not wanted to think about, as he himself "lived in a
happy erotic state, ennobled and beautified by the rejuvenating and
expiatory arrival of children." But nevertheless he decided to
write such a book, and so with sympathy and much old-fashioned
veneration for motherhood the task was undertaken.

Regarding the mother as down-trodden, he wanted to think out a
means for her deliverance. To obtain a clear vision he chose as a
method the delineation of as large a number as possible of marriage
cases that he had seen--and he had seen many, as most of his
contemporary friends were married. Of these he chose twelve, the
most characteristic, and then he went to work. When he had written
about half that number, he stopped and reviewed the collection. The
result was entirely different from what he had expected.

Then chance came to his aid, for in the pension where he was
living, thirty women were stopping. He saw them at all meals,
between meals, and all about, idle, gossiping, pretentious, longing
for pleasure. "There were learned ladies who left the Saturday
Review behind them on the chairs; there were literary ladies, young
ladies, beautiful ladies." When he saw their care-free, idle life,
with concern he asked himself: "Whom do these parasites and their
children live on?" Then he discovered the bread-winners. "The
husband sat in his dark office far away in London; the husband
was far away with a detachment in Tonkin; the husband was at work
in his bureau in Paris; the husband had gone on a business trip to
Australia." And the three men who were there gave him occasion to
reflect about the so-called female slave. "There was a husband who
had a fiercely hot attic room, while the wife and daughter had a
room with a balcony on the first floor. An elderly man passed by,
who, although himself a brisk walker, was now leading his sickly
wife step by step, his hand supporting her back when making an
ascent; he carried her shawls, chair, and other little necessities,
reverently, lovingly, as if he had become her son when she had
ceased to be his wife. And there sat King Lear with his daughter,--
it was terrible to see. He was over sixty, had had eight children,
six of whom were daughters, and who, in his days of affluence, he
had allowed to manage his house and, no doubt, the economy thereof.
Now he was poor, had nothing, and they had all deserted him except
one daughter who had inherited a small income from an aunt. And the
former giant, who had been able to work for a household of twelve,
crushed by the disgrace of bankruptcy, was forced to feel the
humiliation of accepting support from his daughter, who went about
with her twenty-nine women friends, receiving their comfort and
condolence, weeping over her fate, and sometimes actually wishing
the life out of her father."

The immediate result of all this observation and consequent
analysis was the collection of short stories in two volumes called
"Marriages," the first of which, published in 1884, gave rise to
Strindberg's reputation of being a pessimist, and the second, two
years later, to that of woman-hater, which became confirmed by the
portrayals of women in his realistic dramas that soon followed,
notably that of Laura in "The Father." That part of the woman-hater
legend which one encounters most often is that Strindberg was
revealing his own marital miseries in the sex conflicts of these
dramas, particularly in "The Father," notwithstanding the fact that
this play was written five years before his first marriage was
dissolved, and little more than two years after his avowed
hesitancy to undertake the dissection of womankind on account of
the "happy erotic state" in which he was living.

And that his analytical labors and personal experiences, far from
bringing about an acquired aversion for woman, never even let him
be warned, is attested by the fact of his having founded three
families. One is forced to suspect that instead of being a woman-
hater, he was rather a disguised and indefatigable lover of woman,
and that his wars on woman and his fruitless endeavors to get into
harmony with the other half of the race were, fundamentally, a
warring within himself of his own many-sided, rich nature. He said
of himself that he had been sentenced by his nature to be the
faultfinder, to see the other side of things. He hated the Don
Juans among men as intensely as he did the lazy parasites among
women--the rich and spoiled ones who declaimed loudest about
woman's holy duties as wife and mother, but whose time was given
up to being hysterical and thinking out foolish acts,--these women
enraged him.

However, the psychology of woman represents but one phase of
Strindberg. In a book called "The Author," styled by him "a
self-evolutionary history," which was written during the
germinating period of the realistic dramas, but was not given out
for publication until 1909, there is a foreword which contains the
following significant avowal from the Strindberg of the last years:
"The author had not arrived in 1886; perhaps only came into being
then. The book presented herewith is consequently only of secondary
interest as constituting a fragment; and the reader should bear in
mind that it was written over twenty years ago. The personality of
the author is consequently as unfamiliar to me as to the reader--
and as unsympathetic. As he no longer exists, I can no longer
assume any responsibility for him, and as I took part in his
execution [1898] I believe I have the right to regard the past as
expiated and stricken out of the Big Book." The "execution" in 1898
referred to was the spiritual crisis through which Strindberg
passed when he emerged from the abysmal pessimism of "The Inferno;"
then began the gradual return to spiritual faith which, in the end,
caused him to declare himself a Swedenborgian.

The play, "Easter," included in the present collection, belongs to
this period; it is a strange mingling of symbolism and realism,
bearing the spiritual message of the resurrection. It was the most
popular play produced at the Intimate Theatre in Stockholm, having
been given there over two hundred times; and in Germany, also, it
has been one of the plays most appreciated. That "Easter" is
representative of the last phase, spiritually, of the great man is
evidenced by the closing incident of his life. His favorite
daughter, Kirtlin, was in the room as death approached. Strindberg
called to her, and asked for the Bible; receiving the book, he
opened it, and placing it across his breast, said, "This is the
best book of all," and then, with his last breath, "Now everything
personal is obliterated."


E. O. and W. O.



COMRADES
Comedy in Four Acts

CHARACTERS

AXEL, an artist
BERTHA, his wife, artist
ABEL, her friend
WILLMER, litterateur
ÖSTERMARK, a doctor
MRS. HALL, his divorced wife
THE MISSES HALL, her daughters by a second marriage
CARL STARCK, lieutenant
MRS. STARCK, his wife
MAID

COMRADES

[SCENE for the whole play.--An artist's studio in Paris; it is on
the ground floor, has glass windows looking out on an orchard. At
back of scene a large window and door to hall. On the walls hang
studies, canvases, weapons, costumes and plaster casts. To right
there is a door leading to Axel's room; to left a door leading to
Bertha's room. There is a model stand left center. To right an
easel and painting materials. A large sofa, a large store through
the doors of which one sees a hot coal fire. There is a hanging-lamp
from ceiling. At rise of curtain Axel and Doctor Östermark are
discovered.]

AXEL [Sitting, painting]. And you, too, are in Paris!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Everything gathers here as the center of the world;
and so you are married--and happy?

AXEL. Oh, yes, so, so. Yes, I'm quite happy. That's understood.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. What's understood?

AXEL. Look here, you're a widower. How was it with your marriage?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Oh, very nice--for her.

AXEL. And for you?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. So, so! But you see one must compromise, and we
compromised to the end.

AXEL. What do you mean by compromise?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. I mean--that I gave in!

AXEL. You?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Yes, you wouldn't think that of a man like me, would
you?

AXEL. No, I would never have thought that. Look here, don't you
believe in woman, eh?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. No, sir! I do not. But I love her.

AXEL. In your way--yes!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. In my way--yes. How about your way?

AXEL. We have arranged a sort of comradeship, you see, and
friendship is higher and more enduring than love.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. H'm--so Bertha paints too. How? Well?

AXEL. Fairly well.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. We were good friends in the old days, she and I,--
that is, we always quarreled a little.--Some visitors. Hush! It is
Carl and his wife!

AXEL [Rising]. And Bertha isn't at home! Sacristi! [Enter
Lieutenant Carl Starck and his wife.] Welcome! Well, well, we
certainly meet here from all corners of the world! How do you do,
Mrs. Starck? You're looking well after your journey.

MRS. STARCK. Thanks, dear Axel, we have certainly had a delightful
trip. But where is Bertha?

CARL. Yes, where is the young wife?

AXEL. She's out at the studio, but she'll be home at any moment
now. But won't you sit down?

[The doctor greets the visitors.]

CARL. Hardly. We were passing by and thought we would just look in
to see how you are. But we shall be on hand, of course, for your
invitation for Saturday, the first of May.

AXEL. That's good. You got the card then?

MRS. STARCK. Yes, we received it while we were in Hamburg. Well,
what is Bertha doing nowadays?

AXEL. Oh, she paints, as I do. In fact, we're expecting her model,
and as he may come at any moment, perhaps I can't risk you to sit
down after all, if I'm going to be honest.

CARL. Do you think we would blush, then?

MRS. STARCK. He isn't nude, is he?

AXEL. Of course.

CARL. A man? The devil!--No, I couldn't allow my wife to be mixed
up with anything of that sort. Alone with a naked man!

AXEL. I see you still have prejudices, Carl.

CARL. Yes, you know--

MRS. STARCK. Fie!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Yes, that's what I say, too.

AXEL. I can't deny that it, is not altogether to my taste, but as
long as I must have a woman model--

MRS. STARCK. That's another matter.

AXEL. Another?

MRS. STARCK. Yes, it is another matter--although it resembles the
other, it is not the same. [There is a knock.]

AXEL. There he is!

MRS. STARCK. We'll go, then. Good-bye and au revoir. Give my love
to Bertha.

AXEL. Good-bye, then, as you're so scared. And au revoir.

CARL and DR. ÖSTERMARK. Good-bye, Axel.

CARL [To Axel]. You stay in here, at least, while--

AXEL. No, why should I?

CARL [Goes shaking his head]. Ugh!

[Axel alone starts to paint. There is a knock.]

AXEL. Come in. [The model enters.] So, you are back again. Madame
hasn't returned yet.

THE MODEL. But it's almost twelve, and I must keep another
appointment.

AXEL. Is that so? It's too bad, but--h'm--something must have
detained her at the studio. How much do I owe you?

THE MODEL. Five francs, as usual.

AXEL [Paying him]. There. Perhaps you'd better wait awhile,
nevertheless.

THE MODEL. Yes, if I'm needed.

AXEL. Yes, be kind enough to wait a few minutes.

[The model retires behind a screen. Axel alone, draws and whistles.
Bertha comes in after a moment.]

AXEL. Hello, my dear! So you're back at last?

BERTHA. At last?

AXEL. Yes, your model is waiting.

BERTHA [Startled]. No! No! Has he been here again?

AXEL. You had engaged him for eleven o'clock.

BERTHA. I? No! Did he say that?

AXEL. Yes. But I heard you when you made the engagement yesterday.

BERTHA. Perhaps it's so, then, but anyway the professor wouldn't
let us leave and you know how nervous one gets in the last hours.
You're not angry with me, Axel?

AXEL. Angry? No. But this is the second time, and he gets his five
francs for nothing, nevertheless.

BERTHA. Can I help it if the professor keeps us? Why must you
always pick on me?

AXEL. Do I pick on you?

BERTHA. What's that? Didn't you--

AXEL. Yes, yes, yes! I picked on you--forgive me--forgive me--for
thinking that it was your fault.

BERTHA. Well, it's all right there. But what did you pay him with?

AXEL. To be sure. Gaga paid back the twenty francs he owed me.

BERTHA [Takes out account-book.] So, he paid you back? Come on,
then, and I'll put it down, for the sake of order. It's your money,
so of course you can dispose of it as you please, but as you wish
me to take care of the accounts--[Writes] fifteen francs in, five
francs out, model. There.

AXEL. No. Look here. It's twenty francs in.

BERTHA. Yes, but there are only fifteen here.

AXEL. Yes, but you should put down twenty.

BERTHA. Why do you argue?

AXEL. Did I--Well, the man's waiting--

BERTHA. Oh, yes. Be good and get things ready for me.

AXEL. [Puts model stand in place. Calls to model]. Are you
undressed yet?

THE MODEL [From back of screen]. Soon, monsieur.

BERTHA [Closes door, puts wood in stove]. There, now you must go
out.

AXEL [Hesitating]. Bertha!

BERTHA. Yes?

AXEL. Is it absolutely necessary--with a nude model?

BERTHA. Absolutely!

AXEL. H'm--indeed!

BERTHA. We have certainly argued that matter out.

AXEL. Quite true. But it's loathsome nevertheless--[Goes out
right.]

BERTHA [Takes up brushes and palette. Calls to model]. Are you
ready?

THE MODEL. All ready.

BERTHA. Come on, then. [Pause.] Come on. [There is a knock.] Who is
it? I have a model.

WILLMER [Outside]. Willmer. With news from the salon.

BERTHA. From the salon! [To model]. Dress yourself! We'll have to
postpone the sitting.--Axel! Willmer is here with news from the
salon.

[Axel comes in, also Willmer; the model goes out unnoticed during
the following scene.]

WILMER. Hello, dear friends! Tomorrow the jury will begin its work.
Oh, Bertha, here are your pastels. [Takes package from pocket.]

BERTHA. Thanks, my good Gaga; how much did they cost? They must
have been expensive.

WILLMER. Oh, not very.

BERTHA. So they are to start tomorrow. So soon? Do you hear, Axel?

AXEL. Yes, my friend.

BERTHA. Now, will you be very good, very, very good?

AXEL. I always want to be good to you, my friend.

BERTHA. You do? Now, listen. You know Roubey, don't you?

AXEL. Yes, I met him in Vienna mid we became good friends, as it's
called.

BERTHA. You know that he is on the jury?

AXEL. And then what?

BERTHA. Well--now you'll be angry, I know you will.

AXEL. You know it? Don't prove it, then.

BERTHA [Coaxing]. You wouldn't make a sacrifice for your wife,
would you?

AXEL. Go begging? No, I don't want to do that.

BERTHA. Not for me? You'll get in anyway, but for your wife!

AXEL. Don't ask me.

BERTHA. I should really never ask you for anything!

AXEL. Yes, for things that I can do without sacrificing--

BERTHA. Your man's pride!

AXEL. Let it go at that.

BERTHA. But I would sacrifice my woman's pride if I could help you.

AXEL. You women have no pride.

BERTHA. Axel!

AXEL. Well, well, pardon, pardon!

BERTHA. You must be jealous. I don't believe you would really like
it if I were accepted at the salon.

AXEL. Nothing would make me happier. Believe me, Bertha.

BERTHA. Would you be happy, too, if I were accepted and you were
refused?

AXEL. I must feel and see. [Puts his hand over his heart.] No, that
would be decidedly disagreeable, decidedly. In the first place,
because I paint better than you do, and because--

BERTHA [Walking up and down]. Speak out. Because I am a woman!

AXEL. Yes, just that. It may seem strange, but to me it's as if you
women were intruding and plundering where we have fought for so
long while you sat by the fire. Forgive me, Bertha, for talking
like this, but such thoughts have occurred to me.

BERTHA. Has it ever occurred to you that you're exactly like all
other men?

AXEL. Like all others? I should hope so!

BERTHA. And you have become so superior lately. You didn't use to
be like that.

AXEL. It must be because I am superior! Doing something that we men
have never done before!

BERTHA. What! What are you saving! Shame on you!

WILLMER. There, there, good friends! No, but, dear friends--Bertha,
control yourself.

[He gives her a look which she tries to make out.]

BERTHA [Changing]. Axel, let's be friends! And hear me a moment. Do
you think that my position in your house--for it is yours--is
agreeable to me? You support me, you pay for my studying at
Julian's, while you yourself cannot afford instruction. Don't you
think I see how you sit and wear out yourself and your talent on
these pot-boiling drawings, and are able to paint only in leisure
moments? You haven't been able to afford models for yourself, while
you pay mine five hard-earned francs an hour. You don't know how
good--how noble--how sacrificing you are, and also you don't know
how I suffer to see you toil so for me. Oh, Axel, you can't know
how I feel my position. What am I to you? Of what use am I in your
house? Oh, I blush when I think about it!

AXEL. What, what, what! Aren't you my wife?

BERTHA. Yes, but--

AXEL. Well, then?

BERTHA. But you support me.

AXEL. Well, isn't that the right thing to do?

BERTHA. It was formerly--according to the old scheme of marriage,
but we weren't to have it like that. We were to be comrades.

AXEL. What talk! Isn't a man to support his wife?

BERTHA. I don't want it. And you, Axel, you must help me. I'm not
your equal when it's like that, but I could be if you would humble
yourself once, just once! Don't think that you are alone in going
to one of the jury to say a good word for another. If it were for
yourself, it would be another matter, but for me--Forgive me! Now I
beg of you as nicely as I know how. Lift me from my humiliating
position to your side, and I'll be so grateful I shall never
trouble you again with reminding you of my position. Never, Axel!

AXEL. Don't ask me; you know how weak I am.

BERTHA [Embracing him].Yes, I shall ask you--beg of you, until you
fulfil my prayer. Now, don't look so proud, but be human! So!
[Kisses him.]

AXEL [To Willmer]. Look here, Gaga, don't you think that women are
terrible tyrants?

WILLMER [Pained]. Yes, and especially when they are submissive.

BERTHA. See, now, the sky is clear again. You'll go, won't you,
Axel? Get on your black coat now, and go. Then come home, and we'll
strike out together for something to eat.

AXEL. How do you know that Roubey is receiving now?

BERTHA. Don't you think that I made sure of that?

AXEL. What a schemer you are!

BERTHA [Takes a black cutaway coat from wardrobe]. Well, one would
never get anywhere without a little wire-pulling, you know. Here's
your black coat. So!

AXEL. Yes. But this is awful. What am I to say to the man?

BERTHA. H'm. Oh, you'll hit, on something on the way. Say that--
that--that your wife--no--that you're expecting a christening--

AXEL. Fie, Bertha.

BERTHA. Well, say that you can get him decorated, then.

AXEL. Really you frighten me, Bertha!

BERTHA. Say what you please, then. Come, now, and I'll fix your
hair so you'll be presentable. Do you know his wife?

AXEL. No, not at all.

BERTHA [Brushing his hair]. Then you must get an introduction to
her. I understand that she has great influence, but that she
doesn't like women.

AXEL. What are you doing to my hair?

BERTHA. I am fixing it as they are wearing it now.

AXEL. Yes, but I don't want it that way.

BERTHA. Now then--that's fine. Just mind me. [She goes to
chiffonier and takes out a case which contains a Russian Annae
order. She tries to put it in Axel's buttonhole.]

AXEL. No, Bertha. You've gone far enough now. I won't wear that
decoration.

BERTHA. But you accepted it.

AXEL. Yes, because I couldn't decline it. But I'll never wear it.

BERTHA. Do you belong to some political party that is so
liberal-minded as to suppress individual freedom to accept
distinctions?

AXEL. No, I don't. But I belong to a circle of comrades who have
promised each other not to wear their merit on their coats.

BERTHA. But who have accepted salon medals!

AXEL. Which are not worn on their coats.

BERTHA. What do you say to this, Gaga?

WILLMER. As long as distinctions exist, one does one's self harm to
go about with the mark of infamy, and the example no one is likely
to follow. Take them away for all of me--I certainly can't get them
away from the others.

AXEL. Yes, and when my comrades who are more deserving than I do
not wear them, I would lower them by wearing the emblem.

BERTHA. But it doesn't show under your overcoat. No one will know,
and you won't brand any one.

WILLMER. Bertha is right there. You'll wear your order _under_ your
coat, not _on_ your coat.

AXEL. Jesuits! When you are given a finger, you take the whole arm.

[Abel comes in wearing fur coat and cap.]

BERTHA. Oh, here's Abel! Come on, now, and settle this controversy.

ABEL. Hello, Bertha! Hello, Axel! How are you, Gaga? What's the
matter?

BERTHA. Axel doesn't want to wear his order, because he daren't on
account of his comrades.

ABEL. Comrades come before a wife, of course--that's an unwritten
law. [She sits by table, takes up tobacco and rolls a cigarette.]

BERTHA [Fastens ribbon in Axel's buttonhole and puts the star back
in case] He can help me without hurting any one, but I fear he
would rather hurt me!

AXEL. Bertha, Bertha! But you people will drive me mad! I don't
consider it a crime to wear this ribbon, nor have I taken any oath
that I wouldn't do so, but at our exhibitions it's considered
cowardly not to dare to make one's way without them.

BERTHA. Cowardly, of course! But you're not going to take your own
course this time--but mine!

ABEL. You owe it to the woman who has consecrated her life to you
to be her delegate.

AXEL. I feel that what you people are saying is false, but I
haven't the time or energy to answer you now; but there is an
answer! It's as if you were drawing a net about me while I sit
absorbed in my work. I can feel the net winding about me, but my
foot gets entangled when I want to kick it aside. But, you wait, if
only I free my hands, I'll get out my knife and cut the meshes of
your net! What were we talking about? Oh, yes, I was going to make
a call. Give me my gloves and my overcoat. Good-bye, Bertha!
Good-bye. Oh, yes,--where does Roubey live?

WILLMER, ABEL and BERTHA [In unison]. Sixty-five Rue des Martyrs.

AXEL. Why, that's right near here!

BERTHA. Just at the corner. Thanks, Axel, for going. Does the
sacrifice feel very heavy?

AXEL. I can't feel anything but that I am tired of all this talk
and that it will be delightful to get out. Good-bye. [Goes out.]

ABEL. It's too bad about Axel. It's a pity. Did you know that he is
refused?

BERTHA. And I, then?

ABEL. That's not settled yet. As you wrote your own name with
French spelling, you won't be reached until O.

BERTHA. There's still hope for me?

ABEL. Yes, for you, but not for Axel.

WILLMER. Now, we'll see something!

BERTHA. How do you know that he is refused?

ABEL. H'm, I met a "hors concours" who knew, and I was quite
prepared to witness a scene when I came in here. But of course he
hasn't received the notice yet.

BERTHA. No, not that I know of. But, Abel, are you sure that Axel
will meet Madame Roubey and not Monsieur?

ABEL. What should he see Monsieur Roubey for? He hasn't any say
about it, but she is president of the Woman-Painters Protective
Society.

BERTHA. And I am not refused--yet?

ABEL. No, as I said, and Axel's call is bound to do good. He has a
Russian order, and everything Russian is very popular in Paris just
now. But it's too had about Axel just the same.

BERTHA. Too bad? Why? They haven't room for everybody on the salon
walls. There are so many women refused that a man might put up with
it and be made to feel it for once. But if I get in now--we'll soon
hear how _he_ painted my picture, how _he_ has taught me, how _he_
has paid for my lessons. But I shall not take any notice of that,
because it isn't true.

WILLMER. Well, we're bound to see something unusual happen now.

BERTHA. No, I believe--granted that I am not refused--that we'll
see something very usual. But nevertheless I'm afraid of the actual
moment. Something tells me that things won't be right between Axel
and me again.

ABEL. And it was just when you were equals that things were going
to be right.

WILLMER. It seems to me that your position will be much more
clearly defined and much pleasanter when you can sell your pictures
and support yourself.

BERTHA. It should be! We'll see--we'll see! [The maid enters with a
green letter.] A green letter for Axel! Here it is! Here it is! He
is refused! Yes, but this is terrible; however, it will be a
consolation to me if I should be refused.

ABEL. But if you are not refused?

BERTHA [Pause].

ABEL. You won't answer that?

BERTHA. No, I won't answer that.

ABEL. Because, if you are accepted, the equality will be destroyed,
as you will be his superior.

BERTHA. Superior? A wife superior to her husband--her husband--oh!

WILLMER. It's about time an example was made.

ABEL [To Bertha]. You were at the luncheon today? Was it
interesting?

BERTHA. Oh, yes.

WILLMER. When are you going to review my book, Abel?

ABEL. I'm just working on it.

WILLMER. Are you going to be nice to me?

ABEL. Very nice.--Well, Bertha, how and when will you deliver the
letter?

BERTHA [Walking about]. That is just, what I am thinking about. If
he hasn't met Madame Roubey, and if he hasn't carried out our plan,
he will hardly do it after receiving this blow.

ABEL [Rising]. I don't think Axel is so base as to revenge himself
on you.

BERTHA. Base? Such talk! Didn't he go just now when I wanted him
to, because I am his wife? Do you think he would ever have gone for
any one else?

ABEL. Would you like it if he had done it for some one else?

BERTHA. Good-bye to you--you must go now, before he returns!

ABEL. That's what I think. Good bye, Bertha.

WILLMER. Yes, we had better get away. Goodbye for now.

[The maid enters and announces Mrs. Hall.]

BERTHA. Who? Mrs. Hall? Who can that be?

ABEL and WILLMER. Good-bye, Bertha.

[They go out. Mrs. Hall comes in. She is flashily though carelessly
dressed. She looks like an adventuress.]

MRS. HALL. I don't know that I have the honor to be known to you,
but you are Mrs. Alberg, née Ålund, are you not?

BERTHA. Yes, I'm Mrs. Alberg. Won't you sit down?

MRS. HALL. My name is Hall. [Sits.] Oh, my lord, but I'm so tired!
I have walked up so many stairs--oh-ho-ho-ho, I believe I'll faint!

BERTHA. How can I be of service to you?

MRS. HALL. You know Doctor Östermark, don't you?

BERTHA. Yes, he's an old friend of mine.

MRS. HALL. An old friend. Well, you see, dear Mrs. Alberg, I was
married to him once, but we separated. I am his divorced wife.

BERTHA. Oh! He has never told me about that.

MRS. HALL. Oh, people don't tell such things.

BERTHA. He told me he was a widower.

MRS. HALL. Well, you were a young girl then, and I suppose he isn't
so anxious to have it known anyway.

BERTHA. And I who have always believed that Doctor Östermark was an
honorable man!

MRS. HALL [Sarcastic]. Yes, he's a good one! He is a real
gentleman, I must say.

BERTHA. Well, but why do you tell me all this?

MRS. HALL. Just wait, my dear Mrs. Alberg wait and you shall hear.
You area member of the society, aren't you?

BERTHA. Yes, I am.

MRS. HALL. Just so; only wait now.

BERTHA. Did you have any children?

MRS. HALL. Two--two daughters, Mrs. Alberg.

BERTHA. That's another matter! And he left you in want?

MRS. HALL. Just wait now! He gave us a small allowance, not enough
for the rent even. And now that the girls are grown up and about to
start in life, now he writes us that he is a bankrupt and that he
can't send us more than half the allowance. Isn't that nice, just
now, when the girls are grown up and are going out into life?

BERTHA. We must look into this. He'll be here in a few days. Do you
know that you have the law on your side and that the courts can
force him to pay? And he shall be forced to do so. Do you
understand? So, he can bring children into the world and then leave
them empty-handed with the poor, deserted mother. Oh, he'll find
out something very different! Will you give my your address?

MRS. HALL [Gives her card]. You are so good, Mrs. Alberg. And you
won't he vexed with me if I ask a little favor of you?

BERTHA. You can depend on me entirely. I shall write the secretary
immediately--

MRS. HALL. Oh, you're so good, but before the secretary can answer,
I and my poor children will probably be thrown out into the street.
Dear Mrs. Alberg, you couldn't lend me a trifle--just wait--a
trifle of twenty francs?

BERTHA. No, dear lady, I haven't any money. My husband supports me
for the time being, and you may be sure that I'm reminded of the
fact. It's bitter to eat the bread of charity when one is young,
but better times are coming for me too.

MRS. HALL. My dear, good Mrs. Alberg, you must not refuse me. If
you do, I am a lost woman. Help me, for heaven's sake.

BERTHA. Are you terribly in need?

MRS. HALL. And you ask me that!

BERTHA. I'll let you have this money as a loan. [She goes to
chiffonier.] Twenty, forty, sixty, eighty--lacking twenty. What did
I do with it? H'm, luncheon, of course! [She writes in account-book.]
Paints twenty, incidentals twenty--there you are.

MRS. HALL. Thank you, my good Mrs. Alberg, thanks, dear lady.

BERTHA. There, there. But I can't give you any more time today. So,
good-bye, and depend on me.

MRS. HALL [Uncertain]. Just a moment now.

BERTHA [Listening without]. No, you must go now.

MRS. HALL. Just a moment. What was I going to say?--Well, it
doesn't matter.

[Goes out. Bertha is alone for a moment, when she hears Axel
coming. She hides the green letter in her pocket.]

BERTHA. Back already? Well, did you meet her--him?

AXEL. I didn't meet him, but her, which was much better. I
congratulate you, Bertha. Your picture is already accepted!

BERTHA. Oh, no! What are you saying? And yours?

AXEL. It isn't decided yet--but it will surely go through, too.

BERTHA. Are you sure of that?

AXEL. Of course--

BERTHA. Oh, I'm accepted! Good, how good! But why don't you
congratulate me?

AXEL. Haven't I? I'm quite sure that I said, "I congratulate you!"
For that matter, one mustn't sell the skin before the bear is
killed. To get into the salon isn't anything. It's just a toss-up.
It can even depend on what letter one's name begins with. You come
in O, as you spelled your name in French. When the lettering starts
with M it's always easier.

BERTHA. So, you wish to say that perhaps I got in because my name
begins with O?

AXEL. Not on account of that alone.

BERTHA. And if you are refused, it's because your name begins with A.

AXEL. Not exactly that alone, but it might be on that account.

BERTHA. Look here, I don't think you're as honorable as you would
seem. You are jealous.

AXEL. Why should I be, when I don't know what has happened to me
yet?

BERTHA. But when you do know?

AXEL. What? [Bertha takes out letter. Axel puts his hand to his
heart and sits in a chair.] What! [Controls himself.] That was a
blow I had not expected. That was most disagreeable!

BERTHA. Well, I suppose I'll have to help you now.

AXEL, You seem to be filled with malicious delight, Bertha. Oh, I
feel that a great hate is beginning to grow in here. [Indicating
his breast.]

BERTHA. Perhaps I look delighted because I've had a success, but
when one is tied to a man who cannot rejoice in another's good
fortune, it's difficult to sympathize with his misfortune.

AXEL. I don't know why, but it seems as if we had become enemies
now. The strife of position has come between us, and we can never
be friends any more.

BERTHA. Can't your sense of justice bend and recognize me as the
abler, the victorious one in the strife?

AXEL. You are not the abler.

BERTHA. The jury must have thought so, however.

AXEL. But surely you know that I paint better than you do.

BERTHA. Are you so sure of that?

AXEL. Yes, I am. But for that matter--you worked under better
conditions than I. You didn't have to do any pot-boiling, you could
go to the studio, you had models, and you were a woman!

BERTHA. Yes, now I'll hear how I have lived on you--

AXEL. Between ourselves, yes, but the world won't know unless you
go and tell it yourself.

BERTHA. Oh, the world knows that already. But tell me, why don't
you suffer when a comrade, a man comrade, is accepted, although he
has less merit than you?

AXEL. I'll have to think about that. You see our feeling toward you
women has never been critical--we've taken you as a matter of
course, and so I've never thought about our relations as against
each other. Now when the shoe pinches, it strikes me that we are
not comrades, for this experience makes me feel that you women do
not belong here. [Indicating the studio.] A comrade is a more or
less loyal competitor; we are enemies. You women have been lying
down in the rear while we attacked the enemy. And now, when we have
set and supplied the table, you pounce down upon it as if you were
in your own home!

BERTHA. Oh, fie, have we ever been allowed in the conflict?

AXEL. You have always been allowed, but you have never wanted to
take part, or haven't been able to do so in our domain, where you
are now breaking in. Technic had to be put through its whole
development and completion by us before you entered. And now you
buy the centurions' work for ten francs an hour in a studio, and
with money that we have acquired by our work.

BERTHA. You are not honorable now, Axel.

AXEL. When was I honorable? When I allowed you to use me like an
old shoe? But now you are my superior--and now I can't strive to be
honorable any longer. Do you know that this adversity will also
change our economic relations? I cannot think of painting any more,
but must give up my life's dream and become a pot-boiler in earnest.

BERTHA. You needn't do that; when I can sell, I will support
myself.

AXEL. For that matter, what sort of an alliance have we gone into?
Marriage should be built on common interests; ours is built on
opposing interests.

BERTHA. You can work all that out by yourself; I'm going out for
dinner now,--are you coming?

AXEL. No, I want to be alone with my unhappiness.

BERTHA. And I want company for my happiness.--But we have invited
people to come here for the evening--that won't do now, with your
misery, will it?

AXEL. It isn't a very brilliant prospect, but there's no way out.
Let them come.

BERTHA [Dressing to go out]. But you must be here, or it will look
as if you were cowardly.

AXEL. I'll be with you, don't worry--but give me a bit of money
before you go.

BERTHA. We've reached the end of our cash.

AXEL. The end?

BERTHA. Yes, money comes to an end too!

AXEL. Can you lend me ten francs?

BERTHA [Taking out pocketbook]. Ten francs? Yes, indeed, if I have
it. Here you are. Won't you come along? Tell me. They'll think it
rather strange!

AXEL. And play the defeated lion before the triumphant chariot? No,
indeed, I'll need my time to learn my part for this evening's
performance.

BERTHA. Good-bye then.

AXEL. Good-bye, Bertha. Let me ask you one thing.

BERTHA. What then?

AXEL. Don't come home intoxicated. It would be more disagreeable
today than ever.

BERTHA. Does it concern you how I come home?

AXEL. Well, I feel sort of responsible for you, as for a relative,
considering that you bear the same name that I do, and besides, it
is still disgusting to me to see a woman intoxicated.

BERTHA. Why is it any more disgusting than to see a man
intoxicated?

AXEL. Yes, why? Perhaps because you don't bear being seen without a
disguise.

BERTHA [Starting]. Good-bye, you old talking-machine. You won't
come along?

AXEL. No!

[Bertha goes out; Axel rises, takes off his cutaway to change it
for working coat.]

CURTAIN.


ACT II.

[Same scene as Act I, but there is a large table with chairs around
it in middle of scene. On table there is writing material and a
speaker's gavel. Axel is painting. Abel is sitting near him. She is
smoking.]

AXEL. They have finished dinner and are having their coffee now.
Did they drink much?

ABEL. Oh, yes, and Bertha bragged and was disagreeable.

AXEL. Tell me one thing, Abel, are you my friend, or not?

ABEL. H'm--I don't know.

AXEL. Can I trust you?

ABEL. No--you can't.

AXEL. Why not?

ABEL. Oh, I just feel that you can't.

AXEL. Tell me, Abel, you who have the common sense of a man and can
be reasoned with, tell me how it feels to be a woman. Is it so
awful?

ABEL [Jokingly]. Yes, of course. It feels like being a nigger.

AXEL. That's strange. Listen, Abel. You know that I have a passion
for equity and justice--

ABEL. I know you are a visionary--and that's why things will never
go well with you.

AXEL. But things go well with you--because you never feel anything?

ABEL. Yes.

AXEL. Abel, have you really never had any desire to love a man?

ABEL. How silly you are!

AXEL. Have you never found any one?

ABEL. No, men are very scarce.

AXEL. H'm, don't you consider me a man?

ABEL. You! No!

AXEL. That's what I fancied myself to be.

ABEL. Are you a man? You, who work for a woman and go around
dressed like a woman?

AXEL. What? I, dressed like a woman?

ABEL. The way you wear your hair and go around bare-necked, while
she wears stiff collars and short hair; be careful, she'll soon
take your trousers away from you.

AXEL. How you talk!

ABEL. And what is your position in your own house? You beg money
from her, and she puts you under her guardianship. No, you are not
a man! But that's why she took you, when her affairs were in bad
shape.

AXEL. You hate Bertha; what have you against her?

ABEL. I don't know, but perhaps I, too, have been struck with that
same passion for justice.

AXEL. Look here. Don't you believe in your great cause any longer?

ABEL. Sometimes! Sometimes not! What can one believe in any more?
Sometimes it strikes me that the old ways were better. As mothers
we had an honored and respected position when in that way we
fulfilled our duty as citizens; as housewives we were a great
power, and to bring up a family was not an ignominious occupation.
Give me a cognac, Axel. We have talked so much.

AXEL [Getting cognac]. Why do you drink?

ABEL. I don't know. If one could only find the exceptional man!

AXEL. What sort would that be?

ABEL. The man who rules a woman!

AXEL. Well, and if you found one?

ABEL. Then I would--as they say--fall in love with him. Think if
this whole noise were _blague_. Think!

AXEL. No, there is surely life, motion in the movement, whatever it
is.

ABEL. Yes, there's so much motion--forward and backward! And a good
deal of folly can come of the "motion," if they only get the
majority for it.

AXEL. If it turns out that way, then you've made a damned lot of
noise uselessly, for now it's beginning to be loathsome to live.

ABEL. We make so much noise that we make your heads reel. That's
the trouble! Well, Axel, your position will be freer now that
Bertha has been able to sell.

AXEL. Sell! Has she sold a picture?

ABEL. Don't you know that? The small picture with the apple-tree.

AXEL. No, she hasn't said anything about it. When did it happen?

ABEL. Day before yesterday. Don't you know about it? Well, then she
intends to surprise you with the money.

AXEL. Surprise me? She takes care of the cash herself.

ABEL. So! Then it will--Hush, she is coming.

[Bertha comes in.]

BERTHA [To Abel]. Oh, good evening; are you here? What made you
leave us?

ABEL. I thought it was tiresome.

BERTHA. Yes, there is no fun in rejoicing for others!

ABEL. No!

BERTHA [To Axel]. And you sit diligently niggling, I see.

AXEL. Yes, I'm daubing away.

BERTHA. Let me see! That's very good indeed--but the left arm is
far too long.

AXEL. Do you think so?

BERTHA. Think so? Can't I see that it is? Give me the brush and--
[She takes brush.]

AXEL. No, let me alone. Aren't you ashamed?

BERTHA. What's that?

AXEL [Vexed]. Shame, I said. [Rises.] Are you trying to teach me
how to paint?

BERTHA. Why not?

AXEL. Because you have still much to learn from me. But I can learn
nothing from you.

BERTHA. It seems to me that the gentleman is not very respectful to
his wife. One should bear in mind the respect one owes to--

ABEL. Now you're old-fashioned. What particular respect does a man
owe a woman if they are to be equals?

BERTHA [To Abel]. So you think it's all right for a man to be
coarse with his wife?

ABEL. Yes, when she is impudent to him.

AXEL. That's right! Tear each other's eyes out!

ABEL. Not at all! The whole thing is too insignificant for that.

AXEL. Don't say that. Look here, Bertha, considering that our
economic condition is to undergo a change from now on, won't you
be so good as to let me see the account-book?

BERTHA. What a noble revenge for being refused!

AXEL. What revenge? What has the account-book got to do with my
being turned down at the salon? Give me the key to the chiffonier.

BERTHA [Feeling in her pocket]. Very well. H'm! That's strange! I
thought I just had it.

AXEL. Find it!

BERTHA. You speak in such a commanding tone. I don't like that.

AXEL. Come now, find the key.

BERTHA [Looking here and there in the room]. Yes, but I can't
understand it; I can't find it. It must be lost some way.

AXEL. Are you sure that you haven't got it?

BERTHA. Absolutely sure.

[Axel rings; after a moment the maid comes in.]

AXEL [To maid]. Go fetch a locksmith.

MAID. A locksmith?

AXEL. Yes, a smith who can pick a lock.

[Bertha gives the maid a look.]

MAID. Right away, monsieur.

[Maid goes out. Axel changes his coat, discovers the order on the
lapel, tears it off and throws it on the table.]

AXEL. Pardon me, ladies!

BERTHA [Mildly]. Don't mind us. Are you going out?

AXEL. I am going out.

BERTHA. Aren't you going to stay for the meeting?

AXEL. No, I am not!

BERTHA. Yes, but they will think that very discourteous.

AXEL. Let them. I have more important things to do than listening
to the drivel of you women.

BERTHA [Worried]. Where are you going?

AXEL. I don't need to account for myself, as I don't ask you to
account for your actions.

BERTHA. You won't forget that we have invited guests for the
masquerade tomorrow evening?

AXEL. Guests? That's true, tomorrow evening. H'm!

BERTHA. It won't do to postpone it when both Östermark and Carl
have arrived today, and I have asked them to come.

AXEL. So much the better!

BERTHA. And now come home early enough to try on your costume.

AXEL. My Costume? Yes, of course; I am to take the part of a woman.

[The maid enters.]

MAID. The smith hasn't time now, but he'll come within two hours.

AXEL. He hasn't time, eh? Well, perhaps the key will turn up
anyway. However, I must be off now. Good-bye.

BERTHA [Very mild]. Good-bye then. Don't come home late.

AXEL. I don't know just what I will do. Goodbye.

[Abel nods good-bye, Axel goes out.]

ABEL. How very cocky his lordship was!

BERTHA. Such impudence! Do you know, I had a good mind to tame him,
break him so that he'd come back crawling to me.

ABEL. Yes, that tweak the salon disappointment gave him doesn't
seem to have taken all the spunk out of him. Bertha, tell me, have
you ever loved that clown?

BERTHA. Loved him? I liked him very much because he was nice to me.
But he is so silly and--when he nags as he did just now, I feel
that I could hate him. Think of it, it's already around that he
painted my picture!

ABEL. Well, if it's gone as far as that, then you must do something
éclatant.

BERTHA. If I only knew how!

ABEL. I'm usually inventive. Let me see. Look here, why couldn't
you have his refused picture brought home just as all your friends
have gathered here?

BERTHA. No, that would look as if I wanted to triumph. No, that
would be too terrible.

ABEL. Yes, but if I should have it done? Or Gaga, that would be
better still. It would be sent here in Axel's name by the porter.
It's got to come home anyway, and it's no secret that it was
refused.

BERTHA. No, but you know--

ABEL. What? Hasn't he spread false reports, and haven't you the
right to defend yourself?

BERTHA. I would like it to happen very much, but I don't want to
have anything to do with the doing of it. I want to be able to
stand and swear that I am quite clean and innocent.

ABEL. You shall be able to do so. I'll attend to it.

BERTHA. What do you think he wanted the account-book for? He has
never asked to see it before. Do you think he has some scheme in
his head about it?

ABEL. Ye-es! Doubtless. He wants to see if you've accounted for the
three hundred francs you got for your picture.

BERTHA. What picture?

ABEL. The one you sold to Madame Roubey.

BERTHA. How do you know about that?

ABEL. The whole crowd knows about it.

BERTHA. And Axel, too?

ABEL. Yes. I happened to mention it because I thought he knew. It
was stupid of you not to tell him.

BERTHA. Does it concern him if I sell a--

ABEL. Yes, in a way, of course it concerns him.

BERTHA. Well, then, I will explain that I didn't want to give him
another disappointment after he had already had the unhappiness of
seeing me accepted at the salon.

ABEL. Strictly speaking, he has nothing to do with your earnings,
as you have a marriage compact, and you have every reason to be
tight with him. Just to establish a precedent, buck up and stand
your own ground when he returns with his lecture tonight.

BERTHA. Oh, I know how to take care of him. But--another matter.
How are we to treat the Östermark case?

ABEL. Östermark,--yes, he is my great enemy. You had better let me
take care of him. We have an old account that is still unsettled,
he and I. Calm yourself on that score. I'll make him yield, for we
have the law on our side.

BERTHA. What do you intend to do?

ABEL. Invite Mrs. Hall and her two daughters here for tomorrow
night, and then we will find out how he takes it.

BERTHA. No, indeed, no scandal in my house!

ABEL. Why not? Can you deny yourself such a triumph? If it's war,
one must kill one's enemies, not just wound them. And now it is
war. Am I right?

BERTHA. Yes, but a father, and his wife and daughters whom he has
not seen for eighteen years!

ABEL. Well, he'll have a chance to see them now.

BERTHA. You're terrible, Abel!

ABEL. I'm a little stronger than you, that's all. Marriage must
have softened you. Do you live as married people, h'm?

BERTHA. How foolish you are!

ABEL. You have irritated Axel; you have trampled on him. But he can
yet bite your heel.

BERTHA. Do you think he would dare to do anything?

ABEL. I believe he'll create a scene when he comes home.

BERTHA. Well, I shall give him as good as he sends--

ABEL. If you only can! But that business about the chiffonier key--
that was foolish, very foolish.

BERTHA. Perhaps it was foolish. But he will be nice enough again
after he has had an airing. I know him.

[The maid comes in with a package.]

MAID. A messenger brought this costume for Monsieur.

BERTHA. Very well, let me have it. That's fine!

MAID. But it must be for madame, as it's a lady's costume.

BERTHA. No, that's all right. It's for monsieur.

MAID. But, heavens! is monsieur to wear dresses too?

BERTHA. Why not, when we have to wear them? But you may leave us
now.

[Maid goes out. Bertha opens bundle and takes out Spanish costume.]

ABEL. But that is certainly well thought out. Oh, it's beautiful to
avenge any one's stupidities.

[Willmer comes in zenith a messenger, who carries a package.
Willmer is dressed in black frock coat with lapels faced with
white, a flower in buttonhole, knee breeches, red cravat, and
turned over cuffs.]

WILLMER. Good evening; are you alone? Here are the candles and here
are the bottles. One chartreuse and two vermouth; here are two
packages of tobacco and the rest of the things.

BERTHA. Well, but you are a good boy, Gaga!

WILLMER. And here is the receipted bill.

BERTHA. Is it paid? Then you have spent money again?

WILLMER. We'll have plenty of time to settle that. But you must
hurry now, as the old lady will soon be here.

BERTHA. Then be good enough to open the bottles while I fix the
candles.

WILLMER. Of course I will.

[Bertha opens package of candles at table; Willmer stands beside
her, taking the wrappers from bottles.]

ABEL. You look quite family-like as you stand there together. You
might have made quite a nice little husband, Gaga.

[Willmer puts his arm around Bertha and kisses her on the neck.
Bertha turns on Willmer and slaps his face.]

BERTHA. Aren't you ashamed, you little hornet! What are you up to,
anyway?

ABEL. If you can stand that, Gaga, then you can stand the knife.

WILLMER [Angry]. Little hornet? Don't you know who I am? Don't you
know that I'm an author of rank?

BERTHA. You! who write nothing but trash!

WILLMER. It wasn't trash when I wrote for you.

BERTHA. You only copied what we said, that was all!

WILLMER. Take care, Bertha. You know that I can ruin you!

BERTHA. So, you threaten, you little Fido! [To Abel.] Shall we give
the boy a spanking?

ABEL. Think what you are saying!

WILLMER. So! I've been a little Fido, who has been lying on your
skirt; but don't forget that I can bite too.

BERTHA. Let me see your teeth!

WILLMER. No, but you shall feel them!

BERTHA. Very well, come on then! Come!

ABEL. Now, now, be quiet before you go too far.

WILLMER [To Bertha]. Do you know what one has a right to say about
a married woman who accepts presents from a young bachelor?

BERTHA. Presents?

WILLMER. You've accepted presents from me for two years.

BERTHA. Presents! You should have a thrashing, you lying little
snipe, always hanging around the petticoats! Don't you suppose I
can squelch you?

WILLMER [With a shrug]. Perhaps.

BERTHA. And you dare throw a shadow on a woman's honor!

WILLMER, Honor! H'm! Does it do you any honor to have had me buy
part of the household things which you have charged up to your
husband?

BERTHA. Leave my house, you scamp!

WILLMER. Your house! Among comrades one is not careful, but among
enemies one must count every hair! And you shall be compelled to go
over the accounts with me--adventuress--depend on that! [Goes out.]

ABEL. You will suffer for this foolishness! To let a friend leave
you as an enemy--that's dangerous.

BERTHA. Oh, let him do what he likes. He dared to kiss me! He dared
to remind me that I'm a woman.

ABEL. Do you know, I believe a man will always have that in mind.
You have been playing with fire.

BERTHA. Fire! Can one ever find a man and a woman who can live like
comrades without danger of fire?

ABEL. No, I don't think so; as long as there are two sexes there is
bound to be fire.

BERTHA. Yes, but that must be done away with!

ABEL. Yes--it must be--try it!

[The maid comes in; she is bursting with laughter.]

MAID. There is a lady out here who calls herself--Richard--Richard
Wahlström!

BERTHA [Going toward door]. Oh! Richard is here.

ABEL. Oh, well then, if she has come, we can open the meeting. And
now to see if we can disentangle your skein.

BERTHA. Disentangle it, or cut it!

ABEL. Or get caught in it!

CURTAIN.


ACT III.

[Same scene. The hanging-lamp is lighted. Moonlight streams in,
lighting up the studio window. There is a fire in the stove. Bertha
and the maid are discovered. Bertha is dressed in a negligée with
lace. She is sewing on the Spanish costume. The maid is cutting out
a frill.]

BERTHA. There's no fun sitting up waiting for one's husband.

MAID. Do you think it is more fun for him to sit and wait for
madame? This is the first time that he has been out alone--

BERTHA. Well, what does he do when he sits here alone?

MAID. He paints on pieces of wood.

BERTHA. On wooden panels?

MAID. Yes, he has big piles of wood that he paints on.

BERTHA. H'm! Tell me one thing, Ida; has monsieur ever been
familiar with you?

MAID. Oh, never! No, he is such a proper gentleman.

BERTHA. Are you sure?

MAID [Positive]. Does madame think that I am such a--

BERTHA. --What time is it now?

MAID. It must be along toward twelve.

BERTHA. Very well. Then you may go to bed.

MAID. Won't you be afraid to be alone with all these skeletons?

BERTHA. I, afraid?--Hush, some one is coming through the gate--so,
good night to you.

MAID. Good night, Madame. Sleep well.

[Goes out. Bertha alone; she puts the work away; throws herself on
the couch, arranges lace on her gown, then she jumps up, turns down
the lamp to half-light, then returns to couch and pretends to
sleep. A pause before Axel enters.]

AXEL. Is any one here? Are you here, Bertha? [Bertha is silent.
Axel goes to her.] Are you asleep?

BERTHA. [Softly.] Ah, is it you, my friend? Good evening! I was
lying here and fell asleep, and I had such a bad dream.

AXEL. Now you are lying, for I saw you thro' the window from the
garden when you took this pose. [Bertha jumps up.]

AXEL [Quietly]. And we don't want any seductive scenes in
nightgowns, nor any melodramas. Be calm and listen to what I am
going to tell you. [He sits down in the middle of the room.]

BERTHA. What have you got to tell me?

AXEL. A whole lot of things; but I shall begin with the ending. We
must dissolve this concubinage.

BERTHA. What? [Throwing herself on the couch.] Oh, my God, what am
I not made to live through!

AXEL. No hysteria, or I will empty the water bottle on your laces!

BERTHA. This is your revenge because I defeated you in an open
competition!

AXEL. That has no connection with this matter.

BERTHA. You have never loved me!

AXEL. Yes, I have loved you; that was my only motive for marrying
you. But why did you marry me? Because you were hard up, and
because you had green sickness!

BERTHA. It's fortunate that no one can hear us.

AXEL. It would be no misfortune if any one did hear us. I've
treated you like a comrade, with unlimited trust, and I've even
made small sacrifices that you know about.--Has the locksmith been
here yet?

BERTHA. No, he didn't come.

AXEL. It doesn't matter--I have looked over your accounts.

BERTHA. So, you've been spying in my book, have you?

AXEL. The household account-book is common property. You have
entered false expenses and neglected to put down some of the
income.

BERTHA. Can I help it if we are not taught bookkeeping at school?

AXEL. Nor are we. And as far as your bringing-up is concerned, you
had things much better then I did; you went to a seminary, but I
only went to a grade school.

BERTHA. It's not books that bring one up--

AXEL. No, it's the parents! But it's strange that they can't teach
their daughters to be honorable--

BERTHA. Honorable! I wonder if the majority of criminals are not to
be found among men?

AXEL. The majority of the punished, you should say; but of
ninety-nine per cent. of criminal men one can ask with the judge,
"Où est la femme?" But--to return to you. You have lied to me all
the way through, and finally you have cheated me. For instance, you
put down twenty francs for paints instead of for a twenty franc
luncheon at Marguery.

BERTHA. That's not true; the luncheon only cost twelve francs.

AXEL. That is to say, you put eight in your pocket. Then you have
received three hundred francs for the picture that you sold.

BERTHA. "What a woman earns by her work, she also controls." That's
what the law states.

AXEL. That's not a paradox, then? Not monomania?

BERTHA. No, it seems not.

AXEL. Of course, we must not be petty; you control your earnings,
and have controlled mine, in an unspeakable way; still, don't you
think that, as comrades, you should have told me about the sale?

BERTHA. That didn't concern you.

AXEL. It didn't concern me? Well, then it only remains for me to
bring suit for divorce.

BERTHA. Divorce! Do you think I would stand the disgrace of being a
divorced wife? Do you think that I will allow myself to be driven
from my home, like a servant-maid who is sent away with her trunk?

AXEL. I could throw you out into the street if I wished, but I
shall do a more humane thing and get the divorce on the grounds of
incompatibility of temperament.

BERTHA. If you can talk like that, you have never loved me!

AXEL. Tell me, why do you think I asked for your hand?

BERTHA. Because you wanted me to love you.

AXEL. Oh, holy, revered, uncorruptible stupidity--yes! I could
accuse you of counterfeiting, for you have gone into debt to
Willmer and made me responsible for the amount.

BERTHA. Ah, the little insect! he has been talking, has he?

AXEL. I just left him after paying him the three hundred and fifty
francs for which you were indebted to him. But we mustn't be small
about money matters, and we have more serious business to settle.
You have allowed this scoundrel partially to pay for my household,
and in doing so you have completely ruined my reputation. What have
you done with the money?

BERTHA. The whole thing is a lie.

AXEL. Have you squandered it on luncheon and dinner parties?

BERTHA. No, I have saved it; and that's something you have no
conception of, spendthrift!

AXEL. Oh, you saving soul! That negligée cost two hundred francs,
and my dressing-gown cost twenty-five.

BERTHA. Have you anything else to say to me?

AXEL. Nothing else, except that you must think about supporting
yourself from now on. I don't care to decorate wooden panels any
more and let you reap the earnings.

BERTHA. A-ha, you think you can so easily get out of the duty that
you made yourself responsible for when you fooled me into becoming
your wife? You shall see!

AXEL. Now that I've had my eyes opened, the past is beginning to
take on another color. It seems to me almost as if you conjured
that courtship of ours; it seems almost as if I had been the victim
of what you women call seduction; it now seems to me as if I had
fallen into the hands of an adventuress, who lured my money away
from me in a _hôtel garni_; it seems almost as if I had lived in
vice ever since I was united with you! [Rising.] And now, as you
stand there with your back turned to me and I see your neck with
your short hair, it is--yes, it is exactly as if--ugh!--as if you
were Judith and had given your body to be able to behead me! Look,
there is the dress I was going to wear, that you wished to
humiliate me with. Yes, you felt that it was debasing to wear those
things, and thought it disguised your desire to irritate,--this
low-cut bodice and the corsets which were to advertise your woman's
wares. No, I return your love-token and shake off the fetters. [He
throws down the wedding-ring. Bertha looks at him in wonderment.
Axel pushes back his hair.] You didn't want to see that my forehead
is higher than yours, so I let my hair conceal it, so as not to
humble and frighten you. But now I am going to humble you, and
since you were not willing to be my equal when I lowered myself to
your level, you shall be my inferior, which you are.

BERTHA. And all this--all this noble revenge because _you_ were
_my_ inferior!

AXEL. Yes, I was your inferior, even when I painted your picture!

BERTHA. Did you paint my picture? If you repeat that, I'll strike
you.

AXEL. Yes, your kind, who despise raw strength, are always the
first to resort to it. Go ahead and strike.

BERTHA [Advancing]. Don't you think I can measure strength with
you?

[Axel takes both her wrists in one hand.]

AXEL. No, I don't think so. Are you convinced now that I am also
your physical superior? Bend, or I'll break you!

BERTHA. Do you dare strike me?

AXEL. Why not? I know of only one reason why I should not strike
you.

BERTHA. What's that?

AXEL. Because you are morally irresponsible.

BERTHA [Trying to free herself]. Let go!

AXEL. When you have begged for forgiveness! So, down on your knees.
[He forces her down with one hand.] There, now look up to me, from
below! That's your place, that you yourself have chosen.

BERTHA [Giving in]. Axel, Axel, I don't know you any more. Are you
he who swore to love me, who begged to carry me, to lift me?

AXEL. It is I. I was strong then, and believed I had the power to
do it; but you sapped my strength while my tired head lay in your
lap, you sucked my best blood while I slept--and still there was
enough left to subdue you. But get up and let us end this
declaiming. We have business to talk over! [Berths rises, sits on
couch and weeps.] Why are you crying?

BERTHA. I don't know! Because I'm weak, perhaps.

[Bertha's attitude and actions are those of complete surrender.]

AXEL. You see--I was your strength. When I took what was mine, you
had nothing left. You were a rubber ball that I blew up; when I let
go of you, you fell together like an empty bag.

BERTHA [Without looking up]. I don't know whether you are right or
not, but since we have quarreled, my strength has left me. Axel,
will you believe me,--I have never experienced before what I now
feel--

AXEL. So? What do you feel, then?

BERTHA. I can't say it! I don't know whether it is--love, but--

AXEL. What do you mean by love? Isn't it a quiet longing to eat me
alive once more? You begin to love me! Why didn't you do that
before, when I was good to you? Goodness is stupidity, though; let
us be evil! Isn't that right?

BERTHA. Be a little evil, rather, but don't be weak. [Rises.] Axel,
forgive me, but don't desert me. Love me! Oh, love me!

AXEL. It is too late! Yesterday, this morning, I would have fallen
before you as you stand there now, but it's too late now.

BERTHA. Why is it too late now?

AXEL. Because tonight I have broken all ties, even the last.

BERTHA [Taking his hands]. What do you mean?

AXEL. I have been untrue to you.

BERTHA [Falls in a heap]. Oh!

AXEL. It was the only way to tear myself loose.

BERTHA [Collecting herself]. Who was she?

AXEL. A woman--[Pause.]

BERTHA. How did she look?

AXEL. Like a woman! With long hair and high breasts, et cetera.--
Spare yourself.

BERTHA. Do you think I am jealous of one of that kind?

AXEL. One of that kind, two of that kind, many of that kind!

BERTHA [Gasping]. And tomorrow our friends are invited here! Do you
want to create a scandal and call in the invitations?

AXEL. No, I don't want to be mean in my revenge. Tomorrow we'll
have our friends, and the day after our ways will part.

BERTHA. Yes, our ways must part now. Good night! [Goes to door
left.]

AXEL [Going to door right]. Good night!

BERTHA [Stops]. Axel!

AXEL. Yes?

BERTHA. Oh, it wasn't anything!--Yes, wait. [Goes toward Axel with
clasped hands.] Love me, Axel! Love me!

AXEL. Would you share with another?

BERTHA [Pause]. If only you loved me!

AXEL. No, I cannot. You can't draw me to you as you used to do.

BERTHA. Love me, be merciful! I am honest now, I believe, otherwise
I would never humiliate myself as--as I am doing now, before a man.

AXEL. Even if I had compassion for you, I cannot call forth any
love. It has come to an end. It is dead.

BERTHA. I beg for a man's love, I, a woman, and he shoves me away
from him!

AXEL. Why not? _We_ should also have leave to say no for once,
although we are not always very hard to please.

BERTHA. A woman offers herself to a man and is refused!

AXEL. Feel now how millions have felt, when they have begged on
their knees for the mercy of being allowed to give what the other
accepts. Feel it for your whole sex, and then tell them how it
felt.

BERTHA [Rising]. Good night. The day after tomorrow, then.

AXEL. You still want the party tomorrow, then?

BERTHA. Yes, I want the party tomorrow.

AXEL. Good. The day after tomorrow, then.

[They go out, each their own way right and left.]

CURTAIN.


ACT IV.

[SCENE.--Same. But the glass doors leading to orchard are open. The
sun is still shining outside and the studio is brightly lighted.
The side doors are open. A serving table is seen out in the
orchard; on it are glasses and bottles, et cetera. Axel wears
cutaway, but without the decoration, and is wearing a standing
collar with four-in-hand scarf. His hair is brushed straight back.
Bertha wears a dark gown, cut square, with frilled fichu. She has a
flower on the left shoulder. The Misses Hall are extravagantly and
expensively dressed. Bertha enters from orchard. She is pale and
has dark shadows under her eyes. Abel enters from door at back.
They embrace and kiss each other.]

BERTHA. Good afternoon, and welcome.

ABEL. Good afternoon.

BERTHA. And Gaga promised to come?

ABEL. Absolutely certain. He was in a regretful spirit and begged
forgiveness. [Bertha straightens out her fichu.] But what is the
matter with you today? Has anything happened?

BERTHA. How so? What?

ABEL. You are not like yourself. Have you--? Bertha! Have you--

BERTHA. Don't talk.

ABEL. Your eyes are so full of color and brilliancy! What? Is is
possible--? And so pale? Bertha!

BERTHA. I must go out to my guests.

ABEL. Tell me, are Carl and Östermark here?

BERTHA. Both are out in the orchard.

ABEL. And Mrs. Hall and the girls?

BERTHA. Mrs. Hall will come litter, but the girls are in my room.

ABEL. I'm afraid that our scheme of revenge will fall as flat as a
pancake.

BERTHA. No, not this--not this one!

[Willmer enters with a bouquet of flowers. He goes to Bertha,
kisses her hand, and gives her the bouquet.]

WILLMER. Forgive me! For my love's sake!

BERTHA. No, not on that account, but--it doesn't matter. I don't
know why, but today I don't want any enemies.

[Axel comes in. Bertha and Willmer look distressed.]

AXEL [To Bertha, not noticing Willmer]. Pardon--if I disturb--

BERTHA. Not at all.

AXEL. I only wanted to ask if you had ordered the supper?

BERTHA. Yes, of course--as you wished.

AXEL. Very well. I only wanted to know. [Pause.]

ABEL. How festive you two look! [Bertha and Axel are silent.
Willmer breaks the embarrassment by starting for the orchard.]
Listen, Gaga--

[She hastens out after Willmer.]

AXEL. What have you ordered for the supper?

BERTHA [Looks at him and smiles]. Lobsters and poulet.

AXEL [Uncertain]. What are you smiling at?

BERTHA. My thoughts.

AXEL. What are you thinking then?

BERTHA. I am thinking--no, I really don't know--unless it was about
the betrothal supper we had together in the Gardens that spring
evening when you had wooed--

AXEL. You had wooed--

BERTHA. Axel!--And now it is the last, last time. It was a short
summer.

AXEL. Quite short, but the sun will come again.

BERTHA. Yes, for you who can find sunshine in every street.

AXEL. What is there to hinder you from seeking warmth at the same
fire?

BERTHA. And so we shall meet again, perhaps--some evening by street
light, you mean?

AXEL. I didn't mean that--but _à la bonne heure_! That at least
will be a free relation.

BERTHA. Yes, very free, especially for you.

AXEL. For you, too, but pleasanter for me.

BERTHA. That's a noble thought.

AXEL. Now, now--don't tear open the old wounds! We were talking
about the supper. And we must not forget our guests. So! [Goes
toward his room right.]

BERTHA. About the supper--yes, of course! That's what we were
talking about.

[She flies toward her room left, stirred and agitated. They both go
out. The scene is empty for a moment. Then the Misses Hall come in
from the orchard.]

MISS AMÉLIE. How very dull it is here!

MISS THÉRÈSE. Insufferably stupid, and our hosts are not altogether
polite.

MISS AMÉLIE. The hostess is especially unpleasant. And the
short-hair kind, too.

MISS THÉRÈSE. Yes, but I understand that a lieutenant is coming--

MISS AMÉLIE. Well, that's good, for these artists are a lot of free
traders. Hush, here is a diplomat surely.--He looks so distinguished.

[They sit on couch. Doctor Östermark comes in from the orchard; he
discovers the Misses Hall and looks at them through his pince-nez.]

DR. ÖSTERMARK. I am honored, ladies. H'm, one meets so many of
one's countrywomen here. Are you artists, too? You paint, I suppose?

MISS AMÉLIE. No, we don't paint.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Oh, but just a little, perhaps. Here in Paris all
ladies paint--themselves.

MISS THÉRÈSE. We don't have to.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Oh, well, you play then?

MISS AMÉLIE. Play?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Oh, I don't mean playing at cards. But all ladies
play a little.

MISS AMÉLIE. Evidently you are just from the country.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Yes, just from the country. Can I be of any slight
service to you?

MISS THÉRÈSE. Pardon, but we don't know with whom we have the honor--?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. You ladies have evidently just come from Stockholm.
In this country we can talk to each other without asking for
references.

MISS AMÉLIE. We haven't asked for references.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. What do you ask, then? To have your curiosity
satisfied? Well, I'm an old family physician and my name is
Anderson. Perhaps I may know your names now?--Character not needed.

MISS THÉRÈSE. We are the Misses Hall, if that can be of any
interest to the doctor.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Hall? H'm! I've surely heard that name before.
Pardon, pardon me a question, a somewhat countrified question--

MISS AMÉLIE.--Don't be bashful!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Is your father still living?

MISS AMÉLIE. No, he is dead.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Oh, yes. Well, now that I have gone so far, there is
nothing to do but continue. Mr. Hall was--

MISS THÉRÈSE. Our father was a director of the Fire Insurance
Company of Göteborg.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Oh, well, then I beg your pardon. Do you find Paris
to your liking?

MISS AMELIE. Very! Thérèse, do you remember what I did with my
shawl? Such a cold draught here! [Rises.]

MISS THÉRÈSE. You left it in the orchard, no doubt.

DR. ÖSTERMARK [Rising]. No, don't go out. Allow me to find it for
you--no--sit still--just sit still.

[Goes out into orchard. After a moment Mrs. Hall comes in from
left, quite comfortable with drink; her cheeks are flaming red and
her voice is uncertain.]

MISS AMÉLIE. Look, there's mother! And in that condition again!
Heavens, why does she come here? Why did you come here, mother?

MRS. HALL. Keep quiet! I have as much right here as you.

MISS THÉRÈSE. Why have you been drinking again? Think if some one
should come!

MRS. HALL. I haven't been drinking. What nonsense!

MISS AMÉLIE. We will be ruined if the doctor should come back and
see you. Come, let's go in here and you can get a glass of water.

MRS. HALL. It's nice of you to treat your mother like this and say
that she has been drinking, to say such a thing to your own mother!

MISS THÉRÈSE. Don't talk, but go in, immediately.

[They lead her in right. Axel and Carl come in from the orchard.]

CARL. Well, you're looking fine, my dear Axel, and you have a
manlier bearing than you used to have.

AXEL. Yes, I have emancipated myself.

CARL. You should have done that at the start, as I did.

AXEL. As you did?

CARL. As I did. Immediately I took my position as head of the
family, to which place I found myself called both because of my
superior mind and my natural abilities.

AXEL. And how did your wife like that?

CARL. Do you know, I forgot to ask her! But to judge by appearances,
I should say that she found things as they should be. They only
need real men--and human beings can be made even out of women.

AXEL. But at least the power should be divided?

CARL. Power cannot be divided! Either obey or command. Either you
or I. I preferred myself to her, and she had to adjust herself to
it.

AXEL. Yes, but didn't she have money?

CARL. Not at all. She didn't bring more than a silver soup-spoon to
our nest. But she demanded an accounting of it; and she got it. She
was a woman of principle, you see!--She is so good, so good, but so
am I good to her. I think it's really great sport to be married,
what? And besides, she's such a splendid cook!

[The Misses Hall come in from right.]

AXEL. Let me introduce you to the Misses Hall, Lieutenant Starck.

CARL. I am very happy to make your [Carl gives them a look of
recognition] acquaintance.

[The young ladies seem surprised and embarrassed; they nod and go
out to the orchard somewhat excited.]

CARL. How did they get in here?

AXEL. What do you mean? They are friends of my wife's and this is
the first time that they have been here. Do you know them?

CARL. Yes, somewhat!

AXEL. What do you mean to imply?

CARL. H'm, I met them in St. Petersburg late one night!

AXEL. Late one night?

CARL. Yes.

AXEL. Isn't there some mistake?

CARL. No-o! There is no mistake. They were very well known ladies
in St. Petersburg.

AXEL. And Bertha allows that kind in my house!

[Bertha comes rushing in from orchard.]

BERTHA. What does this mean? Have you insulted the young ladies?

AXEL. No--but--

BERTHA. They came out of here crying and declared that they
couldn't stay in the company of you gentlemen any longer! What has
happened?

AXEL. Do you know these young ladies?

BERTHA. They are my friends! Isn't that enough?

AXEL. Not quite enough.

BERTHA. Not quite? Well, but if--

[Dr. Östermark comes in from the orchard.]

DR. ÖSTERMARK. What does this mean? What have you done to the
little girls who ran away? I offered to help them with their wraps,
but they refused to be helped and had tears in their eyes.

CARL [To Bertha]. I must ask you, are they your friends?

BERTHA. Yes, they are! But if my protection is not sufficient, then
perhaps Doctor Östermark will take them under his wing, considering
that he has a certain claim to them.

CARL. But a mistake has been made here. You mean that I, who have
had certain relations with these girls, should appear as their
cavalier?

BERTHA. What sort of relations?

CARL. Chance, such as one has with such women!

BERTHA. Such women? That's a lie!

CARL. I'm not in the habit of lying.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. But I don't understand what _I_ have got to do with
these young ladies.

BERTHA. _You_ would prefer to have nothing to do with your deserted
children.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. My children! But I don't understand.

BERTHA. They are your two daughters--daughters of your divorced
wife.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Since you consider that you have the right to be
personal and make my affairs the subject of public discussion, I
will answer you publicly. You seem to have taken the trouble to
find out that I am not a widower. Good! My marriage, which was
childless, was dissolved twenty years ago. Since then I have
entered into another relation, and we have a child that is just
five years old. These grown girls, therefore, cannot be my
children. Now you know the whole matter.

BERTHA. But your wife--whom you threw out upon the world--

DR. ÖSTERMARK.--No, that wasn't the case either. She walked out, or
staggered, if you prefer it, and then she received half my income
until at last I found out that--enough said. If you could conceive
what it cost me of work and self-denial to support two establishments,
you would have spared me this unpleasant moment, but your kind
wouldn't consider anything like that. You needn't know any more, as
it really doesn't concern you.

BERTHA. But it would amuse me to know why your first wife left you.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. I don't think it would amuse you to know that she
was ugly, narrow, paltry, and that I was too good for her! Think
now, you tender-hearted, sensitive Bertha, think if they really had
been my daughters, these friends of yours and Carl's; imagine how
my old heart would have been gladdened to see, after eighteen
years, these children that I had borne in my arms during the long
night of illness. And imagine if she, my first love, my wife, with
whom life the first time became life, had accepted your invitation
and come here? What a fifth act in the melodrama you wished to
offer us, what a noble revenge on one who is guiltless! Thanks,
old friend. Thank you for your reward for the friendship I have
shown you.

BERTHA. Reward! Yes, I know that I owe you--a fee. [Axel, Carl and
the doctor make protestations of "Oh," "Now," "Really," et cetera.]
I know that, I know it very well.

[Axel, Carl and doctor say "No," "Fie," "This is going too far."]

DR. ÖSTERMARK. No, but I'm going to get out of here. Horrors! Yes,
you are the right sort! Pardon me, Axel, but I can't help it!

BERTHA [To Axel]. You're a fine man, to allow your wife to be
insulted!

AXEL. I can understand neither your allowing yourself to insult, or
to be insulted! [Music is heard from the orchard; guitar and an
Italian song.] The singers have arrived; perhaps you would all like
to step out and have a bit of harmony on top of all this.

[They all go out except the doctor, who goes over to look at some
drawings on wall right near door to Axel's room. The music outside
is played softly. Mrs. Hall comes in and walks unsteadily across
the scene and sits in a chair. The doctor, who does not recognize
her, bows deeply.]

MRS. HALL. What music is that out there?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. They are some Italians, dear lady.

MRS. HALL. Yes? No doubt the ones I heard at Monte Carlo.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Oh, perhaps there are other Italians.

MRS. HALL. Well, I believe it's none other than Östermark! No one
could be as quick as he in his retorts.

DR. ÖSTERMARK [Stares at her]. Ah--think--there are things--that--
are less dreadful than dread! It is you, Carolina! And this is the
moment that for eighteen years I have been running away from,
dreamed about, sought, feared, wished for; wished for that I might
receive the shock and afterward have nothing to dread! [He takes
out a vial and wets his upper lip with a few drops.] Don't be
afraid; it's not poison, in such little doses. It's for the heart,
you see.

MRS. HALL. Ugh, your heart! Yes, you have so much!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. It's strange that two people cannot meet once every
eighteen years without quarreling.

MRS. HALL. It was always you who quarreled!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Alone? What!--Shall we stop now?--I must try to look
at you. [He takes a chair and sits down opposite Mrs. Hall.]
Without trembling!

MRS. HALL. I've become old!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. That's what happens; one has read about it, seen it,
felt it one's self, but nevertheless it is horrifying. I am old,
too.

MRS. HALL. Are you happy in your new life?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. To tell the truth, it's one and the same thing;
different, but quite the same.

MRS. HALL. Perhaps the old life was better, then?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. No, it wasn't better, as it was about the same,
but it's a question if it wouldn't have seemed better now, just
because it was the old life. One doesn't blossom but once, and then
one goes to seed; what comes afterward is only a little aftermath.
And you, how are you getting along?

MRS. HALL [Offended]. What do you mean?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Don't misunderstand me. Are you contented with--
your--lot? I mean--oh, that it should be so difficult to make one's
self understood by women!

MRS. HALL. Contented? H'm!

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Well, you were never contented. But when one is
young, one always demands the first class, and then one gets the
third class when one is old. Now, I understand that you told Mrs.
Alberg here that your girls are my children!

MRS. HALL. I did? That is a lie.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Still untruthful, eh? In the old days, when I was
foolish, I looked upon lying as a vice; but now I know it to be a
natural defect. You actually believe in your lies, and that is
dangerous. But never mind about that now. Are you leaving, or do
you wish me to leave?

MRS. HALL [Rising]. I will go.

[She falls back into the chair and gropes about.]

DR. ÖSTERMARK. What, drunk too?--I really pity you. Oh, this is
most unpleasant! Dear me, I believe I'm ready to cry!--Carolina!
No, I can't bear this!

MRS. HALL. I am ill.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Yes, that's what happens when one drinks too much.
But this is more bitter than I ever thought it could be. I have
killed little unborn children to be able to save the mother, and I
have felt them tremble in their fight against death. I have cut
living muscles, and have seen the marrow flow like butter from
healthy bones, but never has anything hurt me so much as this since
the day you left me. Then it was as if you had gone away with one
of my lungs, so I could only gasp with the other!--Oh, I feel as if
I were suffocating now!

MRS. HALL. Help me out of here. It's too noisy. I don't know why we
came here, anyway. Give me your hand.

DR. ÖSTERMARK [Leading her to door]. Before it was I who asked for
your hand; and it rested so heavily on me, the little delicate
hand! Once it struck my face, the little delicate hand, but I
kissed it nevertheless.--Oh, now it is withered, and will never
strike again.--Ah, dolce Napoli! Joy of life, what became of it?
You who were the bride of my youth!

MRS. HALL [In the hall door]. Where is my wrap?

DR. ÖSTERMARK [Closing door]. In the hall, probably. This is
horrible! [Lights a cigar]. Oh, dolce Napoli! I wonder if it is as
delightful as it's said to be in that cholera breeding fishing
harbor. _Blague_, no doubt! _Blague! Blague_! Naples--bridal
couples, love, joy of life, antiquities, modernity, liberalism,
conservatism, idealism, realism, naturalism,--_blague, blague_, the
whole thing!

[Axel, Abel, Willmer, Mrs. Starck and Bertha come in from orchard.]

MRS. STARCK. What is happening to the doctor?

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Pardon, it was only a little _qui pro quo_. Two
strangers sneaked in here and we had to identify them.

MRS. STARCK. The girls?

CARL. Well, that has nothing to do with you. I don't know why, but
I seem to feel "the enemy in the air."

MRS. STARCK. Ah, you're always seeing the enemy, you dear Carl.

CARL. No, I don't see them, but I feel them.

MRS. STARCK. Well, come to your friend, then, and she will defend
you.

CARL. Oh, you're always so good to me.

MRS. STARCK. Why shouldn't I be, when you are so good to me?

[The door at back is opened and the maid and two men come in
carrying a picture.]

AXEL. What's this?

MAID. The porter said that it must be carried into the studio, as
he didn't have any room for it.

AXEL. What foolishness is this? Take it out.

MAID. The mistress sent for the picture herself.

BERTHA. That's not true. For that matter, it's not my picture,
anyway. It's your master's. Put it down there. [The maid and the
man go out.] Perhaps it isn't yours, Axel? let's see. [Axel places
himself in front of picture.] Move a little so we can see.

AXEL [Gives way]. It's a mistake.

BERTHA [Shrieks]. What! What is this! It's a mistake! What does it
mean? It's my picture, but it's Axel's number! Oh!

[She falls in a faint. The doctor and Carl carry her into her room
left, the women follow.]

ABEL. She is dying!

MRS. STARCK. Heaven help us, what is this! The poor little dear!
Doctor Östermark, do something, say something--and Axel stands
there crestfallen.

[Axel and Willmer are alone.]

AXEL. This is your doing.

WILLMER. My doing?

[Axel takes him by the ear.]

AXEL. Yes, yours, but not altogether. But I am going to give you
your share. [He leads hunt to the door, which he opens with one
foot, and kicks out Willmer with the other.] Out with you!

WILLMER. I'll get even for this!

AXEL. I shall be waiting for it!

[Doctor and Carl come in.]

DR. ÖSTERMARK. What's the trouble with the picture, anyway?

AXEL. Nothing--only that it seemed to represent sulphuric acid.

CARL. Now tell us, are you refused, or is she?

AXEL. I am refused on her picture. I wanted to help her a bit, as a
good comrade, and that's why I changed the numbers.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. Yes, but there is something else too. She says that
you don't love her any more.

AXEL. She is right in that. That's how it is, and tomorrow we part.

DR. ÖSTERMARK and CARL. Part?

AXEL. Yes, when there are no ties to bind things, they loosen of
themselves. This wasn't a marriage; it was only living together, or
something even worse.

DR. ÖSTERMARK. There is bad air here. Come, let's go.

AXEL. Yes, I want to get out--out of here. [They start for the
door. Abel comes in.]

ABEL. What, are you leaving?

AXEL. Does that astonish you?

ABEL. Let me have a word with you.

AXEL. Go on.

ABEL. Don't you want to go in and see Bertha?

AXEL. No!

ABEL. What have you done to her?

AXEL. I have bent her.

ABEL. I noticed that--she is black and blue around the wrists! Look
at me! I didn't think that of you. Well, conqueror, triumph now!

AXEL. It's an uncertain conquest, and I don't even wish for it.

ABEL. Are you sure of that? [She leans over to Axel, in low voice.]
Bertha loves you now--now that you have bent her.

AXEL. I know it. But I don't love her any longer.

ABEL. Won't you go in and see her?

AXEL. No, it's all over. [Takes doctor's arm.] Come!

ABEL. May I take a message to Bertha?

AXEL. No! Yes! Tell her, that I despise and abhor her.

ABEL. Good-bye, my friend.

AXEL. Good-bye, my enemy.

ABEL. Enemy?

AXEL. Are you my friend?

ABEL. I don't know. Both and neither. I am a bastard--

AXEL. We are all that, as we are crocheted out of man and woman!
Perhaps you have loved me in your way, as you wanted to separate
Bertha and me.

ABEL [Rolling a cigarette]. Loved! I wonder how it seems to love?
No, I cannot love; I must be deformed--for it made me happy to see
you two until the envy of deformity set me on fire. Perhaps you
love me?

AXEL. No, on my honor! You have been an agreeable comrade who
happened to be dressed like a woman; you have never impressed me as
belonging to another sex; and love, you see, can and should exist
only between individuals of opposite sexes--

ABEL. Sex love, yes!

AXEL. Is there any other, then?

ABEL. I don't know! But I am to be pitied. And this hate, this
terrible hate! Perhaps that would disappear if you men were not so
afraid to love us, if you were not so--how shall I express it--so
moral, as it's called.

AXEL. But in heaven's name, be a little more lovable, then, and
don't get yourselves up so that one is forced to think of the penal
law whenever one looks at you.

ABEL. Do you think I'm such a fright, then?

AXEL. Well, you know, you must pardon me, but you are awful.
[Bertha comes in.]

BERTHA [To Axel]. Are you going?

AXEL. Yes, I was just about to go, but now I'll stay.

BERTHA [Softly]. What? You--

AXEL. I shall stay in _my_ home.

BERTHA. In _our_--home.

AXEL. No, in _mine_. In my studio with my furniture.

BERTHA. And I?

AXEL. You may do what you please, but you must know what you risk.
You see in my suit I have applied for one year's separation in bed
and board. Should you stay, that is to say, if you should seek me
during this time, you would have to choose between imprisonment, or
being considered my mistress. Do you feel like staying?

BERTHA. Oh, is that the law?

AXEL. That's the law.

BERTHA. You drive me out, then?

AXEL. No, but the law does.

BERTHA. And you think I'll be satisfied with that?

AXEL. No, I don't, for you won't be satisfied until you have taken
all the life out of me.

BERTHA. Axel! How you talk! If you knew how I--love you!

AXEL. That doesn't sound irrational, but I don't love you.

BERTHA [Flaring up and pointing to Abel]. Because you love her!

AXEL. No, indeed, I don't. Have never loved her, and never will.
What incredible imagining! As if there were not other women and
more fascinating than you two!

BERTHA. But Abel loves you!

AXEL. That is possible. I even believe that she suggested something
of the kind. Yes, she said so distinctly; let's see, how was it--

BERTHA [Changing]. You are really the most shameless creature I
have ever met!

AXEL. Yes, I can well believe that.

BERTHA [Puts on her hat and wrap]. Now you expect to put me out on
the street? That is final?

AXEL. On the street, or where you please.

BERTHA [Angry]. Do you think a woman will allow herself to be
treated like this?

AXEL. Once you asked me to forget that you were a woman. Very well,
I have forgotten it.

BERTHA. But do you know that you have liabilities to the one who
has been your wife?

AXEL. You mean the pay for good comradeship? What? A life annuity!

BERTHA. Yes.

AXEL [Putting a few bills on the table]. Here is a month in
advance.

BERTHA [Takes money and counts it]. You still have a little honor
left!

ABEL. Good-bye, Bertha. Now I am off.

BERTHA. Wait and you can go along with me.

ABEL. No, I won't go any further with you.

BERTHA. What? Why not?

ABEL. I am ashamed to.

BERTHA [Astonished]. Ashamed?

ABEL. Yes, ashamed. Good-bye. [Abel goes out.]

BERTHA. I don't understand. Good-bye, Axel! Thanks for the money.
Are we friends? [Taking his hand.]

AXEL. I am not, at least.--Let go of my hand, or I will believe
that you wish to seduce me again. [Bertha goes toward door.]

AXEL [With a sigh of relief]. Pleasant comrades! Oh!

[The maid enters from the orchard.]

MAID [To Axel]. There is it lady waiting for you.

AXEL. I'll soon be free.

BERTHA. Is that the new comrade?

AXEL. No, not comrade, but sweetheart.

BERTHA. And your wife to be?

AXEL, Perhaps. Because I want to meet, my comrades at the café, but
at home I want a wife. [Starts as if to go.] Pardon me!

BERTHA. Farewell, then! Are we never to meet again?

AXEL. Yes, of course! But at the café. Good-bye!

CURTAIN.




CHARACTERS

MONSIEUR DURAND, a pension proprietor, formerly connected with the
state railroad
ADÈLE, his daughter, twenty-seven
ANNETTE, his daughter, twenty-four
THÉRÈSE, his daughter, twenty-four
ANTONIO, a lieutenant in an Italian cavalry regiment in French
Switzerland in the eighties
PIERRE, an errand boy

FACING DEATH

[SCENE--A dining-room with a long table. Through the open door is
seen, over the tops of churchyard cypress trees, Lake Leman, with
the Savoy Alps and the French bathing-resort Evian. To left is a
door to the kitchen. To right a door to inner rooms. Monsieur
Durand stands in doorway looking over the lake with a pair of field
glasses.]

ADÈLE [Comes in from kitchen wearing apron and turned-up sleeves.
She carries a tray with coffee things]. Haven't you been for the
coffee-bread, father?

DURAND. No, I sent Pierre. My chest has been bad for the last few
drays, and it affects me to walk the steep hill.

ADÈLE. Pierre again, eh? That costs three sous. Where are they to
come from, with only one tourist in the house for over two months?

DURAND. That's true enough, but it seems to me Annette might get
the bread.

ADÈLE. That would ruin the credit of the house entirely, but you
have never done anything else.

DURAND. Even you, Adèle?

ADÈLE. Even I am tired, though I have held out longest!

DURAND. Yes, you have, and you were still human when Thérèse and
Annette cautioned me. You and I have pulled this house through
since mother died. You have had to sit in the kitchen like
Cinderella; I have had to take care of the service, the fires,
sweep and clean, and do the errands. You are tired; how should it
be with me, then?

ADÈLE. But you mustn't be tired. You have three daughters who are
unprovided for and whose dowry you have wasted.

DURAND [Listening without]. Doesn't it seem as if you heard the
sound of clanging and rumbling down toward Cully? If fire has
broken out they are lost, because the wind is going to blow soon,
the lake tells me that.

ADÈLE. Have you paid the fire insurance on our house?

DURAND. Yes, I have. Otherwise I would never have got that last
mortgage.

ADÈLE. How much is there left unmortgaged?

DURAND. A fifth of the fire insurance policy. But you know how
property dropped in value when the railroad passed our gates and
went to the east instead.

ADÈLE. So much the better.

DURAND [Sternly]. Adèle! [Pause.] Will you put out the fire in the
stove?

ADÈLE. Impossible. I can't till the coffee-bread comes.

DURAND. Well, here it is.

[Pierre comes in with basket. Adèle looks in the basket.]

ADÈLE. No bread! But a bill--two, three--

PIERRE.--Well, the baker said he wouldn't send any more bread until
he was paid. And then, when I was going by the butcher's and the
grocer's, they shoved these bills at me. [Goes out.]

ADÈLE. Oh, God in heaven, this is the end for us! But what's this?
[Opens a package.]

DURAND. Some candles that I bought for the mass for my dear little
Rèné. Today is the anniversary of his death.

ADÈLE. You can afford to buy such things!

DURAND. With my tips, yes. Don't you think it is humiliating to
stretch out my hand whenever a traveller leaves us? Can't you grant
me the only contentment I possess--let me enjoy my sorrow one time
each year? To be able to live in memory of the most beautiful thing
life ever gave me?

ADÈLE. If he had only lived until mow, you'd see how beautiful he'd
be!

DURAND. It's very possible that there's truth in your irony--as I
remember him, however, he was not as you all are now.

ADÈLE. Will you be good enough to receive Monsieur Antonio
yourself? He is coming now to have his coffee _without_ bread! Oh,
if mother were only living! She always found a way when you stood
helpless.

DURAND. Your mother had her good qualities.

ADÈLE. Although you saw only her faults.

DURAND. Monsieur Antonio is coming. If you leave me now, I'll have
a talk with him.

ADÈLE. You would do better to go out and borrow some money, so that
the scandal would be averted.

DURAND. I can't borrow a sou. After borrowing for ten years! Let
everything crash at once, everything, everything, if it would only
be the end!

ADÈLE. The end for you, yes. But you never think of us!

DURAND. No, I have never thought of you, never!

ADÈLE. Do you begrudge us our bringing-up?

DURAND. I am only answering an unjust reproach. Go now, and I'll
meet the storm--as usual.

ADÈLE. As usual--h'm!

[Goes. Antonio comes in from back.]

ANTONIO. Good morning, Monsieur Durand.

DURAND. Monsieur Lieutenant has already been out for a walk?

ANTONIO. Yes, I've been down toward Cully and saw them put out a
chimney fire. Now, some coffee will taste particularly good.

DURAND. It's needless to say how it pains me to have to tell you
that on account of insufficient supplies our house can no longer
continue to do business.

ANTONIO. How is that?

DURAND. To speak plainly, we are bankrupt.

ANTONIO. But, my good Monsieur Durand, is there no way of helping
you out of what I hope is just a temporary embarrassment?

DURAND. No, there is no possible way out. The condition of the
house has been so completely undermined for many years that I had
rather the crash would come than live in a state of anxiety day and
night, expecting what must come.

ANTONIO. Nevertheless I believe you are looking at the dark side of
things.

DURAND. I can't see what makes you doubt my statement.

ANTONIO. Because I want to help you.

DURAND. I don't wish any help. Privation must come and teach my
children to lead a different life from this which is all play. With
the exception of Adèle, who really does take care of the kitchen,
what do the others do? Play, and sing, and promenade, and flirt;
and as long as there is a crust of bread in the house, they'll
never do anything useful.

ANTONIO. Granting that, but until the finances are straightened out
we must have bread in the house. Allow me to stay a month longer
and I will pay my bill in advance.

DURAND. No, thank you, we must stick to this course even if it
leads us into the lake! And I don't want to continue in this
business, which doesn't bring bread--nothing but humiliations. Just
think how it was last spring, when the house had been empty for
three months. Then at last an American family came and saved us.
The morning after their arrival I ran across the son catching hold
of my daughter on the stairs. It was Thérèse,--he was trying to
kiss her. What would you have done in my case?

ANTONIO [Confused]. I don't know--

DURAND. I know what I, as a father, should have done, but--
father-like--I didn't do it. But I know what to do the next time.

ANTONIO. On account of that very thing it seems to me that you
should think very carefully about what you do, and not leave your
daughters to chance.

DURAND. Monsieur Antonio, you are a young man who, for some
inexplicable reason, has won my regard. Whether you grant it, or
not, I am going to ask one thing of you. Don't form any opinions
about me as an individual, or about my conduct.

ANTONIO. Monsieur Durand, I promise it if you will answer me one
question; are you Swiss born, or not?

DURAND. I am a Swiss citizen.

ANTONIO. Yes, I know that, but I ask if you were born in Switzerland.

DURAND [Uncertainly]. Yes.

ANTONIO. I asked only--because it interested me. Nevertheless--as I
must believe you that your pension must be closed, I want to pay
what I owe. To be sure it's only ten francs, but I can't go away
and leave an unpaid bill.

DURAND. I can't be sure that this is really a debt, as I don't keep
the accounts, but if you have deceived me you shall hear from me.
Now I'll go and get the bread. Afterward we'll find out.

[Goes out. Antonio alone. Afterward Thérèse comes in, carrying a
rat-trap. She wears a morning negligée and her hair is down.]

THÉRÈSE. Oh, there you are, Antonio! I thought I heard the old man.

ANTONIO. Yes, he went to get the coffee-bread, he said.

THÉRÈSE. Hadn't he done that already? No, do you know, we can't
stand him any longer.

ANTONIO. How beautiful you are today, Thérèse! But that rat-trap
isn't becoming.

THÉRÈSE. And such a trap into the bargain! I have set it for a
whole month, but never, never get a live one, although the bait is
eaten every morning. Have you seen Mimi around?

ANTONIO. That damned cat? It's usually around early and late, but
today I've been spared it.

THÉRÈSE. You must speak beautifully about the absent, and remember,
he who loves me, loves my cat. [She puts rat-trap on table and
picks up an empty saucer from under table.] Adèle, Adèle!

ADÈLE [In the kitchen door]. What does Her Highness demand so
loudly?

THÉRÈSE. Her Highness demands milk for her cat and a piece of
cheese for your rats.

ADÈLE. Go get them yourself.

THÉRÈSE. Is that the way to answer Her Highness?

ADÈLE. The answer fits such talk. And besides, you deserve it for
showing yourself before a stranger with your hair not combed.

THÉRÈSE. Aren't we all old friends here, and--Antonio, go and speak
nicely to Aunt Adele, and then you'll get some milk for Mimi.
[Antonio hesitates.] Well, aren't you going to mind?

ANTONIO [Sharply]. No.

THÉRÈSE. What kind of a way to speak is that? Do you want a taste
of my riding whip?

ANTONIO. Impudence!

THÉRÈSE. [Amazed]. What's that? What's that? Are you trying to
remind me of my position, my debt, my weakness?

ANTONIO. No, I only want to remind you of my position, my debt, my
weakness.

ADÈLE [Getting the saucer]. Now listen, good friends. What's all
this foolishness for? Be friends--and then I'll give you some very
nice coffee. [Goes into the kitchen.]

THÉRÈSE [Crying]. You are tired of me, Antonio, and you are
thinking of giving me up.

ANTONIO. You mustn't cry, it will make your eyes so ugly.

THÉRÈSE. Oh, if they are not as beautiful as Annette's--

ANTONIO.--So, it's Annette now? But now look here; all fooling
aside, isn't it about time we had our coffee?

THÉRÈSE. You'd make a charming married man--not able to wait a
moment for your coffee.

ANTONIO. And what a lovable married lady you would be, who growls
at her husband because she has made a blunder.

[Annette comes in fully dressed and hair done up.]

ANNETTE. You seem to be quarreling this morning.

ANTONIO. See, there's Annette, and dressed already.

THÉRÈSE. Yes, Annette is so extraordinary in every respect, and she
also has the prerogative of being older than I am.

ANNETTE. If you don't hold your tongue--

ANTONIO.--Oh, now, now, be good, now, Thérèse!

[He puts his arm around her and kisses her. Monsieur Durand appears
in the doorway as he does so.]

DURAND [Astonished]. What's this?

THÉRÈSE [Freeing herself]. What?

DURAND. Did my eyes see right?

THÉRÈSE. What did you see?

DURAND. I saw that you allowed a strange gentleman to kiss you.

THÉRÈSE. That's a lie!

DURAND. Have I lost my sight, or do you dare lie to my face?

THÉRÈSE. Is it for you to talk about lying, you who lie to us and
the whole world by saying that you were born a Swiss although you
are a Frenchman?

DURAND. Who said that?

THÉRÈSE. Mother said so.

DURAND [To Antonio]. Monsieur Lieutenant, as our account is
settled, I'll ask you to leave this house immediately, or else--

ANTONIO. Or else?

DURAND. Choose your weapon.

ANTONIO. I wonder what sort of defense you would put up other than
the hare's!

DURAND. If I didn't prefer my stick, I should take the gun that I
used in the last war.

THÉRÈSE. You have surely been at war--you who deserted!

DURAND. Mother said that, too. I can't fight the dead, but I can
fight the living.

[Lifts his walking-stick and goes toward Antonio. Thérèse and
Annette throw themselves between the men.]

ANNETTE. Think what you are doing!

THÉRÈSE. This will end on the scaffold!

ANTONIO [Backing away]. Good-bye, Monsieur Durand. Keep my
contempt--and my ten francs.

DURAND [Takes a gold piece from his vest pocket and throws it
toward Antonio]. My curses follow your gold, scamp!

[Thérèse and Annette following Antonio.]

THÉRÈSE and ANNETTE. Don't go, don't leave us! Father will kill us!

DURAND [Breaks his stick in two]. He who cannot kill must die.

ANTONIO. Good-bye, and I hope you'll miss the last rat from your
sinking ship. [He goes.]

THÉRÈSE [To Durand]. That's the way you treat your guests! Is it
any wonder the house has gone to pieces!

DURAND. Yes--that's the way--such guests! But tell me, Thérèse, my
child--[Takes her head between his hands] tell me, my beloved
child, tell me if I saw wrong just now, or if you told a falsehood.

THÉRÈSE [Peevishly]. What?

DURAND. You know what I mean. It isn't the thing itself, which can
be quite innocent--but it is a matter of whether I can trust my
senses that interests me.

THÉRÈSE. Oh, talk about something else.--Tell us rather what we are
going to eat and drink today. For that matter, it's a lie; he
didn't kiss me.

DURAND. It isn't a lie. In Heaven's name, didn't I see it happen?

THÉRÈSE. Prove it.

DURAND. Prove it? With two witnesses or--a policeman! [To Annette.]
Annette, my child, will you tell me the truth?

ANNETTE. I didn't see anything.

DURAND. That's a proper answer. For one should never accuse one's
sister. How like your mother you are today, Annette!

ANNETTE. Don't you say anything about mother! She should be living
such a day as this!

[Adèle comes in with a glass of milk, which she puts on table.]

ADÈLE [To Durand]. There's your milk. What happened to the bread?

DURAND. Nothing, my children. It will continue to come as it always
has up to the present.

THÉRÈSE [Grabs the glass of milk from her father]. You shall not
have anything, you who throw away money, so that your children are
compelled to starve.

ADÈLE. Did he throw away money, the wretch? He should have been put
in the lunatic asylum the time mother said he was ripe for it. See,
here's another bill that came by way of the kitchen.

[Durand takes the bill and starts as he looks at it. Pours a glass
of water and drinks. Sits down and lights his briar pipe.]

ANNETTE. But he can afford to smoke tobacco.

DURAND [Tired and submissively]. Dear children, this tobacco didn't
cost me any more than that water, for it was given to me six months
ago. Don't vex yourselves needlessly.

THÉRÈSE [Takes matches away]. Well, at least you sha'n't waste the
matches.

DURAND. If you knew, Thérèse, how many matches I have wasted on you
when I used to get up nights to see if you had thrown off the
bedclothes! If you knew, Annette, how many times I have secretly
given you water when you cried from thirst, because your mother
believed that it was harmful for children to drink!

THÉRÈSE. Well, all that was so long ago that I can't bother about
it. For that matter, it was only your duty, as you have said
yourself.

DURAND. It was, and I fulfilled my duty and a little more too.

ADÈLE. Well, continue to do so, or no one knows what will become of
us. Three young girls left homeless and friendless, without
anything to live on! Do you know what want can drive one to?

DURAND. That's what I said ten years ago, but no one would heed me;
and twenty years ago I predicted that this moment would come, and I
haven't been able to prevent its coming. I have been sitting like a
lone brakeman on an express train, seeing it go toward an abyss,
but I haven't, been able to get to the engine valves to stop it.

THÉRÈSE. And now you want thanks for landing in the abyss with us.

DURAND. No, my child, I only ask that you be a little less unkind
to me. You have cream fur the cat, but you begrudge milk to your
father, who has not eaten for--so long.

THÉRÈSE. Oh, it's you, then, who has begrudged milk for my cat!

DURAND. Yes, it's I.

ANNETTE. And perhaps it is he who has eaten the rats' bait, too.

DURAND. It is he.

ADÈLE. Such a pig!

THÉRÈSE [Laughing]. Think if it had been poisoned!

DURAND. Alas, if only it had been, you mean!

THÉRÈSE. Yes, you surely wouldn't have minded that, you who have so
often talked about shooting yourself--but have never done it!

DURAND. Why didn't you shoot me? That's a direct reproach. Do you
know why I haven't done it? To keep you from going into the lake,
my dear children.--Say something else unkind now. It's like hearing
music--tunes that I recognize--from the good old times--

ADÈLE. Stop such useless talk now and do something. Do something.

THÉRÈSE. Do you know what the consequences may be if you leave us
in this shape?

DURAND. You will go and prostitute yourselves. That's what your
mother always said she'd do when she had spent the housekeeping
money on lottery tickets.

ADÈLE. Silence! Not a word about our dear, beloved mother!

DURAND [Half humming to himself].
    In this house a candle burns,
    When it burns out the goal he earns,
    The goal once won, the storm will come
   With a great crash. Yes! No!
[It has begun to blow outside and grown cloudy. Durand rises
quickly and says to Adèle] Put out the fire in the stove. The wind
storm is coming.

ADÈLE [Looking Durand in the eyes]. No, the wind is not coming.

DURAND. Put out the fire. If it catches fire here, we'll get
nothing from the insurance. Put out the fire, I say, put it out.

ADÈLE. I don't understand you.

DURAND [Looks in her eyes, taking her hand]. Just obey me, do as I
say. [Adèle goes into kitchen, leaving the door open. To Thérèse
and Annette.] Go up and shut the windows, children, and look after
the draughts. But come and give me a kiss first, for I am going
away to get money for you.

THÉRÈSE. Can you get money?

DURAND. I have a life insurance that I think I am going to realize
on.

THÉRÈSE. How much can yon get for it?

DURAND. Six hundred francs if I sell it, and five thousand if I
die. [Thérèse concerned.] Now, tell me, my child,--we mustn't be
needlessly cruel,--tell me, Thérèse, are you so attached to Antonio
that you would be quite unhappy if you didn't get him?

THÉRÈSE. Oh, yes!

DURAND. Then you must marry him if he really loves you. But you
mustn't be unkind to him, for then you'll be unhappy. Good-bye, my
dear beloved child. [Takes her in his arms and kisses her cheeks.]

THÉRÈSE. But you mustn't die, father, you mustn't.

DURAND. Would you grudge me going to my peace?

THÉRÈSE. No, not if you wish it yourself. Forgive me, father, the
many, many times I've been unkind to you.

DURAND. Nonsense, my child.

THÉRÈSE. But no one was so unkind to you as I.

DURAND. I felt it less because I loved you most. Why, I don't know.
But run and shut the windows.

THÉRÈSE. Here are your matches, papa--and there's your milk.

DURAND [Smiling]. Ah, you child!

THÉRÈSE. Well, what can I do? I haven't anything else to give you.

DURAND. You gave me so much joy as a child that you owe me nothing.
Go now, and just give me a loving look as you used to do. [Thérèse
turns and throws herself into his arms.] So, so, my child, now all
is well. [Thérèse runs out.] Farewell, Annette.

ANNETTE. Are you going away? I don't understand all this.

DURAND. Yes, I'm going.

ANNETTE. But of course you're coming back, papa.

DURAND. Who knows whether he will live through the morrow? Anyway,
we'll say farewell.

ANNETTE. Adieu, then, father--and a good journey to you. And you
won't forget to bring something home to us just as you used to do,
will you?

DURAND. And you remember that, though it's so long since I've
bought anything for you children? Adieu, Annette.
[Annette goes. Durand hums to himself.]
    Through good and evil, great and small,
    Where you have sown, others gather all.
[Adèle comes in.] Adèle, come, now you shall hear and understand.
If I speak in veiled terms, it is only to spare your conscience in
having you know too much. Be quiet. I've got the children up in
their rooms. First you are to ask me this question, "Have you a
life insurance policy?" Well?

ADÈLE [Questioningly and uncertain]. "Have you a life insurance
policy?"

DURAND. No, I had one, but I sold it long ago, because I thought I
noticed that some one became irritable when it was due. But I have
a fire insurance. Here are the papers. Hide them well. Now, I'm
going to ask you something; do you know how many candles there are
in a pound, mass candles at seventy-five centimes?

ADÈLE. There are six.

DURAND [Indicating the package of candles]. How many candles are
there there?

ADÈLE. Only five.

DURAND. Because the sixth is placed very high up and very near--

ADÈLE.--Good Lord!

DURAND [Looking at his watch]. In five minutes or so, it will be
burned out.

ADÈLE. No!

DURAND. Yes! Can you see dawn any other way in this darkness?

ADÈLE. No.

DURAND. Well, then. That takes care of the business. Now about
another matter. If Monsieur Durand passes out of the world as an
[Whispers] incendiary, it doesn't matter much, but his children
shall know that he lived as a man of honor up to that time. Well,
then, I was born in France, but I didn't have to admit that to the
first scamp that came along. Just before I reached the age of
conscription I fell in love with the one who later became my wife.
To be able to marry, we came here and were naturalized. When the
last war broke out, and it looked as if I was going to carry a
weapon against my own country, I went out as a sharpshooter against
the Germans. I never deserted, as you have heard that I did--your
mother invented that story.

ADÈLE. Mother never lied--

DURAND.--So, so. Now the ghost has risen and stands between us
again. I cannot enter an action against the dead, but I swear I am
speaking the truth. Do you hear? And as far as your dowry is
concerned, that is to say your maternal inheritance, these are the
facts: first, your mother through carelessness and foolish
speculations ruined your paternal inheritance so completely that I
had to give up my business and start this pension. After that, part
of her inheritance had to be used in the bringing-up of you
children, which of course cannot be looked upon as thrown away. So
it was also untrue that--

ADÈLE. No, that's not what mother said on her death-bed--

DURAND.--Then your mother lied on her death-bed, just as she had
done all through her life. And that's the curse that has been
following me like a spook. Think how you have innocently tortured
me with these two lies for so many years! I didn't want to put
disquiet into your young lives which would result in your doubting
your mother's goodness. That's why I kept silent. I was the bearer
of her cross throughout our married life; carried all her faults on
my back, took all the consequences of her mistakes on myself until
at last I believed that I was the guilty one. And she was not slow,
first to believe herself to be blameless, and then later the
victim. "Blame it on me," I used to say, when she had become
terribly involved in some tangle. And she blamed and I bore! But
the more she became indebted to me, the more she hated me, with the
limitless hatred of her indebtedness. And in the end she despised
me, trying to strengthen herself by imagining she had deceived me.
And last of all she taught you children to despise me, because she
wanted support in her weakness. I hoped and believed that this evil
but weak spirit would die when she died; but evil lives and grows
like disease, while soundness stops at a certain point and then
retrogrades. And when I wanted to change what was wrong in the
habits of this household, I was always met with "But mother said,"
and therefore it was true; "Mother used to do this way," and
therefore it was right. And to you I became a good-for-nothing when
I was kind, a miserable creature when I was sensitive, and a scamp
when I let you all have your way and ruin the house.

ADÈLE. It's honorable to accuse the dead who can't defend
themselves!

DURAND [Fast and exalted]. I am not dead yet, but I will be soon.
Will you defend me then? No, you need not. But defend your sisters.
Think only of my children, Adèle. Take a motherly care of Thérèse;
she is the youngest and liveliest, quick for good and bad,
thoughtless but weak. See to it that she marries soon, if it can be
arranged. Now, I can smell burning straw.

ADELE. Lord protect us!

DURAND [Drinks from glass]. He will. And for Annette you must try
to find a place as teacher, so that she can get up in the world and
into good company. You must manage the money when it falls due.
Don't be close, but fix up your sisters so that they will be
presentable to the right kind of people. Don't save anything but
the family papers, which are in the top drawer of my chiffonier in
the middle room. Here is the key. The fire insurance papers you
have. [Smoke is seen forcing its way through the ceiling.] It will
soon be accomplished now. In a moment you will hear the clanging
from St. François. Promise me one thing. Never divulge this to your
sisters. It would only disturb their peace for the rest of their
lives. [He sits by table.] And one thing more, never a hard word
against their mother. Her portrait is also in the chiffonier; none
of you knew that, because I found it was enough that her spirit
walked unseen in the home. Greet Thérèse, and ask her to forgive
me. Don't forget that she must have the best when you buy her
clothes; you know her weakness for such things and to what her
weakness can bring her. Tell Annette--

[A distant clanging of bells is heard; the smoke increases.
Monsieur Durand drops his head in his hands on the table.]

ADÈLE. It's burning, it's burning! Father, what's the matter with
you? You'll be burned up! [Durand lifts his head, takes the water
glass up and puts it down with a meaningful gesture.] You have--
taken--poison!

DURAND [Nods affirmatively]. Have you the insurance papers? Tell
Thérèse--and Annette--

[His head falls. The bell in distance strikes again. Rumbling and
murmur of voices outside.]

CURTAIN.




PARIAH, OR THE OUTCAST
One-Act Play


CHARACTERS

MR. X., an archeologist
MR. Y., a traveller from America

Both middle-aged


PARIAH, OR THE OUTCAST

[SCENE--Simple room in a country house; door and window at back,
through which one sees a country landscape. In the middle of the
room a large dining table; on one side of it books and writing
materials and on the other side some antiques, a microscope, insect
boxes, alcohol jars. To the left of scene a book-shelf, and all the
other furnishings are those of a country gentleman. Mr. Y. enters
in his shirt-sleeves, carrying an insect net and a botanical tin
box. He goes directly to the book-shelf, takes down a book and
reads stealthily from it. The after-service bell of a country
church rings. The landscape and room are flooded with sunshine. Now
and then one hears the clucking of hens outside. Mr. X. comes in
also in shirt-sleeves. Mr. Y. starts nervously, returns the book to
its place, and pretends to look for another book on the shelf.]

MR. X. What oppressive heat! We'll surely have a thunder-shower.

MR. Y. Yes? What makes you think so?

MR. X. The bells sound like it, the flies bite so, and the hens are
cackling. I wanted to go fishing, but I couldn't find a single
worm. Don't you feel rather nervous?

MR. Y. [Reflectively]. I? Well, yes.

MR. X. But you always look as if you expected a thunder-shower.

MR. Y. Do I?

MR. X. Well, as you are to start off on your travels again
tomorrow, it's not to be wondered at if you have the knapsack
fever. What's the news? Here's the post. [Takes up letters from the
table.] Oh, I have palpitation of the heart every time I open a
letter. Nothing but debts, debts! Did you ever have any debts?

MR. Y. [Reflecting]. No-o-o.

MR. X. Well, then, of course you can't understand how it feels to
have unpaid bills come in. [He reads a letter.] The rent owing--the
landlord clamoring--and my wife in despair. And I, I sitting up to
my elbows in gold. [Opens an iron-mounted case, which stands on the
table. They both sit down, one on each side of the case.] Here is
six thousand crowns' worth of gold that I've dug up in two weeks.
This bracelet alone would bring the three hundred and fifty crowns
I need. And with all of it I should be able to make a brilliant
career for myself. The first thing I should do would be to have
drawings made and cuts of the figures for my treatises. After that
I would print--and then clear out. Why do you suppose I don't do
this?

MR. Y. It must be because you are afraid of being found out.

MR. X. Perhaps that, too. But don't you think that a man of my
intelligence should be able to manage it so that it wouldn't be
found out? I always go alone to dig out there on the hills--without
witnesses. Would it be remarkable to put a little something in
one's pockets?

MR. Y. Yes, but disposing of it, they say, is the dangerous part.

MR. X. Humph, I should of course have the whole thing smelted, and
then I should have it cast into ducats--full weight, of course--

MR. Y. Of course!

MR. X. That goes without saying. If I wanted to make counterfeit
money--well, it wouldn't be necessary to dig the gold first.
[Pause.] It's remarkable, nevertheless, that if some one were to do
what I can't bring myself to do, I should acquit him. But I should
not be able to acquit myself. I should be able to put up a
brilliant defense for the thief; prove that this gold was _res
nullius_, or no one's, and that it got into the earth before there
were any land rights; that even now it belongs to no one but the
first comer, as the owner had never accounted it part of his
property, and so on.

MR. Y. And you would not be able to do this if--h'm!--the thief had
stolen through need, but rather as an instance of a collector's
mania, of scientific interest, of the ambition to make a
discovery,--isn't that so?

MR. X. You mean that I wouldn't be able to acquit him if he had
stolen through need? No, that is the only instance the law does not
pardon. That is simple theft, that is!

MR. Y. And that you would not pardon?

MR. X. H'm! Pardon! No, I could hardly pardon what the law does
not, and I must confess that it would be hard for me to accuse a
collector for taking an antique that he did not have in his
collection, which he had dug up on some one else's property.

MR. Y. That is to say, vanity, ambition, could gain pardon where
need could not?

MR. X. Yes, that's the way it is. And nevertheless need should be
the strongest motive, the only one to be pardoned. But I can change
that as little as I can change my will not to steal under any
condition.

MR. Y. And you count it a great virtue that you cannot--h'm--steal?

MR. X. With me not to steal is just as irresistible as stealing is
to some, and, therefore, no virtue. I cannot do it and they cannot
help doing it. You understand, of course, that the idea of wanting
to possess this gold is not lacking in me. Why don't I take it
then? I cannot; it's an inability, and a lack is not a virtue. And
there you are!

[Closes the case with a bang. At times stray clouds have dimmed the
light in the room and now it darkens with the approaching storm.]

MR. X. How close it is! I think we'll have some thunder.

[Mr. Y. rises and shuts the door and window.]

MR. X. Are you afraid of thunder?

MR. Y. One should be careful.

[They sit again at table.]

MR. X. You are a queer fellow. You struck here like a bomb two
weeks ago, and you introduced yourself as a Swedish-American who
travels, collecting insects for a little museum.

MR. Y. Oh, don't bother about me.

MR. X. That's what you always say when I get tired of talking about
myself and want to devote a little attention to you. Perhaps it was
because you let me talk so much about myself that you won my
sympathy. We were soon old acquaintances; there were no corners
about you for me to knock against, no needles or pins to prick.
There was something so mellow about your whole personality; you
were so considerate, a characteristic which only the most
cultivated can display; you were never noisy when you came home
late, never made any disturbance when you got up in the morning;
you overlooked trifles, drew aside when ideas became conflicting;
in a word, you were the perfect companion; but you were altogether
too submissive, too negative, too quiet, not to have me reflect
about it in the course of time. And you are fearful and timid; you
look as if you led a double life. Do you know, as you sit there
before the mirror and I see your back, it's as if I were looking at
another person. [Mr. Y. turns and looks in the mirror.] Oh, you
can't see your back in the mirror. Front view, you look like a
frank, fearless man who goes to meet his fate with open heart, but
back view,--well, I don't wish to be discourteous, but you look as
if you carried a burden, as if you were shrinking from a lash; and
when I see your red suspenders across your white shirt--it looks
like--like a big brand, a trade mark on a packing box.

MR. Y. [Rising]. I believe I will suffocate--if the shower doesn't
break and come soon.

MR. X. It will come soon. Just be quiet. And the back of your neck,
too, it looks as if there were another head on it, with the face of
another type than you. You are so terribly narrow between the ears
that I sometimes wonder if you don't belong to another race. [There
is flash of lightning.] That one looked as if it struck at the
sheriff's.

MR. Y. [Worried]. At the--sh-sheriff's!

MR. X. Yes, but it only looked so. But this thunder won't amount to
anything. Sit down now and let's have a talk, as you are off again
tomorrow.--It's queer that, although I became intimate with you so
soon, you are one of those people whose likeness I cannot recall
when they are out of my sight. When you are out in the fields and I
try to recall your face, another acquaintance always comes to mind--
some one who doesn't really look like you, but whom you resemble
nevertheless.

MR. Y. Who is that?

MR. X. I won't mention the name. However, I used to have dinner at
the same place for many years, and there at the lunch counter I met
a little blond man with pale, worried eyes. He had an extraordinary
faculty of getting about in a crowded room without shoving or being
shoved. Standing at the door, he could reach a slice of bread two
yards away; he always looked as if he was happy to be among people,
and whenever he ran into an acquaintance he would fall into
rapturous laughter, embrace him, and do the figure eight around
him, and carry on as if he hadn't met a human being for years; if
any one stepped on his toes he would smile as if he were asking
pardon for being in the way. For two years I used to see him, and I
used to amuse myself trying to figure out his business and
character, but I never asked any one who he was,--I didn't want to
know, as that would have put an end to my amusement. That man had
the same indefinable characteristics as you; sometimes I would make
him out an undergraduate teacher, an under officer, a druggist, a
government clerk, or a detective, and like you, he seemed to be
made up of two different pieces and the front didn't fit the back.
One day I happened to read in the paper about a big forgery by a
well-known civil official. After that I found out that my
indefinable acquaintance had been the companion of the forger's
brother, and that his name was Stråman; and then I was informed
that the afore-mentioned Stråman had been connected with a free
library, but that he was then a police reporter on a big newspaper.
How could I then get any connection between the forgery, the
police, and the indefinable man's appearance? I don't know, but
when I asked a man if Stråman had ever been convicted, he answered
neither yes nor no--he didn't know. [Pause.]

MR. Y. Well, was he ever--convicted?

MR. X. No, he had not been convicted.

[Pause.]

MR. Y. You mean that was why keeping close to the police had such
attraction for him, and why he was so afraid of bumping into people?

MR. X. Yes.

MR. Y. Did you get to know him afterward?

MR. X. No, I didn't want to.

MR. Y. Would you have allowed yourself to know him if he had been
convicted?

MR. X. Yes, indeed.

[Mr. Y. rises and walks up and down.]

MR. X. Sit still. Why can't you sit quietly.

MR. Y. How did you get such a liberal attitude towards people's
conduct? Are you a Christian?

MR. X. No,--of course I couldn't be,--as you've just heard. The
Christians demand forgiveness, but I demand punishment for the
restoration of balance, or whatever you like to call it, and you,
who have served time, ought to understand that.

MR. Y. [Stops as if transfixed. Regards Mr. X. at first with wild
hatred, them with surprise and wonderment.] How--do--you--know--
that?

MR. X. It's plain to be seen.

MR. Y. How? How can you see it?

MR. X. I have taught myself. That's an art, too. But we won't talk
about that matter. [Looks at his watch. Takes out a paper for
signing. Dips a pen and offers it to Mr. Y.] I must think about my
muddled affairs. Now be so kind as to witness my signature on this
note, which I must leave at the bank at Malmö when I go there with
you tomorrow morning.

MR. Y. I don't intend to go by way of Malmö.

MR. X. No?

MR. Y. No.

MR. X. But you can witness my signature nevertheless.

MR. Y. No-o. I never sign my name to papers--

MR. X. --Any more! That's the fifth time that you have refused to
write your name. The first time was on a postal receipt,--and it
was then that I began to observe you; and now, I see that you have
a horror of touching pen and ink. You haven't sent a letter since
you've been here. Just one postal-card, and that you wrote with a
blue pencil. Do you see now how I have figured out your mis-step?
Furthermore, this is the seventh time that you have refused to go
to Malmö, where you have not gone since you have been here.
Nevertheless you came here from America just to see Malmö; and
every morning you have walked southward three miles and a half to
the windmill hill just to see the roofs of Malmö; also, when you
stand at the right-hand window, through the third window-pane to
the left, counting from the bottom up, you can see the turrets of
the castle, and the chimneys on the _state prison_. Do you see now
that it is not that I am so clever but that you are so stupid?

MR. Y. Now you hate me.

MR. X. No.

MR. Y. Yes, you do, you must.

MR. X. No--see, here's my hand.

MR. Y. [Kisses the proffered hand].

MR. X. [Drawing back his hand]. What dog's trick is that?

MR. Y. Pardon! But thou art the first to offer me his hand after
knowing--

MR. X. --And now you are "thou-ing" me! It alarms me that, after
serving your time, you do not feel your honor retrieved, that you
do not feel on equal footing,--in fact, just as good as any one.
Will you tell me how it happened? Will you?

MR. Y. [Dubiously]. Yes, but you won't believe what I say. I'm
going to tell you, though, and you shall see that I was not a
common criminal. You shall be convinced that mis-steps are made, as
one might say, involuntarily--[Shakily] as if they came of their
own accord, spontaneously, without intention, blamelessly!--Let me
open the window a little. I think the thunder shower-has passed
over.

MR. X. Go ahead.

MR. Y. [Goes and opens the window, then comes and sits by the table
again and tells the following with great enthusiasm, theatrical
gestures and false accents]. Well, you see I was a student at Lund,
and once I needed a loan. I had no dangerously big debts, my father
had some means--not very much, to be sure; however, I had sent away
a note of hand to a man whom I wanted to have sign it as second
security, and contrary to all expectations, it was returned to me
with a refusal. I sat for a while benumbed by the blow, because it
was a disagreeable surprise, very disagreeable. The note lay before
me on the table, and beside it the letter of refusal. My eyes
glanced hopelessly over the fatal lines which contained my
sentence. To be sure it wasn't a death-sentence, as I could easily
have got some other man to stand as security; as many as I wanted,
for that matter--but, as I've said, it was very unpleasant; and as
I sat there in my innocence, my glance rested gradually on the
signature, which, had it been in the right place, would have made
my future. That signature was most unusual calligraphy--you know
how, as one sits thinking, one can scribble a whole blotter full of
meaningless words. I had the pen in my hand--[He takes up the pen]
like this, and before I knew what I was doing it started to write,--
of course I don't want to imply that there was anything mystical
spiritualistic, behind it--because I don't believe in such things!--
it was purely a thoughtless, mechanical action--when I sat and
copied the beautiful autograph time after time--without, of course,
any prospect of gain. When the letter was scribbled all over, I had
acquired skill enough to reproduce the signature remarkably well
[Throws the pen down with violence] and then I forgot the whole
thing. That night my sleep was deep and heavy, and when I awakened
I felt that I had been dreaming, but I could not recall the dream;
however, it seemed as though the door to my dream opened a little
when I saw the writing table and the note in memory--and when I got
up I was driven to the table absolutely, as if, after ripe
consideration, I had made the irrevocable resolution to write that
name on the fateful paper. All thought of risk, of consequence, had
disappeared--there was no wavering--it was almost as if I were
fulfilling a precious duty--and I wrote. [Springs to his feet.]
What can such a thing be? Is it inspiration, hypnotic suggestion,
as it is called? But from whom? I slept alone in my room. Could it
have been my uncivilized ego, the barbarian that does not recognize
conventions, but who emerged with his criminal will and his
inability to calculate the consequences of his deed? Tell me, what
do you think about such a case?

MR. X. [Bored]. To be honest, your story does not quite convince
me. There are holes in it,--but that may be clue to your not being
able to remember all the details,--and I have read a few things
about criminal inspirations--and I recall--h'm--but never mind. You
have had your punishment, you have had character enough to admit
your error, and we won't discuss it further.

MR. Y. Yes, yes, yes, we will discuss it; we must talk, so that I
can have complete consciousness of my unswerving honesty.

MR. X. But haven't you that?

MR. Y. No, I haven't.

MR. X. Well, you see, that's what bothers me, that's what bothers
me. Don't you suppose that each one of us has a skeleton in his
closet? Yes, indeed! Well, there are people who continue to be
children all their lives, so that they cannot control their lawless
desires. Whenever the opportunity comes, the criminal is ready. But
I cannot understand why you do not feel innocent. As the child is
considered irresponsible, the criminal should be considered so too.
It's strange--well, it doesn't matter; I'll regret it later.
[Pause.] I killed a man once, and I never had any scruples.

MR. Y. [Very interested]. You--did?

MR. X. Yes--I did. Perhaps you wouldn't like to take a murderer's
hand?

MR. Y. [Cheerily]. Oh, what nonsense!

MR. X. Yes, but I have not been punished for it.

MR. Y. [Intimate, superior]. So much the better for you. How did
you get out of it?

MR. X. There were no accusers, no suspicions, no witnesses. It
happened this way: one Christmas a friend of mine had invited me
for a few days' hunting just outside of Upsala; he sent an old
drunken servant to meet me, who fell asleep on the coach-box and
drove into a gate-post, which landed us in the ditch. It was not
because my life had been in danger, but in a fit of anger I struck
him a blow to wake him, with the result that he never awakened
again--he died on the spot.

MR. Y. [Cunningly]. And you didn't give yourself up?

MR. X. No, and for the following reasons. The man had no relatives
or other connections who were dependent on him. He had lived out
his period of vegetation and his place could soon be filled by some
one who was needed more, while I, on the other hand, was
indispensable to the happiness of my parents, my own happiness, and
perhaps to science. Through the outcome of the affair I was cured
of the desire to strike any more blows, and to satisfy an abstract
justice I did not care to ruin the lives of my parents as well as
my own life.

MR. Y. So? That's the way you value human life?

MR. X. In that instance, yes.

MR. Y. But the feeling of guilt, the "restoration of balance?"

MR. X. I had no guilty feeling, its I had committed no crime. I had
received and given blows as a boy, and it was only ignorance of the
effect of blows on old people that caused the fatality.

MR. Y. Yes, but it is two years' hard labor for homicide--just as
much as for--forgery.

MR. X. You may believe I have thought of that too, and many a night
have I dreamed that I was in prison. Ugh! is it as terrible as it's
said to be behind bolts and bars?

MR. Y. Yes, it is terrible. First they disfigure your exterior by
cutting off your hair, so if you did not look like a criminal
before, you do afterward, and when you look at yourself in the
mirror, you become convinced that you are a desperado.

MR. X. It's the mask that they pull off; that's not a bad idea.

MR. Y. You jest! Then they cut down your rations, so that every
day, every hour you feel a distinct difference between life and
death; all life's functions are repressed; you feel yourself
grovelling, and your soul, which should be bettered and uplifted
there, is put on a starvation cure, driven back a thousand years in
time; you are only allowed to read what was written for the
barbarians of the migratory period; you are allowed to hear about
nothing but that which can never come to pass in heaven, but what
happens on earth remains a secret; you are torn from your own
environment, moved down out of your class; you come under those who
come under you; you have visions of living in the bronze age, feel
as if you went about in an animal's skin, lived in a cave, and ate
out of a trough! Ugh!

MR. X. That's quite rational. Any one who behaves as if he belonged
to the bronze age ought to live in the historic costume.

MR. Y. [Spitefully]. You scoff, you, you who have behaved like a
man of the stone age! And you are allowed to live in the gold age!

MR. X. [Searchingly and sharp]. What do you mean by that last
expression--the gold age?

MR. Y. [Insidiously]. Nothing at all.

MR. X. That's a lie; you are too cowardly to state your whole
meaning.

MR. Y. Am I cowardly? Do you think that? I wasn't cowardly when I
dared to show myself in this neighborhood, where I have suffered
what I have.--Do you know what one suffers from most when one sits
in there? It is from the fact that the others are not sitting in
there too.

MR. X. What others?

MR. Y. The unpunished.

MR. X. Do you allude to me?

MR. Y. Yes.

MR. X. I haven't committed any crime.

MR. Y. No? Haven't you?

MR. X. No. An accident is not a crime.

MR. Y. So, it's an accident to commit murder?

MR. X. I haven't committal any murder.

MR. Y. So? Isn't it murder to slay a man?

MR. X. No, not always. There is manslaughter, homicide, assault
resulting in death, with the subdivisions, with or without intent.
However, now I am really afraid of you, for you belong in the most
dangerous category of human beings, the stupid.

MR. Y. So you think that I am stupid? Now listen! Do you want me
to prove that I am very shrewd?

MR. X. Let me hear.

MR. Y. Will you admit that I reason shrewdly and logically when I
say this? You met with an accident which might have brought you two
years of hard labor. You have escaped the ignominious penalty
altogether. Here sits a man who also has been the victim of an
accident, an unconscious suggestion, and forced to suffer two
years of hard labor. This man can wipe out the stain he has
unwittingly brought upon himself only through scientific
achievement; but for the attainment of this he must have money--
much money, and that immediately. Doesn't it seem to you that the
other man, the unpunished one, would restore the balance of human
relations if he were sentenced to a tolerable fine? Don't you think
so?

MR. X. [Quietly]. Yes.

MR. Y. Well, we understand each other.--H'm! How much do you
consider legitimate?

MR. X. Legitimate? The law decrees that a man's life is worth at
the minimum fifty crowns. But as the deceased had no relatives,
there's nothing to be said on that score.

MR. Y. Humph, you will not understand? Then I must speak more
plainly. It is to me that you are to pay the fine.

MR. X. I've never heard that a homicide should pay a fine to a
forger, and there is also no accuser.

MR. Y. No? Yes, you have me.

MR. X. Ah, now things are beginning to clear up. How much do you
ask to become accomplice to the homicide?

MR. Y. Six thousand crowns.

Mr. X. That's too much. Where am I to get it? [Mr. Y. points to the
case.] I don't want to do that, I don't want to become a thief.

MR. Y. Don't pretend. Do you want me to believe that you haven't
dipped into that case before now?

MR. X. [As to himself]. To think that I could make such a big
mistake! But that's the way it always is with bland people. One is
fond of gentle people, and then one believes so easily that he is
liked; and just on account of that I have been a little watchful of
those of whom I've been fond. So you are fully convinced that I
have helped myself from that case?

MR. Y. Yes, I'm sure of it.

MR. X. And you will accuse me if you do not receive the six
thousand crowns?

MR. Y. Absolutely. You can't get out of it, so it's not worth while
trying to do so.

MR. X. Do you think I would give my father a thief for son, my wife
a thief for husband, my children a thief for father, and my
confrères a thief for comrade? That shall never happen. Now I'll go
to the sheriff and give myself up.

MR. Y. [Springs up and gets his things together]. Wait a moment.

MR. X. What for?

M$. Y. [Stammering]. I only thought--that as I'm not needed--I
wouldn't need to be present--and could go.

MR. X. You cannot. Sit down at your place at the table, where
you've been sitting, and we will talk a little.

MR. Y. [Sits, after putting on a dark coat]. What's going to happen
now?

MR. X. [Looking into mirror]. Now everything is clear to me! Ah!

MR. Y. [Worried]. What do you see now that's so remarkable?

MR. X. I see in the mirror that you are a thief, a simple, common
thief. Just now, when you sat there in your shirt-sleeves, I
noticed that something was wrong about my book-shelf, but I
couldn't make out what it was, as I wanted to listen to you and
observe you. Now, since you have become my antagonist, my sight is
keener, and since you have put on that black coat, that acts as a
color contrast against the red backs of the books, which were not
noticeable before against your red suspenders, I see that you have
been there and read your forgery story in Bernheim's essay on
hypnotic suggestion, and returned the book upside down. So you
stole that story too! In consequence of all this I consider that I
have the right to conclude that you committed your crime through
need, or because you were addicted to pleasures.

MR. Y. Through need. If you knew--

MR. X. If _you_ knew in what need I have lived, and lived, and
still live! But this is no time for that. To continue, that you
have served time is almost certain, but that was in America, for it
was American prison life that you described; another thing is
almost as certain--that you have not served out your sentence here.

MR. Y. How can you say that?

MR. X. Wait until the sheriff comes and you will know. [Mr. Y.
rises.] Do you see? The first time I mentioned the sheriff in
connection with the thunderbolt, you wanted to run then, too; and
when a man has been in that prison he never wants to go to the
windmill hill every day to look at it, or put himself behind a
window-pane to--to conclude, you have served one sentence, but not
another. That's why you were so difficult to get at. [Pause.]

MR. Y. [Completely defeated]. May I go now?

MR. X. Yes, you may go now.

MR. Y. [Getting his things together]. Are you angry with me?

MR. X. Yes. Would you like it better if I pitied you?

MR. Y. [Wrathfully]. Pity! Do you consider yourself better than I
am?

MR. X. Of course I do, as I _am_ better. I am more intelligent than
you are, and of more worth to the common weal.

MR. Y. You are pretty crafty, but not so crafty as I am. I stand in
check myself, but, nevertheless, the next move you can be
checkmated.

MR. X. [Fixing Mr. Y. with his eye]. Shall we have another bout?
What evil do you intend to do now?

MR. Y. That is my secret.

MR. X. May I look at you?--You think of writing an anonymous letter
to my wife, disclosing my secret.

MR. Y. Yes, and you cannot prevent it. You dare not have me
imprisoned, so you must let me go; and when I have gone I can do
what I please.

MR. X. Ah, you devil! You've struck my Achilles heel--will you
force me to become a murderer?

MR. Y. You couldn't become one! You timid creature!

MR. X. You see, then, there is a difference in people after all,
and you feel within you that I cannot commit such deeds as you, and
that is your advantage. But think if you forced me to deal with you
as I did with the coachman!

[Lifts his hand as if to strike. Mr. Y. looks hard at Mr. X.]

MR. Y. You can't do it. He who dared not take his salvation out of
the case couldn't do that.

MR. X. Then you don't believe that I ever took from the case?

MR. Y. You were too cowardly, just as you were too cowardly to tell
your wife that she is married to a murderer.

MR. X. You are a different kind of being from me--whether stronger
or weaker I do not know--more criminal or not--that doesn't concern
me. But you are the stupider, that's proven. Because you were
stupid when you forged a man's name instead of begging as I have
had to do; you were stupid when you stole out of my book--didn't
you realize that I read my books? You were stupid when you thought
that you were more intelligent than I am and that you could fool me
into becoming a thief; you were stupid when you thought, that the
restoration of balance would be accomplished by the world's having
two thieves instead of one, and you were most stupid when you
believed that I have built my life's happiness without having laid
the cornerstone securely. Go and write your an