ce, village women who put out
clean stockings for the children every Saturday night, and clean
shirts and ginghams, and lead them all into a pew Sunday morning,
and teach them the Golden Rule, and to honor their father and
their mother, and all the rest of it!"

"And what do you think you would gain by that?" Warren asked.

"Oh, I would gain--security," Rachael said vaguely, but with a
suspicion of tears in her eyes. "I would have something to--to
stand upon, to be guided by. There is a purity, an austerity,
about that old church-going, loving-God-and-your-neighbor ideal.
Truth and simplicity and integrity and uprightness--my old great-
grandmother used to use those words, but one doesn't ever hear
them any more! Everything's half black and half white nowadays;
we're all as good or as bad as we happen to be born. There's no
more discipline, no more self-denial, no more development of
character! I want to--to hold on to something, now that forces I
can't control are coming into my life."

"What do you mean by forces you can't control?" he asked with a
sort of annoyed interest.

"Love, Warren," she answered quickly. "Love for you and the boys,
and fear for you and the boys. Love always brings fear. And
illness--I never thought of it before I was ill. And jealousy--"

"What have you got to be jealous of?" he asked, somewhat gruffly,
as she paused.

"Your work," Rachael said simply; "everything that keeps you away
from me!"

"And you think going to Saint Luke's every Sunday morning at
eleven o'clock, and listening to Billy Graves, will fix it all
up?" he smiled not unkindly. But as she did not answer his smile,
and as the tears he disliked came into her eyes, his tone changed.
"Now I'll tell you what's the matter with you, my dear," he said
with a brisk kindliness that cut her far more just then than
severity would have done, "you're all wound up in self-analysis
and psychologic self-consciousness, and you're spinning round and
round in your own entity like a kitten chasing her tail. It's a
perfectly recognizable phase of a sort of minor hysteria that
often gets hold of women, and curiously enough, it usually comes
about five or six years after marriage. We doctors meet it over
and over again. 'But, Doctor, I'm so nervous and excited all the
time, and I don't sleep! I worry so--and much as I love my
husband, I just can't help worrying!'"

Looking up and toward his wife as she sat opposite him in the
lamp-light, Warren Gregory found no smile on the beautiful face.
Rachael's hurt was deeper than her pride; she looked stricken.

"Don't put yourself in their class, my dear!" her husband said
leniently. "You need some country air. You'll get down to Clark's
Hills in a week or two and blow some of these notions away.
Meanwhile, why don't you run down to the club every morning, and
play a good smashing game of squash, and take a plunge. Put
yourself through a little training!" He reopened his book.

Rachael did not answer. Presently glancing at her he saw that she
was reading, too.




CHAPTER V


That his overtired nerves and her exhausted soul and body would
have recovered balance in time, did not occur to Rachael. She
suffered with all the intensity of a strongly passionate nature.
Warren had changed to her; that was the terrible fact. She went
about stunned and sick, neglecting her meals, forgetting her
tonic, refusing the distractions that would have been the best
thing possible for her. Little things troubled her; she said to
herself bitterly that everything, anything, caused irritation
between herself and Warren now. Sometimes the atmosphere
brightened for a few days, then the old hopeless tugging at cross
purposes began again.

"You're sick, Rachael, and you don't know it!" said Magsie Clay
breezily. June was coming in, and Magsie was leaving town for the
Villalonga camp. She told Rachael that she was "crazy" about Kent
Parmalee, and Rachael's feeling of amazement that Magsie Clay
could aspire to a Parmalee was softened by an odd sensation of
relief at hearing Magsie's plans--a relief she did not analyze.

"I believe I am sick!" Rachael agreed. "I shall be glad to get
down to the shore next week." She told Warren of Magsie's
admission that night.

"Kent! She wouldn't look at him!" Warren said comfortably.

"It would be a brilliant match for her," Rachael countered
quietly.

She saw that she had antagonized him, but he did not speak again.
One of their unhappy silences fell.

Home Dunes, as always, restored health and color magically.
Rachael felt more like herself after the first night's sleep on
the breezy porch, the first invigorating dip in the ocean. She
began to enjoy her meals again, she began to look carefully to her
appearance. Presently she was laughing, singing, bubbling with
life and energy. Alice, watching her, rejoiced and marvelled at
her recovery. Rachael's beauty, her old definite self-reliance,
came back in a flood. She fairly radiated charm, glowing as she
held George and Alice under the spell of her voice, the spell of
her happy planning. Her letters to Warren were in the old, tender,
vivacious strain. She was interested in everything, delighted with
everything in Clark's Hills. She begged him for news; Vivian had a
baby? And Kent Parmalee was engaged to Eliza Bowditch--what did
Magsie's say? And did he miss her? The minute she got home she was
going to talk to him about having a big porch built on, outside
the nursery, and at the back of the house; what about it? Then the
children could sleep out all the year through. George and Alice
positively stated that they were going around the world in two
years, and if they did, why couldn't the Gregorys go, too?

"You're wonderful!" said Alice one day. "You're not the same woman
you were last winter!"

"I was ill last winter, woman! And never so ill as when they all
thought I was entirely cured! Besides--" Rachael looked down at
her tanned arm and slender brown fingers marking grooves in the
sand. "Besides, it's partly--bluff, Alice," she confessed. "I'm
fighting myself these days. I don't want to think that we--Greg
and I--can't go back, can't be to each other--what we were!"

What an April creature she was, thought Alice, seeing that tears
were close to the averted eyes, and hearing the tremble in
Rachael's voice.

"Goose!" she said tenderly. "You were a nervous wreck last year,
and Warren was working far too hard! Make haste slowly, Rachael."

"But it's three weeks since he was here," Rachael said in a low
voice. "I don't understand it, that's all!"

"Nor I--nor he!" Alice said, smiling.

"Next week!" Rachael predicted bravely. And a second later she had
sprung up from the sand and was swimming through the surf as if
she swam from her own intolerable thoughts.

The next week-end would bring him she always told herself, and
usually after two or three empty Sundays there would come a happy
one, with the new car which was built like a projectile, purring
in the road, George and Alice shouting greetings as they came in
the gate, Louise excitedly attempting to outdo herself on the
dinner, and the sunburned noisy babies shrieking themselves hoarse
as they romped with their father.

To be held tight in his arms, to get his first big kiss, to come
into the house still clinging to him, was bliss to Rachael now.
But as the summer wore away she noticed that in a few hours the
joy of homecoming would fade for him, he would become fitfully
talkative, moodily silent, he would wonder why the Valentines were
always late, and ask his wife patiently if she would please not
hum, his head ached--

"Dearest! Why didn't you say so!"

"I don't know. It's been aching all day!"

"And you let those great boys climb all over you!"

"Oh, that's all right."

"Would you like a nap, Warren, or would you like to go over to the
beach, just you and me, and have a swim?"

"No, thank you. I may run the car into Katchogue"--Katchogue,
seven miles away, was the site of the nearest garage--"and have
that fellow look at my magneto. She didn't act awfully well coming
down!"

"Would you like me to go with you, Warren?"

"Love it, my dear, but I have to take Pierre. He's got twice the
sense I have about it!"

And again a sense of heaviness, of helplessness, would fall upon
Rachael, so that on Sunday afternoon it was almost a relief to
have him go away.

"Well," she would say in the nursery again, after the good-byes,
kissing the fat little shoulder of Gerald Fairfax Gregory where
the old baby white ran into the new boyish tan, "we will not be
introspective and imaginative, and cry for the moon. We will take
off our boys' little old, hot rumply shirts, and put them into
their nice cool nighties, and be glad that we have everything in
the world--almost! Get me your Peter Rabbit Book, Jimmy, and get
up here on my other arm. Everybody hasn't the same way of showing
love, and the main thing is to be grateful that the love is there.
Daddy loves his boys, and his home, and his boys' mother, only it
doesn't always occur to him that--"

"Are you talking for me, or for you, Mother?" Jimmy would
sometimes ask, after puzzled and attentive listening.

"For me, this time, but now I'll talk for you!" Rachael satisfied
her hungry heart with their kisses, and was never so happy as when
both fat little bodies were in her arms. She grudged every month
that carried them away from babyhood, and one day Alice Valentine
found her looking at a book of old photographs with an expression
of actual sadness on her face.

"Look at Jim, Alice, that second summer--before Derry was born!
Wasn't he the dearest little fatty, tumbling all over the place!"

"Rachael, don't speak as if the child was dead!" Alice laughed.

"Well, one loses them almost as completely," Rachael said,
smiling. "Jim is such a great big, brown, mischievous creature
now, and to think that my Derry is nearly two!"

"Think of me, with Mary fifteen!" Mrs. Valentine countered, "and
just as baby-hungry as ever! But I shall have to do nothing but
chaperon now, for a few years, and wait for the grandchildren."

"I shouldn't mind getting old, Alice," Rachael said, "if I were
like you; you're so temperate and unselfish and sweet that no one
could help loving you! Besides, you don't sit around worrying
about what people think, you just go on cutting out cookies, and
putting buttons on gingham dresses, and let other people do the
worrying!"

And suddenly, to the other woman's concern, she burst into bitter
crying, and covered her face with her hands.

"I'm so frightened, Alice!" sobbed Rachael. "I don't know what's
the matter with me, but I FEEL--I feel that something is all
wrong! I don't seem to have any HOLD on Warren any more--you can't
explain such things--but I'm--"

She got to her feet, a splendid figure of tragedy, and walked
blindly to the end of the long porch, where she stood staring down
at the heaving, sun-flooded expanse of the blue sea, and at the
roofs of little Quaker Bridge beyond the bar. Lazy waves were
creaming, in great interlocked circles, on the white beach, the
air was as clear as crystal on the cloudless September morning.
Not a breath of wind stirred the tufted grass on the dunes; down
by the weather-blown bath-houses a dozen children, her own among
them, were shouting and splashing in the spreading shallows.

Alice Valentine, her plain, sweet face a picture of sympathy, sat
dumb and unmoving. In her own heart she felt that Rachael's was a
terrible situation. What WAS the matter with Warren Gregory,
anyway, wondered Alice; he had a beautiful wife, and beautiful
children, and if George, with all his summer substituting and
hospital work, could come to his family, as he did come every
Friday night, it was upon no claim of hard work that Warren could
remain away. As a matter of fact, Alice knew it was not for work
that he stayed, for George, the least critical of friends, had
once or twice told her of yachting parties in which Warren had
participated--men's parties, of which Rachael perhaps might not
have disapproved, but of which Rachael certainly did not know.
George had told her vaguely that Greg liked to play golf on
Saturday afternoons, and sleep late on Sunday, and seemed to feel
it more of a rest than coming down to the shore.

"I am a fool to break down this way," said Rachael, interrupting
her guest's musings to come back to her chair, and showing a
composed face despite her red eyes, "but my--my heart is heavy to-
day!" Something in the simple dignity of the words brought the
tears to Alice's eyes. She held out her hand and Rachael took it
and clung to it, as she went on: "I had a birthday yesterday--and
Warren forgot it!"

"They all do that!" Alice said cheerfully. "George never remembers
mine!"

"But Warren always has before," Rachael said, smiling sadly, "and-
-and it came to me last night--I didn't sleep very well--that I am
thirty-four, and--and I have given him all I have!"

Again tears threatened her self-control, but she fought them
resolutely, and in a moment was herself again.

"You love too hard, my dear woman," Alice Valentine remonstrated
affectionately; "nothing is worse than extremes in anything. Say
to yourself, like a sensible girl, that you have a good husband,
and let it go at that! Be as cool and cheerful with Warren as if
he were--George, for instance, and try to interest yourself in
something entirely outside your own home. I wonder if perhaps this
place isn't a little lonely for you? Why don't you try Bar Harbor
or one of the mountain places next year, and go about among
people, and entertain a little more?"

"But, Alice, people BORE me so--I've had so much of it, and it's
always the same thing!"

"I know; I hate it, too. But there are funny phases in marriage,
Rachael, and one has to take them as they come. Warren might like
it."

Rachael pondered. Elinor Pomeroy and the Villalongas, the
Whittakers and Stokes and Parmalees again! Noise and hurry, and
dancing and smoking and drinking again! She sighed.

"I believe I'll suggest it to Warren, Alice. Then if he's keen for
it, we'll do it next year."

"I would." Mrs. Valentine rose, and looked toward the beach with
an idea of locating Martha and Katrina before sending for them.
"Isn't it almost lunch time?" she asked, adding in a matter-of-
fact tone: "Don't worry any more, Rachael; it's largely a bad
habit. Just look the whole thing in the face, and map it out like
a campaign. 'The way to begin living the ideal life is to begin,'
my father used to say!"

This talk, and others like it, had the effect of bracing Rachael
to fresh endurance and of spurring her to fresh courage for the
few days that its effect lasted. But sooner or later her bravery
would die away, and an increasing discouragement possess her.
Lying in her bare, airy bedroom at night, with sombre eyes staring
at the arch of stars above the moving sea, an almost unbearable
loneliness would fall upon soul and body; she needed Warren, she
said to herself, often with bitter tears. Warren, splashing in his
bath, scattering wet towels and discarded garments so royally
about the place; Warren, in a discursive mood, regarding some
operation as he stropped his razor; Warren's old, half-unthinking
"you look sweet, dear," when, fresh and dainty, his wife was ready
to go downstairs--for these and a thousand other memories of him
she yearned with an aching desire that racked her like a bodily
pain.

"Oh, it isn't right for him to torture me so!" she would whisper
to herself. "It isn't right!"

October found them all back in the city, an apparently united and
devoted family again. Rachael entered with great zest into the
delayed matter of redecorating and refurnishing the old home on
Washington Square, finding the dignified house--Warren's
birthplace--more and more to her liking as modern enamel fixtures
went into the bathrooms, simple modern hangings let sunshine and
air in at the long-darkened windows, and rich tapestry papers and
Oriental rugs subdued the effect of severe cream woodwork and
colonial mantels.

She found Warren singularly unenthusiastic about it, almost
ungracious when he answered her questions or decided for her any
detail. But Rachael was firmly resolved to ignore his moods, and
went blithely about her business, displaying an indifference--or
an assumed indifference--that was evidently somewhat puzzling to
Warren and to all her household. She equipped the boys in dark-
blue coats and squirrel-skin caps for the winter, marvelling a
little sadly that their father did not seem to see the charms so
evident to all the world. A rosier, gayer, more sturdy pair of
devoted little brothers never stamped through snowy parks, or came
chattering in for chops and baked potatoes. Every woman in the
neighborhood, every policeman, knew Jim and Derry Gregory; their
morning walks were so many separate little adventures in
popularity. But Warren, beyond paternal greetings at breakfast,
and an occasional perfunctory query as to their health, made no
attempt to enter into their lives. They were still too small to
interest their father except as good and satisfactory babies.

One bitter December day the thunderbolt fell. Rachael felt that
she had always known it, that she had been sitting in this hideous
hotel dining-room for years watching Warren--and Margaret Clay.

There was a bitter taste of salt water in her mouth, there was a
hideous drumming at her heart. She felt sick and cold from her
bewildered brain down to her very feet. When one felt like this--
one fainted.

But Rachael did not faint, although it was by sheer power of will
that she held her reeling senses. No scene--no, there mustn't be a
scene--for Jimmy's sake, for Derry's sake, no scene. She was here,
in the Waldorf Grill, of course. She had been--what had she been
doing? She had been--she came downtown after breakfast--of course,
shopping. Shopping for the children's Christmas. They were to have
coasters--they were old enough for coasters--she must go on this
quiet way, thinking of the children--five was old enough for
coasters--and Jim always looked out for Derry.

She couldn't go out. They hadn't seen her; they wouldn't see her,
here in this corner. But she dared not stand up and pass them
again. Warren--and Magsie. Warren--and Magsie. Oh, God--God--God--
what should she do--she was going to faint again.

Here was her shopping list, a little wet and crumpled because she
had put her glove on the snowy handle of the motor-car door. Mary
had said that it would be a white Christmas--how could Mary tell?-
-this was only the eighteenth, only the eighteenth--ridiculous to
be panting this way, like a runner. Nothing was going to hurt her-
-

"Anything--anything!" she said to the waiter, with dry, bloodless
lips, and a ghastly attempt at a smile. "Yes, that will do. Thank
you, yes, I suppose so. Yes, if you will. Thank you. That will do
nicely."

And now she must be quiet. That was the main thing now. They must
not see her. She had been shopping, and now she was having her
lunch in the Grill. If she could only breathe a little less
violently--but she seemed to have no control over her heaving
breast, she could not even close her mouth. Nobody suspected
anything, and if she could but control herself, nobody would, she
told herself desperately.

She never knew that the silent, gray-haired waiter recognized her,
and recognized both the man and woman who sat only thirty feet
away. She had not ordered coffee, but he brought her a smoking
pot. It was not the first time he had encountered the situation.
Rachael drank the vivifying fluid, and her nerves responded at
once.

She sat up, set her lips firmly, forced herself to dispose of
gloves and napkin in the usual way. Her breath was coming more
evenly--so much was gained. As for this deadly cold and quivering
sensation of nausea, that was no more than fatigue and the
frightfully cold wind.

So it was Magsie. Rachael had not been seven years a wife to
misread Warren's eyes as he looked at the girl. No woman could
misread their attitude together, an attitude of wonderful, sweet
familiarity with each other's likes and dislikes under all its
thrilling newness. Rachael had seen him turn that very glance,
that smiling-eyed yet serious look--

Oh, God! it could not be that he had come to care for Magsie! Her
hard-won calm was shattered in a second, she was panting and
quivering again. Her husband, her own big, tender, clever Warren--
but he was hers, and the boys--he was HERS! Her husband--and this
other woman was looking at him with all her soul in her eyes, this
other woman cared--all the world might see how she cared for him--
and was loved in return!

What had she been hearing, lately, of Magsie? Rachael began
dizzily to recall what she could. Magsie had been "on the road,"
she had had a small part in an unsuccessful play early in the
winter. Rachael had been for some reason unable to see it, but she
had sent Magsie flowers, and--she remembered now--Warren had
represented himself as having looked in on the play with some
friends, one evening, and as having found it pretty poor stuff. So
little had Magsie and Magsie's affairs seemed to matter, then,
that Rachael could not even remember the name of the play, nor of
hearing it discussed. The world in general had not seemed inclined
to make much of the professional advent of Miss Margaret Clay, and
presently the play closed, and Warren, in answer to a careless
question from Rachael, had said that they would probably take it
on the road until spring.

And then, some weeks ago, she had asked about Magsie again, and
Warren had said: "I believe she's in town. Somebody told me the
other day that she was to have a part in one of Bowman's things
this winter."

"It's amazing to me that Magsie doesn't get ahead faster," Rachael
had mused. No more was said.

And how pretty she was, how young she was, Rachael thought now,
with a stabbing pain at her heart. How earnestly they were
talking--no ordinary conversation. Presently tears were in the
little actress's eyes; she had no handkerchief, but Warren had. He
gave it to her, and she surreptitiously wiped her eyes, and smiled
at him, like a pretty child, in her furs.

Rachael felt actually sick with shock. She felt as if some vital
cord in her anatomy had been snapped, and as if she could never
control these heavy languid limbs of hers again. Her head ached. A
lassitude seemed to possess her. She felt cold, and old, and
helpless in the face of so much youth and beauty.

Magsie--and Warren. She must accustom herself to the thought. They
cared for each other. They cared--Rachael's heart seemed to shut
with an icy spasm, she felt herself choking and shut her eyes.

Well, what could they do--at worst? Could Magsie go out now, and
get into the Gregory motor car, and say, "Home, Martin!" to the
man? Could Magsie run up the steps of the Washington Square house,
gather the cream of the day's news from the butler in a breath,
and, flinging off furs and wraps, catch the two glorious boys to
her heart?

No! However the situation developed, Rachael was still the wife.
Rachael held the advantage, and whatever poor Magsie's influence
was, it could be but temporary, it must be unrecognized and
unapproved by the world.

Slowly self-control came back, the dizziness subsided, the room
sank and settled into its usual aspect. It was hideous, but it was
a fact, she must face it--she must face it. There was an honorable
way, and a dignified way, and that must be her way. No one must
know.

Presently the table near her was empty, and she began to breathe
more naturally. She pondered so deeply that for a long time the
room was forgotten, and the moving crowd shifted about her unseen.
Then abstractedly she rose, and went slowly out to the waiting
car. She carried a heart of lead.

"I've kept you waiting, Martin?"

Martin merely touched his hat. It was four o'clock.

And so Rachael found herself facing an unbelievable situation. To
love, and to know herself unloved, was a cold, dull misery that
clung like a weight to her heart. Her thoughts stumbled in a
close, hot fog; from sheer weariness she abandoned them again and
again.

She had never been a reasonable woman, but she forced herself to
be reasonable now. Logic and philosophy had never been her natural
defences, but she brought logic and philosophy to bear upon this
hideous circumstance. She did not waste time and tears upon a
futile "Why?" It was too late now to question; the fact spoke for
itself. Warren's senses were wrapped in the charms of another
woman. His own devoted and still young and beautiful wife was not
the first devoted and young and beautiful woman to have her claim
displaced.

For days after the episode in the Waldorf lunch-room she moved
like a conspirator, watching, thinking. Warren had never seemed
more considerate of her happiness, more satisfied with life. He
was full of agreeable chatter at breakfast, interested in her
plans, amused at the boys. He did not come home for luncheon, but
usually ran up the steps at five o'clock, and was reading or
dressing when Rachael wandered into his room to greet him after
the day. He never kissed her now, or touched her hand even by
chance; she was reminded, in his general aspect, of those
occasions when the delicious Derry wandered out from the nursery,
evading the nap which was his duty, but full of the airy
conversation and small endearments that only a child on sufferance
knows.

Rachael tried in vain to understand the affair; what evil genius
possessed Warren; what possessed Magsie? She tried to think kindly
of Magsie; poor child, she had had no ugly intention, she was
simply spoiled, simply an egotist undeveloped in brain and soul!

But--Warren! Well, Warren's soft, simple heart had been touched by
all that endearing kittenish confidence, by Magsie's belief that
he was the richest and cleverest and most powerful of men.

So they were meeting for lunch, for tea--where else? What did they
talk about, what did they plan or hope or expect? Through all her
hot impatience Rachael believed that she could trust them both, in
the graver sense. Warren was as unlikely to take advantage of
Magsie's youthful innocence as Magsie was to definitely commit
herself to a reckless course.

But what then? Absurd, preposterous as it was, it was not all a
joke. It had already shut the sun from all Rachael's sky. What was
it doing to Warren--to Magsie? With Rachael in a cold and
dangerous mood, Warren evasive, unresponsive, troubled, what was
Magsie feeling and thinking?

Proudly, and with a bitter pain at her heart, Rachael went through
her empty days. Her household affairs ran as if by magic; never
was there a more successful conspiracy for one man's comfort than
that organized by Rachael and her maids. For the first time since
their marriage she and Warren were occupying separate rooms now,
but Rachael made it a special charge to go in and out of his room
constantly when he was there. She would come in with his mail and
his newspaper at nine o'clock, full of cheerful solicitude, or
follow him in for the half-hour just before dinner, chatting with
apparent ease of heart while he dressed.

Only apparent ease of heart, however, for Warren's invariable
courtesy and sweetness filled his wife with sick apprehension. Ah,
for the old good hours when he scolded and argued, protested and
laughed over the developments of the day. Sometimes, nowadays, he
hardly heard her, despite his bright, interested smile. Once he
had commented upon her gown the instant she came into the room;
now he never seemed to see her at all; as a matter of fact, their
eyes never met.

In February he told her suddenly that Margaret Clay was to open in
another fortnight at the Lyric, in a new play by Gideon Barrett,
called "The Bad Little Lady."

"At the Lyric!" Rachael said in a rush of something almost like
joy that they could speak of Magsie at last, "and one of
Barrett's! Well, Magsie is coming on! What part does she take?"

"The lead--the title part--Patricia Something-or-other, I
believe."

"The LEAD! At the Lyric--why, isn't that an astonishing compliment
to Magsie!"

Warren looked for his paper-cutter, cut a page, and shrugged his
shoulders without glancing up from his book.

"Well, yes, I suppose it is. But of course she's gone steadily
ahead."

"But I thought she wasn't so successful last winter, Warren?"

"I don't know," he said politely, wearily, uninterestedly.

"How did you hear this, Warren?" his wife asked, with a deceitful
air of innocence.

"Met her," he answered briefly.

"Well, we must see the play," Rachael said briskly. For some
reason her heart was lighter than it had been for weeks. This was
something definite and in the open at last after all these days of
blundering in the dark. "We could take a box, couldn't we, and ask
George and Alice?" she added. Warren's expression was that of a
boy whose way with his first sweetheart is too suddenly favored by
parents and guardians, and Rachael could have laughed at his face.

"Well," he said without enthusiasm. A week later he told her that
he had secured the box, but suggested that someone else than the
Valentines be asked, Elinor and Peter, for instance.

"You and George aren't quite as good friends as you were, are
you?" Rachael said, gravely.

"Quite," Warren said with his bright, deceptive smile and his
usual averted glance. "Ask anyone you please--it was merely a
suggestion!"

Rachael asked Peter and Elinor, and gave them a delicious dinner
before the play. She looked her loveliest, a little fuller in
figure than she had been seven years before, and with gray here
and there in her rich hair, but still a beautiful and winning
presence, and still with something of youth in her spontaneous,
quick speech and ready laughter. Warren was, as always, the
attentive host, but Rachael noticed that he was abstracted and
nervous to-night, and wondered, with a chill at her heart, if
Magsie's new venture meant so much to him as his manner implied.

It was an early dinner, and they reached the theatre before the
curtain rose.

"It looks like a good house," said Rachael, settling herself
comfortably.

"You can't tell anything by this," Warren said, quickly; "it's a
first night and papered."

"Aren't you smart with your professional terms?" Elinor Pomeroy
laughed, dropping the lorgnette through which she had been idly
studying the house. "What _I_'D like to know," she added
interestedly, "what _I_'D like to know is, who's doing this for
Magsie Clay? Vera Villalonga says she knows, but I don't believe
it. Magsie's a little nobody, she has no special talent, and here
she is leading in a Barrett play--"

Peter Pomeroy's foot here pressed lightly against Rachael's; a
hint, Rachael instantly suspected, that was intended for his wife.

"Now I think Magsie's as straight as a string," the unconscious
Mrs. Pomeroy went on, "but she must have a rich beau up her
sleeve, and the question is, who is he? I don't--"

But here, it was evident, Peter's second appeal to his wife's
discretion was felt, and it suddenly arrested her flow of
eloquence.

"--I don't doubt," floundered Elinor, "that--that is--and of
course Magsie IS a talented creature, so that naturally--
naturally--some girl makes a hit every year, and why shouldn't it
be Magsie? Which is right, Peter, 'why shouldn't it be she' or
'why shouldn't it be her?' I never know," she finished somewhat
incoherently.

"I should think any investment in Magsie would be perfectly safe,"
said Rachael's delightful voice. And boldly she added: "Do you
know who is backing this, Warren?"

"To a certain extent--I am," Warren said, after an imperceptible
pause. To Peter he added, in a lower voice, the voice in which men
discuss business matters: "It was a question of the whole deal
falling through--I think she'll make good--this fellow Barrett--"

Rachael began to chat with Elinor, but there was bitterness in her
soul. She had leaped into the breach, she had saved the situation,
at least before Elinor and Peter. But it was not fair--not fair
for Warren to have been deep in this affair with Magsie, with
never a word to his wife! She--Rachael--would have been all
interest, all sympathy. There was no reason between civilized
human beings why this eternal question of sex should debar men and
women from common ambitions and common interests! Let Warren
admire Magsie if he wanted to do so, let him buy her her play, and
stand between her and financial responsibility, jet him admire
her--yes, even love her, in his generous, big-brotherly way! But
why shut out of this new interest the kindly cooperation of his
devoted wife, who had never failed him, who had borne him sons,
who had given him the whole of her passionate heart in the full
glory of youth, and in health, and in sickness, when it came, had
turned to him for all the happiness of her life!

The play began, and presently the house was applauding the
entrance of Miss Margaret Clay. She came down a wide, light-
flooded stairway, and in her childish white gown and flower-
wreathed shepherdess hat looked about sixteen. "How young she is!"
Rachael thought with a pang. Her voice was young, too, the fact
being that Magsie was frightened, and that Nature was helping her
play her first big ingenue part.

Rachael glanced in the darkness at Warren. He had not joined in
the applause, nor did his handsome face express any pleasure. He
was leaning forward, his hands locked and hanging between his
knees, his eyes riveted on the little white figure that was moving
and talking down there in the bright bath of light beyond the
footlights.

Despite all reason, despite her desperate effort at self-control,
Rachael felt an agony of pure jealousy seize her. In an absolute
passion of envy she looked down at Magsie Clay. The young, flower-
crowned head, the slender, slippered feet, the youthful and
appealing voice--what weapons had she against these? And beyond
these was the additional lure--as old as the theatre itself--of
the fascinating profession: the work that is like play, the rouge
and curls, the loves and rages so openly assumed yet so strangely
and stirringly effective! Rachael had gowns a thousand times
handsomer than these youthful muslins and embroideries; Rachael's
own home was a setting far more beautiful than any that could be
simulated within the limits of a stage; if Magsie was a successful
ingenue, Rachael might have been called a natural queen of tragedy
and of comedy! And yet--

And yet, it was because she, too, saw the charm and came under the
spell, that Rachael suffered to-night. If she could have laughed
it to scorn, could have admired the surface prettiness, and
congratulated Magsie upon the almost perfect illusion, then she
would have had the most effective of all medicines with which to
cure Warren's midsummer madness.

But it seemed to Rachael, stunned with the terrible force of
jealousy, that Magsie was the great star of the stage, that there
never had been such a play and such a leading lady. It seemed to
her that not only to-night's triumph, but a thousand other
triumphs were before her, not only the admiration of these twelve
or fifteen hundred persons, but that of thousands more! Magsie
would be a rage! Magsie's young favors would be sought far and
wide. Magsie's summer home, Magsie's winter apartments, Magsie's
clothes and fads, these would belong to the adoring public of the
most warmhearted and impressionable city in the world! Rachael saw
it all coming with perhaps more certainty than did even the little
actress behind the footlights.

"Cute play, but I don't think much of Magsie!" Elinor Pomeroy said
frankly. Elinor Vanderwall would not have been so impolitic. But
Rachael felt that she would have liked to kiss her guest.

"I think Magsie is rather good," she said deliberately.

"Nothing like praising the girl with faint damns!" Peter Pomeroy
chuckled.

"Well, what do you think, Peter?" his hostess asked.

"I--oh, Lord! I don't see a play once a year," he said, with the
manner, if not the actual presence, of a yawn. "I think it's
rather good. I'll tell you what, Greg, I don't see you losing any
money on it," he added, with interest; "it'll run; the matinee
girls will come!"

"Magsie'd kill you for that," Elinor said.

"I don't suppose we could see Magsie, Warren, after this is over?"
Rachael asked to make him speak.

"What did you say, dear?" He brought his gaze from a general study
of the house to a point only a few inches out of range of her own.
"No, I hardly think so," he answered when she had repeated her
question. "She's probably excited and tired."

"You wouldn't mind my sending a line down by the boy?" Rachael
persisted.

"Well, I don't think I'd do that--" He hesitated.

"Oh, I'm strong for it!" Elinor said vivaciously. "It'll cheer
Magsie up. She's probably scared blue, and even I can see that
this isn't making much of a hit!"

The note was accordingly scribbled and dispatched; Rachael's heart
was singing because Warren had not denied Elinor's comment upon
the success of the play. The leading man, a popular and prominent
actor, was disturbingly good, and there was the part of an Irish
maid, a comedy part, so well filled by some hitherto unknown young
actress that it might really influence the run of the play; but
still, there was a consoling indication already in the air that
Margaret Clay's talent was somewhat too slight to sustain a
leading woman.

At eleven it was over, and if Rachael had had to endure the
comment that the second act was "the best yet," there was the
panacea, immediately to follow, that the end of the play was
"pretty flat."

Presently they all filed back to the dark, windy stage, and joined
Magsie in her dressing-room. She was glowing, excited, eager for
praise. Never was a young and lovely woman more confident of her
charm than Magsie to-night. A flushed self-satisfaction was
present on her face during every second of the ten minutes she
gave them; her laughter was self-conscious, her smile full of
artless gratification; she could not speak to any member of the
little group unless the attention of everyone present was riveted
upon her.

A callow youth, evidently her adorer, was awaiting her. She spoke
slightingly of Bryan Masters, the leading man.

"He's charming, Rachael," said Magsie, smiling her bored young
smile, with deliciously red lips, as she was buttoned into a long
fur coat, "but--he wants to impose on the fact that--well, that I
have arrived, if you know what I mean? As everyone knows, his day
is pretty well over. Now you think I'm conceited, don't you, Greg.
Oh, I like him, and he does do it rather well, don't you think?
But Richie"--Richie was the escorting young man--"Richie and I
tease him by breaking into French now and then, don't we?" laughed
Magsie.

Sauntering out from the stage entrance with her friends, Miss Clay
was the cynosure of all eyes, and knew it; part of the audience
still waited for the tedious line of limousines to disperse. She
could not move her bright glance to Warren's without encountering
the admiring looks of men and women all about her; she could not
but hear their whispers: "There, there she is--that's Miss Clay
now!" Richie, introduced as Mr. Gardiner, muttered that his car
was somewhere; it proved to be a handsome car with a chauffeur.
Magsie raised her bright face pleadingly to Warren's as she took
his hands for goodbye.

"Say you were proud of me, Warren?"

He laughed, his indulgent glance flashing to Elinor and to
Rachael, as one who invited their admiration of an attractive
child, before he looked down at her again.

"Proud of you! Why, I'm as happy as you are about it!"

"You know," Magsie said to Elinor naively, still holding Warren's
hands, "he's helped me--tremendously. He's been just--an absolute
angel to me!" And real and becoming tears came suddenly to her
eyes; she dropped Warren's hands to find a filmy little
handkerchief. A second later her smile flashed out again. "You
don't mind his being kind to me, do you, Rachael?" she asked
childishly.

Rachael's mouth was dry, she felt that her smile was hideous.

"Why should I, Magsie?" she asked a little huskily, "He's kind to
everyone!"

A moment later the Gregorys and their guests were in the car
whirling toward the Pomeroy home and supper. It was more than an
hour later that Rachael and her husband were alone, and then she
only said mildly:

"I wish you had let me know you were helping Magsie, so--so
conspicuously, Warren. One hates to be taken unawares that way."

"She asked me to keep the thing confidential," he answered with
his baffling simplicity. "She had this good chance, but she
couldn't quite swing it. I had no idea that you would care, one
way or the other."

"Well, she ought to be launched now," Rachael said. She hated to
talk of Magsie, especially in his company, where she could do
nothing but praise, but she could somehow find it difficult to
speak of anything else tonight.

"Cunning little thing, there she was, holding on to my hands, as
innocently as a child!" Warren said with a musing smile. "She's a
funny girl--all fire and ice, as she says herself!"

Rachael smothered a scornful interjection. Let Magsie employ the
arts of a schoolgirl if she would, but at least let the great
Doctor Gregory perceive their absurdity!

"Young Mr. Richie Gardiner seemed louche" she observed after a
silence which Warren seemed willing indefinitely to prolong.

"H'm!" Warren gave a short, contented laugh.

"He's crazy about her, but of course to her he's only a kid," he
volunteered. "She's funny about that, too. She's emotional, of
course, full of genius, and full of temperament. She says she
needs a safety-valve, and Gardner is her safety-valve. She says
she can sputter and rage and laugh, and he just listens and quiets
her down. To-night she called him her 'bread-and-butter'--did you
hear her?"

"I wonder what she considers you--her champagne?" Rachael asked
with a poor assumption of amusement.

But Warren was too absorbed in his own thoughts to notice it.

"It's curious how I do inspire and encourage her," he admitted.
"She needs that sort of thing. She's always up in the clouds or
down in the dumps."

"Do you see her often, Warren?" Rachael asked with deadly calm.

"I've seen her pretty regularly since this thing began," he
answered absently, still too much wrapped in the memories of the
evening to suspect his wife's emotion. Rachael did not speak
again.




CHAPTER VI


Only Miss Margaret Clay perused the papers on the following
morning with an avidity to equal that of Mrs. Warren Gregory.
Magsie read hungrily for praise, Rachael was as eager to discover
blame. The actress, lying in her soft bed, wrapped in embroidered
silk, and sleepily conscious that she was wakening to fame and
fortune, gave, it is probable, only an occasional fleeting thought
to her benefactor's wife, but Rachael, crisp and trim over her
breakfast, thought of nothing but Magsie while she read.

Praise--and praise--and praise. But there was blame, too; there
was even sharply contemptuous criticism. On the whole, Rachael had
almost as much satisfaction from her morning's reading as Magsie
did. The three most influential papers did not comment upon Miss
Clay's acting at all. In two more, little Miss Elsie Eaton and
Bryan Masters shared the honors. The Sun remarked frankly that
Miss Clay's amateurish acting, her baby lisp, her utter
unacquaintance with whatever made for dramatic art, would
undoubtedly insure the play a long run. Rachael knew that Warren
would see all these papers, but she cut out all the pleasanter
reviews and put them on his dresser.

"Did you see these?" she asked him at six o'clock.

"I glanced at some of them. You've not got The Sun here?"

"No--that was a mean one," Rachael said sweetly. "I thought it
might distress you, as it probably did Magsie."

"I saw it," he said, evidently with no thought of her feeling in
the matter. "Lord, no one minds what The Sun thinks!"

"She's really scored a success," said Rachael reluctantly. Warren
did not answer.

For the next three evenings he did not come home to dinner, nor
until late at night. Rachael bore it with dignity, but her heart
was sick within her. She must simply play the waiting game, as
many a better woman had before her, but she would punish Warren
Gregory for this some day!

She dressed herself charmingly every evening, and dined alone,
with a book. Sometimes the old butler saw her look off from the
page, and saw her breast rise on a quick, rebellious breath; and
old Mary could have told of the hours her mistress spent in the
nursery, sitting silent in the darkness by the sleeping boys, but
both these old servants were loyalty's self, and even Rachael
never suspected their realization of the situation and their
resentment. To Vera, to Elinor, even to Alice Valentine, she said
never a word. She had discussed Clarence Breckenridge easily
enough seven years before, but she could not criticise Warren
Gregory to anyone.

On the fourth evening, when they were to dine with friends, Warren
reached home in time to dress, and duly accompanied his wife to
the affair. He complained of a headache after dinner, and they
went home at about half-past ten. Rachael felt his constraint in
the car, and for very shame could not make it hard for him when he
suggested that he should go downtown again, to look in at the
club.

"But is this right, is it fair?" she asked herself sombrely while
she was slowly disrobing. "Could I treat him so? Of course I could
not! Why, I have never even looked at a man since our very wedding
day--never wanted to. And I will be reasonable now. I will be
reasonable, but he tries me hard--he makes it hard!"

She put her face in her hands and began to cry. Warren was deluded
and under a temporary spell, but still her dear and good and
handsome husband, her dearest companion and confidant. And she
missed him.

Oh, to have him back again, in the old way, so infinitely dear and
interested, so quick with laughter, so vigorous with comment, so
unsparing where he blamed! To have him come and kiss the white
parting of her hair once more as she sat waiting for him at the
breakfast table, turn to her in the car with his quick "Happy?"
once more, hold her tight once more against his warm heart!

How unlike him it was, how contemptible it was, this playing with
the glorious thing that had been their love! For the first time in
her life Rachael could have played the virago, could have raged
and stamped, could have made him absolutely afraid to misuse her
so. He did not deserve such consideration, he should not be
treated so gently.

While she sat alone, in the long evenings, she tried to follow him
in her thoughts. He was somewhere in the big, warm, dark theatre,
watching the little pool of brightness in which Magsie moved,
listening to the crisp, raw freshness of Magsie's voice. Night
after night he must sit there, drinking in her beauty and charm,
torturing himself with the thought of her inaccessibility.

It seemed strange to Rachael that this world-old tragedy should
come into her life with all the stinging novelty of a calamity.
People and press talked about a murder, about an earthquake, about
a fire. Yet what was death or ruin or flames beside the horror of
knowing love to be outgrown, of living beside this empty mask and
shell of a man whose mind and soul were in bondage elsewhere?
Rachael came to know love as a power, and herself a victim of that
power abused.

Slowly resentment began to find room in her heart. It was all so
childish, so futile, so unnecessary! A prominent surgeon, the
husband of a devoted wife, the father of two splendid sons, thus
flinging pride and sanity to the wind, thus being caught in the
lightly flung net of an ordinary, pretty little actress, the
daughter of a domestic servant and a soldier in the ranks! And
what was to be the outcome? Rachael mused sombrely. Was Warren to
tire simply of his folly, Magsie to carelessly fill his place in
the ranks of her admirers, Rachael to gracefully forgive and
forget?

It was an unpalatable role, yet she saw no other open to her. What
was to be gained by coldness, by anger, by controversy? Was a man
capable of Warren's curious infatuation to be merely scolded and
punished like a boy? She was helpless and she knew it. Until he
actually transgressed against their love, she could make no move.
Even when he did, or if he did, her only recourse was the hated
one of a public scandal: accusations, recriminations.

She began to understand his nature as she had not understood it in
all these years. Bits of his mother's brief comment upon him came
back to her; uncomprehensible when she first heard them, they were
curiously illuminating now. He had been a naturally good boy,
awkward, silent, conscientious; turning toward integrity as
normally as many of his companions turned toward vice. Despite his
natural shyness, his diffidence of manner, he had been strong
himself and had scorned weakness in anyone; upright, he needed
little guiding. The praise of servants and of his mother's friends
had been quite frankly his; even his severe mother and father had
been able to find little fault in the boy. But they had early
learned that when a minor correction was demanded by their first-
born's character, it was almost impossible to effect it. His
standard of behavior was high, fortunately, for it was also
unalterable. There was no hope of their grafting upon his
conscience any new roots. James knew right from wrong with
infallible instinct; he was not often wrong, but when he was, no
outside criticism affected him. As a baby, he would defend his
rare misdeeds, as a boy, he was never thrashed, because there was
always some good reason for what he did. He had been misinformed,
he certainly understood the other fellows to say this; he
certainly never heard the teacher forbid that; handsome,
reasonable, self-respecting, he won approval on all sides, and
because of this mysterious predisposition toward what was right
and just, came safely to the years when he was his own master and
could live unchallenged by the high moral standard he set himself.

Some of this Rachael began to perceive. It was a key to his
conduct now. He respected Magsie, he admired her; there was no
reason why he should not indulge his admiration. No unspoken
criticism from his wife could affect him, because he had seen the
whole situation clearly and had decided what was seemly and safe
in the matter. Criticism only brought a resentful, dull red color
to Warren Gregory's face, and confirmed him more stubbornly in the
course he was pursuing. He could even enjoy a certain martyr-like
satisfaction under undeserved censure, all censure being equally
incomprehensible and undeserved. Rachael had once seen in this
quality a certain godlike supremacy, a bigness, and splendidness
of vision that rose above the ordinary standards of ordinary men;
now it filled her with uneasiness.

"Well," she thought, with a certain desperate philosophy, "in a
certain number of months or years this will all be over, and I
must simply endure it until that time comes. Life is full of
trouble, anyway!"

Life was full of trouble; she saw it on all sides. But what
trivial matters they were, after all, that troubled Elinor and
Vera and Judy Moran! Vera was eternally rushing into fresh,
furious hospitalities, welcoming hordes of men and women she
scarcely knew into her house; chattering, laughing, drinking;
flattering the debutantes, screaming at the telephone, standing
patient hours under the dressmaker's hands; never rested, never
satisfied, never stopping to think. Judy Moran's trouble was that
she was too fat; nothing else really penetrated the shell of her
indolent good nature. Kenneth might be politely dropped from the
family firm, her husband might die and be laid away, her brother-
in-law commence an ugly suit for the reclamation of certain jewels
and silver tableware, but all these things meant far less to Mrs.
Moran than the unflattering truths her bedroom scales told her
every morning. She had reached the age of fifty without ever
acquiring sufficient self-control to rid herself of the surplus
forty pounds, yet she never buttered a muffin at breakfast time,
or crushed a French pastry with her fork at noon, without an
inward protest. She spent large sums of money for corsets and
gowns that would disguise her immense weight rather than deny
herself one cup of creamed-and-sugared tea or one box of
chocolates. And she suffered whenever a casual photograph, or an
unexpected glimpse of herself in a mirror, brought to her notice
afresh the dreadful two hundred and twenty pounds.

And Elinor had her absurd and unnecessary troubles, rich man's
wife as she was now, and firmly established in the social group
upon whose outskirts she had lingered so long. The single state of
her four sisters was a constant annoyance to her, especially as
Peter was not fond of the girls, and liked to allude to them as
"spinsters" and "old maids," and to ask more entertaining and
younger women to the house. Elinor had never wanted a child, but
in the third or fourth year of her marriage she had begun to
perceive that it might be wise to give her worldly old husband an
heir, much better that, at any cost, than to encourage his
fondness for Barbara Oliphant's boy, his namesake nephew, who was
an officious, self-satisfied little lad of twelve. But Nature
refused to cooperate in Elinor's maternal plans and Peter Junior
did not make his appearance at the big house on the Avenue. Elinor
grew yearly noisier, more reckless, more shallow; she rushed about
excitedly from place to place, sometimes with Peter, sometimes
with one of her sisters; not happy in either case, but much given
to quarrelsome questioning of life. It was not that she could not
get what she wanted so much as that she did not know her own mind
and heart. Whatever was momentarily tiresome or distasteful must
be pushed out of her path, and as almost every friend and every
human experience came sooner or later into this category, Elinor
found herself stranded in the very centre of life.

Alice had her troubles, too, but when her thoughts came to Alice,
Rachael found a certain envy in her heart. Ah, those were the
troubles she could have welcomed; she could have cried with sheer
joy at the thought that her life might some day slip into the same
groove as Alice's life. Rachael loved the atmosphere of the big,
shabby house now; it was the only place to which she really cared
to go. There was in Alice Valentine's character something simple,
direct, and high-principled that communicated itself to everybody
and everything in her household. A small girl in her nursery might
show symptoms of diphtheria, a broken tile on the roof might
deluge the bedroom ceilings, an old cook leave suddenly, or a
heavy rain fall upon a Sunday predestined for picknicking, but
Alice Valentine, plain, slow of speech, and slow of thought, went
her serene way, nursing, consoling, repairing, readjusting.

She had her cares about George, but they were not like Rachael's
cares for Warren. Alice knew him to be none too strong, easily
tired, often discouraged. His professional successes were many,
but there were times when the collapse of a tiny child in a free
hospital could blot from George's simple, big, tender heart the
memory of a dozen achievements. The wife, deep in the claims of
her four growing children, sometimes longed to put her arms about
him, to run away with him to some quiet land of sunshine and
palms, some lazy curve of white beach where he could rest and
sleep, and drift back to his old splendid energy and strength. She
longed to cook for him the old dishes he had loved in the early
days of their marriage, to read to him, to let the world forget
them while they forgot the world.

Instead, a hundred claims kept them here in the current of
affairs. Mary was a tall, sweet, gracious girl of sixteen now,
like her father, a pretty edition of his red hair and long-
featured clever face. Mary must go on with her music, must be put
through the lessoning and grooming of a gentlewoman, and take her
place in the dancing class that would be the Junior Cotillion in a
year or two. Alice Valentine was not a worldly woman, but she knew
it would be sheer cruelty to let her daughter grow up a stranger
in her own world, different in speech and dress and manner from
all the other girls and boys. So Mary went to little dances at the
Royces' and the Bowditches', and walked home from her riding
lesson with little Billy Parmalee or Frank Whittaker, or with
Florence Haviland and Bobby Oliphant. And Alice watched her gowns,
and her hair, and her pretty young teeth only a little less
carefully than she listened to her confidences, questioned her
about persons and things, and looked for inaccuracies in her
speech.

George Junior was a care, too, in these days at the non-committal,
unenthusiastic age of fourteen, when all the vices in the world,
finger on lip, form a bright escort for waking or sleeping hours,
and the tenderest and most tactful of maternal questions slips
from the shell of boyish silence and gruffness unanswered. Full of
apprehension and eagerness, Alice watched her only son; she could
not give him every hour of her busy days; she would have given him
every instant if she could. He was a good boy, but he was human.
Dressed for dinner and the theatre, his mother would look into the
children's sitting-room to find Mary reading, George reading,
Martha, very conscious of being there on sufferance, also reading
virtuously and attentively.

"Good-night, my darlings! You're going to bed promptly at nine,
aren't you, Mary--and Gogo, too? You know we were all late last
night," Alice would say, coming in.

"I am!" Mary would give her mother her sunny smile. "Leslie Perry
is going to be here to-morrow night, anyway, and we're going to
Thomas Prince's skating party in the afternoon, aren't we,
Mother?"

"Thomas Prince, the big boob!" Gogo might comment without
bitterness.

"He's not a big boob, either, is he, Mother?" Mary was swift in
defence. "He's not nearly such a boob as Tubby Butler or Sam
Moulton!"

"Gosh, that's right--knock Tubby!" Gogo would mumble.

"Oh, my darling boy, and my darling girl!" Alice, full of
affection and distress, would look from one to the other. Gogo,
standing near his mother, usually had a request.

"They're all over at Sam's to-night. Gosh! they're going to have
fun!"

"Father said 'NOT again this week,'" Mary might chant.

"Mary!" Alice's reproachful look would silence her daughter; she
would put an arm about her son.

"What is it to-night, dear?"

"Oh, nothing much!" Gogo would fling up his dark head impatiently.

"Just Tubby and Sam?"

"I guess so," gruffly.

"But Daddy feels--" Alice would stop short in perplexity. Why
shouldn't he go? She had known Mrs. Moulton from the days when
they both were brides, the Moultons' house was near, and it was
dull for Gogo here, under the sitting-room lamp. If he had only
been as contented as Mary, who, with a good time to remember from
yesterday, and another to look forward to to-morrow, was perfectly
happy to-night. But boys were different. Sam was a trustworthy
little fellow, but Alice did not so much like Tubby Butler. And
George did not like to have Gogo away from the house at night. She
would smile into the boy's gloomy eyes.

"Couldn't you just read to-night, my son, or perhaps Mary would
play rum with you? Wouldn't that be better, and a long night's
sleep, than going over to Sam's EVERY night?"

But she would leave a disappointed and sullen boy behind her; his
disgusted face would haunt her throughout the entire evening.

Martha was not so much a problem, and little Katharine was still
baby enough to be a joy to the whole house. But between the
children's meals, their shoes and hats and lessons, Alice was a
busy woman, and she realized that her responsibilities must
increase rather than lessen in the next few years. When Mary was
married, and Gogo finishing college, and Martha ready to be
entertained and chaperoned by her big sister, then she and George
might take Kittiwake and run away; but not now.

Rachael formed the habit of calling at the Valentine house through
the wet winds of March and April, coming in upon Alice at all
hours, sometimes with the boys, sometimes alone. Alice, in her
quiet way, was ready to open her heart completely to her brilliant
friend. Rachael spoke of all topics except one to Alice. They
discussed houses and maids, the children, books and plays and
plans for the summer, birth and death, the approaching
responsibility of the vote, philosophies and religions, saints and
sages. And the day came when Rachael spoke of Warren and of
Margaret Clay.

It was a quiet, wet spring afternoon, a day when the coming of
green leaves could be actually felt in the softened air. The two
women were upstairs in Alice's white and blue sitting-room
enjoying a wood fire. Jim and Derry were in the playroom with
Kittiwake; the house was silent, so silent that they could hear
the drumming of rain on the leads, and the lazy purr of the fire.

Alice was first incredulous, and then stunned at the story.

Rachael told all she knew, the change in her husband, the opening
night of "The Bad Little Lady," her lonely dinners and evenings,
and Magsie's complacent attitude of possession.

"Well," said Alice, who had been an absorbed and astounded
listener, when she finished, "I confess I don't understand it! If
Warren Gregory is making a fool of himself over Margaret Clay, no
one is going to be as much ashamed as he is when he is over it. I
think with you," Alice added, much in earnest, "that as far as any
actual infidelity goes, neither one would be CAPABLE of it!
Magsie's a selfish little featherhead, but she has her own
advantage too close at heart, and Warren, no matter what
preposterous theory he has to explain his interest in Magsie,
isn't going to actually do anything that would put him in the
wrong!" She paused, but Rachael did not speak, and something in
her aspect, as she sat steadily watching the fire, smote Alice to
the heart. "I have never been so shocked and so disappointed in my
life!" Alice went on, "I can't YET believe it! The only thing you
can do is keep quiet and dignified, and wait for the whole thing
to wear itself out. This explains the change between George and
Warren. I knew George suspected something from the way he tried to
shut me up when I saw Warren the other night at the theatre."

"Now that I've talked about it," Rachael smiled, "I believe I feel
better!" And presently she dried her eyes, and even laughed at
herself a little as she and Alice fell to talking of other things.
When Rachael, a boy in each hand, said good-bye, and went out into
the pale, late afternoon sunshine that followed the rain, Alice
accompanied her to the door, and stood for a moment with her at
the top of the street steps.

"You're so lovely, Rachael," said her friend affectionately. "It
doesn't seem right to have anything ever trouble anyone so
pretty!"

Rachael only smiled doubtfully in answer, but Derry and Jim talked
all the way home, their mother listening in silence. She found
their conversation infinitely more amusing when uninfluenced by
her. Both were naturally observant, Jim logical and reasonable,
Derry always misled by his fancy and his dreams. When Tim was a
lion, he was a lion who lived in the Gregory nursery, sat in the
chairs that belonged to the Gregory children, and preyed upon
their toys, as toys. But Derry was a beast of another calibre. The
polished nursery floor was the still water of jungle pools, and
the cribs were trees which a hideous and ferocious beast,
radically differing in every way from little Gerald Gregory,
climbed at will. Jim was a lion who liked to be interrupted by
grown-ups, who was laughing at his make-believe all the time, but
Derry was so frightfully in earnest as to often terrify himself,
and almost always impress his brother, with his roarings and
ravaging.

To-day their conversation ran along pleasantly; they were
companionable little brothers, and only unmanageable when
separated.

"All the men walking home will get their feet horrid an' wet,"
said Jim, "and then the ladies will scold 'em!"

"This would be a great, big ocean for a fairy," Derry commented,
flicking a wide puddle with a well-protected little foot. "Jim,"
he added in an anxious undertone, "could a fairy drown?"

"Not if he had his swimming belt on," Jim said hardily.

"All the fairies have to take little white rose leaves, and make
themselves swimming belts," Derry said dreamily, "'r else their
mothers won't let them go swimming, will they, Mother?"

They did not wait for her answer, and Rachael was free to return
to her own thoughts. But the interruption roused her, and she
watched the little pair with pleasure as they trotted before her
on the drying sidewalks. Derry was blond and Jim dark, yet they
looked alike, both with Rachael's dark, expressive eyes, and with
their father's handsome mouth and sudden, appealing smile. But
Rachael fancied that her oldest son was most like his father in
type, and found it hard to be as stern with Jim as she was with
the impulsive reckless, eager Derry, whose faults were more apt to
be her own.

To-night she went with them to the nursery, where their little
table was already set for supper and their small white beds
already neatly turned down.

"Mother's going to give us our baths!" shouted Jim. Both boys
looked at her eagerly; Rachael smiled doubtfully.

"Mother's afraid that she will have to dress, to meet Daddy
downtown," she began regretfully, when old Mary interposed
respectfully:

"Excuse me, Mrs. Gregory. But Dennison took a message from Doctor
this afternoon. I happen to know it because Louise asked me if I
didn't think she had better order dinner for you. Doctor has been
called to Albany on a case, and was to let you know when to expect
him."

"Goody--goody--good-good!" shouted Jim, and Derry joined in with a
triumphant shriek, and clasped his arms tightly about his mother's
knees. Rachael had turned a little pale, but she kissed both boys,
and only left them long enough to change her gown to something
loose and comfortable.

Then she came back to the nursery, and there were baths, and
games, and suppers, and then stories and prayers before the fire,
Mary and Rachael laughing over the fluffy heads, revelling in the
beauty of the little bodies.

When they were in bed she went down to a solitary dinner, and, as
she ate it, her thoughts went back to other solitary dinners years
ago. Utter discouragement and something like a great, all-
enveloping fear possessed her. She was afraid of life. She had
dented her armor, broken her steel, she had been flung back and
worsted in the fight.

What was the secret, then, Rachael asked the fire, if youth and
beauty and high hopes and great love failed like so many straws?
Why was Alice contented, and she, Rachael, torn by a thousand
conflicting hopes and fears? Why was it, that with all her
cleverness, and all her beauty, the woman who had been Rachael
Fairfax, and Rachael Breckenridge, and Rachael Gregory, had never
yet felt sure of joy, had never dared lay hands upon it boldly,
and know it to be her own, had trembled, and apprehended, and
distrusted where women of infinitely lesser gifts had been able to
enter into the kingdom with such utter certainty and serenity?

Sitting through the long evening by the fire, in the drowsy
silence of the big drawing-room, Rachael felt her eyes grow heavy.
Who was unhappy, who was happy--what was all life about anyway--

Dennison and old Mary came in at eleven, and looked at her for a
long five minutes. Their eyes said a great many things, although
neither spoke aloud. The fire had burned low, the light of a
shaded lamp fell softly on the sleeping woman's face. There was a
little frown between the beautiful brows, and once she sighed
lightly, like a child.

The man stepped softly back into the hall, and Mary touched her
mistress.

"Mrs. Gregory, you've dropped off to sleep!"

Rachael roused, looked up, smiling bewilderedly. Her look seemed
to search the shadows beyond the old woman's form. Slowly the new
look of strain and sorrow came back into her eyes.

"Why, so I did!" she said, getting to her feet. "I think I'll go
upstairs. Any message from Doctor Gregory?"

"No message, Mrs. Gregory."

"Thank you, Mary, good-night!" Rachael went slowly out through the
dimly lighted arch of the hall doorway, and slowly upstairs. She
deliberately passed the nursery door. Her heart was too full to
risk a visit to the boys to-night. She lighted her room and sank
dazedly into a chair.

"I dreamed that we were just married, and in the old studio," she
said, half aloud. "I dreamed I had the old-feeling again, of being
so sure, and so beloved! I thought Warren had come home early and
had brought me violets!"




CHAPTER VII


A day later Dennison brought up the card of Miss Margaret Clay.
Rachael turned it slowly in her hands, pondering, with a quickened
heartbeat and a fluctuating color. Magsie had been often a guest
in Rachael's house a year ago, but she had not been to see Rachael
for a long time now. They were to meet, they were to talk alone
together--what about? There was nothing about which Rachael
Gregory cared to talk to Margaret Clay.

A certain chilliness and trembling smote Rachael, and she sat
down. She wished she had been out. It would be simple enough to
send down a message to that effect, of course, but that was not
the same thing. That would be evading the issue, whereas, had she
been out, she could not have held herself responsible for missing
Magsie.

Well, the girl was in the neighborhood, of course, and had simply
come in to say now do you do? But it would mean evasions, and
affectations, and insincerities to talk with Magsie; it would mean
lying, unless there must be an open breach. Rachael found herself
in a state of actual dread of the encounter, and to end it,
impatient at anything so absurd, she asked Dennison to bring the
young lady at once to her own sitting-room.

This was the transformed apartment that had been old Mrs.
Gregory's, running straight across the bedroom floor, and
commanding from four wide windows a glimpse of the old square, now
brave in new feathery green. Rachael had replaced its dull red rep
with modern tapestries, had had it papered in peacock and gray,
had covered the old, dark woodwork with cream-colored enamel and
replaced the black marble mantel with a simply carved one of white
stone. The chairs here were all comfortable now; Rachael's book
lay on a magazine-littered table, a dozen tiny, leather-cased
animals, cows, horses, and sheep, were stabled on the hearth, and
the spring sunlight poured in through fragile curtains of crisp
net. Over the fireplace the great oil portrait of Warren Gregory
smiled down, a younger Warren, but hardly more handsome than he
was to-day. A pastel of the boys' lovely heads hung opposite it,
between two windows, and photographs of Jim and Derry and their
father were everywhere: on the desk, on the little grand piano,
under the table lamp. This was Rachael's own domain, and in asking
Magsie to come here she consciously chose the environment in which
she would feel most at ease.

Upstairs came the light, tripping feet. "In here?" said the fresh,
confident voice. Magsie came in.

Rachael met her at the door, and the two women shook hands. Magsie
hardly glanced at her hostess, her dancing scrutiny swept the room
and settled on Warren's portrait.

She looked her prettiest, Rachael decided miserably. She was all
in white: white shoes, white stockings, the smartest of little
white suits, a white hat half hiding her heavy masses of trimly
banded golden hair. If her hard winter had tired Magsie--"The Bad
Little Lady" was approaching the end of its run--she did not show
it. But there was some new quality in her face, some quality
almost wistful, almost anxious, that made its appeal even to
Warren Gregory's wife.

"This is nice of you, Magsie," Rachael said, watching her closely,
and conscious still of that absurd flutter at her heart. Both
women had seated themselves, now Rachael reached for the silk-
lined basket where she kept a little pretence of needlework, and
began to sew. There were several squares of dark rich silks in the
basket, and their touch seemed to give her confidence.

"What are you making?" said Magsie with a rather touching pretence
at interest. Rachael began to perceive that Magsie was ill at
ease, too. She knew the girl well enough to know that nothing but
her own affairs interested her; it was not like Magsie to ask
seriously about another woman's sewing.

"Warren likes silk handkerchiefs," explained Rachael, all the
capable wife, "and those I make are much prettier than those he
can find in the shops. So I pick up pieces of silk, from time to
time, and keep him supplied."

"He always has beautiful handkerchiefs," said Magsie rather
faintly. "I remember, years ago, when I was with Mrs. Torrence,
thinking that Greg always looked so--so carefully groomed."

"A doctor has to be," Rachael answered sensibly. There were no
girlish vapors or uncertainties about her manner; she had been the
man's wife for nearly seven years; she was in his house; she need
not fear Magsie Clay.

"I suppose so," Magsie said vaguely.

"What are your plans, Magsie?" Rachael asked kindly, as she
threaded a needle.

"We close on the eighteenth," Magsie announced.

"Yes, so I noticed." Rachael had looked for this news every week
since the run of the play began. "Well, that was a successful
engagement, wasn't it?" she asked. It began to be rather a
satisfaction to Rachael to find herself at such close quarters at
last. What a harmless little thing this dreaded opponent was,
after all!

"Yes, they were delighted," Magsie responded still in such a
lackadaisical, toneless, and dreary manner that Rachael glanced at
her in surprise. Magsie's eyes were full of tears.

"Why, what's the matter, my dear child?" she asked, feeling more
sure of herself every instant.

Her guest took a little handkerchief from her pretty white leather
purse, and touched her bright brown eyes with it lightly.

"I'll tell you, Rachael," said she, with an evident effort at
brightness and naturalness, "I came here to see you about
something to-day, but I--I don't quite know how to begin. Only,
whatever you think about it, I want you to remember that your
opinion is what counts; you're the one person who--who can really
advise me, and--and perhaps help me and other people out of a
difficulty."

Rachael looked at her with a twinge of inward distaste. This
rather dramatic start did not promise well; she was to be treated
to some youthful heroics. Instantly the hope came to her that
Magsie had some new admirer, someone she would really consider as
a husband, and wanted to make of Rachael an advocate with Warren,
who, in his present absurd state of infatuation, might not find
such a situation to his taste.

"I want to put to you the case of a friend of mine," Magsie said
presently, "a girl who, like myself, is on the stage." Rachael
wondered if the girl really hoped to say anything convincing under
so thin a disguise, but said nothing herself, and Magsie went on:
"She's pretty, and young--" Her tone wavered. "We've had a nice
company all winter," she remarked lamely.

This was beginning to be rather absurd. Rachael, quite at ease,
raised mildly interrogatory eyes to Magsie.

"You'll go on with your work, now that you've begun so well, won't
you?" she asked casually.

"W--w--well, I suppose so," Magsie answered dubiously, flushing a
sudden red. "I--don't know what I shall do!"

"But surely you've had an unusually encouraging beginning?"
pursued Rachael comfortably.

"Oh, yes, there's no doubt about that, at least!" Magsie said.
About what was there doubt, then? Rachael wondered.

She deliberately allowed a little silence to follow this remark,
smiling, as if at her own thoughts, as she sewed. The younger
woman's gaze roved restlessly about the room, she leaned from her
chair to take a framed photograph of the boys from a low bookcase,
and studied it with evidently forced attention.

"They're stunning!" she said in an undertone as she laid it aside.

"They're good little boys," their mother said contentedly. "I know
that the queerest persons in the world, about eating and drinking,
are actresses, Magsie," she added, smiling, "so I don't know
whether to offer you tea, or hot soup, or an egg beaten up in
milk, or what! We had a pianist here about a year ago, and--"

"Oh, nothing, nothing, thank you, Rachael!" Magsie said eagerly
and nervously. "I couldn't--"

"The boys may be in soon," Rachael remarked, choosing to ignore
her guest's rather unexpected emotion.

This seemed to spur Magsie suddenly into speech. She glanced at
the tall old moonfaced clock that was slowly ticking near the
door, as if to estimate the time left her, and sat suddenly erect
on the edge of her chair.

"I mustn't stay,"' she said breathlessly. "I--I have to be back at
the theatre at seven, and I ought to go home first for a few
minutes. My girl--she's just a Swedish woman that I picked up by
chance--worries about me as if she were my mother, unless I come
in and rest, and take an eggnog, or something." She rallied her
forces with a quite visible effort. "It was just this, Rachael,"
said Magsie, looking at the fire, and twisting her white gloves in
desperate embarrassment, "I know you've always liked me, you've
always been so kind to me, and I can only hope that you'll forgive
me if what I say sounds strange to you. I thought I could come
here and say it, but--I've always been a little bit afraid of you,
Rachael--and I"--Magsie laughed nervously--"and I'm scared to
death now!" she said simply.

Something natural, unaffected, and direct in her usually self-
conscious and artificial manner struck Rachael with a vague sense
of uneasiness. Magsie certainly did not seem to be acting now;
there were real tears in her pretty eyes, and a genuine break in
her young voice.

"I'm going straight ahead," she said rapidly, "because I've been
getting up my courage this whole week to come and see you, and
now, while Greg is in Albany, I can't put it off any longer. He
doesn't know it, of course, and, although I know I'm putting
myself entirely at your mercy, Rachael, I believe you'll never
tell him if I ask you not to!"

"I don't understand," Rachael said slowly.

"I've been thinking it all out," Magsie went on, "and this is the
conclusion--at least, this is what I've thought! You have always
had everything, Rachael. You've always been so beautiful, and so
much admired. You loved Clarence, and married him--oh, don't think
I'm rude, Rachael," the girl pleaded eagerly, as Rachael voiced an
inarticulate protest, "because I'm so desperately in earnest, and
s-s-so desperately unhappy!" Her voice broke on a rush of tears,
but she commanded it, and hurried on. "You've always been
fortunate, not like other women, who had to be second best, but
ALWAYS the cleverest, and ALWAYS the handsomest! I remember, when
I heard you were to marry Greg, I was just sick with misery for
two or three days! I had seen him a few weeks before in Paris, but
he said nothing of it, didn't even mention you. Don't think I was
jealous, Rachael--it wasn't that. But it seemed to me that you had
everything! First the position of marrying a Breckenridge, then to
step straight into Greg's life. You'll never know how I--how I
singled you out to watch--"

"Just as I have singled you out this horrible winter," Rachael
said to herself, in strange pain and bewilderment at heart. Magsie
watched her hopefully, but Rachael did not speak, and the girl
went on:

"When I came to America I thought of you, and I listened to what
everyone said of you. You had a splendid boy, named for Greg, and
then another boy; you were richer and happier and more admired
than ever! And Rachael--I know you'll forgive me--you were so much
FINER than ever--when I met you I saw that. I couldn't dislike
you, I couldn't do anything but admire, with all the others. I
remember at Leila's wedding, when you wore dark blue and furs, and
you looked so lovely! And then I met Greg again. And truly, truly,
Rachael, I never dreamed of this then!"

"Dreamed of what?" Rachael said with dry lips. The girl's voice,
the darkening room, the dull, fluttering flames of the dying fire,
seemed all like some oppressive dream.

"Dreamed--" Magsie's voice sank. Her eyes closed, she put one hand
over her heart, and pressed it there. "Then came my plan to go on
the stage," she said, taking up her story, "and one day, when I
was especially blue, I met Greg. We had tea together. I've never
forgotten one instant of that day! He tried to telephone you, but
couldn't get you; we just talked like any friends. But he promised
to help me, he was so interested, and I was homesick for Paris,
and ready to die in this awful city! After that you gave me a
dinner, and then we had theatricals, and then Bowman placed me,
and I had to go on the road. But I saw Greg two or three times,
and one day--one day last winter"--again her voice faltered, as if
she found the memories too poignant for speech--"we drove in the
Park," she said dreamily; "and then Greg saw how it was."

Rachael sat silent, stunned.

"Oh, Rachael," the girl said passionately. "Don't think I didn't
fight it! I thought of you, I tried to think for us all. I said we
would never see each other again, and I went away--you know that!
For months after that day in the Park we hardly saw each other.
And then, last summer, we met again. And he talked to me so
wonderfully, Rachael, about making the best of it, about being
good friends anyway--and I've lived on that! But I can't live on
that forever, Rachael."

"You've been seeing each other?" Rachael asked stupidly.

"Oh, every day! At tea, you know, or sometimes especially before
you came back, at dinner. And, Rachael, nobody will ever know what
it's done for me! Greg's managed all my business, and whenever I
was utterly discouraged and tired he had the kindest way of
saying: 'Never mind, Magsie, I'm tired and discouraged, too!'"
Magsie's face glowed happily at the memory of it. "I know I'm not
worthy of Greg's friendship," she said eagerly. "And all the time
I've thought of you, Rachael, as having the first right, as being
far, far above me in everything! But--I'm telling you everything,
you see--" Magsie interrupted herself to explain.

"Go on!" Rachael urged, clearing her throat.

"Well, it's not much. But a week or two ago Greg was talking to me
about your being eager to get the boys into the country early this
year. He looked awfully tired that afternoon, and he said that he
thought he would close this house, and live at the club this
summer, and he said 'That means you have a dinner date every
night, Magsie!' And suddenly, Rachael--I don't know what came over
me, but I burst out crying"--Magsie's eyes filled now as she
thought of it--"and I said, 'Oh, Greg, we need each other! Why
can't we belong to each other! You love me and I love you; why
can't we give up our work and the city and everything else, and
just be happy!'"

"And what did--Warren say?" Rachael asked in a whisper.

"Oh, Rachael! That's what I've been remembering ever since!"
Magsie said. "That's what made me want to come to you; I KNEW you
would understand! You're so good; you want people to be happy,"
said Magsie, fighting tears again and trying to smile. "You have
everything: your sons, your position, your beauty--everything!
I'm--I'm different from some women, Rachael. I can't just run away
with him. There is an honorable and a right way to do it, and I
want to ask you if you'll let us take that way!"

"An honorable way?" Rachael echoed in an unnatural voice.

"Well--" Magsie widened innocent eyes. "Nobody has ever blamed YOU
for taking it, Rachael!" she said simply. "And nobody ever blamed
Clarence, with Paula!"

Rachael, looking fixedly at her, sat as if turned to stone.

"You are brave, Magsie, to come and tell me this," she said at
last quietly.

"You are kind to listen to me," Magsie answered with disarming
sincerity. "I know it is a strange thing to do." She laughed
nervously. "Of course, I know THAT!" she added. "But it came to me
that I would the other day. Greg and I were talking about dreams,
you know--things we wanted to do. And we talked about going away
to some beach, and swimming, and moonlight, and just rest--and
quiet--"

"I see," Rachael said.

"Greg said, 'This is only a dream, Magsie, and we mustn't let
ourselves dream!'" Magsie went on. "But--but sometimes dreams come
true, don't they?"

She stopped. There was an unearthly silence in the room.

"I've tried to fight it, and I cannot," Magsie presently said in a
small, tired voice; "it comes between me and everything I do. I'm
not a great actress--I know that. I don't even want to be any
more. I want to go away where no one will ever see me or hear of
me again. I've heard of this--feeling"--she sent Rachael a brave
if rather uncertain smile--"but I never believed in it before! I
never believed that when--when you care"--Rachael was grateful to
be spared the great word--"you can't live or breathe or think
anything"--again there was an evasion--"but the one thing!"

And with a long, tired sigh, again she relapsed into silence.
Rachael could find nothing to say.

"Honestly, HONESTLY," the younger woman presently added, "you
mustn't think that either one of us saw this coming! We were
simply carried away. It was only this year, only a few months ago,
that I began to think that perhaps--perhaps if you understood, you
would set--Greg free. You want to live just for the boys, you love
the country, and books, and a few friends. Your life would go on,
Rachael, just as it has, only he would be happy, and I would be
happy. Oh, my God," said Magsie, with quivering lips and brimming
eyes, "how happy I would be!"

Rachael looked at her in impassive silence.

"At all events," the visitor said more composedly, "I have been
planning for a week to come to you, Rachael, and have this talk. I
may have done more harm than good--I don't know; but from the
instant I thought of it I have simply been drawn, as if I were
under a spell. I haven't said what I meant to, I know that. I
haven't said"--her smile was wistful and young and sweet, as,
rising from her chair, she stood looking down at Rachael--"how
badly I feel that it--it happens so," said Magsie. "But you know
how deeply I've always admired you! It must seem strange to you
that I would come to you about it. But Ruskin, wasn't it, and
Wagner--didn't they do something like this? I knew, even if things
were changed between you and Greg, that you would be big enough
and good enough to help us all to find the--the solution, if there
is one!"

Rachael stood up, too, so near her guest that she could put one
hand on Magsie's shoulder. The girl looked up at her with the
faith of a distressed child.

"I'm glad you did come, Magsie," said Rachael painfully, "although
I never dreamed, until this afternoon, that--this--could possibly
have been in Warren's thoughts. You speak of--divorce, quite
naturally, as of course anyone may, to me. But I never had thought
of it. It's a sad tangle, whatever comes of it, and perhaps you're
right in feeling that we had better face it, and try to find the
solution, if, as you say, there is one."

And Rachael, breathing a little hard, stood looking down at Magsie
with something so benign, so tragic, and so heroic in her
beautiful face that the younger woman was a little awed, even a
little puzzled, where she had been so sure. She would have liked
to put her arms about her hostess's neck, and to seal their
extraordinary treaty with a kiss, but she knew better. As well
attempt to kiss the vision of a ministering angel. Rachael, one
arm on Magsie's shoulder, her whole figure and her face expressing
painful indecision, had never seemed so remote, so goddesslike.

"And--and you won't tell him of this?" faltered Magsie.

"Ah--you must leave that to me," Rachael said with a sad smile.

For a few seconds longer they looked at each other. Then Rachael
dropped her arm, and Magsie moved a little. The visitor knew that
another sentence must be in farewell, but she felt strangely
awkward, curiously young and crude. Rachael, except for the
falling of her arm, was motionless. Her eyes were far away, she
seemed utterly unconscious of herself and her surroundings. Magsie
wanted to think of one more thing to say, one clinching sentence,
but everything seemed to be said. Something of the other woman's
weariness and coldness of spirit seemed to communicate itself to
her; she felt tired and desolate. It seemed a small and
insignificant matter that she had had her momentous talk with
Rachael, and had succeeded in her venture. Love was failing her,
life was failing.

"I hope--I haven't distressed you--too awfully, Rachael," Magsie
faltered. She had not thought of herself, a few hours ago, as
distressing Rachael at all. She had thought that Rachael might be
scornful, might be cold, might overwhelm her with her magnificence
of manner, and shame her for her daring. She had come in on a
sudden impulse, and had had no time for any thought but that her
revelation would be exciting and dramatic and astonishing. She was
sincerely anxious to have Warren freed, but not so swept away by
emotion that she could not appreciate this lovely setting and her
own picturesque position in the eyes of her beautiful rival.

"Oh, no!" Rachael answered, perfunctorily polite, and with her
eyes still fixed darkly on space. And as if half to herself, she
added, in a breathless, level undertone:

"It all rests with Warren!"

Presently Magsie breathed a faint "Good-bye," following it with an
almost inaudible murmur that Dennison would let her out. Then the
white figure was gone from the gloom of the room, and Rachael was
alone.

For a time she was so dazed, so emotionally exhausted by the event
of the last hour, that she stood on, fixed, unseeing, one hand
pressed against her side as if she stopped with it the mouth of a
wound. Occasionally she drew a long, sharp breath as the dying
sometimes breathe.

"It all rests with Warren," she said presently, half-aloud, and in
a toneless, passive voice. And slowly she turned and slowly went
to the window.

The room was dark, but twilight lingered in the old square, and
home-going men and women were filing across it. The babies and
their nurses were gone now, there were only lounging men on the
benches. Lumbering green omnibuses rocked their way through the
great stone arch, and toward the south, over the crowded foreign
quarter, the pink of street lamps was beginning to battle with the
warm purple and blue that still hung in the evening sky. The
season had been long delayed, but now there was a rustle of green
against the network of boughs; a few warm days would bring the
tulips and the fruit blossoms.

What a sweet, good, natural world it was in which to be happy!
With its wheeling motor cars, its lovers seated in high security
for the long omnibus ride, its laborers pleasantly ready for the
home table and the day's domestic news! The chattering little
Jewish girls from one of the uptown department stores were gay
with shrilly voiced plans; the driver, riding lazily home on a
pile of empty bags, had no quarrel with the world; the smooth-
haired, unhatted Italian women from the Ghetto, with shawls
wrapped over their full breasts, and serene black-eyed babies
toddling beside them, were placidly content with the run of their
days. It remained for the beautiful woman in the drawing-room to
look with melancholy eyes upon the springtime, and tear out her
heart in an agony no human power could cure.

"It all rests with Warren," Rachael said. Magsie was nothing, she
was nothing; the world, the boys, were nothing. It was for Warren
to hold their destinies in his hands and decide for them all. No
use in raging, in reasoning, in arguing. No use in setting forth
the facts, the palpable right and wrong. No use in bitterly asking
the unanswering heavens if this were right and just, this system
that could allow any young girl to feel any married man, any
father, her natural prey. She had come to love Warren just as in a
few years she might come to love someone else. That was all
permissible; regrettable perhaps for Warren's wife, an
unmistakable calamity for Warren's boys, but, from Magsie's
standpoint, comprehensible and acceptable. If Warren were free,
Magsie was well within her rights; if he were not, Rachael was the
last woman in the world to dispute it.

After a while Rachael began to move mechanically about the room.
She sat down at her desk and wrote a few checks; the boys little
first dancing lessons must be paid for, the man who mended the
clock, the woman who had put all her linen in order. She wrote
briskly, reaching quickly for envelopes and stamps, and, when she
had finished, closed the desk with her usual neatness. She
telephoned the kitchen; had she told Louise that Doctor Gregory
might come home at midnight? He might be at home for breakfast.
Then she glanced about the quiet room, and went softly out,
through the inner door, to her own bedroom adjoining. She walked
on little usual errands between bureau and wardrobe, steadily
proceeding with the changing of her gown. Once she stopped short,
in the centre of the floor, and stood musing for a few silent
minutes, then she said, aloud and lightly:

"Poor Magsie--it's all so absurd!"

If for a few seconds her thoughts wandered, they always came
swiftly back. Magsie and Warren had fallen in love with each
other--wanted to marry each other. Rachael tried to marshal her
whirling thoughts; there must be simple reason somewhere in this
chaotic matter. She had the desperate sensation of a mad-woman
trying to prove herself sane. Were they all crazy, to have got
themselves into this hideous fix? What was definite, what facts
had they upon which to build their surmises?

Warren was her husband, that was one fact; Warren loved her, that
was another. They had lived together for nearly eight years,
planned together, they knew each other now, heart and soul. And
there were two sons. These being facts for Rachael, what facts had
Magsie? Rachael's heart rose on a wild rush of confidence. Magsie
had no basis for her pretension. Magsie was young, and she had
madly and blindly fallen in love. There was her single claim: she
loved. Rachael could not doubt it after that hour in the sitting-
room. But what pitiable folly! To love and to admit love for
another woman's husband!

Thinking, thinking, thinking, Rachael lay awake all night. She
composed herself a hundred times for sleep, and a hundred times
sleep evaded her. Magsie--Warren--Rachael. Their names swept round
and round in her tired brain. She was talking to Magsie, so
eloquently and kindly; she was talking to Warren. Warren was
shocked at the mere thought of her suspicions, had seen nothing,
had suspected nothing, couldn't believe that Rachael could be so
foolish! Warren's arms were about her, he was going to take her
and the boys away. This was a bad atmosphere for wives, this
diseased and abnormal city, Warren said. She was buying steamer
coats for Derry and Jim--

Magsie! Again the girl's tense, excited face rose before Rachael's
fevered memory. "You mustn't think either one of us saw this
coming!"

Rachael rose on her elbow, shook her pillows, flashed a night-
light on her watch. Quarter to three. It was a rather dismal hour,
she thought, not near enough either midnight or morning. Tossing
so long, she would be sleepless all night now.

Well, what was marriage anyway? Was there never a time of
serenity, of surety? Was any pretty, irresponsible young woman
free to set her heart upon another woman's husband, the father of
another woman's children? Rachael suddenly thought of Clarence.
How different the whole thing had seemed then! Clarence's pride,
Clarence's child, had they been so hurt as her pride and her
children were to be hurt now?

She must not allow herself to be so easily frightened. She had
been thinking too many months of the one thing; she could not see
it fairly. Why, Magsie had been infinitely more dangerous in the
early days of her success; there was nothing to fear from the
simple, apprehensive Magsie of this afternoon! The only sensible
thing was to stop thinking of it, and to go to sleep. But Rachael
felt sick and frightened, experienced sensations of faintness,
sensations like hunger. Her eyes seemed painfully open, she could
not shut them. Her breath came fitfully. She sighed, turned on her
side. She would count one hundred, breathing deep and with closed
eyes. "Sixteen, seventeen!" Rachael sat suddenly erect, and looked
at her watch again. Twenty-two minutes past three.

Morning broke with wind and rain; the new leaves in the square
were tossing wildly; sleet struck noisily against the windows.
Rachael, waking exhausted, after not more than an hour's sleep,
went through the process of dressing in a weary daze. The boys, as
was usual, came in during the hour, full of fresh conversation and
eager to discuss plans for the day. Jim tied strings from knob to
knob of her bureau drawers, Derry amused himself by dashing a
chain of glass beads against the foot of the bed until the links
gave and the tiny balls rolled in every direction over the floor.

"Never mind," Rachael consoled the discomfited junior, "Pauline
will come in and pick them all up. Mother doesn't care!"

Derry, however, howled on unconsoled, and Rachael, stopping, half-
dressed, to take him in her arms, mused while she kissed him over
the tiny sorrow that could so convulse him. Was she no more than a
howling baby robbed of a toy? Nothing could be more real than
Derry's sense of loss, no human being could weep more desolately
or more unreasonably. Were her love and her life no more than a
string of baubles, scattered and flung about by some irresponsible
hand? Was nothing real except the great moving sea and the arch of
stars above the spring nights? Life and death, and laughter and
tears, how unimportant they were! Eight years ago she had felt
herself to be unhappy; now she knew that in those days she had
known neither sorrow nor joy. Since then, what an ecstasy of
fulfilled desire had been hers! She had lived upon the heights,
she had tasted the fullest and the sweetest of human emotions.
What other woman--Cleopatra, Helen, all the great queens of
countries and of art--had known more exquisite delight than hers
had been in those first days when she had waited for Warren to
come to her with violets?

The morning went on like an ugly dream. At nine o'clock Rachael
sent down an untouched breakfast tray. Mary took the boys out into
the struggling sunshine. The house was still.

Rachael lay on her wide couch, staring wretchedly into space. Her
head ached. The moonfaced clock struck a slow ten, the hall clock
downstairs following it with a brisk silver chime. Vendors in the
square called their wares; the first carts of potted spring
flowers were going their rounds.

Shortly after ten o'clock she heard Warren run upstairs and into
his room. She could hear his voice at the telephone; he wanted the
hospital--Doctor Gregory wished to speak to Miss Moore.

Miss Moore? Doctor Gregory would be there at eleven ... please
have everything ready. Miss Moore, who was a veteran nurse and a
privileged character, asked some question as to the Albany case;
Warren wearily answered that the patient had not rallied; it was
too bad--too bad.

Once it would have been Rachael's delight to soothe him, to give
him the strong coffee he needed before eleven o'clock, to ask
about the poor Albany man. Now she hardly heard him. Beginning to
tremble, she sat up, her heart beating fast.

"Warren!" she called in a shaken voice.

He came to her door immediately, and they faced each other, his
perfunctory greeting arrested by her look.

"Warren," said Rachael with a desperate effort at control, "I want
you to tell me about--about you and Magsie Clay."

Instantly his face darkened. He gazed back at her steadily,
narrowing his eyes.

"What about it?" he asked sharply.

Rachael knew that she was growing angry against her passionate
resolution to keep the conversation in her own hands.

"Magsie came to see me yesterday," she said, panting.

Had she touched him? She could not tell. There was no wavering in
his impassive face.

"What about it?" he asked again after a silence.

His wife pushed the rich, tumbled hair from her face with a wild
gesture, as if she fought for air.

"What about it?" she echoed, in a constrained tone, still with
that quickened shallow breath. "Do you think it is CUSTOMARY for a
girl to come to a man's wife, and tell her that she cares for him?
Do you think it is CUSTOMARY for a man to have tea every day with
a young actress who admits she is in love with him--"

"I don't know what you're talking about!" Warren said, his face a
dull red.

"Do you mean to tell me that you don't know that Margaret Clay
cares for you," Rachael asked in rising anger, "and that you have
never told her you care for her--that you and she have never
talked about it, have never wished that you were free to belong to
each other!"

"You will make yourself ill!" Warren said quietly, watching her.

His tone brought Rachael abruptly to her senses. Fury and
accusation were not her best defence. With Warren calm and
dignified she would only hurt her claim by this course. In a
second she was herself again, her breath grew normal, she
straightened her hair, and with a brief shrug walked slowly from
the room into her own sitting-room adjoining. Following her,
Warren found her looking down at the square from the window.

"If you are implying anything against Magsie, you are merely
making yourself ridiculous, Rachael," he said nervously. "Neither
Magsie nor I have forgotten your claim for a single instant. If
she came here and talked to you, she did so absolutely without my
knowledge."

"She said so," Rachael admitted, heart and mind in a whirl.

"From a sense of protection--for her," Warren went on, "I did NOT
tell you how much we have come to mean to each other. I am
extremely--unwilling--to discuss it now. There is nothing to be
said, as far as I am concerned. It is better not to discuss it; we
shall not agree. That Magsie could come here and talk to you
surprises me. I naturally don't know what she said, or what
impression she gave you. I would only remind you that she is
young--and unhappy." He glanced at the morning paper he carried in
his hand with an air of casual interest, and added in a moderate
undertone, "It's an unhappy business!"

Rachael stood as if she had been shot through the heart--
motionless, dumb. She felt the inward physical convulsion that
might have followed an actual shot. Her heart seemed to be
struggling under a choking flood, and black circles moved before
her eyes.

Watching her, Warren presently began to enlarge upon the subject.
His tone was that of frank and unashamed, if regretful, narrative.
Rachael perceived, with utter stupefaction, that although he was
sorry, and even angry at being drawn into this talk, he was far
from being confused or ashamed.

"I am sorry for this, Rachael," he began in the logical tone she
knew so well. "I think, frankly, that Magsie made a mistake in
coming to you. The situation isn't of my making. Magsie, being a
woman, being impulsive and impatient, has taken the law into her
own hands." He shrugged. "She may have been wise, or unwise, I
can't tell!"

He paused, but Rachael did not speak or stir.

Warren had rolled up the paper, and now, in his pacing, reaching
the end of the room, he turned, and, thrusting it into his armpit,
came back with folded arms.

"Now that this thing has come up," he said in a practical tone,
"it is a great satisfaction to me to realize how reasonable a
woman you are. I want you to know just how this whole thing
happened. Magsie has always been a most attractive girl to me. I
remember her in Paris, years ago, young, and with a pretty little
way of turning her head, and effective eyes."

"I know all this, Warren!" Rachael said wearily.

"I know you do. But let me recapitulate it," he said, resuming in
a businesslike voice: "When I met her at Hoyt's wedding I knew
right away that we had a personality to deal with--something rare!
I remember thinking then that it would be interesting to see whom
she cared for, what that volcanic little heart would be in love--
Time went on; we saw more of her. I met her, now and then, we had
the theatricals, and the California trip. One day, that fall, in
the Park, I took her for a drive, innocently enough, nothing
prearranged. And I remember asking if any lucky man had made an
impression upon her."

Warren smiled, his eyes absent. Rachael's look of superb scorn was
wasted.

"It came to me in a flash," he went on, "that Magsie had come to
care for me. Poor little Magsie, she hadn't meant to, she hadn't
seen it coming. I remember her looking up at me--she didn't have
to say a word. 'I'm sorry, Magsie,' I said. That was all. The
touching thing was that even in that trouble she turned to me. We
talked it over, I took her back to her hotel, and very simply she
said, 'Kiss me, once, Greg, and I'll be good!' After that I didn't
see her for a long, long time.

"It seemed to me a sacred charge--you can see that. I couldn't
doubt it, the evidence was right there before my eyes, and
thinking it over, I couldn't be much surprised. We were in the
fix, and of course there was nothing to be done. She went away and
that was the end of it, then. But when I saw her again last winter
the whole miserable business came up. The rest, of course, she
told you. She is unhappy and rebellious, or she would never have
dared to come to you! I can't understand her doing so, now, for
Magsie is a good little sport, Rachael; she knows you have the
right of way. The affair has always been with that understanding.
However much I feel for Magsie, and regret the whole thing--why, I
am not a cad!" He struck her to her heart with his friendly smile.
"You brought the subject up; I don't care to discuss it," he said.
"I don't question your actions, and all I ask is that you will not
question mine!"

"Perhaps--the world--may some day question them, Warren!" Rachael
tried to speak quietly, but she was beginning to be frightened at
her own violence. She shook with actual chill, her mouth was dry
and her cheeks blazing.

"The world?" He shrugged. "I can hardly see that it is the world's
business that you go your way and I go mine!" he said reasonably.
He glanced at his watch. "Perhaps you will be so good as to say no
more about it?" he suggested. "I have no time, now, anyway.
Marriage--"

"Warren!" Rachael interrupted hoarsely. She stopped.

"Marriage," he went on, "never stands still! A man and woman are
growing nearer together hourly, or they are growing apart. There
is no need, between reasonable beings, for recriminations and
bitterness. A man is only a man, after all, and if I have been
carried off my feet by Magsie--as I admit I have been--why, such
things have happened before! When she and my wife--who might have
protected my dignity--meet to discuss the question of their
feelings, and their rights, then I confess that I am beyond my
depth."

He took a deep chair and sat back, his knees crossed, his elbow on
the chair arm, his chin resting on his hand, as one conscious of
scoring a point.

"And what about the boys' feelings and rights?" Rachael said in a
low, tense tone.

"There you are!" Warren exclaimed. "It's all absurd on the face of
it--the whole tangle!"

His wife looked at him in grave, dispassionate scrutiny. Of what
was he made, this handsome, well-groomed man of forty-eight? What
fatal infection had poisoned heart and brain? She saw him this
morning as a stranger, and as a most repellent stranger.

"But it is a tangle in which one still sees right and wrong,
Warren," she said, desperately struggling for calm. "Human
relationships can't be discussed as if they were the moves on a
chess-board. I make no claim for myself--the time has gone by when
I could do so--but there is honor and decency in the world, there
is simple uprightness! Your attentions, as a married man, can only
do Magsie harm, and your daring"--suddenly she began restlessly to
pace the floor as he had done--"your daring in coming here to me,
to tell me that any other woman has a claim on you," she said,
beginning to breathe violently, "only shows me how blind, how
drugged you are with--I don't know what to call it--with your own
utter lawlessness! What right has Margaret Clay compared to MY
right? Are my claims, and my sons' claims, to be swept aside
because a little idle girl of Magsie's age chooses to flirt with
my husband? What is marriage, anyway--what is parenthood? Are you
mad, Warren, that you can come here to our home and talk of
'tangles'--and rights? Do you think I am going to argue it with
you, going to belittle my own position by admitting, for one
second, that it is open to question?"

She flashed him one blazing look, then resumed her walking and her
angry rush of words.

"Why, if some four-year-old child came in here and began to
contend for Derry's place," Rachael asked passionately, "how long
would we seriously consider his right? If I must dispute the title
of Magsie Clay this year, why not of Jennie Jones next year, of
Polly Smith the year after that? If--"

"Now you are talking recklessly," Warren Gregory said quietly,
"and you have entirely lost sight of the point at issue. Nobody is
attempting a controversy with you."

The cool, analytical voice robbed Rachael of all her fire. She sat
down, and was silent.

"What you say is quite true," pursued Warren, "and of course, if a
woman chooses to stand on her RIGHTS--if it becomes a question of
legal obligation--"

"Warren! When was our marriage that?"

"I don't say it was that! I am protesting because YOU talk of
rights and titles. I only say that if the problem has come down to
a mere question of what is LEGAL, why, that in itself is a
confession of failure!"

"Failure!" she echoed with white lips.

"I am not speaking of ourselves, I tell you!" he said, annoyed.
"But can any sane person in these days deny that when a man and
woman no longer pull together in double harness, our world accepts
an honorable change?"

Rachael was silent. These had been her words eight years ago.

"They may have reasons for not making that change," Warren went on
logically; "they may prefer to go on, as thousands of people do,
to present a perfectly smooth exterior to the world. But don't be
so unfair as to assume that what hundreds of good and reputable
men and women are doing every day is essentially wrong!"

"You know that you may say this--to me, Warren," she said with a
leaden heart.

"Anybody may say it to anybody!" he answered irritably. "Tying a
man and a woman together doesn't necessarily make them--"

She interrupted with a quick, breathless, "WARREN!"

"Well!" Again he shrugged his shoulders and again glanced at his
watch. "It seems to me that you shouldn't have spoken of the
matter if you were not prepared to discuss it!" he said.

Rachael felt the room whirling. She could neither see nor feel
anything now but the fury that possessed her. Perhaps twice in her
life before, never with him, had she so given way to anger.

"_I_ shouldn't have spoken of it, Warren!" she echoed. "I should
have borne it, and smiled, and said nothing! Perhaps I should!
Perhaps some women would have done that--"

"Rachael!" he interrupted quickly. But she swept down his words in
the wild tide of her own.

"Warren!" she said with deadly decision, "I'm not that sort of
woman. You've had your fun--now it's my turn! Now it's my turn!"
Rachael repeated in a voiceless undertone as she rapidly paced the
room. "Now you can turn to the world, and SEE what the world
thinks! Let them know how often you and Magsie have been together,
let them know that she came here to ask me to set you free, and
then see what the general verdict is! I'm not going to hush this
up, to refrain from discussing it because you don't care to,
because it hurts your feelings! It SHALL be discussed, and you
shall be free! You shall be free, and if you choose to put Magsie
Clay here in my place, you may do so!"

"Rachael!" he said angrily. And he caught her thin wrists in his
hands.

"Don't touch me!" she said, wrenching herself free. "Don't touch
me, you cruel and wicked and heartless--! Go to Magsie! Tell her
that I sent you to her! Take your hands off me, Warren--"

Standing back, discomfited, he attempted reason.

"Rachael! Don't talk so! I don't know what to make of you! Why, I
never saw you like this. I never heard you--"

The door of her room closed behind her. She was gone. A long
silence fell in the troubled room where their voices had warred so
lately.

Warren looked at his watch, looked at her door. Then he went out
the other door, and downstairs, and out of the house. Rachael
heard him go. She was still breathing fast, still blind to
everything but her own fury. She would punish him, she would
punish him. He should have his verdict from the world he trusted
so serenely; he should have his Magsie.

The clocks struck eleven: first the slow clock in her sitting-
room, then the quick silvery echo from downstairs. Rachael glanced
about nervously. The Bank--the boys' lunches--the trunks--

She went downstairs. In the little breakfast-room off the big
dining-room the array of Warren's breakfast waited. Old Mary, with
the boys, had just come in the side door.

"Mary," Rachael said quickly, "I want you to help me. Pack some
clothes for the boys and me, and give them some luncheon. We are
going down to Clark's Hills on the two o'clock train--"

"My God! Mrs. Gregory, you look very bad, my dear!" said Mary.

The unconscious endearment, the shock and concern visible on
Mary's homely, honest face were too much for Rachael. Her face
changed to ivory, she put one hand to her throat, and her lips
quivered.

"Help me--some coffee--Mary!" she whispered. "I think--I'm dying!"




BOOK III




CHAPTER I


Warren went to the hospital and performed his operation. It was a
long, hard strain for all concerned, and the nurses told each
other afterward that you could see Doctor Gregory's heart was in
it, he looked as bad as the child's father and mother did. It was
after one o'clock when the surgeons got out of their white gowns,
and Warren was in the cold, watery sunlight of the street before
he realized that he had had nothing to eat since his dinner in
Albany last night.

He looked about vaguely; there were plenty of places all about
where he could get a meal. He saw Magsie--

Magsie often drove about in hansom-cabs--they were one of her
delights; and more than once of late she had come to meet Warren
at some hospital, or even to pick him up at the club. But this was
the first time that she had done so without prearrangement.

She leaned out of the cab, a picture of youth and beauty, and
waved a white glove. How did she know he was in here? she echoed
his question. He had written her from Albany that he would operate
at Doctor Berry's hospital this morning she reminded him. And
where was he going now?

"I'm awfully worried this morning, honey-girl," said Warren, "and
I can't stop to play with nice little Magsies in new blue dresses!
My head is blazing, and I believe I'll go home--"

"When did you get in, and where did you have breakfast?" she asked
with pretty concern. "Greg, you've not had any? Oh, I believe he
hasn't had any! And it's after one, and you've been operating! Get
STRAIGHT in--"

"No, dear!" he smiled as she moved to one side of the seat, and
packed her thin skirts neatly under her, "not to-day! I'll--"

"Warren Gregory!" said Magsie sternly, "you get right straight in
here, and come and have your breakfast! Now, what's nearest? The
Biltmore!" She poked the upper door with her slim umbrella. "To
the Biltmore!" commanded Magsie.

At a quiet table Warren had coffee and eggs and toast, and more
coffee, and finally his cigar. The color came back into his face,
and he looked less tired.

Magsie was a rather simple little soul under her casing of
Parisian veneer, and was often innocently surprised at the potency
of her own charm. That men, big men and wise men, were inclined to
take her artful artlessness at its surface value was a continual
revelation to her. Like Rachael, she had gone to bed the night
before in a profoundly thoughtful frame of mind, a little
apprehensive as to Warren's view of her call, and uneasy as to the
state in which she had left his wife. But, unlike Rachael, Magsie
had not been wakeful long. The consideration of other people's
attitudes never troubled her for more than a few consecutive
minutes. She had been genuinely stirred by her talk that
afternoon, and was honestly determined to become Mrs. Warren
Gregory; but these feelings did not prevent her from looking back,
with thrilled complacence, to the scene in Rachael's sitting-room,
and from remembering that it was a dramatic and heroic thing for a
slender, pretty girl in white to go to a man's wife and plead for
her love. "No harm done, anyway!" Magsie had reflected drowsily,
drifting off to sleep; and she had awakened conscious of no
emotion stronger than a mild trepidation at the possibility of
Warren's wrath.

Dainty and sweet, she came to meet him halfway, and now sat
congratulating herself that he was soothed, fed, and placidly
smoking before their conversation reached deep channels.

"Greg, dear, I've got a horrible confession to make!" began Magsie
when this propitious moment arrived.

"You mean your call on Rachael?" he asked quickly, the shadow
coming back to his eyes. "Why did you do it?"

Magsie was conscious of being frightened.

"Was she surprised, Greg?"

"I don't know that she was surprised. Of course she was angry."

"Well," Magsie said, widening her childish eyes, "didn't you
EXPECT her to be angry?"

"I didn't expect her to take any attitude whatever," Warren said
with a look half puzzled and half reproving.

"Greg!" Magsie was quite honestly astonished. "What did you expect
her to do? Give you a divorce without any feeling whatever?"

There was no misunderstanding her. For a full minute Warren stared
at her in silence. In that minute he remembered some of his recent
talks with Magsie, some of his notes and presents, he remembered
the plan that involved a desert island, sea-bathing, moonlight,
and solitude.

"I think, if you had been listening to us," Magsie went on, as he
did not answer, "you could not have objected to one word I said!
And Rachael was lovely, Greg. She told me she would not contest
it--"

"She told you THAT?"

"Well, she said several times that it must be as you decide."
Magsie dimpled demurely. "And I was--nice, too!" she asserted
youthfully. "I didn't tell her about this--and this!" and with one
movement of her pretty hand Magsie indicated the big emerald on
her ring finger and the heavy bracelet of mesh gold about her
wrist. Suddenly her face brightened, and with an eager movement
she leaned across the narrow table, and caught his hand in both
her own. "Ah, Greg," she said tenderly, "does it seem true, that
after all these months of talking, and hoping, you and I are going
to belong to each other?"

"But I have no idea that Rachael is seriously considering a
divorce," Warren said slowly. "Why should she? She has no cause!"

"She thinks she has!" Magsie said triumphantly.

"She isn't the sort of woman to think things without reason,"
Warren said.

"She doesn't have to think," Magsie assured him with the same air
of satisfaction; "she knows! Everyone knows how much you and I
have been together: everyone knows that you backed 'The Bad Little
Lady'--"

"Everyone has no right to draw conclusions from that!" Warren
said.

Magsie shrugged her shoulders.

"And what do we care, Greg? I don't care what the world thinks as
long as I have you! Let them have the letters, let them buzz--
we'll be miles away, and we won't care! And in a year or two,
Greg, we'll come back, and they'll all flock about us--you'll see!
That's the advantage of a name like the Gregory name! Why, who
among them all dropped Clarence on Paula's account, or Rachael on
Clarence's?"

"Your going to see her has certainly--complicated things," Warren
said reflectively.

"On the contrary," Magsie said confidently, "it has cleared things
up. It had to come, Greg; every time you and I talked about it we
brought the inevitable nearer! Why, you weren't ever at home.
Could that have gone on forever? You had no home, no wife, no
freedom. I was simply getting sick of the whole thing! Now at
least we're all open and aboveboard; all we've got to do is
quietly set the wheels in motion!"

"Well, I'll tell you what must be the first step, Magsie," Warren
said after thought; "I'm going home now to see Rachael. I'll talk
the whole thing over with her. Then I'll come to see you."

"Positively?" asked Magsie.

"Positively."

"You won't just telephone that you're delayed, Greg, and leave me
to wonder and worry?" the girl asked wistfully. "I'll wait until
any hour!" He looked at her kindly, with a gentleness of aspect
new in their relationship.

"No, dear. It's nearly three now. I'll come take you to tea at,
say, half-past four. I am operating again to-night, at nine, and
SOME TIME I've got to get in a bath and some sleep. But there'll
be time for tea."

Magsie chattered gayly, but Warren was almost silent as they
gathered together their belongings, and went out to the street. He
called her another cab and beckoned to the man who was waiting
with his own car.

"In a few months, perhaps," said Magsie at parting, "when he's all
tired and cross, I'll make him coffee AT HOME, and see that he
gets his rest and quiet whenever he needs it!"

She did not like his answer.

"Rachael's a wonder at that sort of thing," he said. Magsie had
not heard him speak so of his wife for months. "In fact, she
spoils me," he added.

"Spoils you by leaving you alone in this hot town for six months
out of every year?" Magsie laughed lightly. "Good-bye, dear! At
half-past four?"

But even while he nodded Warren Gregory was resolving, in his
soul, that he must never see Magsie Clay again. His world was
strange and alarming; was falling to pieces about him. He was
thirsting for Rachael: her voice, her reproaches, her forgiveness.
In seven minutes he would be at home talking to his wife--

Dennison reported, with an impassive face, that Mrs. Gregory had
left two hours ago with the children. He believed that they were
gone to the Long Island house, sir. Warren, stupefied, went slowly
upstairs to have the news confirmed by Pauline. Mrs. Gregory had
taken Mary and Millie, sir. And there was a note.

Of course there was a note. To emotion like Rachael's emotion
silence was the only unthinkable thing. She had planned a dozen
notes, written perhaps five. The one she left was brief:

MY DEAR WARREN: I am leaving with the children for Clark's Hills.
You will know best what steps to take in the matter of the freedom
you desire. I will cooperate in any way. I have written Magsie
that I will not contest your divorce. If for any reason you come
to Clark's Hills, I will of course be obliged to see you. I ask
you not to come. Please spare me another such talk as ours this
morning. I have plenty of money.

Always faithfully, R. G.

Warren read it, and stood in the middle of her bedroom with the
sheet crushed in his hand. Pauline had put the empty room in
order--in terrible and desolate order. Usually there were flowers
in the jars and glass bowls, a doll's chair by the bed, and a
woolly animal seated in the chair; a dainty litter of lace
scattered on Rachael's sewing-table. Usually she was there when he
came in tired, to look up beautiful and concerned: "Something to
eat, dear, or are you going to lie down?"

Standing here with the note that ended it all in his hand, he
wondered if he was the same man who had so often met that inquiry
with an impatient: "Just please don't bother me, dear!" Who had
met the succeeding question with, "I don't know whether I shall
dine here or not!"

It was half-past three. In an hour he would see Magsie.

In that hour Magsie had received Rachael's note, and her heart
sang. For the first time, in what she would have described as this
"funny, mixed-up business," she began seriously to contemplate her
elevation to the dignity of Warren Gregory's wife. Rachael's note
was capable of only one interpretation: she would no longer stand
in their way. She was taking the boys to the country, and had
given Warren the definite assurance of her agreement to his
divorce. If necessary, on condition that her claim to the children
was granted, she would establish her residence in some Western
city, and proceed with the legal steps from there.

Magsie was frightened, excited, and thrilled all at once. She felt
as if she had set some enormous machinery in motion, and was not
quite sure of how it might be controlled. But on the whole,
complacency underlay all other emotions. She was going to be
married to the richest and nicest and most important man of her
acquaintance!

At heart, however, her manner belied her; Magsie had little self-
confidence. She lived in a French girl's terror that youth would
leave her before she had time to make a good match. If nobody knew
better than Magsie that she was pretty, also nobody knew better
that she was not clever. Men tired of her dimples and giggles and
round eyes. Bryan Masters admired her, to be sure, but then Bryan
Masters was also a divorced man, and an actor whose popularity was
already on the wane. Richie Gardiner admired her in his pathetic,
hopeless way, and Richie was young and rich. But Magsie shuddered
away from Richie's coughing and fainting; his tonics and his diet
had no place in her robust and joyous scheme of life. Besides, all
Magsie's world would envy her capture of Greg; he belonged to New
York. And Richie's father had been a miner, and his mother was
"impossible!"

Magsie dressed exquisitely for the tea; it seemed to her that she
had never been so pleasantly excited in her life. She felt a part
of the humming, crowded city, the spring wind and the uncertain
sky. Life was thrilling and surprising.

Half-past four o'clock came, and Warren came. They were in
Magsie's little apartment now, and she could go into his arms.
Warren was rather quiet as they went out to tea, but Magsie did
not notice it.

As a matter of fact, the man was bewildered; he was tired and
worried about his work; but that was the least of it. He could not
believe that the day's dazing and flying memories were real--the
Albany train, Rachael's room, the hospital, Magsie and the
Biltmore breakfast-room, Rachael's room again, and now again
Magsie.

Were the lawsuits about which one read in the papers based on no
more than this? Apparently not. Magsie seemed perfectly confident
of the outcome; Rachael had not shown any doubt. One woman had
practically presented him to the other; the law was to be
consulted.

The law? How would those letters of Magsie's read if the law got
hold of them? His memory flew from note to note. These hastily
scratched words would be flung to the wind of gossip, that wind
that blew so merrily among the houses where he was known. He had
called Magsie his "wonder-child" and his "good little bad girl!"
He had given her rings and sashes and a gold purse and a hat and
white fox furs--any one gift he had made her was innocent enough
in itself! But taken with all the others--

Magsie was in high feather; some tiresome preliminaries, and the
day was won! She had not planned so definite a campaign, but it
was all coming about in a fashion that more than fulfilled her
plans. So, said Magsie to herself, stirring her tea, that was to
be her fate: Paris, America, the stage, and then a rich marriage?
Well, so be it. She could not complain.

"Greg," she said a dozen times, "isn't it all like a dream?"

To Warren Gregory, as he walked down the street after leaving her
at the theatre, it was indeed like a dream, a frightful dream. He
could hardly credit his senses, hardly believe that all these
horrible things were true, that Rachael knew all about Magsie, and
that Magsie was quietly thinking of divorce and marriage! Rachael,
in such a rage, rushing away with the boys--why, he had made no
secret of his admiration for Magsie from Rachael, he had often
talked to her enthusiastically of Magsie! And here she was
furiously offering him his freedom.

Well, what had he done after all? What a preposterous fuss about
nothing. His thoughts were checked and chilled by the memory of
letters that Magsie had. Magsie could prove nothing by those
letters--

But what a fool they would make him! Warren Gregory remembered the
case of a dignified college professor whose private correspondence
had recently been given to the press, and he felt a cool shudder
run down his spine. Rachael, reading those letters! It was
unthinkable! She and the world would think him a fool! It came to
him suddenly that she and the world would be right. He was a fool,
and it was a fool's paradise in which he had been wandering: to
take his wife and home and sons for granted, and to spend all his
leisure at the feet of a calculating little girl like Magsie!

"What did you expect her to do?" Magsie had asked. What would any
sane man expect her to do? Smile with him at the new favorite's
charms, and take up her life in loneliness and neglect?

And now, Rachael was gone, and he stood promised to Magsie. So
much was clear. Rachael would fight for her divorce. Magsie would
fight for her husband.

"Oh, my God, how did we ever get into this sickening, sickening
mess?" Warren said out loud in his misery.

He had not dined, he did not think of dinner as he paced the
windy, cool city streets hour after hour. Nine struck, and he
hailed a cab, and went to the hospital, moving through his work
like a man in a dream. The woman whose life he chanced to save
throughout all her days would say she had had a lovely doctor.
Warren hardly saw her. He thought only of Magsie, Magsie who had
in her possession a number of compromising letters, every one
sillier than the last--Magsie, who expected him to divorce his
wife and marry her. He was in such a state of terror that he could
not think. Every instant brought more disquiet to his thoughts; he
felt as if, when he stepped out into the street again, the
newsboys might be calling his divorce, as if honor and safety and
happiness were gone forever.

He did not see Magsie again that night, but walked and walked,
entering his house sick and haggard, and sleeping the hours
restlessly away.

At nine o'clock the next morning he went to the telephone, and
called the Valentine house. Doctor Valentine was not at home, he
was informed. Was Mrs. Valentine there? Would she speak to Doctor
Gregory?

A long pause. Then the maid's pleasant impersonal voice again.
Mrs. Valentine begged Doctor Gregory to excuse her.

Warren felt as if he had been struck in the face. Under the eyes
of irreproachable and voiceless servants he moved about his silent
house. The hush of death seemed to him to lie heavy in the lovely
rooms that had been Rachael's delight, and over the city that was
just breaking into the green of spring. He dressed, and left
directions with unusual sternness; he would be at the hospital, or
the club, if he was wanted. He would come home to dinner at seven.

"Mrs. Gregory may be back in a day or so, Pauline," he said. "I
wish you'd keep her rooms in order--flowers, and all that."

"Yes, sir," Pauline said respectfully. "Excuse me, Doctor--" she
added.

"Well?" said Warren as she paused.

"Excuse me, Doctor, but I telephoned Mrs. Prince yesterday, as
Mrs. Gregory suggested," Pauline went on timidly, "and she would
be glad to have me come at any time, sir."

Warren's expression did not change.

"You mean that Mrs. Gregory dismissed you?" he suggested.

"Yes, sir!" said Pauline with a sniff. "She paid me for--"

"Then I should make an arrangement with Mrs. Prince, by all
means!" Warren said evenly. But a deathlike terror convulsed his
heart. Rachael had burned her bridges!

He sent Magsie a note and flowers. He was "troubled by unexpected
developments," he said, and too busy to see her to-day, but he
would see her to-morrow.




CHAPTER II


Magsie had awakened to a sense of pleasure impending. It was many
months since she had felt so important and so sure of herself. Her
self-esteem had received more than one blow of late. Bowman had
attempted to persuade her to take "The Bad Little Lady" on the
road; Magsie had indignantly declined. He had then offered her a
poor part in a summer farce; about this Magsie had not yet made up
her mind.

Now, she said to herself, reading Warren's note over her late
breakfast tray, perhaps she might treat Mr. Bowman to the snubbing
she had long been anxious to give him. Perhaps she might spend the
summer quietly, inconspicuously, somewhere, placidly awaiting the
hour when she would come out gloriously before the world as Warren
Gregory's wife. Not at all a bad prospect for the daughter of old
Mrs. Torrence's companion and housekeeper.

A caller was announced and was admitted, a thin, restless woman
who looked thirty-five despite or perhaps because of the rouge on
her sunken cheeks and the smart gown she wore. The years had not
treated Carol Pickering kindly: she was an embittered,
dissatisfied woman now, noisily interested in the stage as a
possible escape from matrimony for herself, and hence interested
in Magsie, with whom she had lately formed a sort of suspicious
and resentful intimacy.

Joe Pickering had entirely justified in eight years the misgivings
felt toward him by everyone who had Carol Breckenridge's interests
at heart. His wife had come to him rich, and a few hours after
their wedding her father's death had more than doubled the fortune
left her by her grandmother. But it would be a sturdy legacy
indeed that might hope to resist such inroads as the aimless and
ill-matched young couple made upon it from their first day
together.

Idly acquiring, idly losing, being cheated and robbed on all
sides, they drifted through an unhappy and exciting year or two,
finally investing much of their money in bonds, and a handsome
residue in that favorite dream of such young wasters: the breeding
of horses for the polo market. "What if we lose it all--which we
won't--we've still got the bonds!" Joe Pickering, leaden pockets
under his eyes, his weak lips hanging loose, had said with his
unsteady laugh. What inevitably followed, and what he had not
foreseen, was that he should lose more than half the bonds, too.
They were seriously crippled now, and began to quarrel, to hate
each other for a greater part of the time; and their little son's
handsome dark eyes fell on some sad scenes. But now, in the
child's sixth year, they were still together, still appearing in
public, and still, in that mysterious way known only to their
type, rushing about on motor parties, buying champagne, and
entertaining after a fashion in their cramped but pretentious
apartment.

Of late Billy had been seriously considering the stage. She was
but twenty-six, after all, and she still had a girl's thirst for
admiration and for excitement. She had called on Magsie,
entertained the young actress, and the two had discovered a
certain affinity. Magsie was delighted to see her now. They
greeted each other affectionately, and Magsie, sending out her
tray, settled herself comfortably in her pillows, and took the
interested Carol entirely into her confidence, with the single
reservation of Warren Gregory's name.

"Handsome, and rich as Croesus, and his wife would divorce him,
and belongs to one of the best families," summarized Billy. "Why,
I think you would be a fool to do anything else!"

"S'pose I would," dimpled Magsie in interesting embarrassment.

"Have a heart, and tell me who it is," teased Carol, slipping her
foot from her low shoe to study a hole in the heel of her silk
stocking.

"Oh, I couldn't!" Magsie protested.

"Well, I shall guess, if I can," the other woman warned her. And
presently she added: "I'll tell you what, if you do give it up,
I'm going straight to Bowman, and ask for your place in your new
show! There's nothing about it that I couldn't do, and I believe
he might give me a chance! I'll tell you what: you wait until the
last moment before you tell him, and then he can't be prepared in
advance. And I'll risk having Jacqueline make me a couple of
gowns, and be all ready to jump in. I'll learn the part, too,"
said Billy kindling; "you'll coach me in it, won't you?"

"Of course I will!" Magsie agreed, but she did not say it
heartily. The conversation was not extremely pleasing to Magsie at
the moment. She loved Warren, of course, but it was certainly a
good deal to resign, even to marry a Gregory of New York! Why,
here was Billy, who had been a rich man's daughter, and had
married the man of her choice, and had a nice child, mad to step
into her shoes!

And it was a painful reflection that probably Billy could do it.
Billy was smart, she had a dash and finish about her that might
well catch a manager's eye, and more than that, it was a rather
poor part. It was no such part as Magsie had had in "The Bad
Little Lady." There was a comedian in this cast, and a matinee
idol for a leading man, and Magsie must content herself with a
part and a salary much smaller than was given to either of these.

She thought of Warren, and also fleetingly of Bryan Masters, and
even of Richie Gardiner, and decided that it was a bitter and
empty world, and she wished she had never been born. Bowman would
be smart enough to see that he need pay Billy almost no salary,
that she might be a discovery--the discovery for which all
managers are always so pathetically on the alert, and that in case
the play failed--Magsie was sure, this morning, that it would be
the flattest failure ever seen on Broadway--he would have no irate
leading lady to pacify; Billy would be only too grateful for the
opportunity to try and fail.

"Farce is the most difficult thing in the world to play," she
said, now clinging desperately to her little distinction.

"Oh, I know that!" Billy answered absently. She would have a smart
apartment on the Drive, and dear little old Breck should drive
with her in the Park, and go to the smartest boys' school in the
country--

"And of course, I may not marry!" said Magsie.

Carol hardly heard her. She was looking about the comfortable
hotel apartment, all in a pretty disorder now, with Magsie's
various possessions scattered about. There were pictures of actors
on the mantel, heavily autographed, and flowers thrust carelessly
into vases. There was a great sheaf of Killarney roses; the
envelope that had held a card still dangled from their stems.
Carol would have given a great deal to know whose card had been
torn from it, and whose name was ringing just now in Magsie's
brain. She even cared enough to tentatively interrogate Anna,
Magsie's faithful Swedish woman.

"Well, perhaps we shall have a change here, Anna?" Billy said
brightly but cautiously, when she was in the hall. She wondered
whether the woman would let her slip a bill into her hand.

"Maybe," said Anna impassively.

"How shall you like keeping house for a man and wife?" Billy
pursued.

"Aye do that bayfore," remarked Anna, responsive to this kindly
interest; "aye ban hahr savan yahre, now, en des country."

"And do you like Miss Clay's young man?" Billy said boldly. But at
this shift of topic the light faded from Anna's infantile blue
eyes, and a wary look replaced it.

"She got more as one feller," she remarked discouragingly. Billy,
outfaced, departed, feeling rather contemptible as she walked down
the street. Joe was at home; she had left him in bed when she left
the house at ten o'clock, and little Breck had been rather
listlessly chatting with the colored boy in the elevator, and had
begged his mother to take him downtown. Billy was really sorry for
the little boy, but she did not know what to do about it; she
wondered what other women did with little lonely boys of six. If
she went home, it would not materially better the situation; the
cook was cross to-day anyway, and would be crosser if Joe shouted
for his breakfast in his usual ungracious manner. She could not go
to Jacqueline and talk dresses unless she was willing to pay
something on the last bill.

Billy thought of the bank, as she always did think of the bank,
when her reflections reached this point. There were the bonds, not
as many as they had been, but still fine, salable bonds. She could
pay the cook, pay the dressmaker, take Breck home a game, look at
hats, spend the day in exactly the manner that pleased her best.
She had promised Joe that they would discuss the sale of the next
one together when they had sold the last bond, a month ago, and
avoid it if possible. But what difference did one make?--a paltry
fifty dollars a year! Perhaps it would be possible not to tell
Joe--

Billy looked in her purse. She had a dollar bill and fifty cents,
more than enough to take her to the bank in appropriate style. She
signalled a taxicab.

Magsie did not see Warren the next day, but they had tea and a
talk on the day following. She told him gayly that he needed
cheering, and presently took him into Tiffany's, where Warren
found himself buying her a coveted emerald. Somehow during the
afternoon he found himself talking and planning as if they really
loved each other, and really were to be married. But it was an
unsatisfactory hour. Magsie was excited and nervous, and was
rather relieved than otherwise that her interviews with her
admirer were necessarily short. As a matter of fact, the
undisciplined little creature was overtired and unreasonable. She
would have given her whole future for a quiet week in bed, with
frivolous novels to read, and Anna to spoil her, no captious
manager to please, no exhausting performances to madden her with a
sense of her own and other people's imperfections, and no Warren
to worry her with his long face.

Added to Magsie's trials, in this dreadful week, was an interview
with the imposing mother of young Richie Gardiner, a handsome,
florid lady, who had inherited a large fortune from the miner
husband whose fortunes she had gallantly shared through some
extraordinary adventures in Nome. Mrs. Gardiner idolized her son;
she was not inclined to be generous to the little flippant actress
who had broken his heart. Richie would not go to the healing
desert, he would not go to any place out of sound of Miss Clay's
voice, out of the light of Miss Clay's eyes. Mrs. Gardiner had no
objection to Magsie's person, nor to her profession, the fact
being that her own origin had been even more humble than that of
Miss Clay, but she wanted the treasure of her boy's love to be
appreciated; she had been envying, since the hour of his birth,
the woman who should win Richie's love.

Stout, overdressed, deep-voiced, she came to see the actress, and
they both cried; Magsie said that she was sorry--she was so
bitterly sorry--but, yes, there was someone else. Mrs. Gardiner
shrugged philosophically, wiped her eyes, drew a deep breath. No
help for it! Presently she heavily departed; her solid weight, her
tinkling spangles, and her rainbow plumes vanished into the
limousine, and she was whirled away.

Magsie sighed; these complications were romantic. What could one
do?




CHAPTER III


Silent, abstracted, unsmiling, Rachael got through the days. She
ate what Mary put before her, slept fairly well, answered the
puzzled boys the second time they addressed her. She buckled
sandals, read fairy tales, brushed the unruly heads, and listened
to the wavering prayers day after day. Her eyes were strained, her
usually quick, definite motions curiously uncertain; otherwise
there was little change.

Alice, in spite of her husband's half protest, went down to
Clark's Hills, deciding in the first hour that the worst of the
matter was all over and Rachael quite herself, gradually becoming
doubtful, and returning home in despair. Her tearful account took
George down to the country house a week later.

Rachael met them; they dined with her. She was interested about
the Valentine children, interested in their summer plans. She
laughed as she quoted Derry's latest ventures with words. She
walked to her gate to wave them good-bye on Monday morning, and
told Alice that she was counting the days until the big family
came down. But George and Alice were heavy hearted as they drove
away.

"What IS it?" asked Alice, anxious eyes upon her husband's kind,
homely face. "She's like a person recovering from a blow. She's
not sick; but, George, she isn't well!"

"No, she's not well," George agreed soberly. "Bad glitter in her
eyes, and I don't like that calm for fiery Rachael! Well, you'll
be down here in a week or two--"

"Last week," Alice said not for the first time, "she only spoke
of--of the trouble, you know--once. We were just going out to
dinner, and she turned to me, and said: 'I didn't like my bargain
eight years ago, Alice, and I tore my contract to pieces! Now I'll
pay for it.'"

"And you said?"

"I said, 'Oh, nonsense, Rachael. Don't be morbid! There's no
parallel between the cases!'"

"H'm!" The doctor was silent for a long time. "I don't know what
Greg's doing," he added after thought.

"The question is, what is Magsie doing?" said Alice.

"In my opinion, Rachael's simply blown up," George submitted.

"Magsie told her they had talked of marriage!" Alice countered.
George gave an incredulous snort.

"Well, then, Magsie lied," he said firmly.

"She really isn't the lying type, George. And there's no question
that Greg and she did see each other every day, and that he wrote
her letters and gave her presents!" Alice finished rather timidly,
for her husband's face was a thunder-cloud. The old car flew along
at thirty-five miles an hour.

"Damn FOOL!" George presently muttered. Alice glanced at him in
sympathetic concern.

"George, why don't you see him?"

George preserved a stern silence for perhaps two flying minutes,
then he sighed.

"Oh, he'll come to me fast enough when he needs me! Lord, I've
pulled old Greg out of trouble before." His whole face grew tender
as he added: "You know Greg is a genius, Alice; he's not like
other men!"

"I should hope he wasn't!" said Alice with spirit.

"We--ll!" She was sorry for her vehemence when George merely shook
his head and ended the conversation on the monosyllable. After a
while she attempted to reopen the subject.

"If geniuses can act that way, I'd rather have our girls marry
grocers!"

The girls' father smiled absently.

"Oh, well, of course!" he conceded.

"Greg is no more a genius than you are, George," argued Alice.

"Oh, Alice, Alice!" he protested, really distressed, "don't ever
let anyone hear you say that! Why, that only shows that you don't
know what Greg is. Lord, the man seems to have an absolute
instinct for bones; he'll take a chance when not one of the rest
will! No, you mark my words, Alice, Greg has let Magsie Clay make
a fool of him; he's been overtired and nervous--we've all seen
that--but he's as innocent of any actual harm in this thing as our
Gogo!"

"Innocent!" sniffed Alice. "He'll break Rachael's heart with his
innocence, and then he'll marry Magsie Clay--you'll see!"

"He'll come to me to get him out of it within the month--you'll
see!" George retorted.

"He'll keep out of your way!" Alice predicted confidently. "I know
Greg. He has to be perfect or nothing."

But it was only ten days later that Warren Gregory walked up the
steps of the Valentine house at about ten o'clock on a silent,
hazy morning. George had not yet left the house for the day. The
drawing-room furniture was swathed in linen covers, and a
collection of golf irons, fishing rods, canoe paddles, and tennis
rackets crowded the hallway. The young Valentines were departing
for the country to-morrow, and their excited voices echoed from
above stairs.

Warren had supposed them already gone. Rachael was alone, then, he
reflected, alone in that desolate little country village! He
nodded to the maid, and asked in a guarded tone for Doctor
Valentine. A moment later George Valentine came into the drawing-
room, and the two men exchanged a look strange to their twenty
years of affectionate intercourse. Warren attempted mere cold
dignity; he was on the defensive, and he knew it. George's look
verged on contempt, thinly veiled by a polite interest in his
visitor's errand.

"George," said Warren suddenly, when he had asked for Alice and
the children, and an awkward silence had made itself felt;
"George, I'm in trouble. I--I wonder if you can help me out?"

He could hardly have made a more fortunate beginning; halting as
the words were, and miserable as was the look that accompanied
them, both rang true to the older man, and went straight to his
heart.

"I'm sorry to hear it," George said.

Warren folded his arms, and regarded his friend steadily across
them.

"You know Rachael has left me, George?" he began.

"I--well, yes, Alice went down there first, and then I went down,"
George said. "We only came back ten days ago." There was another
brief silence.

"She--she hasn't any cause for this, you know, George," Warren
said, ending it, after watching the other man hopefully for
further suggestion.

"Hasn't, huh?" George asked thoughtfully, hopefully.

"No, she hasn't!" Warren reiterated, gaining confidence. "I've
been a fool, I admit that, but Rachael has no cause to go off at
half-cock, this way!"

"What d'you mean by that?" George asked flatly. "What do you mean-
-you've been a fool?"

"I've been a fool about Magsie Clay," Warren admitted, "and
Rachael learned about it, that's all. My Lord! there never was an
instant in my life when I took it seriously, I give you my word,
George!"

"Well, if Rachael takes it seriously, and Magsie takes it
seriously, you may find yourself beginning to take it seriously,
too," George said with a dull man's simple evasion of confusing
elements.

"Rachael may get her divorce," Warren said desperately. "I can't
help that, I suppose. I've got a letter from her here--she left
it. I don't know what she thinks! But I'll never marry Margaret
Clay--that much is settled. I'll leave town--my work's ended, I
might as well be dead. God knows I wish I were!"

"Just how far have you gone with Magsie?" George interrupted
quietly.

"Why, nothing at all!" Warren said. "Flowers, handbags, things
like that! I've kissed her, but I swear Rachael never gave me any
reason to think she'd mind that."

"How often have you seen her?" George asked in a somewhat relieved
tone. "Have you seen her once a week?"

"Oh, yes! I say frankly that this was a--a flirtation, George.
I've seen her pretty nearly every day---"

"But she hasn't got any letters--nothing like that?"

Warren's confident expression changed.

"Well, yes, she has some letters. I--damn it! I am a fool, George!
I swear I wrote them just as I might to anybody. I--I knew it
mattered to her, you know, and that she looked for them. I don't
know how they'd read!"

George was silent, scowling, and Warren said, "Damn it!" again
nervously, before the other man said:

"What do you think she will do?"

"I don't know, George," Warren said honestly.

"Could you--buy her off?" George presently asked after thought.

"Magsie? Never! She's not that type. She's one of ourselves as to
that, George. It was that that made me like Magsie--she's a lady,
you know. She thinks she's in love; she wants to be married. And
if Rachael divorces me, what else can I do?"

"Rachael wants the divorce for the boys," George said. "She told
Alice so. She said that except for that, nothing on earth would
have made her consider it. But she doesn't want you and Magsie
Clay to have any hold over her sons--and can you blame her? She's
been dragged through all this once. You might have thought of
that!"

"Oh, my God!" Warren said, stopping by the mantel, and putting his
face in his hands.

"Well, what did you think would happen?" George asked as Magsie
had asked.

Then for perhaps two long minutes there was absolute silence,
while Warren remained motionless, and George, in great distress,
rubbed his upstanding hair.

"George, what shall I do?" Warren burst out at length.

"Why, now I'll tell you," the older man said in a tone that
carried exquisite balm to his listener. "Alice and I have talked
this over, of course, and this seems to me to be the only way out:
we know you, old man--that's what hurts. Alice and I know exactly
what has got you into this thing. You're too easy, Warren. You
think because you mean honorably by Magsie Clay, and amuse
yourself by being generous to her, that Magsie means honorably by
you. You've got a high standard of morals, Greg, but where they
differ from the common standards you fail. If the world is going
to put a certain construction upon your attentions to an actress,
it doesn't matter what private construction you happen to put upon
them! Wake up, and realize what a fool you are to try to buck the
conventions! What you need is to study other people's morals, not
to be eternally justifying and analyzing your own. I don't know
how you'll come out of this thing. Upon my word, it's the worst
mess we ever got into since you misquoted Professor Diggs and he
sued you. Remember that?"

"Oh, George--my God--how you stood by me then," Warren said. "Get
me out of this, and I'll believe that there never was a friend
like you in the world! I don't know what I ever did to have you
and Alice stand by me--"

"Alice isn't standing by you to any conspicuous extent," George
Valentine said smilingly, "although, last night, when she was
putting the girls to bed, she put her arms about Martha, and said,
'George, she wouldn't be here to-day if Greg hadn't taken the
chance and cut that thing out of her throat!' At which, of
course," Doctor Valentine added with his boyish smile, "Martha's
dad had to wipe his eyes, and Martha's mother began to cry!"

And again he frankly wiped his eyes.

"However, the thing is this," he presently resumed, "if you could
buy off Magsie--simply tell her frankly that you've been a fool,
that you don't want to go on with it--no, eh?" A little
discouraged by Warren's dubious shake of the head, he went on to
the next suggestion. "Well, then, if you can't--tell her that
there cannot be any talk at present of a legal separation, and
that you are going away. Would you have the nerve to do that? Tell
her that you'll be back in eight months or a year. But of course
the best thing would be to buy her off, or call it off in some
way, and then write Rachael fully, frankly--tell her the whole
thing, ask her to wait at least one year, and then let you see
her--"

Warren could see himself writing this letter, could even see
himself walking into the dear old sitting-room at Home Dunes.

"I might see Magsie," he said after thought, "and ask her what she
would take in place of what she wants. It's just possible, but I
don't believe she would---"

"Well, what could she do if you simply called the whole thing
off?" George asked. "Hang it! it's a beastly thing to do, but if
she wants money, you've got it, and you've done her no harm,
though nobody'll believe that."

"She'll take the heartbroken attitude," Warren said slowly.
"She'll say that she trusted me, that she can't believe me, and so
on."

"Well, you can stand that. Just set your jaw, and think of
Rachael, and go through with it once and for all."

"Yes, but then if she should turn to Rachael again?"

"Ah, well, she mustn't do that. Let her think that, after the
year, you'll come to a fresh understanding rather than let her
fight. And meanwhile, if I were you, I would write Rachael a long
letter and make a clean breast. Alice and the girls go down to-
morrow; they'll keep me in touch. How about coming in here for a
bachelor dinner Friday? Then we can talk developments."

"George, you certainly are a generous loyal friend!" Warren
Gregory said, a dry huskiness in his voice as he wrung the other's
hand in good-bye.

George went upstairs to tell the interested and excited and
encouraged Alice about their talk, and Alice laughed and cried
with-pleasure, confident that everything would come out well now,
and grateful beyond words that Greg was showing so humbled and
penitent a spirit.

"Leave Rachael to me!" Alice said exultingly. "How we'll all laugh
at this nonsense some day!"

Even Warren Gregory, walking down the street, was conscious of new
hope and confidence. He was not thinking of Magsie to-day, but of
Rachael, the most superb and splendid figure of womanhood that had
ever come into his life. How she had raged at him in that last
memorable talk; how vital, how vigorous she was, uncompromising,
direct, courageous! And as a swimmer, who miles away from shore in
the cruel shifting green water, might think with aching longing of
the quiet home garden, the kitchen with its glowing fire and
gleaming pottery, the pleasant homely routine of uneventful days,
and wonder that he had ever found safety and comfort anything less
than a miracle, Warren thought of the wife he had sacrificed, the
children and home that had been his, unchallenged and undisputed,
only a few months before. He knew just where he had failed his
wife. He felt to-day that to comfort her again, to take her to
dinner again, violets on her breast, and to see her loosen her
veil, and lay aside her gloves with those little gestures so
familiar and so infinitely dear would be heaven, no less! What
comradeship they had had, they two, what theatre trips, what
summer days in the car, what communion over the first baby's downy
head, what conferences over the new papers and cretonnes for Home
Dunes!

Girded by these and a hundred other sacred memories he went to
Magsie, who was busy, the maid told him, with her hairdresser. But
she presently came out to him, wrapped snugly in a magnificent
embroidered kimono, and with her masses of bright hair, almost
dry, hanging about her lovely little face. She had never in all
their intercourse shown him quite this touch of intimacy before,
and he felt with a little wince of his heart that it was a sign of
her approaching possession.

"Greg, dear," said Magsie seating herself on the arm of his chair,
and resting her soft little person against him, "I've been
thinking about you, and about the wonderful, WONDERFUL way that
all our troubles have come out! If anyone had told us, two months
ago, that Rachael would set you free, and that all this would have
happened, we wouldn't have believed it, would we? I watched you
walking down the street yesterday afternoon, and, oh, Greg, I hope
I'm going to be a good wife to you; I hope I'm going to make up to
you for all the misery you've had to bear!"

This was not the opening sentence Warren was expecting. Magsie had
been petulant the day before, and had pettishly declared that she
would not wait a year for any man in the world. Warren had at once
seized the opening to say that he would not hold her to anything
against her will, to be answered by a burst of tears, and an
entreaty not to be "so mean." Then Magsie had to be soothed, and
they had gone to tea as a part of that familiar process. But to-
day her mood was different; she was full of youthful enthusiasm
for the future.

"You know I love Rachael, Greg, and of course she is a most
exceptional woman," bubbled Magsie happily, "but she doesn't
appreciate the fact that you're a genius--you're not a little
everyday husband, to be held to her ideas of what's done and what
isn't done! Big men are a law unto themselves. If Rachael wants to
hang over babies' cribs, and scare you to death every time Jim
sneezes--"

Warren listened no further. His mind went astray on a memory of
the night Jim was feverish, a memory of Rachael in her trailing
dull-blue robe, with her thick braids hanging over her shoulders.
He remembered that Jim was promised the circus if he would take
his medicine; and how Rachael, with smiling lips and anxious eyes,
had described the big lions and the elephants for the little
restless potentate---

"--because I've had enough of Bowman, and enough of this city, and
all I ask is to run away with you, and never think of rehearsals
and routes and all the rest of it in my life again!" Magsie was
saying. Presently she seemed to notice his silence, for she asked
abruptly: "Where's Rachael?"

Warren roused himself from deep thought.

"At the Long Island house; at Clark's Hills."

"Oh!" Magsie, who was now seated opposite him, clasped her hands
girlishly about her knees. "What is the plan, Greg?" she asked
vivaciously.

"Her plan?" Warren said clearing his throat.

"Our plan!" Magsie amended contentedly. And she summarized the
case briskly: "Rachael consents to a divorce, we know that. I am
not going on with Bowman, I've decided that. Now what?" She eyed
his brooding face curiously. "What shall I do, Greg? I suppose we
oughtn't to see each other as we did last summer? If Rachael goes
West--and I suppose she will--shall I go up to the Villalongas'?
They're terribly nice to me; and I think Vera suspects---"

"What makes you think she does?" Warren asked, feeling as if a
hot, dry wind suddenly smote his skin.

"Because she's so nice to me!" Magsie answered triumphantly.
"Rachael's been just a little snippy to Vera," she confided
further, "or Vera thinks she has. She's not been up there for
ages! I could tell Vera---"

Warren's power of reasoning was dissipated in an absolute panic.
But George had primed him for this talk. He assumed an air of
business.

"There are several things to think of, Magsie," he said briskly,
"before we can go farther. In the first place, you must spend the
summer comfortably. I've arranged for that--"

He handed her a small yellow bank-book. Magsie glanced at it;
glanced at him.

"Oh, Greg, dear, you're too generous!"

"I'm not generous at all," he answered with an honest flush. "I
know what I am now, Magsie, I'm a cad."

"Who says you're a cad?" Magsie demanded indignantly.

"I say so!" he answered. "Any man is a cad who gets two women into
a mess like this!"

"Greg, dear, you shan't say so!" Her slender arms were about his
neck.

"Well--" He disengaged the arms, and went on with his planning.
"George Valentine is going to see Rachael," he proceeded.

"About the divorce?" said Magsie with a nod.

"About the whole thing. And George thinks I had better go away."

"Where?" demanded Magsie.

"Oh, travelling somewhere."

"Rio?" dimpled Magsie. "You know you have always had a sneaking
desire to see Rio."

Warren smiled mechanically. It had been Rachael's favorite dream
"when the boys are big enough!" His sons--were they bathing this
minute, or eagerly emptying their blue porridge bowls?

"Magsie, dear," he said slowly, "it's a miserable business--this.
I'm as sorry as I can be about it. But the truth is that George
wants me to get away only until he and Alice can get Rachael into
a mood where she'll forgive me. They see this whole crazy thing as
it really is, dear. I'm not a young man, Magsie, I'm nearly fifty.
I have no business to think of anything but my own wife and my
work and my children--Don't look so, Magsie," he broke off to say;
"I only blame myself! I have loved you--I do love you--but it's
only a man's love for a sweet little amusing friend. Can't we--
can't we stop it right here? You do what you please; draw on me
for twice that, for ten times that; have a long, restful summer,
and then come back in the fall as if this was all a dream---"

Magsie had been watching him steadily during this speech, a long
speech for him. At first she had been obviously puzzled, then
astonished, now she was angry. She had grown pale, her pretty
childish mouth was a little open, her breath coming fast. For a
full minute, as his voice halted, there was silence.

"Then--then you didn't mean all you said?" Magsie demanded
stormily, after the pause. "You didn't mean that you--cared? You
didn't mean the letters, and the presents, and the talks we've
had? You knew I was in earnest, but you were just fooling!" Sheer
excitement and fury kept her panting for a moment, then she went
on: "But I think I know who's done this, Greg!" she said
viciously; "it's Mrs. Valentine. She and her husband have been
talking to you; they've done it. She's persuaded you that you
never were in earnest with me!" Magsie ran across the room, flung
open the little desk that stood there, and tore the rubber band
from a package of letters. "You take her one of these!" she said,
half sobbing. "Ask her if that means anything! Greg, dear!" she
interrupted herself to say in a child's reproachful tone, "didn't
you mean it?" And with her soft hair floating, and her figure
youthful under the simple lines of her Oriental robe, she came to
stand close beside him, her mood suddenly changed. "Don't you love
me any more, Greg?" said she.

"Love you!" he countered with a rueful laugh, "that's the
trouble."

She linked her soft little hands in his, raised reproachful eyes.

"But you don't love me enough to stand by me, now that Rachael is
so cross?" she asked artlessly. "Oh, Greg, I will wait years and
years for you!"

Warren's expression was of wretchedness; he managed a smile.

"It's only that I hate to let you in for it all, dear. And let her
in for it. I feel as if we hadn't thought it out--quite enough,"
he said.

"What does it let Rachael in for?" she asked quickly. "Here's her
letter, Greg--I'll read it to you! Rachael doesn't mind."

"Well--it will be horrible for you," he submitted in a troubled
tone. "Horrible for us both."

"You mean your work can't spare you?" she asked with a shrewd
look.

"No!" He shrugged wearily. "No. The truth is, I want to get away,"
he said in an undertone.

"Ah, well!" Magsie understood that. "Of course you want to get
away from the fuss and the talk, Greg," she said eagerly. "I think
we all ought to get away: Rachael to Long Island, I to Vera, you
anywhere! We can't possibly be married for months---" Suddenly her
voice sank, she dropped his hands, and locked her smooth little
arms about his neck. "But I'll be waiting for you, and you for me,
Greg," she whispered. "Isn't it all settled now, isn't it only a
question of all the bother, lawyers and arrangements, before you
and I belong to each other as we've always dreamed we might?"

He looked down gravely, almost sadly, and yet with tenderness,
upon the eager face. He had always found her lovable, endearing,
and sweet; even out of this hideous smoke and flame she emerged
all charming and all desirable. He tightened his arms about the
thinly wrapped little figure.

"Yes. I think it's all settled now, Magsie!" he said.

"Well, then!" She sealed it with one of her quick little kisses.
"Now sit down and read a magazine, Greg," she said happily, "and
in ten minutes you'll see me in my new hat, all ready to go to
lunch!"




CHAPTER IV


The blue tides rose and fell at Clark's Hills, the summer sun
shone healingly down upon Rachael's sick heart and soul. Day after
day she took her bare-headed, sandalled boys to the white beach,
and lay in the warm sands, with the tonic Atlantic breezes blowing
over her. Space and warmth and silence were all about; the
incoming breakers moved steadily in, and shrank back in a tumble
of foam and blue water; gulls dipped and wheeled in the spray. As
far as her dreaming eyes could reach, up the beach and down, there
was the same bath of warm color, blue sea melting into blue sky,
white sand mingling with yellow dunes, until all colors, in the
distance, swam in a haze of dull gold.

Now and then, when even the shore was hot, the boys elected to
spend their afternoon by the bay on the other side of the village.
Here there was much small traffic in dingies and dories and
lobster-pots; the slower tides rocked the little craft at the
moorings, and sent bright swinging light against the weather-worn
planks under the pier. Rachael smiled when she saw Derry's little
dark head confidently resting against the flowing, milky beard of
old Cap'n Jessup, or heard the bronzed lean younger men shout to
her older son, as to an equal, "Pitch us that painter, will ye,
Jim!"

She spoke infrequently but quietly of Warren to Alice. The older
woman discovered, with a pang of dismay, that Rachael's attitude
was fixed beyond appeal. There was such a thing as divorce,
established and approved; she, Rachael, had availed herself of its
advantages; now it was Warren's turn.

Rachael would live for her sons. They must of course be her own.
She would take them away to some other atmosphere: "England, I
think," she told Alice. "That's my mother country, you know, and
children lead a sane, balanced life there."

"I will be everything to them until they are--say, ten and
twelve," she added on another day, "and then they will begin to
turn toward their father. Of course I can't blame him to them,
Alice. And some day they will come to believe that it is all their
mother's fault--that's the way with children! And so I'll pay
again."

"Dearest girl, you're morbid!" Alice said, not knowing whether to
laugh or cry.

"No, I mean it, I truly mean that! It is disillusioning for young
boys to learn that their father and mother were not self-
controlled, normal persons, able to bear the little pricks of
life, but that our history has been public gossip for years, that
two separate divorces are in their immediate history!"

"Rachael, don't talk so recklessly!"

Rachael smiled sadly.

"Well, perhaps I can be a good mother to them, even if they don't
idealize me!" she mused.

"I have come to this conclusion," she told

Alice one day, about a fortnight later, "while civilization is as
it is, divorce is wrong. No matter what the circumstances are, no
matter where the right and wrong lie, divorce is wrong."

"I suppose there are cases of drink or infidelity--" Alice
submitted mildly.

"Then it's the drink, or the infidelity that should be changed!"
Rachael answered inflexibly. "It's the one vow we take with God as
witness; and no blessing ever follows a broken vow!"

"I think myself that there are not many marriages that couldn't be
successes!" Alice said thoughtfully.

"Separation, if you like!" Rachael conceded with something of her
old bright energy. "Change and absence, for weeks and months, but
not divorce. Paula Verlaine should never have divorced Clarence;
she made a worse match, if that was possible, and involved three
other small lives in the general discomfort. And I never should
have married Clarence, because I didn't love him. I didn't want
children then; I never felt that the arrangement was permanent;
but having married him, I should have stayed by him. I know the
mood in which Clarence took his own life; he never loved me as he
did Bill, but he wouldn't have done it if I had been there!"

"I cannot consider Clarence Breckenridge a loss to society," Alice
said.

"I might have made Clarence a man who would have been a loss to
society," Rachael mused. "He was proud; loved to be praised. And
he loved children; one or two babies in the nursery would have put
Billy in second place. But he bored me, and I simply wouldn't go
on being bored. So that if I had had a little more courage, or a
little more prudence in the first place, Billy, Clarence, perhaps
Charlotte and Charlie, Greg, Deny, Jim, Joe Pickering, and Billy
might all have been happier, to say nothing of the general example
to society."

"I hear that Billy is unhappy enough now," Alice said, pleased at
Rachael's unusual vivacity. "Isabella Haviland told my Mary that
Cousin Billy was talking about divorce."

"From Joe?--is that so?" Rachael looked up interestedly. "I hadn't
heard it, and somehow I don't believe it! They have a curious
affinity through all their adventures. Poor little Bill, it hasn't
been much of a life!"

"They say she is going on the stage," Alice pursued, "which seems
a pity, especially for the child's sake. He's an attractive boy;
we saw him with her at Atlantic City last winter--one of those
wonderfully dressed, patient, pathetic children, always with the
grown-ups! The little chap must have a rather queer life of it
drifting about from hotel to hotel. They're hard up, and I believe
most of the shops and hotels have actually black-listed them. He
would seem to be the sort of man who cannot hold on to anything,
and, of course, there's the drinking! She's not the girl to save
him. She drinks rather recklessly herself; it's a part of her
pose."

"I wonder if she would let the youngster come down here and
scramble about with my boys?" Rachael said unexpectedly. She had
not seriously thought of it; the suggestion came idly. But
instantly it took definite hold. "I wonder if she would?" she
added with more animation than she had shown for some time. "I
would love to have him, and of course the boys would go wild with
joy! I would be so glad to do poor old Billy a good turn. She and
I were always friends, and had some queer times together. And more
than that"--Rachael's eyes darkened--"I believe that if I had had
the right influence over her she never would have married Joe. I
regarded the whole thing too lightly; I could have tried, in a
different way, to prevent it, at least. I am certainly going to
write her, and ask for little Breckenridge. It would be something
to do for Clarence, too," Rachael added in a low tone, and as if
half to herself, "and for many long years I have felt that I would
be glad to do something for him! To have his grandson here--
doesn't it seem odd?-and perhaps to lend Billy a hand; it seems
almost like an answer to prayer! He can sleep on the porch,
between the boys, and if he has some old clothes, and a bathing
suit--"

"MY DEAR BILLY," she wrote that night, "I have heard one or two
hints of late that you have a good many things in your life just
now that make for worry, and am writing to know if my boys and I
may borrow your small son for a few weeks or a month, so that one
small complication of a summer in the city will be spared you. We
are down here on Long Island on a strip of high land that runs
between the beautiful bay and the very ocean, and when Jim and
Derry are not in the one they are apt to be in the other. It will
be a great joy to them to have a guest, and a delight to me to
take good care of your boy. I think he will enjoy it, and it will
certainly do him good.

"I often think of you with great affection, and hope that life is
treating you kindly. Sometimes I fancy that my old influence might
have been better for you than it was, but life is mistakes, after
all, and paying for them, and doing better next time.

"Always affectionately yours, RACHAEL."

Three days elapsed after this letter was dispatched, and Rachael
had time to wonder with a little chill if she had been too cordial
to Billy, and if Billy were laughing her cool little laugh at her
one-time step-mother's hospitality and moralizing.

But as a matter of fact, the invitation could not have been more
happily timed for young Mrs. Pickering. Billy, without any further
notice to Magsie, had been to see Magsie's manager, coolly
betraying her friend's marriage plans, pledging the angry and
bewildered Bowman to secrecy, and applying for the position on her
own account in the course of one brief visit.

Bowman would not commit himself to engaging Billy, but he was
infinitely obliged to her for the news of Magsie, and told her so
frankly.

It was when she returned home from this call, and hot and weary,
was trying to break an absolute promise to the boy, involving the
Zoo and ice-cream, that Rachael's letter arrived.

Billy read it through, sat thinking hard, and presently read it
again. The softest expression her rather hard young face ever knew
came over it as she sat there. This was terribly decent of
Rachael, thought Billy. She must be the busiest and happiest woman
in the world, and yet her heart had gone out to little Breck. The
last line, however, meant more than all the rest, just now, to
Billy Pickering. She was impressionable, and not given to finding
out the truths of life for herself. Rachael's opinions she had
always respected. And now Rachael admitted that life was all
mistakes, and added that heartening line about paying for them,
and doing better.

"'Cause I am so hot--and I never had any lunch--and you said you
would!" fretted the little boy, flinging himself against her, and
sending a wave of heat through her clothing as he did so.

"Listen, Breck," she said suddenly, catching him lightly in her
arm, and smiling down at him, "would you like to go down and stay
with the Gregory boys?"

"I don't know 'em," said Breck doubtfully.

"Down on the ocean shore," Billy went on, "where you could go in
bathing every day, and roll in the surf, and picnic, and sleep out
of doors!"

"Did they ask me?" he demanded excitedly.

"Their mother did, and she says that you can stay as long as
you're a good boy, down there where it's nice and cool, digging in
the sand, and going bare foot--"

"I'll be the best boy you ever saw!" Breck sputtered eagerly.
"I'll work for her, and I'll make the other kids work for her--
she'll tell you she never saw such a good boy! And I'll write you
letters--"

"You won't have to work, old man!" Billy felt strangely stirred as
she kissed him. She watched him as he rushed away to break the
news of his departure to the stolid Swedish girl in the kitchen
and the colored boy at the elevator. He jerked his little bureau
open, and began to scramble among his clothes; he selected a toy
for Jim and a toy for Derry, and his mother noticed that they were
his dearest toys. She took him downtown and bought him a bathing
suit, and sandals, and new pajamas, and his breathless delight, as
he assured sympathetic clerks that he was going down to the shore,
made her realize what a lonely, uncomfortable little fellow he had
been all these months. He could hardly eat his supper that night,
and had to be punished before he would even attempt to go to
sleep, and the next morning he waked his mother at six, and fairly
danced with impatience and anxiety as the last preparations were
made.

Billy took him down to Clark's Hills herself. She had not notified
Rachael, or answered her in any way, never questioning that
Rachael would know her invitation to be accepted. But from the big
terminal station she did send a wire, and Rachael and the boys met
her after the hot trip.

"Billy, it was good of you to come," Rachael said, kissing her
quite naturally as they met.

"I never thought of doing anything else," Billy said, breathing
the fresh salt air with obvious pleasure. "I had no idea that it
was such a trip. But he was an angel--look at them now, aren't
they cute together?"

Rachael's boys had taken eager possession of their guest; the
three were fast making friends as they trotted along together
toward the old motor car that Rachael ran herself.

"It's a joy to them," their mother said. "Get in here next to me,
Bill; I'm not going even to look at you until I get you home. Did
you ever see the water look so delicious? We'll all go down for a
dip pretty soon. I live so simply here that I'm entirely out of
the way of entertaining a guest, but now that you're here, you
must stay and have a little rest yourself!"

"Oh, thank you, but--" Billy began in perfunctory regret. Her tone
changed: "I should love to!" she said honestly.

Rachael laughed. "So funny to hear your old voice, Bill, and your
old expressions."

"I was just thinking that you've not changed much, Rachael."

"I? Oh, but I've gray hair! Getting old fast, Billum."

"And how's Greg?" Billy did not understand the sudden shadow that
fell across Rachael's face, but she saw it, and wondered.

"Very well, my dear."

"Does he get down here often? It's a hard trip."

"He always comes in his car. They make it in--I don't know--
something like two hours and ten minutes, I think. This is my
house, with all its hydrangeas in full bloom. Yes, isn't it nice?
And here's Mary for Breckenridge's bag."

Rachael had got out of the car, and now she gave Billy's boy her
hand, and stood ready to help him down.

"Well, Breck," said she, "do you think you are going to like my
house, and my little boys? Will you give Aunt Rachael a kiss?"

Billy said nothing as the child embraced his new-found relative
heartily, nor when Rachael took her upstairs to show her the third
hammock between the other two, and herself invested the visitor in
blue overalls and a wide hat. But late that evening, after a
silence, she said suddenly:

"You're more charming than ever, Rachael; you're one of the
sweetest women I ever saw!"

"Thank you!" Rachael said with a little note of real pleasure
under her laugh.

"You've grown so gentle, and good," said Billy a little awkwardly.
"Perhaps it's just because you're so sweet to Breck, and because
you have such a nice way with children, but I--I am ever and ever
so grateful to you! I've often thought of you, all this time, and
of the old days, and been glad that so much happiness of every
sort has come to you. At first I felt dreadfully--at that time,
you know--"

She stopped and faltered, but Rachael looked at her kindly. They
were sitting on the wide porch, under the velvet-black arch of the
starry sky, and watching the occasional twinkle of lights on the
dark surface of the bay.

"You may say anything you like to me, Billy," Rachael said.

"Well, it was only--you know how I loved him--" Billy said
quickly. "I've so often thought that perhaps you were the only
person who knew what it all meant to me. I only thought he would
be angry for a while. I thought then that Joe would surely win
him. And afterward, I thought I would go crazy, thinking of him
sitting there in the club. I had failed him, you know! I've never
talked about it. I guess I'm all tired out from the trip down."

It was clumsily expressed; the words came as if every one were
wrung from the jealous silence of the long years, but presently
Billy was beside Rachael's chair, kneeling on the floor, and their
arms were about each other.

"I killed him!" sobbed Billy. "He spoke of me the last of all. He
said to Berry Stokes that he--he loved me. And he had a little old
picture of me--you remember the one in the daisy frame?--over his
heart. Oh, Daddy, Daddy!--always so good to me!"

"No, Bill, you mustn't say that you killed him," Rachael said,
turning pale. "If you were to blame, I was, too, and your
grandmother, and all of us who made him what he was. I didn't love
him when I married him, and he was the sort of man who has to be
loved; he knew he wasn't big, and admirable, and strong, but many
a man like Clancy has been made so, been made worth while, by
having a woman believe in him. I never believed in him for one
second, and he knew it. I despised him, and where he sputtered and
stammered and raged, I was cool and quiet, and smiling at him. It
isn't right for human beings to feel that way, I see it now. I see
now that love--love is the lubricant everywhere in the world,
Bill. One needn't be a fool and be stepped upon; one has rights;
but if loving enough goes into everything, why, it's bound to come
out right."

"Oh, I do believe it!" said Billy fervently, kneeling on the floor
at Rachael's feet, her wet, earnest eyes on Rachael's face, her
arms crossed on the older woman's knees.

"I believe," Rachael said, "that in those seven years I might have
won your father to something better if I had cared. He wasn't a
hard man, just desperately weak. I've thought of it so often, of
late, Bill. There might have been children. Clancy had a funny
little pathetic fondness for babies. And he was a loving sort of
person---"

"Ah, wasn't he?" Billy's eyes brimmed again. "Always that to me.
But not to you, Rachael, and little cat that I was--I knew it. But
you see I had no particular reverence for marriage, either. How
should I? Why, my own mother and my half-sisters--hideous girls,
they are, too--were pointed out to me in Rome a year ago. I didn't
know them! I could have made your life much easier, Rachael. I
wish I had. I was thinking that this afternoon when Breck was
letting you carry him out into deep water, clinging to you so
cunningly. He is a cute little kid, isn't he? And he'll love you
to death! He's a great kisser."

"He's a great darling," smiled Rachael, "and all small boys I
adore. He'll begin to put on weight in no time. And--I was
thinking, Bill--he would have reconciled Clancy to you and Joe,
perhaps; one can't tell! If I had not left him, Clarence might
have been living to-day, that I know. He only--did what he did in
one of those desperate lonely times he used to dread so."

"Ah, but he was terrible to you, Rachael!" Billy said generously.
"You deserved happiness if anyone ever did!" Again she did not
understand Rachael's sharp sigh, nor the little silence that
followed it. Their talk ran on quite naturally to other topics:
they discussed all the men and women of that old world they both
had known, the changes, the newcomers, and the empty places. Mrs.
Barker Emory had been much taken up by Mary Moulton, and was a
recognized leader at Belvedere Bay now; Straker Thomas was in a
sanitarium; old Lady Torrence was dead; Marian Cowles had snatched
George Pomeroy away from one of the Vanderwall girls at the last
second; Thomas Prince was paralyzed; Agnes Chase had married a
Denver man whom nobody knew; the Parker Hoyts had a delicate
little baby at last; Vivian Sartoris had left her husband, nobody
knew why. Billy was quite her old self as she retailed these items
and many more for Rachael's benefit.

But Rachael saw that the years had made a sad change in her before
the three days' visit was over. Poor little, impudent, audacious
Billy was gone forever--Billy, who had always been so exquisite in
dress, so prettily conspicuous on the floor of the ballroom, so
superbly self-conscious in her yachting gear, her riding-clothes,
her smart little tennis costumes! She was but a shadow of her old
self now. The smart hats, the silk stockings, the severely trim
frocks were still hers, but the old delicious youth, her roses,
her limpid gaze, the velvety curve of throat and cheek, these were
gone. Billy had been spirited, now she was noisy. She had been
amusingly precocious, now she was assuming an innocence, a
naivete, that were no longer hers, had never been natural to her
at any time. She had always been coolly indifferent to the lives
of other men and women. Now she was embittered as to her own
destiny, and full of ugly and eager gossip concerning everyone she
knew. She chanced upon the name of Magsie Clay, little dreaming
how straight the blow went to Rachael's heart, but had excellent
reasons of her own for not expressing the belief that Magsie would
soon leave the stage, and so gave no hint of Magsie's rich and
mysterious lover. She did tell Rachael that she herself meant to
go on the stage, but imparted no details as to her hopes for doing
so.

"Just how much money is left, Billy?" Rachael presently felt
herself justified in asking.

"Oh, well"--Billy had always hated statistics--"we sold the
Belvedere Bay place last year, you know, but it was a perfect
wreck, and the Moultons said they had to put seventeen thousand
dollars into repairs, but I don't believe it, and that money, and
some other things, were put into the bank. Joe was just making a
scene about it--we have to draw now and then--we sank I don't know
what into those awful ponies, and we still have that place--it's a
lovely house, but it doesn't rent. It's too far away. The kid
adores it of course, but it's too far away, it gives me the
creeps. It's just going to wreck, too. Joe says sometimes that
he's going to raise chickens there. I see him!" Billy scowled, but
as Rachael did not speak, she presently came back to the topic.
"But just how much of my money is left, I don't know. There are
two houses in East One Hundredth--way over by the river. Daddy
took them for some sort of debt."

Rachael remembered them perfectly. But she could not revert to the
days when she was Clarence's wife without a pang, and so let the
allusion go.

"Why he took them I don't know," Billy resumed, "ten flats, and
all empty. They say it would cost us ten thousand dollars to get
them into shape. They're mortgaged, anyway."

"But Billy, wouldn't that bring you in a fair income, in itself,
if it was once filled?"

"My dear, perhaps it would. But do you think you could get Joe
Pickering to do it? As long as the money in the bank lasts--I
forget what it is, several thousand, more than twenty, I think--
we'll go along as we are. Joe has a half-interest in a patent,
anyway, some sort of curtain-pole; it's always going to make us a
fortune!"

"But, Billy, if you and the boy took a little place somewhere, and
you had one good maid--up there on the pony farm, for instance--
surely it would be saner, surely it would be wiser, than trying to
think of the stage now with him on your hands!"

"Except that I would simply die!" Billy said. "I love the city,
and the excitement of not knowing what will turn up. And if Joe
would behave himself, and if I should make a hit, why, we'll be
all right."

A queer, hectic, unsatisfying life it must be, Rachael thought,
saying good-bye to her guest a day or two later. Dressing,
rouging, lacing, pinning on her outrageously expensive hats,
jerking on her extravagant white gloves, drinking, rushing,
screaming with laughter, screaming with anger, Billy was one of
that large class of women that the big city breeds, and that
cannot live elsewhere than in the big city. She would ride in a
thousand taxicabs, worrying as she watched the metre; she would
drink a thousand glasses of champagne, wondering anxiously if Joe
were to pay for it; she would gossip of a dozen successful
actresses without the self-control to work for one-tenth of their
success, and she would move through all the life of the theatres
and hotels without ever having her place among them, and her share
of their little glory. And almost as reckless in action as she was
in speech, she would cling to the brink of the conventions, never
quite a good woman, never quite anything else, a fond and loyal if
a foolish and selfish mother, some day noisily informing her
admirers that she actually had a boy in college, and enjoying
their flattering disbelief. And so would disappear the last of the
handsome fortune that poor Clarence's father had bequeathed to
him, and Clarence's grandson must fight his way with no better
start than his grandfather had had financially, and with an
infinitely less useful brain and less reliable pair of hands.
Billy might be widowed or freed in some less unexceptionable way,
and then Billy would marry again, and it would be a queer
marriage; Rachael could read her fate in her character.

She wondered, walking slowly the short mile that lay between her
house and the station, when Billy was gone, just how a discerning
eye might read her own fate in her own character. Just what did
the confused mixture of good motives and bad motives, erratic
unselfishnesses and even more erratic weaknesses that was Rachael,
deserve of Fate? She had bought some knowledge, but it had been
dearly bought; she had bought some goodness, but at what a cost of
pain!

"I don't believe that Warren ever did one-tenth the silly things
we suspected him of!" Alice exclaimed one day. "I believe he was
just an utter fool, and Magsie took advantage of it!"

Rachael did not answer, but there was no brightening of her sombre
look. Her eyes, grave and sad, held for Alice no hope that she had
come, as George and Alice had come, to a softer view of Warren's
offence.

"I see him always as he was that last horrible morning," she said
to Alice. "And I pray that I will never look upon his face again!"
And when presently Alice hinted that George was receiving an
occasional letter from Warren, Rachael turned pale.

"Don't quote it to me, Alice," she said gently; "don't ask me to
hear it. It's all over. I haven't a heart any more, just a void
and a pain. You only hurt me--I can't ever be different. You and
George love me, I know that. Don't drive me away. Don't ever feel
that it will be different from what it is now. I--I wish him no
ill, God knows, but--I can't. It wouldn't be happiness for me or
for him. Please, PLEASE--!"

Alice, in tears, could only give her her way.




CHAPTER V


Upon the discontented musings of Miss Margaret Clay one hot
September morning came Mrs. Joseph Pickering, very charming in
coffee-colored madras, with an exquisite heron cockade upon her
narrow tan hat. Magsie was up, but not dressed, and was not ill
pleased to have company. Her private as well as professional
affairs were causing her much dissatisfaction of late, and she was
at the moment in the act of addressing a letter to Warren, now on
the ocean, from whom she had only this morning had an extremely
disquieting letter.

Warren had come to see her the day before sailing, and with a
grave determination new to their intercourse, had repeated several
unpalatable truths. Rachael, on second thoughts, he told her, had
absolutely refused him a divorce.

"But she can't do that! She wrote me herself--" Magsie had begun
in anger. His distressed voice interrupted her.

"She's acting for the boys, Magsie. And she's right."

"Right!" The little actress turned pale as the full significance
of his words and tone dawned upon her. "But--but what do you mean!
What about ME?"

To this Warren had only answered with an exquisitely uncomfortable
look and the simple phrase, "Magsie, I'm sorry."

"You mean that you're not going to MAKE her keep her word?"

And again she had put an imperative little hand upon his arm, sure
of her power to win him ultimately. Days afterward the angry blood
came into her face when she remembered his kind, his almost
fatherly, smile, as he dislodged the hand.

"Magsie, I'm sorry. You can't despise me as I despise myself,
dear. I'm ashamed. Some day, perhaps, there'll be something I can
do for you, and then you'll see by the way I do it that I want
with all my heart to make it up to you. But I'm going away now,
Magsie, and we mustn't see each other any more."

Magsie, repulsed, had flung herself the length of the little room.

"You DARE tell me that, Greg?"

"I'm sorry, Magsie!"

"Sorry!" Her tone was vitriol. "Why, but I've got your letters.
I've got your own words! Everyone knows-the whole world knows! Can
you deny that you gave me this?--and this? Can you deny--"

"No, I'm not denying anything, Magsie. Except--that I never meant
to hurt you. And I hope there was some happiness in it for you as
there was for me."

Magsie had dropped into a chair with her back to him.

"I've made you cross," she said penitently, "and you're punishing
me! Was it my seeing Richie, Greg? You know I never cared---"

"Don't take that tone," he said.

Her color flamed again, and she set her little teeth. He saw her
breast rise and fall.

"Don't think you can do this, Greg," she said with icy
viciousness. "Don't delude yourself! I can punish you, and I will.
Alice and George Valentine can fix it all up to suit themselves,
but they don't know me! You've said your say now, and I've
listened. Very well!"

"Magsie," he said almost pleadingly, interrupting the hard little
voice, "can't you see what a mistake it's all been?"

She looked at him with eyes suddenly flooded with tears.

"M-m-mistake to s-s-say we loved each other, Greg?"

The man did not answer. Presently Magsie began to speak in a sad,
low tone.

"You can go now if you want to, Greg. I'm not going to try to hold
you. But I know you'll come back to me to-morrow, and tell me it
was all just the trouble other people tried to make between us--it
wasn't really you, the man I love!"

"I'll write you," he said after a silence. And from the doorway he
added, "Good-bye." Magsie did not turn or speak; she could not
believe her ears when she heard the door softly close.

Next day brought her only a letter from the steamer, a letter
reiterating his good-byes, and asking her again to forgive him.
Magsie read it in stupefaction. He was gone, and she had lost him!

The first panic of surprise gave way to more reasonable thinking.
There were ways of bringing him back; there were arguments that
might persuade Rachael to adhere to her original resolution. It
could not be dropped so easily. Magsie began to wonder what a
lawyer might advise. Billy came in upon her irresolute musing.

"Hello, dearie! But I'm interrupting---" said Billy.

"Oh, hello, darling! No, indeed you're not," Magsie said, tearing
up an envelope lazily. "I was trying to write a letter, but I have
to think it over before it goes."

"I should think you could write a letter to your beau with your
eyes shut," Billy said. "You've had practice enough! I know you're
busy, but I won't interrupt you long. Upon my word, I had a hard
enough time getting to you. There was no boy at the lift, and only
a dear old Irish girl mopping up the floors. We had a long heart-
to-heart talk, and I gave her a dollar."

"A dollar! I'll have to move-you're raising the price of living!"
said Magsie. "She's the janitor's wife, and they're rich already.
What possessed you?"

"Well, she unpinned her skirts and went after the boy," Billy said
idly, "and it was the only thing I had." She was trying quietly to
see the name on the envelope Magsie had destroyed, but being
unsuccessful, she went on more briskly, "How is the beau, by the
way?"

"I wish I had never seen the man!" Magsie said, glad to talk of
him. "His wife is raising the roof now---"

"I thought she would!" Billy said wisely. "I didn't see any woman,
especially if she's not young, giving all that up without a fight!
You know I said so."

"I know you did," said Magsie ruefully. "But I don't see what she
can do!"

"Well, she can refuse to give him his divorce, can't she?" Billy
said sensibly.

"But CAN she?" Magsie was obviously not sure.

"Of course she can!"

"But she doesn't want him. I went to see her--"

"Went to see her? For heaven's sake, what did you do that for?"

"Because I cared for him," Magsie said, coloring.

"For heaven's sake! You had your nerve! And what sort of a person
is she?"

"Oh, beautiful! I knew her before. And she said that she would not
interfere. She was as willing as he was; then---"

"But now she's changed her mind?"

"Apparently." Magsie scowled into space.

"Well, what does HE say?" Billy asked after a pause.

"Why, he can't--or he seems to think he can't--force her."

"Well, I don't know that he can--here. There are states--"

"Yes, I know, but we're here in New York," Magsie said briefly. A
second later she sat up, suddenly energetic and definite in voice
and manner. "But there ARE ways of forcing her, as she will soon
see," said Magsie in a venomous voice. "I have his letters. I
could put the whole thing into a lawyer's hands. There's such a
thing as-as a breach of promise suit--"

"Not with a married man," Billy interrupted. Magsie halted, a
little dashed.

"How do you know?" she demanded.

"You'd have to show you had been injured--and you've known all
along he was married," Billy said.

"Well"--Magsie was scarlet with anger--"I could make him sorry,
don't worry about that!" she said childishly.

"Of course, if his wife DID consent, and then changed her mind,
and you sent his letters to her," Billy said after cogitation. "It
might--he may have glossed it all over, to her, you know."

"Exactly!" Magsie said triumphantly. "I knew there was a way!
She's a sensitive woman, too. You know you can't go as far as you
like with a girl, Billy," she went on argumentatively, "without
paying for it somehow!"

"Make him pay!" said the practical Billy.

"I don't want--just money," Magsie said discontentedly. "I want--I
don't want to be interfered with. I believe I shall do just that,"
she went on with a brightening eye. "I'll write him---"

"Tell him. Ever so much more effective than writing!" Billy
suggested.

"Tell him then," Magsie did not mean to betray his identity if she
could help it, "that I really will send these things on to his
wife--that's just what I'll do!"

"Are there children?" asked Billy.

"Two--girls," Magsie said with barely perceptible hesitation.

"Grown?" pursued the visitor.

"Ye-es, I believe so." Magsie was too clever to multiply
unnecessary untruths. She began to dress.

"What are you doing this afternoon?" asked Billy. "I have the
Butlers' car for the day. Joe brought it into town to be fixed,
and can't drive it out until tomorrow. We might do something. It's
a gorgeous car."

"I'm not doing one thing in the world. Where's Joe?"

"Joe Pickering?" asked Billy. "Oh, he's gone off with some men for
some golf and poker. We might find someone, and go on a party.
Where could we go--Long Beach? It's going to be stifling hot."

"Stay and have lunch with me," said Magsie.

"I can't to-day. I'm lunching with a theatrical man at Sherry's. I
tell you I'm in deadly earnest. I'm going to break in! Suppose I
come here for you at just three. Meanwhile, you think up someone.
How about Bryan Masters?"

Magsie made a face.

"Well," said Billy, departing, "you think of someone, and I will.
Perhaps the Royces would go--a nice little early party. The worst
of it is, no one's in town!"

She ran downstairs and jumped into the beautiful car.

"Sherry's, please, Hungerford," said Billy easily. "And then you
might get your lunch, and come for me sharp at half-past two."

The man touched his hat. Billy leaned back against the rich
leather upholstery luxuriously; she was absolutely content. Joe
was quiet and away, dear little old Breck was in seventh heaven
down on the cool seashore, and there was a prospect of a party to-
night. As they rolled smoothly downtown the passing throng might
well have envied the complacent little figure in coffee-colored
madras with the big heron feather in her hat.

When Billy was gone, Magsie, with a thoughtful face and compressed
lips, took two packages of letters from her desk and wrapped them
for posting. She fell into deep musing for a few minutes before
she wrote Rachael's name on the wrapper, but after that she
dressed with her usual care, and carried the package to the
elevator boy for mailing. As she came back to her rooms a caller
was announced and followed her name into Magsie's apartment almost
immediately. Magsie, with a pang of consternation, found herself
facing Richie Gardiner's mother.

Anna would never have permitted this, was Magsie's first resentful
thought, but Anna was on a vacation, and the elevator boy could
not be expected to discriminate.

"Good morning, Mrs. Gardiner," said Magsie; "you'll excuse my
dressing all over the place, but I have no maid this week. How's
Richie?"

Mrs. Gardiner was oblivious of anything amiss. She sat down, first
removing a filmy scarf of Magsie's from a chair, and smiled, the
little muscle-twitching smile of a person in pain, as if she
hardly heard Magsie's easy talk.

"He doesn't seem to get better, Miss Clay," said she, almost
snorting in her violent effort to breathe quietly. "Doctor doesn't
say he gets worse, but of course he don't fool me--I know my boy's
pretty sick."

The agony of helpless motherhood was not all lost upon Magsie,
even though it was displayed by a large, plain woman in
preposterous clothes, strangely introduced into her pretty rooms,
and a most incongruous figure there.

"What a SHAME!" she said warmly.

"It's a shame to anyone that knew Rich as I did a few years ago,"
his mother said. "There wasn't a brighter nor a hardier child. It
wasn't until we came to this city that he begun to give way--and
what wonder? It'd kill a horse to live in this place. I wish to
God that I had got him out of it when he had that first spell. I
may be--I don't know, but I may be too late now." Tears came to
her eyes, the hard tears of a proud and suffering woman. She took
out a folded handkerchief and pressed it unashamedly to her eyes.
"But he wouldn't go," she resumed, clearing her throat. "He was
going to stay here, live or die. And Miss Clay, YOU know why!" She
stopped short, a terrible look upon Magsie.

"I?" faltered Magsie, coloring, and feeling as if she would cry
herself.

"You kept him," said his mother. "He hung round you like a bee
round a rose--poor, sick boy that he was! He's losing sleep now
because he can't get you out of his thoughts."

She stopped again, and Magsie hung her head.

"I'm sorry," she said slowly. And with the childish words came
childish tears. "I'm awfully sorry, Mrs. Gardiner," stammered
Magsie. "I know--I've known all along--how Richie feels to me. I
suppose I could have stopped him, got him to go away, perhaps, in
time. But--but I've been unhappy myself, Mrs. Gardiner. A person--
I love has been cruel to me. I don't know what I'm going to do. I
worry and worry!" Magsie was frankly crying now. "I wish there was
something I could do for Richie, but I can't tell him I care!" she
sobbed.

Both women sat in miserable silence for a moment, then Richard
Gardiner's mother said: "It wouldn't do you any harm to just--if
you would--to just see him, would it? Don't say anything about
this other man. Could you do that? Couldn't you let him think that
maybe if he went away and came back all well you'd--you might--
there might be some chance for him? Doctor says he's got to go
away AT ONCE if he's going to get well."

The anguish in her voice and manner reached Magsie at last. There
was nothing cruel about the little actress, however sordid her
ambitions and however selfish her plans.

"Could you get him away, now?" she said almost timidly. "Is he
strong enough to go?"

"That's what Doctor says; he ought to go away TO-DAY, but--but he
won't lissen to me," his mother answered with trembling lips.
"He's all I have. I just live for Rich. I loved his father, and
when Dick was killed I had only him."

"I'll go see him," said Magsie in sudden generous impulse. "I'll
tell him to take care of himself. It's simply wicked of him to
throw his life away like this."

"Miss Clay," said Mrs. Gardiner with a break in her strong, deep
voice, "if you do that--may the Lord send you the happiness you
give my boy!" She began to cry again.

"Why, Mrs. Gardiner," said Magsie in a hurt, childish voice, "I
LIKE Richie!"

"Well, he likes you all right," said his mother on a long,
quivering breath. With big, coarse, tender fingers she helped
Magsie with the last hooks and bands of her toilette. "If you
ain't as pretty and dainty as a little wax doll!" she observed
admiringly. Magsie merely sighed in answer. Wax dolls had their
troubles!

But she liked the doglike devotion of Richie's big mother, and the
beautiful car--Richie's car. Perhaps the hurt to her heart and her
pride had altered Magsie's sense of values. At all events, she did
not even shrink from Richie to-day.

She sat down beside the white bed, beside the bony form that the
counterpane revealed in outline, and smiled at Richie's dark, thin
eager face and sunken, adoring eyes. She laid her warm, plump
little hand between his long, thin fingers. After a while the
nurse timidly suggested the detested milk; Richie drank it
dutifully for Magsie.

They were left together in the cool, airy, orderly room, and in
low, confidential tones they talked. Magsie was well aware that
the big doctors themselves would not interrupt this talk, that the
nurses and the mother were keeping guard outside the door. Richie
was conscious of nothing but Magsie.

In this hour the girl thought of the stormy years that were past
and the stormy future. She had played her last card in the game
for Warren Gregory's love. The letters, without an additional
word, were gone to Rachael. If Rachael chose to use them against
Warren, then the road for Magsie, if long, was unobstructed. But
suppose Rachael, with that baffling superiority of hers, decided
not to use them?

Magsie had seriously considered and seriously abandoned the idea
of holding out several letters from the packages, but the letters,
as legal documents, had no value to anyone but Rachael. If Rachael
chose to forgive and ignore the writing of them, they were so much
waste paper, and Magsie had no more hold over Warren than any
other young woman of his acquaintance.

But Magsie was more or less committed to a complete change. The
break with Bowman could not be avoided without great awkwardness
now. She despised herself for having so simply accepted a bank
account from Warren, yet what else could she do? Magsie had wanted
money all her life, and when that money was gone---Richie was
falling into a doze, his hand still tightly clasping hers. She
slipped to her knees beside the bed, and as he lazily opened his
eyes she gave him a smile that turned the room to Heaven for him.
When a nurse peeped cautiously in, a warning nod from Magsie sent
the surprised and delighted woman away again with the great news.
Mr. Gardiner was asleep!

The clock struck twelve, struck one, still Magsie knelt by the
bedside, watching the sleeping face. Outside the city was silent
under the summer sun. In the great hospital feet cheeped along
wide corridors, now and then a door was opened or closed. There
was no other sound.

Magsie eyed her charge affectionately. When he had come to her
dressing-room in former days trying to ignore his cough, trying to
take her about and to order her suppers as the other men did, he
had been vaguely irritating; but here in this plain little bed, so
boyish, so dependent, so appreciative, he seemed more attractive
than he ever had before. Whatever there was maternal in Magsie
rose to meet his need. She could not but be impressed by the royal
solicitude that surrounded the heir to the "Little Dick Mine."
Mrs. Richard Gardiner would be something of a personage, thought
Magsie dreamily. He might not live long!

Of course, that was calculating and despicable; she was not the
woman to marry where she did not love! But then she really did
love Richie in a way. And Richie loved her--no question of that!
Loved her more than Warren did for all his letters and gifts, she
decided resentfully.

When Richie wakened, bewildered, at one o'clock, Magsie was still
there. She insisted that he drink more milk before a word was
said. Then they talked again, Magsie in a new mood of reluctance
and gentleness, Richie half wild with rising hope and joy.

"And you would want me to marry you, feeling this way?" Magsie
faltered.

"Oh, Magsie!" he whispered.

A tear fell on the thin hand that Magsie was patting. Through
dazzled eyes she saw the future: reckless buying of gowns--brief
and few farewells--the private car, the adoring invalid, the great
sunny West with its forests and beaches, the plain gold ring on
her little hand. In the whole concerned group--doctor, nurse,
valet, mother, maid--young Mrs. Gardiner would be supreme! She saw
herself flitting about a California bungalow, lending her young
strength to Richie's increasing strength in the sunwashed, health-
giving air.

She put her arms about him, laid her rosy cheek against his pale
one.

"And you really want me to go out," Magsie began, smiling through
tears, "and get a nice special license and a nice little plain
gold ring and come back here with a nice kind clergyman, and say
'I will'---"

But at this her tears again interrupted her, and Richard, clinging
desperately to her hand, could not speak either for tears. His
mother who had silently entered the room on Magsie's last words
suddenly put her fat arms about her and gave her the great
motherly embrace for which, without knowing it, she had hungered
for years, and they all fell to planning.

Richard could help only with an occasional assent. There was
nothing to which he would not consent now. They would be married
as soon as Magsie and his mother could get back with the
necessities. And then would he drink his milk, good boy--and go
straight to sleep, good boy. Then to-morrow he should be helped
into the softest motor car procurable for money, and into the
private car that his mother and Magsie meant to engage, by hook or
crook, to-night. In six days they would be watching the blue
Pacific, and in three weeks Richie should be sleeping out of doors
and coming downstairs to meals. He had only to obey his mother; he
had only to obey his wife. Magsie kissed him good-bye tenderly
before leaving him for the hour's absence. Her heart was twisting
little tendrils about him already. He was a sweet, patient dear,
she told his mother, and he would simply have to get well!

"God above bless and reward you, Margaret!" was all Mrs. Gardiner
could say, but Magsie never tired of hearing it.

When the two women went down the hospital steps they found Billy
Pickering, in her large red car, eying them reproachfully from the
curb.

"This is a nice way to act!" Billy began. "Your janitor's wife
said you had come here. I've got two men--" Magsie's expression
stopped her.

"This is Mr. Gardiner's mother, Billy," Magsie said solemnly. "The
doctors agree that he must not stand this climate another day. He
had another sinking spell yesterday, and he--he mustn't have
another! I am going with them to California--"

"You ARE?" Billy ejaculated in amazement. Magsie bridled in
becoming importance.

"It is all very sudden," she said with the weary, patient smile of
the invalid's wife, "but he won't go without me." And then, as
Mrs. Gardiner began to give directions to the driver of her own
car, which was waiting, she went on inconsequentially, and in a
low and troubled undertone, "I didn't know what to do. Do--do you
think I'm a fool, Billy?"

"But what'll the other man say?" demanded Billy.

Magsie, leaning against the door of the car, rubbed the polished
wood with a filmy handkerchief.

"He won't know," she said.

"Won't know? But what will you tell him?"

"Oh, he's not here. He won't be back for ever so long. And--and
Richie can't live--they all say that. So if I come back before he
does, what earthly difference can it make to him that I was
married to Richie?"

"MARRIED!" For once in her life Billy was completely at a loss.
"But are you going to MARRY him?"

Magsie gave her a solemn look, and nodded gravely. "He loves me,"
she said in a soft injured tone, "and I mean to take as good care
of him as the best wife in the world could! I'm sick of the stage,
and if anything happens with--the other, I shan't have to worry--
about money, I mean. I'm not a fool, Billy. I can't let a chance
like this slip. Of course I wouldn't do it if I didn't like him
and like his mother, too. And I'll bet he will get well, and I'll
never come back to New York! Of course this is all a secret. We're
going right down to the City Hall for the license now, and the
ring---There are a lot of clothes I've got to buy immediately--"

"Why don't you let me run you about?" suggested Billy. "I don't
have to meet the men until six--I'll have to round up another
girl, too; but I'd love to. Let Mama go back to Mr. Gardiner!"

"Oh, I couldn't," Magsie said, quite the dutiful daughter. "She's
a wonderful person; she's arranging for our own private car, and a
cook, and I may take Anna if I can get her!"

"All righto!" agreed Billy.

A rather speculative look came into her face as the other car
whirled away. She suddenly gave directions to the driver.

"Drive to Miss Clay's apartment, where you picked me up this
morning, Hungerford!" she said quickly. "I--I think I left
something there--gloves--"

"I wonder if you would let me into Miss Clay's apartment?" she
said to the beaming janitor's wife fifteen minutes later. "Miss
Clay isn't here, and I left my gloves in her rooms."

Something in Magsie's manner had made her feel that Magsie had
good reason for keeping the name of her admirer hid. Billy had
felt for weeks that she would know the name if Magsie ever
divulged it. And this morning she had noticed the admission that
the wronged wife was a beautiful woman--and the hesitation with
which Magsie had answered "Two girls." Then Magsie had said that
she would "write him," not at all the natural thing to do to a man
one was sure to see, and Rachael had said that Warren was away!
But most significant of all was her answer to Billy's question as
to whether the children were grown. Magsie had admitted that she
knew the wife, had "known her before," and yet she pretended not
to know whether or not the children were grown. Billy had had just
a fleeting idea of Warren Gregory before that, but this particular
term confirmed the suspicion suddenly.

So while Magsie was getting her marriage license, Billy was in
Magsie's apartment turning over the contents of her wastepaper
basket in feverish haste. The envelope was ruined, it had been
crushed while wet; a name had been barely started anyway. But here
was the precious scrap of commencement, "My dearest Greg--"

Billy was almost terrified by the discovery. There it was, in
irrefutable black and white. She stuffed it back into the basket,
and left the house like a thief, panting for the open air. A
suspicion only ten minutes before, now she felt as if no other
fact on earth had ever so fully possessed her. For an hour she
drove about in a daze. Then she went home, and sat down at her
desk, and wrote the following letter:

"Mv DEAR RACHAEL: The letter with the darling little 'B' came
yesterday. I think he is cute to learn to write his own letter so
quickly. Tell him that mother is proud of him for picking so many
blackberries, and will love the jam. It is as hot as fire here,
and the park has that steamy smell that a hothouse has. I have
been driving about in Joe Butler's car all afternoon. We are going
to Long Beach to-night.

"Rachael--Magsie Clay and a man named Richard Gardiner were
married this afternoon. He is an invalid or something; he is at
St. Luke's Hospital, and she and his mother are going to take him
to California at once. What do you know about that? Of course this
is a secret, and for Heaven's sake, if you tell anybody this,
don't say I gave it away.

"If Magsie Clay should send you a bunch of letters, she will just
do it to be a devil, and I want to ask you to burn them up before
you read them. You know how you talked to me about divorce,
Rachael! What you don't know can't hurt you. Don't please Magsie
Clay to the extent of doing exactly what she wants you to do. If
anyone you love has been a fool, why, it is certainly hard to
understand how they could, but you stand by what you said to me
the other day, and forget it.

"I feel as if I was breaking into your own affairs. I hope you
won't care, and that I'm not all in the dark about this--"
"Affectionately, BILLY."




CHAPTER VI


This letter, creased from constant reading, Rachael showed to
George Valentine a week later. The doctor, who had spent the week-
end with his family at Clark's Hills, was in his car and running
past the gate of Home Dunes on his way back to town when Rachael
stopped him. She looked her composed and dignified self in her
striped blue linen and deep-brimmed hat, but the man's trained
look found the circles about her wonderful eyes, and he detected
signs of utter weariness in her voice.

"Read this, George," said she, resting against the door of his
car, and opening the letter before him. "This came from Billy--
Mrs. Pickering, you know--several days ago."

George read the document through twice, then raised questioning
eyes to hers, and made the mouth of a whistler.

"What do you think?" Rachael questioned in her turn.

"Lord! I don't know what to think," said George. "Do you suppose
this can be true?"

Rachael sighed wearily, staring down the road under the warming
leaves of the maples into a far vista of bare dunes in thinning
September sunshine.

"It might be, I suppose. You can see that Billy believes it," she
said.

"Sure, she believes it," George agreed. "At least, we can find
out. But I don't understand it!"

"Understand it?" she echoed in rich scorn. "Who understands
anything of the whole miserable business? Do I? Does Warren, do
you suppose?"

"No, of course nobody does," George said hastily in distress. He
regarded the paper almost balefully. "This is the deuce of a
thing!" he said. "If she didn't care for him any more than that,
what's all the fuss about? I don't believe the threat about
sending his letters, anyway!" he added hardily.

"Oh, that was true enough," Rachael said lifelessly. "They came."

George gave her an alarmed glance, but did not speak.

"A great package of them came," Rachael added dully. "I didn't
open it. I had a fire that morning, and I simply set it on the
fire." Her voice sank, her eyes, brooding and sombre, were far
away. "But I watched it burning, George," she said in a low,
absent tone, "and I saw his handwriting--how well I know it--
Warren's writing, on dozens and dozens of letters--there must have
been a hundred! To think of it--to think of it!"

Her voice was like some living thing writhing in anguish. George
could think of nothing to say. He looked about helplessly,
buttoned a glove button briskly, folded the letter, and made some
work of putting it away in an inside pocket.

"Well," Rachael said, straightening up suddenly, and with resolute
courage returning to her manner and voice, "you'll have, somebody
look it up, will you, George?"

"You may depend upon it-immediately," George said huskily. "It--of
course it will make an immense difference," he added, in his
anxiety to be reassuring saying exactly the wrong thing.

Rachael was pale.

"I don't know how anything can make a great difference now,
George," she answered slowly. "The thing remains--a fact. Of
course this ends, in one way, the sordid side, the fear of
publicity, of notoriety. But that wasn't the phase of it that ever
counted with me. This will probably hurt Warren--"

"Oh, Rachael, dear old girl, don't talk that way!" George
protested. "You can't believe that Warren will feel anything but
a--a most unbelievable relief! We all know that. He's not the
first man who let a pretty face drive him crazy when he was
working himself to death." George was studying her as he spoke,
with all his honest heart in his look, but Rachael merely shook
her head forlornly.

"Perhaps I don't understand men," she said with a mildness that
George found infinitely more disturbing than any fury would have
been.

"Well, I'll look up records at the City Hall," he said after a
pause. "That's the first thing to do. And then I'll let you know.
Boys well this morning?"

"Lovely," Rachael smiled. "My trio goes fishing to-day, packing
its lunch itself, and asking no feminine assistance. The lunch
will be eaten by ten o'clock, and the boys home at half-past ten,
thinking it is almost sundown. They only go as far as the cove,
where the men are working, and we can see the tops of their heads
from the upstairs' porch, so Mary and I won't feel entirely
unprotected. I'm to lunch with Alice, so my day is nicely
planned!"

The bright look did not deceive him, nor the reassuring tone. But
George Valentine's friendship was more easily displayed by deeds
than words, and now, with an affectionate pat for her hand, he
touched his starter, and the car leaped upon its way. Just four
hours later he telephoned Alice that the wedding license of
Margaret Rose Clay and Richard Gardiner had indeed been issued a
week before, and that Magsie was not to be found at her apartment,
which was to be sublet at the janitor's discretion; that Bowman's
secretary reported the absence of Miss Clay from the city, and the
uncertainty of her appearing in any of Mr. Bowman's productions
that winter, and that at the hospital a confident inquiry for "Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner" had resulted in the discreet reply that "the
parties" had left for California. George, with what was for him a
rare flash of imagination, had casually inquired as to the name of
the clergyman who had performed the ceremony, being answered
dispassionately that the person at the other end of the telephone
"didn't know."

"George, you are an absolute WONDER!" said Alice's proud voice,
faintly echoed from Clark's Hills. "Now, shall you cable--anybody-
-you know who I mean?"

"I have," answered the efficient George, "already."

"Oh, George! And what will he do?"

"Well, eventually, he'll come back."

"Do you THINK so? I don't!"

"Well, anyway, we'll see."

"And you're an angel," said Mrs. Valentine, finishing the
conversation.

Ten days later Warren Gregory walked into George Valentine's
office, and the two men gripped hands without speaking. That
Warren had left for America the day George's cable reached him
there was no need to say. That he was a man almost sick with empty
days and brooding nights there was no need to say. George was
shocked in the first instant of meeting, and found himself, as
they talked together, increasingly shocked at the other's aspect.

Warren was thin, his hair actually showed more gray, there were
deep lines about his mouth. But it was not only that; his eyes had
a tired and haunted look that George found sad to see, his voice
had lost its old confident ring, and he seemed weary and shaken.
He asked for Alice and the children, and for Rachael and the boys.

"Rachael's well," George said. "She looks--well, she shows what
she's been through; but she's very handsome. And the boys are
fine. We had the whole crowd down as far as Shark Light for a
picnic last Sunday. Rachael has little Breck Pickering down there
now; he's a nice little chap, younger than our Katrina--Jim's age.
The youngster is in paradise, sure enough, and putting on weight
at a great rate."

"I didn't know he was there," Warren said slowly. "Like her--to
take him in. I wish I had been there--Sunday. I wish to the Lord
that it was all a horrible dream!"

He stopped and sat silent, looking gloomily at the floor, his
whole figure, George thought, indicating a broken and shamed
spirit.

"Well, Magsie's settled, at least," said George after a silence.

"Yes. That wasn't what counted, though," Warren said, as Rachael
had said. "She is settled without my moving; there's no way in
which I can ever make Rachael feel that I would have moved." Again
his voice sank into silence, but presently he roused himself.
"I've come back to work, George," he said with a quiet decision of
manner that George found new and admirable. "That's all I can do
now. If she ever forgives me--but she's not the kind that
forgives. She's not weak--Rachael. But anyway, I can work.
I'll go to the old house, for the present, and get things in
order. And you drop a hint to Alice, when she talks to Rachael,
that I've not got anything to say. I'll not annoy her."

George's heart ached for him as Warren suddenly covered his face
with his hands. Warren had always been the adored younger brother
to him, Warren's wonderful fingers over the surgical table, a
miracle that gave their owner the right to claim whatever human
weaknesses and failings he might, as a balance. George had never
thought him perfect, as so much of the world thought him; to
George, Warren had always been a little more than perfect, a
machine of inspired surgery, underbalanced in many ways that in
this one supreme way he might be more than human. George had to
struggle for what he achieved; Warren achieved by divine right.
The women were in the right of it now, George conceded, they had
the argument. But of course they didn't understand--a thing like
that had nothing to do with Warren's wife; Rachael wasn't brought
into the question at all. And Lord! when all was said and done
Warren was Warren, and professionally the biggest figure in
George's world.

"I don't suppose you feel like taking Hudson's work?" said George
now. "He's crazy to get away, and he was telling me yesterday that
he didn't see himself breaking out of it. Mrs. Hudson wants to go
to her own people, in Montreal, and I suppose Jack would be glad
to go, too."

"Take it in a minute!" Warren said, his whole expression changing.
"Of course I'll take it. I'm going to spend this afternoon getting
things into shape at the house, and I think I'll drop round at the
hospital about five. But I can start right in to-morrow."

"It isn't too much?" George asked affectionately.

"Too much? It's the only thing that will save my reason, I think,"
Warren answered, and after that George said no more.

The two men lunched together, and dined together, five times a
week, with a curious change from old times: it was Warren who
listened, and George who did the talking now. They talked of cases
chiefly, for Warren was working day and night, and thought of
little else than his work; but once or twice, as September waned,
and October moved toward its close, there burst from him an
occasional inquiry as to his wife.

"Will she ever forgive me, George?" Warren asked one cool autumn
dawning when the two men were walking away from the hospital under
the fading stars. Warren had commenced an operation just before
midnight, it was only concluded now, and George, who had remained
beside him for sheer admiration of his daring and his skill, had
suggested that they walk for a while, and shake off the atmosphere
of ether and of pain.

"It's a time like this I miss her," Warren said. "I took it all
for granted, then. But after such a night as this, when I would go
home in those first years, and creep into bed, she was never too
sleepy to rouse and ask me how the case went, she never failed to
see that the house was quiet the next morning, and she'd bring in
my tray herself--Lord, a woman like that, waiting on me!"

George shook his head but did not speak. They walked an echoing
block or two in silence.

"George, I need my wife," Warren said then. "There isn't an hour
of my life that some phase of our life together doesn't come back
to me and wring my heart. I don't want anything else--our sons,
our fireside, our interests together. I've heard her voice ever
since. And I'm changed, George, not in what I always believed,
because I know right from wrong, and always have, but I don't
believe in myself any more. I want my kids to be taught laws--not
their own laws. I want to go on my knees to my girl---"

His voice thickened suddenly, and they walked on with no attempt
on either side to end the silence for a long time. The city
streets were wet from a rain, but day was breaking in hopeful
pearl and rose.

"I can say this," said George at last: "I believe that she needs
you as much as you do her. But Rachael's proud--"

"Ah, yes, she's that!" Warren said eagerly as he paused.

"And Warren, she has been dragged through the muck during the last
few years," George resumed in a mildly expostulatory tone.

"Oh, I know it!" Warren answered, stricken.

"She hates coarseness," pursued George, "she hates weakness. I
believe that if ever a divorce was justified in this world, hers
was. But to have you come back at her, to have Magsie Clay break
in on her, and begin to yap breezily about divorce, and how
prevalent it is, and what a solution it is, why, of course it was
enough to break her heart!"

"Don't!" Warren said thickly, quickening his pace, as if to walk
away from his own insufferable thoughts.

For many days they did not speak of Rachael again; indeed George
felt that there was nothing further to say. He feared in his own
heart that nothing would ever bring about a change in her feeling,
or rather, that the change that had been taking place in her for
so many weeks was one that would be lasting, that Rachael was an
altered woman.

Alice believed this, too, and Rachael believed it most of all.
Indeed, over Rachael's torn and shaken spirit there had fallen of
late a peace and a sense of security that she had never before
known in her life. She tried not to think of Warren any more, or
at least to think of him as he had been in the happy days when
they had been all in all to each other. If other thoughts would
creep in, and her heart grow hot and bitter within her at the
memory of her wrongs, she resolutely fought for composure; no
matter now what he had been or done, that life was dead. She had
her boys, the sunsets and sunrises, the mellowing beauty of the
year. She had her books, and above all her memories. And in these
memories she found much to blame in herself, but much to pity,
too. A rudderless little bark, she had been set adrift in so
inviting, so welcoming a sea twenty years ago! She had known that
she was beautiful, and that she must marry--what else? What more
serious thought ever flitted through the brain of little Rachael
Fairfax than that it was a delicious adventure to face life in a
rough blue coat and feathered hat, and steer her wild little sails
straight into the heart of the great waters?

She would have broken Stephen's heart; but Stephen was dead. She
had seized upon Clarence with never a thought of what she was to
give him, with never a prayer as to her fitness to be his wife,
nor his fitness to be the father of her children. She had laughed
at self-sacrifice, laughed at endurance, laughed at married love--
these things were only words to her. And when she had tugged with
all her might at the problem before her, and tried, with her
pitiable, untrained strength to force what she wished from Fate,
then she had flung the whole thing aside, and rushed on to new
experiments--and to new failures.

Always on the surface, always thinking of the impression she made
on the watching men and women about her, what a life it had been!
She had never known who made Clarence's money, what his own father
had been like, what the forces were that had formed him, and had
made him what he was. He did not please her, that began and ended
the story. He had presently flung himself into eternity with as
little heed as she had cast herself into her new life.

Ah, but there had been a difference there! She had loved there,
and been awakened by great love. Her child's crumpled, rosy foot
had come to mean more to her than all the world had meant before.
The smile, or the frown, in her husband's eyes had been her
sunshine or her storm. Through love she had come to know the
brimming life of the world, the pathos, the comedy that is ready
to spill itself over every humble window-sill, the joy that some
woman's heart feels whenever the piping cry of the new-born sounds
in a darkened room, the sorrow held by every shabby white hearse
that winds its way through a hot and unnoticing street. She had
clung to husband and sons with the tigerish tenacity that is the
rightful dower of wife and mother; she had thought the world well
lost in holding them.

And then the sordid, selfish past rose like an ugly mist before
her, and she found at her lips the bitter cup she had filled
herself. She was not so safe now, behind her barrier of love, but
that the terrible machinery she had set in motion might bring its
grinding wheels to bear upon the lives she guarded. She had flung
her solemn promise aside, once; what defence could she make for a
second solemn promise now? The world, divorce mad, spun blindly
on, and the echo of her own complacent "one in twelve" came
faintly, sickly back to her after the happy years.

"Divorce has actually no place in our laws, it isn't either wrong
or right," Rachael said one autumn day when they were walking
slowly to the beach. Over their heads the trees were turning
scarlet; the days were still soft and warm, but twilight fell
earlier now, and in the air at morning and evening was the
intoxicating sharpness, the thin blue and clear steel color that
mark the dying summer. Alice's three younger children were in
school, and the family came to Clark's Hills only for the week-
ends, but Rachael and her boys stayed on and on, enjoying the rare
warmth and beauty of the Indian Summer, and comfortable in the old
house that had weathered fifty autumns and would weather fifty
more.

"In some states it is absolutely illegal," Rachael continued, "in
others, it's permissible. In some it is a real source of revenue.
Now fancy treating any other offence that way! Imagine states in
which stealing was only a regrettable incident, or where murder
was tolerated! In South Carolina you cannot get a divorce on any
grounds! In Washington the courts can give it to you for any cause
they consider sufficient. There was a case: a man and his wife
obtained a divorce and both remarried. Now they find they are both
bigamists, because it was shown that the wife went West, with her
husband's knowledge and consent, to establish her residence there
for the explicit purpose of getting a divorce. It was well-
established law that if a husband or wife seek the jurisdiction of
another state for the sole object of obtaining a divorce, without
any real intent of living there, making their home there, goes, in
other words, just for divorce purposes, then the decree having
been fraudulently obtained will not be recognized anywhere!"

"But thousands do it, Rachael."

"But thousands don't seem to realize--I never did before--that
that is illegal. You can't deliberately move to Reno or Seattle or
San Francisco for such a purpose. All marriages following a
divorce procured under these conditions are illegal. Besides this,
the divorce laws as they exist in Washington, California, or
Nevada are not recognized by other states, and so because a couple
are separated upon the grounds of cruelty or incompatibility in
some Western state, they are still legally man and wife in New
York or Massachusetts. All sorts of hideous complications are
going on: blackmail and perjury!

"I wonder why divorce laws are so little understood?" Alice mused.

"Because divorce is an abnormal thing. You can't make it right,
and of course we are a long way from making it wrong. But that is
what it is coming to, I believe. Divorce will be against the law
some day! No divorce on ANY GROUNDS! It cannot be reconciled to
law; it defies law. Right on the face of it, it is breaking a
contract. Are any other contracts to be broken with public
approval? We will see the return of the old, simple law, then we
will wonder at ourselves! I am not a woman who takes naturally to
public work--I wish I were. But perhaps some day I can strike the
system a blow. It is women like me who understand, and who will
help to end it."

"It is only the worth-while women who do understand," said Alice.
"You are the marble worth cutting. Life is a series of phases; we
are none of us the same from year to year. You are not the same
girl that you were when you married Clarence Breckenridge--"

"What a different woman!" Rachael said under her breath.

"Well," said Alice then a little frightened, "why won't you think
that perhaps Warren might have changed, too; that whatever Warren
has done, it was done more like--like the little boy who has never
had his fling, who gets dizzy with his own freedom, and does
something foolish without analyzing just what he is doing?"

"But Warren, after all, isn't a child!" Rachael said sadly.

"But Warren is in some ways; that's just it," Alice said eagerly.
"He has always been singularly--well, unbalanced, in some ways.
Don't you know there was always a sort of simplicity, a sort of
bright innocence about Warren? He believed whatever anybody said
until you laughed at him; he took every one of his friends on his
own valuation. It's only where his work is concerned that you ever
see Warren positive, and dictatorial, and keen--"

Rachael's eyes had filled with tears.

"But he isn't the man I loved, and married," she said slowly. "I
thought he was a sort of god--he could do no wrong for me!"

"Yes, but that isn't the way to feel toward anybody," persisted
Alice. "No man is a god, no man is perfect. You're not perfect
yourself; I'm not. Can't you just say to yourself that human
beings are faulty--it may be your form of it to get dignified and
sulk, and Warren's to wander off dreamily into curious paths--but
that's life, Rachael, that's 'better or worse,' isn't it?"

"It isn't a question of my holding out for a mere theory, Alice,"
Rachael said after a while; "I'm not saying that I'm all in the
right, and that I will never see Warren again until he admits it,
and everyone admits it--that isn't what I want. But it's just that
I'm dead, so far as that old feeling is concerned. It is as if a
child saw his mother suddenly turn into a fiend, and do some
hideously cruel act; no amount of cool reason could ever convince
that child again that his mother was sweet and good."

"But as you get older," Alice smiled, "you differentiate between
good and good, and you see grades in evil, too. Everything isn't
all good or all bad, like the heroes and the villains of the old
plays. If Warren had done a 'hideously cruel' thing deliberately,
that would be one thing; what he has done is quite another. The
God who made us put sex into the world, Warren didn't; and Warren
only committed, in his--what is it?--forty-eighth year one of the
follies that most boys dispose of in their teens. Be generous,
Rachael, and forgive him. Give him another trial!"

"How CAN I forgive him?" Rachael said, badly shaken, and through
tears. "No, no, no, I couldn't! I never can."

They had reached the beach now, and could see the children, in
their blue field coats, following the curving reaches of the
incoming waves. The fresh roar of the breakers filled a silence,
gulls piped their wistful little cry as they circled high in the
blue air. Old Captain Semple, in his rickety one-seated buggy,
drove up the beach, the water rising in the wheel-tracks. The
children gathered about him; it was one of their excitements to
see the Captain wash his carriage, and the old mare splash in the
shallow water. Alice seated herself on a great log, worn silver
from the sea, and half buried in the white sand, but Rachael
remained standing, the sweet October wind whipping against her
strong and splendid figure, her beautiful eyes looking far out to
sea.

"You two have no quarrel," the older woman added mildly. "You and
Warren were rarely companionable. I used to say to George that you
were almost TOO congenial, too sensitive to each other's moods.
Warren knew that you idolized him, Rachael, and consequently, when
criticism came, when he felt that you of all persons were
misjudging him, why, he simply flung up his head like a horse, and
bolted!"

"Misjudging?" Rachael said quickly, half turning her head, and
bringing her eyes from the far horizon to rest upon Alice's face.
The children had seen them now, and were running toward them, and
Alice did not attempt to answer. She sighed, and shrugged her
shoulders.

A dead horseshoe crab on the sands deflected the course of the
racing children, except Derry, who pursued his panting way, and as
Rachael sat down on the log, cast himself, radiant and breathless,
into her arms. She caught the child to her heart passionately. He
had always been closer to her than even the splendid first-born
because of the giddy little head that was always getting him into
troubles, and the reckless little feet that never chose a sensible
course. Derry was always being rescued from deep water, always
leaping blindly from high places and saved by the narrowest
possible chance, always getting his soft mop of hair inextricably
tangled in the steering-gear of Rachael's car, or his foot
hopelessly twisted in the innocent-looking bars of his own bed,
always eating mysterious berries, or tasting dangerous medicines,
always ready to laugh deeply and deliciously at his own crimes.
Jim assumed a protective attitude toward him, chuckling at his
predicaments, advising him, and even gallantly assuming the blame
for his worst misdeeds. Rachael imagined them in boarding-school
some day; in college; Jim the student, dragged from his books and
window-seat to go to the rescue of the unfortunate but fascinating
junior. Jim said he was going to write books; Derry was going--her
heart contracted whenever he said it--was going to be a doctor,
and Dad would show him what to do!

Ah, how proud Warren might have been of them, she thought, walking
home to-day, a sandy hand in each of hers, Derry hopping on one
foot, twisting, and leaping; Jim leaning affectionately against
her, and holding forth as to the proper method of washing wagons!
What man would not have been proud of this pair, enchanting in
faded galatea now, soon to be introduced to linen knickerbockers,
busy with their first toiling capitals now, some day to be
growling Latin verbs. They would be interested in the Zoo this
winter, and then in skating, and then in football--Warren loved
football. He had thrown it all away!

Widowed in spirit, still Rachael was continually reminded that she
was not actually widowed, and in the hurt that came to her, even
in these first months, she found a chilling premonition of the
years to come. Warm-hearted Vera Villalonga wrote impulsively from
the large establishment at Lakewood that she had acquired for the
early winter. She had heard that Rachael and Greg weren't exactly
hitting it off--hoped to the Lord it wasn't true--anyway, Rachael
had been perfectly horrible about seeing her old friends; couldn't
she come at once to Vera, lots of the old crowd were there, and
spend a month? Mrs. Barker Emery, meeting Rachael on one of the
rare occasions when Rachael went into the city, asked pleasantly
for the boys, and pleasantly did not ask for Warren. Belvedere Bay
was gayer than ever this year, Mrs. Emory said; did Rachael know
that the Duchess of Exton was visiting Mary Moulton--such a dear!
Georgiana Vanderwall, visiting the Thomases at Easthampton,
motored over one day to spend a sympathetic half morning with
Rachael, pressing that lady's unresponsive hand with her own
large, capable one, and murmuring that of course--one heard--that
the Bishop of course felt dreadfully--they only hoped--both such
dear sweet people--

Rachael felt as if she would like to take a bath after this well-
meant visitation. A day or two later she had a letter from
Florence, who said that "someone" had told her that the Gregorys
might not be planning to keep their wonderful cook this winter. If
that was true, would Rachael be so awfully good as to ask her to
go see Mrs. Haviland?

"The pack," Rachael said to Alice, "is ready to run again!"




CHAPTER VII


November turned chilly, and in its second week there was even a
flutter of snow at Clark's Hills. Rachael did not dislike it, and
it was a huge adventure to the boys. Nevertheless, she began to
feel that a longer stay down on the bleak coast might be unwise.
The old house, for all its purring furnace and double windows, was
draughty enough to admit icy little fingers of the outside air,
here and there, and the village, getting under storm shutters and
closing up this wing or that room for the winter, was so
businesslike in its preparations as to fill Rachael's heart with
mild misgivings.

Alice still brought her brood down for the week-ends, and it was
on one of these that Rachael suddenly decided to move. The two
women discussed it, Rachael finally agreeing to go to the
Valentines' for a week before going on to Boston--or it might be
Washington or Philadelphia--any other city than the one in which
she might encounter the boys' father. Alice had never won her to
promise a visit before, and although Rachael's confidence in her--
for Rachael neither extracted a promise from Alice as to any
possible encounter with Warren, nor reminded her friend that she
placed herself entirely at Alice's mercy--rather disconcerted
Alice, she had a simple woman's strong faith in coincidence, and
she felt, she told George, that the Lord would not let this
opportunity for a reconciliation go by. Mrs. Valentine had seen
Warren Gregory now, more than once, and far more potent than any
argument that he might have made was his silence, his most
unexpected and unnatural silence. There was no explanation; indeed
Warren had little to say on any subject in these days. He liked to
come now and then, in the evening, to the Valentine house, but he
would not dine there, and confined his remarks almost entirely to
answers to George. Physically, Alice thought him shockingly
changed.

"He is simply broken," she said to George, in something like
fright. "I didn't know human beings could change that way. Warren-
-who used to be so positive! Why, he's almost timid!"

She did not tell Rachael this, and George insisted that, while
Rachael and the boys were at the house, Warren must be warned to
keep away; so that Alice had frail enough material with which to
build her dreams. Nevertheless, she dreamed.

It was finally arranged that Rachael and little Jim should go up
to town on a certain Monday with Alice; that Rachael should make
various engagements then, as to storage, packing, and such matters
as the care of the piano and the car, for the winter. Then Jim,
for the first time in his life, would stay away from his mother
overnight with Aunt Alice, Rachael returning to Clark's Hills to
bring Mary and Derry up the next day in the car. Jim was to go to
the dentist, and to get shoes; there were several excellent
reasons why it seemed wise to have him await his mother and
brother in town rather than make the long trip twice in one day.
Mary smuggled Derry out of sight when the Monday morning came, and
Rachael and her oldest son went away with the Valentines in the
car.

It was a fresh, sweet morning in the early winter, and both women,
furred to the eyes, enjoyed the trip. The children, snuggled in
between them, chattered of their own affairs, and Rachael
interrupted her inexhaustible talk with Alice only to ask a
question of the driver now and then.

"I shall have to bring my own car over this road to-morrow, Kane,"
she explained. "I have never been at the wheel myself before in
all the times I have done it."

"Mar-r-tin does be knowin' every step of the way," suggested Kane.

"But Martin hasn't been with me this summer," the lady smiled.

"I thought I saw him runnin' the docther's car yesterda' week,"
mused Kane who was a privileged character. "Well,'tis not hard,
Mrs. Gregory. The whole place is plasthered wid posts. But the
thing of it is, ma'am," he added, after a moment, turning back
toward her without taking his eyes from the road, "there does be a
big storm blowin' up. Look there, far over there, how black it
is."

"But that won't break to-day?" Rachael said uneasily, thinking of
Derry.

"Well, it may not--that's thrue. But these roads will be in a
grand mess if we have anny more rain--that's a fact for ye," Kane
persisted.

"Then don't come until Wednesday," suggested Alice.

"Oh, Alice, but I'll be so frantic to see my boy!"

"Twenty-four hours more, you goose!" Alice laughed. Rachael
laughed, too, and took several surreptitious kisses from the back
of Jimmy's neck as a fortification against the coming separation.

Indeed, she found it unbelievably hard to leave him, trotting
happily upstairs with his beloved Katharine, and to go about her
day's business anticipating the long trip back to Home Dunes
without him. However, there were not many hours to spare, and
Rachael had much to do. She set herself systematically to work.

By one o'clock everything was done, with an hour to spare for
train time. But she had foolishly omitted luncheon, and felt tired
and dizzy. She turned toward a downtown lunchroom, and was held at
the crossing of Fifth Avenue and one of the thirties idly watching
the crowd of cars that delayed her when she saw Warren in his car.

He was on the cross street, and so also stopped, but he did not
see her. Martin was at the wheel, Warren buttoned to the neck in a
gray coat, his hat well down over his eyes, alone in the back
seat. He was staring steadily, yet with unseeing eyes, before him,
and Rachael felt a sense of almost sickening shock at the sight of
his altered face. Warren, looking tired and depressed, looking
discouraged, and with some new look of diffidence and hurt,
besides all these, in his face! Warren old! Warren OLD!

Rachael felt as if she should faint. She was rooted where she
stood. Fifth Avenue pushed gayly and busily by her under the
leaden sky. Furred old ladies, furred little girls, messenger boys
and club men, jostling, gossiping, planning. Only she stood still.
And after a while she looked again where Warren had been. He was
gone. But had he seen her? her heart asked itself with wild
clamor. Had he seen her?

She began to walk rapidly and blindly, conscious of taking a
general direction toward the Terminal Station, but so vague as to
her course that she presently looked bewilderedly about to find
that she was in Eighth Avenue and that, standing absolutely still
again, and held by thought, she was being curiously regarded by a
policeman. She gave the man a dazed and sickly smile.

"I am afraid I am a little out of my way," she stammered. "I am
going to the station."

He pointed out the direction, and she thanked him, and blindly
went on her way. But her heart was tearing like a living thing in
her breast, and she walked like a wounded creature that leaves a
trail of life blood.

Oh, she was his wife--his wife--his wife! She belonged there, in
that empty seat beside him, with her shoulder against that gray
overcoat! What was she doing in this desolate street of little
shops, faint and heartsick and alone! Oh, for the security of that
familiar car again! How often she had sat beside him, arrested by
the traffic, content to placidly watch the shifting crowd, to wait
for the shrill little whistle that gave them the right of way! If
she were there now, where might they be going? Perhaps to a
concert, perhaps to look at a picture in some gallery, but first
of all certainly to lunch. His first question would be: "Had your
lunch?" and his answer only a satisfied nod. But he would direct
Martin to the first place that suggested itself to him as being
suitable for Rachael's meal. And he would order it, no trouble was
too much for her; nothing too good for his wife.

She was not beside him. She was still drifting along this hideous
street, battling with faintness and headache, and never, perhaps,
to see her husband again. One of her sons was in the city, another
miles away, To her horror she felt herself beginning to cry. She
quickened her pace, and reckless of the waiter's concern, entered
the station restaurant and ordered herself a lunch. But when it
came she could not eat it, and she was presently in the train,
without a book or magazine, still fasting except for a hurried
half cup of tea, and every instant less and less able to resist
the corning flood of her tears.

All the long trip home she wept, quietly and steadily, one arm on
the window sill, a hand pressed against her face. There were few
other passengers in the train, which was too hot. The winter
twilight shut down early, and at last the storm broke; not
violently, but with a stern and steady persistence. The windows
ran rain, and were blurred with steam, the darkening landscape
swept by under a deluge. When the train stopped at a station, a
rush of wet air, mingled with the odors of mackintoshes and the
wet leather of motor cars, came in. Rachael would look out to see
meetings, lanterns and raincoats, umbrellas dripping over eager,
rosy faces.

She would be glad to get home, she said to herself, to her snuggly
little comforting Derry. They would not attempt to make the move
to-morrow--that was absurd. It had been far too much of a trip to-
day, and Alice had advised her against it. But it had not sounded
so formidable. To start at seven, be in town at ten, after the
brisk run, and take the afternoon train home--this was no such
strain, as they had planned it. But it had proved to be a
frightful strain. Leaving Jim, and then catching that heart-
rending glimpse of the changed Warren--Warren looking like a hurt
child who must bear a punishment without understanding it.

"Oh, what are we thinking about, to act in this crazy manner!"
Rachael asked herself desperately. "He loves me, and I--I've
always loved him. Other people may misjudge him, but I know! He's
horrified and shamed and sorry. He's suffering as much as I am.
What fools--what utter FOOLS we are!"

And suddenly--it was nearly six o'clock now, and they were within
a few minutes of Clark's Hills--she stopped crying, and began to
plan a letter that should end the whole terrible episode.

"Your stop Quaker Bridge?" asked the conductor, coming in, and
beginning to shift the seats briskly on their iron pivots, as one
who expected a large crowd to accompany him on the run back.

"Clark's Hills," Rachael said, noticing that she was alone in the
train.

"Don't know as we can get over the Bar," the man said cheerily.

"Looks as if we were going to try it!" Rachael answered with equal
aplomb as the train ran through Quaker Bridge without stopping,
and went on with only slightly decreased speed. And a moment later
she began to gather her possessions together, and the conductor
remarked amiably: "Here we are! But she surely is raining," he
added. "Well, we've only got to run back as far as the car barn--
that's Seawall--to-night. My folks live there."

Rachael did not mind the rain. She would be at home in five
minutes. She climbed into a closed surrey, smelling strongly of
leather and horses, and asked the driver pleasantly how early the
rain had commenced. He evidently did not hear her, at all events
made no answer, and she did not speak again.

"Where's my Derry?" Rachael's voice rang strong and happy through
the house. "Mary--Mary!" she added, stopping, rather puzzled, in
the hall. "Where is he?"

How did it come to her, by what degrees? How does such news tell
itself, from the first little chill, that is not quite fear, to
the full thundering avalanche of utter horror? Rachael never
remembered afterward, never tried to remember. The moment remained
the blackest of all her life. It was not the subtly changed
atmosphere of the house, not Mary's tear-swollen face, as she
appeared, silent, at the top of the stairs; not Millie, who came
ashen-faced and panting from the kitchen; not the sudden, weary
little moan that floated softly through the hallway--no one of all
these things.

Yet Rachael knew--Derry was dying. She needed not to know how or
why. Her furs fell where she stood, her hat was gone, she had
flown upstairs as swiftly as light. She knew the door, she knew
what she would see. She went down on her knees beside him.

Her little gallant, reckless, shouting Derry! Her warm, beautiful
boy, changed in these few hours to this crushed and moaning little
being, this cruelly crumpled and tortured little wreck of all that
had been gay and sound and confident babyhood!

In that first moment at his side it had seemed to Rachael that she
must die, too, of sheer agony of spirit. She put her beautiful
head down against the brown little limp hand upon which a rusty
stain was drying, and she could have wailed aloud in the bitter
rebellion of her soul. Not Derry, not Derry, so small and innocent
and confiding--her own child, her own flesh and blood, the fibre
of her being! Trusting them, obeying them, and betrayed--brought
to this!

At her first look she had thought the child dead; now, as she drew
back from him, and caught her self-control with a quivering
breath, and wrung her hands together in desperate effort to hold
back a scream, she found it in her heart to wish he were. His
little face was black from a great bruise that spread from temple
to chin, his mouth cut and swollen, his eyes half shut. His body
was doubled where it lay, a great bubble of blood moved with his
breath. He breathed lightly and faintly, with an occasional deep
gasp that invariably brought the long, heart-sickening moan. They
had taken off part of his clothes, his shoes and stockings, but he
still wore his Holland suit, and the dark-blue woolen coat had
only been partly removed.

Rachael, ashen-faced, rose from her knees, and faced Mary and
Millie. With bitter tears the story was told. He had been playing,
as usual, in the barn, and Mary had been swinging him. Not high,
nothing like as high as Jimmie went. And Millie came out to say
that their dinner was ready, and all of a sudden he called out
that he could swing without holding on, and put both his hands up
in the air. And then Mary saw him fall, the board of the swing
falling, too, and striking him as he fell, and his face dashing
against the old mill-wheel that stood by the door. And he had not
spoken since.

His arm had hung down loose-like, as Mary carried him in, and
Millie had run for the doctor. But Doctor Peet wouldn't be back
until seven, and the girls had dared do no more than wash off his
face a little and try to make him comfortable. "I wish the Lord
had called me before the day came," said Mary, "me, that would
have died for him--for any of you!"

"I know that, Mary," Rachael said. "It would have happened as
easily with me. We all know what you have been to the boys, Mary.
But you mustn't cry so hard. I need you. I am going to drive him
into town."

"Oh, my God, in this storm?" exclaimed Millie.

"There's nothing else to do," Rachael said. "He may die on the
way, but his mother will do what she can. I couldn't have Doctor
Peet, kind as he is. Doctor Gregory--his father--will know. It's
nearly seven now. We must start as fast as we can. You'll have to
pin something all about the back seat, Mary, and line it with
comforters. We'll put his mattress on the seat--you'll make it
snug, won't you?--and you'll sit on the floor there, and steady
him all you can, for I'll have to drive. We ought to be there by
midnight, even in the storm."

"I'll fix it," Mary said, with one great sob, and immediately, to
Rachael's great relief, she was her practical self.

"And I want some coffee, Millie," she said, "strong; I'm not
hungry, but if you have something ready, I'll eat what I can. Did
Ruddy come up and get the car to-day, for oil and gas, and so on?"

"He did," said Millie, eager to be helpful.

"That's a blessing." Rachael turned to look at the little figure
on the bed. Her heart contracted with a freezing spasm of terror
whenever her eyes even moved in that direction.

But there was plenty to do. She got herself into dry, warm
clothes. She leaned over her little charge, straightening and
adjusting as best she could, shifting the little body as gently as
was possible to the smaller mattress, covering it warmly but
lightly. As she did so she wondered which one of those long,
moaning breaths would be the last; when would little Derry
straighten himself--and lie still?

No time to think of that. She tied on her hat and veil, and went
out to look at the car. The rear seat was lined with pillows, the
curtain drawn. She had matches, her electric flashlight, her road
maps, a flask of brandy--what else?

Millie had run for neighbors, and the chains were finally
adjusted. The car had been made ready for the run, and was in good
shape.

The big shadowy barn that was the garage was full of dancing
shapes in the lantern-light. The rain splashed and spattered
incessantly outside; a black sky seemed to have closed down just
over their heads. She was in a fever to get away.

Slowly the dazzling headlights moved in the pitchy blackness, the
wheels grated but held their own. The car came to the side door,
and the little mattress came out, and the muffled shape that was
Mary got in beside it. Then there was buttoning of storm curtains
by willing hands, and many a whispered good wish to Rachael as she
slipped in under the wheel. Millie was beside her, at the last
moment, begging to be of some use if she might.

"There's just this, Mrs. Gregory," said Ruddy Simms nervously,
when the engine was humming, and, Rachael's gloved hand racing the
accelerator, "they say the tide's making fast in all this rain! I
don't know how you'll do at the Bar. She's ugly a night, like
this; what with the bay eating one side, and the sea breaking over
the other!"

"Thank you," Rachael said, not hearing him. "God bless you! Good-
bye!"

She released the clutch. The big car leaped forward, into the
darkness. The clock before her eyes said thirty-five minutes past
seven. Rain beat against the heavy cloth of the curtains, water
swished and splashed under the wheels, and above the purring of
the engine they could hear the clinking fall of the chains. There
was no other sound except when Derry caught a moaning breath.

Clark's Hills passed in blackness, the road dropped down toward
the Bar. Rachael could feel that Mary, in the back seat, was
praying, and that Millie was praying beside her. Her own heart
rose on a wild and desperate prayer. If they could cross this
narrow strip between the bay and the ocean, then whatever the
fortune of the road, she could meet it. Telephones, at least, were
on the other side, resources of all sorts. But to be stopped here!

The look of the Bar, when they reached it, struck chill even to
Rachael's heart. In the clear tunnels of light flung from the car
lamps it seemed all a moving level of restless water smitten under
sheets of rain. Anything more desperate than an effort to find the
little belt of safety in this trackless spread of merciless seas
it would be hard to imagine. At an ordinary high tide the Bar was
but a few inches above the sea; now, with a wind blowing, a heavy
rain falling, and the tide almost at the full, no road whatever
was visible. It was there, the friendly road that Rachael and the
hot and sandy boys had tramped a hundred times, but even she could
not believe it, now, so utterly impassable did the shifting
surface appear.

But she gallantly put the car straight into the heart of it,
moving as slowly as the engine permitted, and sending quick,
apprehensive glances into the darkness as she went.

"At the worst, we can back out of this, Millie," said she.

"Of course we can," Millie said, suppressing frightened tears with
some courage.

The water was washing roughly against the running boards; to an
onlooker the car would have had the appearance of being afloat,
hub-deep, at sea.

Slowly, slowly, slowly they were still moving. The car stopped
short. The engine was dead. Rachael touched her starter, touched
it again and again. No use. The car had stopped. The rain struck
in noisy sheets against the curtains. The sea gurgled and rushed
about them. Derry moaned softly.

And now the full madness of the attempted expedition struck her
for the first time. She had never thought that, at worst, she
could not go back. What now? Should they stand here on the
shifting sand of the Bar until the tide fell--it was not yet full.
Rachael felt her heart beating quick with terror. It began to seem
like a feverish dream.

Neither maid spoke, perhaps neither one realized the full extent
of the calamity. With the confidence of those who do not
understand the workings of a car, they waited to have it start
again.

But both girls screamed when suddenly a new voice was heard.
Rachael, starting nervously as a man's figure came about the car
out of the black night, in the next second saw, with a great rush
of relief, that it was Ruddy Simms. He was a mighty fellow,
devoted to the Gregorys. He proceeded rather awkwardly to explain
that he hadn't liked to think of their trying to cross the Bar,
and so had come with them on the running board.

"Oh, Ruddy, how grateful I am to you!" Rachael said. "Perhaps you
can go back and get us a tow? What can we do?"

"Stuck?" asked Ruddy, wading as unconcernedly about the car as if
the sun were shining on the scene.

"No, I don't think so, not yet. But I can feel the road under us
giving already. And I've killed my engine!"

Ruddy deliberated.

"Won't start, eh?"

"She simply WON'T!"

"Ain't got a crank, have ye?"

Rachael stared.

"Why, yes, we have, under my seat here. But is there a chance that
she might start on cranking?" she said eagerly.

"Dun't know," Ruddy said non-committally.

Rachael was instantly on her feet, and after some groping and
adjusting, the cranking was attempted. Failure. Ruddy went bravely
at it again. Failure. Again Rachael touched the starter.

"No use!" she said with a sinking heart.

But Ruddy was bred of sea-folk who do not expect quick results. He
tugged away again vigorously, and again after that. And suddenly--
the most delicious sound that Rachael's ears had ever heard--there
was the sucking and plunging that meant success. The car panted
like a giant revived, and Ruddy stood back in the merciless green
light and sent Rachael a smile. His homely face, running rain,
looked at her as bright as an angel's.

"Dun't know as I'd stand there, s'deep in my tracks!" shouted
Ruddy.

Gingerly, timidly, she pushed the car on some ten feet. "What I's
thinking," suggested Ruddy then, coming to put his face in close
to hers, and shouting over the noise of wind and water, "is this:
if I was to walk ahead of ye, kinder feeling for the road with my
feet, then you could come after, d'ye see?"

"Oh, Ruddy, do you think we can make it, then?" Rachael's face was
wet with tears.

"Dun't know," he said. He took off his immense boots and gray
socks, and rolled up his wet trousers, the better to feel every
inch of rise or fall in the ground beneath his feet, and Millie
held these for him as if it were a sacred charge.

And then, with the full light of the lamps illumining his big
figure, and with the water rushing and gurgling about them, and
the rain pouring down as if it were an actual deluge, they made
the crossing at Clark's Bar. The shifting water almost blinded
Rachael sometimes, and sometimes it seemed as if any way but the
way that Ruddy's waving arms indicated was the right one; as if to
follow him were utter madness. The water spouted up through the
clutch, and once again the engine stopped, and long moments went
by before it would respond to the crank again. But Rachael pushed
slowly on. She was not thinking now, she was conscious of no
feeling but that there was an opposite shore, and she must reach
it.

And presently it rose before them. The road ran gradually upward,
a shallow sheet of running water covering it, but firm, hard
roadway discernible nevertheless. Rachael stopped the car, and
Ruddy came again and put his face close to hers, through the
curtains.

"Now ye've got straight road, Mrs. Gregory, and I hope to the good
Lord you'll have a good run. Thank ye, Millie--much obliged!"

"Ruddy!" said Rachael passionately, her wet gloves holding his
big, hairy hands tight. "I'll never forget this! If he has a
chance to live at all, this is his chance, and you've given it to
him! God bless you, a thousand times!"

"That's all right," said Ruddy, terribly embarrassed. "You've
always been awful good to my folks. I'm glad we done it! Good-
night!" Then Ruddy had turned back for the walk home in the
streaming blackness, and Rachael, drawing a deep breath, was on
her way again. She stopped only for a quick question to Mary.

"No change?"

"Just the same."

The wet miles flew by; rain beat untiringly against the curtains,
slished in two great feathers of water from under the rushing
wheels. Rachael watched her speedometer; twenty-five--twenty-
eight--thirty--they could not do better than that in this weather.
And they had a hundred miles to go.

But that hundred was only eighty-six now, only eighty. Villages
flew by, and men came out and stood on the dripping porches of
crossroad stores to marvel as the long scream of Rachael's horn
cut through the night air. Twenty minutes past eight o'clock--
eight minutes of nine o'clock. The little villages began to grow
dark.

There was nothing to pass on the road; so much was gain. Except in
the villages, and once or twice where a slow, rattling wagon was
plodding along on the wet mirror-like asphalt, Rachael might make
her own speed. The road lay straight, and was an exceptionally
good road, even in this weather. She need hardly pause for
signboards. The rain still fell in sheets. Seventy-two miles to
go.

"How is he, Mary?"

"The same, Mrs. Gregory. Except that he gives a little groan now
and then--when it shakes him!"

"My boy! But not sleeping?" "Oh, no, Mrs. Gregory. He just lies
quiet like."

"God bless him!" Rachael said under her breath. Aloud she said:
"Millie, couldn't you lean over, and watch him a few minutes, and
see what you think?"

Then they were flying on again. Rachael began to wonder just how
long the run was. They always carelessly called it "a hundred
miles." But was it really a hundred and two, or ninety-eight? What
a difference two or three miles would make to-night! She fell into
a nervous shiver; suppose they reached the bridge, and then Mary
should touch her arm. "He doesn't look right, Mrs. Gregory!"
Suppose that for the little boy that they finally carried into New
York there was no longer any hope. Her little Derry--

The child that might have been the joy of a happy home, that might
have grown to a dignified inheritance of the love and tenderness
that had been between his father and mother. Robbed in his
babyhood, taken away from the father he adored, and now--this!
Sixty-one miles to go.

"Detour to New York." The sign, with all its hideous import, rose
before her suddenly. No help for it; she must lose one or two,
perhaps a dozen miles, she must give up the good road for a bad
one. She must lose her way, too, perhaps. Had Kane gone over this
road yesterday? It was much farther on that she had spoken to
Kane. Perhaps he had, but she could not remember, doubt made every
foot of the way terrible to Rachael. She could only plunge on,
over rocks, over bumps, into mud-holes. She could only blindly
take what seemed of two turnings the one most probably right.

"Oh--Mother!" The little wail came from Derry. Rachael, her heart
turned to ice, slowed down--stopped and leaned into the half
darkness in the back of the car. The child's lovely eyes were
opened. Rachael could barely see his white face.

"My darling!" she said.

"Will you not--bump me so, Mother?" the little boy whispered.

"I will try not to, my heart!" Rachael, wild with terror, looked
to Mary's face. Was he dying, now and here?

"Oh Moth--it hurts so!"

"Does it, my darling?"

He drowsed again. Rachael turned back to her wheel. They must go
more slowly now, at any cost.

The road was terrible, in parts, after the hours of heavy rain, it
seemed almost impassable. Rachael pushed on. Presently they were
back in the main road again, and could make better time. Of the
hundred miles only fifty remained. But that meant nothing now. How
much time had she lost in that frightful bypath? Rachael's face
was dripping with rain, rain had trickled under her clothing at
neck and wrists. Through her raincoat the breast of her gown was
soaking, and her feet ached with the strain of controlling the
heavy car. Water came in long runnels through the wind-shield, and
struck her knees; she had turned her dress back, her thin silk
petticoat was soaked, and the muscles of knees and ankles were
cold and sore. But she felt these things not at all. Her eyes
burned ahead, into the darkness, she heard nothing but the
occasional fluttering moan from Derry; she thought nothing but
that she might be too late--too late--too late!

At the first town of any size she stopped, a telegram to George
taking shape in her mind. But the wires here were down, as they
had been farther down the Island. The rain was thinning, but the
wind was rising every second, and as she rushed on she saw that in
many places the lights on the road were out; all the Island lay
battered and bruised under the storm.

Slowly as they seemed to creep, yet the miles were going by.
Freeport--Lynbrook--Jamaica--like a woman in a dream she reached
the bridge and a moment later looked down upon the long belt of
lights winking in the rain that was New York.

And here, on the very apex of the bridge, came the most heart-
rending moment of the run, for the little boy began to cough, and
for two or three frightful minutes the women hung over him,
speechless with terror, and knowing that at any second the
exhausted little body might succumb to the strain. Blindly, as
with a long, choked cry he sank back again, Rachael went back to
her wheel. Third Avenue--Fifth Avenue--Forty-second Street tore
by; they were running straight down toward Washington Arch as the
clocks everywhere struck midnight. The wide street was deserted in
the rain, it shone like a mirror, reflecting long pendants of
light.

They were turning the corner; she was out of the car, and had
glanced at the familiar old house. Wet, exhausted, fired by a
passion that made her feel curiously light and sure, Rachael put
her arms about her child, and carried him up the steps. Mary had
preceded her, the door was opened; a dazed and frightened maid was
looking at her.

Then she was crossing the familiar hall; lights were in the
library, and Warren in the library, somebody with him, but Rachael
only caught a glimpse of the old familiar attitude: he was sitting
in a straight-backed chair, his legs crossed, and one firm hand
grasping a silk-clad ankle as he intently listened to whatever was
being said.

"Warren!" she said in a voice that those who heard it remembered
all their lives. "It's Derry! He's hurt--he's dying, I think! Can
you--can you save him?" And with a great burst of tears she gave
up the child.

"My God--what is it!" said Warren Gregory on his feet, and with
Derry in his arms, even as he spoke. For a second the tableau
held: Rachael, agonized, her beautiful face colorless, and
dripping with rain, her husband staring at her as if he could not
credit his senses, the child's limp body in his arms, yet not
quite freed from hers. In the background were the whitefaced
servants and the gray-headed doctor upon whose conversation the
newcomers had so abruptly broken.

"We've just brought him up from Clark's Hills!" Rachael said.

"From Clark's Hills--YOU!"

His look, the dear familiar look of solicitude and concern, tore
her to the soul.

"There was nothing else to do!" she faltered.

"But--you drove up to-night?"

"Since seven."

He looked at her, and Rachael felt the look sink into her soul
like rain into parched land.

"And you came straight to me!" His voice sank. "Rachael," he said,
"I will save him for you if I can!"

And instantly there began such activities in the old house as
perhaps even its dignified century of living had never known.
Rachael, hungry through these terrible hours of suspense for just
the wild rush and hurry, watched her husband as if she had never
seen him before. Presently lights blazed from cellar to attic,
maids flew in every direction, fires were lighted, the moving of
heavy furniture shook the floors. Derry, the little unconscious
cause of it all, lay quiet, with Mary watching him.

New York had been asleep; it was awakened now. Motor cars wheeled
into the Gregorys' street; Mrs. Gregory herself answered the door.
Here was the nurse, efficient, yet sympathetic, too, with her
paraphernalia and her assistants. Yes, she had been able to get
it, Doctor Gregory. Yes, Doctor, she had that. Here was the man
from the drug store--that was all right, Doctor, that was what he
expected, being waked up in the night; thank you, Doctor. And here
was George Valentine, too much absorbed in the business in hand to
say more than an affectionate "Hello" to Rachael. But with George
was Alice, white-faced but smiling, and little sleepy Jimmy, who
was to be smuggled immediately into bed.

"I thought you'd rather have him here," said Alice.

Rachael knew why. Rachael knew what doctors said to each other,
when they gathered, and used those quick, low monosyllables. She
knew why Miss Redding was speeding the arrangements for the
improvised operating-room with such desperate hurry. She knew why
one of these assisting doctors was delegated to do nothing but sit
beside Derry, watching the little hurt breast rise and fall,
watching the bubble of blood form and break on the swollen mouth.

Warren had told her to get into dry clothing, and then to take a
stimulant, and have something to eat. And eager to save him what
she could, she was warm and dry now. She sat in Derry's room, and
presently, when they came to stand beside him, Warren and George,
they found her agonized eyes, bright with questions, facing them.
But she knew better than to speak.

Neither man spoke for a few dreadful moments. Warren looked at the
child without a flicker of change in his impassive look; George
bit his lip, and almost imperceptibly shook his head. And in their
faces Rachael read the death of her last faint hope.

"We don't dare anesthetize him until we know just the lie of those
broken ribs," said Warren gravely to his wife, "and yet the little
chap is so exhausted that the strain of trying to touch it may--
may be too much for him. There's no time for an X-ray. Some of
these fellows think it is too great a risk. I believe it may be
done. If there are internal injuries, we can't hope to--" He
paused. "But otherwise, I believe--"

Again his voice dropped. He stood looking at the little boy with
eyes that were not a surgeon's now; all a father's.

"Good little chap," he said softly. "Do you remember how he used
to watch Jim, through the bars of his crib, when he was about
eight months old, and laugh as if Jim was the funniest thing in
the world?"

Rachael looked up and nodded with brimming eyes. She could not
speak.

They carried Derry away, and Rachael followed them up to the head
of the stairway outside of the operating-room, and sat there, her
hands locked in her lap, her head resting against the wall. Alice
dared not join her, she kept her seat by the library fire, and
with one hand pressed tight against her eyes, tried to pray.

Rachael did not pray. She was unable even to think clearly.
Visions drifted through her tired brain, the panorama of the long
day and night swept by unceasingly. She was in Eighth Avenue
again, she was in the hot train, with the rain beating against the
windows, and tears running down her hot cheeks. She was entering
the house--"Where's my boy?" And then she was driving the car
through that cruel world of water and wind. She would have saved
him if she could! She had done her share. Instantly,
unflinchingly, she had torn through blackness and storm; a
battered ship beating somehow toward the familiar harbor. Now he
must be saved. Rachael knew that madness would come upon her if
these hideous hours were only working toward the moment when she
would know that she had been too late. For the rest of her life
she would only review them: the Bar, the wet roads, the detour,
and the frightful seconds on the bridge. There had been something
expiatory, something symbolic in this mad adventure, this flight
through the night. The fires that had been burning in her heart
for the past terrible hours were purged, she must be changed
forevermore after to-night. But for the new birth, Derry must not
be the price! The strain had been too great, the delicate
machinery of her brain would give, she could not take up life
again, having lost him--and lost him in this way--

They were torturing him; the child's cry of utter agony reached
her where she sat. It came to her, in a flash, that Warren had
said there might be no merciful chloroform. Cold water broke out
on her forehead, she covered her ears with her hands, her breath
coming wild and deep. Derry!

"Oh, no--Daddy! Oh, no, Daddy! Oh, Mother--Mother--!"

"Oh, my God! this is not right," Rachael said half aloud. "Oh,
take him, take him, but don't let him suffer so!"

She was writhing as if the suffering were her own. For perhaps
five horrible moments the house rang, then there was sudden
silence.

"Now he is dead," Rachael said in the same quiet, half-audible
tone. "I am glad. He will never know what pain is again. Five
perfect little years, with never one instant that was not sweet
and good. Gerald Fairfax Gregory--five years old. One sees it in
the papers almost every day. But who thinks what it means? Just
the mother, who remembers the first cry, and the little crumpled
flannel wrappers, and the little hand crawling up her breast. He
walked so much sooner than Jim did, but of course he was lighter.
And how he would throw things out of windows--the camera that hit
the postman! Oh, my God!"

For the anguished screaming had recommenced, and the child wanted
his mother.

Rachael bore it for endless, agonizing minutes. Presently Alice,
white-faced, was kneeling on the step below her, and their wet
hands were clasped.

"Dearest, why do you sit here!"

"Oh, Alice, could I get Warren, do you think? They mustn't--it's
too cruel! He's only a baby, he doesn't understand! Better a
thousand times to let him go--tell them so! Get George--tell him I
say so!"

"Rachael, it's terrible," said Alice, who was crying hard, "b-b-
but they must think there is a chance, dear. We couldn't interrupt
them now. He would see you--there, he's quiet again. That may be
all!"

But it was not the end for many hours. The women on the stairs,
and the sobbing maids in the diningroom, hoped and despaired, and
grew faint and sick themselves as the merciless work went on. Once
George came out of the room for a few minutes, with a face flaked
with white, and his surgeon's gown crumpled, wet with water and
stained here and there a terrible red. He did not speak to either
woman, and in answer to Alice's breath of interrogation merely
shook his head.

At four o'clock Warren himself came to the door. Rachael sprang to
her feet, was close to him in a second. The sight of him, his
gown, his hands, his dreadful face, turned Alice faint, but
Rachael's voice was steady.

"What is it?"

"We are nearly done. Nearly done," Warren said. "I can't tell yet-
-nobody can. But I must finish it. Do you think you could--he
keeps asking for you. I am sorry to ask you--"

"Hold him?" Rachael's voice of agony said. "Yes, I could do that.
I--I have been wanting to!"

"No--there is no necessity for that. He is on the table. But if he
could see you. It is the very end of our work," he answered. "It
may be that he can't--you must be ready for that."

"I am ready," she said.

A second later she was in the room with the child. She saw nothing
but Derry, his little body beneath the sheet rigidly strapped to
the table. The group gave place, and Rachael stood beside him. His
beautiful baby eyes, wild with terror and agony, found her; she
bent over him, and laid her fingers on his wet little forehead. He
wanted his mother to take him away, he had been calling her--
hadn't she heard him? Please, please, not to let anyone touch him
again!

Rachael summoned a desperate courage. She spoke to him, she could
even smile. Did he remember the swing--yes, but he didn't remember
Mother bringing him all the way up, so that Daddy and Uncle
George--

His brave eyes were fixed on hers. He was trying to remember,
trying to answer her smile, trying to think of other things than
the recommencing pain.

No use. The hoarse, terrible little screams began again. His
little hand writhed in hers.

"Mother--PLEASE--will you make them stop?"

Rachael was breathing deep, her own forehead was wet. She knew the
child's strength was gone.

"Just a little more, dearest," she said, white lipped; eyes full
of agonized appeal turned to George.

"Doctor--" One of the nurses, her hand on his pulse, said softly.
George Valentine looked up.

Rachael's apprehensive glance questioned them both. But Warren
Gregory did not falter, did not even glance away from his own
hands.

Then it was over. The tension in the room broke suddenly, the
atmosphere changed, although there was not an audible breath. The
nurses moved swiftly and surely, needing no instructions. George
lifted Derry's little hand from Rachael's, and put one arm about
her. Warren put down his instrument, and bent, his face a mask of
anxiety, over the child. Derry was breathing--no more. But on the
bloodless face that Warren raised there was the light of hope.

"I believe he will make it, George," he said. "I think we have
saved him for you, Rachael! No--no--leave him where he is, Miss
Moore. Get a flat pillow under his head if you can. Cover him up.
I'm going to stay here."

"Wouldn't he be more comfortable in his bed?" Rachael's shaken
voice asked in a low tone. She was conscious only that she must
not faint now.

"He would be, of course. But it may be just by that fraction of
energy that he is hanging on. Brave little chap, he has been
helping us just as if he knew--"

But this Rachael could not endure. Her whole body shook, the room
rocked before her eyes. She had strength to reach the hall, saw
Alice standing white and tense, at the top of the stairs--then it
was all darkness.

It seemed hours later, though it was only minutes, that Rachael
came dreamily to consciousness in her own old room, on her own
bed. Her idly moving eyes found the shaded lamp, found Alice
sitting beside her. Alice's hand lay over her own. For a long time
they did not speak.

A perfect circle of shadow was flung on the high ceiling from the
lamp. Outside of the shadow were the familiar window draperies,
the white mantel with its old candlesticks, the exquisite crayon
portrait of Jim at three, and Derry a delicious eighteen-months-
old. There was the white bowl that had always been filled with
violets, empty now. And there were the low bookcases where a few
special favorites were kept, and the quaint old mahogany sewing-
table that had been old Mrs. Gregory's as a bride.

Rachael was exhausted in every fibre of body and soul, consecutive
thought was impossible now; her aching head defied the effort, but
lying here, in this dim light, there came to her a vision of the
years that might be. If she were ever rested again, if little
Derry were again his sunny, resolute self, if Warren and she were
reunited, then what an ideal of fine and simple and unselfish
living would be hers! How she would cling to honor and truth and
goodness, how she would fortify herself against the pitfalls dug
by her own impulsiveness. She and Warren had everything in life
worth while, it was not for them to throw their gifts away. Their
home should be the source of help to other homes, their sons
should some day go out into the world equipped with wisdom,
disciplined and self-controlled, ready to meet life far more
bravely than ever their mother had.

There was a low voice at her door. Alice was gone, and Warren was
kneeling beside her. And as she laid one tired arm about his neck,
in the dear familiar fashion of the past, and as their eyes met,
Rachael felt that all her life had been a preparation for this
exquisite minute.

"I thought you would like to know that he is sleeping, and we have
moved him," Warren said. "In three days you will have him roaring
to get up."

Tears brimmed Rachael's eyes.

"You saved him," she whispered.

"YOU saved him; George says so, too. If that fellow down there had
given him chloroform, there would have been no chance. Our only
hope was to relieve that pressure on his heart, and take the risk
of it being too much for him. He's as strong as a bull. But it was
a fight! And no one but a woman would have rushed him up here in
the rain."

Rachael's eyes were streaming. She could not speak. She clung to
her husband's hand for a moment or two of silence.

"And now, I want to speak to you," Warren said, ending it. "I have
nothing to say in excuse. I know--I shall know all my life, what I
have done. It is like a bad dream."

His uncertain voice stopped. Husband and wife looked full at each
other, both breathing quickly, both faces drawn and tense.

"But, Rachael," Warren went on, "I think, if you knew how I have
suffered, that you would--that some day, you would forgive me. I
was never happy. Never anything but troubled and excited and
confused. But for the last few months, in this empty house, seeing
other men with their wives, and thinking what a wife you were--It
has been like finding my sight--like coming out of a fever--" He
paused. Rachael did not speak.

"I know what I deserve at your hands," Warren said. "Nobody--
nobody--not old George, not anyone--can think of me with the
contempt and the detestation with which I think of myself! It has
changed me. I will never--I can never, hold up my head again. But,
Rachael, you loved me once, and I made you happy--you've not
forgotten that! Give me another chance. Let me show you how I love
you, how bitterly sorry I am that I ever caused you one moment of
pain! Don't leave me alone. Don't let me feel that between you and
me, as the years go by, there is going to be a widening gulf. You
don't know what the loneliness means to me! You don't know how I
miss my wife every time I sit down to dinner, every time I climb
into the car. I think of the years to come--of what they might
have been, of what they will be without you! And I can't bear it.
Why, to go down with you and the boys to Clark's Hills, to tell
you about my work, to take you to dinner again--my God! it seems
to me like Heaven now, and I look back a few years, when it was
all mine, and wonder if I have been sane, wonder if too much work,
and all the other responsibilities, of the boys, and Mother's
death, and the estate, and poor little Charlie, whether I really
wasn't a little twisted mentally!"

Rachael tightened her arms about his neck, pressed her wet face to
his.

"Sweetheart," said her wonderful voice, a mere tired essence of a
voice now, "if there is anything to forgive, I am so glad to
forgive it! You are mine, and I am yours. Please God we will never
be parted again!"

And then for a long time there was silence in the room, while
husband and wife clung together, and the hurt of the long months
was cured, and dissolved, and gone forever. What Warren felt,
Rachael could only know from his tears, and his passionate kisses,
and the grip of his arms. For herself, she felt that she might
gladly die, being so held against his heart, feeling through her
entire being the rising flood of satisfied love that is life and
breath to such a nature as hers.

"I am changed," said Warren after long moments; "you will see it,
for I see it myself. I can see now what my mother meant, years
ago, when she talked to me about myself. And I am older, Rachael."

"I am not younger," Rachael said, smiling. "And I think I am
changed, too. All the pressure, all the nervous worry of the last
few years, seem to be gone. Washed away, perhaps, by tears--there
have been tears enough! But somehow--somehow I am confident,
Warren, as I never was before, that happiness is ahead. Somehow I
feel sure that you and I have won to happiness, now, won to
sureness. With each other, and the boys, and books and music, and
Home Dunes, the years to come seem all bright. After all, we are
young to have learned how to live!"

And again she drew his face down to hers.

Alice did not come back again, but Mary came in with a cup of
smoking soup. Mrs. Valentine had taken the doctor home, but they
would be back later on. It was after six, and Doctor Gregory said
Mrs. Gregory was to drink this, and try to get some sleep. But
first Mary and Rachael must talk over the terrible and wonderful
night, and Rachael must creep down the hall, to smile at the
nurse, who sat by the heavily sleeping Derry.

Then she slept, for hours and hours, while the winter sun smiled
down on the bare trees in the square and women in furs and babies
in woolens walked and chattered on the leaf-strewn paths.

Such a sleep and such a waking are memorable in a lifetime.
Rachael woke, smiling and refreshed, in a radiant world. Afternoon
sunshine was streaming in at her windows, she felt rested,
deliciously ready for life again.

To bathe, to dress with the chatting Jimmy tying strings to her
dressing-table, to have the maids quietly and cheerfully coming
and going in the old way; this in itself was delight. But when she
tiptoed into Derry's room, and found hope and confidence there,
found the blue eyes wide open, under the bandage, and heard the
enchanting little voice announce, "I had hot milk, Mother,"
Rachael felt that her cup of joy was brimming.

He had fallen out of the swing, Derry told her, and Dad had hurted
him, and Jimmy added sensationally that Derry had broken his leg!

"But just the same, we wanted our Daddy the moment we woke up this
morning," Miss Moore smiled, "and we managed to hold up one arm to
welcome him, and it was Daddy that held the glass of milk, wasn't
it, Gerald?"

"She calls me Gerald because she doesn't know me very well," said
Derry in a tactful aside, and Rachael, not daring to laugh for
fear of beginning to cry, could only kiss the brown hand, and
devour, with tear-dazzled eyes, the eager face.

Then she and Jimmy went down to have a meal that was like
breakfast and luncheon and tea in one, with Warren. And to
Rachael, thinking of all their happy meals together, since
honeymoon days, this seemed the best of all. The afternoon light
in the breakfast-room, the maids so poorly concealing their
delight in this turn of events, little Jim so pleased at finding a
meal served at this unusual hour, and his parents seemingly
disposed to let him eat anything and everything, and Warren,
tired--so strangely gray--and yet utterly content and at peace;
these made the hour memorably happy; a forerunner of other happy
hours to come.

"It seems to me that there never was such a bright sunshine, and
never such a nice little third person, and never such coffee, and
such happiness!" said Rachael, her eyes reflecting something of
the placid winter day; soul and body wrapped in peace. "Yesterday-
-only yesterday, I was wretched beyond all believing! To-day I
think I have had the best hours of my life!"

"It is always going to be this way for you, Rachael," her husband
said, "my life is going to be one long effort to keep you
absolutely happy. You will never grieve on my account again!"

"Say rather," she said seriously, "that we know each other, and
ourselves, now. Say that I will never demand utter perfection of
you, or you of me. But, Warren--Warren--as long as we love each
other--"

He had come around the table to her side, and was kneeling with
his arms about her, and Rachael locked her hands about his neck.
He was tired, he had had no sleep after the difficult night, and
he seemed to her strangely broken, strangely her own. Rachael felt
that he had never been so infinitely dear, so much hers to protect
and save. The wonder of marriage came to her, the miracle of love
rooted too deep for disturbance, of love fed on faults as well as
virtues; so light a tie in the beginning, so powerful a bond as
the years go by.

"As long as we love each other!" she said, smiling through tears,
her eyes piercing him to the very soul.

He did not speak, and so for a moment they remained motionless,
looking at each other. But when she released him, with one of her
quick, shy kisses, he knew that the heart of Rachael was
satisfied.









Produced by Ralph Zimmerman, Steve Schulze, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




HALF A DOZEN GIRLS

by

ANNA CHAPIN RAY



TO MY PARENTS

I OFFER THESE MEMORIES OF A HAPPY, NAUGHTY CHILDHOOD.

  My fairest child, I have no song to give you;
     No lark could pipe to skies so dull and gray:
   Yet, ere we part, one lesson I can leave you
     For every day.

  "Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be