rrent of its life beneath a lowering sky, heavy with snow.
Nature is absent from the picture, so to speak.  No wind, no sunlight.
Just enough light for the dullest colors, the faintest reflections to
produce an admirable effect, from the reddish-gray tone of the monuments
to the gleams of jet which bespangle a woman's dress.  Theatre and
concert posters shine resplendent, as if illumined by the effulgence of
the footlights.  The shops are crowded.  It seems that all those people
must be preparing for perpetual festivities.  And at such times, if any
sorrow is mingled with that bustle and tumult, it seems the more terrible
for that reason.  For five minutes Claire suffered martyrdom worse than
death.  Yonder, on the road to Savigny, in the vast expanse of the
deserted fields, her despair spread out as it were in the sharp air and
seemed to enfold her less closely.  Here she was stifling.  The voices
beside her, the footsteps, the heedless jostling of people who passed,
all added to her torture.

At last she entered the shop.

"Ah! yes, Madame, certainly--Monsieur Fromont.  A necklace of diamonds
and roses.  We could make you one like it for twenty-five thousand
francs."

That was five thousand less than for him.

"Thanks, Monsieur," said Claire, "I will think it over."

A mirror in front of her, in which she saw her dark-ringed eyes and her
deathly pallor, frightened her.  She went out quickly, walking stiffly in
order not to fall.

She had but one idea, to escape from the street, from the noise; to be
alone, quite alone, so that she might plunge headlong into that abyss of
heartrending thoughts, of black things dancing madly in the depths of her
mind.  Oh! the coward, the infamous villain!  And to think that only last
night she was speaking comforting words to him, with her arms about him!

Suddenly, with no knowledge of how it happened, she found herself in the
courtyard of the factory.  Through what streets had she come?  Had she
come in a carriage or on foot?  She had no remembrance.  She had acted
unconsciously, as in a dream.  The sentiment of reality returned,
pitiless and poignant, when she reached the steps of her little house.
Risler was there, superintending several men who were carrying potted
plants up to his wife's apartments, in preparation for the magnificent
party she was to give that very evening.  With his usual tranquillity he
directed the work, protected the tall branches which the workmen might
have broken: "Not like that.  Bend it over.  Take care of the carpet."

The atmosphere of pleasure and merry-making which had so revolted her a
moment before pursued her to her own house.  It was too much, after all
the rest!  She rebelled; and as Risler saluted her, affectionately and
with deep respect as always, her face assumed an expression of intense
disgust, and she passed without speaking to him, without seeing the
amazement that opened his great, honest eyes.

From that moment her course was determined.  Wrath, a wrath born of
uprightness and sense of justice, guided her actions.  She barely took
time to kiss her child's rosy cheeks before running to her mother's room.

"Come, mamma, dress yourself quickly.  We are going away.  We are going
away."

The old lady rose slowly from the armchair in which she was sitting,
busily engaged in cleaning her watch-chain by inserting a pin between
every two links with infinite care.

"Come, come, hurry.  Get your things ready."

Her voice trembled, and the poor monomaniac's room seemed a horrible
place to her, all glistening as it was with the cleanliness that had
gradually become a mania.  She had reached one of those fateful moments
when the loss of one illusion causes you to lose them all, enables you to
look to the very depths of human misery.  The realization of her complete
isolation, between her half-mad mother, her faithless husband, her too
young child, came upon her for the first time; but it served only to
strengthen her in her resolution.

In a moment the whole household was busily engaged in making preparations
for this abrupt, unexpected departure.  Claire hurried the bewildered
servants, and dressed her mother and the child, who laughed merrily amid
all the excitement.  She was in haste to go before Georges' return, so
that he might find the cradle empty and the house deserted.  Where should
she go?  She did not know as yet.  Perhaps to her aunt at Orleans,
perhaps to Savigny, no matter where.  What she must do first of all was-
go, fly from that atmosphere of treachery and falsehood.

At that moment she was in her bedroom, packing a trunk, making a pile of
her effects--a heartrending occupation.  Every object that she touched
set in motion whole worlds of thoughts, of memories.  There is so much of
ourselves in anything that we use.  At times the odor of a sachet-bag,
the pattern of a bit of lace, were enough to bring tears to her eyes.
Suddenly she heard a heavy footstep in the salon, the door of which was
partly open; then there was a slight cough, as if to let her know that
some one was there.  She supposed that it was Risler: for no one else had
the right to enter her apartments so unceremoniously.  The idea of having
to endure the presence of that hypocritical face, that false smile, was
so distasteful to her that she rushed to close the door.

"I am not at home to any one."

The door resisted her efforts, and Sigismond's square head appeared in
the opening.

"It is I, Madame," he said in an undertone.  "I have come to get the
money."

"What money?"  demanded Claire, for she no longer remembered why she had
gone to Savigny.

"Hush!  The funds to meet my note to-morrow.  Monsieur Georges, when he
went out, told me that you would hand it to me very soon."

"Ah!  yes--true.  The hundred thousand francs."

"I haven't them, Monsieur Planus; I haven't anything."

"Then," said the cashier, in a strange voice, as if he were speaking to
himself, "then it means failure."

And he turned slowly away.

Failure!  She sank on a chair, appalled, crushed.  For the last few hours
the downfall of her happiness had caused her to forget the downfall of
the house; but she remembered now.

So her husband was ruined!  In a little while, when he returned home, he
would learn of the disaster, and he would learn at the same time that his
wife and child had gone; that he was left alone in the midst of the
wreck.

Alone--that weak, easily influenced creature, who could only weep and
complain and shake his fist at life like a child!  What would become of
the miserable man?

She pitied him, notwithstanding his great sin.

Then the thought came to her that she would perhaps seem to have fled at
the approach of bankruptcy, of poverty.

Georges might say to himself:

"Had I been rich, she would have forgiven me!"

Ought she to allow him to entertain that doubt?

To a generous, noble heart like Claire's nothing more than that was
necessary to change her plans.  Instantly she was conscious that her
feeling of repugnance, of revolt, began to grow less bitter, and a sudden
ray of light seemed to make her duty clearer to her.  When they came to
tell her that the child was dressed and the trunks ready, her mind was
made up anew.

"Never mind," she replied gently.  "We are not going away."





ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Abundant details which he sometimes volunteered
Exaggerated dramatic pantomime
Void in her heart, a place made ready for disasters to come
Would have liked him to be blind only so far as he was concerned









This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





FROMONT AND RISLER

By ALPHONSE DAUDET



BOOK 4.


CHAPTER XXI

THE DAY OF RECKONING

The great clock of Saint-Gervais struck one in the morning.  It was so
cold that the fine snow, flying through the air, hardened as it fell,
covering the pavements with a slippery, white blanket.

Risler, wrapped in his cloak, was hastening home from the brewery through
the deserted streets of the Marais.  He had been celebrating, in company
with his two faithful borrowers, Chebe and Delobelle, his first moment of
leisure, the end of that almost endless period of seclusion during which
he had been superintending the manufacture of his press, with all the
searchings, the joys, and the disappointments of the inventor.  It had
been long, very long.  At the last moment he had discovered a defect.
The crane did not work well; and he had had to revise his plans and
drawings.  At last, on that very day, the new machine had been tried.
Everything had succeeded to his heart's desire.  The worthy man was
triumphant.  It seemed to him that he had paid a debt, by giving the
house of Fromont the benefit of a new machine, which would lessen the
labor, shorten the hours of the workmen, and at the same time double
the profits and the reputation of the factory.  He indulged in beautiful
dreams as he plodded along.  His footsteps rang out proudly, emphasized
by the resolute and happy trend of his thoughts.

Quickening his pace, he reached the corner of Rue des Vieilles-
Haudriettes.  A long line of carriages was standing in front of the
factory, and the light of their lanterns in the street, the shadows of
the drivers seeking shelter from the snow in the corners and angles that
those old buildings have retained despite the straightening of the
sidewalks, gave an animated aspect to that deserted, silent quarter.

"Yes, yes!  to be sure," thought the honest fellow, "we have a ball at
our house."  He remembered that Sidonie was giving a grand musical and
dancing party, which she had excused him from attending, by the way,
knowing that he was very busy.

Shadows passed and repassed behind the fluttering veil of the curtains;
the orchestra seemed to follow the movements of those stealthy
apparitions with the rising and falling of its muffled notes.  The guests
were dancing.  Risler let his eyes rest for a moment on that
phantasmagoria of the ball, and fancied that he recognized Sidonie's
shadow in a small room adjoining the salon.

She was standing erect in her magnificent costume, in the attitude of a
pretty woman before her mirror.  A shorter shadow behind her, Madame
Dobson doubtless, was repairing some accident to the costume, retieing
the knot of a ribbon tied about her neck, its long ends floating down to
the flounces of the train.  It was all very indistinct, but the woman's
graceful figure was recognizable in those faintly traced outlines, and
Risler tarried long admiring her.

The contrast on the first floor was most striking.  There was no light
visible, with the exception of a little lamp shining through the lilac
hangings of the bedroom.  Risler noticed that circumstance, and as the
little girl had been ailing a few days before, he felt anxious about her,
remembering Madame Georges's strange agitation when she passed him so
hurriedly in the afternoon; and he retraced his steps as far as Pere
Achille's lodge to inquire.

The lodge was full.  Coachmen were warming themselves around the stove,
chatting and laughing amid the smoke from their pipes.  When Risler
appeared there was profound silence, a cunning, inquisitive, significant
silence.  They had evidently been speaking of him.

"Is the Fromont child still sick?"  he asked.

"No, not the child, Monsieur."

"Monsieur Georges sick?"

"Yes, he was taken when he came home to-night.  I went right off to get
the doctor.  He said that it wouldn't amount to anything--that all
Monsieur needed was rest."

As Risler closed the door Pere Achille added, under his breath, with the
half-fearful, half-audacious insolence of an inferior, who would like to
be listened to and yet not distinctly heard:

"Ah! 'dame', they're not making such a show on the first floor as they
are on the second."

This is what had happened.

Fromont jeune, on returning home during the evening, had found his wife
with such a changed, heartbroken face, that he at once divined a
catastrophe.  But he had become so accustomed in the past two years to
sin with impunity that it did not for one moment occur to him that his
wife could have been informed of his conduct.  Claire, for her part, to
avoid humiliating him, was generous enough to speak only of Savigny.

"Grandpapa refused," she said.

The miserable man turned frightfully pale.

"I am lost--I am lost!"  he muttered two or three times in the wild
accents of fever; and his sleepless nights, a last terrible scene which
he had had with Sidonie, trying to induce her not to give this party on
the eve of his downfall, M. Gardinois' refusal, all these maddening
things which followed so closely on one another's heels and had agitated
him terribly, culminated in a genuine nervous attack.  Claire took pity
on him, put him to bed, and established herself by his side; but her
voice had lost that affectionate intonation which soothes and persuades.
There was in her gestures, in the way in which she arranged the pillow
under the patient's head and prepared a quieting draught, a strange
indifference, listlessness.

"But I have ruined you!"  Georges said from time to time, as if to rouse
her from that apathy which made him uncomfortable.  She replied with a
proud, disdainful gesture.  Ah! if he had done only that to her!

At last, however, his nerves became calmer, the fever subsided, and he
fell asleep.

She remained to attend to his wants.

"It is my duty," she said to herself.

Her duty.  She had reached that point with the man whom she had adored so
blindly, with the hope of a long and happy life together.

At that moment the ball in Sidonie's apartments began to become very
animated.  The ceiling trembled rhythmically, for Madame had had all the
carpets removed from her salons for the greater comfort of the dancers.
Sometimes, too, the sound of voices reached Claire's ears in waves, and
frequent tumultuous applause, from which one could divine the great
number of the guests, the crowded condition of the rooms.

Claire was lost in thought.  She did not waste time in regrets, in
fruitless lamentations.  She knew that life was inflexible and that all
the arguments in the world will not arrest the cruel logic of its
inevitable progress.  She did not ask herself how that man had succeeded
in deceiving her so long--how he could have sacrificed the honor and
happiness of his family for a mere caprice.  That was the fact, and all
her reflections could not wipe it out, could not repair the irreparable.
The subject that engrossed her thoughts was the future.  A new existence
was unfolding before her eyes, dark, cruel, full of privation and toil;
and, strangely enough, the prospect of ruin, instead of terrifying her,
restored all her courage.  The idea of the change of abode made necessary
by the economy they would be obliged to practise, of work made compulsory
for Georges and perhaps for herself, infused an indefinable energy into
the distressing calmness of her despair.  What a heavy burden of souls
she would have with her three children: her mother, her child, and her
husband!  The feeling of responsibility prevented her giving way too much
to her misfortune, to the wreck of her love; and in proportion as she
forgot herself in the thought of the weak creatures she had to protect
she realized more fully the meaning of the word "sacrifice," so vague on
careless lips, so serious when it becomes a rule of life.

Such were the poor woman's thoughts during that sad vigil, a vigil of
arms and tears, while she was preparing her forces for the great battle.
Such was the scene lighted by the modest little lamp which Risler had
seen from below, like a star fallen from the radiant chandeliers of the
ballroom.

Reassured by Pere Achille's reply, the honest fellow thought of going up
to his bedroom, avoiding the festivities and the guests, for whom he
cared little.

On such occasions he used a small servants' staircase communicating with
the counting-room.  So he walked through the many-windowed workshops,
which the moon, reflected by the snow, made as light as at noonday.  He
breathed the atmosphere of the day of toil, a hot, stifling atmosphere,
heavy with the odor of boiled talc and varnish.  The papers spread out on
the dryers formed long, rustling paths.  On all sides tools were lying
about, and blouses hanging here and there ready for the morrow.  Risler
never walked through the shops without a feeling of pleasure.

Suddenly he spied a light in Planus's office, at the end of that long
line of deserted rooms.  The old cashier was still at work, at one
o'clock in the morning!  That was really most extraordinary.

Risler's first impulse was to retrace his steps.  In fact, since his
unaccountable falling-out with Sigismond, since the cashier had adopted
that attitude of cold silence toward him, he had avoided meeting him.
His wounded friendship had always led him to shun an explanation; he had
a sort of pride in not asking Planus why he bore him ill-will.  But, on
that evening, Risler felt so strongly the need of cordial sympathy, of
pouring out his heart to some one, and then it was such an excellent
opportunity for a tete-a-tete with his former friend, that he did not try
to avoid him but boldly entered the counting-room.

The cashier was sitting there, motionless, among heaps of papers and
great books, which he had been turning over, some of which had fallen to
the floor.  At the sound of his employer's footsteps he did not even lift
his eyes.  He had recognized Risler's step.  The latter, somewhat
abashed, hesitated a moment; then, impelled by one of those secret
springs which we have within us and which guide us, despite ourselves, in
the path of our destiny, he walked straight to the cashier's grating.

"Sigismond," he said in a grave voice.

The old man raised his head and displayed a shrunken face down which two
great tears were rolling, the first perhaps that that animate column of
figures had ever shed in his life.

"You are weeping, old man?  What troubles you?"

And honest Risler, deeply touched, held out his hand to his friend, who
hastily withdrew his.  That movement of repulsion was so instinctive, so
brutal, that all Risler's emotion changed to indignation.

He drew himself up with stern dignity.

"I offer you my hand, Sigismond Planus!"  he said.

"And I refuse to take it," said Planus, rising.

There was a terrible pause, during which they heard the muffled music of
the orchestra upstairs and the noise of the ball, the dull, wearing noise
of floors shaken by the rhythmic movement of the dance.

"Why do you refuse to take my hand?"  demanded Risler simply, while the
grating upon which he leaned trembled with a metallic quiver.

Sigismond was facing him, with both hands on his desk, as if to emphasize
and drive home what he was about to say in reply.

"Why?  Because you have ruined the house; because in a few hours a
messenger from the Bank will come and stand where you are, to collect a
hundred thousand francs; and because, thanks to you, I haven't a sou in
the cash-box--that's the reason why!"

Risler was stupefied.

"I have ruined the house--I?"

"Worse than that, Monsieur.  You have allowed it to be ruined by your
wife, and you have arranged with her to benefit by our ruin and your
dishonor.  Oh!  I can see your game well enough.  The money your wife has
wormed out of the wretched Fromont, the house at Asnieres, the diamonds
and all the rest is invested in her name, of course, out of reach of
disaster; and of course you can retire from business now."

"Oh--oh!"  exclaimed Risler in a faint voice, a restrained voice rather,
that was insufficient for the multitude of thoughts it strove to express;
and as he stammered helplessly he drew the grating toward him with such
force that he broke off a piece of it.  Then he staggered, fell to the
floor, and lay there motionless, speechless, retaining only, in what
little life was still left in him, the firm determination not to die
until he had justified himself.  That determination must have been very
powerful; for while his temples throbbed madly, hammered by the blood
that turned his face purple, while his ears were ringing and his glazed
eyes seemed already turned toward the terrible unknown, the unhappy man
muttered to himself in a thick voice, like the voice of a shipwrecked man
speaking with his mouth full of water in a howling gale: "I must live!
I must live!"

When he recovered consciousness, he was sitting on the cushioned bench on
which the workmen sat huddled together on pay-day, his cloak on the
floor, his cravat untied, his shirt open at the neck, cut by Sigismond's
knife.  Luckily for him, he had cut his hands when he tore the grating
apart; the blood had flowed freely, and that accident was enough to avert
an attack of apoplexy.  On opening his eyes, he saw on either side old
Sigismond and Madame Georges, whom the cashier had summoned in his
distress.  As soon as Risler could speak, he said to her in a choking
voice:

"Is this true, Madame Chorche--is this true that he just told me?"

She had not the courage to deceive him, so she turned her eyes away.

"So," continued the poor fellow, "so the house is ruined, and I--"

"No, Risler, my friend.  No, not you."

"My wife, was it not?  Oh!  it is horrible!  This is how I have paid my
debt of gratitude to you.  But you, Madame Chorche, you could not have
believed that I was a party to this infamy?"

"No, my friend, no; be calm.  I know that you are the most honorable man
on earth."

He looked at her a moment, with trembling lips and clasped hands, for
there was something child-like in all the manifestations of that artless
nature.

"Oh!  Madame Chorche, Madame Chorche," he murmured.  "When I think that I
am the one who has ruined you."

In the terrible blow which overwhelmed him, and by which his heart,
overflowing with love for Sidonie, was most deeply wounded, he refused to
see anything but the financial disaster to the house of Fromont, caused
by his blind devotion to his wife.  Suddenly he stood erect.

"Come," he said, "let us not give way to emotion.  We must see about
settling our accounts."

Madame Fromont was frightened.

"Risler, Risler--where are you going?"

She thought that he was going up to Georges' room.

Risler understood her and smiled in superb disdain.

"Never fear, Madame.  Monsieur Georges can sleep in peace.  I have
something more urgent to do than avenge my honor as a husband.  Wait for
me here.  I will come back."

He darted toward the narrow staircase; and Claire, relying upon his word,
remained with Planus during one of those supreme moments of uncertainty
which seem interminable because of all the conjectures with which they
are thronged.

A few moments later the sound of hurried steps, the rustling of silk
filled the dark and narrow staircase.  Sidonie appeared first, in ball
costume, gorgeously arrayed and so pale that the jewels that glistened
everywhere on her dead-white flesh seemed more alive than she, as if they
were scattered over the cold marble of a statue.  The breathlessness due
to dancing, the trembling of intense excitement and her rapid descent,
caused her to shake from head to foot, and her floating ribbons, her
ruffles, her flowers, her rich and fashionable attire drooped tragically
about her.  Risler followed her, laden with jewel-cases, caskets, and
papers.  Upon reaching his apartments he had pounced upon his wife's
desk, seized everything valuable that it contained, jewels, certificates,
title-deeds of the house at Asnieres; then, standing in the doorway, he
had shouted into the ballroom:

"Madame Risler!"

She had run quickly to him, and that brief scene had in no wise disturbed
the guests, then at the height of the evening's enjoyment.  When she saw
her husband standing in front of the desk, the drawers broken open and
overturned on the carpet with the multitude of trifles they contained,
she realized that something terrible was taking place.

"Come at once," said Risler; "I know all."

She tried to assume an innocent, dignified attitude; but he seized her by
the arm with such force that Frantz's words came to her mind: "It will
kill him perhaps, but he will kill you first."  As she was afraid of
death, she allowed herself to be led away without resistance, and had not
even the strength to lie.

"Where are we going?"  she asked, in a low voice.

Risler did not answer.  She had only time to throw over her shoulders,
with the care for herself that never failed her, a light tulle veil, and
he dragged her, pushed her, rather, down the stairs leading to the
counting-room, which he descended at the same time, his steps close upon
hers, fearing that his prey would escape.

"There!"  he said, as he entered the room.  "We have stolen, we make
restitution.  Look, Planus, you can raise money with all this stuff."
And he placed on the cashier's desk all the fashionable plunder with
which his arms were filled--feminine trinkets, trivial aids to coquetry,
stamped papers.

Then he turned to his wife:

"Take off your jewels!  Come, be quick."

She complied slowly, opened reluctantly the clasps of bracelets and
buckles, and above all the superb fastening of her diamond necklace on
which the initial of her name-a gleaming S-resembled a sleeping serpent,
imprisoned in a circle of gold.  Risler, thinking that she was too slow,
ruthlessly broke, the fragile fastenings.  Luxury shrieked beneath his
fingers, as if it were being whipped.

"Now it is my turn," he said; "I too must give up everything.  Here is my
portfolio.  What else have I?  What else have I?"

He searched his pockets feverishly.

"Ah!  my watch.  With the chain it will bring four-thousand francs.  My
rings, my wedding-ring.  Everything goes into the cash-box, everything.
We have a hundred thousand francs to pay this morning.  As soon as it is
daylight we must go to work, sell out and pay our debts.  I know some one
who wants the house at Asnieres.  That can be settled at once."

He alone spoke and acted.  Sigismond and Madame Georges watched him
without speaking.  As for Sidonie, she seemed unconscious, lifeless.
The cold air blowing from the garden through the little door, which was
opened at the time of Risler's swoon, made her shiver, and she
mechanically drew the folds of her scarf around her shoulders, her eyes
fixed on vacancy, her thoughts wandering.  Did she not hear the violins
of her ball, which reached their ears in the intervals of silence, like
bursts of savage irony, with the heavy thud of the dancers shaking the
floors?  An iron hand, falling upon her, aroused her abruptly from her
torpor.  Risler had taken her by the arm, and, leading her before his
partner's wife, he said:

"Down on your knees!"

Madame Fromont drew back, remonstrating:

"No, no, Risler, not that."

"It must be," said the implacable Risler.  "Restitution, reparation!
Down on your knees then, wretched woman!"  And with irresistible force he
threw Sidonie at Claire's feet; then, still holding her arm;

"You will repeat after me, word for word, what I say: Madame--"

Sidonie, half dead with fear, repeated faintly: "Madame--"

"A whole lifetime of humility and submission--"

"A whole lifetime of humil--  No, I can not!"  she exclaimed, springing to
her feet with the agility of a deer; and, wresting herself from Risler's
grasp, through that open door which had tempted her from the beginning of
this horrible scene, luring her out into the darkness of the night to the
liberty obtainable by flight, she rushed from the house, braving the
falling snow and the wind that stung her bare shoulders.

"Stop her, stop her!--Risler, Planus, I implore you!  In pity's name do
not let her go in this way," cried Claire.

Planus stepped toward the door.

Risler detained him.

"I forbid you to stir!  I ask your pardon, Madame, but we have more
important matters than this to consider.  Madame Risler concerns us no
longer. We have to save the honor of the house of Fromont, which alone is
at stake, which alone fills my thoughts at this moment."

Sigismond put out his hand.

"You are a noble man, Risler.  Forgive me for having suspected you."

Risler pretended not to hear him.

"A hundred thousand francs to pay, you say?  How much is there left in
the strong-box?"

He sat bravely down behind the gratin, looking over the books of account,
the certificates of stock in the funds, opening the jewel-cases,
estimating with Planus, whose father had been a jeweller, the value of
all those diamonds, which he had once so admired on his wife, having no
suspicion of their real value.

Meanwhile Claire, trembling from head to foot, looked out through the
window at the little garden, white with snow, where Sidonie's footsteps
were already effaced by the fast-falling flakes, as if to bear witness
that that precipitate departure was without hope of return.

Up-stairs they were still dancing.  The mistress of the house was
supposed to be busy with the preparations for supper, while she was
flying, bare-headed, forcing back sobs and shrieks of rage.

Where was she going?  She had started off like a mad woman, running
across the garden and the courtyard of the factory, and under the dark
arches, where the cruel, freezing wind blew in eddying circles.  Pere
Achille did not recognize her; he had seen so many shadows wrapped in
white pass his lodge that night.

The young woman's first thought was to join the tenor Cazaboni, whom at
the last she had not dared to invite to her ball; but he lived at
Montmartre, and that was very far away for her to go, in that garb; and
then, would he be at home?  Her parents would take her in, doubtless; but
she could already hear Madame Chebe's lamentations and the little man's
sermon under three heads.  Thereupon she thought of Delobelle, her old
Delobelle.  In the downfall of all her splendors she remembered the man
who had first initiated her into fashionable life, who had given her
lessons in dancing and deportment when she was a little girl, laughed at
her pretty ways, and taught her to look upon herself as beautiful before
any one had ever told her that she was so.  Something told her that that
fallen star would take her part against all others.  She entered one of
the carriages standing at the gate and ordered the driver to take her to
the actor's lodgings on the Boulevard Beaumarchais.

For some time past Mamma Delobelle had been making straw hats for export-
a dismal trade if ever there was one, which brought in barely two francs
fifty for twelve hours' work.

And Delobelle continued to grow fat in the same degree that his "sainted
wife" grew thin.  At the very moment when some one knocked hurriedly at
his door he had just discovered a fragrant soup 'au fromage', which had
been kept hot in the ashes on the hearth.  The actor, who had been
witnessing at Beaumarchais some dark-browed melodrama drenched with gore
even to the illustrated headlines of its poster, was startled by that
knock at such an advanced hour.

"Who is there?"  he asked in some alarm.

"It is I, Sidonie.  Open the door quickly."

She entered the room, shivering all over, and, throwing aside her wrap,
went close to the stove where the fire was almost extinct.  She began to
talk at once, to pour out the wrath that had been stifling her for an
hour, and while she was describing the scene in the factory, lowering her
voice because of Madame Delobelle, who was asleep close by, the
magnificence of her costume in that poor, bare, fifth floor, the dazzling
whiteness of her disordered finery amid the heaps of coarse hats and the
wisps of straw strewn about the room, all combined to produce the effect
of a veritable drama, of one of those terrible upheavals of life when
rank, feelings, fortunes are suddenly jumbled together.

"Oh! I never shall return home.  It is all over.  Free--I am free!"

"But who could have betrayed you to your husband?"  asked the actor.

"It was Frantz!  I am sure it was Frantz.  He wouldn't have believed it
from anybody else.  Only last evening a letter came from Egypt.  Oh! how
he treated me before that woman!  To force me to kneel!  But I'll be
revenged.  Luckily I took something to revenge myself with before I came
away."

And the smile of former days played about the corners of her pale lips.

The old strolling player listened to it all with deep interest.
Notwithstanding his compassion for that poor devil of a Risler, and for
Sidonie herself, for that matter, who seemed to him, in theatrical
parlance, "a beautiful culprit," he could not help viewing the affair
from a purely scenic standpoint, and finally cried out, carried away by
his hobby:

"What a first-class situation for a fifth act!"

She did not bear him.  Absorbed by some evil thought, which made her
smile in anticipation, she stretched out to the fire her dainty shoes,
saturated with snow, and her openwork stockings.

"Well, what do you propose to do now?"  Delobelle asked after a pause.

"Stay here till daylight and get a little rest.  Then I will see."

"I have no bed to offer you, my poor girl.  Mamma Delobelle has gone to
bed."

"Don't you worry about me, my dear Delobelle.  I'll sleep in that
armchair.  I won't be in your way, I tell you!"

The actor heaved a sigh.

"Ah!  yes, that armchair.  It was our poor Zizi's.  She sat up many a
night in it, when work was pressing.  Ah, me!  those who leave this world
are much the happiest."

He had always at hand such selfish, comforting maxims.  He had no sooner
uttered that one than he discovered with dismay that his soup would soon
be stone-cold.  Sidonie noticed his movement.

"Why, you were just eating your supper, weren't you?  Pray go on."

"'Dame'!  yes, what would you have?  It's part of the trade, of the hard
existence we fellows have.  For you see, my girl, I stand firm.  I
haven't given up.  I never will give up."

What still remained of Desiree's soul in that wretched household in which
she had lived twenty years must have shuddered at that terrible
declaration.  He never would give up!

"No matter what people may say," continued Delobelle, "it's the noblest
profession in the world.  You are free; you depend upon nobody.  Devoted
to the service of glory and the public!  Ah!  I know what I would do in
your place.  As if you were born to live with all those bourgeois--the
devil!  What you need is the artistic life, the fever of success, the
unexpected, intense emotion."

As he spoke he took his seat, tucked his napkin in his neck, and helped
himself to a great plateful of soup.

"To say nothing of the fact that your triumphs as a pretty woman would
in no wise interfere with your triumph as an actress.  By the way, do you
know, you must take a few lessons in elocution.  With your voice, your
intelligence, your charms, you would have a magnificent prospect."

Then he added abruptly, as if to initiate her into the joys of the
dramatic art:

"But it occurs to me that perhaps you have not supped!  Excitement makes
one hungry; sit there, and take this soup.  I am sure that you haven't
eaten soup 'au fromage' for a long while."

He turned the closet topsy-turvy to find her a spoon and a napkin; and
she took her seat opposite him, assisting him and laughing a little at
the difficulties attending her entertainment.  She was less pale already,
and there was a pretty sparkle in her eyes, composed of the tears of a
moment before and the present gayety.

The strolling actress!  All her happiness in life was lost forever:
honor, family, wealth.  She was driven from her house, stripped,
dishonored.  She had undergone all possible humiliations and disasters.
That did not prevent her supping with a wonderful appetite and joyously
holding her own under Delobelle's jocose remarks concerning her vocation
and her future triumphs.  She felt light-hearted and happy, fairly
embarked for the land of Bohemia, her true country.  What more would
happen to her?  Of how many ups and downs was her new, unforeseen, and
whimsical existence to consist?  She thought about that as she fell
asleep in Desiree's great easy-chair; but she thought of her revenge,
too--her cherished revenge which she held in her hand, all ready for use,
and so unerring, so fierce!




CHAPTER XXII

THE NEW EMYLOYEE OF THE HOUSE OF FROMONT

It was broad daylight when Fromont Jeune awoke.  All night long, between
the drama that was being enacted below him and the festivity in joyous
progress above, he slept with clenched fists, the deep sleep of complete
prostration like that of a condemned man on the eve of his execution or
of a defeated General on the night following his disaster; a sleep from
which one would wish never to awake, and in which, in the absence of all
sensation, one has a foretaste of death.

The bright light streaming through his curtains, made more dazzling by
the deep snow with which the garden and the surrounding roofs were
covered, recalled him to the consciousness of things as they were.  He
felt a shock throughout his whole being, and, even before his mind began
to work, that vague impression of melancholy which misfortunes,
momentarily forgotten, leave in their place.  All the familiar noises of
the factory, the dull throbbing of the machinery, were in full activity.
So the world still existed!  and by slow degrees the idea of his own
responsibility awoke in him.

"To-day is the day," he said to himself, with an involuntary movement
toward the dark side of the room, as if he longed to bury himself anew in
his long sleep.

The factory bell rang, then other bells in the neighborhood, then the
Angelus.

"Noon!  Already!  How I have slept!"

He felt some little remorse and a great sense of relief at the thought
that the drama of settling-day had passed off without him.  What had they
done downstairs?  Why did they not call him?

He rose, drew the curtains aside, and saw Risler and Sigismond talking
together in the garden.  And it was so long since they had spoken to each
other!  What in heaven's name had happened?  When he was ready to go down
he found Claire at the door of his room.

"You must not go out," she said.

"Why not?"

"Stay here.  I will explain it to you."

"But what's the matter?  Did any one come from the Bank?"

"Yes, they came--the notes are paid."

"Paid?"

"Risler obtained the money.  He has been rushing about with Planus since
early morning.  It seems that his wife had superb jewels.  The diamond
necklace alone brought twenty thousand francs.  He has also sold their
house at Asnieres with all it contained; but as time was required to
record the deed, Planus and his sister advanced the money."

She turned away from him as she spoke.  He, on his side, hung his head to
avoid her glance.

"Risler is an honorable man," she continued, "and when he learned from
whom his wife received all her magnificent things--"

"What!"  exclaimed Georges in dismay.  "He knows?"

"All," Claire replied, lowering her voice.

The wretched man turned pale, stammered feebly:

"Why, then--you?"

"Oh!  I knew it all before Risler.  Remember, that when I came home last
night, I told you I had heard very cruel things down at Savigny, and that
I would have given ten years of my life not to have taken that journey."

"Claire!"

Moved by a mighty outburst of affection, he stepped toward his wife; but
her face was so cold, so sad, so resolute, her despair was so plainly
written in the stern indifference of her whole bearing, that he dared not
take her in his arms as he longed to do, but simply murmured under his
breath:

"Forgive!--forgive!"

"You must think me strangely calm," said the brave woman; "but I shed all
my tears yesterday.  You may have thought that I was weeping over our
ruin; you were mistaken.  While one is young and strong as we are,
such cowardly conduct is not permissible.  We are armed against want and
can fight it face to face.  No, I was weeping for our departed happiness,
for you, for the madness that led you to throw away your only, your true
friend."

She was lovely, lovelier than Sidonie had ever been, as she spoke thus,
enveloped by a pure light which seemed to fall upon her from a great
height, like the radiance of a fathomless, cloudless sky; whereas the
other's irregular features had always seemed to owe their brilliancy,
their saucy, insolent charm to the false glamour of the footlights in
some cheap theatre.  The touch of statuesque immobility formerly
noticeable in Claire's face was vivified by anxiety, by doubt, by all the
torture of passion; and like those gold ingots which have their full
value only when the Mint has placed its stamp upon them, those beautiful
features stamped with the effigy of sorrow had acquired since the
preceding day an ineffaceable expression which perfected their beauty.

Georges gazed at her in admiration.  She seemed to him more alive, more
womanly, and worthy of adoration because of their separation and all the
obstacles that he now knew to stand between them.  Remorse, despair,
shame entered his heart simultaneously with this new love, and he would
have fallen on his knees before her.

"No, no, do not kneel," said Claire; "if you knew of what you remind me,
if you knew what a lying face, distorted with hatred, I saw at my feet
last night!"

"Ah! but I am not lying," replied Georges with a shudder.  "Claire, I
implore you, in the name of our child--"

At that moment some one knocked at the door.

"Rise, I beg of you!  You see that life has claims upon us," she said in
a low voice and with a bitter smile; then she asked what was wanted.

Monsieur Risler had sent for Monsieur to come down to the office.

"Very well," she said; "say that he will come."

Georges approached the door, but she stopped him.

"No, let me go.  He must not see you yet."

"But--"

"I wish you to stay here.  You have no idea of the indignation and wrath
of that poor man, whom you have deceived.  If you had seen him last
night, crushing his wife's wrists!"

As she said it she looked him in the face with a curiosity most cruel to
herself; but Georges did not wince, and replied simply:

"My life belongs to him."

"It belongs to me, too; and I do not wish you to go down.  There has been
scandal enough in my father's house.  Remember that the whole factory is
aware of what is going on.  Every one is watching us, spying upon us.
It required all the authority of the foremen to keep the men busy to-day,
to compel them to keep their inquisitive looks on their work."

"But I shall seem to be hiding."

"And suppose it were so!  That is just like a man.  They do not recoil
from the worst crimes: betraying a wife, betraying a friend; but the
thought that they may be accused of being afraid touches them more keenly
than anything.  Moreover, listen to what I say.  Sidonie has gone; she
has gone forever; and if you leave this house I shall think that you have
gone to join her."

"Very well, I will stay," said Georges.  "I will do whatever you wish."

Claire descended into Planus' office.

To see Risler striding to and fro, with his hands behind his back, as
calm as usual, no one would ever have suspected all that had taken place
in his life since the night before.  As for Sigismond, he was fairly
beaming, for he saw nothing in it all beyond the fact that the notes had
been paid at maturity and that the honor of the firm was safe.

When Madame Fromont appeared, Risler smiled sadly and shook his head.

"I thought that you would prefer to come down in his place; but you are
not the one with whom I have to deal.  It is absolutely necessary that I
should see Georges and talk with him.  We have paid the notes that fell
due this morning; the crisis has passed; but we must come to an
understanding about many matters."

"Risler, my friend, I beg you to wait a little longer."

"Why, Madame Chorche, there's not a minute to lose.  Oh! I suspect that
you fear I may give way to an outbreak of anger.  Have no fear--let him
have no fear.  You know what I told you, that the honor of the house of
Fromont is to be assured before my own.  I have endangered it by my
fault.  First of all, I must repair the evil I have done or allowed to be
done."

"Your conduct toward us is worthy of all admiration, my good Risler; I
know it well."

"Oh!  Madame, if you could see him!  he's a saint," said poor Sigismond,
who, not daring to speak to his friend, was determined at all events to
express his remorse.

"But aren't you afraid?"  continued Claire.  "Human endurance has its
limits.  It may be that in presence of the man who has injured you so--"

Risler took her hands, gazed into her eyes with grave admiration, and
said:

"You dear creature, who speak of nothing but the injury done to me!  Do
you not know that I hate him as bitterly for his falseness to you?  But
nothing of that sort has any existence for me at this moment.  You see in
me simply a business man who wishes to have an understanding with his
partner for the good of the firm.  So let him come down without the
slightest fear, and if you dread any outbreak on my part, stay here with
us.  I shall need only to look at my old master's daughter to be reminded
of my promise and my duty."

"I trust you, my friend," said Claire; and she went up to bring her
husband.

The first minute of the interview was terrible.  Georges was deeply
moved, humiliated, pale as death.  He would have preferred a hundred
times over to be looking into the barrel of that man's pistol at twenty
paces, awaiting his fire, instead of appearing before him as an
unpunished culprit and being compelled to confine his feelings within the
commonplace limits of a business conversation.

Risler pretended not to look at him, and continued to pace the floor as
he talked:

"Our house is passing through a terrible crisis.  We have averted the
disaster for to-day; but this is not the last of our obligations.  That
cursed invention has kept my mind away from the business for a long
while.  Luckily, I am free now, and able to attend to it.  But you must
give your attention to it as well.  The workmen and clerks have followed
the example of their employers to some extent.  Indeed, they have become
extremely negligent and indifferent.  This morning, for the first time in
a year, they began work at the proper time.  I expect that you will make
it your business to change all that.  As for me, I shall work at my
drawings again.  Our patterns are old-fashioned.  We must have new ones
for the new machines.  I have great confidence in our presses.  The
experiments have succeeded beyond my hopes.  We unquestionably have in
them a means of building up our business.  I didn't tell you sooner
because I wished to surprise you; but we have no more surprises for each
other, have we, Georges?"

There was such a stinging note of irony in his voice that Claire
shuddered, fearing an outbreak; but he continued, in his natural tone.

"Yes, I think I can promise that in six months the Risler Press will
begin to show magnificent results.  But those six months will be very
hard to live through.  We must limit ourselves, cut down our expenses,
save in every way that we can.  We have five draughtsmen now; hereafter
we will have but two.  I will undertake to make the absence of the others
of no consequence by working at night myself.  Furthermore, beginning
with this month, I abandon my interest in the firm.  I will take my
salary as foreman as I took it before, and nothing more."

Fromont attempted to speak, but a gesture from his wife restrained him,
and Risler continued:

"I am no longer your partner, Georges.  I am once more the clerk that I
never should have ceased to be.  From this day our partnership articles
are cancelled.  I insist upon it, you understand; I insist upon it.  We
will remain in that relation to each other until the house is out of
difficulty and I can--  But what I shall do then concerns me alone.  This
is what I wanted to say to you, Georges.  You must give your attention to
the factory diligently; you must show yourself, make it felt that you are
master now, and I believe there will turn out to be, among all our
misfortunes, some that can be retrieved."

During the silence that followed, they heard the sound of wheels in the
garden, and two great furniture vans stopped at the door.

"I beg your pardon," said Risler, "but I must leave you a moment.  Those
are the vans from the public auction rooms; they have come to take away
my furniture from upstairs."

"What!  you are going to sell your furniture too?"  asked Madame Fromont.

"Certainly--to the last piece.  I am simply giving it back to the firm.
It belongs to it."

"But that is impossible," said Georges.  "I can not allow that."

Risler turned upon him indignantly.

"What's that?  What is it that you can't allow?"

Claire checked him with an imploring gesture.

"True--true!"  he muttered; and he hurried from the room to escape the
sudden temptation to give vent to all that was in his heart.

The second floor was deserted.  The servants, who had been paid and
dismissed in the morning, had abandoned the apartments to the disorder of
the day following a ball; and they wore the aspect peculiar to places
where a drama has been enacted, and which are left in suspense, as it
were, between the events that have happened and those that are still to
happen.  The open doors, the rugs lying in heaps in the corners, the
salvers laden with glasses, the preparations for the supper, the table
still set and untouched, the dust from the dancing on all the furniture,
its odor mingled with the fumes of punch, of withered flowers, of rice-
powder--all these details attracted Risler's notice as he entered.

In the disordered salon the piano was open, the bacchanal from 'Orphee
aux Enfers' on the music-shelf, and the gaudy hangings surrounding that
scene of desolation, the chairs overturned, as if in fear, reminded one
of the saloon of a wrecked packet-boat, of one of those ghostly nights of
watching when one is suddenly informed, in the midst of a fete at sea,
that the ship has sprung a leak, that she is taking in water in every
part.

The men began to remove the furniture.  Risler watched them at work with
an indifferent air, as if he were in a stranger's house.  That
magnificence which had once made him so happy and proud inspired in him
now an insurmountable disgust.  But, when he entered his wife's bedroom,
he was conscious of a vague emotion.

It was a large room, hung with blue satin under white lace.  A veritable
cocotte's nest.  There were torn and rumpled tulle ruffles lying about,
bows, and artificial flowers.  The wax candles around the mirror had
burned down to the end and cracked the candlesticks; and the bed, with
its lace flounces and valances, its great curtains raised and drawn back,
untouched in the general confusion, seemed like the bed of a corpse, a
state bed on which no one would ever sleep again.

Risler's first feeling upon entering the room was one of mad indignation,
a longing to fall upon the things before him, to tear and rend and
shatter everything.  Nothing, you see, resembles a woman so much as her
bedroom.  Even when she is absent, her image still smiles in the mirrors
that have reflected it.  A little something of her, of her favorite
perfume, remains in everything she has touched.  Her attitudes are
reproduced in the cushions of her couch, and one can follow her goings
and comings between the mirror and the toilette table in the pattern of
the carpet.  The one thing above all others in that room that recalled
Sidonie was an 'etagere' covered with childish toys, petty, trivial
knickknacks, microscopic fans, dolls' tea-sets, gilded shoes, little
shepherds and shepherdesses facing one another, exchanging cold,
gleaming, porcelain glances.  That 'etagere' was Sidonie's very soul, and
her thoughts, always commonplace, petty, vain, and empty, resembled those
gewgaws.  Yes, in very truth, if Risler, while he held her in his grasp
last night, had in his frenzy broken that fragile little head, a whole
world of 'etagere' ornaments would have come from it in place of a brain.

The poor man was thinking sadly of all these things amid the ringing of
hammers and the heavy footsteps of the furniture-movers, when he heard an
interloping, authoritative step behind him, and Monsieur Chebe appeared,
little Monsieur Chebe, flushed and breathless, with flames darting from
his eyes.  He assumed, as always, a very high tone with his son-in-law.

"What does this mean?  What is this I hear?  Ah! so you're moving, are
you?"

"I am not moving, Monsieur Chebe--I am selling out."

The little man gave a leap like a scalded fish.

"You are selling out?  What are you selling, pray?"

"I am selling everything," said Risler in a hollow voice, without even
looking at him.

"Come, come, son-in-law, be reasonable.  God knows I don't say that
Sidonie's conduct--  But, for my part, I know nothing about it.  I never
wanted to know anything.  Only I must remind you of your dignity.  People
wash their dirty linen in private, deuce take it!  They don't make
spectacles of themselves as you've been doing ever since morning.  Just
see everybody at the workshop windows; and on the porch, too!  Why,
you're the talk of the quarter, my dear fellow."

"So much the better.  The dishonor was public, the reparation must be
public, too."

This apparent coolness, this indifference to all his observations,
exasperated Monsieur Chebe.  He suddenly changed his tactics, and
adopted, in addressing his son-in-law, the serious, peremptory tone which
one uses with children or lunatics.

"Well, I say that you haven't any right to take anything away from here.
I remonstrate formally, with all my strength as a man, with all my
authority as a father.  Do you suppose I am going to let you drive my
child into the street.  No, indeed!  Oh!  no, indeed!  Enough of such
nonsense as that!  Nothing more shall go out of these rooms."

And Monsieur Chebe, having closed the door, planted himself in front of
it with a heroic gesture.  Deuce take it!  his own interest was at stake
in the matter.  The fact was that when his child was once in the gutter
he ran great risk of not having a feather bed to sleep on himself.  He
was superb in that attitude of an indignant father, but he did not keep
it long.  Two hands, two vises, seized his wrists, and he found himself
in the middle of the room, leaving the doorway clear for the workmen.

"Chebe, my boy, just listen," said Risler, leaning over him.  "I am at
the end of my forbearance.  Since this morning I have been making
superhuman efforts to restrain myself, but it would take very little now
to make my anger burst all bonds, and woe to the man on whom it falls!
I am quite capable of killing some one.  Come!  Be off at once!--"

There was such an intonation in his son-in-law's voice, and the way that
son-in-law shook him as he spoke was so eloquent, that Monsieur Chebe was
fully convinced.  He even stammered an apology.  Certainly Risler had
good reason for acting as he had.  All honorable people would be on his
side.  And he backed toward the door as he spoke.  When he reached it,
he inquired timidly if Madame Chebe's little allowance would be
continued.

"Yes," was Risler's reply, "but never go beyond it, for my position here
is not what it was.  I am no longer a partner in the house."

Monsieur Chebe stared at him in amazement, and assumed the idiotic
expression which led many people to believe that the accident that had
happened to him--exactly like that of the Duc d'Orleans, you know--was
not a fable of his own invention; but he dared not make the slightest
observation.  Surely some one had changed his son-in-law.  Was this
really Risler, this tiger-cat, who bristled up at the slightest word
and talked of nothing less than killing people?

He took to his heels, recovered his self-possession at the foot of the
stairs, and walked across the courtyard with the air of a conqueror.

When all the rooms were cleared and empty, Risler walked through them for
the last time, then took the key and went down to Planus's office to hand
it to Madame Georges.

"You can let the apartment," he said, "it will be so much added to the
income of the factory."

"But you, my friend?"

"Oh! I don't need much.  An iron bed up under the eaves.  That's all a
clerk needs.  For, I repeat, I am nothing but a clerk from this time on.
A useful clerk, by the way, faithful and courageous, of whom you will
have no occasion to complain, I promise you."

Georges, who was going over the books with Planus, was so affected at
hearing the poor fellow talk in that strain that he left his seat
precipitately.  He was suffocated by his sobs.  Claire, too, was deeply
moved; she went to the new clerk of the house of Fromont and said to him:

"Risler, I thank you in my father's name."

At that moment Pere Achille appeared with the mail.

Risler took the pile of letters, opened them tranquilly one by one, and
passed them over to Sigismond.

"Here's an order for Lyon.  Why wasn't it answered at Saint-Etienne?"

He plunged with all his energy into these details, and he brought to them
a keen intelligence, due to the constant straining of the mind toward
peace and forgetfulness.

Suddenly, among those huge envelopes, stamped with the names of business
houses, the paper of which and the manner of folding suggested the office
and hasty despatch, he discovered one smaller one, carefully sealed, and
hidden so cunningly between the others that at first he did not notice
it.  He recognized instantly that long, fine, firm writing,--To Monsieur
Risler--Personal.  It was Sidonie's writing!  When he saw it he felt the
same sensation he had felt in the bedroom upstairs.

All his love, all the hot wrath of the betrayed husband poured back into
his heart with the frantic force that makes assassins.  What was she
writing to him?  What lie had she invented now?  He was about to open the
letter; then he paused.  He realized that, if he should read that, it
would be all over with his courage; so he leaned over to the old cashier,
and said in an undertone:

"Sigismond, old friend, will you do me a favor?"

"I should think so!"  said the worthy man enthusiastically.  He was so
delighted to hear his friend speak to him in the kindly voice of the old
days.

"Here's a letter someone has written me which I don't wish to read now.
I am sure it would interfere with my thinking and living.  You must keep
it for me, and this with it."

He took from his pocket a little package carefully tied, and handed it to
him through the grating.

"That is all I have left of the past, all I have left of that woman.
I have determined not to see her, nor anything that reminds me of her,
until my task here is concluded, and concluded satisfactorily,--I need
all my intelligence, you understand.  You will pay the Chebes' allowance.
If she herself should ask for anything, you will give her what she needs.
But you will never mention my name.  And you will keep this package safe
for me until I ask you for it."

Sigismond locked the letter and the package in a secret drawer of his
desk with other valuable papers.  Risler returned at once to his
correspondence; but all the time he had before his eyes the slender
English letters traced by a little hand which he had so often and so
ardently pressed to his heart.




CHAPTER XXIII

CAFE CHANTANT

What a rare, what a conscientious clerk did that new employe of the house
of Fromont prove himself!

Every day his lamp was the first to appear at, and the last to disappear
from, the windows of the factory.  A little room had been arranged for
him under the eaves, exactly like the one he had formerly occupied with
Frantz, a veritable Trappist's cell, furnished with an iron cot and a
white wooden table, that stood under his brother's portrait.  He led the
same busy, regular, quiet life as in those old days.

He worked constantly, and had his meals brought from the same little
creamery.  But, alas! the disappearance forever of youth and hope
deprived those memories of all their charm.  Luckily he still had Frantz
and Madame "Chorche," the only two human beings of whom he could think
without a feeling of sadness.  Madame "Chorche" was always at hand,
always trying to minister to his comfort, to console him; and Frantz
wrote to him often, without mentioning Sidonie, by the way.  Risler
supposed that some one had told Frantz of the disaster that had befallen
him, and he too avoided all allusion to the subject in his letters.
"Oh! when I can send for him to come home!"  That was his dream, his sole
ambition: to restore the factory and recall his brother.

Meanwhile the days succeeded one another, always the same to him in the
restless activity of business and the heartrending loneliness of his
grief.  Every morning he walked through the workshops, where the profound
respect he inspired and his stern, silent countenance had reestablished
the orderly conditions that had been temporarily disturbed.  In the
beginning there had been much gossip, and various explanations of
Sidonie's departure had been made.  Some said that she had eloped with a
lover, others that Risler had turned her out.  The one fact that upset
all conjectures was the attitude of the two partners toward each other,
apparently as unconstrained as before.  Sometimes, however, when they
were talking together in the office, with no one by, Risler would
suddenly start convulsively, as a vision of the crime passed before his
eyes.

Then he would feel a mad longing to spring upon the villain, seize him by
the throat, strangle him without mercy; but the thought of Madame
"Chorche" was always there to restrain him.  Should he be less
courageous, less master of himself than that young wife?  Neither Claire,
nor Fromont, nor anybody else suspected what was in his mind.  They could
barely detect a severity, an inflexibility in his conduct, which were not
habitual with him.  Risler awed the workmen now; and those of them upon
whom his white hair, blanched in one night, his drawn, prematurely old
features did not impose respect, quailed before his strange glance-a
glance from eyes of a bluish-black like the color of a gun-barrel.
Whereas he had always been very kind and affable with the workmen, he had
become pitilessly severe in regard to the slightest infraction of the
rules.  It seemed as if he were taking vengeance upon himself for some
indulgence in the past, blind, culpable indulgence, for which he blamed
himself.

Surely he was a marvellous employe, was this new officer in the house of
Fromont.

Thanks to him, the factory bell, notwithstanding the quavering of its
old, cracked voice, had very soon resumed its authority; and the man who
guided the whole establishment denied himself the slightest recreation.
Sober as an apprentice, he left three-fourths of his salary with Planus
for the Chebes' allowance, but he never asked any questions about them.
Punctually on the last day of the month the little man appeared to
collect his little income, stiff and formal in his dealings with
Sigismond, as became an annuitant on duty.  Madame Chebe had tried to
obtain an interview with her son-in-law, whom she pitied and loved; but
the mere appearance of her palm-leaf shawl on the steps put Sidonie's
husband to flight.

In truth, the courage with which he armed himself was more apparent than
real.  The memory of his wife never left him.  What had become of her?
What was she doing?  He was almost angry with Planus for never mentioning
her.  That letter, above all things, that letter which he had had the
courage not to open, disturbed him.  He thought of it continually.  Ah!
had he dared, how he would have liked to ask Sigismond for it!

One day the temptation was too strong.  He was alone in the office.
The old cashier had gone out to luncheon, leaving the key in his drawer,
a most extraordinary thing.  Risler could not resist.  He opened the
drawer, moved the papers, and searched for his letter.  It was not there.
Sigismond must have put it away even more carefully, perhaps with a
foreboding of what actually happened.  In his heart Risler was not sorry
for his disappointment; for he well knew that, had he found the letter,
it would have been the end of the resigned and busy life which he imposed
upon himself with so much difficulty.

Through the week it was all very well.  Life was endurable, absorbed by
the innumerable duties of the factory, and so fatiguing that, when night
came, Risler fell on his bed like a lifeless mass.  But Sunday was long
and sad.  The silence of the deserted yards and workshops opened a far
wider field to his thoughts.  He tried to busy himself, but he missed the
encouragement of the others' work.  He alone was busy in that great,
empty factory whose very breath was arrested.  The locked doors, the
closed blinds, the hoarse voice of Pere Achille playing with his dog in
the deserted courtyard, all spoke of solitude.  And the whole
neighborhood also produced the same effect.  In the streets, which seemed
wider because of their emptiness, and where the passers-by were few and
silent, the bells ringing for vespers had a melancholy sound, and
sometimes an echo of the din of Paris, rumbling wheels, a belated hand-
organ, the click of a toy-peddler's clappers, broke the silence, as if to
make it even more noticeable.

Risler would try to invent new combinations of flowers and leaves, and,
while he handled his pencil, his thoughts, not finding sufficient food
there, would escape him, would fly back to his past happiness, to his
hopeless misfortunes, would suffer martyrdom, and then, on returning,
would ask the poor somnambulist, still seated at his table: "What have
you done in my absence?"  Alas! he had done nothing.

Oh! the long, heartbreaking, cruel Sundays!  Consider that, mingled with
all these perplexities in his mind, was the superstitious reverence of
the common people for holy days, for the twenty-four hours of rest,
wherein one recovers strength and courage.  If he had gone out, the sight
of a workingman with his wife and child would have made him weep, but his
monastic seclusion gave him other forms of suffering, the despair of
recluses, their terrible outbreaks of rebellion when the god to whom they
have consecrated themselves does not respond to their sacrifices.  Now,
Risler's god was work, and as he no longer found comfort or serenity
therein, he no longer believed in it, but cursed it.

Often in those hours of mental struggle the door of the draughting-room
would open gently and Claire Fromont would appear.  The poor man's
loneliness throughout those long Sunday afternoons filled her with
compassion, and she would come with her little girl to keep him company,
knowing by experience how contagious is the sweet joyousness of children.
The little one, who could now walk alone, would slip from her mother's
arms to run to her friend.  Risler would hear the little, hurrying steps.
He would feel the light breath behind him, and instantly he would be
conscious of a soothing, rejuvenating influence.  She would throw her
plump little arms around his neck with affectionate warmth, with her
artless, causeless laugh, and a kiss from that little mouth which never
had lied.  Claire Fromont, standing in the doorway, would smile as she
looked at them.

"Risler, my friend," she would say, "you must come down into the garden a
while,--you work too hard.  You will be ill."

"No, no, Madame,--on the contrary, work is what saves me.  It keeps me
from thinking."

Then, after a long pause, she would continue:

"Come, my dear Risler, you must try to forget."

Risler would shake his head.

"Forget?  Is that possible?  There are some things beyond one's strength.
A man may forgive, but he never forgets."

The child almost always succeeded in dragging him down to the garden.
He must play ball, or in the sand, with her; but her playfellow's
awkwardness and lack of enthusiasm soon impressed the little girl.  Then
she would become very sedate, contenting herself with walking gravely
between the hedges of box, with her hand in her friend's.  After a moment
Risler would entirely forget that she was there; but, although he did not
realize it, the warmth of that little hand in his had a magnetic,
softening effect upon his diseased mind.

A man may forgive, but he never forgets!

Poor Claire herself knew something about it; for she had never forgotten,
notwithstanding her great courage and the conception she had formed of
her duty.  To her, as to Risler; her surroundings were a constant
reminder of her sufferings.  The objects amid which she lived pitilessly
reopened the wound that was ready to close.  The staircase, the garden,
the courtyard, all those dumb witnesses of her husband's sin, assumed on
certain days an implacable expression.  Even the careful precaution her
husband took to spare her painful reminders, the way in which he called
attention to the fact that he no longer went out in the evening, and took
pains to tell her where he had been during the day, served only to remind
her the more forcibly of his wrong-doing.  Sometimes she longed to ask
him to forbear,--to say to him: "Do not protest too much."  Faith was
shattered within her, and the horrible agony of the priest who doubts,
and seeks at the same time to remain faithful to his vows, betrayed
itself in her bitter smile, her cold, uncomplaining gentleness.

Georges was wofully unhappy.  He loved his wife now.  The nobility of her
character had conquered him.  There was admiration in his love, and--why
not say it?--Claire's sorrow filled the place of the coquetry which was
contrary to her nature, the lack of which had always been a defect in her
husband's eyes.  He was one of that strange type of men who love to make
conquests.  Sidonie, capricious and cold as she was, responded to that
whim of his heart.  After parting from her with a tender farewell, he
found her indifferent and forgetful the next day, and that continual need
of wooing her back to him took the place of genuine passion.  Serenity in
love bored him as a voyage without storms wearies a sailor.  On this
occasion he had been very near shipwreck with his wife, and the danger
had not passed even yet.  He knew that Claire was alienated from him and
devoted entirely to the child, the only link between them thenceforth.
Their separation made her seem lovelier, more desirable, and he exercised
all his powers of fascination to recapture her.  He knew how hard a task
it would be, and that he had no ordinary, frivolous nature to deal with.
But he did not despair.  Sometimes a vague gleam in the depths of the
mild and apparently impassive glance with which she watched his efforts,
bade him hope.

As for Sidonie, he no longer thought of her.  Let no one be astonished at
that abrupt mental rupture.  Those two superficial beings had nothing to
attach them securely to each other.  Georges was incapable of receiving
lasting impressions unless they were continually renewed; Sidonie, for
her part, had no power to inspire any noble or durable sentiment.  It was
one of those intrigues between a cocotte and a coxcomb, compounded of
vanity and of wounded self-love, which inspire neither devotion nor
constancy, but tragic adventures, duels, suicides which are rarely fatal,
and which end in a radical cure.  Perhaps, had he seen her again, he
might have had a relapse of his disease; but the impetus of flight had
carried Sidonie away so swiftly and so far that her return was
impossible.  At all events, it was a relief for him to be able to live
without lying; and the new life he was leading, a life of hard work and
self-denial, with the goal of success in the distance, was not
distasteful to him.  Luckily; for the courage and determination of both
partners were none too much to put the house on its feet once more.

The poor house of Fromont had sprung leaks on all sides.  So Pere Planus
still had wretched nights, haunted by the nightmare of notes maturing and
the ominous vision of the little blue man.  But, by strict economy, they
always succeeded in paying.

Soon four Risler Presses were definitively set up and used in the work of
the factory.  People began to take a deep interest in them and in the
wall-paper trade.  Lyons, Caen, Rixbeim, the great centres of the
industry, were much disturbed concerning that marvellous "rotary and
dodecagonal" machine.  One fine day the Prochassons appeared, and offered
three hundred thousand francs simply for an interest in the patent
rights.

"What shall we do?"  Fromont Jeune asked Risler Aine.

The latter shrugged his shoulders indifferently.

"Decide for yourself.  It doesn't concern me.  I am only an employe."

The words, spoken coldly, without anger, fell heavily upon Fromont's
bewildered joy, and reminded him of the gravity of a situation which he
was always on the point of forgetting.

But when he was alone with his dear Madame "Chorche," Risler advised her
not to accept the Prochassons' offer.

"Wait,--don't be in a hurry.  Later you will have a better offer."

He spoke only of them in that affair in which his own share was so
glorious.  She felt that he was preparing to cut himself adrift from
their future.

Meanwhile orders came pouring in and accumulated on their hands.  The
quality of the paper, the reduced price because of the improved methods
of manufacture, made competition impossible.  There was no doubt that a
colossal fortune was in store for the house of Fromont.  The factory had
resumed its former flourishing aspect and its loud, business-like hum.
Intensely alive were all the great buildings and the hundreds of workmen
who filled them.  Pere Planus never raised his nose from his desk; one
could see him from the little garden, leaning over his great ledgers,
jotting down in magnificently molded figures the profits of the Risler
press.

Risler still worked as before, without change or rest.  The return of
prosperity brought no alteration in his secluded habits, and from the
highest window on the topmost floor of the house he listened to the
ceaseless roar of his machines.  He was no less gloomy, no less silent.
One day, however, it became known at the factory that the press, a
specimen of which had been sent to the great Exposition at Manchester,
had received the gold medal, whereby its success was definitely
established.  Madame Georges called Risler into the garden at the
luncheon hour, wishing to be the first to tell him the good news.

For the moment a proud smile relaxed his prematurely old, gloomy
features.  His inventor's vanity, his pride in his renown, above all,
the idea of repairing thus magnificently the wrong done to the family by
his wife, gave him a moment of true happiness.  He pressed Claire's hands
and murmured, as in the old days:

"I am very happy!  I am very happy!"

But what a difference in tone!  He said it without enthusiasm,
hopelessly, with the satisfaction of a task accomplished, and nothing
more.

The bell rang for the workmen to return, and Risler went calmly upstairs
to resume his work as on other days.

In a moment he came down again.  In spite of all, that news had excited
him more than he cared to show.  He wandered about the garden, prowled
around the counting-room, smiling sadly at Pere Planus through the
window.

"What ails him?"  the old cashier wondered.  "What does he want of me?"

At last, when night came and it was time to close the office, Risler
summoned courage to go and speak to him.

"Planus, my old friend, I should like--"

He hesitated a moment.

"I should like you to give me the--letter, you know, the little letter
and the package."

Sigismond stared at him in amazement.  In his innocence, he had imagined
that Risler never thought of Sidonie, that he had entirely forgotten her.

"What--you want--?"

"Ah!  I have well earned it; I can think of myself a little now.  I have
thought enough of others."

"You are right," said Planus.  "Well, this is what we'll do.  The letter
and package are at my house at Montrouge.  If you choose, we will go and
dine together at the Palais-Royal, as in the good old times.  I will
stand treat.  We'll water your medal with a bottle of wine; something
choice!  Then we'll go to the house together.  You can get your trinkets,
and if it's too late for you to go home, Mademoiselle Planus, my sister,
shall make up a bed for you, and you shall pass the night with us.  We
are very comfortable there--it's in the country.  To-morrow morning at
seven o'clock we'll come back to the factory by the first omnibus.  Come,
old fellow, give me this pleasure.  If you don't, I shall think you still
bear your old Sigismond a grudge."

Risler accepted.  He cared little about celebrating the award of his
medal, but he desired to gain a few hours before opening the little
letter he had at last earned the right to read.

He must dress.  That was quite a serious matter, for he had lived in a
workman's jacket during the past six months.  And what an event in the
factory!  Madame Fromont was informed at once.

"Madame, Madame!  Monsieur Risler is going out!"

Claire looked at him from her window, and that tall form, bowed by
sorrow, leaning on Sigismond's arm, aroused in her a profound, unusual
emotion which she remembered ever after.

In the street people bowed to Risler with great interest.  Even their
greetings warmed his heart.  He was so much in need of kindness!  But the
noise of vehicles made him a little dizzy.

"My head is spinning," he said to Planus:

"Lean hard on me, old fellow-don't be afraid."

And honest Planus drew himself up, escorting his friend with the artless,
unconventional pride of a peasant of the South bearing aloft his village
saint.

At last they arrived at the Palais-Royal.

The garden was full of people.  They had come to hear the music,
and were trying to find seats amid clouds of dust and the scraping of
chairs.  The two friends hurried into the restaurant to avoid all that
turmoil.  They established themselves in one of the large salons on the
first floor, whence they could see the green trees, the promenaders, and
the water spurting from the fountain between the two melancholy flower-
gardens.  To Sigismond it was the ideal of luxury, that restaurant, with
gilding everywhere, around the mirrors, in the chandelier and even on the
figured wallpaper.  The white napkin, the roll, the menu of a table
d'hote dinner filled his soul with joy.  "We are comfortable here, aren't
we?"  he said to Risler.

And he exclaimed at each of the courses of that banquet at two francs
fifty, and insisted on filling his friend's plate.

"Eat that--it's good."

The other, notwithstanding his desire to do honor to the fete, seemed
preoccupied and gazed out-of-doors.

"Do you remember, Sigismond?"  he said, after a pause.

The old cashier, engrossed in his memories of long ago, of Risler's first
employment at the factory, replied:

"I should think I do remember--listen!  The first time we dined together
at the Palais-Royal was in February, 'forty-six, the year we put in the
planches-plates at the factory."

Risler shook his head.

"Oh!  no--I mean three years ago.  It was in that room just opposite that
we dined on that memorable evening."

And he pointed to the great windows of the salon of Cafe Vefour, gleaming
in the rays of the setting sun like the chandeliers at a wedding feast.

"Ah!  yes, true," murmured Sigismond, abashed.  What an unlucky idea of
his to bring his friend to a place that recalled such painful things!

Risler, not wishing to cast a gloom upon their banquet, abruptly raised
his glass.

"Come!  here's your health, my old comrade."

He tried to change the subject.  But a moment later he himself led the
conversation back to it again, and asked Sigismond, in an undertone, as
if he were ashamed:

"Have you seen her?"

"Your wife?  No, never."

"She hasn't written again?"

"No--never again."

"But you must have heard of her.  What has she been doing these six
months?  Does she live with her parents?"

"No."

Risler turned pale.

He hoped that Sidonie would have returned to her mother, that she would
have worked, as he had worked, to forget and atone.  He had often thought
that he would arrange his life according to what he should learn of her
when he should have the right to speak of her; and in one of those far-
off visions of the future, which have the vagueness of a dream, he
sometimes fancied himself living in exile with the Chebes in an unknown
land, where nothing would remind him of his past shame.  It was not a
definite plan, to be sure; but the thought lived in the depths of his
mind like a hope, caused by the need that all human creatures feel of
finding their lost happiness.

"Is she in Paris?"  he asked, after a few moments' reflection.

"No.  She went away three months ago.  No one knows where she has gone."

Sigismond did not add that she had gone with her Cazaboni, whose name she
now bore, that they were making the circuit of the provincial cities
together, that her mother was in despair, never saw her, and heard of her
only through Delobelle.  Sigismond did not deem it his duty to mention
all that, and after his last words he held his peace.

Risler, for his part, dared ask no further questions.

While they sat there, facing each other, both embarrassed by the long
silence, the military band began to play under the trees in the garden.
They played one of those Italian operatic overtures which seem to have
been written expressly for public open-air resorts; the swiftly-flowing
notes, as they rise into the air, blend with the call of the swallows and
the silvery plash of the fountain.  The blaring brass brings out in bold
relief the mild warmth of the closing hours of those summer days, so long
and enervating in Paris; it seems as if one could hear nothing else.  The
distant rumbling of wheels, the cries of children playing, the footsteps
of the promenaders are wafted away in those resonant, gushing, refreshing
waves of melody, as useful to the people of Paris as the daily watering
of their streets.  On all sides the faded flowers, the trees white with
dust, the faces made pale and wan by the heat, all the sorrows, all the
miseries of a great city, sitting dreamily, with bowed head, on the
benches in the garden, feel its comforting, refreshing influence.  The
air is stirred, renewed by those strains that traverse it, filling it
with harmony.

Poor Risler felt as if the tension upon all his nerves were relaxed.

"A little music does one good," he said, with glistening eyes.  "My heart
is heavy, old fellow," he added, in a lower tone; "if you knew--"

They sat without speaking, their elbows resting on the window-sill, while
their coffee was served.

Then the music ceased, the garden became deserted.  The light that had
loitered in the corners crept upward to the roofs, cast its last rays
upon the highest windowpanes, followed by the birds, the swallows, which
saluted the close of day with a farewell chirp from the gutter where they
were huddled together.

"Now, where shall we go?"  said Planus, as they left the restaurant.

"Wherever you wish."

On the first floor of a building on the Rue Montpensier, close at hand,
was a cafe chantant, where many people entered.

"Suppose we go in," said Planus, desirous of banishing his friend's
melancholy at any cost, "the beer is excellent."

Risler assented to the suggestion; he had not tasted beer for six months.

It was a former restaurant transformed into a concert-hall.  There were
three large rooms, separated by gilded pillars, the partitions having
been removed; the decoration was in the Moorish style, bright red, pale
blue, with little crescents and turbans for ornament.

Although it was still early, the place was full; and even before entering
one had a feeling of suffocation, simply from seeing the crowds of people
sitting around the tables, and at the farther end, half-hidden by the
rows of pillars, a group of white-robed women on a raised platform, in
the heat and glare of the gas.

Our two friends had much difficulty in finding seats, and had to be
content with a place behind a pillar whence they could see only half of
the platform, then occupied by a superb person in black coat and yellow
gloves, curled and waxed and oiled, who was singing in a vibrating voice

                    Mes beaux lions aux crins dores,
                    Du sang des troupeaux alteres,
                    Halte la!--Je fais sentinello!

                    [My proud lions with golden manes
                    Who thirst for the blood of my flocks,
                    Stand back!--I am on guard!]

The audience--small tradesmen of the quarter with their wives and
daughters-seemed highly enthusiastic: especially the women.
He represented so perfectly the ideal of the shopkeeper imagination,
that magnificent shepherd of the desert, who addressed lions with such an
air of authority and tended his flocks in full evening dress.  And so,
despite their bourgeois bearing, their modest costumes and their
expressionless shop-girl smiles, all those women, made up their little
mouths to be caught by the hook of sentiment, and cast languishing
glances upon the singer.  It was truly comical to see that glance at the
platform suddenly change and become contemptuous and fierce as it fell
upon the husband, the poor husband tranquilly drinking a glass of beer
opposite his wife: "You would never be capable of doing sentry duty in
the very teeth of lions, and in a black coat too, and with yellow
gloves!"

And the husband's eye seemed to reply:

"Ah! 'dame', yes, he's quite a dashing buck, that fellow."

Being decidedly indifferent to heroism of that stamp, Risler and
Sigismond were drinking their beer without paying much attention to the
music, when, at the end of the song, amid the applause and cries and
uproar that followed it, Pere Planus uttered an exclamation:

"Why, that is odd; one would say--but no, I'm not mistaken.  It is he,
it's Delobelle!"

It was, in fact, the illustrious actor, whom he had discovered in the
front row near the platform.  His gray head was turned partly away from
them.  He was leaning carelessly against a pillar, hat in hand, in his
grand make-up as leading man: dazzlingly white linen, hair curled with
the tongs, black coat with a camellia in the buttonhole, like the ribbon
of an order.  He glanced at the crowd from time to time with a
patronizing air: but his eyes were most frequently turned toward the
platform, with encouraging little gestures and smiles and pretended
applause, addressed to some one whom Pere Planus could not see from his
seat.

There was nothing very extraordinary in the presence of the illustrious
Delobelle at a cafe concert, as he spent all his evenings away from home;
and yet the old cashier felt vaguely disturbed, especially when he
discovered in the same row a blue cape and a pair of steely eyes.  It was
Madame Dobson, the sentimental singing-teacher.  The conjunction of those
two faces amid the pipe-smoke and the confusion of the crowd, produced
upon Sigismond the effect of two ghosts evoked by a bad dream.  He was
afraid for his friend, without knowing exactly why; and suddenly it
occurred to him to take him away.

"Let us go, Risler.  The heat here is enough to kill one."

Just as they rose--for Risler was no more desirous to stay than to go--
the orchestra, consisting of a piano and several violins, began a
peculiar refrain.  There was a flutter of curiosity throughout the room,
and cries of "Hush! hush! sit down!"

They were obliged to resume their seats.  Risler, too, was beginning to
be disturbed.

"I know that tune," he said to himself.  "Where have I heard it?"

A thunder of applause and an exclamation from Planus made him raise his
eyes.

"Come, come, let us go," said the cashier, trying to lead him away.

But it was too late.

Risler had already seen his wife come forward to the front of the stage
and curtsey to the audience with a ballet-dancer's smile.

She wore a white gown, as on the night of the ball; but her whole costume
was much less rich and shockingly immodest.

The dress was barely caught together at the shoulders; her hair floated
in a blond mist low over her eyes, and around her neck was a necklace of
pearls too large to be real, alternated with bits of tinsel.  Delobelle
was right: the Bohemian life was better suited to her.  Her beauty had
gained an indefinably reckless expression, which was its most
characteristic feature, and made her a perfect type of the woman who has
escaped from all restraint, placed herself at the mercy of every
accident, and is descending stage by stage to the lowest depths of the
Parisian hell, from which nothing is powerful enough to lift her and
restore her to the pure air and the light.

And how perfectly at ease she seemed in her strolling life!  With what
self-possession she walked to the front of the stage!  Ah! could she have
seen the desperate, terrible glance fixed upon her down there in the
hall, concealed behind a pillar, her smile would have lost that equivocal
placidity, her voice would have sought in vain those wheedling,
languorous tones in which she warbled the only song Madame Dobson had
ever been able to teach her:

                    Pauv' pitit Mamz'elle Zizi,
                    C'est l'amou, l'amou qui tourne
                    La tete a li.

Risler had risen, in spite of Planus's efforts.  "Sit down! sit down!"
the people shouted.  The wretched man heard nothing.  He was staring at
his wife.

                    C'est l'amou, l'amou qui tourne
                    La tete a li,

Sidonie repeated affectedly.

For a moment he wondered whether he should not leap on the platform and
kill her.  Red flames shot before his eyes, and he was blinded with
frenzy.

Then, suddenly, shame and disgust seized upon him and he rushed from the
hall, overturning chairs and tables, pursued by the terror and
imprecations of all those scandalized bourgeois.




CHAPTER XXIV

SIDONIE'S VENGEANCE

Never had Sigismond Planus returned home so late without giving his
sister warning, during the twenty years and more that he had lived at
Montrouge.  Consequently Mademoiselle Planus was greatly worried.  Living
in community of ideas and of everything else with her brother, having but
one mind for herself and for him, the old maid had felt for several
months the rebound of all the cashier's anxiety and indignation; and the
effect was still noticeable in her tendency to tremble and become
agitated on slight provocation.  At the slightest tardiness on
Sigismond's part, she would think:

"Ah! mon Dieu!  If only nothing has happened at the factory!"

That is the reason why on the evening in question, when the hens and
chickens were all asleep on their perches, and the dinner had been
removed untouched, Mademoiselle Planus was sitting in the little ground-
floor living-room, waiting, in great agitation.

At last, about eleven o'clock, some one rang.  A timid, melancholy ring,
in no wise resembling Sigismond's vigorous pull.

"Is it you, Monsieur Planus?" queried the old lady from behind the door.

It was he; but he was not alone.  A tall, bent old man accompanied him,
and, as they entered, bade her good-evening in a slow, hesitating voice.
Not till then did Mademoiselle Planus recognize Risler Aine, whom she had
not seen since the days of the New Year's calls, that is to say, some
time before the dramas at the factory.  She could hardly restrain an
exclamation of pity; but the grave taciturnity of the two men told her
that she must be silent.

"Mademoiselle Planus, my sister, you will put clean sheets on my bed.
Our friend Risler does us the honor to pass the night with us."

The sister hastened away to prepare the bedroom with an almost
affectionate zeal; for, as we know, beside "Monsieur Planus, my brother,"
Risler was the only man excepted from the general reprobation in which
she enveloped the whole male sex.

Upon leaving the cafe concert, Sidonie's husband had had a moment of
frantic excitement.  He leaned on Planus's arm, every nerve in his body
strained to the utmost.  At that moment he had no thought of going to
Montrouge to get the letter and the package.

"Leave me--go away," he said to Sigismond.  "I must be alone."

But the other knew better than to abandon him thus to his despair.
Unnoticed by Risler, he led him away from the factory, and as his
affectionate heart suggested to the old cashier what he had best say to
his friend, he talked to him all the time of Frantz, his little Frantz
whom he loved so dearly.

"That was genuine affection, genuine and trustworthy.  No treachery to
fear with such hearts as that!"

While they talked they left behind them the noisy streets of the centre
of Paris.  They walked along the quays, skirted the Jardin des Plantes,
plunged into Faubourg Saint-Marceau.  Risler followed where the other
led.  Sigismond's words did him so much good!

In due time they came to the Bievre, bordered at that point with
tanneries whose tall drying-houses with open sides were outlined in blue
against the sky; and then the ill-defined plains of Montsouris, vast
tracts of land scorched and stripped of vegetation by the fiery breath
that Paris exhales around its daily toil, like a monstrous dragon, whose
breath of flame and smoke suffers no vegetation within its range.

From Montsouris to the fortifications of Montrouge is but a step.  When
they had reached that point, Planus had no great difficulty in taking his
friend home with him.  He thought, and justly, that his tranquil
fireside, the spectacle of a placid, fraternal, devoted affection, would
give the wretched man's heart a sort of foretaste of the happiness that
was in store for him with his brother Frantz.  And, in truth, the charm
of the little household began to work as soon as they arrived.

"Yes, yes, you are right, old fellow," said Risler, pacing the floor of
the living-room, "I mustn't think of that woman any more.  She's like a
dead woman to me now.  I have nobody left in the world but my little
Frantz; I don't know yet whether I shall send for him to come home, or go
out and join him; the one thing that is certain is that we are going to
stay together.  Ah! I longed so to have a son!  Now I have found one.
I want no other.  When I think that for a moment I had an idea of killing
myself!  Nonsense!  it would make Madame What-d'ye-call-her, yonder, too
happy.  On the contrary, I mean to live--to live with my Frantz, and for
him, and for nothing else."

"Bravo!"  said Sigismond, "that's the way I like to hear you talk."

At that moment Mademoiselle Planus came to say that the room was ready.

Risler apologized for the trouble he was causing them.

"You are so comfortable, so happy here.  Really, it's too bad to burden
you with my melancholy."

"Ah!  my old friend, you can arrange just such happiness as ours for
yourself," said honest Sigismond with beaming face.  "I have my sister,
you have your brother.  What do we lack?"

Risler smiled vaguely.  He fancied himself already installed with Frantz
in a quiet little quakerish house like that.

Decidedly, that was an excellent idea of Pere Planus.

"Come to bed," he said triumphantly.  "We'll go and show you your room."

Sigismond Planus's bedroom was on the ground floor, a large room simply
but neatly furnished; with muslin curtains at the windows and the bed,
and little squares of carpet on the polished floor, in front of the
chairs.  The dowager Madame Fromont herself could have found nothing to
say as to the orderly and cleanly aspect of the place.  On a shelf or two
against the wall were a few books: Manual of Fishing, The Perfect Country
Housewife, Bayeme's Book-keeping.  That was the whole of the intellectual
equipment of the room.

Pere Planus glanced proudly around.  The glass of water was in its place
on the walnut table, the box of razors on the dressing-case.

"You see, Risler.  Here is everything you need.  And if you should want
anything else, the keys are in all the drawers--you have only to turn
them.  Just see what a beautiful view you get from here.  It's a little
dark just now, but when you wake up in the morning you'll see; it is
magnificent."

He opened the widow.  Great drops of rain were beginning to fall, and
lightning flashes rending the darkness disclosed the long, silent line of
the fortifications, with telegraph poles at intervals, or the frowning
door of a casemate.  Now and then the footsteps of a patrol making the
rounds, the clash of muskets or swords, reminded them that they were
within the military zone.

That was the outlook so vaunted by Planus--a melancholy outlook if ever
there were one.

"And now good-night.  Sleep well!"

But, as the old cashier was leaving the room, his friend called him back:

"Sigismond."

"Here!"  said Sigismond, and he waited.

Risler blushed slightly and moved his lips like a man who is about to
speak; then, with a mighty effort, he said:

"No, no-nothing.  Good-night, old man."

In the dining-room the brother and sister talked together a long while in
low tones.  Planus described the terrible occurrence of the evening, the
meeting with Sidonie; and you can imagine the--"Oh! these women!"  and
"Oh!  these men?"  At last, when they had locked the little garden-door,
Mademoiselle Planus went up to her room, and Sigismond made himself as
comfortable as possible in a small cabinet adjoining.

About midnight the cashier was aroused by his sister calling him in a
terrified whisper:

"Monsieur Planus, my brother?"

"What is it?"

"Did you hear?"

"No.  What?"

"Oh!  it was awful.  Something like a deep sigh, but so loud and so sad!
It came from the room below."

They listened.  Without, the rain was falling in torrents, with the
dreary rustling of leaves that makes the country seem so lonely.

"That is only the wind," said Planus.

"I am sure not.  Hush!  Listen!"

Amid the tumult of the storm, they heard a wailing sound, like a sob, in
which a name was pronounced with difficulty:

"Frantz!  Frantz!"

It was terrible and pitiful.

When Christ on the Cross sent up to heaven His despairing cry: 'Eli, eli,
lama sabachthani', they who heard him must have felt the same species of
superstitious terror that suddenly seized upon Mademoiselle Planus.

"I am afraid!"  she whispered; "suppose you go and look--"

"No, no, we will let him alone.  He is thinking of his brother.  Poor
fellow!  It's the very thought of all others that will do him the most
good."

And the old cashier went to sleep again.

The next morning he woke as usual when the drums beat the reveille in the
fortifications; for the little family, surrounded by barracks, regulated
its life by the military calls.  The sister had already risen and was
feeding the poultry.  When she saw Sigismond she came to him in
agitation.

"It is very strange," she said, "I hear nothing stirring in Monsieur
Risler's room.  But the window is wide open."

Sigismond, greatly surprised, went and knocked at his friend's door.

"Risler!  Risler!"

He called in great anxiety:

"Risler, are you there?  Are you asleep?"

There was no reply.  He opened the door.

The room was cold.  It was evident that the damp air had been blowing in
all night through the open window.  At the first glance at the bed,
Sigismond thought: "He hasn't been in bed"--for the clothes were
undisturbed and the condition of the room, even in the most trivial
details, revealed an agitated vigil: the still smoking lamp, which he had
neglected to extinguish, the carafe, drained to the last drop by the
fever of sleeplessness; but the thing that filled the cashier with dismay
was to find the bureau drawer wide open in which he had carefully
bestowed the letter and package entrusted to him by his friend.

The letter was no longer there.  The package lay on the table, open,
revealing a photograph of Sidonie at fifteen.  With her high-necked
frock, her rebellious hair parted over the forehead, and the embarrassed
pose of an awkward girl, the little Chebe of the old days, Mademoiselle
Le Mire's apprentice, bore little resemblance to the Sidonie of to-day.
And that was the reason why Risler had kept that photograph, as a
souvenir, not of his wife, but of the "little one."

Sigismond was in great dismay.

"This is my fault," he said to himself.  "I ought to have taken away the
keys.  But who would have supposed that he was still thinking of her?
He had sworn so many times that that woman no longer existed for him."

At that moment Mademoiselle Planus entered the room with consternation
written on her face.

"Monsieur Risler has gone!"  she exclaimed.

"Gone?  Why, wasn't the garden-gate locked?"

"He must have climbed over the wall.  You can see his footprints."

They looked at each other, terrified beyond measure.

"It was the letter!"  thought Planus.

Evidently that letter from his wife must have made some extraordinary
revelation to Risler; and, in order not to disturb his hosts, he had made
his escape noiselessly through the window, like a burglar.  Why?  With
what aim in view?

"You will see, sister," said poor Planus, as he dressed with all haste,
"you will see that that hussy has played him still another trick."  And
when his sister tried to encourage him, he recurred to his favorite
refrain:

"I haf no gonfidence!"

As soon as he was dressed, he darted out of the house.

Risler's footprints could be distinguished on the wet ground as far as
the gate of the little garden.  He must have gone before daylight, for
the beds of vegetables and flowers were trampled down at random by deep
footprints with long spaces between; there were marks of heels on the
garden-wall and the mortar was crumbled slightly on top.  The brother and
sister went out on the road skirting the fortifications.  There it was
impossible to follow the footprints.  They could tell nothing more than
that Risler had gone in the direction of the Orleans road.

"After all," Mademoiselle Planus ventured to say, "we are very foolish to
torment ourselves about him; perhaps he has simply gone back to the
factory."

Sigismond shook his head.  Ah! if he had said all that he thought!

"Return to the house, sister.  I will go and see."

And with the old "I haf no gonfidence" he rushed away like a hurricane,
his white mane standing even more erect than usual.

At that hour, on the road near the fortifications, was an endless
procession of soldiers and market-gardeners, guard-mounting, officers'
horses out for exercise, sutlers with their paraphernalia, all the bustle
and activity that is seen in the morning in the neighborhood of forts.
Planus was striding along amid the tumult, when suddenly he stopped.  At
the foot of the bank, on the left, in front of a small, square building,
with the inscription.

                             CITY OF PARIS,
                       ENTRANCE TO THE QUARRIES,

On the rough plaster, he saw a crowd assembled, and soldiers' and custom-
house officers' uniforms, mingled with the shabby, dirty blouses of
barracks-loafers.  The old man instinctively approached.  A customs
officer, seated on the stone step below a round postern with iron bars,
was talking with many gestures, as if he were acting out his narrative.

"He was where I am," he said.  "He had hanged himself sitting, by pulling
with all his strength on the rope!  It's clear that he had made up his
mind to die, for he had a razor in his pocket that he would have used in
case the rope had broken."

A voice in the crowd exclaimed: "Poor devil!"  Then another, a tremulous
voice, choking with emotion, asked timidly:

"Is it quite certain that he's dead?"

Everybody looked at Planus and began to laugh.

"Well, here's a greenhorn," said the officer.  "Don't I tell you that he
was all blue this morning, when we cut him down to take him to the
chasseurs' barracks!"

The barracks were not far away; and yet Sigismond Planus had the greatest
difficulty in the world in dragging himself so far.  In vain did he say
to himself that suicides are of frequent occurrence in Paris, especially
in those regions; that not a day passes that a dead body is not found
somewhere along that line of fortifications, as upon the shores of a
tempestuous sea,--he could not escape the terrible presentiment that had
oppressed his heart since early morning.

"Ah! you have come to see the man that hanged himself," said the
quartermaster-sergeant at the door of the barracks.  "See! there he is."

The body had been laid on a table supported by trestles in a sort of
shed.  A cavalry cloak that had been thrown over it covered it from head
to foot, and fell in the shroud-like folds which all draperies assume
that come in contact with the rigidity of death.  A group of officers and
several soldiers in duck trousers were looking on at a distance,
whispering as if in a church; and an assistant-surgeon was writing a
report of the death on a high window-ledge.  To him Sigismond spoke.

"I should like very much to see him," he said softly.

"Go and look."

He walked to the table, hesitated a minute, then, summoning courage,
uncovered a swollen face, a tall, motionless body in its rain-soaked
garments.

"She has killed you at last, my old comrade!"  murmured Planus, and fell
on his knees, sobbing bitterly.

The officers had come forward, gazing curiously at the body, which was
left uncovered.

"Look, surgeon," said one of them.  "His hand is closed, as if he were
holding something in it."

"That is true," the surgeon replied, drawing nearer.  "That sometimes
happens in the last convulsions.

"You remember at Solferino, Commandant Bordy held his little daughter's
miniature in his hand like that?  We had much difficulty in taking it
from him."

As he spoke he tried to open the poor, tightly-closed dead hand.

"Look!"  said he, "it is a letter that he is holding so tight."

He was about to read it; but one of the officers took it from his hands
and passed it to Sigismond, who was still kneeling.

"Here, Monsieur.  Perhaps you will find in this some last wish to be
carried out."

Sigismond Planus rose.  As the light in the room was dim, he walked with
faltering step to the window, and read, his eyes filled with tears:

"Well, yes, I love you, I love you, more than ever and forever!  What is
the use of struggling and fighting against fate?  Our sin is stronger
than we .  .  .  "

It was the letter which Frantz had written to his sister-in-law a year
before, and which Sidonie had sent to her husband on the day following
their terrible scene, to revenge herself on him and his brother at the
same time.

Risler could have survived his wife's treachery, but that of his brother
had killed him.

When Sigismond understood, he was petrified with horror.  He stood there,
with the letter in his hand, gazing mechanically through the open window.

The clock struck six.

Yonder, over Paris, whose dull roar they could hear although they could
not see the city, a cloud of smoke arose, heavy and hot, moving slowly
upward, with a fringe of red and black around its edges, like the powder-
smoke on a field of battle.  Little by little, steeples, white buildings,
a gilded cupola, emerged from the mist, and burst forth in a splendid
awakening.

Then the thousands of tall factory chimneys, towering above that sea of
clustered roofs, began with one accord to exhale their quivering vapor,
with the energy of a steamer about to sail.  Life was beginning anew.
Forward, ye wheels of time!  And so much the worse for him who lags
behind!

Thereupon old Planus gave way to a terrible outburst of wrath.

"Ah! harlot-harlot!"  he cried, shaking his fist; and no one could say
whether he was addressing the woman or the city of Paris.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

A man may forgive, but he never forgets
Word "sacrifice," so vague on careless lips









This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





GERFAUT

By CHARLES DE BERNARD


With a Preface by JULES CLARETIE, of the French Academy




CHARLES DE BERNARD

PIERRE-MARIE-CHARLES DE BERNARD DU GRAIL DE LA VILLETTE, better known by
the name of Charles de Bernard, was born in Besancon, February 24, 1804.
He came from a very ancient family of the Vivarais, was educated at the
college of his native city, and studied for the law in Dijon and at
Paris.  He was awarded a prize by the 'Jeux floraux' for his
dithyrambics, 'Une fete de Neron' in 1829.  This first success in
literature did not prevent him aspiring to the Magistrature, when the
Revolution of 1830 broke out and induced him to enter politics.  He
became one of the founders of the 'Gazette de Franche-Comte' and an
article in the pages of this journal about 'Peau de chagrin' earned him
the thanks and the friendship of Balzac.

The latter induced him to take up his domicile in Paris and initiated him
into the art of novel-writing.  Bernard had published a volume of odes:
'Plus Deuil que Joie' (1838), which was not much noticed, but a series of
stories in the same year gained him the reputation of a genial 'conteur'.
They were collected under the title 'Le Noeud Gordien', and one of the
tales, 'Une Aventure du Magistrat, was adapted by Sardou for his comedy
'Pommes du voisin'.  'Gerfaut', his greatest work, crowned by the
Academy, appeared also in 1838, then followed 'Le Paravent', another
collection of novels (1839); 'Les Ailes d'Icare (1840); La Peau du Lion
and La Chasse aux Amants (1841); L'Ecueil (1842); Un Beau-pere (1845);
and finally Le Gentilhomme campagnard,' in 1847.  Bernard died, only
forty-eight years old, March 6, 1850.

Charles de Bernard was a realist, a pupil of Balzac.  He surpasses his
master, nevertheless, in energy and limpidity of composition.  His style
is elegant and cultured.  His genius is most fully represented in a score
or so of delightful tales rarely exceeding some sixty or seventy pages in
length, but perfect in proportion, full of invention and originality, and
saturated with the purest and pleasantest essence of the spirit which for
six centuries in tableaux, farces, tales in prose and verse, comedies and
correspondence, made French literature the delight and recreation of
Europe.  'Gerfaut' is considered De Bernard's greatest work.  The plot
turns on an attachment between a married woman and the hero of the story.
The book has nothing that can justly offend, the incomparable sketches of
Marillac and Mademoiselle de Corandeuil are admirable; Gerfaut and
Bergenheim possess pronounced originality, and the author is, so to
speak, incarnated with the hero of his romance.

The most uncritical reader can not fail to notice the success with which
Charles de Bernard introduces people of rank and breeding into his
stories.  Whether or not he drew from nature, his portraits of this kind
are exquisitely natural and easy.  It is sufficient to say that he is the
literary Sir Joshua Reynolds of the post-revolution vicomtes and
marquises.  We can see that his portraits are faithful; we must feel that
they are at the same time charming.  Bernard is an amiable and spirited
'conteur' who excels in producing an animated spectacle for a refined and
selected public, whether he paints the ridiculousness or the misery of
humanity.

The works of Charles de Bernard in wit and urbanity, and in the peculiar
charm that wit and urbanity give, are of the best French type.  To any
elevation save a lofty place in fiction they have no claim; but in that
phase of literature their worth is undisputed, and from many testimonies
it would seem that those whom they most amuse are those who are best
worth amusing.

These novels, well enough as they are known to professed students of
French literature, have, by the mere fact of their age, rather slipped
out of the list of books known to the general reader.  The general reader
who reads for amusement can not possibly do better than proceed to
transform his ignorance of them into knowledge.

                                        JULES CLARETIE
                                   de l'Academie Francaise.



GERFAUT


BOOK 1.


CHAPTER I

THE TRAVELLER

During the first days of the month of September, 1832, a young man about
thirty years of age was walking through one of the valleys in Lorraine
originating in the Vosges mountains.  A little river which, after a few
leagues of its course, flows into the Moselle, watered this wild basin
shut in between two parallel lines of mountains.  The hills in the south
became gradually lower and finally dwindled away into the plain.
Alongside the plateau, arranged in amphitheatres, large square fields
stripped of their harvest lay here and there in the primitive forest; in
other places, innumerable oaks and elms had been dethroned to give place
to plantations of cherry-trees, whose symmetrical rows promised an
abundant harvest.

This contest of nature with industry is everywhere, but is more
pronounced in hilly countries.  The scene changed, however, as one
penetrated farther, and little by little the influence of the soil gained
ascendancy.  As the hills grew nearer together, enclosing the valley in a
closer embrace, the clearings gave way to the natural obduracy of the
soil.  A little farther on they disappeared entirely.  At the foot of one
of the bluffs which bordered with its granite bands the highest plateau
of the mountain, the forest rolled victoriously down to the banks of the
river.

Now came patches of forest, like solid battalions of infantry; sometimes
solitary trees appeared, as if distributed by chance upon the grassy
slopes, or scaling the summit of the steepest rocks like a body of bold
sharpshooters.  A little, unfrequented road, if one can judge from the
scarcity of tracks, ran alongside the banks of the stream, climbing up
and down hills; overcoming every obstacle, it stretched out in almost a
straight line.  One might compare it to those strong characters who mark
out a course in life and imperturbably follow it.  The river, on the
contrary, like those docile and compliant minds that bend to agreeable
emergencies, described graceful curves, obeying thus the caprices of the
soil which served as its bed.

At a first glance, the young man who was walking alone in the midst of
this picturesque country seemed to have nothing remarkable in his dress;
a straw hat, a blue blouse and linen trousers composed his costume.
It would have been very natural to take him for an Alsatian peasant
returning to his village through the Vosges's rough pathways; but a more
attentive glance quickly dispelled this conjecture.  There is something
in the way in which a person wears the plainest costume which betrays the
real man, no matter how he may be clothed.  Thus, nothing could be more
modest than this traveller's blouse, but the absence on collar and
sleeves of the arabesques in white or red thread, the pride of all
village dandies, was sufficient for one to realize that this was not a
fancy costume.

His expressive, but not handsome face was dark, it is true, but it did
not look as if wind or sun had contributed to its complexion; it seemed
rather to have lost by a sedentary life something of the southern
carnation, which had ended by blending these warmer tints into a dead
uniform pallor.  Finally, if, as one may suppose after different
diagnoses, this person had the slightest desire to play the role of
Tyrcis or Amintas, his white hand, as carefully cared for as a pretty
woman's, would have been sufficient to betray him.  It was evident that
the man was above his costume; a rare thing!  The lion's ears pierced the
ass's skin this time.

It was three o'clock in the afternoon; the sky, which had been overcast
all the morning, had assumed, within a few moments, a more sombre aspect;
large clouds were rapidly moving from south to north, rolled one over
another by an ominous wind.  So the traveller, who had just entered the
wildest part of the valley, seemed very little disposed to admire its
fine vegetation and romantic sites.  Impatient to reach the end of his
journey, or fearing the approaching storm, he quickened his steps; but
this pace was not kept long.  At the end of a few moments, having crossed
a small clearing, he found himself at the entrance of a lawn where the
road divided in two directions, one continuing to skirt the river banks,
the other, broader and better built, turning to the left into a winding
ravine.

Which of these two roads should he follow?  He did not know.  The
profound solitude of the place made him fear that he might not meet any
one who could direct him, when the sound of a psalm vigorously chanted
reached his ears from the distance.  Soon it became more distinct, and he
recognized the words, 'In exitu Israel de Egypto', sung at the top of the
lungs by a voice so shrill that it would have irritated the larynx of any
of the sopranos at the Opera.  Its vibrating but sharp tones resounded so
clearly in the dead silence of the forest that a number of stanzas were
finished before the pious musician came in sight.  At last a drove of
cattle appeared through the trees which bordered the road on the left,
walking with a slow, grave step; they were driven by a little shepherd
about nine or ten years of age, who interrupted his song from time to
time to reassemble the members of his flock with heavy blows from his
whip, thus uniting temporal cares with those of a spiritual nature with a
coolness which the most important personages might have envied him.

"Which of these roads leads to Bergenheim?"  called out the traveller
when they were near enough to speak to each other.

"Bergenheim!"  repeated the child, taking off his cotton cap, which was
striped like a rainbow, and adding a few words in an unintelligible
Gallo-Germanic patois.

"You are not French, then?"  asked the stranger, in a disappointed tone.

The shepherd raised his head proudly and replied:

"I am Alsatian, not French!"

The young man smiled at this trait of local patriotism so common then in
the beautiful province by the Rhine; then he thought that pantomime might
be necessary, so he pointed with his finger first at one road, then at
the other:

"There or there, Bergenheim?"  asked he.

The child, in his turn, pointed silently with the tip of his whip to the
banks of the river, designating, at some distance on the other side, a
thicket of woods behind which a slight column of smoke was rising.

"The deuce!"  murmured the stranger, "it seems that I have gone astray;
if the chateau is on the other side, where can I establish my ambuscade?"

The shepherd seemed to understand the traveller's embarrassment.  Gazing
at him with his intelligent blue eyes, he traced, with the tip of his toe
in the middle of the road, a furrow across which he rounded his whip like
the arch of a bridge; then he pointed a second time up the river.

"You are an honor to your country, young fellow," exclaimed the stranger;
"there is the material in you to make one of Cooper's redskins."  As he
said these words he threw a piece of money into the child's cap and
walked rapidly away in the direction indicated.

The Alsatian stood motionless for a few moments with one hand in his
blond hair and his eyes fastened upon the piece of silver which shone
like a star in the bottom of his cap; when the one whom he considered as
a model of extraordinary generosity had disappeared behind the trees, he
gave vent to his joy by heavy blows from his whip upon the backs of the
cattle, then he resumed his way, singing in a still more triumphant tone:
'Mantes exultaverunt ut arites', and jumping higher himself than all the
hills and rams in the Bible.

The young man had not walked more than five minutes before he recognized
the correctness of the directions he had received.  The ground which he
had passed over was a field covered with clumps of low trees; it was easy
to see by its disc-like shape that it had been formed by successive
alluvia, at the expense of the other shore, which had been incessantly
worn away by the stream.  This sort of flat, level peninsula was crossed
in a straight line by the road, which deviated from the river at the
point where the two roads came together again, like the cross and string
of a bow at its extremity.  The trees, becoming thinner, revealed a
perspective all the more wonderful as it was unexpected.  While the eye
followed the widening stream, which disappeared in the depths of a
mountainous gorge, a new prospect suddenly presented itself on the right
upon the other shore.

A second valley, smaller than the first and in measure its vassal, formed
an amphitheatre the crest of which was bordered by a fringe of
perpendicular rocks as white as dried bones.  Under this crown, which
rendered it almost inaccessible, the little valley was resplendent in its
wealth of evergreen trees, oaks with their knotty branches, and its fresh
green turf.

Taken as a whole, it was a foundation worthy of the picturesque edifice
which met one's eye in the foreground, and at which the traveller gazed
with extreme interest.

At the junction of the two valleys stood an enormous building, half
manorial, half monastic in appearance.  The shore formed, at this point,
for an extent of several hundred feet, a bluff whose edge plunged
vertically into the river.  The chateau and its outbuildings rested upon
this solid base.  The principal house was a large parallelogram of very
old construction, but which had evidently been almost entirely rebuilt at
the beginning of the sixteenth century.  The stones, of grayish granite
which abounds in the Vosges, were streaked with blue and violet veins,
and gave the facade a sombre aspect, increased by the scarcity of
windows, some of which were 'a la Palladio', others almost as narrow as
loop-holes.  An immense roof of red tile, darkened by rain, projected
several feet over the whole front, as is still to be seen in old cities
in the North.  Thanks to this projecting weather-board, the apartments
upon the upper floor were shaded from the sun's rays, like those persons
who have weak eyes and who protect them from a strong light by wearing a
green shade.

The view which this melancholy dwelling presented from the place where
the traveller had first seen it, was one which made it appear to the best
advantage; it seemed, from this point, to come immediately out of the
river, built as it was upon the very curb of the bluffs, at this place at
least thirty feet high.  This elevation, added to that of the building,
effaced the lack of proportion of the roof and gave to the whole a most
imposing appearance; it seemed as if the rocks were a part of the
building to which it served as foundation, for the stones had ended by
assuming the same color, and it would have been difficult to discover the
junction of man's work and that of nature, had it not been outlined by a
massive iron balcony running across the entire length of the first story,
whence one could enjoy the pleasure of line-fishing.  Two round towers
with pointed roofs stood at each corner of the facade and seemed to gaze
with proud satisfaction at their own reflection in the water.

A long line of sycamore-trees skirted the banks of the river, beginning
from the foot of the chateau, and forming the edge of a park which
extended to the back of the double valley.  A little wooden bridge
connected this sort of avenue with the road the traveller had just passed
over; but the latter did not seem disposed to profit by this silent
invitation to which large raindrops gave more emphasis.  He was so
absorbed in his meditation that, to arouse him, it needed the sound of a
gruff voice behind him uttering these words:

"That is what I call an ugly castle!  It is hardly as good as our common
country houses around Marseilles."

The stranger turned quickly around and found himself face to face with a
man wearing a gray cap and carrying his coat upon his shoulder, as
workmen do in the South.  He held in his hand a knotty stick which had
been recently cut.  The newcomer had a swarthy complexion, harsh
features, and deep-set eyes which gave his face an ugly, false
expression.

"I said an ugly castle," continued he.  "However, the cage is made for
the bird."

"It seems, then, that you do not like its master?"  said the traveller.

"The master!"  repeated the workman, seizing hold of his stick with a
threatening air, "Monsieur le Baron de Bergenheim, as they say!  He is
rich and a nobleman, and I am only a poor carpenter.  Well, then, if you
stay here a few days, you will witness a comical ceremony; I shall make
this brigand repent."

"Brigand!"  exclaimed the stranger, in a surprised tone.  "What has he
done to you?"

"Yes, brigand! you may tell him so from me.  But, by the way," continued
the workman, surveying his companion from head to foot with a searching,
defiant air, "do you happen to be the carpenter who is coming from
Strasbourg?  In that case, I have a few words to say to you.  Lambernier
does not allow any one to take the bread out of his mouth in that way; do
you understand?"

The young man seemed very little moved by this declaration.

"I am not a carpenter," said he, smiling, "and I have no wish for your
work."

"Truly, you do not look as if you had pushed a plane very often.  It
seems that in your business one does not spoil one's hands.  You are a
workman about as much as I am pope."

This remark made the one to whom it was addressed feel in as bad a humor
as an author does when he finds a grammatical error in one of his books.

"So you work at the chateau, then," said he, finally, to change the
conversation.

"For six months I have worked in that shanty," replied the workman;
"I am the one who carved the new woodwork, and I will say it is well
done.  Well, this great wild boar of a Bergenheim turned me out of the
house yesterday as if I had been one of his dogs."

"He doubtless had his reasons."

"I tell you, I will crush him--reasons!  Damn it!  They told him I talked
too often with his wife's maid and quarrelled with the servants, a pack
of idlers!  Did he not forbid my putting my foot upon his land?  I am
upon his land now; let him come and chase me off; let him come, he will
see how I shall receive him.  Do you see this stick?  I have just cut it
in his own woods to use it on himself!"

The young man no longer listened to the workman; his eyes were turned
toward the castle, whose slightest details he studied, as if he hoped
that in the end the stone would turn into glass and let him see the
interior.  If this curiosity had any other object than the architecture
and form of the building it was not gratified.  No human figure came to
enliven this sad, lonely dwelling.  All the windows were closed, as if
the house were uninhabited.  The baying of dogs, probably imprisoned in
their kennel, was the only sound which came to break the strange silence,
and the distant thunder, with its dull rumbling, repeated by the echoes,
responded plaintively, and gave a lugubrious character to the scene.

"When one speaks of the devil he appears," said the workman, suddenly,
with an emotion which gave the lie to his recent bravado; "if you wish to
see this devil incarnate of a Bergenheim, just turn your head.  Good-by."

At these words he leaped a ditch at the left of the road and disappeared
in the bushes.  The stranger also seemed to feel an impression very like
that of Lambernier's as he saw a man on horseback advancing on a gallop.
Instead of waiting for him, he darted into the field which descended to
the river, and hid behind a group of trees.

The Baron, who was not more than thirty-three years of age, had one of
those energetic, handsome faces whose type seems to belong particularly
to old military families.  His bright, blond hair and clear, blue eyes
contrasted strongly with his ruddy complexion; his aspect was severe, but
noble and imposing, in spite of his negligent dress, which showed that
indifference to matters of personal attire which becomes habitual with
country lords.  His tall figure was beginning to grow stout, and that
increased his athletic appearance.  He sat very erect in his saddle, and
from the way in which he straightened out his long legs against the sides
of his beast, one suspected that he could, if necessary, repeat the
Marshal de Saxe's feats of skill.  He stopped his horse suddenly at the
very spot which the two men had just vacated and called out in a voice
which would startle a regiment of cuirassiers:

"Here, Lambernier!"

The carpenter hesitated a moment, at this imperative call, between the
fear which he could not overcome and shame at fleeing from a single man
in the presence of a witness; finally this last feeling triumphed.
He returned to the edge of the road without saying a word, and stationed
himself in an insolent way face to face with the Baron, with his hat
drawn down over his ears, and grasped through precaution the knotty stick
which served him as a weapon.

"Lambernier," said the master of the castle, in a severe tone, "your
account was settled yesterday; was it not paid in full?  Is anything due
you?"

"I ask nothing of you," replied the workman, brusquely.

"In that case, why are you wandering about my place when I forbade you?"

"I am upon the highway, nobody can prevent me from passing there."

"You are upon my land, and you came out of my woods," replied the Baron,
emphasizing his words with the firmness of a man who would permit no
violation of his rights as a landowner.

"The ground upon which I walk is mine," said the workman, in his turn, as
he struck the end of his stick upon the ground as if to take possession.
This gesture attracted Bergenheim's attention, and his eyes flashed with
a sudden light at the sight of the stick which Lambernier held.

"You scoundrel!"  he exclaimed, "you probably regard my trees also as
your own.  Where did you cut that stick?"

"Go and find out," said the workman, accompanying his reply with a
flourish of the stick.

The Baron coolly dismounted, threw the bridle over his horse's neck,
walked up to the workman, who had taken the position of a practised
pugilist to receive him, and, without giving him time to strike, he
disarmed him with one hand by a blow which would have been sufficient to
uproot the beech rod before it was metamorphosed into a club; with the
other hand he seized the man by the collar and gave him a shaking that it
was as impossible to struggle against as if it had been caused by a
steam-engine.  Obeying this irresistible force, in spite of his kicking,
Lambernier described a dozen circles around his adversary, while the
latter set these off with some of the hardest blows from green wood that
ever chastised an insolent fellow.  This gymnastic exercise ended by a
sleight-of-hand trick, which, after making the carpenter pirouette for
the last time, sent him rolling head-first into a ditch, the bottom of
which, fortunately for him, was provided with a bed of soft mud.  When
the punishment was over, Bergenheim remounted his horse as tranquilly as
he had dismounted it, and continued his way toward the chateau.

The young man, in the midst of the thicket where he was concealed, had
lost no detail of this rural scene.  He could not help having a feeling
of admiration for this energetic representative of the feudal ages who,
with no fear of any court of justice or other bourgeois inventions, had
thus exerted over his own domains the summary justice in force in Eastern
countries.

"France has thrashed Gaul," said he, smiling to himself; "if all our men
had this Bergenheim's iron fist many things determined upon to-day might
be called in question.  If I ever have the slightest difficulty with this
Milo de Crotona, he may be sure I shall not choose pugilism as my mode of
discussion."

The storm now burst forth in all its fury.  A dark curtain covered the
whole valley, and the rain fell in torrents.  The Baron put spurs to his
horse, crossed the bridge and, entering the sycamore avenue, was soon out
of sight.  Without paying any attention to Lambernier, who was uttering
imprecations at the bottom of the ditch, into which he was sinking deeper
and deeper, the stranger went to seek a less illusive shelter than the
trees under which he had taken his position; but at this moment his
attention was attracted to one side of the castle.  A window, or rather
a glass door, just then opened upon the balcony, and a young woman in a
rose-colored negligee appeared upon the dark facade.  It would be
impossible to imagine anything more fresh or charming than this
apparition at such a moment.  Leaning upon the balustrade, the young
woman rested her face upon a hand which was as white as a lily, and her
finger smoothed with a mechanical caress the ringlets of chestnut hair
that lay upon her forehead, while her large brown eyes gazed into the
depths of the clouds from which the lightning was flashing, and with
which they vied in brilliancy.  A poet would have said it was Miranda
evoked by the tempest.

The stranger parted the branches before him to get a better view; at the
same instant he was blinded by a terrible flash which lighted the whole
valley and was immediately followed by a terrific crash.  When he opened
his eyes the chateau which he believed to be at the bottom of the river
stood still upright, solemn, and firm as before; but the lady in the
rose-colored gown had disappeared.




CHAPTER II

THE CASTLE OF BERGENHEIM

The appearance of the room into which the lady had precipitately entered,
when startled by the thunder, corresponded with the edifice to which it
belonged.  It was a very large room, longer than it was wide, and lighted
by three windows, the middle one of which opened from top to bottom like
a door and led out upon the balcony.  The woodwork and ceiling were in
chestnut, which time had polished and a skilful hand had ornamented with
a profusion of allegorical figures.  The beauty of this work of art was
almost entirely concealed by a very remarkable decoration which covered
every side of the room, consisting of one of the most glorious
collections of family portraits which a country chateau of the nineteenth
century could offer.

The first of these portraits hung opposite the windows at the right of
the entrance door and was that of a chevalier in full armor, whose teeth
gleamed from under his long moustache like those of an untamed tiger.
Beginning with this formidable figure, which bore the date 1247, forty
others of about the same dimensions were placed in order according to
their dates.  It seemed as if each period had left its mark upon those of
the personages it had seen live and die, and had left something of its
own character there.

There were more gallant cavaliers cut after the same pattern as the
first.  Their stern, harsh faces, red beards, and broad, square military
shoulders told that by swordthrusts and broken lances they had founded
the nobility of their race.  An heroic preface to this family biography!
A rough and warlike page of the Middle Ages!  After these proud men-of-
arms came several figures of a less ferocious aspect, but not so
imposing.  In these portraits of the fifteenth century beards had
disappeared with the sword.  In those wearing caps and velvet toques,
silk robes and heavy gold chains supporting a badge of the same metal,
one recognized lords in full and tranquil possession of the fiefs won by
their fathers, landowners who had degenerated a little and preferred
mountain life in a manor to the chances of a more hazardous existence.
These pacific gentlemen were, for the most part, painted with the left
hand gloved and resting upon the hip; the right one was bare, a sort of
token of disarmament which one might take for a painter's epigram.
Some of them had allowed their favorite dogs to share the honors of the
picture.  All in this group indicated that this branch of the family had
many points of resemblance with the more illustrious faces.  It was the
period of idle kings.

A half dozen solemn personages with gold-braided hats and long red robes
bordered with ermine, and wearing starched ruffles, occupied one corner
of the parlor near the windows.  These worthy advisers of the Dukes of
Lorraine explained the way in which the masters of the chateau had
awakened from the torpor in which they had been plunged for several
generations, in order to participate in the affairs of their country and
enter a more active sphere.

Here the portraits assumed the proportions of history.  Did not this
branch, descended from warlike stock, seem like a fragment taken from the
European annals?  Was it not a symbolical image of the progress of
civilization, of regular legislation struggling against barbaric customs?
Thanks to these respectable counsellors and judges, one might reverse the
motto: 'Non solum toga', in favor of their race.  But it did not seem as
if these bearded ancestors looked with much gratitude upon this
parliamentary flower added to their feudal crest.  They appeared to look
down from the height of their worm-eaten frames upon their enrobed
descendants with that disdainful smile with which the peers of France
used to greet men of law the first time they were called to sit by their
side, after being for so long a time at their feet.

In the space between the windows and upon the remaining woodwork was a
crowd of military men, with here and there an Abbe with cross and mitre,
a Commander of Malta, and a solemn Canon, sterile branches of this
genealogical tree.  Several among the military ones wore sashes and
plumes of the colors of Lorraine; others, even before the union of this
province to France, had served the latter country; there were lieutenant-
colonels of infantry and cavalry; some dressed in blue coats lined with
buff serge and little round patches of black plush, which served as the
uniform for the dragoons of the Lorraine legion.

Last of all was a young man with an agreeable face, who smiled
superciliously from under a vast wig of powdered hair; a rose was in the
buttonhole of his green cloth pelisse with orange facings, a red
sabrecache hung against his boots a little lower than the hilt of his
sabre.  The costume represented a sprightly officer of the Royal Nassau
hussars.  The portrait was hung on the left of the entrance door and only
separated by it from his great-grandfather of 1247, whom he might have
assisted, had these venerable portraits taken some night a fancy to
descend from their frames to execute a dance such as Hoffmann dreamed.

These two persons were the alpha and the omega of this genealogical tree,
the two extreme links of the chain-one, the root buried in the sands of
time; the other, the branch which had blossomed at the top.  Fate had
created a tragical resemblance between these two lives, separated by more
than five centuries.  The chevalier in coat-of-mail had been killed in
the battle of the Mansourah during the first crusade of St. Louis.  The
young man with the supercilious smile had mounted the scaffold during the
Reign of Terror, holding between his lips a rose, his usual decoration
for his coat.  The history of the French nobility was embodied in these
two men, born in blood, who had died in blood.

Large gilded frames of Gothic style surrounded all these portraits.  At
the right, on the bottom of each picture was painted a little escutcheon
having for its crest a baronial coronet and for supports two wild men
armed with clubs.  The field was red; with its three bulls' heads in
silver, it announced to people well versed in heraldic art that they had
before them the lineaments of noble and powerful lords, squires of
Reisnach-Bergenheim, lords of Reisnach in Suabia, barons of the Holy
Empire, lords of Sapois, Labresse, Gerbamont, etc., counts of Bergenheim,
the latter title granted them by Louis XV, chevaliers of Lorraine, etc.,
etc., etc.

This ostentatious enumeration was not needed in order to recognize the
kindred of all these noble personages.  Had they been mingled with other
portraits, a careful observer would have promptly distinguished and
reunited them, so pronounced were the family features common to them all.
The furniture of the room was not unworthy of these proud defunct ones.
High-backed chairs and enormous armchairs, dating from the time of Louis
XIII; more modern sofas, which had been made to harmonize with the older
furniture, filled the room.  They were covered with flowered tapestry in
thousands of shades, which must have busied the white hands of the ladies
of the house for two or three generations past.

The row of portraits was interrupted on one side by a large fireplace of
grayish granite, which was too high for one to hang a mirror above or to
place ornaments upon its mantel.  Opposite was an ebony console inlaid
with ivory, upon which was placed one of those elegant clocks whose
delicate and original chased work has not been eclipsed by any modern
workmanship.  Two large Japanese vases accompanied it; the whole was
reflected in an antique mirror which hung above the console; its edges
were bevelled, doubtless in order to cause one to admire the thickness of
the glass.

It would be impossible to imagine a stronger contrast than that of this
Gothic room with the lady in the rose-colored gown who had just entered
it so precipitately.  The fire upon the hearth threw a warm light over
the old portraits, and it was heightened by the heavy, red damask
curtains which hung by the windows.  The light sometimes softened,
sometimes revivified by some sudden flash of the flames, glanced over the
scowling faces and red beards, enlivening the eyes and giving a
supernatural animation to those lifeless canvases.  One would have said
that the cold, grave faces looked with curiosity at the young woman with
graceful movements and cool garments, whom Aladdin's genii seemed to have
transported from the most elegant boudoir on the Chaussee d'Antin, and
thrown, still frightened, into the midst of this strange assembly.

"You are crazy, Clemence, to leave that window open!"  said at this
moment an old voice issuing from an armchair placed in a corner near the
fireplace.

The person who broke the charm of this silent scene was a woman of sixty
or seventy years of age, according to the gallantry of the calculator.
It was easy to judge that she was tall and thin as she lay, rather than
sat, in her chair with its back lowered down.  She was dressed in a
yellowish-brown gown.  A false front as black as jet, surmounted by a cap
with poppy-colored ribbons, framed her face.  She had sharp, withered
features, and the brilliancy of her primitive freshness had been
converted into a blotched and pimpled complexion which affected above all
her nose and cheek-bones, but whose ardor had been dimmed only a trifle
by age.  There was something about the whole face as crabbed, sour, and
unkind as if she had daily bathed it in vinegar.  One could read old maid
in every feature!  Besides, a slight observation of her ways would have
destroyed all lingering doubt in this respect.

A large, coffee-colored pug-dog was lying before the fire.  This
interesting animal served as a footstool for his mistress, stretched in
her easy-chair, and recalled to mind the lions which sleep at the foot of
chevaliers in their Gothic tombs.  As a pug-dog and an old maid pertain
to each other, it was only necessary, in order to divine this venerable
lady's state, to read the name upon the golden circlet which served as a
collar for the dog: "Constance belongs to Mademoiselle de Corandeuil."

Before the younger lady, who was leaning upon the back of a chair,
seeming to breathe with difficulty, had time to reply, she received a
second injunction.

"But, aunt," said she, at last, "it was a horrible crash!  Did you not
hear it?"

"I am not so deaf as that yet," replied the old maid.  "Shut that window;
do you not know that currents of air attract lightning?"

Clemence obeyed, dropping the curtain to shut out the flashes of
lightning which continued to dart through the heavens; she then
approached the fireplace.

"Since you are so afraid of lightning," said her aunt; "which, by the
way, is perfectly ridiculous in a Corandeuil, what induced you to go out
upon the balcony?  The sleeve of your gown is wet.  That is the way one
gets cold; afterward, there is nothing but an endless array of syrups and
drugs.  You ought to change your gown and put on something warmer.  Who
would ever think of dressing like that in such weather as this?"

"I assure you, aunt, it is not cold.  It is because you have a habit of
always being near the fire--"

"Ah! habit! when you are my age you will not hint at such a thing.  Now,
everything goes wonderfully well; you never listen to my advice--you go
out in the wind and rain with that flighty Aline and your husband, who
has no more sense than his sister; you will pay for it later.  Open the
curtains, I pray; the storm is over, and I wish to read the Gazette."

The young woman obeyed a second time and stood with her forehead pressed
against the glass.  The distant rumbling of the thunder announced the end
of the storm; but a few flashes still traversed the horizon.

"Aunt," said she, after a moment's silence, "come and look at the
Montigny rocks; when the lightning strikes them they look like a file of
silver columns or a procession of ghosts."

"What a romantic speech," growled the old lady, never taking her eyes
from her paper.

"I assure you I am not romantic the least in the world," replied
Clemence.  "I simply find the storm a distraction, and here, you know,
there is no great choice of pleasures."

"Then you find it dull?"

"Oh, aunt, horribly so!"  At these words, pronounced with a heartfelt
accent, the young woman dropped into an armchair.

Mademoiselle de Corandeuil took off her eye-glasses, put the paper upon
the table and gazed for several moments at her pretty niece's face, which
was tinged with a look of deep melancholy.  She then straightened herself
up in her chair, and, leaning forward, asked in a low tone:

"Have you had any trouble with your husband?"

"If so, I should not be so bored," replied Clemence, in a gay tone, which
she repented immediately, for she continued more calmly:

"No, aunt; Christian is kind, very kind; he is very much attached to me,
and full of good-humor and attentions.  You have seen how he has allowed
me to arrange my apartments to suit myself, even taking down the
partition and enlarging the windows; and yet, you know how much he clings
to everything that is old about the house.  He tries to do everything for
my pleasure.  Did he not go to Strasbourg the other day to buy a pony for
me, because I thought Titania was too skittish?  It would be impossible
to show greater kindness."

"Your husband," suddenly interrupted Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, for she
held the praise of others in sovereign displeasure, "is a Bergenheim like
all the Bergenheims present, past, and future, including your little
sister-in-law, who appears more as if she had been brought up with boys
than at the 'Sacred Heart.'  He is a worthy son of his father there,"
said she, pointing to one of the portraits near the young Royal-Nassau
officer; "and he was the most brutal, unbearable, and detestable of all
the dragoons in Lorraine; so much so that he got into three quarrels at
Nancy in one month, and at Metz, over a game of checkers, he killed the
poor Vicomte de Megrigny, who was worth a hundred of him and danced so
well!  Some one described Bergenheim as being 'proud as a peacock, as
stubborn as a mule, and as furious as a lion!'  Ugly race!  ugly race!
What I say to you now, Clemence, is to excuse your husband's faults, for
it would be time lost to try to correct them.  However, all men are
alike; and since you are Madame de Bergenheim, you must accept your fate
and bear it as well as possible.  And then, if you have your troubles,
you still have your good aunt to whom you can confide them and who will
not allow you to be tyrannized over.  I will speak to your husband."

Clemence saw, from the first words of this tirade, that she must arm
herself with resignation; for anything which concerned the Bergenheims
aroused one of the hobbies which the old maid rode with a most complacent
spite; so she settled herself back in her chair like a person who would
at least be comfortable while she listened to a tiresome discourse, and
busied herself during this lecture caressing with the tip of a very
shapely foot the top of one of the andirons.

"But, aunt," said she at last, when the tirade was over, and she gave a
rather drawling expression to her voice, "I can not understand why you
have taken this idea into your head that Christian renders me unhappy.
I repeat it, it is impossible that one should be kinder to me than he,
and, on my side, I have the greatest respect and friendship for him."

"Very well, if he is such a pearl of husbands, if you live so much like
turtle-doves-and, to tell the truth, I do not believe a word of it--what
causes this ennui of which you complain and which has been perfectly
noticeable for some time?  When I say ennui, it is more than that; it is
sadness, it is grief?  You grow thinner every day; you are as pale as a
ghost; just at this moment, your complexion is gone; you will end by
being a regular fright.  They say that it is the fashion to be pale
nowadays; a silly notion, indeed, but it will not last, for complexion
makes the woman."

The old lady said this like a person who had her reasons for not liking
pale complexions, and who gladly took pimples for roses.

Madame de Bergenheim bowed her head as if to acquiesce in this decision,
and then resumed in her drawling voice:

"I know that I am very unreasonable, and I am often vexed with myself for
having so little control over my feelings, but it is beyond my strength.
I have a tired sensation, a disgust for everything, something which I can
not overcome.  It is an inexplicable physical and moral languor,
for which, for this reason, I see no remedy.  I am weary and I suffer;
I am sure it will end in my being ill.  Sometimes I wish I were dead.
However, I have really no reason to be unhappy.  I suppose I am happy--
I ought to be happy."

"Truly, I can not understand in the least the women of today.  Formerly,
upon exciting occasions, we had a good nervous attack and all was over;
the crisis passed, we became amiable again, put on rouge and went to a
ball.  Now it is languor, ennui, stomach troubles--all imagination and
humbug!  The men are just as bad, and they call it spleen!  Spleen!
a new discovery, an English importation!  Fine things come to us from
England; to begin with, the constitutional government!  All this is
perfectly ridiculous.  As for you, Clemence, you ought to put an end to
such childishness.  Two months ago, in Paris, you did not have any of the
rest that you enjoy here.  I had serious reasons for wishing to delay my
departure; my apartment to refurnish, my neuralgia which still troubles
me--and Constance, who had just been in the hands of the doctor, was
hardly in a condition to travel, poor creature!  You would listen to
nothing; we had to submit to your caprices, and now--"

"But, aunt, you admitted yourself that it was the proper thing for me to
do, to join my husband.  Was it not enough, and too much, to have left
him to pass the entire winter alone here while I was dancing in Paris?"

"It was very proper, of course, and I do not blame you.  But why does the
very thing you so much desired two months ago bore you so terribly now?
In Paris you talked all the time of Bergenheim, longed only for
Bergenheim, you had duties to fulfil, you wished to be with your husband;
you bothered and wore me out with your conjugal love.  When back at
Bergenheim, you dream and sigh for Paris.  Do not shake your head; I am
an old aunt to whom you pay no heed, but who sees clearly yet.  Will you
do me the favor to tell me what it is that you regret in Paris at this
time of the year, when there are no balls or parties, and not one human
being worth visiting, for all the people you know are in the country?  Is
it because--"

Mademoiselle de Corandeuil did not finish her sentence, but she put a
severity into these three words which seemed to condense all the
quintessence of prudery that a celibacy of sixty years could coagulate in
an old maid's heart.

Clemence raised her eyes to her aunt's face as if to demand an
explanation.

It was such a calm, steady glance that the latter could not help being
impressed by it.

"Well," said she, softening her voice, "there is no necessity for putting
on such queenly airs; we are here alone, and you know that I am a kind
aunt to you.  Now, then, speak freely--have you left anything or any
person in Paris, the remembrance of which makes your sojourn here more
tiresome than it really is?  Any of your adorers of the winter?"

"What an idea, aunt!  Did I have any adorers?"  exclaimed Madame de
Bergenheim, quickly, as if trying to conceal by a smile the rosy flush
that mounted to her cheeks.

"And what if you should have some, child?"  continued the old maid, to
whom curiosity lent an unaccustomed coaxing accent to her voice, "where
would be the harm?  Is it forbidden to please?  When one is of good
birth, must one not live in society and hold one's position there?  One
need not bury one's self in a desert at twenty-three years of age, and
you really are charming enough to inspire love; you understand, I do not
say, to experience it; but when one is young and pretty conquests are
made almost unwittingly.  You are not the first of the family to whom
that has happened; you are a Corandeuil.  Now, then, my good Clemence,
what troubled heart is pining for you in Paris?  Is it Monsieur de
Mauleon?"

"Monsieur de Mauleon!"  exclaimed the young woman, bursting into
laughter; "he, a heart! and a troubled one, too!  Oh, aunt, you do him
honor!  Monsieur de Mauleon, who is past forty-five years old and wears
stays! an audacious man who squeezes his partners' hands in the dance and
looks at them with passionate glances!  Oh! Monsieur de Mauleon!"

Mademoiselle de Corandeuil sanctioned by a slight grimace of her thin
lips her niece's burst of gayety, when, with one hand upon her heart, she
rolled her sparkling eyes in imitation of the languishing air of her
unfortunate adorer.

"Perhaps it is Monsieur d'Arzenac?"

"Monsieur d'Arzenac is certainly very nice; he has perfect manners; it
may be that he did not disdain to chat with me; on my side, I found his
conversation very entertaining; but you may rest assured that he did not
think of me nor I of him.  Besides, you know that he is engaged to marry
Mademoiselle de la Neuville."

"Monsieur de Gerfaut?"  continued Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, with the
persistency with which aged people follow an idea, and as if determined
to pass in review all the young men of their acquaintance until she had
discovered her niece's secret.

The latter was silent a moment before replying.

"How can you think of such a thing, aunt?"  said she at last, "a man with
such a bad reputation, who writes books that one hardly dares read, and
plays that it's almost a sin to witness!  Did you not hear Madame de
Pontivers say that a young woman who cared for her reputation would
permit his visits very rarely?"

"Madame de Pontivers is a prude, whom I can not endure, with her show of
little, grimaces and her pretentious, outrageous mock-modesty.  Did she
not take it into her head this winter to constitute me her chaperon?
I gave her to understand that a widow forty years old was quite old
enough to go about alone!  She has a mania for fearing that she may be
compromised.  The idea of turning up her nose at Monsieur de Gerfaut!
What presumption!  He certainly is too clever ever to solicit the honor
of being bored to death in her house; for he is clever, very clever.  I
never could understand your dislike for him, nor your haughty manner of
treating him; especially, during the latter part of our stay in Paris."

"One is not mistress of one's dislikes or affections, aunt.  But to reply
to your questions, I will say that you may rest assured that none of
these gentlemen, nor any of those whom you might name, has the slightest
effect upon my state of mind.  I am bored because it probably is my
nature to need distractions, and there are none in this deserted place.
It is an involuntary disagreeableness, for which I reproach myself and
which I hope will pass away.  Rest assured, that the root of the evil
does not lie in my heart."

Mademoiselle de Corandeuil understood by the cold and rather dry tone in
which these words were spoken that her niece wished to keep her secret,
if she had one; she could not prevent a gesture of anger as she saw her
advances thus repelled, but felt that she was no wiser than when she
began the conversation.  She manifested her disappointment by pushing the
dog aside with her foot--the poor thing was perfectly innocent!--and in a
cross tone, which was much more familiar than her former coaxing one, she
continued:

"Very well, since I am wrong, since your husband adores you and you him,
since, to sum it all up, your heart is perfectly tranquil and free, your
conduct is devoid of common-sense, and I advise you to change it.  I warn
you that all this hypochondria, paleness, and languor are caprices which
are very disagreeable to others.  There is a Provence proverb which says:
Vaillance de Blacas, prudence de Pontevez, caprice de Corandeuil.  If
there was not such a saying, it should be created for you, for you have
something incomprehensible enough in your character to make a saint
swear.  If anybody should know you, it is I, who brought you up.  I do
not wish to reproach you, but you gave me trouble enough; you were a most
wayward, capricious, and fantastic creature, a spoiled child--"

"Aunt," interrupted Clemence, with heightened color in her pale cheeks,
"you have told me of my faults often enough for me to know them, and, if
they were not corrected, it was not your fault, for you never spared me
scoldings.  If I had not been so unfortunate as to lose my mother when I
was a baby, I should not have given you so much trouble."

Tears came into the young woman's eyes, but she had enough control over
herself to keep them from streaming down her burning cheeks.  Taking a
journal from the table, she opened it, in order to conceal her emotion
and to put an end to this conversation, which had become painful to her.
Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, on her side, carefully replaced her eye-
glasses upon her nose, and, solemnly stretching herself upon her chair,
she turned over the leaves of the 'Gazette de France,' which she had
neglected so long.

Silence reigned for some moments in the room.  The aunt apparently read
the paper very attentively.  Her niece sat motionless, with her eyes
fastened upon the yellow cover of the last number of 'La Mode,' which had
chanced to fall into her hands.  She aroused herself at last from her
revery and carelessly turned over the leaves of the review in a manner
which showed how little interest she felt in it.  As she turned the first
page a surprised cry escaped her, and her eyes were fastened upon the
pamphlet with eager curiosity.  Upon the frontispiece, where the Duchesse
de Berry's coat-of-arms is engraved, and in the middle of the shield,
which was left empty at this time by the absence of the usual fleurs de
lys, was sketched with a pencil a bird whose head was surmounted by a
baron's coronet.

Curious to know what could have caused her niece so much surprise,
Mademoiselle de Corandeuil stretched out her neck and gazed for an
instant upon the page without seeing, at first, anything extraordinary,
but finally her glance rested upon the armorial bearings, and she
discovered the new feature added to the royal Bourbon coat-of-arms.

"A cock!"  exclaimed she, after a moment's reflection; "a cock upon
Madame's shield!  What can that mean, 'bon Dieu'! and it is not engraved
nor lithographed; it is drawn with a pencil."

"It is not a cock, it is a crowned gerfaut," said Madame de Bergenheim.

"A gerfaut!  How do you know what a gerfaut is?  At Corandeuil, in your
grandfather's time, there was a falconry, and I have seen gerfauts there,
but you--I tell you it is a cock, an old French cock; ugly thing!  What
you take for a coronet--and it really does resemble one--is a badly drawn
cock's comb.  How did this horrid creature come to be there?  I should
like to know if such pretty tricks are permitted at the postoffice.
People protest against the 'cabinet noir', but it is a hundred times
worse if one is permitted to outrage with impunity peaceable families in
their own homes.  I mean to find out who has played this trick.  Will you
be so kind as to ring the bell?"

"It really is very strange!"  said Madame de Bergenheim, pulling the
bell-rope with a vivacity which showed that she shared, if not the
indignation, at least the curiosity of her aunt.

A servant in green livery appeared.

"Who went to Remiremont yesterday for the newspapers?"  asked
Mademoiselle de Corandeuil.

"It was Pere Rousselet, Mademoiselle," replied the servant.

"Where is Monsieur de Bergenheim?"

"Monsieur le Baron is playing billiards with Mademoiselle Aline."

"Send Leonard Rousselet here."

And Mademoiselle de Corandeuil settled herself back in her chair with the
dignity of a chancellor about to hold court.




CHAPTER III

A DIVIDED HOUSEHOLD

The servants in the castle of Bergenheim formed a family whose members
were far from living in harmony.  The Baron managed his household
himself, and employed a large number of day-laborers, farm servants, and
kitchen-girls, whom the liveried servants treated with great disdain.
The rustics, on their side, resisted these privileged lackeys and called
them "coxcombs" and "Parisians," sometimes accompanying these remarks
with the most expressive blows.  Between these tribes of sworn enemies
a third class, much less numerous, found them selves in a critical
position; these were the two servants brought by Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil.  It was fortunate for them that their mistress liked large,
vigorous men, and had chosen them for their broad, military shoulders;
but for that it would have been impossible for them to come out of their
daily quarrels safe and sound.

The question of superiority between the two households had been the first
apple of discord; a number of personal quarrels followed to inflame them.
They fought for their colors the whole time; the Bergenheim livery was
red, the Corandeuil green.  There were two flags; each exalted his own
while throwing that of his adversaries in the mud.  Greenhorn and crab
were jokes; cucumber and lobster were insults.

Such were the gracious terms exchanged every day between the two parties.
In the midst of this civil war, which was carefully concealed from their
masters' eyes, whose severity they feared, lived one rather singular
personage.  Leonard Rousselet, Pere Rousselet, as he was generally
called, was an old peasant who, disheartened with life, had made various
efforts to get out of his sphere, but had never succeeded in doing so.
Having been successively hairdresser, sexton, school-teacher, nurse, and
gardener, he had ended, when sixty years old, by falling back to the very
point whence he started.  He had no particular employment in M. de
Bergenheim's house; he went on errands, cared for the gardens, and
doctored the mules and horses; he was a tall man, about as much at ease
in his clothing as a dry almond in its shell.  A long, dark, yellow coat
usually hung about the calves of his legs, which were covered with long,
blue woollen stockings, and looked more like vine-poles than human legs;
a conformation which furnished daily jokes for the other servants, to
which the old man deigned no response save a disdainful smile, grumbling
through his teeth, "Menials, peasants without education."  This latter
speech expressed the late gardener's scorn, for it had been his greatest
grief to pass for an uneducated man; and he had gathered from his various
conditions a singularly dignified and pretentious way of speaking.

In spite of his self-confidence, it was not without some emotion that
Leonard Rousselet responded to this call to appear in the drawing-room
before the person he most feared in the chateau.  His bearing showed this
feeling when he presented himself at the drawing-room door, where he
stood as grave and silent as Banquo's ghost.  Constance arose at sight of
this fantastic figure, barked furiously and darted toward a pair of legs
for which she seemed to share the irreverence of the liveried servants;
but the texture of the blue stocking and the flesh which covered the
tibia were rather too hard morsels for the dowager's teeth; she was
obliged to give up the attack and content herself with impotent barks,
while the old man, who would gladly have given a month's wages to break
her jaw with the tip of his, boot, caressed her with his hand, saying,
"Softly, pretty dear!  softly, pretty little creature!"  in a
hypocritical tone.

This courtier-like conduct touched the old lady's heart and softened the
severe look upon her face.

"Stop your noise, Constance," said she, "lie down beside your mistress.
Rousselet, come nearer."

The old man obeyed, walking across the floor with reverential bows, and
taking a position like a soldier presenting arms.

"You were the one," said Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, "who was sent to
Remiremont yesterday?  Did you perform all the commissions that were
given you?"

"It is not among the impossibilities, Mademoiselle, that I may have
neglected some of them," replied the old man, fearing to compromise
himself by a positive affirmative.

"Tell us, then, what you did."

Leonard wiped his nose behind his hat, like a well-bred orator, and,
balancing himself upon his legs in a way not at all Bourbonic, he said:

"I went to the city that morning myself because Monsieur le Baron had
said the night before that he should hunt to-day, and that the groom was
to help Monsieur le Baron drive a wild boar out of the Corne woods.
I reached Remiremont; I went to the butcher's; I purchased five
kilogrammes of dressed goods--"

"Of dressed goods at the butcher's!"  exclaimed Madame de Bergenheim.

"I would say ten pounds of what uneducated people call pork," said
Rousselet, pronouncing this last word in a strangled voice.

"Pass over these details," said Mademoiselle de Corandeuil.  "You went to
the post-office."

"I went to the post-office, where I put in letters for Mademoiselle,
Madame, Monsieur le Baron, and one from Mademoiselle Aline for Monsieur
d'Artigues."

"Aline writing to her cousin!  Did you know that?"  said the old aunt,
turning quickly toward her niece.

"Certainly; they correspond regularly," replied Clemence with a smile
which seemed to say that she saw no harm in it.

The old maid shook her head and protruded her under lip, as much as to
say: We will attend to this another time.

Madame de Bergenheim, who was out of patience at this questioning, began
to speak in a quick tone which was a contrast to her aunt's solemn
slowness.

"Rousselet," said she, "when you took the newspapers out of the office,
did you notice whether the wrappers were intact, or whether they had been
opened?"

The good man half concealed his face in his cravat at this precise
questioning, and it was with embarrassment that he replied, after a
moment's hesitation:

"Certainly, Madame--as to the wrappers--I do not accuse the postmaster--"

"If the journals were sealed when you received them, you are the only one
who could have opened them."

Rousselet straightened himself up to his full height, and, giving to his
nut-cracker face the most dignified look possible, he said in a solemn
tone:

"With due deference to you, Madame, Leonard Rousselet is well known.
Fifty-seven years old on Saint-Hubert's day, I am incapable of opening
newspapers.  When they have been read at the chateau and they send me
with them to the cure, I do not say--perhaps on my way--it is a
recreation--and then the cure is Jean Bartou, son of Joseph Bartou, the
tilemaker.  But to read the newspaper before my masters have done so!
Never!  Leonard Rousselet is an old man incapable of such baseness.
Baptized when a child; fifty-seven years on Saint-Hubert's day."

"When you speak of your pastor, do so in a more becoming manner,"
interrupted Mademoiselle de Colrandeuil, although she herself in private
did not speak of the plebeian priest in very respectful terms.  But if
Joseph Bartou's son was always the son of Joseph Bartou to her, she meant
that he should be Monsieur le Cure to the peasants.

Madame de Bergenheim had not been much affected by Pere Rousselet's
harangue, and shook her head impatiently, saying in an imperative tone:

"I am certain that the newspapers have been opened by you, or by some
person to whom you have given them, and I wish to know at once by whom."

Rousselet dropped his pose of a Roman senator; passing his hand behind
his ears, a familiar gesture with people when in embarrassing positions,
he continued less emphatically:

"I stopped on my way back at La Fauconnerie, at the 'Femme-sans-Tete
Inn'."

"And what were you doing in a tavern?"  interrupted Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil severely.  "You know it is not intended that the servants in
this house should frequent taverns and such low places, which are not
respectable and corrupt the morals of the lower classes."

"Servants!  lower classes!  Old aristocrat!"  growled Rousselet secretly;
but, not daring to show his ill humor, he replied in a bland voice:

"If Mademoiselle had gone the same road that I did, with the same
conveyance, she would know that it is a rather thirsty stretch.  I
stopped at the 'Femme-sans-Tete' to wash the dust down my parched throat.
Whereupon Mademoiselle Reine--the daughter of Madame Gobillot, the
landlady of the inn--Mademoiselle Reine asked me to allow her to look at
the yellow-journal in which there are fashions for ladies; I asked her
why; she said it was so that she might see how they made their bonnets,
gowns, and other finery in Paris.  The frivolity of women!"

Mademoiselle de Corandeuil threw herself back in her chair and gave way
to an access of hilarity in which she rarely indulged.

"Mademoiselle Gobillot reading La Mode!  Mademoiselle Gobillot talking of
gowns, shawls, and cashmeres!  Clemence, what do you say to that?  You
will see, she will be ordering her bonnets from Herbault!  Ha!  ha!  This
is what is called the progress of civilization, the age of light!"

"Mademoiselle Gobillot," said Clemence, fixing a penetrating glance upon
the old man, "was not the only one who looked at La Mode.  Was there no
other person in the tavern who saw it?"

"Madame," replied Rousselet, forced from his last refuge, "there were two
young men taking their refection, and one of them wore a beard no longer
than a goat's.  Madame will pardon me if I allow myself to use this
vulgar expression, but Madame wished to know all."

"And the other young man?"

"The other had his facial epidermis shaved as close as a lady's or mine.
He was the one who held the journal while his comrade was smoking outside
the door."

Madame de Bergenheim made no further inquiries, but fell into a profound
revery.  With eyes fixed upon the last number of La Mode, she seemed to
study the slightest lines of the sketch that had been made thereon, as if
she hoped to find a solution to the mystery.  Her irregular breathing,
and the bright flush which tinged her usually pale cheeks, would have
denoted to an eye-witness one of those tempests of the heart, the
physical manifestations of which are like those of a fever.  The pale
winter flower dying under the snow had suddenly raised its drooping head
and recovered its color; the melancholy against which the young woman had
so vainly struggled had disappeared as if by enchantment.  A little bird
surmounted by a coronet, the whole rather badly sketched, was the strange
talisman that had produced this change.

"They were commercial travellers," said the old aunt; "they always
pretend to know everything.  One of them, doubtless, when reading the
well-known name of Monsieur de Bergenheim upon the wrapper, sketched the
animal in question.  These gentlemen of industry usually have a rather
good education!  But this is giving the affair more importance than it
merits.  Leonard Rousselet," said she, raising her voice as a judge does
in court when pronouncing his charge, "you were wrong to let anything
addressed to your master leave your hands.  We will excuse you this time,
but I warn you to be more careful in future; when you go to Madame
Gobillot's, you may say to Mademoiselle Reine, from me, that if she
wishes to read La Mode I shall be delighted to procure a subscriber to
one of our journals.  You may retire now."

Without waiting for this invitation to be repeated, Rousselet backed out
of the room like an ambassador leaving the royal presence, escorted by
Constance acting as master of ceremonies.  Not having calculated the
distance, he had just bumped against the door, when it suddenly opened
and a person of extreme vivacity bounded into the middle of the room.

It was a very young and petite lady, whose perfectly developed form
predicted an inclination to stoutness in the future.  She belonged to
the Bergenheim family, if one could credit the resemblance between her
characteristic features and several of the old portraits in the room;
she wore a dark-brown riding-habit, a gray hat perched on one side,
showing on the left a mass of very curly, bright blond hair.  This
coiffure and the long green veil, floating at each movement like the
plume in a helmet, gave a singularly easy air to the fresh face of this
pretty amazon, who brandished, in guise of a lance, a billiard cue.

"Clemence," she exclaimed, "I have just beaten Christian; I made the red
ball, I made the white, and then the double stroke; I made all!
Mademoiselle, I have just beaten Christian two games; is it not glorious?
He made only eighteen points in a single game.  Pere Rousselet, I have
just beaten Christian!  Do you know how to play billiards?"

"Mademoiselle Aline, I am absolutely ignorant of the game," replied the
old man, with as gracious a smile as was possible, while he tried to
recover his equilibrium.

"You are needed no longer, Rousselet," said Mademoiselle de Corandeuil;
"close the door as you go out."

When she had been obeyed, the old maid turned gravely toward Aline, who
was still dancing about the room, having seized her sister-in-law's hands
in order to force her to share her childish joy.

"Mademoiselle," said she in a severe tone, "is it the custom at the
'Sacred Heart' to enter a room without greeting the persons who are in
it, and to jump about like a crazy person? a thing that is never
permitted even in a peasant's house."

Aline stopped short in the midst of her dance and blushed a trifle; she
caressed the pug dog, instead of replying, for she knew as well as
Rousselet that it was the surest way of softening the old maid's heart.
The cajolery was lost this time.

"Do not touch Constance, I beg of you," exclaimed the aunt, as if a
dagger had been raised against the object of her love, "do not soil this
poor beast with your hands.  What dreadful thing have you on your
fingers?  Have you just come out of an indigo bag?"

The young girl blushed still deeper and gazed at her pretty hands, which
were really a little daubed, and began to wipe them with an embroidered
handkerchief which she took from her pocket.

"It was the billiards," she said, in a low voice, "it is the blue chalk
they rub the cue with in order to make good shots and caroms."

"Make good shots!  Caroms!  Will you be so good as to spare us your slang
speeches," continued Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, who seemed to become
more crabbed as the young girl's confusion increased.  "What a fine
education for a young lady!  and one who has just come from the 'Sacred
Heart'!  One that has taken five prizes not fifteen days ago!  I really
do not know what to think of those ladies, your teachers!  And now I
suppose you are going to ride.  Billiards and horses, horses and
billiards!  It is fine!  It is admirable!"

"But, Mademoiselle," said Aline, raising her large blue eyes, which were
on the verge of tears, "it is vacation now, and there is no wrong in my
playing a game of billiards with my brother; we have no billiards at the
'Sacred Heart,' and it is such fun!  It is like riding; the doctor said
that it would be very healthful for me, and Christian hoped that it might
make me grow a little."

As she said these words, the young girl glanced into the mirror in order
to see whether her brother's hopes had been realized; for her small
stature was her sole anxiety.  But this glance was as quick as a flash,
for she feared that the severe old maid would make this act of coquetry
serve as the text for another sermon.

"You are not my niece, and I am thankful for it," continued the old lady.
"I am too old to begin another education; thank goodness, one is quite
enough!  I have no authority over you, and your conduct is your brother's
concern.  The advice which I give you is entirely disinterested; your
amusements are not such as seem to me proper for a young girl of good
birth.  It may be possible that it is the fashion today, so I will say no
more about it; but there is one thing more serious, upon which I should
advise you to reflect.  In my youth, a young lady never was allowed to
write letters except to her father and mother.  Your letters to your
cousin d'Artigues are inconsiderate--do not interrupt me--they are
inconsiderate, and I should advise you to mend your ways."

Mademoiselle de Corandeuil arose, and, as she had found an opportunity to
read three sermons in one forenoon, she could not say, like Titus, "I
have wasted my morning."  She left the room with a majestic step,
escorted by her dog and satisfied with herself, bestowing an ironical
curtsey on the young girl, which the latter did not think it necessary to
return.

"How hateful your aunt is!"  exclaimed Mademoiselle de Bergenheim to her
sister-in-law, when they were alone.  "Christian says that I must pay no
attention to her, because all women become like her if they never marry.
As for myself, I know very well that if I am an old maid I shall try not
to hurt others' feelings--I, inconsiderate!  When she can think of
nothing more to say, she scolds me about my cousin.  It is hardly worth
while, for what we write about!  Alphonse wrote of nothing, in his last
letter, but of the partridge he had shot and his hunting costume; he is
such a boy!  But why do you not say something?  You sit there speechless;
are you angry with me, too?"

She approached Clemence and was about to seat herself in her lap, when
the latter arose to avoid this loving familiarity.

"So you really have beaten Christian," said she, in a listless tone;
"are you going for a ride now?  Your habit is very becoming."

"Truly?  oh! I am so glad!" replied the young girl, planting herself
before the glass to look at her pretty figure.  She pulled down her
waist, adjusted the folds of the skirt of her dress and arranged her
veil, placed her hat on her head with a little more jaunty air, turned
three quarters around to get a better view of her costume; in one word,
she went through the coquettish movements that all pretty women learn
upon entering society.  On the whole, she seemed very well pleased with
her examination, for she smiled and showed a row of small teeth which
were as white as milk.

"I am sorry now," said she, "that I did not send for a black hat; my hair
is so light that gray makes me look ugly.  Do you not think so?  Why do
you not reply, Clemence?  One can not get a word out of you to-day; is it
because you have your neuralgia?"

"I have a trifle of it," said Madame de Bergenheim, in order to give some
pretext for her preoccupation.

"Now, then, you ought to come with us for a ride; the fresh air will do
you good.  Look how fine the weather is now; we will have a good gallop.
Will you?  I will help you put on your habit, and in five minutes you
will be ready.  Listen, I hear them in the yard now.  I am going to tell
Christian to have your horse saddled; come."

Aline took her sister-in-law by the hand, led her into the next room and
opened the window to see what was going on outside, where the cracking of
whips and several voices were to be heard.  A servant was walking up and
down the yard leading a large horse which he had just brought from the
stable; the Baron was holding a smaller one, which bore a lady's saddle,
while he carefully examined all the buckles.  As he heard the window open
above his head, he turned and bowed to Clemence with much chivalrous
gallantry.

"You still refuse to go with us?"  he asked.

"Is Aline going to ride Titania," replied Madame de Bergenheim, making an
effort to speak; "I am sure the mare will end by playing her some trick."

The young girl, who had a fancy for Titania because the skittish creature
had the attraction of forbidden fruit, nudged her sister with her elbow,
and made a little grimace.

"Aline is afraid of nothing," said the Baron; "we will enlist her with
the hussars as soon as she leaves the 'Sacred Heart.'  Come, Aline."

The young girl kissed the Baroness, gathered up her skirt, and in a few
moments was in the yard patting the neck of her dear brown mare.

"Up with you!"  said Christian, taking his sister's foot in one hand
while he raised her with the other, placing her in the saddle as easily
as he would a six-year-old child.  Then he mounted his large horse,
saluted his wife, and the couple, starting at a trot, soon disappeared
down the avenue, which began at the gate of the courtyard.

As soon as they were out of sight, Clemence went to her room, took a
shawl from her bed, and went rapidly down a secret stairway which led
into the gardens.




CHAPTER IV

THE GALLANT IN THE GARDEN

Madame de Bergenheim's apartments occupied the first floor of the wing on
the left side of the house.  On the ground floor were the library, a
bathroom, and several guest-chambers.  The large windows had a modern
look, but they were made to harmonize with the rest of the house by means
of grayish paint.  At the foot of this facade was a lawn surrounded by a
wall and orange-trees planted in tubs, forming a sort of English garden,
a sanctuary reserved for the mistress of the castle, and which brought
her, as a morning tribute, the perfume of its flowers and the coolness of
its shade.

Through the tops of the fir-trees and the tuliptrees, which rose above
the group of smaller shrubs, the eye could follow the winding river until
it finally disappeared at the extremity of the valley.  It was this
picturesque view and a more extensive horizon which had induced the
Baroness to choose this part of the Gothic manor for her own private
apartments.

After crossing the lawn, the young woman opened a gate concealed by
shrubs and entered the avenue by the banks of the river.  This avenue
described a curve around the garden, and led to the principal entrance
of the chateau.  Night was approaching, the countryside, which had been
momentarily disturbed by the storm, had resumed its customary serenity.
The leaves of the trees, as often happens after a rain, looked as fresh
as a newly varnished picture.  The setting sun cast long shadows through
the trees, and their interlaced branches looked like a forest of boa-
constrictors.

Clemence advanced slowly under this leafy dome, which became darker and
more mysterious every moment, with head bent and enveloped in a large
cashmere shawl which fell in irregular folds to the ground.  Madame de
Bergenheim had one of those faces which other women would call not at all
remarkable, but which intelligent men ardently admire.  At the first
glance she seemed hardly pretty; at the second, she attracted involuntary
admiration; afterward, it was difficult to keep her out of one's
thoughts.  Her features, which taken separately might seem irregular,
were singularly harmonious, and, like a thin veil which tempers a too
dazzling light, softened the whole expression.  Her light chestnut hair
was arranged about the temples in ingenious waves; while her still darker
eyebrows gave, at times, an imposing gravity to her face.  The same
contrast was to be found in the mouth; the short distance which separated
it from the nose would indicate, according to Lavater, unusual energy;
but the prominent underlip impregnated her smile with enchanting
voluptuousness.  Her rather clearcut features, the exceeding brilliancy
of her brown eyes, which seemed like diamonds set in jet, would, perhaps,
have given to the whole rather too strong a character had not these eyes
when veiled given to their dazzling rays a glamour of indescribable
softness.

The effect produced by this face might be compared to that of a prism,
every facet of which reflects a different color.  The ardor burning under
this changeable surface, which, through some sudden cause, betrayed its
presence, was so deeply hidden, however, that it seemed impossible to
fathom it completely.  Was she a coquette, or simply a fashionable lady,
or a devotee?  In one word, was she imbued with the most egotistical
pride or the most exalted love?  One might suppose anything, but know
nothing; one remained undecided and thoughtful, but fascinated, the mind
plunged into ecstatic contemplation such as the portrait of Monna Lisa
inspires.  An observer might have perceived that she had one of those
hearts, so finely strung, from which a clever hand might make
incomparable harmonies of passion gush; but perhaps he would be mistaken.
So many women have their souls only in their eyes!

Madame de Bergenheim's revery rendered the mysterious and impenetrable
veil which usually enveloped her countenance more unfathomable yet.  What
sentiment made her bend her head and walk slowly as she meditated?  Was
it the ennui of which she had just complained to her aunt?  Was it pure
melancholy?  The monotonous ripple of the stream, the singing of the
birds in the woods, the long golden reflections under the trees, all
seemed to unite in filling the soul with sadness; but neither the
murmuring water, the singing birds, nor the sun's splendor was paid any
attention to by Madame de Bergenheim; she gave them neither a glance nor
a sigh.  Her meditation was not revery, but thought; not thoughts of the
past, but of the present.  There was something precise and positive in
the rapid, intelligent glance which flashed from her eyes when she raised
them; it was as if she had a lucid foresight of an approaching drama.

A moment after she had passed over the wooden bridge which led from the
avenue, a man wearing a blouse crossed it and followed her.  Hearing the
sound of hurried steps behind her, she turned and saw, not two steps from
her, the stranger who, during the storm, had vainly tried to attract her
attention.  There was a moment's silence.  The young man stood
motionless, trying to catch his breath, which had been hurried, either by
emotion or rapid walking.  Madame de Bergenheim, with head thrown back
and widely opened eyes, looked at him with a more agitated than surprised
look.

"It is you," exclaimed he, impulsively, "you whom I had lost and now find
again!"

"What madness, Monsieur!"  she replied, in a low voice, putting out her
hand as if to stop him.

"I beg of you, do not look at me so!  Let me gaze at you and assure
myself that it is really you--I have dreamed of this moment for so long!
Have I not paid dear enough for it?  Two months passed away from you--
from heaven!  Two months of sadness, grief, and unhappiness!  But you are
pale!  Do you suffer, too?"

"Much, at this moment."

"Clemence!"

"Call me Madame, Monsieur de Gerfaut," she interrupted, severely.

"Why should I disobey you?  Are you not my lady, my queen?"

He bent his knee as a sign of bondage, and tried to seize her hand, which
she immediately withdrew.  Madame de Bergenheim seemed to pay very little
attention to the words addressed her; her uneasy glances wandered in
every direction, into the depths of the bushes and the slightest
undulations of the ground.  Gerfaut understood this pantomime.
He glanced, in his turn, over the place, and soon discovered at some
distance a more propitious place for such a conversation as theirs.
It was a semicircular recess in one of the thickets in the park.
A rustic seat under a large oak seemed to have been placed there
expressly for those who came to seek solitude and speak of love.
From there, one could see the approach of danger, and, in case of alarm,
the wood offered a secure retreat.  The young man had had enough
experience in gallant strategies to seize the advantage of this position,
and wended his steps in that direction while continuing to converse.
It may be that instinct which, in a critical situation, makes us follow
mechanically an unknown impulse; it may be that the same idea of prudence
had also struck her, for Madame de Bergenheim walked beside him.

"If you could understand what I suffered," said he, "when I found that
you had left Paris!  I could not discover at first where you had gone;
some spoke of Corandeuil, others of Italy.  I thought, from this hasty
departure and the care you took to conceal your abiding-place, that you
were fleeing from me.  Oh! tell me that I was mistaken; or, if it is true
that you wished to separate yourself from me, say that this cruel resolve
had left your mind, and that you will pardon me for following you!  You
will pardon me, will you not?  If I trouble or annoy you, lay the blame
entirely upon my love, which I can not restrain, and which drives me at
times to do the most extravagant things; call it reckless, insane love,
if you will; but believe it to be true and devoted!"

Clemence replied to this passionate tirade by simply shaking her head as
a child does who hears the buzzing of a wasp and fears its sting; then,
as they reached the bench, she said with affected surprise:

"You have made a mistake, this is not your road; you should have gone
over the bridge."

There was a little palpable insincerity in these words; for if the road
which they had taken did not lead to the bridge, neither did it lead to
the chateau, and the mistake, if there was one, was mutual.

"Listen to me, I beg of you," replied the lover, with 'a supplicating
glance, "I have so many things to say to you!  I beg of you, grant me one
moment."

"Afterward, will you obey me?"

"Only a few words, and I will then do all that you wish."

She hesitated a moment; then, her conscience doubtless lulled by this
promise, she seated herself and made a gesture for M. de Gerfaut to do
likewise.  The young man did not make her repeat this invitation, but
hypocritically seated himself on the farther end of the seat.

"Now, talk reasonably," she said, in a calm tone.  "I suppose that you
are on your way to Germany or Switzerland, and as you passed near me you
wished to favor me with a call.  I ought to be proud of this mark of
respect from a man so celebrated as you are, although you are rather
hiding your light under this garb.  We are not very strict as to dress in
the country, but, really, yours is quite unceremonious.  Tell me, where
did you find that headdress?"

These last words were spoken with the careless, mocking gayety of a young
girl.

Gerfaut smiled, but he took off his cap.  Knowing the importance that
women attach to little things, and what an irreparable impression an ugly
cravat or unblacked boots might produce in the most affecting moments, he
did not wish to compromise himself by a ridiculous head-gear.  He passed
his hand through his hair, pushing it back from his large, broad
forehead, and said softly:

"You know very well that I am not going to Germany or Switzerland, and
that Bergenheim is the end of my journey, as it has been its aim."

"Then will you be so good as to tell me what your intention was in taking
such a step, and whether you have realized how strange, inconsiderate,
and in every way extravagant your conduct is?"

"I have realized it; I know it.  You were here, I came because there is
a loadstone within you, that is my heart's sole attraction, and I must
follow my heart.  I came because I wanted to see your beautiful eyes
again, to be intoxicated by your sweet voice, because to live away from
you is impossible for me; because your presence is as necessary to my
happiness as air to my life; because I love you.  That is why I came.
Is it possible that you do not understand me, that you will not pardon
me?"

"I do not wish to believe that you are speaking seriously," said
Clemence, with increased severity.  "What sort of an idea can you have of
me, if you think I will allow such conduct?  And then, even if I were
foolish enough for that-which I never shall be--to what would it lead?
You know perfectly well that it is impossible for you to come to the
castle, as you are not acquainted with Monsieur de Bergenheim, and I
certainly shall not introduce you to him.  My aunt is here, and she would
persecute me the whole day long with questions!  Mon Dieu!  how you
disturb me!  how unhappy you make me!"

"Your aunt never goes out, so she will not see me, unless I am officially
received at the chateau, and then there could be no danger."

"But the servants she brought with her, and mine, who have seen you in
her house!  I tell you, the whole thing is as perilous as it is crazy,
and you will make me die of fright and chagrin."

"If one of those servants should chance to meet me, how could he ever
recognize me in this costume?  Do not fear, I shall be prudent!  I would
live in a log cabin, if necessary, for the joy of seeing you
occasionally."

Madame de Bergenheim smiled disdainfully.

"That would be quite pastoral," she replied; "but I believe that such
disguises are seldom seen now except upon the stage.  If this is a scene
out of a play, which you wish to rehearse in order to judge its effect,
I warn you that it is entirely lost upon me, and that I consider the play
itself very ill-timed, improper, and ridiculous.  Besides, for a man of
talent and a romantic poet you have not exhibited any very great
imagination.  It is a classical imitation, nothing better.  There is
something like it in mythology, I believe.  Did not Apollo disguise
himself as a shepherd?"

Nothing more is to be feared by a lover than a witty woman who does not
love or loves but half; he is obliged to wear velvet gloves in all such
sentimental controversies; he owes it to himself out of propriety first,
out of prudence afterward.  For it is not a question of taking part in a
conversation for the simple pleasure of brilliant repartee; and while he
applies himself carefully to play his part well, he feels that he has
been dexterously cut to pieces with a well-sharpened knife.

Gerfaut indulged in these unpleasant reflections while gazing at Madame
de Bergenheim.  Seated up on the bench as proudly as a queen upon her
throne, with shining eyes, scornful lips, and arms tightly folded under
her cashmere shawl, with that haughty gesture familiar to her, the young
woman looked as invulnerable under this light wrap as if she had been
covered with Ajax's shield, formed, if we can credit Homer, of seven
bulls' hides and a sheet of brass.

After gazing at this scornful face for a moment, Gerfaut glanced at his
coarse blouse, his leggings, and muddy boots.  His usual dainty ways made
the details of this costume yet more shocking to him, and he exaggerated
this little disaster.  He felt degraded and almost ridiculous.  The
thought took away for a moment his presence of mind; he began
mechanically to twirl his hat in his hands, exactly as if he had been
Pere Rousselet himself.  But instead of being hurtful to him, this
awkwardness served him better than the eloquence of Rousseau or the
coolness of Richelieu.  Was it not a genuine triumph for Clemence to
reduce a man of his recognized talent, who was usually anything but
timid, to this state of embarrassment?  What witty response, what
passionate speech could equal the flattery of this poet with bent head
and this expression of deep sadness upon his face?

Madame de Bergenheim continued her raillery, but in a softer tone.

"This time, instead of staying in a cabin, the god of poetry has
descended to a tavern.  Have you not established your general
headquarters at La Fauconnerie?"

"How did you know that?"

"By the singular visiting-card that you drew in La Mode.  Do I not know
your coat-of-arms?  An expressive one, as my aunt would say."

At these words, which probably referred to some letters, doubtless read
without very much anger, since they were thus recalled, Gerfaut took
courage.

"Yes," said he, "I am staying at La Fauconnerie; but I can not stay there
any longer, for I think your servants make the tavern their pleasure-
ground.  I must come to some decision.  I have two propositions to submit
to you: the first is, that you will allow me to see you occasionally;
there are numerous promenades about here; you go out alone, so it would
be very easy."

"Let us hear the second," said Clemence, with a shrug of the shoulders.

"If you will not grant my first, I beg of you to persuade your aunt that
she is ill and to take her with you to Plombieres or Baden.  The season
is not very far advanced; there, at least, I should be able to see you."

"Let us end this folly," said the Baroness; "I have listened patiently to
you; now, in your turn, listen to me.  You will be sensible, will you
not?  You will leave me and go.  You will go to Switzerland, and return
to the Montanvert, where you met me for the first time, which I shall
always remember, if you, yourself, do not make it painful for me to do
so.  You will obey me, Octave, will you not?  Give me this proof of your
esteem and friendship.  You know very well that it is impossible for me
to grant what you ask; believe me, it is painful to me to be forced to
refuse you.  So, say farewell to me; you shall see me again next winter
in Paris.  Adieu!"

She arose and extended her hand; he took it, but, thinking to profit by
the emotion betrayed by Madame de Bergenheim's voice, he exclaimed in a
sort of transport:

"No!  I will not wait until next winter to see you.  I was about to
submit to your will; if you repulse me I will consult only myself; if you
repulse me, Clemence, I warn you that tomorrow I shall be in your house,
seated at your table and admitted to your drawing-room."

"You?"

"I!"

"To-morrow?"

"To-morrow."

"And how will you do it, pray?"  said she, defiantly.

"That is my secret, Madame," he replied, coldly.

Although her curiosity was greatly aroused, Clemence felt that it would
be beneath her to ask any more questions.  She replied with an
affectation of mocking indifference:

"Since I am to have the pleasure of seeing you tomorrow, I hope you will
permit me to leave you today.  You know that I am not well, and it is
showing me very little attention to allow me to stand here in this wet
grass."

She raised her skirt a trifle and extended her foot, showing her slipper,
which was really covered with pearly drops of rain.  Octave threw himself
quickly upon his knees, and, taking a silk handkerchief from his pocket,
began to wipe away all traces of the storm.  His action was so rapid that
Madame de Bergenheim stood for a moment motionless and speechless, but
when she felt her foot imprisoned in the hand of the man who had just
declared war against her, her surprise gave place to a mingled feeling of
impatience and anger.  She drew her foot back with a sudden movement, but
unfortunately the foot went one way and the slipper another.  A fencing-
master, who sees his foil carried ten steps away from him by a back
stroke, could not feel more astonishment than that felt by Madame de
Bergenheim.  Her first movement was to place her foot, so singularly
undressed, upon the ground; an instinctive horror of the damp, muddy walk
made her draw it quickly back.  She stood thus with one foot lifted; the
movement which she had started to make threw her off her balance and as
she was about to fall she extended her hand to find some support.  This
support proved to be Octave's head, for he still remained upon his knees.
With the usual presumption of lovers, he believed that he had the right
to give her the assistance which she seemed to ask for, and passed his
arm about the slender waist which was bent toward him.

Clemence drew herself up at once, and with frowning brow regained her
coolness, standing upright upon one foot, like Cupid in the painting by
Gerard; like him, also, she seemed about to fly away, there was so much
airy lightness in her improvised attitude.

Many puerile incidents and ridiculous events occur in life, which it
would render impossible for the most imperturbable of mandarins to
struggle against in order to preserve his gravity.  When Louis XIV, this
king so expert in courtly ways, dressed his hair alone behind his
curtains before presenting himself to the eyes of his courtiers, he
feared that this disarray of costume might compromise even his royal
majesty.  So, upon such authority, if one looks upon a complete head of
hair as indispensable to the dignity of manhood, the same reasoning
should exist for the covering of one's feet.  In less than a second,
Madame de Bergenheim comprehended that in such circumstances prudish airs
would fail of their effect.  Meanwhile, the agreeable side of her
position operated within her; she felt unable to keep up the show of
anger that she had wished to assume.  The involuntary smile upon her lips
smoothed her forehead as a ray of sun dissipates a cloud.  Thus, disposed
to clemency by reflection or fascination, it was in a very sweet and
coaxing voice that she said: "Octave, give me my slipper."  Gerfaut gazed
at the lovely face bent toward him with an expression of childish
entreaty, then he glanced with an irresolute air at the trophy which he
held in his hand.  This slipper, which was as small as Cinderella's, was
not green, but gray, the lining was of rose-colored silk, and the whole
was so pretty, coquettish, and dainty that it seemed impossible its owner
could be vexed with him if he examined it closely.  "I will give it back
to you," said he, at last, "on condition that you will allow me to put it
on for you."

"As to that, certainly not," said she, in a sharp tone; "I should much
prefer to leave it with you and return home as I am."

Gerfaut shook his head and smiled incredulously.

"Think of your delicate lungs and of this terrible mud?"

Clemence drew her foot suddenly back under her skirt, concealing it
entirely from the sight of the young man, who gazed at it more than she
thought proper.  Then she exclaimed, with the obstinacy of a spoiled
child:

"Very well!  I will return hopping on one foot; I could hop very well
when I was young, I should be able to do so now."

To give more weight to this observation, she took two little jumps with a
grace and sprightliness worthy of Mademoiselle Taglioni.

Octave arose.

"I have had the pleasure of seeing you waltz," said he; "but I admit that
I shall be pleased to witness a new dance, and one executed for me
alone."

As he said these words, he pretended to conceal the innocent object of
this dispute in his blouse.  The pretty dancer saw by this that a
compromise would be necessary.  Recourse to concessions is often as fatal
to women as to kings; but what can one do when every other exit is
closed?  Obliged by absolute necessity to accept the conditions imposed
upon her, Clemence wished at least to cover this defeat with sufficient
dignity, and escape from an awkward position with the honors of war.

"Get down upon your knees, then," she said, haughtily, "and put on my
slipper, since you exact it, and let this end this ridiculous scene.
I think you should be too proud to regard a maid's privilege as a favor."

"As a favor which a king would envy," replied Gerfaut, in a voice as
tender as hers had been disdainful.  He put one knee on the ground,
placed the little slipper upon the other and seemed to await his enemy's
pleasure.  But the latter found a new subject for complaint in the
pedestal offered her, for she said with increased severity:

"On the ground, Monsieur; and let that end it."

He obeyed, without a reply, after giving her a reproachful glance by
which she was as much moved as by his silent obedience.  She put out her
foot with a more gracious air, and thrust it into the slipper.  To be a
correct historian, we must admit that this time she left it in the hands
which softly pressed it longer than was strictly necessary.  When Octave
had fastened it with skill but with no haste, he bent his head and
pressed his lips to the openwork stocking, through which he could catch a
glimpse of white, satiny skin.

"My husband!"  exclaimed Madame de Bergenheim, as she heard the clatter
of horses' hoofs at the end of the avenue; and without adding a word she
fled rapidly toward the chateau.  Gerfaut arose from his position no less
rapidly and darted into the woods.  A rustling of branches which he heard
a few steps from him made him uneasy at first, for he feared that an
invisible witness had been present at this imprudent interview; but he
was soon reassured by the silence which reigned about him.

After the Baron and his sister had passed, he crossed the avenue and soon
disappeared over the winding road on the other side of the bridge.




CHAPTER V

ART AND MUSIC

A league below the castle of Bergenheim, the village of La Fauconnerie
was situated, at the junction of several valleys the principal of which,
by means of an unfrequented road, opened communications between Lorraine
and upper Alsatia.  This position had been one of some importance in the
Middle Ages, at the time when the Vosges were beset with partisans from
the two countries, always ready to renew border hostilities, the
everlasting plague of all frontiers.  Upon a cliff overlooking the
village were situated the ruins which had given the village its name;
it owed it to the birds of prey [falcons, in French: 'faucons'], the
habitual guests of the perpendicular rocks.  To render proper justice to
whom it belongs, we should add that the proprietors of La Fauconnerie had
made it a point at all times to justify this appellation by customs more
warlike than hospitable; but for some time the souvenirs of their feudal
prowess had slept with their race under the ruins of the manor; the
chateau had fallen without the hamlet extending over its ruins; from a
bourg of some importance La Fauconnerie had come down to a small village,
and had nothing remarkable about it but the melancholy ruins of the
chateau.

It would be impossible to imagine anything more miserably prosaic than
the houses that bordered the road, in regular order; their one story with
its thatched roof blackened by rain; the sorry garden surrounded by a
little low wall and presenting as vegetables patches of cabbage and a few
rows of beans, gave an idea of the poverty of its inhabitants.  Save the
church, which the Bishop of St.-Die had caused to be built, and the manse
that had naturally shared this fortunate privilege, only one house rose
above the condition of a thatched cottage; this was the tavern called 'La
Femme-sans-Tete', and kept by Madame Gobillot, an energetic woman, who
did not suggest in the least the name of her establishment, "The Headless
Woman."

A large sign shared with the inevitable bunch of juniper, the honor of
decorating the entrance and justified an appellation one might have
regarded as disrespectful to the fair sex.  The original design had been
repainted in dazzling colors by the artist charged with restoring the
church.  This alliance of the profane with the sacred had, it is true,
scandalized the parish priest, but he did not dare say a word too much,
as Madame Gobillot was one of his most important parishioners.  A woman
in a rose-colored dress and large panniers, standing upon very high-
heeled shoes, displayed upon this sign the rejuvenated costume of 1750;
an enormous green fan, which she held in her hand, entirely concealed her
face, and it was through this caprice of the painter that the tavern came
to have the name it bore.

At the right of this original figure was painted, in a very appetizing
manner, a pie out of whose crust peeped a trio of woodcocks' heads.  A
little farther, upon a bed of watercresses, floated a sort of marine
monster, carp or sturgeon, trout or crocodile.  The left of the sign was
none the less tempting; it represented a roast chicken lying upon its
back with its head under its wing, and raising its mutilated legs in the
air with a piteous look; it had for its companion a cluster of crabs, of
a little too fine a red to have been freshly caught.  The whole was
interspersed with bottles and glasses brimful of wine.  There were stone
jugs at each extremity, the sergeants of the rear-rank of this
gastronomic platoon, whose corks had blown out and were still flying in
space, while a bubbling white foam issued from their necks and fell
majestically over their sides after describing a long parabola.  A
misleading sign, indeed!

A remorseful conscience, or a desire to protect herself from all reproach
of mendacity on the part of the customers, had made the owner of the inn
place a wire cupboard upon the sill of one of the windows near the door;
in which receptacle were some eggs on a plate, a bit of bread with which
David might have loaded his sling, a white glass bottle filled with a
liquid of some color intended to represent kirsch, but which was in
reality only water.  This array gave a much more correct idea of the
resources of the establishment and formed a menu like an anchorite's
repast, and even this it was difficult for the kitchen's resources to
maintain.

A carriage-gate led into the yard and to the stables, cart-drivers being
the principal habitues of the place; another entrance, the one which was
crowned with the fantastic sign, was flanked by two stone seats and
opened directly into the kitchen, which also served as parlor for the
guests.  A fireplace with an enormous mantel, under which a whole family
might warm themselves, occupied the middle of one side of the room.
There was a large oven in one corner which opened its huge mouth, the
door partly hiding the shovels and tongs employed in its service.  Two or
three thoroughly smoked hams, suspended from the beams, announced that
there was no fear of a famine before the gastronomic massacres of
Middlemas.  Opposite the window, a large, polished oak dresser displayed
an array of large flowered plates and little octagon-shaped glasses.  A
huge kitchen kettle and some wooden chairs completed the furniture of the
room.

From the kitchen one passed into another room, where a permanent table
surrounded by benches occupied its entire length.  The wall paper, once
green, was now a dirty gray; it was embellished by half a dozen black
frames representing the story of Prince Poniatowski, who shares the honor
of decorating village inns with Paul and Virginia and Wilhelm Tell.
On the upper floor-for this aristocratic dwelling had a second story--
several sleeping-rooms opened upon a long corridor, at the end of which
was a room with two beds in it.  This room was very neat and clean, and
was destined for any distinguished guests whose unlucky star led them
into this deserted country.

That evening the inn presented an unaccustomed lively appearance; the
long seats, each side of the door, were occupied by rustics stripping
hemp, by some village lads, and three or four cart-drivers smoking short
pipes as black as coal.  They were listening to two girls who were
singing in a most mournful way a song well known to all in this country:

                   "Au chateau de Belfort
                    Sont trois jolies filles, etc."

The light from the hearth, shining through the open door, left this group
in the shadow and concentrated its rays upon a few faces in the interior
of the kitchen.  First, there was Madame Gobillot in person, wearing a
long white apron, her head covered with an immense cap.  She went from
oven to dresser, and from dresser to fireplace with a very important air.
A fat little servant disappeared frequently through the dining-room door,
where she seemed to be laying the cover for a feast.  With that
particular dexterity of country girls, she made three trips to carry two
plates, and puffed like a porpoise at her work, while the look of
frightened amazement showed upon her face that every fibre of her
intelligence was under unaccustomed tension.  Before the fire, and upon
the range, three or four stew-pans were bubbling.  A plump chicken was
turning on the spit, or, rather, the spit and its victim were turned by a
bright-looking boy of about a dozen years, who with one hand turned the
handle and with the other, armed with a large cooking-ladle, basted the
roast.

But the two principal persons in this picture were a young country girl
and a young man seated opposite her, who seemed busily engaged in making
her portrait.  One would easily recognize, from the airs and elegance of
the young woman, that she was the daughter of the house, Mademoiselle
Reine Gobillot, the one whose passion for fashion-plates had excited
Mademoiselle de Corandeuil's anger.  She sat as straight and rigid upon
her stool as a Prussian corporal carrying arms, and maintained an
excessively gracious smile upon her lips, while she made her bust more
prominent by drawing back her shoulders as far as she could.

The young painter, on the contrary, was seated with artistic abandon,
balancing himself upon a two-legged chair with his heels resting against
the mantel; he was dressed in a black velvet coat, and a very small Tam
O'Shanter cap of the same material covered the right side of his head,
allowing a luxuriant crop of brown hair to be seen upon the other side.
This head-dress, accompanied by long moustaches and a pointed beard
covering only his chin, gave the stranger's face the mediaeval look he
probably desired.  This travelling artist was sketching in an album
placed upon his knees, with a freedom which indicated perfect confidence
in his own talents.  A cigar, skilfully held in one corner of his mouth,
did not prevent him from warbling between each puff some snatches of
Italian airs of which he seemed to possess a complete repertoire.  In
spite of this triple occupation he sustained a conversation with the ease
of a man who, like Caesar, could have dictated to three secretaries at
once if necessary.

                   "Dell' Assiria, ai semidei
                    Aspirar--"

"I have already asked you not to purse up your mouth so, Mademoiselle
Reine; it gives you a Watteau air radically bourgeois."

"What sort of air does it give me?"  she asked, anxiously.

"A Watteau, Regence, Pompadour air.  You have a large mouth, and we will
leave it natural, if you please."

"I have a large mouth!"  exclaimed Reine, blushing with anger; "how
polite you are!"

And she pinched up her lips until she reduced them to nearly the size of
Montmorency cherries.

"Stop this vulgar way of judging of art, queen of my heart.  Learn that
there is nothing more appetizing than a large mouth.  I do not care for
rosebud mouths!"

"If it is the fashion!"  murmured the young girl, in a pleased tone, as
she spread out horizontally her vermillion lips, which might have
extended from ear to ear, not unlike--if we can credit that slanderer,
Bussy-Rabutin-the amorous smile of Mademoiselle de la Valliere.

"Why did you not let me put on my gold necklace?

That would have given my portrait a smarter look.  Sophie Mitoux had hers
painted with a coral comb and earrings.  How shabby this style is!"

"I beg of you, my good Reine, let me follow my own fancy; an artist is a
being of inspiration and spontaneity.  Meanwhile, you make your bust too
prominent; there is no necessity for you to look as if you had swallowed
a whale.  L'art n'est pas fait pour toi, tu n'en as pas besoin.  Upon my
word, you have a most astonishing bust; a genuine Rubens."

Madame Gobillot was an austere woman, though an innkeeper, and watched
over her daughter with particular care, lest any ill-sounding or
insiduous expression should reach her child's ear.  Considering the
company which frequented the house, the task was not easy.  So she was
shocked at the young man's last words, and although she did not quite
understand his meaning, for that very reason she thought she scented a
concealed poison more dangerous for Mademoiselle Reine than the awful
words used by the drivers.  She dared not, however, show her displeasure
to a customer, and one who seemed disposed to spend money freely; and, as
usual in such circumstances, she vented her displeasure upon the persons
immediately under her charge.

"Hurry now, Catherine!  Will you never finish setting the table?  I told
you before to put on the Britannia; these gentlemen are used to eating
with silver.  Listen to me when I am talking to you.  Who washed these
glasses?  What a shame!  You are as afraid of water as a mad-dog.  And
you!  what are you staring at that chicken for, instead of basting it?
If you let it burn you shall go to bed without any supper.  If it is not
provoking!"  she continued, in a scolding tone, visiting her stewpans one
after another, "everything is dried up; a fillet that was as tender as it
could be will be scorched!  This is the third time that I have diluted
the gravy.  Catherine!  bring me a dish.  Now, then, make haste."

"One thing is certain," interrupted the artist, "that Gerfaut is making a
fool of me.  I do not see what can have become of him.  Tell me, Madame
Gobillot, are you certain that an amateur of art and the picturesque,
travelling at this hour, would not be eaten by wolves or plundered by
robbers in these mountains?"

"Our mountains are safe, Monsieur," replied the landlady, with offended
dignity; "except for the pedler who was assassinated six months ago and
whose body was found in the Combe-aux-Renards--"

"And the driver who was stopped three weeks ago in the Fosse," added
Mademoiselle Reine; "the thieves did not quite kill him, but he is still
in the hospital at Remiremont."

"Oh!  that is enough to make one's hair stand on end!  This is worse than
the forest of Bondy!  Truly, if I knew what direction my friend took this
morning, I would follow him with my pistols."

"Here is Fritz," said Madame Gobillot.  "He met a stranger in the woods
who gave him ten sous for telling him the way to Bergenheim.  From his
description, it seems that it must be the gentleman you speak of.  Tell
us about it, Fritz."

The child related in his Alsatian patois his meeting of the afternoon,
and the artist was convinced that it was Gerfaut he had met.

"He must be wandering in the valley," said he, "dreaming about our play.
But did you not say something about Bergenheim?  Is there a village near
here by that name?"

"There is a chateau of that name, Monsieur, and it is about a league from
here as you go up the river."

"And does this chateau happen to belong to the Baron de Bergenheim--
a large, blond, good-looking fellow, with rather reddish moustache?"

"That's the picture of its owner, only that the Baron does not wear a
moustache now, not since he left the service.  Do you know him,
Monsieur?"

"Yes, I know him!  Speaking of service, I once rendered him one which was
of some account.  Is he at the castle?"

"Yes, Monsieur, and his lady also."

"Ah! his wife, too.  She was a Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, of Provence.
Is she pretty?"

"Pretty," said Mademoiselle Gobillot, pursing up her lips, "that depends
upon tastes.  If a person likes a face as white as a ghost, she is.  And,
then, she is so thin!  It certainly can not be very difficult to have a
slender waist when one is as thin as that."

"Not everybody can have rosy cheeks and a form like an enchantress," said
the painter, in a low voice, as he looked at his model in a seductive
manner.

"There are some people who think that Monsieur's sister is prettier than
Madame," observed Madame Gobillot.

"O mother!  how can you say that?"  exclaimed Reine with a disdainful
air.  "Mademoiselle Aline!  A child of fifteen!  She certainly is not
wanting in color; her hair is such a blond, such a red, rather!  It looks
as if it were on fire."

"Do not say anything against red hair, I beg of you," said the artist,
"it is an eminently artistic shade, which is very popular."

"With some it may be so, but with Christians!  It seems to me that black
hair--"

"When it is long and glossy like yours, it is wonderful," said the young
man, darting another killing glance.  "Madame Gobillot, would you mind
closing that door?  One can not hear one's self think here.  I am a
little critical, so far as music is concerned, and you have two sopranos
outside who deafen me with their shrieks."

"It is Marguerite Mottet and her sister.  Since our cure has taken to
teaching them, they bore us to death, coming here and singing their fine
songs.  One of these days I shall notify them to leave."

As she said these words, Madame Gobillot went to close the door in order
to please her guest; as soon as her back was turned, the latter leaned
forward with the boldness of a Lovelace and imprinted a very loving kiss
upon the rosy cheek of Mademoiselle Reine, who never thought of drawing
back until the offence was committed.

The sole witness to this incident was the little kitchen drudge, whose
blue eyes had been fastened upon the artist's moustache and beard for
some time.  They seemed to plunge him into a deep admiration.  But at
this unexpected event his amazement was so complete that he dropped his
spoon into the ashes.

"Eh!  mein herr, do you wish to go to bed without your supper, as has
been promised you?"  said the young man, while the beautiful Reine was
trying to recover her countenance.  "Now, then, sing us a little song
instead of staring at me as if I were a giraffe.  Your little cook has a
nice voice, Madame Gobillot.  Now, then, mein herr, give us a little
German lied.  I will give you six kreutzers if you sing in tune, and a
flogging if you grate upon my ears."

He arose and put his album under his arm.

"And my portrait?"  exclaimed the young girl, whose cheek was still
burning from the kiss she had just received.

The painter drew near her, smiling, and said in a mysterious tone:

"When I make a portrait of a pretty person like you, I never finish it
the first day.  If you will give me another sitting in the morning before
your mother arises I promise to finish this sketch in a way that will not
be displeasing to you."

Mademoiselle Reine saw that her mother was watching her, and walked away
with no reply save a glance which was not discouraging.

"Now, then!  You droll little fellow!"  exclaimed the artist, as he
whirled on one foot; "triple time; one, two, begin."

The child burst into an Alsatian song in a high, ringing voice.

"Wait a moment!  What devilish key are you singing that in?  La, la, la,
la; mi, in E major, key of four sharps.  By Jove, my little man!  here is
a fellow who sings B's and C's away up in the clouds; an E sharp, too!"
he continued, with astonishment, while the singer made a hold upon the
keynote an octave higher in a voice as clear as a crystal.

The artist threw into the fire the cigar which he had just lighted, and
began pacing the kitchen floor, paying no more attention to Mademoiselle
Reine, who felt a little piqued at seeing herself neglected for a kitchen
drudge.

"A rare voice," said he, as he took a great stride; "per Bacco, a very
rare voice.  Added to that, he sings very deep; two octaves and a half,
a clear, ringing tone, the two registers are well united.  He would make
an admirable 'primo musico'.  And the little fellow has a pretty face,
too.  After supper I will make him wash his face, and I will sketch it.
I am sure that in less than a year's study, he could make his debut with
the greatest success.  By Jove!  I have an idea!  Why does not that
Gerfaut return?  Now, then, he would do very well for 'Pippo' in La
Gazza, or for Gemma in Wilhelm Tell.  But we must have a role for him to
make his debut in.  What subject could we take properly to introduce a
child's part?  Why does not that Gerfaut come?  A child, girl or boy; a
boy part would be better.  'Daniel,' of course; viva 'Daniel!'  'The
Chaste Suzannah,' opera in three acts.  Madame Begrand would be fine as
Suzannah.  By Jove!  if Meyerbeer would only take charge of the score!
That falls to him by right as a compatriot.  Then, that would give him an
opportunity to break lances with Mehul and Rossini.  If that fool of a
Gerfaut would only come!  Let us see what would be the three characters:
Soprano, Suzannah; contralto, David; the old men, two basses; as for the
tenor, he would be, of course, Suzannah's husband.  There would be a
superb entrance for him upon his return from the army, 'cavatina
guerriera con cori'.  Oh!  that terrible Gerfaut!  the wolves must have
devoured him.  If he were here, we would knock off the thing between our
fruit and cheese."

Just at that moment the door opened suddenly.  "Is supper ready?"  asked
a deep voice.

"Eh, here he is, the dear friend!

                        "O surprise extreme!
                         Grand Dieu! c'est lui-meme--

alive and in the flesh."

"And hungry," said Gerfaut, as he dropped into a chair near the fire.

"Would you like to compose an opera in three acts, The Chaste Suzannah,
music by Meyerbeer?"

"I should like some supper first.  Madame Gobillot, I beseech you, give
me something to eat.  Thanks to your mountain air, I am almost starved."

"But, Monsieur, we have been waiting two hours for you," retorted the
landlady, as she made each stewpan dance in succession.

"That is a fact," said the artist; "let us go into the dining-room, then.

                    "Gia la mensa a preparata."

"While supping, I will explain my plans to you.  I have just found a
Daniel in the ashes--"

"My dear Marillac, drop your Daniel and Suzannah," replied Gerfaut, as he
sat down to the table; "I have something much more important to talk to
you about."




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Evident that the man was above his costume; a rare thing!
Mania for fearing that she may be compromised
Material in you to make one of Cooper's redskins
Recourse to concessions is often as fatal to women as to kings
Those whom they most amuse are those who are best worth amusing
Trying to conceal by a smile (a blush)
When one speaks of the devil he appears
Wiped his nose behind his hat, like a well-bred orator









This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





GERFAUT

By CHARLES DE BERNARD



BOOK 2.


CHAPTER VI

GERFAUT'S STORY

While the two friends are devouring to the very last morsel the feast
prepared for them by Madame Gobillot, it may not be out of place to
explain in a few words the nature of the bonds that united these two men.

The Vicomte de Gerfaut was one of those talented beings who are the
veritable champions of an age when the lightest pen weighs more in the
social balance than our ancestors' heaviest sword.  He was born in the
south of France, of one of those old families whose fortune had
diminished each generation, their name finally being almost all that they
had left.  After making many sacrifices to give their son an education
worthy of his birth, his parents did not live to enjoy the fruits of
their efforts, and Gerfaut became an orphan at the time when he had just
finished his law studies.  He then abandoned the career of which his
father had dreamed for him, and the possibilities of a red gown bordered
with ermine.  A mobile and highly colored imagination, a passionate love
for the arts, and, more than all, some intimacies contracted with men of
letters, decided his vocation and launched him into literature.

The ardent young man, without a murmur or any misgivings, drank to the
very dregs the cup poured out to neophytes in the harsh career of letters
by editors, theatrical managers, and publishers.  With some, this course
ends in suicide, but it only cost Gerfaut a portion of his slender
patrimony; he bore this loss like a man who feels that he is strong
enough to repair it.  When his plans were once made, he followed them up
with indefatigable perseverance, and became a striking example of the
irresistible power of intelligence united to will-power.  Reputation, for
him, lay in the unknown depths of an arid and rocky soil; he was obliged,
in order to reach it, to dig a sort of artesian well.  Gerfaut accepted
this heroic labor; he worked day and night for several years, his
forehead, metaphorically, bathed in a painful perspiration alleviated
only by hopes far away.  At last the untiring worker's drill struck the
underground spring over which so many noble ones breathlessly bend,
although their thirst is never quenched.  At this victorious stroke,
glory burst forth, falling in luminous sparks, making this new name--his
name--flash with a brilliancy too dearly paid for not to be lasting.

At the time of which we speak, Octave had conquered every obstacle in the
literary field.  With a versatility of talent which sometimes recalled
Voltaire's "proteanism," he attacked in succession the most difficult
styles.  Besides their poetic value, his dramas had this positive merit,
the highest in the theatre world they were money-makers; so the managers
greeted him with due respect, while collaborators swarmed about him.
The journals paid for his articles in their weight in gold; reviews
snatched every line of his yet unfinished novels; his works were
illustrated by Porret and Tony Johannot--the masters of the day--
and shone resplendent behind the glass cases in the Orleans gallery.
Gerfaut had at last made a place for himself among that baker's dozen
of writers who call themselves, and justly, too, the field-marshals of
French literature,  of which Chateaubriand was then commander-in-chief.

What was it that had brought such a person a hundred leagues from the
opera balcony, to put on a pretty woman's slipper?  Was the fair lady one
of those caprices, so frequent and fleeting in an artist's thoughts, or
had she given birth to one of those sentiments that end by absorbing the
rest of one's life?

The young man seated opposite Gerfaut was, physically and morally, as
complete a contrast to him as one could possibly imagine.  He was one of
the kind very much in request in fashionable society.  There is not a
person who has not met one of these worthy fellows, destined to make good
officers, perfect merchants, and very satisfactory lawyers, but who,
unfortunately, have been seized with a mania for notoriety.  Ordinarily
they think of it on account of somebody else's talent.  This one is
brother to a poet, another son-in-law to a historian; they conclude that
they also have a right to be poet and historian in their turn.  Thomas
Corneille is their model; but we must admit that very few of our writers
reach the rank attained by Corneille the younger.

Marillac was train-bearer to Gerfaut, and was rewarded for this bondage
by a few bribes of collaboration, crumbs that fall from the rich man's
table.  They had been close friends since they both entered the law
school, where they were companions in folly rather than in study.
Marillac also had thrown himself into the arena of literature; then,
different fortunes having greeted the two friends' efforts, he had
descended little by little from the role of a rival to that of an
inferior.  Marillac was an artist, talent accepted, from the tip of his
toes to the sole of his boots, which he wished to lengthen by pointed
toes out of respect for the Middle Ages; for he excelled above all things
in his manner of dressing, and possessed, among other intellectual
merits, the longest moustache in literature.

If he had not art in his brain, to make up for it he always had its name
at his tongue's end.  Vaudeville writing or painting, poetry or music,
he dabbled in all these, like those horses sold as good for both riding
and driving, which are as bad in the saddle as in front of a tilbury.
He signed himself "Marillac, man of letters"; meanwhile, aside from his
profound disdain for the bourgeois, whom he called vulgar, and for the
French Academy, to which he had sworn never to belong, one could reproach
him with nothing.  His penchant for the picturesque in expression was not
always, it is true, in the most excellent taste, but, in spite of these
little oddities, his unfortunate passion for art, and his affection for
the Middle Ages, he was a brave, worthy, and happy fellow, full of good
qualities, very much devoted to his friends, above all to Gerfaut.  One
could, therefore, pardon him for being a pseudo-artist.

"Will your story be a long one?"  said he to the playwright, when
Catherine had conducted them after supper to the double-bedded room,
where they were to pass the night.

"Long or short, what does it matter, since you must listen to it?"

"Because, first, I would make some grog and fill my pipe; otherwise, I
would content myself with a cigar."

"Take your pipe and make your grog."

"Here!"  said the artist, running after Catherine, "don't rush downstairs
so.  You are wanted.  Fear nothing, interesting maid; you are safe with
us; but bring us a couple of glasses, brandy, sugar, a bowl, and some hot
water."

"They want some hot water," cried the servant, rushing into the kitchen
with a frightened look; "can they be ill at this hour?"

"Give the gentlemen what they want, you little simpleton!"  replied
Mademoiselle Reine; "they probably want to concoct some of their Paris
drinks."

When all the articles necessary for the grog were on the table, Marillac
drew up an old armchair, took another chair to stretch his legs upon,
replaced his cap with a handkerchief artistically knotted about his head,
his boots with a pair of slippers, and, finally, lighted his pipe.

"Now," said he, as he seated himself, "I will listen without moving an
eyelid should your story last, like the creation, six days and nights."

Gerfaut took two or three turns about the room with the air of an orator
who is seeking for a beginning to a speech.

"You know," said he, "that Fate has more or less influence over our
lives, according to the condition of mind in which we happen to be.
In order that you may understand the importance of the adventure I am
about relating to you, it will be necessary for me to picture the state
of mind which I was in at the time it happened; this will he a sort of
philosophical and psychological preamble."

"Thunder!"  interrupted Marillac, "if I had known that, I would have
ordered a second bowl."

"You will remember," continued Gerfaut, paying no attention to this
pleasantry, "the rather bad attack of spleen which I had a little over a
year ago?"

"Before your trip to Switzerland?"

"Exactly."

"If I remember right," said the artist, "you were strangely cross and
whimsical at the time.  Was it not just after the failure of our drama at
the Porte Saint-Martin?"

"You might also add of our play at the Gymnase."

"I wash my hands of that.  You know very well that it only went as far as
the second act, and I did not write one word in the first."

"And hardly one in the second.  However, I take the catastrophe upon my
shoulders; that made two perfect failures in that d---d month of August."

"Two failures that were hard to swallow," replied Marillac, "We can say,
for our consolation, that there never were more infamous conspiracies
against us, above all, than at the Gymnase.  My ears ring with the hisses
yet!  I could see, from our box, a little villain in a dress coat, in one
corner of the pit, who gave the signal with a whistle as large as a
horse-pistol.  How I would have liked to cram it down his throat!"  As he
said these words, he brought his fist down upon the table, and made the
glasses and candles dance 'upon it.

"Conspiracy or not, this time they judged the play aright.  I believe it
would be impossible to imagine two worse plays; but, as Brid Oison says,
'These are things that one admits only to himself'; it is always
disagreeable to be informed of one's stupidity by an ignorant audience
that shouts after you like a pack of hounds after a hare.  In spite of my
pretension of being the least susceptible regarding an author's vanity of
all the writers in Paris, it is perfectly impossible to be indifferent to
such a thing--a hiss is a hiss.  However, vanity aside, there was a
question of money which, as I have a bad habit of spending regularly my
capital as well as my income, was not without its importance.  It meant,
according to my calculation, some sixty thousand francs cut off from my
resources, and my trip to the East was indefinitely postponed.

"They say, with truth, that misfortunes never come singly.  You know
Melanie, whom I prevented from making her debut at the Vaudeville?  By
taking her away from all society, lodging her in a comfortable manner and
obliging her to work, I rendered her a valuable service.  She was a good
girl, and, aside from her love for the theatre and a certain indolence
that was not without charm, I did not find any fault in her and grew more
attached to her every day.  Sometimes after spending long hours with her,
a fancy for a retired life and domestic happiness would seize me.
Gentlemen with brains are privileged to commit foolish acts at times, and
I really do not know what I might have ended in doing, had I not been
preserved from the danger in an unexpected manner.

"One evening, when I arrived at Melanie's, I found the bird had flown.
That great ninny of a Ferussac, whom I never had suspected, and had
introduced to her myself, had turned her head by making capital out of
her love for the stage.  As he was about to leave for Belgium, he
persuaded her to go there and dethrone Mademoiselle Prevost.  I have
since learned that a Brussels banker revenged me by taking this Helene of
the stage away from Ferussac.  Now she is launched and can fly with her
own wings upon the great highway of bravos, flowers, guineas--"

"And wreck and ruin," added Marillac.  "Here's to her health!"

"This triple disappointment of pride, money, and heart did not cause,
I hope you will believe me, the deep state of melancholy into which I
soon fell; but the malady manifested itself upon this occasion, for it
had been lurking about me for a long time, as the dormant pain of a wound
is aroused if one pours a caustic upon its surface.

"There is some dominant power in each individual which is developed at
the expense of the other faculties, above all when the profession one
chooses suits his nature.  The vital powers thus condensed manifest
themselves externally, and gush out with an abundance which would become
impossible if all the faculties were used alike, and if life filtered
away, so to speak.  To avoid such destruction, and concentrate life upon
one point, in order to increase the action, is the price of talent and
individuality.  Among athletes, the forehead contracts according as the
chest enlarges; with men of thought, it is the brain which causes the
other organs to suffer, insatiable vampire, exhausting at times the last
drop of blood in the body which serves as its victim.  This vampire was
my torturer.

"For ten years I had crowded romance upon poetry, vaudeville upon drama,
literary criticism upon leader; I proved, through my own self, in a
physical way, the phenomena of the absorption of the senses by
intelligence.  Many times, after several nights of hard work, the chords
of my mind being too violently stretched, they relaxed and gave only
indistinct harmony.  Then, if I happened to resist this lassitude of
nature demanding repose, I felt the pressure of my will exhausting the
sources at the very depths of my being.  It seemed to me that I dug out
my ideas from the bottom of a mine, instead of gathering them upon the
surface of the brain.  The more material organs came to the rescue of
their failing chief.  The blood from my heart rushed to my head to revive
it; the muscles of my limbs communicated to the fibres of the brain their
galvanic tension.  Nerves turned into imagination, flesh into life.
Nothing has developed my materialistic beliefs like this decarnation of
which I had such a sensible, or rather visible perception.

"I destroyed my health with these psychological experiments, and the
abuse of work perhaps shortened my life.  When I was thirty years old my
face was wrinkled, my cheeks were pallid, and my heart blighted and
empty.  For what result, grand Dieu!  For a fleeting and fruitless
renown!

"The failure of my two plays warned me that others judged me as I judged
myself.  I recalled to mind the Archbishop of Granada, and I thought I
could hear Gil Blas predicting the failure of my works.  We can not
dismiss the public as we can our secretary; meanwhile, I surrendered to a
too severe justice in order to decline others' opinions.  A horrible
thought suddenly came into my mind; my artistic life was ended, I was a
worn-out man; in one word, to picture my situation in a trivial but
correct manner, I had reached the end of my rope.

"I could not express to you the discouragement that I felt at this
conviction.  Melanie's infidelity was the crowning touch.  It was not my
heart, but my vanity which had been rendered more irritable by recent
disappointments.  This, then, was the end of all my ambitious dreams!
I had not enough mind left, at thirty years of age, to write a vaudeville
or to be loved by a grisette!

"One day Doctor Labanchie came to see me.

"'What are you doing there' said he, as he saw me seated at my desk.

"'Doctor,' said I, reaching out my hand to him, 'I believe that I am a
little feverish.'

"'Your pulse is a little rapid,' said he, after making careful
examination, 'but your fever is more of imagination than of blood.'

"I explained to him my condition, which was now becoming almost
unendurable.  Without believing in medicine very much, I had confidence
in him and knew him to be a man who would give good advice.

"'You work too much,' said he, shaking his head.  'Your brain is put to
too strong a tension.  This is a warning nature gives you, and you will
make a mistake if you do not follow it.  When you are sleepy, go to bed;
when you are tired, you must have rest.  It is rest for your brain that
you now need.  Go into the country, confine yourself to a regular and
healthy diet: vegetables, white meat, milk in the morning, a very little
wine, but, above all things, no coffee.  Take moderate exercise, hunt--
and avoid all irritating thoughts; read the 'Musee des familles' or the
'Magasin Pittoresque'.  This regime will have the effect of a soothing
poultice upon your brain, and before the end of six months you will be in
your normal condition again.'

"'Six months!' I exclaimed.  'You wretch of a doctor, tell me, then, to
let my beard and nails grow like Nebuchadnezzar.  Six months!  You do not
know how I detest the country, partridges, rabbits and all.  For heaven's
sake, find some other remedy for me.'

"'There is homoeopathy,' said he, smiling.  'Hahnemann is quite the
fashion now.'

"'Let us have homoeopathy!'

"'You know the principles of the system: 'Similia similibus!' If you have
fever, redouble it; if you have smallpox, be inoculated with a triple
dose.  So far as you are concerned, you are a little used up and 'blase',
as we all are in this Babylon of ours; have recourse, then, as a remedy,
to the very excesses which have brought you into this state.
Homoeopathize yourself morally.  It may cure you, it may kill you; I wash
my hands of it.'

"The doctor was joking, I said to myself after he had left.  Does he
think that passions are like the Wandering Jew's five sous, that there
is nothing to do but to put your hand in your pocket and take them out
at your convenience when necessary.  However, this idea, strange as it
seemed, struck me forcibly.  I decided to try it.

"The next day at seven o'clock in the evening, I was rolling along the
road to Lyons.  Eight days later, I was rowing in a boat on Lake Geneva.
For a long time I had wanted to go to Switzerland, and it seemed as if I
could not have chosen a better time.  I hoped that the fresh mountain air
and the soft pure breezes from the lakes would communicate some of their
calm serenity to my heart and brain.

"There is something in Parisian life, I do not know what, so exclusive
and hardening, that it ends by making one irresponsive to sensations of a
more simple order.

"'My kingdom for the gutter in the Rue du Bac!' I exclaimed with Madame
de Stael from the height of the Coppet terrace.  The spectacle of nature
interests only contemplative and religious minds powerfully.  Mine was
neither the one nor the other.  My habits of analysis and observation
make me find more attraction in a characteristic face than in a
magnificent landscape; I prefer the exercising of thought to the careless
gratification of ecstasy, the study of flesh and soul to earthly
horizons, of human passions to a perfectly pure atmosphere.

"I met at Geneva an Englishman, who was as morose as myself.  We vented
our spleen in common and were both bored together.  We travelled thus
through the Oberland and the best part of Valais; we were often rolled up
in our travelling robes in the depths of the carriage, and fast asleep
when the most beautiful points of interest were in sight.

"From Valais we went to Mont-Blanc, and one night we arrived at
Chamounix--"

"Did you see any idiots in Valais?"  suddenly interrupted Marillac, as he
filled his pipe the second time.

"Several, and they were all horrible."

"Do you not think we might compose something with an idiot in it?  It
might be rather taking."

"It would not equal Caliban or Quasimodo; will you be so kind as to spare
me just now these efforts of imagination, and listen to me, for I am
reaching the interesting part of my story?"

"God be praised!"  said the artist, as he puffed out an enormous cloud of
smoke.

"The next day the Englishman was served with tea in his bedroom, and when
I asked him to go to the 'Mer de Glace' he turned his head toward the
wall; so, leaving my phlegmatic companion enveloped in bedclothes up to
his ears, I started alone for the Montanvert.

"It was a magnificent morning, and small parties of travellers, some on
foot, others mounted, skirted the banks of the Arve or climbed the sides
of the mountain.  They looked like groups of mice in the distance, and
this extreme lessening in size made one comprehend, better than anything
else, the immense proportions of the landscape.  As for myself, I was
alone: I had not even taken a guide, this was too favorite a resort for
tourists, for the precaution to be necessary.  For a wonder, I felt
rather gay, with an elasticity of body and mind which I had not felt in
some time.

I courageously began climbing the rough pathway which led to the Mer de
Glace, aiding myself with a long staff, which I had procured at the inn.

"At every step I breathed with renewed pleasure the fresh, pure, morning
air; I gazed vaguely at the different effects of the sun or mist, at the
undulations of the road, which sometimes rose almost straight up in the
air, sometimes followed a horizontal line, while skirting the open abyss
at the right.  The Arve, wending its course like a silvery ribbon, seemed
at times to recede, while the ridges of the perpendicular rocks stood out
more plainly.  At times, the noise of a falling avalanche was repeated,
echo after echo.  A troupe of German students below me were responding to
the voice of the glaciers by a chorus from Oberon.  Following the turns
in the road, I could see through the fir-trees, or, rather, at my feet,
their long Teutonic frock-coats, their blond beards, and caps about the
size of one's fist.  As I walked along, when the path was not too steep,
I amused myself by throwing my stick against the trunks of the trees
which bordered the roadside; I remember how pleased I was when I
succeeded in hitting them, which I admit was not very often.

"In the midst of this innocent amusement, I reached the spot where the
reign of the Alpine plants begins.  All at once I saw, above me, a rock
decked with rhododendrons; these flowers looked like tufts of oleanders
through the dark foliage of the fir-trees, and produced a charming
effect.  I left the path in order to reach them sooner, and when I had
gathered a bouquet, I threw my staff and at the same time uttered a
joyous cry, in imitation of the students, my companions on this trip.

"A frightened scream responded to mine.  My staff in its flight had
crossed the path and darted into an angle in the road.  At that same
moment, I saw a mule's head appear with ears thrown back in terror, then
the rest of its body, and upon its back a lady ready to fall into the
abyss.  Fright paralyzed me.  All aid was impossible on account of the
narrowness of the road, and this stranger's life depended upon her
coolness and the intelligence of her beast.  Finally the animal seemed to
regain its courage and began to walk away, lowering its head as if it
could still hear the terrible whistle of the javelin in his ears.  I
slipped from the rock upon which I stood and seized the mule by the
bridle, and succeeded in getting them out of a bad position.  I led the
animal in this way for some distance, until I reached a place where the
path was broader, and danger was over.

"I then offered my apologies to the person whose life I had just
compromised by my imprudence, and for the first time took a good look at
her.  She was young and well dressed; a black silk gown fitted her
slender form to perfection; her straw hat was fastened to the saddle, and
her long chestnut hair floated in disorder over her pale cheeks.  As she
heard my voice, she opened her eyes, which in her fright she had
instinctively closed; they seemed to me the most beautiful I had ever
seen in my life.

"She looked at the precipice and turned away with a shudder.  Her glance
rested upon me, and then upon the rhododendrons which I held in my hand.

"The frightened expression on her face was replaced immediately by one of
childish curiosity.

"'What pretty flowers!' she exclaimed, in a fresh, young voice.  "Are
those rhododendrons, Monsieur?'

"I presented her my bouquet without replying; as she hesitated about
taking it, I said:

"'If you refuse these flowers, Madame, I shall not believe that you have
pardoned me.'

"By this time, the persons who were with her had joined us.  There were
two other ladies, three or four men mounted upon mules, and several
guides.  At the word rhododendron, a rather large, handsome fellow,
dressed in a pretentious style, slipped from his mule and climbed the
somewhat steep precipice in quest of the flowers which seemed to be so
much in favor.  When he returned, panting for breath, with an enormous
bunch of them in his hand, the lady had already accepted mine.

"'Thank you, Monsieur de Mauleon,' said she, with a rather scornful air;
'offer your flowers to these ladies.' Then, with a slight inclination of
the head to me, she struck her mule with her whip, and they rode away.

"The rest of the company followed her, gazing at me as they passed, the
big, fashionable fellow especially giving me a rather impertinent glance.
I did not try to pick a quarrel with him on account of this discourteous
manifestation.  When the cavalcade was at some distance, I went in search
of my stick, which I found under a tree on the edge of the precipice;
then I continued climbing the steep path, with my eyes fastened upon the
rider in the black silk gown, her hair flying in the wind and my bouquet
in her hand.

"A few moments later, I reached the pavilion at the Montanvert, where I
found a gay company gathered together, made up principally of English
people.  As for myself, I must admit the frivolous, or, rather mundane,
bent of my tastes; the truly admirable spectacle presented to my eyes
interested me much less than the young stranger, who at this moment was
descending with the lightness of a sylph the little road which led to the
Mer de Glace.

"I do not know what mysterious link bound me to this woman.  I had met
many much more beautiful, but the sight of them had left me perfectly
indifferent.  This one attracted me from the first.  The singular
circumstances of this first interview, doubtless, had something to do
with the impression.  I felt glad to see that she had kept my bouquet;
she held it in one hand, while she leaned with the other upon a staff
somewhat like my own.  The two other ladies, and even the men had stopped
on the edge of the ice.

Monsieur de Mauleon wished to fulfil his duties as escort, but at the
first crevasse he had also halted without manifesting the slightest
desire to imitate the chamois.  The young woman seemed to take a
malicious pleasure in contemplating her admirer's prudent attitude, and,
far from listening to the advice he gave her, she began to run upon the
ice, bounding over the crevasses with the aid of her stick.  I was
admiring her lightness and thoughtlessness, but with an uneasy feeling,
when I saw her suddenly stop.  I instinctively ran toward her.  An
enormous crevasse of great depth lay at her feet, blue at its edges and
dark in its depths.  She stood motionless before this frightful gulf with
hands thrown out before her in horror, but charmed like a bird about to
be swallowed by a serpent.  I knew the irresistible effect upon nervous
temperaments of this magnetic attraction toward an abyss.  I seized her
by the arm, the suddenness of the movement made her drop her staff and
flowers, which fell into the depths of the chasm.

"I tried to lead her away, but after she had taken a few steps, I felt
her totter; she had grown pale; her eyes were closed.  I threw my arm
about her, in order to support her and turned her face toward the north;
the cold air striking her revived her, and she soon opened her beautiful
brown eyes.  I do not know what sudden tenderness seized me then, but I
pressed this lovely creature within my grasp, and she remained in my arms
unresistingly.  I felt that I loved her already.

"She remained for a moment with her languishing eyes fixed on mine,
making no response, perhaps not even having heard me.  The shouts of her
party, some of whom were coming toward her, broke the charm.  With a
rapid movement, she withdrew from my embrace, and I offered her my arm,
just as if we were in a drawing-room and I was about to lead her out for
a dance; she took it, but I did not feel elated at this, for I could feel
her knees waver at every step.  The smallest crevasse, which she had
crossed before with such agility, now inspired her with a horror which I
could divine by the trembling of her arm within mine.  I was obliged to
make numerous detours in order to avoid them, and thus prolonged the
distance, for which I was not sorry.  Did I not know that when we reached
our destination, the world, that other sea of ice, was going to take her
away from me, perhaps forever?  We walked silently, occasionally making a
few trivial remarks, both deeply embarrassed.  When we reached the
persons who awaited her, I said, as she disengaged my arm:

"'You dropped my flowers, Madame; will it be the same with your memory of
me?'

"She looked at me, but made no reply.  I loved this silence.  I bowed
politely to her and returned to the pavilion, while she related her
adventure to her friends; but I am quite sure she did not tell all the
details.

"The register for travellers who visit the Montan-Vert is a mixture of
all nationalities, and no tourist refuses his tribute; modest ones write
down their names only.  I hoped in this way to learn the name of the
young traveller, and I was not disappointed.  I soon saw the corpulent
Monsieur de Mauleon busily writing his name upon the register in
characters worthy of Monsieur Prudhomme; the other members of the little
party followed his example.  The young woman was the last to write down
her name.  I took the book in my turn, after she had left, and with
apparent composure I read upon the last line these words, written in a
slender handwriting:

"Baroness Clemence de Bergenheim."




CHAPTER VII

GERFAUT ASKS A FAVOR

"The Baroness de Bergenheim!"  exclaimed Marillac.  "Ah!  I understand it
all now, and you may dispense with the remainder of your story.  So this
was the reason why, instead of visiting the banks of the Rhine as we
agreed, you made me leave the route at Strasbourg under the pretext of
walking through the picturesque sites of the Vosges.  It was unworthy of
you to abuse my confidence as a friend.  And I allowed myself to be led
by the nose to within a mile of Bergenheim!"

"Peace," interrupted Gerfaut; "I have not finished.  Smoke and listen.

"I followed Madame de Bergenheim as far as Geneva.  She had gone there
from here with her aunt, and had availed herself of this journey to visit
Mont Blanc.  She left for her home the next day without my meeting her
again; but I preserved her name, and it was not unknown to me.  I had
heard it spoken in several houses in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, and I
knew that I should certainly have an opportunity of meeting her during
the winter.

"So I remained at Geneva, yielding to a sensation as new as it was
strange.  It first acted upon my brain whose ice I felt melting away,
and its sources ready to gush forth.  I seized my pen with a passion not
unlike an access of rage.  I finished in four days two acts of a drama
that I was then writing.  I never had written anything more vigorous or
more highly colored.  My unconstrained genius throbbed in my arteries,
ran through my blood, and bubbled over as if it wished to burst forth.
My hand could not keep even with the course of my imagination; I was
obliged to write in hieroglyphics.

"Adieu to the empty reveries brought about by spleen, and to the
meditations 'a la Werther'!  The sky was blue, the air pure, life
delightful--my talent was not dead.

"After this first effort, I slackened a little!  Madame de Bergenheim's
face, which I had seen but dimly during this short time, returned to me
in a less vaporous form; I took extreme delight in calling to mind the
slightest circumstances of our meeting, the smallest details of her
features, her toilette, her manner of walking and carrying her head.
What had impressed me most was the extreme softness of her dark eyes,
the almost childish tone of her voice, a vague odor of heliotrope with
which her hair was perfumed; also the touch of her hand upon my arm.
I sometimes caught myself embracing myself in order to feel this last
sensation again, and then I could not help laughing at my thoughts, which
were worthy of a fifteen-year-old lover.

"I had felt so convinced of my powerlessness to love, that the thought of
a serious passion did not at first enter my mind.  However, a remembrance
of my beautiful traveller pervaded my thoughts more and more, and
threatened to usurp the place of everything else.  I then subjected
myself to a rigid analysis; I sought for the exact location of this
sentiment whose involuntary yoke I already felt; I persuaded myself,
for some time yet, that it was only the transient excitement of my brain,
one of those fevers of imagination whose fleeting titillations I had felt
more than once.

"But I realized that the evil, or the good--for why call love an evil?--
had penetrated into the most remote regions of my being, and I realized
the energy of my struggle like a person entombed who tries to extricate
himself.  From the ashes of this volcano which I had believed to be
extinct, a flower had suddenly blossomed, perfumed with the most fragrant
of odors and decked with the most charming colors.  Artless enthusiasm,
faith in love, all the brilliant array of the fresh illusions of my youth
returned, as if by enchantment, to greet this new bloom of my life; it
seemed to me as if I had been created a second time, since I was aided by
intelligence and understood its mysteries while tasting of its delights.
My past, in the presence of this regeneration, was nothing more than a
shadow at the bottom of an abyss.  I turned toward the future with the
faith of a Mussulman who kneels with his face toward the East--I loved!

"I returned to Paris, and applied to my friend Casorans, who knows the
Faubourg Saint-Germain from Dan to Beersheba.

"'Madame de Bergenheim,' he said to me, 'is a very popular society woman,
not very pretty, perhaps, rather clever, though, and very amiable.  She
is one of our coquettes of the old nobility, and with her twenty-four
carats' virtue she always has two sufferers attached to her chariot,
and a third on the waiting-list, and yet it is impossible for one to find
a word to say against her behavior.  Just at this moment, Mauleon and
d'Arzenac compose the team; I do not know who is on the waiting-list.
She will probably spend the winter here with her aunt, Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil, one of the hatefullest old women on the Rue de Varennes.
The husband is a good fellow who, since the July revolution, has lived
upon his estates, caring for his forests and killing wild boars without
troubling himself much about his wife.'

"He then told me which houses these ladies frequented, and left me,
saying with a knowing air:

"'Take care, if you intend to try the power of your seductions upon the
little Baroness; whoever meddles with her smarts for it!'

"This information from a viper like Casorans satisfied me in every way.
Evidently the place was not taken; impregnable, that was another thing.

"Before Madame de Bergenheim's return, I began to show myself assiduously
at the houses of which my friend had spoken.  My position in the Faubourg
Saint-Germain is peculiar, but good, according to my opinion.  I have
enough family ties to be sustained by several should I be attacked by
many, and this is the essential point.  It is true that, thanks to my
works, I am regarded as an atheist and a Jacobin; aside from these two
little defects, they think well enough of me.  Besides, it is a notorious
fact that I have rejected several offers from the present government,
and refused last year the 'croix d'honneur'; this makes amends and washes
away half my sins.  Finally, I have the reputation of having a certain-
knowledge of heraldry, which I owe to my uncle, a confirmed hunter after
genealogical claims.  This gains me a respect which makes me laugh
sometimes, when I see people who detest me greet me as cordially as the
Cure of Saint-Eustache greeted Bayle, for fear that I might destroy their
favorite saint.  However, in this society, I am no longer Gerfaut of the
Porte-Saint-Martin, but I am the Vicomte de Gerfaut.  Perhaps, with your
bourgeois ideas, you do not understand--"

"Bourgeois!"  exclaimed Marillac, bounding from his seat, "what are you
talking about?  Do you wish that we should cut each other's throats
before breakfast to-morrow?  Bourgeois! why not grocer?  I am an artist--
don't you know that by this time?"

"Don't get angry, my dear fellow; I meant to say that in certain places
the title of a Vicomte has still a more powerful attraction than you,
with your artistic but plebeian ideas, would suppose in this year of our
Lord 1832."

"Well and good.  I accept your apology."

"A vicomte's title is a recommendation in the eyes of people who still
cling to the baubles of nobility, and all women are of this class.  There
is something, I know not what, delicate and knightly in this title, which
suits a youngish bachelor.  Duke above all titles is the one that sounds
the best.  Moliere and Regnard have done great harm to the title of
marquis.  Count is terribly bourgeois, thanks to the senators of the
empire.  As to a Baron, unless he is called Montmorency or Beaufremont,
it is the lowest grade of nobility; vicomte, on the contrary, is above
reproach; it exhales a mixed odor of the old regime and young France;
then, don't you know, our Chateaubriand was a vicomte.

"I departed from my subject in speaking of nobility.  I accidentally
turned over one day to the article upon my family in the Dictionnaire de
Saint-Allais; I found that one of my ancestors, Christophe de Gerfaut,
married, in 1569, a Mademoiselle Yolande de Corandeuil.

"'O my ancestor!  O my ancestress!' I exclaimed, 'you had strange
baptismal names; but no matter, I thank you.  You are going to serve me
as a grappling iron; I shall be very unskilful if at the very first
meeting the old aunt escapes Christophe.'

"A few days later I went to the Marquise de Chameillan's, one of the most
exclusive houses in the noble Faubourg.  When I enter her drawing-room,
I usually cause the same sensation that Beelzebub would doubtless produce
should he put his foot into one of the drawing-rooms in Paradise.  That
evening, when I was announced, I saw a certain undulation of heads in a
group of young women who were whispering to one another; many curious
eyes were fastened upon me, and among these beautiful eyes were two more
beautiful than all the others: they were those of my bewitching
traveller.

"I exchanged a rapid glance with her, one only; after paying my respects
to the mistress of the house, I mingled with a crowd of men, and entered
into conversation with an old peer upon some political question, avoiding
to look again toward Madame de Bergenheim.

"A moment later, Madame de Chameillan came to ask the peer to play whist;
he excused himself, he could not remain late.

"'I dare not ask you to play with Mademoiselle de Corandeuil,' said she,
turning toward me; 'besides, I understand too well that it is to my
interest and the pleasure of these ladies, not to exile you to a whist
table.'

"I took the card which she half offered me with an eagerness which might
have made her suppose that I had become a confirmed whist expert during
my voyage.

"Mademoiselle de Corandeuil certainly was the ugly, crabbed creature that
Casorans had described; but had she been as frightful as the witches in
Macbeth I was determined to make her conquest.  So I began playing with
unusual attention.  I was her partner, and I knew from experience the
profound horror which the loss of money inspires in old women.  Thank
heaven, we won!  Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, who has an income of one
hundred thousand francs, was not at all indifferent to the gain of two or
three louis.  She, therefore, with an almost gracious air, congratulated
me, as we left the table, upon my manner of playing.

"'I would willingly contract an alliance, offensive and defensive with
you,' said she to me.

"'The alliance is already contracted, Mademoiselle,' said I, seizing the
opportunity.

"'How is that, Monsieur?' she replied, raising her head with a dignified
air, as if she were getting ready to rebuke some impertinent speech.

"I also gravely straightened up and gave a feudal look to my face.

"'Mademoiselle, I have the honor of belonging to your family, a little
distantly, to be sure; that is what makes me speak of an alliance between
us as a thing already concluded.  One of my ancestors, Christophe de
Gerfaut, married Mademoiselle Yolande de Corandeuil, one of your great-
grand-aunts, in 1569.'

"'Yolande is really a family name,' replied the old lady, with the most
affable smile that her face would admit; 'I bear it myself.  The
Corandeuils, Monsieur, never have denied their alliances, and it is a
pleasure for me to recognize my relationship with such a man as you.  We
address by the title of cousin relatives as far back as 1300.'

"'I am nearer related to you by three centuries,' I replied, in my most
insinuating voice; 'may I hope that this good fortune will authorize me
to pay my respects to you?'

"Mademoiselle de Corandeuil replied to my 'tartuferie' by granting me
permission to call upon her.  My attention was not so much absorbed in
our conversation that I did not see in a mirror, during this time, the
interest with which Madame de Bergenheim watched my conversation with her
aunt; but I was careful not to turn around, and I let her take her
departure without giving her a second glance.

"Three days later, I made my first call.  Madame de Bergenheim received
my greeting like a woman who had been warned and was, therefore,
prepared.  We exchanged only one rapid, earnest glance, that was all.
Availing myself of the presence of other callers, numerous enough to
assure each one his liberty, I began to observe, with a practised eye,
the field whereon I had just taken my position.

"Before the end of the evening, I recognized the correctness of
Casorans's information.  Among all the gentlemen present I found only
two professed admirers: Monsieur de Mauleon, whose insignificance was
notorious, and Monsieur d'Arzenac, who appeared at first glance as if
he might be more to be feared.  D'Arzenac, thanks to an income of ten
thousand livres, beside being a man of rank, occupies also one of the
finest positions that one could desire; he is not unworthy of his name
and his fortune.  Irreproachable in morals as in manners; sufficiently
well informed; of an exquisite but reserved politeness; understanding
perfectly the ground that he is walking upon; making also more advances
than is customary among the pachas of modern France, he was, without
doubt, the flower of the flock in Mademoiselle de Corandeuil's drawing-
room.  In spite of all these advantages, an attentive examination showed
me that his passion was hopeless.  Madame de Bergenheim received his
attentions very kindly--too kindly.  She usually listened to him with a
smile in which one could read gratitude for the devotion he lavished upon
her.  She willingly accepted him as her favorite partner in the galop,
which he danced to perfection.  His success stopped there.

"At the end of several days, the ground having been carefully explored
and the admirers, dangerous and otherwise, having been passed in review,
one after another, I felt convinced that Clemence loved nobody.

"'She shall love me,' said I, on the day I reached this conclusion.  In
order to formulate in a decisive manner the accomplishment of my desire,
I relied upon the following propositions, which are to me articles of
faith.

"No woman is unattainable, except when she loves another.  Thus, a woman
who does not love, and who has resisted nine admirers, will yield to the
tenth.  The only question for me was to be the tenth.  Here began the
problem to be solved.

"Madame de Bergenheim had been married only three years; her husband, who
was good-looking and young, passed for a model husband; if these latter
considerations were of little importance, the first was of great weight.
According to all probability, it was too soon for any serious attack.
Without being beautiful, she pleased much and many; a second obstacle,
since sensibility in women is almost always developed in inverse ratio to
their success.  She had brains; she was wonderfully aristocratic in all
her tastes.

Last, being very much the fashion, sought after and envied, she was under
the special surveillance of pious persons, old maids, retired beauties in
one word, all that feminine mounted police, whose eyes, ears, and mouths
seem to have assumed the express mission of annoying sensitive hearts
while watching over the preservation of good morals.

"This mass of difficulties, none of which escaped me, traced as many
lines upon my forehead as if I had been commanded to solve at once all
the propositions in Euclid.  She shall love me! these words flashed
unceasingly before my eyes; but the means to attain this end?  No
satisfactory plan came to me.  Women are so capricious, deep, and
unfathomable!  It is, with them, the thing soonest done which is soonest
ended!  A false step, the least awkwardness, a want of intelligence, a
quarter of an hour too soon or too late!  One thing only was evident: it
needed a grand display of attractions, a complete plan of gallant
strategy; but, then, what more?

"That earthly paradise of the Montanvert was far from us, where I had
been able in less time than it would take to walk over a quadrille, to
expose her to death, to save her afterward, and finally to say to her 'I
love you!'  Passion in drawing-rooms is not allowed those free, dramatic
ways; flowers fade in the candle-light; the oppressive atmosphere of
balls and fetes stifles the heart, so ready to dilate in pure mountain
air.  The unexpected and irresistible influence of the glacier would have
been improper and foolish in Paris.  There, an artless sympathy, stronger
than social conventions, had drawn us to each other--Octave and Clemence.
Here, she was the Baroness de Bergenheim, and I the Vicomte de Gerfaut.
I must from necessity enter the ordinary route, begin the romance at the
first page, without knowing how to connect the prologue with it.

"What should be my plan of campaign?

"Should I pose as an agreeable man, and try to captivate her attention
and good graces by the minute attentions and delicate flattery which
constitute what is classically called paying court?  But D'Arzenac had
seized this role, and filled it in such a superior way that all
competition would be unsuccessful.  I saw where this had led him.  It
needed, in order to inflame this heart, a more active spark than foppish
gallantry; the latter flatters the vanity without reaching the heart.

"There was the passionate method--ardent, burning, fierce love.  There
are some women upon whom convulsive sighs drawn from the depths of the
stomach, eyebrows frowning in a fantastic manner, and eyes in which only
the whites are to be seen and which seem to say: 'Love me, or I will kill
you!' produce a prodigious effect.  I had myself felt the power of this
fascination while using it one day upon a softhearted blond creature who
thought it delightful to have a Blue-Beard for a lover.  But the drooping
corners of Clemence's mouth showed at times an ironical expression which
would have cooled down even an Othello's outbursts.

"'She has brains, and she knows it,' said I to myself; 'shall I attack
her in that direction?' Women rather like such a little war of words; it
gives them an opportunity for displaying a mine of pretty expressions,
piquant pouts, fresh bursts of laughter, graceful peculiarities of which
they well know the effect.  Should I be the Benedict to this Beatrice?
But this by-play would hardly fill the prologue, and I very much wished
to reach the epilogue.

"I passed in review the different routes that a lover might take to reach
his end; I recapitulated every one of the more or less infallible methods
of conquering female hearts; in a word, I went over my tactics like a
lieutenant about to drill a battalion of recruits.  When I had ended I
had made no farther advance than before.

"'To the devil with systems!' exclaimed I; 'I will not be so foolish as
wilfully to adopt the role of roue when I feel called upon to play the
plain role of true lover.  Let those who like play the part of Lovelace!
As for myself, I will love; upon the whole, that is what pleases best.'
And I jumped headlong into the torrent without troubling myself as to the
place of landing.

"While I was thus scheming my attack, Madame de Bergenheim was upon her
guard and had prepared her means of defence.  Puzzled by my reserve,
which was in singular contrast with my almost extravagant conduct at our
first meeting, her woman's intelligence had surmised, on my part, a plan
which she proposed to baffle.  I was partly found out, but I knew it and
thus kept the advantage.

"I could not help smiling at the Baroness's clever coquetry, when I
decided to follow the inspirations of my heart, instead of choosing
selfish motives as my guide.  Every time I took her hand when dancing
with her, I expected to feel a little claw ready to pierce the cold
glove.  But, while waiting for the scratch, it was a very soft, velvety
little hand that was given me; and I, who willingly lent myself to her
deception, did not feel very much duped.  It was evident that the sort of
halo which my merited or unmerited reputation had thrown over me had made
me appear to her as a conquest of some value, a victim upon whom one
could lavish just enough flowers in order to bring him to the sacrificial
altar.  In order to wind the first chain around my neck, Mauleon and
D'Arzenac, 'a tutti quanti', were sacrificed for me without my
soliciting, even by a glance, this general disbandment.  I could
interpret this discharge.  I saw that the fair one wished to concentrate
all her seductions against me, so as to leave me no means of escape;
people neglect the hares to hunt for the deer.  You must excuse my
conceit.

"This conduct wounded me at first, but I afterward forgave her, when a
more careful examination taught me to know this adorable woman's
character.  Coquetry was with her not a vice of the heart or of an
unscrupulous mind; having nothing better to do, she enjoyed it as a
legitimate pastime, without giving it any importance or feeling any
scruples.  Like all women, she liked to please; her success was sweet to
her vanity; perhaps flattery turned her head at times, but in the midst
of this tumult her heart remained in perfect peace.  She found so little
danger for herself in the game she played that it did not seem to her
that it could be very serious for others.  Genuine love is not common
enough in Parisian parlors for a pretty woman to conceive any great
remorse at pleasing without loving.

"Madame de Bergenheim was thus, ingenuously, unsuspectingly, a matchless
coquette.  Never having loved, not even her husband, she looked upon her
little intriguing as one of the rights earned on the day of her marriage,
the same as her diamonds and cashmeres.  There was something touching in
the sound of her voice and in her large, innocent eyes which she
sometimes allowed to rest upon mine, without thinking to turn them away,
and which said, 'I have never loved.' As for myself, I believed it all;
one is so happy to believe!

"Far from being annoyed at the trap she laid for me, I, on the contrary,
ran my head into it and presented my neck to the yoke with a docility
which must have amused her, I think; but I hoped not to bear it alone.
A coquette who coolly flaunts her triumphs to the world resembles those
master-swimmers who, while spectators are admiring the grace of their
poses, are struck by an unexpected current; the performer is sometimes
swept away and drowned without his elegant strokes being of much service
to him.  Throw Celimene into the current of genuine passion--I do not
mean the brutality of Alceste--I will wager that coquetry will be swept
away by love.  I had such faith in mine that I thought to be able to fix
the moment when I should call myself victorious and sure of being obeyed.

"You know that sadness and ennui were considered etiquette last winter,
in a certain society, which was thrown into mourning by the July
revolution.  Reunions were very few; there were no balls or soirees;
dancing in drawing-rooms to the piano was hardly permissible, even with
intimate friends.  When once I was installed in Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil's drawing-room upon a friendly footing, this cessation of
worldly festivities gave me an opportunity to see Clemence in a rather
intimate way.

"It would take too long to tell you now all the thousand and one little
incidents which compose the history of all passions.  Profiting by her
coquetry, which made her receive me kindly in order to make me expiate my
success afterward, my love for her was soon an understood thing between
us; she listened to me in a mocking way, but did not dispute my right to
speak.  She ended by receiving my letters, after being constrained to do
so through a course of strategies in which, truly, I showed incredible
invention.  I was listened to and she read my letters; I asked for
nothing more.

"My love, from the first, had been her secret as well as mine; but every
day I made to sparkle some unexpected facet of this prism of a thousand
colors.  Even after telling her a hundred times how much I adored her,
my love still had for her the attraction of the unknown.  I really had
something inexhaustible in my heart, and I was sure, in the end,
to intoxicate her with this philtre, which I constantly poured out
and which she drank, while making sport of it like a child.

"One day I found her thoughtful and silent.  She did not reply to me with
her usual sprightliness during the few moments that I was able to talk
with her; the expression of her eyes had changed; there was something
deeper and less glowing in their depths; instead of dazzling me by their
excessive splendor, as had often happened to me before, they seemed to
soften as they rested on mine; she kept her eyelids a trifle lowered,
as if she were tired of being gazed at by me.  Her voice, as she spoke,
had a low, soft sound, a sort of inexplicable something which came from
the very depths of her soul.  She never had looked at me with that glance
or spoken to me in that tone before.  Upon that day I knew that she loved
me.

"I returned to my home unutterably happy, for I loved this woman with a
love of which I believed myself incapable.

"When I met Madame de Bergenheim again, I found her completely changed
toward me; an icy gravity, an impassible calm, an ironical and disdainful
haughtiness had taken the place of the delicious abandon of her former
bearing.  In spite of my strong determination to allow myself to love
with the utmost candor, it was impossible for me to return to that happy
age when the frowning brows of the beautiful idol to whom we paid court
inspired us with the resolve to drown ourselves.  I could not isolate
myself from my past experiences.  My heart was rejuvenated, but my head
remained old.  I was, therefore, not in the least discouraged by this
change of humor, and the fit of anger which it portended.

"'Now,' said I to myself, 'there is an end to coquetry, it is beaten on
all sides; it is gone, never to return.  She has seen that the affair is
a little too deep for that, and the field not tenable.  She will erect
barriers in order to defend herself and will no longer attack.'  Thus we
pass from the period of amiable smiles, sweet glances, and half-avowals
to that of severity and prudery, while waiting for the remorse and
despair of the denouement.  I am sure that at this time she called to her
help all her powers of resistance.  From that day she would retreat
behind the line of duty, conjugal fidelity, honor, and all the other fine
sentiments which would need numbering after the fashion of Homer.  At the
first attack, all this household battalion would make a furious sortie;
should I succeed in overthrowing them and take up my quarters in the
trenches, there would then be a gathering of the reserve force, and
boiling oil or tar would rain upon my head, representing virtue,
religion, heaven, and hell."

"A sort of conjugal earthquake," interrupted Marillac.

"I calculated the strength and approximate duration of these means of
defence.  The whole thing appeared to me only a question of time, a few
days or weeks at most--so long on the husband's account, so long on the
father confessor's account.  I deserved to be boxed on the ears for my
presumption; I was.

"A combat is necessary in order to secure a victory.  In spite of all my
efforts and ruses, it was not possible for me to fight this combat; I did
not succeed, in spite of all my challenges, in shattering, as I expected,
this virtuous conjugal fortress.  Madame de Bergenheim still persisted in
her systematic reserve, with incredible prudence and skill.  During the
remainder of the winter, I did not find more than one opportunity of
speaking to her alone.  As I was a permanent fixture every evening in her
aunt's parlors, she entered them only when other guests were there.  She
never went out alone, and in every place where I was likely to meet her
I was sure to find a triple rampart of women erected between us, through
which it was impossible to address one word to her.  In short, I was
encountering a desperate resistance; and, yet, she loved me!  I could see
her cheeks gradually grow pale; her brilliant eyes often had dark rings
beneath them, as if sleep had deserted her.  Sometimes, when she thought
she was not observed, I surprised them fastened upon me; but she
immediately turned them away.

"She had been coquettish and indifferent; she was now loving but
virtuous.

"Spring came.  One afternoon I went to call upon Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil, who had been ill for several days.  I was received, however,
probably through some mistake of the servants.  As I entered the room
I saw Madame de Bergenheim; she was alone at her embroidery, seated upon
a divan.  There were several vases of flowers in the windows, whose
curtains only permitted a soft, mysterious light to penetrate the room.
The perfume from the flowers, the sort of obscurity, the solitude in
which I found her, overcame me for a moment; I was obliged to pause in
order to quiet the beating of my heart.

"She arose as she heard my name announced; without speaking or laying
down her work, she pointed to a chair and seated herself; but instead of
obeying her, I fell upon my knees before her and seized her hands, which
she did not withdraw.  It had been impossible for me to say another word
to her before, save 'I love you!' I now told her of all my love.  Oh!
I am sure of it, my words penetrated to the very depth of her heart,
for I felt her hands tremble as they left mine.  She listened without
interrupting me or making any reply, with her face bent toward me as if
she were breathing the perfume of a flower.  When I begged her to answer
me, when I implored her for one single word from her heart, she withdrew
one of her hands, imprisoned within mine, and placed it upon my forehead,
pushing back my head with a gesture familiar to women.  She gazed at me
thus for a long time; her eyes were so languishing under their long
lashes, and their languor was so penetrating, that I closed mine, not
being able to endure the fascination of this glance any longer.

"A shiver which ran over her and which went through me also, like an
electric shock, aroused me.  When I opened my eyes I saw her face bathed
in tears.  She drew back and repelled me.  I arose impetuously, seated
myself by her side and took her in my arms.

"'Am I not a wretched, unhappy woman?' said she, and fell upon my breast,
sobbing.

"'Madame la Comtesse de Pontiviers,' announced the servant, whom I would
willingly have assassinated, as well as the visiting bore who followed in
his footsteps.

"I never saw Madame de Bergenheim in Paris again.  I was obliged to go to
Bordeaux the next day, on account of a lawsuit which you know all about.
Upon my return, at the end of three weeks, I found she had left.  I
finally learned that she had come to this place, and I followed her.
That is the extent of my drama.

"Now you know very well that I have not related this long story to you
for the sole pleasure of keeping you awake until one o'clock in the
morning.  I wanted to explain to you that it was really a serious thing
for me, so that you might not refuse to do what I wish to ask of you."

"I think I understand what you are aiming at," said Marillac, rather
pensively.

"You know Bergenheim; you will go to see him to-morrow.  He will invite
you to pass a few days with him; you will stay to dinner.  You will see
Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, in whose presence you will speak my name as
you refer to our journey; and before night, my venerable cousin of 1569
shall send me an invitation to come to see her."

"I would rather render you any other service than this," replied the
artist, walking up and down the room in long strides.  "I know very well
that in all circumstances bachelors should triumph over husbands, but
that does not prevent my conscience from smiting me.  You know that I
saved Bergenheim's life?"

"Rest assured that he runs no very great danger at present.  Nothing will
result from this step save the little enjoyment I shall take in annoying
the cruel creature who defied me today.  Is it agreed?"

"Since you insist upon it.  But then, when our visit is ended, shall we
go to work at our drama or upon 'The Chaste Suzannah' opera in three
acts?  For, really, you neglected art terribly for the sake of your love
affairs."

"The Chaste Suzannah or the whole Sacred History we shall put into
vaudeville, if you exact it.  Until to-morrow, then."

"Until to-morrow."




CHAPTER VIII

A LOVER'S RUSE

It was three o'clock in the afternoon; the drawing-room of the Chateau
de Bergenheim presented its usual aspect and occupants.  The fire on the
hearth, lighted during the morning, was slowly dying, and a beautiful
autumn sun threw its rays upon the floor through the half-opened windows.
Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, stretched on the couch before the fireplace
with Constance at her feet, was reading, according to her habit, the
newspapers which had just arrived.  Madame de Bergenheim seemed very
busily occupied with a piece of tapestry in her lap; but the slow manner
in which her needle moved, and the singular mistakes she made, showed
that her mind was far away from the flowers she was working.  She had
just finished a beautiful dark lily, which contrasted strangely with its
neighbors, when a servant entered.

"Madame," said he, "there is a person here inquiring for Monsieur le
Baron de Bergenheim."

"Is Monsieur de Bergenheim not at home?"  asked Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil.

"Monsieur has gone to ride with Mademoiselle Aline."

"Who is this person?"

"It is a gentleman; but I did not ask his name."

"Let him enter."

Clemence arose at the servant's first words and threw her work upon a
chair, making a movement as if to leave the room; but after a moment's
reflection, she resumed her seat and her work, apparently indifferent as
to who might enter.

"Monsieur de Marillac," announced the lackey, as he opened the door a
second time.

Madame de Bergenheim darted a rapid glance at the individual who
presented himself, and then breathed freely again.

After setting to rights his coiffure 'a la Perinet', the artist entered
the room, throwing back his shoulders.  Tightly buttoned up in his
travelling redingote, and balancing with ease a small gray hat, he bowed
respectfully to the two ladies and then assumed a pose a la Van Dyke.

Constance was so frightened at the sight of this imposing figure that,
instead of jumping at the newcomer's legs, as was her custom, she
sheltered herself under her mistress's chair, uttering low growls; at
first glance the latter shared, if not the terror, at least the aversion
of her dog.  Among her numerous antipathies, Mademoiselle de Corandeuil
detested a beard.  This was a common sentiment with all old ladies, who
barely tolerated moustaches: "Gentlemen did not wear them in 1780," they
would say.

Marillac's eyes turned involuntarily toward the portraits, and other
picturesque details of a room which was worthy the attention of a
connoisseur; but he felt that the moment was not opportune for indulging
in artistic contemplation, and that he must leave the dead for the
living.

"Ladies," said he, "I ought, first of all, to ask your pardon for thus
intruding without having had the honor of an introduction.  I hoped to
find here Monsieur de Bergenheim, with whom I am on very intimate terms.
I was told that he was at the chateau."

"My husband's friends do not need to be presented at his house," said
Clemence; "Monsieur de Bergenheim probably will return soon."  And with a
gracious gesture she motioned the visitor to a seat.

"Your name is not unknown to me," said Mademoiselle de Corandeuil in her
turn, having succeeded in calming Constance's agitation.  "I remember
having heard Monsieur de Bergenheim mention you often."

"We were at college together, although I am a few years younger than
Christian."

"But," exclaimed Madame de Bergenheim, struck by some sudden thought,
"there is more than a college friendship between you.  Are you not,
Monsieur, the person who saved my husband's life in 1830?"

Marillac smiled, bowed his head, and seated himself.  Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil herself could not but graciously greet her nephew's preserver,
had he had a moustache as long as that of the Shah of Persia, who ties
his in a bow behind his neck.

After the exchange of a few compliments, Madame de Bergenheim, with the
amiability of a mistress of the house who seeks subjects of conversation
that may show off to best advantage the persons she receives, continued:

"My husband does not like to talk of himself, and never has told us the
details of this adventure, in which he ran such great danger.  Will you
be kind enough to gratify our curiosity on this point?"

Marillac, among his other pretensions, had that of being able to relate a
story in an impressive manner.  These words were as pleasing to his ears
as the request for a song is to a lady who requires urging, although she
is dying to sing.

"Ladies," said he, crossing one leg over the other and leaning upon one
arm of his chair, "it was on the twenty-eighth of July, 1830; the
disastrous decrees had produced their effects; the volcano which--"

"Pardon me, Monsieur, if I interrupt you," said Mademoiselle de
Corandeuil, quickly; "according to my opinion, and that of many others,
the royal decrees you speak of were good and necessary.  The only mistake
of Charles Tenth was not to have fifty thousand men around Paris to force
their acceptance.  I am only a woman, Monsieur, but if I had had under my
command twenty cannon upon the quays, and as many upon the boulevards, I
assure you that your tricolored flag never should have floated over the
Tuileries."

"Pitt and Cobourg!"  said the artist between his teeth, as, with an
astonished air, he gazed at the old lady; but his common-sense told him
that republicanism was not acceptable within this castle.  Besides,
remembering the mission with which he was charged, he did not think his
conscience would feel much hurt if he made a little concession of
principles and manoeuvred diplomatically.

"Madame," replied he, "I call the decrees disastrous when I think of
their result.  You will certainly admit that our situation to-day ought
to make everybody regret the causes which brought it about."

"We are exactly of the same opinion regarding that point, Monsieur," said
Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, resuming her serenity.

"The open volcano beneath our feet," continued Marillac, who still stuck
to his point, "warned us by deep rumblings of the hot lava which was
about to gush forth.  The excitement of the people was intense.  Several
engagements with the soldiers had already taken place at different
points.  I stood on the Boulevard Poissonniere, where I had just taken my
luncheon, and was gazing with an artist's eye upon the dramatic scene
spread out before me.  Men with bare arms and women panting with
excitement were tearing up the pavements or felling trees.  An omnibus
had just been upset; the rioters added cabriolets, furniture, and casks
to it; everything became means of defence.  The crashing of the trees as
they fell, the blows of crowbars on the stones, the confused roaring of
thousands of voices, the Marseillaise sung in chorus, and the irregular
cannonading which resounded from the direction of the Rue Saint-Denis,
all composed a strident, stupefying, tempestuous harmony, beside which
Beethoven's Tempest would have seemed like the buzzing of a bee.

"I was listening to the roaring of the people, who were gnawing at their
chains before breaking them, when my eyes happened to fall upon a window
of a second-floor apartment opposite me.  A man about sixty years of age,
with gray hair, a fresh, plump face, an honest, placid countenance, and
wearing a mouse-colored silk dressing-gown, was seated before a small,
round table.  The window opened to the floor, and I could see him in this
frame like a full-length portrait.  There was a bowl of coffee upon the
table, in which he dipped his roll as he read his journal.  I beg your
pardon, ladies, for entering into these petty details, but the habit of
writing--"

"I assure you, Monsieur, your story interests me very much," said Madame
de Bergenheim, kindly.

"A King Charles spaniel, like yours, Mademoiselle, was standing near the
window with his paws resting upon it; he was gazing with curiosity at the
revolution of July, while his master was reading his paper and sipping
his coffee, as indifferent to all that passed as if he had been in Pekin
or New York.

"'Oh, the calm of a pure, sincere soul!' I exclaimed to myself, at the
sight of this little tableau worthy of Greuze; 'oh, patriarchal
philosophy!  in a few minutes perhaps blood will flow in the streets, and
here sits a handsome old man quietly sipping his coffee.' He seemed like
a lamb browsing upon a volcano."

Marillac loved volcanoes, and never lost an opportunity to bring one in
at every possible opportunity.

"Suddenly a commotion ran through the crowd; the people rushed in every
direction, and in an instant the boulevard was empty.  Plumes waving from
high caps, red-and-white flags floating from the ends of long lances,
and the cavalcade that I saw approaching through the trees told me the
cause of this panic.  A squadron of lancers was charging.  Have you ever
seen a charge of lancers?"

"Never!"  said both of the ladies at once.

"It is a very grand sight, I assure you.  Fancy, ladies, a legion of
demons galloping along upon their horses, thrusting to the right and left
with long pikes, whose steel points are eighteen inches long.  That is a
charge of lancers.  I beg you to believe that I had shown before this the
mettle there was in me, but I will not conceal from you that at this
moment I shared with the crowd the impression which the coming of these
gentlemen made.  I had only time to jump over the sidewalk and to dart up
a staircase which ran on the outside of a house, every door being closed.
I never shall forget the face of one of those men who thrust the point of
a lance at me, long enough to pierce through six men at once.  I admit
that I felt excited then!  The jinn having passed--"

"The--what?"  asked Mademoiselle de Corandeuil, who was not familiar with
Eastern terms.

"I beg a thousand pardons, it was a poetical reminiscence.  The lancers,
having rushed through the boulevard like an avalanche, a laggard rider,
a hundred steps behind the others, galloped proudly by, erect in his
stirrups and flourishing his sword.  Suddenly the report of a gun
resounded, the lancer reeled backward, then forward, and finally fell
upon his horse's neck; a moment later he turned in his saddle and lay
stretched upon the ground, his foot caught in the stirrup; the horse,
still galloping, dragged the man and the lance, which was fastened to his
arm by a leather band."

"How horrible!"  said Clemence, clasping her hands.

Marillac, much pleased with the effect of his narration, le