arge school-room in the rambling house in
Grosvenor Square. And that the learning for which they all strove was of a
comprehensive nature, moreover, that those of their party who had already
entered the gay world never disdained to share such labours, is shown in a
letter written many years afterwards to John by his brother Charles, in
which the writer complains sarcastically--


    You have no idea how happy, year by year, as of yore, the little ones
    seem--(for they will always be called so, though now Frances is as big
    as me and amazingly handsome). Yet still they have not one moment of
    time to themselves. They cram and stuff with accomplishments
    incessantly, and they prison me in my room & won't allow me to pry
    into the haunts of the Muses. Marianne and Anne have been learning to
    paint for these last two years, and make (_I_ think) but slow
    progress. Marianne never will have done (I wish I could be so
    industrious). She is now beginning to learn the harp. They are both
    learning to sing from some great star, which is only money and time
    thrown away; & Isabella, Frances and Maria learn to dance of one of
    the most celebrated Opera dancers. Isabella learns a new instrument
    something like a guitar, called a harp-lute. Marianne and Anne, having
    learnt French, German, Latin and Italian, are now at a loss to find
    something left to know, and talk of learning Russian. They will be
    dyed blue-stocking up to their very chins.


Allowing for the exaggeration of a schoolboy, the letter throws an
interesting light on the standard of education aimed at by those who,
despite the imputation to the contrary, had no pretension to belong to the
recognised blue-stocking coteries of their day. And the father of that
busy, happy circle, in the seriousness of his own life and aims, presented
the same contrast to many of his contemporaries which was reflected in his
family.

Fourteen years senior to his wife, and at this date in his fifty-seventh
year, Walter Stanhope had been M.P. respectively for his different
constituencies since 1775. A keen politician, he was punctilious in his
attendance at the House.

Nevertheless, as shown in a former volume, although a man of ability and
of intense earnestness of purpose, his devotion to his political labours
never wholly counteracted a certain lethargy of temperament which,
throughout his life, limited achievement. Thus, although in his youth
undoubtedly gifted with a lively fancy, or with what his generation termed
sensibility, this very trait seems at variance with the sum of his later
career. True, that under stress of emotion he could rise to heights of
impassioned oratory which provoked by its very evidence of latent power;
but the tenor of his existence was scarcely in accordance with these brief
flashes of genius, and the fulfilment of his prime belied its promise. The
record of his life remains one which commands respect rather than
admiration. Level-headed, sober in judgment and conduct, even while
possessed of a wit which was rare and a discernment at times profound, his
days flowed on in an undeviating adherence to duty which makes little
appeal to the imagination. As a churchman, as a parent, as a landowner, as
a politician he fulfilled each avocation with credit. As a man of the
world he could toy with but remain unmastered by the foibles of his age.
While a Fox and a Pitt rose to heights and sank to depths which Stanhope
never touched; while a Wilberforce was imbued with religious fervour as
with a permeating flame, Stanhope, to his contemporaries, presented
something of an anomaly. As in his early years he had been a Macaroni who
eschewed the exaggerations of his sect, so throughout life he could gamble
without being a gamester, could drink without being a toper, be a
politician without party acumen, and a man of profoundly religious
feelings devoid of fanaticism. But since he who himself is swayed by the
intensity of his convictions is he who in turn sways his fellows, possibly
the very restraint which saved Stanhope from folly debarred him from fame.
[13]

Meantime his generation was one of colossal exaggeration, both in talent
and in idiocy, in virtue and in vice. Men sinned like giants and as giants
atoned. Common sense, mediocrity--save upon the throne--were rare. Even
the fools in their folly were great. The spectacle was recurrent of men
who would smilingly stake a fortune as a wager, who could for hours drench
their drink-sodden brains in wine, then rise like gods refreshed, and with
an iron will throw off the stupor which bound them, to wield a flood of
eloquence that swayed senates and ruled the fate of nations. Even the fops
in their foppishness were of a magnitude in harmony with their period.
They could promote dandyism to a fine art and win immortality by
perfecting the rôle. Their affectation became an adjunct of their
greatness, their eccentricity an assumption of supremacy; their very
insolence was a right divine before which the common herd bowed with a
limitless tolerance.

In the world of London, as that celebrated gossip, Gronow, points out,
from generation to generation, certain men of fashion have come to the
fore amongst the less conspicuous mass of their fellows, and have been
defined by the general term of "men about town." The earlier
representatives of that race, the Macaronis of a former date, ere 1805 had
been replaced by a clique of dandies whose pretensions to recognition were
based on a less worthy footing. For while those previous votaries of
fashion, although derided and caricatured according to the humour of their
day, were, none the less, valuable patrons of art and literature, the
exquisites of a later date could seldom lay claim to such distinction. To
dine, to dress, to exhibit sufficient peculiarity in their habits and
rudeness in their manners whereby to enhance that fictitious value in the
eyes of those who did not dare to emulate such foibles, was the end and
aim of their existence. Yet it is doubtful whether posterity remembers
them less faithfully. Side by side with the great names of their century
there has come down to us the record of these apparently impudent
pretenders to fame, and it is questionable whether a Nash, a Brummell, or
a D'Orsay are less familiar to the present generation than those whose
claim to the recognition of posterity was not so ephemeral.

Thus, while the circle of acquaintance with which the lives of Stanhope
and his family at this date mingled serves to throw into sharper relief
his own divergence of character from that of many of his contemporaries--
those men who to great abilities, and sometimes to great achievement,
joined the pettiness of a fop and the follies of a mountebank--still more
did the typical man-about-town, with his whims and his foibles, his
shallow aims and his lost opportunities, compare strangely with the larger
souls of his generation. For the moment was one which called forth the
greatness or the littleness of those who met it, and which heightened that
contrast of contemporary lives.

With the coming of the nineteenth century the political outlook for
England had waxed grave. The air was full of wars and rumours of wars.
Napoleon, the mighty scourge of the civilised world, was minded to
accomplish the downfall of the one Power which still defied his strength.
"The channel is but a ditch," he boasted, "and anyone can cross it who has
but the courage to try." Boats were in readiness at Boulogne and at most
of the French ports, fitted up for the attempt, while the Conqueror of
Europe dallied only for the psychological moment to put his project into
execution. With bated breath Europe awaited the possible demolition of the
sole barrier which yet lay between the Tyrant and universal monarchy,
while upon the other side of the "ditch" the little Island expected his
arrival in a condition of prolonged tension and stubborn courage. At any
moment her blue waters and green fields might be dyed with blood. At any
moment a swarm of foreign invaders might trample her pride in the dust,
and crush her as other nations had been effectually crushed. But she meant
to sell her liberty dear. Out of a population averaging 9,000,000 souls
there were 120,000 regular troops, 347,000 volunteers, and 78,000 militia;
and still Napoleon paused.

Upon the threatened throne still sat good Farmer George and his prim
German consort, models of dull domesticity, of narrow convictions, of
punctilious etiquette--the epitome of respectable and respected
mediocrity, save when, with a profound irony, the recurring blast of
insanity transformed the personality of the stolid monarch, and shattered
the complacency of the smug little Court. Within its shelter hovered the
bevy of amiable Princesses, whose minutest word and glance yet lives for
us in the searchlight of Fanny Burney's adoring scrutiny. Afar, the sons
pursued their wild careers. The Prince of Wales, the mirror of fashion,
diced and drank, coquetted with politics and kingship, and--a very
travesty of chivalry--betrayed his friend, broke the heart of the woman
who loved him, deserted the woman who had wedded him, and tortured with
petty jealousy the sensitive soul of the child who might rule after him.

In secret silence Mrs Fitzherbert endured the calumny of the world, and
ate out her heart in faith to the faithless. With flippant and undignified
frivolity the Princess of Wales strove to support an anomalous position
and find balm to her wounded pride and weak brain; while the passionate,
all-human child-princess, Charlotte, awakening with pitiful precocity to
the realities of an existence which was to deal with her but harshly,
pitted her stormy soul against a destiny which decreed that before her the
sweets of life were eternally to be flaunted, to be eternally withheld.

       *       *       *       *       *

But with the dawning of 1805 the crisis of England's fate approached
consummation. Napoleon's plans were known to be completed. Pitt's
Continental Allies were secretly arming. The sea-dogs who guarded the
safety of our shores--Nelson, Collingwood, Cornwallis, Calder--were on the
alert. Yet while England's very existence as a Nation hung in the balance,
in the gay world of London those who represented the _ton_ danced and
flirted, attended routs and assemblies, complaining fretfully of the
unwonted dullness of the town, or in their drawing-rooms discussed the
topics of the hour--the acting of the wonder-child Roscius; the lamentable
scandal relating to Lord Melville; or, ever and again--with a tremor--the
possibilities of invasion.




THE LETTER-BAG OF LADY ELIZABETH SPENCER-STANHOPE




CHAPTER I

1805-1806

LETTERS RELATING TO THE WORLD OF TON


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _January 18th, 1805._

    Here we are established as of old and beginning our usual
    avocations.... Our Opera-box we like extremely. I generally take some
    young woman, which makes us cheerful. Miss Glyn [1] was of my party
    one night, and was well pleased. Little Roscius [2] appeared again
    to-night. I almost despair of seeing him, though I will try.

    On Saturday morning, Marianne and I and five or six hundred others
    went to hear Mr Sydney Smith [3] lecture upon the _Conduct of the
    Human Understanding_. His voice is fine and he is well satisfied
    with himself. I cannot say we came away much wiser, but we were well
    amused. I hear that Mr Smith protests that all women of talent are
    plain.

    Lady de Clifford [4] is to be Governess to Princess Charlotte, Mrs and
    Miss Trimmer [5] the acting ones. I doubt the mother accepting the
    appointment. On the 25th February there is to be a grand ball at
    Windsor.


[Illustration: MRS. TRIMMER]


    _Marianne Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope_.
    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _February 1st, 1805._

    MY DEAR JOHN,

    I fear you will have thought me long in performing my promise, but as
    I was to have gone to Court yesterday, I delayed writing to you until
    the ceremony was over; as it is, instead of my letter being full of
    royalty, peers and ribbons, you must accept nothing but the remnant of
    those ideas, which the interesting hairbreadth adventures of _Tom
    Jones_ have left me; in plain English the Drawing-room was put off
    on account of the Queen's indisposition, and I am just at the end of
    the above-mentioned delightful book. Oh! had I the wit of Partridge,
    the religion of Thwackum, or the learning of Square, I might describe
    with tolerable accuracy the intolerable stupidity of this great town.
    The Opera is thin of company, thin of performers, thin of lights, thin
    of _figurantes_, thin of scene-shifters, thin of everything! One
    night we were a good deal entertained by having his R.H., & _chère
    amie_ [6] in the next box to us, really they squabbled so, you
    would have imagined they were man and wife....

    As for Politicks, of which you ask so much, everyone here seems
    discontented. All Pitt's friends, angry that he has deserted them for
    Addington, and Lord Stafford, the head of them all, angry that the
    ribbon should be given to Lord Abercorn--to one who has protected
    rather than to one who has insulted Pitt--"Such little things are
    great to little men."

    The King, everyone agrees, looks charmingly and is more composed than
    he has been for long. Lady de Clifford is appointed Governess to the
    Princess (Charlotte)--_the bosom friend of Mrs Fitzherbert,
    hélas!_--and Mrs and Miss Trimmer under her; some say they will not
    accept it. Dr Fisher, Bishop of Exeter, is to be Governor. I am for
    making he and Mrs Trimmer disagree about Religion.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope. February 23rd._

    On Thursday Marianne and I attended the Drawingroom, and so
    disagreeable a crowd I never was in. Miss Drummond [7] looked very
    well and Miss Glyn quite pretty--the great Hoop suits her figure. I
    have not heard you mention being acquainted with a young man of the
    name of Knox-Irish. [8] His father and mother live in this street, and
    are friends of Mrs Beaumont's. [9]

    I have finished the Life of Sir William Jones. [10] His acquirements
    appear to have been wonderful--eight languages perfectly, but I think
    it was twenty-eight of which he had more or less some knowledge. He
    was withal a very religious man. His attainments were of the right
    sort, for they fixed his principles and all his writings are in favor
    of Virtue.

    The speech Mr Windham made in the House of Commons was full of wit,
    and would I think amuse you.


    _Marianne Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    (_Undated._)

    The apparent good spirits in which you write, even after a
    Mathematical Lecture, gives us reason to hope that that favourite
    exercise has not quite deprived you of your valuable intellect Long
    may it continue thus! Long may you be the glory of CH. CH.
    Mathematicians; and when you have left the British Athens, long may
    your name stand forward among the lists of those Worthies who
    discovered that two parallel, straight lines might run on to all
    Eternity without ever meeting!

    As a little incitement to you to continue acquiring learning, I will
    send you a short account of the manner that two Dukes of Suffolk
    (_sic_) spent their time at Cambridge in 1550:

    "During dinner, one of them read a Chapter of the Greek Testament, and
    did afterwards translate it into English; they then said Grace, in
    turns; & did afterwards propound questions, either in Philosophy or
    Divinity; & so spent all the time at Meat in Latin disputation.

    "When there was any Public disputation, they were always present;
    every Morning they did read & afterwards translate some of Plato in
    Greek, & at Supper present their Labours. They were of St John's
    College, & every day were devoted to private lectures, & the Residue
    they did account for."

    I ought almost to apologise for sending you so long an extract, but I
    thought it would remind you so forcibly of yourself and your
    distribution of your time, that I was unwilling to deny you the
    pleasure of the comparison.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    (_Undated._)

    Thanks for the account of the distribution of your time. I flatter
    myself you are too much attached to home and to the life you have led
    here ever to get into the idle way of spending Sunday, which I fear
    you will witness too frequently at Oxford, for from your account of
    what they are obliged to do on that day, a very small portion only
    need be given up to the religious duties of the day.

    I was particularly pleased with a passage I met with the other day in
    which Bishop Newton on the Prophecies, speaking of Lord Bolingbrook,
    who, you know, was an unbeliever and from his talents and eloquence
    had too much weight at the time, says, "Raleigh and Clarendon
    believed, Lock and Newton believed, where then is the discredit to
    Revelation if Lord Bolingbrook was an Infidel. 'A scorner,' saith
    Solomon, 'seeketh Wisdom and findeth it not'"

    I know not if your father took any notice of the part of your letter
    to him where you mention that, in a lecture, it had been proved that
    the Blacks were a species between men and monkeys--I think, for I have
    not your letter, that I have stated rightly what was said. It might be
    asserted, but surely could not be _proved_, and it is doctrine I
    do not like, as it goes directly to justify using them as beasts of
    burthen--a very good argument for a slave dealer.


    _March 1st._

    Your father is very well. He was sorry for the fate of the Slave Trade
    Bill last night.

    The Elopement and distress in the House of Petre has been the chief
    subject of conversation for the last few days. Miss Petre [11] made
    her escape from her father's house in Norfolk with her Brothers' tutor
    on Monday last. It is said they are at Worcester and married only by a
    Catholic Priest. However, Lord and Lady P. are gone there and it is
    expected she will be brought back to-night. They can do nothing but
    get her married to the man at Church. She is 18, he 30, and no
    Gentleman. She was advertised and 20 guineas reward offered to anyone
    who could give an account of the stray sheep. It is a sad History.
    What misery this idle girl has caused her parents, and probably
    ensured her own for life.


    _Marianne Stanhope to John Spencer Stanhope._
    _March 3rd._

    You have doubtless read in the papers the account of Miss Petre's
    elopement with her brother's tutor, Mr Philips. He is a very low man,
    quite another class, always dined with the children, never associated
    the least with the family, a sort of upper servant. Lady Petre thought
    him rather forward, he was to have left them at Easter. She had seen
    her daughter at twelve the night before, and only missed her at
    breakfast. Her clothes were all gone. A friend of his, a brandy
    merchant, accompanied her in the chaise, the tutor rode first. A
    clergyman refused to marry them some time ago at Lambeth, but they
    have since been married at Oxford by a Mr Leslie, a Catholic priest,
    which is not enough. They are not yet discovered.


    _The Same._
    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _March 4th, 1805._

    MY DEAR JOHN,

    ... London cannot be duller, those who remember it formerly were
    astonished at the change that time has wrought, and those ho look
    forward to the future, hope it will not always be so; but without a
    joke, except the Opera and the house of Glyn, I have scarcely seen
    anybody or been anywhere. We have three dinner engagements this week,
    besides one at home, but not one Assembly. You must know that we
    contrive to go out almost every night, but that it is only one degree
    better, or if you please, two degrees worse, than dozing at home;
    then, you know, as the existence of an Assembly is the not having room
    to stir, when you have plenty of elbow room from the thinness of the
    company it must be bad; besides another thing, when you have no time
    for conversation, you fancy everybody is agreeable, and in fashionable
    life, trust me, imagination is always preferable to reality!

    Not a ball have I heard of excepting one the other night at Mr
    Johnstone's, Hanover Square. Now you know, balls without dancing are
    such very enchanting things! Without the Opera it requires a stretch
    of imagination to know how we should have existed. Our neighbour, Mrs
    Fitzherbert, in the next box to our own, affords us plenty of
    amusement. I shall almost become an adept at finding out Royalty by
    their conversation, from frequently overhearing what passes between
    the Lady, and not only one but several of their R.H.'s. I will give
    you an infallible guide to a Royal conversation. Stupidity for its
    basis, an ignorance of intellectual merit for one prop, and a contempt
    of moral excellence for the other; witticisms, _double entendres_,
    mimickry, and every species of oaths that any English gentleman ever
    made use of for the _fond_; as a whole you may call it double refined
    folly and vulgarity. This is only doing justice to the conversations I
    have overheard; far be it from me to wish to diminish the meridian
    lustre with which these noble gentlemen shine. Let me rather forgive
    _them_ for understanding who have no conduct and those for conduct who
    have no understanding. The excellent qualifications of the lady as an
    associate are evident, she has neither conduct nor understanding.

    The ball at Windsor has been the general subject of conversation this
    last week. The House of Stanhope put in a good appearance. Mrs
    Pierrepont was there. The supper was most magnificent. Seats were
    raised above the rest for the Royal Family; during the entertainment
    the King rose, and gave the Queen's health, while everybody bowed and
    curtseyed. Afterwards, the Queen repeated the same compliment to His
    Majesty.

    Our next-door flirt complained much to Lord Grantham at being obliged
    to dance a great deal with Lord Petersham, which she thought very
    tiresome. Mr Kinnaird [12] seems quite off, Lord P. quite out of
    spirits. Papa thinks he really loves not her purse but _her_. She
    seems to love nobody, and flirts with everybody. I saw her at Court on
    Thursday se'nnight looking beautifully cross at not having a man near
    her. The Drawing-room was a dreadful squash.

    I have seen a good deal of the Kinnairds lately, we dine there to-
    morrow and stay the evening. Georgiana is very pleased and looks well.

    The Royal Institution is more the _ton_ than anything and Ladies
    of all ages submit to a squeeze of an hundred people in a morning, to
    hear lectures on the Human Understanding, Experimental Philosophy,
    Painting, Music or Geology. We only attend a course of the latter--
    don't shout at the name, it means the History of the Earth. You see
    how wise I grow! Mr Eyre thinks all the ladies will be pedants, and
    when you have been there, you will think so too. To see so large a
    party, the majority ladies, not very handsome though all listening
    with profound attention to the opinion of Descartes and Newton, some
    taking notes and all looking quite scientific, is really ridiculous.
    Mr Davy, [13] who lectures on Geology or the Chemical History of the
    Earth, is very clever, his style is good, his matter interesting, and
    to make use of an expression I heard a gentleman use, he certainly
    writes on the subject _con amore_.

    I hope you will like Sir Wm. Jones's life. I have not read it but have
    heard it is very clever. My lectures at present are _Metastasio_,
    and _St Simon's Memoirs_, the Bp. of London's lectures and Bigland's
    _Letters on Ancient History_.

    There is a little tale of Miss Edgeworth's which is much admired, "The
    Modern Griselda," which you must read.


Of the names mentioned in this letter, that of Lord Petersham deserves
more than a passing notice. Among the members of the House of Stanhope, it
must first be remarked, there were to be found some notable exceptions to
the prevailing social type of that generation. Philip, Earl of
Chesterfield, for one, although he failed to keep up the traditions of his
famous predecessor in art and elegance, was never notorious for the
weaknesses of his day; and Charles, the 3rd Earl Stanhope, more violently
eschewed the foppishness of many of his contemporaries, devoting all his
attention to mechanical contrivances and scientific research. His
simplicity of life, however, was said to be the expression of his
Republican tendencies which he had inherited in a pronounced form from his
father, who had likewise left behind him the reputation of having been a
magnificent patron of learning. In fact, in order to emphasize his
democratic principles, so shabby had been the attire of the second Earl
Stanhope, that on one occasion he had actually been stopped by a new door-
keeper as he was about to enter the House of Lords. "Now then, honest man,
go back!" quoth this vigilant guardian of the sacred precincts; "you can
have no business in such a place, honest man!" And it was only with
considerable difficulty that the eccentric peer had asserted his right to
admittance among his fellows, whose honesty was enhanced by a more elegant
exterior.

In marked contrast, therefore, to these other members of the family, it
was in the Harrington branch that the foibles of the _beau monde_ were
cultivated with intention.

Charles, 3rd Earl of Harrington, born the same year as Charles, 3rd Earl
Stanhope, had married Jane, daughter and heiress of Sir John Fleming, Bt,
who proved no unworthy successor to her celebrated predecessor
immortalised by George Selwyn for vivacity and abnormal conversational
powers. [14] The drawing-room of this later Lady Harrington was recognised
as a great social centre where her friends could meet, if not actually
without invitation, at least at a shortness of notice which marked the
informality of the entertainment and lent to it a subtle charm. The
hostess, whose energy was unbounded, would go out in the morning and pay
about thirty calls, leaving at each house an invitation bidding her
friends to assemble at Harrington House that same evening.

She would then walk up Bond Street at the hour at which the fashionable
young men of the day were likely to be abroad, and would dart from one
side of the road to the other as she spied a suitable object for her
purpose. A circle of friends assembled thus three or four times a week,
resulted in the formation of a recognised clique, the delightful
informality of which was much appreciated by her young relations from
Grosvenor Square, and the _entrée_ into which was much envied by those who
were admitted only to the larger and more stately parties reserved for the
less favoured.

Nor were Lady Harrington's impromptu evening assemblies less celebrated
than her perpetual tea-drinkings at Harrington House. The superior quality
of this expensive beverage in which the family of Stanhope indulged there,
and the frequency with which Lady Harrington presented it to her visitors
at all hours of the day, gave rise to the saying that where you saw a
Stanhope, there you saw a tea-pot. A story current in town was that when
her son, General Lincoln Stanhope, returned home after a prolonged absence
in India, he found the family party precisely as he had left them many
years before, seated in the long gallery sipping their favourite
refreshment. On his entry, his father looked up from this absorbing
occupation, and, with a restraint indicative of the highest breeding, gave
voice to the characteristic greeting--"Hullo! Linky, my dear boy, you are
just in time for a cup of tea!"

Such a home was the very atmosphere in which to develop a fashionable man
of the period; and the eldest son of the House, Charles. Lord Petersham,
did not discredit his surroundings. Tall, handsome, and faultlessly clad,
he was one of the most celebrated dandies of his day. Decidedly affected
in his manners, he spoke with a slight lisp; and since he was said to
recall the pictures of Henri IV., he endeavoured to accentuate this
likeness by cultivating a pointed beard. He never went out till six in the
evening, and one of his hobbies indoors was the strenuous manufacture of a
particular sort of blacking which, he always maintained, once perfected,
would surpass every other. His sitting-room emphasized his eccentricity.
One side of it represented the family _penchant_, being covered with
shelves upon which were placed canisters containing the most expensive and
perfect kinds of tea. On the other, in beautiful jars, reposed an equally
choice and varied assortment of snuffs. Lord Petersham's snuff-boxes and
his canes were alike celebrated; indeed, his collection of the former was
said to be the finest in England, and he was reported to have a fresh box
for every day in the year. Thus Gronow relates that once when a light
Sevres box which he was using, was admired, Lord Petersham responded with
a gentle lisp--"Yes, it is a nice summer box--but would certainly be
inappropriate for winter wear!"

Caricatures of the period represent the heir to the Earldom of Harrington
clad in light trousers and a brown coat, seated upon a brown prancing
horse. One of his whims, indeed, was to affect everything brown in hue--
brown steeds, brown liveries, brown carriages, brown harness and brown
attire. This was attributed to the fact of his having been in love with a
fair widow of the name of Brown, whose charms he thus endeavoured to
immortalise; but whatever the truth of this rumour, it is evident from the
letter of Marianne Stanhope, that at the age of twenty-five he honoured
with his devoted attention a lady whose personal attractions and unamiable
disposition afforded a fund of entertainment to his relations living next
door to her in Grosvenor Square. And this sidelight on the character of
the dandy gives pause to criticism. How much, perhaps, of the eccentricity
for which Lord Petersham was remarkable, like that of the celebrated Lady
Hester Stanhope, may be attributed to the buffetings of a secret fate?
Yet, this man who, with exceptional abilities and exceptional opportunity
for exercising those abilities, could contentedly fill his empty days with
the manufacture of blacking, or pass an entire night, as Gronow relates
him to have done, playing battledore and shuttlecock for a wager with Ball
Hughes, was, in much, a typical product of his generation. His mannerisms
were accepted by his contemporaries with a forbearance which bordered on
admiration, and, however childish his peculiarities, he remained
unalterably popular. Nor were the other members of his family less
appreciated for their good-nature and amiability.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _March 19th, 1805._

    I shall employ my Pen in sending you an account of last night's
    gaiety--the first really gay night Marianne has had.

    We began our evening at a concert at Mrs Methuen's, from thence we
    proceeded to a very fine Assembly at the Ladies' Townshends, and about
    twelve arrived at the Duchess of Bolton's, where we found them
    tripping on the light fantastick toe with great spirit. Marianne found
    herself near Lady A. Stanhope, [15] who was extremely attentive to
    her, & her first partner introduced to her by Lady Harrington was Mr
    Mercer. After supper she danced a Reel, and afterwards two dances with
    Mr Dashwood, & then two with Mr Cooke of the Guards. I need not, after
    this account of the ball say she was well amused. There were a great
    many men & very young ones, not too fine to dance. Lord Alvanley [16]
    is not amongst the smartest. Hay Drummond amused me, for _at five in
    the morning_, he asked me if I had a daughter there!--I was in bed
    by 1/2 after five.

    Marianne is quite well this morning and very well disposed to go to
    Almack's if your father does not object. On Thursday we go to another
    ball at Lady Ledespenser's.

    We have now delightful weather, soft rain yesterday; therefore I
    expect a pull in the Sociable will be delightful to-day & do us all
    good after our night's raking.


The Duchess of Bolton, [17] who was a cousin of Walter Stanhope, had been
a widow since 1794, when the dukedom became extinct on the death of her
husband. The latter, well known during the lifetime of his elder brother
as the eccentric Lord Henry Paulet, was believed to have supplied Smollet
with his character of Captain Whiffle in _Roderick Random_. For many years
he had resided at Bolton--formerly Baltimore--House, a quaintly
constructed, solitary mansion, standing on the outskirts of London amid
rural scenery, and encircled by a fine garden. Celebrated for its
hospitality in those the last days of its splendour, Bolton House had
opened its portals nightly to the guests who drove down from town to take
part in the festivities there, amongst the most frequent of whom had been
Walter Stanhope and his young wife. The duchess, however, subsequent to
her husband's death, had heard with dismay of a projected transformation
in her surroundings. The erection of new buildings in the neighbourhood
was predicted--houses which would blot out the rural scenery and for ever
destroy the privacy of her country home. And although this dreaded
innovation did not actually come to pass till 1801, long before the first
stone of Russell Square had been laid, the duchess had sold her threatened
mansion to Lord Loughborough, a friend of Walter Stanhope, and had
established herself in a new home but four doors from the house of the
latter, No. 32 Grosvenor Square.

Settled thus in the heart of London, her love of entertaining remained
undiminished, and beneath her hospitable roof the House of Stanhope, in
its various branches, continued to assemble as of yore. There Lady
Harrington still figured as one of the most constant guests, ever ready to
do a kindly action to any of her young relations whom she encountered. Mr
Mercer, whom she presented to Marianne Stanhope at the party on March
18th, was, as she was well aware, a man greatly in request in society, and
to whom an introduction was eagerly coveted on account of his exceptional
talent for music. Gifted with a remarkably fine voice, he sang duets in
company with a friend, in Greek, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and English.
"Mercer's voice and both their tastes are exquisite," relates Lord
Glenbervie at this date. "They accompany themselves, Mercer on the
Pianoforte, Gill on a Spanish guitar, which he has had made under his own
directions in London. Their foreign airs and words they have chiefly
picked up recently from ballad-singers in the streets."

Marianne Stanhope was therefore fortunate in securing this acquaintance,
as she was in having for a partner "Mr Cooke of the Guards," better known
in London society as "Kangaroo Cooke," for many years private aide-de-camp
and secretary to the Duke of York, and of whom Gronow relates that, "He
was in the best society and always attracted attention by his dandified
mode of dress." Still more, besides frequenting all the _Ton_ parties in
London at night, during the day he was invariably to be seen somewhere
between the barracks of the Horse Guards and the premises of Weston the
tailor in Bond Street, an ultra-fashionable promenade, which he paced and
re-paced, thus satisfactorily exhibiting the beauty of his clothes and
encountering the most select members of his acquaintance.

The curious nickname which clung to this dandy through life is usually
ascribed to a quaint resemblance noticeable in him to the Australian
quadruped after which he was called; but others attributed it rather to
the leaps and bounds by which he advanced socially, though on account of
his connections and the exquisite perfection of his dress this could not
be considered surprising. The fact that he bore such a name was well known
to him, and only on one occasion did it cause him any annoyance. Once,
when dining on board the flag-ship off Lisbon with Admiral Galton, he was
much startled by his host suddenly springing up and shouting out a
mysterious order, the terms of which seemed like a veiled insult. "Make
signal," thundered the Admiral, "for the _Kangaroo_ to get under way!" For
one instant the dismayed beau feared that this was a nautical form of
dismissal due to some offence of which he had unwittingly been guilty; but
his neighbour at table relieved his fears by explaining that the Admiral
was merely directing the immediate departure of one of the vessels of his
squadron, which, by a strange coincidence, bore the same name as his
honoured guest.

But a yet more celebrated leader of fashion mentioned by Mrs Stanhope as
being present at the ball given by the Duchess of Bolton was Lord
Alvanley. One of the accepted dandies in the same category as Lord
Petersham, the Duke of Argyle, Lords Foley and Worcester, Beau Brummell
and his great friend, Henry Pierrepont, Lord Alvanley had served with
distinction in the army, and further enjoyed the reputation of being one
of the wittiest men in Europe. Short and somewhat stout, with a small nose
and florid cheeks usually adorned with a lavish sprinkling of snuff, like
his rival Lord Petersham, he cultivated a lisp which accentuated the
humour of his utterances. He also adopted much the same method of
enhancing his value by indulging in certain peculiarities which, however
inconvenient to his fellows, appear to have been accepted by them with
surprising amiability. For instance, being fond of reading in bed, when he
at length felt sleep overpowering him, he would extinguish his candle by
the novel method of popping it alight under his bolster, or flinging it
into the middle of the room and taking a shot at it with his pillow--but
if the shot was unsuccessful, with a heavy sigh he left it to take its
chance. So well known, indeed, was this little habit of Lord Alvanley,
that hostesses who were anxious not to have their houses set on fire at
midnight would depute a servant to watch in a neighbouring apartment till
his lordship composed himself to sleep, a precaution which was invariably
adopted by Mrs Stanhope when he paid his annual visit to Cannon Hall.

However, despite such minor failings, Lord Alvanley enjoyed a popularity
seldom surpassed. To his other recommendations was added that of being a
celebrated _gourmet_, and the excellence was proverbial of the little
dinners which he gave in his house in Park Street, St James's, to which
never more than eight friends were bidden, and at which there was an
apricot tart on the sideboard all the year round. Moreover, although like
Brummell and Sheridan, many a _bon mot_ was fathered upon him to which he
had never given utterance, yet his reputation as a wit was well deserved,
and at a date when both the dandies and the fine ladies prided themselves
upon their undisguised insolence, Lord Alvanley remained a shining example
of good-nature, so that, save, perhaps, in one instance recorded in this
book, his wit never offended. Likewise, only once, it is said, did he
exhibit reluctance in consenting to oblige anyone who requested from him a
favour, on which occasion he conveyed his refusal in a singularly
characteristic manner. Some friends were anxious to get up a
representation of _Ivanhoe_, and begged Lord Alvanley to take the part of
Isaac. "That I fear is impossible," he replied. "Why so?" urged his
friends, "since you are so clever at doing different characters." "Ah,
but--" objected Lord Alvanley, "in all my life I have never been able to
_do_ a Jew!"

In truth, with the House of Israel his extravagance had made him painfully
familiar; nevertheless, as mentioned by Lord Broughton, on one occasion he
made his peccadilloes in this respect the subject of another jest. "Is
there any chance," he asked with assumed pathos, "of the ten tribes of
Israel being recovered? For I have exhausted the other two!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was three months after the ball at Bolton House, which had been
preceded by a concert at Mrs Methuen's that Mrs Stanhope mentions
attending another entertainment given by the latter hostess, to which she
went shortly after an evening of painful excitement.


    _Tuesday, June 18th, 1805._

    You would read in the papers of the riot at the Opera House. So
    complete and mischievous a one I never before saw, or ever wish to see
    again. I saw part of the stage pulled up and thrown into the Pitt, and
    when the scene was thrown down, it was only wonderful people were not
    killed, as the stage was full. Notwithstanding the damage was said to
    amount from £900 to £1200, we are to have an Opera to-night.

    It was said the House of Peers intended to, object to the Commons
    prosecuting one of their House, but I have not heard anything more of
    it--so I suppose it will pass over.

    It formed the great topick of conversation at the Methuen's ball where
    we were till five this morning--fine, but dull--the best supper I
    ever saw.


The Opera House, at the date of this occurrence, was usually a brilliant
and attractive scene. The accommodation was divided into seats in the
gallery, boxes and pit. The latter, where many of the _élite_ were seated,
was separated from the stage by the orchestra only, which then consisted
of less than half the number of performers of which it would be composed
to-day. There were, consequently, no stalls, but a passage led from the
entrance to the front seats, known as Fop's Alley from the dandies who
lounged and promenaded there, partly to see and partly to be seen by the
ladies with whom the house was filled.

The dress of these exquisites was ruled by a punctilious etiquette, and
their knee-breeches, lace ruffles, diamond buckles, and _chapeaux bras_
were subject to the strictest regulations and to every fluctuation of the
prevailing mode. Their gold-handled spy-glasses were impartially directed
towards the stars upon the stage or to the belles in the neighbouring
boxes, where, from the grand tier to the roof, was a dazzling display of
beauty and of fashion. Their excursions to the Green Room were likewise
interspersed with visits to those amongst the audience to whose boxes they
had the entree; and as they murmured platitudes to their fair
acquaintance, they traced languidly the locality of yet other friends whom
they could visit, whose names were inserted upon the paper fans with which
each lady was provided, and on which was printed a diagram of the boxes
and a list of their owners throughout the great building.

But on this momentous night the very atmosphere of the place was
transformed. At the first token of the coming storm, many of the
frightened beaux hurriedly vacated their beloved promenade, while certain
peaceable members of the audience also endeavoured to escape from the
building. But the majority remained, brazenly instigating or prolonging
the disgraceful scene which followed. The cause of the sudden riot was
afterwards related personally by Michael Kelly, the then celebrated actor
and stage manager.

On account of the length of the arias and ballets, and the impossibility
of being able to get the lady-singers ready to begin in time, the operas
seldom finished till after twelve o'clock on Saturdays. The Bishop of
London had therefore sent to inform Kelly that if the curtain did not drop
before midnight, the licence should be taken away and the house shut up.
Against this fiat there was no appeal, and for two or three weeks running,
Kelly was obliged, on Saturday night, to order the closing of the
performance in the midst of an interesting scene in the ballet. On these
two or three occasions this was submitted to with unexpected good-humour
by the subscribers and the general public, but such a state of affairs
could not long continue.

"On Saturday, the 15th of June (Oh! fatal night!)," Kelly relates, "the
demon of discord appeared in all his terrors in this hitherto undisturbed
region of harmony. The curtain fell before twelve o'clock, just as
Deshayes and Parisot were dancing a popular _pas de deux_. This was the
signal for the sports to begin: a universal outcry of `Raise the curtain!
Finish the ballet!' resounded from all parts of the House; hissing,
hooting, yelling, (in which most of the ladies of quality joined)
commenced.

"The ballet master, D'Egville, was called for, and asked 'Why he allowed
the curtain to drop before the conclusion of the ballet?' He affirmed that
he had directions from me to do so. I was then called upon the stage, and
received a volley of hisses, yellings, etc. I stood it all, like brick and
mortar; but at last, thinking to appease them, I said the truth was that
an order had been received from the Bishop of London to conclude the
performance before midnight. Some person from the third tier of the boxes
who appeared to be a principal spokesman called out--'You know, Kelly,
that you are telling a lie.' I turned round very coolly and looking up at
the box from whence the lie came, I said, 'You are at a very convenient
distance; come down on the stage and use that language again, if you
dare!'

"This appeal was received by the audience with a loud burst of applause,
and the universal cry of 'Bravo, Kelly: well replied!--turn him out! Turn
the fellow out of the boxes!' The gentleman left the box, but did not
think proper to make his appearance on the stage. This was a lucky turn as
regarded myself, but did not appease the rioters; for finding their
mandate for drawing up the curtain and finishing the ballet was not
obeyed, they threw all the chairs out of the boxes into the Pitt, tore up
the benches, broke the chandeliers, jumped into the orchestra, smashed the
pianoforte, and continued their valourous exploits by breaking all the
instruments of the poor unoffending performers. Having achieved deeds so
worthy of a polished nation, and imagining no more mischief could be done,
they quitted the scene of their despoliation with shouts of victory."

There was, however, a finale to the drama which the rioters did not
expect. Mr Goold, a lawyer and great friend of Kelly, identified some of
the ringleaders and brought actions against them for damages which cost
them many hundreds of pounds. The lustres, scenes and musical instruments
which had been destroyed alone were estimated at £1500. And the
prosecutions were only withdrawn on the culprits undertaking to apologise
for their conduct, as well as to recoup all who had suffered through their
misbehaviour. Meanwhile, many persons were frightened from attending the
Opera for fear of a repetition of such scenes, and the rival attraction of
the performances given by the young Roscius prospered in proportion.

This infant prodigy, who was born in 1791, first appeared on the stage at
the age of eleven, and for over five years personated the most difficult
characters before enraptured audiences, earning from fifty to seventy-five
guineas per night, apart from benefits, so that he really made from £4000
to £5000 a year.

In 1805, the House of Commons adjourned in a body to witness his
performance of _Hamlet_. Wherever he appeared an excited mob instantly
gathered; ladies vied with each other in the endeavour to kiss his hand,
and at the hour when he was expected at the Play House a larger crowd
assembled than ever collected to see the king. "He and Bonaparte now
divide the world," wrote Sir William Knightly at this date; "This is, I
believe, the first instance since the creation, of a child so much under
age, getting such an income by any ability. I think he is very excellent,
his gracefulness is unparalleled and the violence of the desire to see him
either on or off the stage is like a madness in the people."

In the autumn of 1805, Roscius went a tour in the Provinces; in August of
that year he was in the North, and Mr Smith, the Vicar of Newcastle
(formerly tutor to the sons of Walter Stanhope) wrote to Mrs Stanhope an
account of the prodigy's reception there:--


    _August 19th_.

    The Young Roscius is engaged here for three nights, and makes his
    _début_ this evening in the play of "Douglas"; places are as yet
    allowed to be taken only for the first four nights of his performance,
    and so great is the expectation of Newcastle, that if the boxes had
    held double the number of spectators, all the seats would have been
    taken.


But whatever impression the young actor made on the other inhabitants of
Newcastle, the verdict pronounced by the critical Mr Smith is very
modified praise:--


    For Mrs Stanhope's comfort and the credit and taste of the people of
    Newcastle, I add that Master Betty has had a very good Benefit,
    considering the thinness of the Town. I should conjecture the house
    amounted to about £95; and admitting that he mouths a good deal, is
    indistinct in his lower tones, and does not pronounce very accurately,
    I was not displeased with his performance of Warwick in the play "Earl
    of Warwick."


[Illustration: MASTER WILLIAM HENRY WEST BETTY, "THE YOUNG ROSCIUS" _From
an engraving by J. Ward after J. Northcote._]

Despite this far from enthusiastic verdict, great was the excitement of
the Stanhope family to hear that the next county to be visited by Roscius
was Yorkshire, whither they usually returned before Christmas. Ere that
date, however, their thoughts were much occupied by a double tragedy, the
death within a month of their friends, Lord and Lady Kinnaird. [18]


    _November 2nd, 1805._

    I sent you word of the truly deplorable situation of the two poor
    Kinnairds; within one month deprived of both parents, and all their
    brothers in Yeomanry. When the last accounts were received, the
    present Lord Kinnaird was at Vienna. Lady K. did not, as I sent you
    word, die in her carriage, tho' in it when she was seized. Lord K. was
    dining at the Ordinary at Perth races and was seized at dinner, the
    Uvula descending into the Windpipe. He recovered sufficiently to
    return into the room, but did not survive many days.

    Lord Primrose [19] from whom the whole detail came, sent us also an
    account of his gaieties, he and his father had been a tour in Scotland
    and had not neglected to visit at Drummond Castle with which he was
    enchanted, which he could not well fail being, as the lady of the
    Castle [20] is a passionate admirer of it, and takes great pleasure in
    it and manages much about the Estate.

    We have at last concluded Roscoe's elaborate work, the Life of Leo X,
    and I do not think I shall ever go through the whole again. The
    Italian wars are tiresome and to me always most uninteresting. I
    neither like Leo's principles nor those of his biographer. Parts I
    shall certainly read again. The style is elegant, and he is an able
    apologist. I certainly should recommend parts of the work to you; it
    will be an amusement to you at Christmas.


The comment of Mrs Stanhope, as a staunch Tory, upon the famous _Life of
Leo X._, which was then attracting much attention, affords an amusing
contrast to the extravagant praise bestowed upon the work by the Whigs of
the day. Shortly after she had finished its perusal she must have returned
with her family to Yorkshire, where a fresh excitement awaited her.

"The Gallery at Bretton," she writes, "is to be painted, as well as the
staircase. The Architect says, he has worked there six months already. We
are going over to see the result of his labours."

Bretton Park, which was then undergoing such complete renovation, is
situated about a couple of miles from Cannon Hall, and its owner at this
date afforded endless food for discussion both in Yorkshire and London.

In a previous volume, [21] reference has been made to the celebrated Mrs
Beaumont, or, as she was universally called by her generation, Madame
Beaumont. The natural daughter of Sir Thomas Blackett of Bretton, she had
been made his heiress, and had married Colonel Beaumont, M.P. for York.
Although Mrs Stanhope and many others then living could remember her as a
village girl riding to Penistone every market day to sell butter and eggs,
Mrs Beaumont successfully ignored any such unpleasant reminiscences on the
part of those acquainted with her early life, and continued to dominate a
situation to which, thus heavily handicapped, she might well have
succumbed.

By dint of an unassailable belief in her wealth and importance, she held
her own with the county families, whose slights she ignored or repaid with
interest, and whom she alternately flouted and patronised. At once a
source of irritation and of amusement to her neighbours, this was
particularly so in the case of the family at Cannon Hall, whose property
adjoined her own and who were perpetually annoyed by her interference and
impertinence. There was unfortunately no boundary line between the
estates, so Mrs Beaumont used unhesitatingly to inform strangers that all
the land from the walls of Bretton to those of Cannon Hall was hers; while
on one occasion, when a dispute arose between herself and Mr Stanhope
respecting a certain tree, she settled the question in a characteristic
manner by causing this to be cut down in the night.

The letters of the younger Stanhopes were full of anecdotes of, or
complaints against their aggressive neighbour. "You can have no idea what
petty differences my father and Mrs Beaumont have about boundaries and
rights, which Madam Graspall claims in everything," wrote Edward Stanhope
on one occasion. "She warned us all not to shoot _anywhere_ on her ground
or Manors, also from Mr Bosville's, and she at once sent Mr Bird to shoot
on my father's land. However, we warned _him_ off! "But although the
sportsman with the inappropriate name met with a warm reception from the
younger branches of the House of Stanhope, Edward adds, "My mother never
will take part in these differences but chuses to call and dine. However,
as she was thus civil, this year Madam has chosen only to leave cards
without inquiring whether we were at home, and has now sent out cards for
a party and left us out!" None the less, although later in life, as we
shall see, the family at Bretton were cleverly satirised by Marianne
Stanhope, a show of friendship was maintained between the two families,
which, in the case of the younger generation was very genuine, for the
daughters of Madame Beaumont were the antithesis of their parent and were
simple and charming.

Yet Mrs Beaumont was undoubtedly one of the most curious characters of her
generation, in that, as stated, her self-assurance enabled her to tilt
successfully against the strong social prejudices of her day and to
sustain an all but impossible position with undoubted success. While
Yorkshire and London rang with tales of her effrontery, the imperturbable
lady, instead of perceiving snubs, dealt them, and in the height of her
triumphant career enjoyed the wrath of the amazed recipients. Meanwhile,
although many of the stories related of her were genuine, a few were
undoubtedly apocryphal, among which must be classed the following, very
generally believed in the West Riding a century ago.

It was said that being much addicted to gambling and proud of the
immensity of the wagers which she dared to risk, Madame Beaumont on one
occasion staked the entire Bretton estate on a game of chance. She lost;
and her opponent, being apparently as sporting as herself, dared her to
win it back by riding through Bretton Park and village astride on a
jackass with her face to the tail The idea of the haughty and pompous lady
undertaking such a penance must have seemed actually incredible, but
Madame Beaumont was not readily daunted. To the unbounded surprise of her
fellow-gamester she accomplished the feat and thus reinstated herself in
all her former wealth and grandeur.

In Yorkshire, she invariably drove about the country in a carriage drawn
by four beautiful black horses on which were seated postilions in velvet
jockey-caps. She owned an extraordinary number of carriages, and directly
news reached her that any visitor of importance was being entertained at
Cannon Hall, she would order out her finest equipage and drive over in
full state with the intention of enticing away the guest whose rank
attracted her. As usual, no rebuffs discouraged her-she failed to perceive
them. In London, she strove with equal determination to admit no one to
her parties who was not the possessor of a title--commoners, however well
born, were received by her with a scarcely concealed insolence. The big
yellow coach in which she and her daughters drove about town was a
familiar sight, making its triumphal progress through the most fashionable
streets, or drawn up by the Park railings that its occupants might
converse with the _élite_ among the loungers who thronged around it. For
those who scoffed at Madame Beaumont courted her diligently on account of
the excellence of her entertainments, while her luxury and the lavish
nature of her expenditure formed their favourite topic of jest and gossip.
Apart from her boundless hospitality to those whom she considered
sufficiently important to be honoured by it, the sums which she spent on
the house and stables at Bretton were said to have been enormous; and it
was doubtless with considerable curiosity that the family at Cannon Hall,
on their return to Yorkshire, hurried over to inspect the alterations
which their neighbour was effecting.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    CANNON HALL, _December 4th, 1805._

    We drove to Bretton this morning. We walked all over the gardens and
    the House. The number of people is enough to distract one Architect.
    Improvers, Agents, etc., etc., without end. Much is done, and still
    much remains to be done. Madame B. says she shall quite rejoice to
    leave the place. The plants appear in great order and are very
    valuable. The Collection is extremely large, but at present the plants
    are so very small that to the ignorant they appear of little value--
    which we know is impossible to be the case.

    Thanks for the account of your studies; as for mine, I cannot give a
    very favourable report of them. Hume's _Henry 8th_, Warton on Pope,
    _Cowper's Letters_, and _The Idler_, are the books I have at present
    in hand; but I have not much leisure. We are at present alone, and
    with my family round me, I do not wish for company. It is not a bustle
    of company I _like_, for I do not like the Society of the Country--it
    is morning, noon, and night.

    Roscius is now performing at Sheffield--I should like to see him
    there!


Life in the country at this date was apparently more exhausting than life
in London. No moment of the day was sacred from the encroachments of
visitors. Morning calls were the fashion, and it was held to be impolite
to refuse admission to friends who, after a long drive over bad roads, not
only expected the offer of some substantial refreshment, but in view of
the fatigue they had undergone and their desire that they should be
sufficiently recovered before undertaking the return journey, were apt to
outstay their welcome. Of a neighbour, however, who resided beyond the
distance practicable for a morning call, and with whom Marianne Stanhope
had apparently been staying at this date, she gives a more enthusiastic
description. Mr Fawkes of Farnley was the son of her father's old friend
and neighbour at Horsforth, in the days of his youth, Walter Hawkesworth,
[22] who took the name of Fawkes on inheriting the property of Farnley
under the will of a cousin. He was succeeded, in 1792, by this son, Walter
Ramsden Fawkes, who, in 1806, became Member for York, and later, as his
father had been before him, High Sheriff for the county. This younger Mr
Fawkes was a man of exceptional talent, who is best remembered by
posterity as having been one of the earliest and most munificent patrons
of J. M. W. Turner, but who was better known to his contemporaries for his
remarkable oratory. Mr Stanhope relates of him that once at a meeting
which was convened in Yorkshire to discuss the Peace of Amiens, he made a
speech so brilliant that the reporters declared themselves unable to take
it down, so completely were they carried away by its extraordinary
eloquence and beauty of language.


    _Marianne Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    _December 4th, 1805._

    You cannot think how charmed I was with Mr Fawkes when we were at
    Farnley, he is so full of information and talent. He told us two
    stories which pleased me so much that I will endeavour to relate
    them--both facts.

    About ten years ago a friend of his was riding thro' a long and gloomy
    wood in one of the inland counties. As he came to the most intricate
    part, suddenly his horse made a dead pause, pricked up his ears,
    snorted, and when spurred, refused to proceed, his eyes all the time
    upon one spot on the ground. On looking towards this place, conceive
    the gentleman's horror at beholding a woman's body weltering in blood
    and a dog licking the wounds. The traveller stood for some minutes
    petrified with horror, his eyes rivetted on the body, when all at once
    the dog, perceiving him, set off full speed thro' the thickest part of
    the wood.

    He was resolved to pursue the animal, and instantly spurring his
    horse, he followed it through most intricate and unfrequented roads
    for about ten miles, when he saw it enter a miserable house in a
    little village. The traveller put up his horse, and entering the same
    house, desired they would bring him something to drink. There were
    three ill-looking fellows sitting round a table, under which the dog
    had lain down. The traveller's object was now to find out to whom the
    dog belonged, he tried every means, in vain, for about an hour, when,
    seizing hold of the poker he, under some trivial pretext, gave the dog
    a violent blow on the head, upon which one of the men with an oath
    asked him why he did this. The gentleman with much presence of mind,
    turned the poker promptly against the man who asked the question, and
    having overpowered him in a pretended quarrel, discovered in his
    pocket a bag of gold. The rest I do not know, but the man was hanged
    for the murder in Oxfordshire or Warwickshire about ten years ago. Is
    it not a curious story?

    Mr Fawkes thinks it would be a fine subject for a picture--the awful
    gloominess of the wood, the dead body, the dog licking the wounds, the
    horror of the horse, and the man's countenance as he sat contemplating
    the scene--he thinks might be wonderfully portrayed on canvas.

    His other story is of a different cast. You have doubtless heard of
    Edwards the great bookseller. He has quitted his shop in Town, and
    gone to reside at his native place, Halifax. He is a great miser, but
    being a man of talent, often visits Mr Fawkes. One day he arrived upon
    such a miserable hired horse that they resolved to play him a trick.
    Accordingly, after dinner the Steward came in, with a solemn face,
    stating that instead of killing a horse that was meant for the dogs,
    they had shot Mr Edwards's; that it was half eat before they found out
    the mistake. Edwards was in a dreadful pucker; but at last, having
    condoled with him, they told him that the only difference between his
    deceased horse & the one of Mr Fawkes's which they had meant to kill,
    was that Mr Fawkes's horse had not a white spot on its forehead, & his
    legs were not white, but that by _painting them_ it would look
    just the same, and that the people at the livery stable would never
    find out the mistake. Edwards was highly delighted with this plan,
    and, would you believe it, he was mean enough to hope by this means to
    cheat the man. You may picture what fun it was to Mr Fawkes and his
    servants to see him ride home on his _own_ hired horse all bedaubed
    with paint; after which he wrote word triumphantly, "The man at the
    Livery Stables has never found out the trick _we_ have put on him!"
    How they will all quiz him when finally they tell him the truth!!

    When shall you come to Yorkshire? You will find Frances grown quite a
    beauty and Philip an adept at _l'art militaire_. I am glad you
    were so pleased with the young Beaumonts. Their sister rode here the
    other day, she is a very nice girl and nearly pretty.

    Mr and the Miss Abbotts left us yesterday, after a week's visit They
    are very musical, but rather too Irish for our taste. To give you some
    idea of them, they talk of people being _beasts and puking whelps,
    and brutes_. They frequently _blest their souls and bodies_, and
    "_talked their fill_" which was not a "_few_." Surely this cannot be
    elegant, even in Ireland. Have you any Hibernian friends who could
    inform you on this subject? Adieu, breakfast waits. All here send
    their love.


These Hibernian friends were apparently not the only guests whose
peculiarities occasioned the Stanhope family some mild surprise. The
handsome Bishop of Carlisle [23] and his wife, Lady Anne Vernon, were at
this date frequently at Cannon Hall, and both of them and of their ten
sons various anecdotes are related. Mr Stanhope, indeed, as Member for
Carlisle, had long been intimate with the popular prelate, and used to
tell with what unstinted hospitality Dr Vernon was wont to receive his
countless visitors at the Palace on public days, also what a picturesque
sight he then invariably presented in his full-bottomed, snow-white wig
and bright, purple coat. But the good bishop, though extremely stately and
impressive of demeanour, was gifted with a keen sense of humour and could
enjoy a spice of frivolity when he could indulge in it without detracting
from his dignity. In 1807 he was appointed to the Archbishopric of York,
and was fond of retailing how a groom belonging to his old friend, Sir
James Graham, [24] got news of the event and rode hard to Netherby to take
his master the first tidings. Bursting into the dining-room where a large
party of guests were assembled, the man exultingly shouted out
the Information which he was desperately afraid someone else might have
anticipated--"Sir Jams! Sir Jams! The Bushopp has got his situation!" The
sense of humour cherished by Dr Vernon seems to have been inherited by his
sons in a different guise. In two undated letters Marianne relates to her
brother:--


    Here is an anecdote of your friend, the sailor, Mr Vernon, [25] who
    has got some prize money. He was walking, I believe, a few days since
    with a gentleman in the streets when they met two men who spoke to him
    civilly and to whom he returned a very short answer. His companion
    inquired who they were. He said--"Two men who came over in the ship
    with me." "Then why were you so cold in your manner to them?" asked
    his friend. "Why, my dear fellow, because they were convicts returned
    from transportation!" was Vernon's answer.


    _Undated._

    Your ball appears to have been very gay, but you never named your
    opinion of Miss Monckton. [26] I assure you her sisters at Harrogate
    were quite belles, the gentlemen made Charades on them. I must close
    my letter with a story of Mr Vernon, [27] told me by a gentleman we
    met at Sir Francis Wood's.

    At one of the Lichfield balls, he came in so late that everybody
    inquired the reason. He said he had been waiting for his tailor while
    he was sewing the buttons on his etceteras. Each of these buttons
    contained the picture of a French beauty, and he had the tailor in his
    room while his hair was being dressed in order to tell him which to
    place _nearest to his heart_.

    In the course of the evening he told a lady a wondrous story, and upon
    her looking surprised, he said vehemently--"Upon my honour, Madam, it
    is true!"--adding gently--"When I say 'Upon my honour' Madam, _never
    believe me_."

    Adieu, and at least believe me, Your affectionate sister, M. A. S. S.


Mr George Vernon, indeed, appears to have been of a somewhat
impressionable temperament, for a few years later his sister-in-law, Lady
Granville, writing from Trentham to announce her departure for Texel,
remarks, "I must take Mr Vernon away to flirt with my beauties there. It
will not be dangerous for Lady Harriet, and Corise bears a charmed life.
_He will be proud beyond measure and fancy both are in love with him._"
Yet with the dawning of 1806, the mention made by the Stanhopes of these
friends comes in sad contrast to the lively tales respecting them in which
they were wont to indulge.

As January drew to a close Walter Stanhope received an intimation that the
illness of William Pitt was likely to have a fatal termination. He
hastened up to town, and was in time to take a last farewell of his
friend. [28] His family followed more leisurely, and on the 27th, from
Grosvenor Square, Mrs Stanhope wrote:--


    I cannot say how shocked I was with the melancholy intelligence of
    Edward Vernon's death, and of the dangerous illness of George. I hear
    it was the scarlet fever.


On the 30th she adds:--


    This morning I had particular pleasure in reading the favourable
    report you sent your father of George Vernon. I now trust he will be
    restored to his afflicted parents, and great as is their loss they
    will have much cause for thankfulness to Providence when they reflect
    how near they were losing both their valuable sons. I hear that the
    Bishop and Lady Anne are wonderfully composed.


But the sinister note with which the year had dawned was unexpectedly
accentuated. In February she writes:--


    What a moment is the present! Every hour brings report of death. In
    addition to our great National losses is now the death of Lord
    Cornwallis--a man who was a blessing and ornament to his country.
    Awful and critical is the present period. Woronzow, the Russian
    Minister, is likewise dead. He is brother to the Woronzow who is
    Ambassador here. [29]

    In our Peerage there are also great changes, Lord Coventry, Lord
    Somers, and it is said, Lord Uxbridge, are _all_ dead.


    _Friday._

    It is strange there is not a word mentioned of Lord Uxbridge's death
    in to-day's paper. The Ministry is still unsettled. Lord Moira is
    expected in Town to-day. You will be glad to hear Addington is
    certainly better, and that the family entertain hopes of his recovery.

    Pray inform Glyn I saw Lady and Miss Glyn to-day, the latter in great
    beauty, just returned from hearing Dr Crotch [30] lecture on Musick at
    the Institution, where they attend as assiduously as ever.


    _Saturday._

    Lo! Lord Coventry is come to life again! I wish it were possible the
    same could happen to Lord Cornwallis, but alas, that cannot be! Who
    will succeed him must yet remain a secret.

    Mrs Beaumont was with us last night. Col. Beaumont had in the morning
    inquired whether Gloucester House was to be sold, as provided they
    could renew the lease, they would like to have it.

    Egremont House is to be sold on the 13th. My opinion is they will have
    that. Why not both?

    What think you of Sydney Smith lecturing to small audiences? Such is
    popular favour. He may thank Westminster for the neglect he now meets
    with.

    I am reading a book I think you would be amused with. Turner's History
    of the Anglo Saxons. It contains much to amuse an Antiquarian, and I
    consider you as having a little taste that way. Lady Glyn, who is
    with us, is studying Juvenal. Marianne has just lifted her eyes from
    Euclid to desire her love to you. Anne is employed at her Harp.


Meanwhile, the family had resumed the placid routine of their usual life,
of which, in the next letter, Marianne furnishes her brother with a
graphic account.


    _February 14th, 1806._

    Mamma must, I am sure, have informed you of our various proceedings,
    in her numerous letters to you, and therefore I will not torment you
    with a repetition. Our life since we came to London has passed in its
    usual routine of _faisant bien des riens_; arranging the teaching
    geniuses, making the usual purchases and visiting the usual set;
    walking in Hyde Park, and watching the people in the Square. This
    morning, we have Mr Roussin for the third time, have taken a short
    turn in the Park, and called on Mrs M. Marriott, and at present Anne
    is rehearsing to Myer on the harp, who is all astonishment at the
    progress she has made. We dine and stay the evening at the Dowager
    Lady Glyn's.

    Anne relishes London vastly, and hitherto the little going out she has
    had agrees with her. The Opera is her delight. Papa took William
    there, and I never saw a child so happy. He enjoys going out
    prodigiously.

    Are you not outrageous at the manner in which Mr Singleton, [31] son-
    in-law to the great man who died for his country, was turned out? I
    think it is really a disgrace to the Nation. I should have thought
    every connection of my Lord Cornwallis would have been distinguished
    with honours, instead of which he is turned out of Office as soon as
    the account arrived of his Father-in-Law's death.

    The papers have indeed been in a most bloody humour, they have
    unjustly killed Lord Coventry, Lord Uxbridge, Lord Harrowby, and it
    was astonishingly reported that Lord Melville had destroyed himself,
    when he was quite well. It really was curious to hear people inquiring
    in the most melancholy tone, what was the cause of such a Lord's
    death, and the next person announcing merrily that he was perfectly
    well! Lord Kinnaird is expected home daily with the transports.

    We heard the other day that the Princesses had received a letter from
    the Duchess of Wurtemburg [32] since she had seen the Empress of
    France. Upon entering, the Duchess said she felt something like
    _effroi_, which Madame Bonaparte took for _Froid_ and she threw over
    her shoulders a most beautiful shawl she had been wearing herself. The
    Emperor was very polite and never named England or the English. He
    brought a most superb _présent de noces_ for the Princess of
    Wurtemburg who is going to be married.

    I wish also to tell you a story I heard of Erskine. He was dining one
    evening with a large party at Carlton House. The conversation turned
    upon Sir Robert Calder's sentence. [33] Erskine said, to set a pack of
    yellow Admirals who had never seen active service to judge a brave and
    distinguished Officer was horrible. "They might as well," said he,
    "_set a parcel of Attorney's clerks to judge Erskine_!" Is not
    this _Chancellor Ego_?--This was just before he was Chancellor.
    His wife died a short time ago, and his daughter wrote word to a
    friend that had her father known how soon her mother would die, he
    would not have behaved better to her! They must all be mad, I think.


Thomas Erskine, the third son of the 10th Earl of Buchan, was, in 1806,
appointed Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain and elevated to the
Peerage the same year by the title of Baron Erskine. Brilliant, eloquent
and witty, from his habit of invariably talking about himself and his
concerns, he was given the name of Chancellor Ego. Owing to his being of
opposite politics, the Stanhopes were disposed to view him somewhat
disparagingly, and owned, indeed, but slight acquaintance with him till
years afterwards when they met him at Holkham. It was on the occasion of a
dinner-party in London, however, that Lord Erskine once told John Stanhope
the following story, and which the latter used to recount as an instance
of the Chancellor's genuine kindliness of heart.

"In the days of my youth", Lord Erskine related, "I arrived in Edinburgh
one morning after a lengthy absence from Scotland, feeling delighted at
the prospect of re-visiting my old haunts and looking up my old friends. I
went first to a bookseller's shop which I was fond of visiting, and as I
was leaving it, to my surprise and pleasure I encountered an old butler
who had been for many years in my father's service. I noticed, however, to
my regret, that the old man looked greatly changed. He was pale, worn and
shadowy as a ghost. Moreover, when I greeted him genially he showed little
excitement at the unexpected encounter. 'I came to meet your honour,' he
said, very gravely, 'I want to solicit your interference with my Lord to
recover a sum of money due to me which the steward at the last settlement
would not pay.'

"Struck both by his manner and his unaccountable knowledge of my
movements, I decided to question him further respecting the cause of his
evident distress. Stepping back into the shop, therefore, I invited him to
follow me, explaining that there we could discuss the matter privately.
When, however, I turned round to hear what he had to tell me, I found that
he was gone, nor, on returning to the door, could I see him anywhere in
the street.

"Unable to account for his abrupt departure, and anxious to help him if it
lay in my power, I recalled that his wife had a little shop in the town,
and I succeeded in tracing my way thither. Judge of my astonishment on
finding the old woman in widow's mourning, and on learning from her that
her husband had been dead for some months! Still more was I startled upon
hearing that on his death-bed he had repeatedly told her that my father's
steward had wronged him of some money, but that when Master Tom returned
he would see her righted. Needless to say, as speedily as possible I
accomplished the old man's dying wish which had been so strangely brought
to my knowledge."

The next mention of Chancellor Ego which occurs in Mrs Stanhope's
correspondence is not so complimentary:--


    _June 3rd, 1806._

    Your sisters are now well, and propose being very gay. To-morrow, in
    the morning, we attend the Drawingroom, after which your father dines
    at what is called Mr Pitt's Dinner, & where the attendance is expected
    to be very large. In the evening, I am to have a few friends, amongst
    them Lady C. Wortley and Mr Mercer, who sing together most
    beautifully; after which I shall go to Mr Hope's, the finest house in
    London, with respect to taste and _vertu_.

    We have now fine weather. You would delight in Kensington Gardens, or
    perhaps you would prefer joining the impertinent Loungers who sit on
    Horseback, too lazy to join the walkers. The political world is at
    present in a strange situation. Should Lord Melville be acquitted he
    will probably take an active part in Indian affairs. There is a
    canvass against him, but I trust British Peers are not to be
    influenced.

    I hope our _Dancing Chancellor_ will act properly as far as he is
    concerned, but I believe he is now referred to the House of Peers. If
    the intelligence has not yet reached you, you will wonder at the
    expression "Dancing Chancellor." Know then that at Sheridan's ball the
    Lord High Chancellor of England [34] danced with Miss Drummond after
    having dined and sat too long with a party where was the Prime
    Minister, [35] the Chancellor of the Exchequer [36] and a greater
    Personage than any. They contrived to set Somerset House on fire
    _twice_, and, after dancing, the head of the Law amused himself
    with rowing on the Thames.--So much for the Rulers of this Land!


Thomas Hope of Deepdene, Surrey, and Duchess Street, Portland Place, who
is mentioned in the above letter, was a member of an eminent commercial
family, of Scottish descent, generally known as the Hopes of Amsterdam.
Having inherited an immense fortune at the age of eighteen, he became an
early patron of literature and the arts. Flaxman owed much to his support,
Thorwaldsen and Chantrey to his recognition of their genius early in life.
Crazy also about architecture, Mr Hope travelled all over the world,
studying famous buildings and collecting, meanwhile, priceless treasures
in pictures, statues, and furniture, so that on his return he
reconstructed his home in London, and replenished it with beautiful
possessions. In 1805 he published a handsome volume on Household
Furniture, illustrated by many drawings of the fine specimens in his own
house. He afterwards wrote other works, but is most celebrated as the
writer of a romance, _Anastasius_, the authorship of which was at one time
attributed to Byron, and of a scientific work, _The Origin and Prospects
of Man_, which may be considered the parent of the well-known _Vestiges of
Creation_, and which formed the basis of one of Carlyle's most remarkable
essays.

In 1806, he was, however, still looked upon as a mere superficial
dilettante, though, on account of the _objets d'art_ which he owned,
everyone was eager to gain access to his house. This desire was
accentuated with regard to the party which he gave that year, it being the
first for which he had issued invitations since his marriage, in the
previous April, with Louisa, the youngest daughter of the Right Rev. Lord
Decies, Archbishop of Tuam.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    _June 6th, 1806._

    Had you been here on the Birthday night, you would have pronounced us
    of the Wronghead Family, for we had nothing but _contretemps_ from the
    moment we set out for the Drawingroom till the next day rose upon us.

    At three we set out in wind and rain for St James's, & drove down
    Grosvenor Street; but as there was a string of carriages from Oxford
    Street, to get in was impossible. We therefore turned about and tried
    Dover Street, but there we were not permitted to go. At last, after
    much whipping and much delay, we were admitted into the string in
    Albemarle Street, and in process of time reached St James's safely and
    proceeded as far as the Guard Room.--Further, we never arrived! All
    the people who came out of the Drawingroom looked expiring, and begged
    we would not attempt to go in, as they were almost dead, and many had
    fainted. Very soon we found the Queen had taken herself off, not
    having spoken to above one third of the Company. Notwithstanding that
    we had only our labour for our trouble, we were there till half past
    seven before we could get our carriage.

    In the evening I expected Mr Mercer and Lady C. Wortley to sing, and
    the Eyres. All came but Mr Mercer, the songster,--another
    disappointment! They stayed with me till half past eleven, when we set
    out for Mr T. Hope's rout, but after waiting in the street _till
    near one_, we found to get in was impossible. Therefore very
    reluctantly we turned about and came home. Did you ever hear of such
    disappointments? However, we are all quite well, which probably would
    not have been the case had we done all we intended.

    The Wit at the Drawingroom was to call it the _levée en masse_.
    London does not abound in wit. The only things of the sort I have
    heard are what has been said about Mrs Fox's Ball. The first is given
    to Fox himself who was asked what it was like, and referred the
    inquirer to the 22nd Chapter of the First Book of Samuel at the second
    verse, [37] where is to be found a very just description of it, tho'
    probably you would not have thought to have looked at your Bible for
    an account of Mrs Fox's Ball. The other was a _bon mot_ of your
    friend, Lyttleton [38] who said, "There was all the world, but little
    of his wife!"

    Last night I was at Mrs Law's, a very pleasant Assembly. Osborne
    Markham [39] was flirting with his intended, Lady Mary Thynne, a
    pretty-looking woman.


Mr Lyttleton, whose _bon mot_ respecting Mrs Fox's ball so pleased Mrs
Stanhope, was a constant source of amusement to her and her daughters.
Earlier that same year, on March 4th, she had written:--


    I suppose you saw the address which Mr Lyttleton made to the
    Freeholders of Worcestershire? It was very short & I think
    comprehended in these words:--"_Be assured that the Hon. William
    Henry Lyttleton will offer himself at the next county Meeting; if the
    Freeholders will be true to their interest & to the welfare of the
    country._"

    This short address was posted in the corner of the newspaper. Now you
    must know that his father knows nothing about his offering himself;
    and this was printed in the corner of the newspaper that his sister
    might cut it out before his father saw it! I understand that he has
    the majority on the Poll at present & that he made a speech of above
    two hours in length.


In an undated letter she subsequently relates:--


    Have you heard the latest story of our friend Lyttleton? It appears
    that at some large party he was seated at the card table next to Mrs
    Beaumont who expressed herself very dissatisfied with the smallness of
    the stakes. "In the great houses which I frequent," she explained
    grandly to Lyttleton, "we constantly play for _paper_." "Madam,"
    said Lyttleton in a solemn whisper, "In the little houses which
    _I_ frequent, we play for note paper."


Meanwhile another event had been arranged to take place on that Birthday
night which for Mrs Stanhope proved so unfortunate, and had been announced
by her so early as May 30th previously:--


    On the Birthday, all the friends of Mr Pitt have agreed to dine
    together instead of on _his_ birthday, which is just past. The
    first idea rose from the Opposition wishing to dine together on the
    4th, but many objected. They then determined to celebrate Mr Pitt's
    birthday on that day. Your father means to be there.


"Pitt dinners," as they were subsequently termed, forthwith became an
annual institution, and were held in all parts of the United Kingdom. John
Stanhope, who, in 1806, was staying in Edinburgh, attended one in that
city, and eight days later was invited to be present at another public
banquet designed to be commemorative of a very different event.

Throughout the months of May and June, public attention had been absorbed
by the famous trial of Lord Melville. So early as May 6th, Mrs Stanhope
had written delightedly:--"You will be glad to hear that the cross-
examination of Mr Trotter went in fayour of Lord Melville who looked
perfectly composed the whole time." But not till the 12th did the end
arrive.


    _June 13th, 1806._

    Your sisters both attended the trial and had the gratification of
    hearing Lord Melville acquitted. The Prince had the good sense not to
    vote. The Court was as full as possible & when the two youngest Peers
    voted on the first charge & said Guilty, there was something like a
    hiss from the House of Commons. I am glad it is over & I hope the
    country will not be put to the expense of any more trials of the same
    kind for many years. The Princes went and shook Lord Melville by the
    hand as soon as it was over.


Thus it was that eight days after the Pitt dinner, Edinburgh felt itself
called upon to give another banquet, designed to celebrate the joyful
event of Lord Melville's acquittal. It was likewise proposed to illuminate
the city, but the Solicitor-General (Chief Magistrate in the absence of
the Lord Advocate) prohibited such a demonstration. He was, in
consequence, nicknamed, "The Extinguisher General," and the friends of
Lord Melville, to the number of five hundred, consoled themselves by
singing a song written by Walter Stanhope for the occasion, and entitled,
"A Health to Lord Melville." Each of the eight verses of which it is
composed proposes a toast that was staunchly drunk by all present; but
perhaps those in honour of the volunteers and of the luckless Princess of
Wales, afterwards Queen Caroline, are the most significant.

  "Since here we are set in array round the table,
  Five hundred good fellows well met in a hall,
  Come listen, brave boys, and I'll sing as I'm able
  How innocence triumphed, and Pride got a fall;
    But push round the claret,
    Come, Stewards, don't spare it;
  With rapture you'll drink to the toasts that I give.
    Here, Boys,
    Off with it merrily,
  Melville for ever and long may he live!

  What _were_ the Whigs doing, when, boldly pursuing,
  Pitt banished Rebellion, gave treason a sting?
  Why, they swore on their honour, for Arthur O'Connor
  And fought hard for Despard, 'gainst Country & King!
    Well then, we knew, Boys,
    Pitt and Melville were true Boys,
  And tempest was raised by the friends of Reform.
    Ah, woe!
    Weep for his memory;
  Low lies the Pilot that weathered the storm. [40]

       *       *       *       *       *

  They would turn us adrift, tho', rely, Sir, upon it,
  Our own faithful Chronicles warrant us that
  The free Mountaineer, and his bonny brown bonnet
  Have oft gone as far as the Regular's hat.
    We laugh at their taunting,
    For all we are wanting
  Is licence our life for our country to give;
    Off with it merrily,
    Horse, Foot and Artillery,
  Each loyal Volunteer--long may he live!

       *       *       *       *       *

  And then our Revenue, Lord knows how they viewed it,
  While each petty Statesman talked lofty and big,
  And the Beer tax was weak as if Windham had brewed it,
  And the Pig Iron Duty a shame to a pig;
    In vain is their boasting,
    Too surely there's wanting
  What judgment, experience and steadiness give;
    Come, Boys,
    Drink about merrily,
  Health to sage Melville, and long may he live!

  Our King too,--our Princess--I dare not say more, Sir,
  May Providence watch them with mercy and might;
  While there's one Scottish arm that can wag a day more, Sir,
  They shall ne'er want a friend to stand up for their right.
    Be d--d he that dare not,
    For my part I'll spare not
  To beauty afflicted a tribute to give!
    Fill it up steadily,
    Drink it off readily,
  Here's to the Princess and long may she live!

  And since we must not set Auld Reekie [41] in glory,
  And make her brown visage as light as her heart,
  Till each man illumine his own upper storey
  Nor _Law_ trash nor Lawyer shall force us to part.
    In Grenville and Spencer
    And some few good men, Sir,
  High talents and honour slight difference forgive,
    But the Brewer we'll hoax;
    Tally ho! to the Fox;
  And drink Melville for ever as long as we live!"




CHAPTER II

1805-1810

LETTERS OF AN EXILE


To a man far distant from the memorable scene of Lord Melville's trial,
the news of the verdict, sent by Mrs Stanhope, must have caused peculiar
satisfaction.

Among her numerous correspondents at this date, probably few had been more
frequently in her thoughts during the past two years than her kinsman,
Cuthbert Collingwood. From her earliest days, indeed, he had occupied a
certain prominence in her horizon. Her mother, Winifred Collingwood, had
belonged to another branch of the Northumberland family which owned a
common ancestor with that of the afterwards famous Admiral, [1] and this
tie had been strengthened rather than diminished throughout the passing of
generations by the propinquity of the two branches.

In the commencement of his naval career, Cuthbert Collingwood, on board
the _Lennox_, had attracted the hearty approbation of Mrs Stanhope's other
relation, Admiral Roddam, [2] the grand old veteran who had been in the
service about thirty-seven years before his young neighbour from
Northumberland had become his midshipman. In 1787 he won as warm an
appreciation from her husband when he stayed at Cannon Hall and first made
the acquaintance of Walter Stanhope, who then formed for him a lifelong
friendship. During the all-too-brief period when Collingwood was on shore,
there occur entries in Stanhope's Journal recording many a quiet rubber of
whist played with the man whose harsh fate was to render such moments of
happy social intercourse a precious recollection through long, lonely
years. Returned to his post, Captain Collingwood's thoughts clung to that
family circle he had left-to the man who basked in the happiness of a home
life from which he, personally, was debarred. Year by year Collingwood
kept his kinsman Stanhope in touch with all his movements. Year by year,
Stanhope and his wife responded, supplying the absent seaman with news of
the chief events which were happening in the political world at home. And
the letters from Collingwood, with their stern grip of a strenuous life,
with their deep underlying tragedy of a profound loneliness, afford a
curious contrast to the shallow utterances of other correspondents. Over
the intervening miles of ocean, from that isolated soul on guard, they
reached the family in Grosvenor Square, bearing, so it seemed, something
of the freshness and the force of the wind-rocked brine which they had
traversed. Into that restless routine of London life, they carried the
echo of a distant clash of arms, the mutterings of a brooding storm. They
told how the sea-dogs upon the alert were playing a desperate game of
tactics with their country's foe, the outcome of which none could foretell
and the chances of which few dared to contemplate. And in the minds of
those to whom they were addressed they awoke an answering apprehension,
which entered into the heart of their home-life, for one of that circle,
little William Stanhope, was shortly to join his great kinsman at sea and
to play his small part in the fierce ocean drama which was going forward.


    _Captain Collingwood to Walter Spencer-Stanhope_.
    _"Dreadnought" off_ CADIZ, _July 10th, 1805._

    I shall have great pleasure in taking your young sailor into my care,
    whenever you chuse he should come--and you may assure yourself that I
    will be as regardful of everything that relates to him as you yourself
    could be. Considering how uncertain my situation is or where I may be
    at any particular period, had I known your intention in March, I
    should have recommended that he embarked then, and made his first
    essay in a warm country and far from home....

    When I sailed from England I had under my command a fine fleet, but
    the change of circumstances since that has both altered my destination
    and reduced my force. I am now blocking up the ports here. On my
    arrival I found the Spaniards on the point of sailing, waiting only
    for the Carthagena Squadron to join them, and _they_ were actually at
    sea, in their way down, but recalled by a dispatch boat on our
    appearance off the coast. We never know whether we go too fast or too
    slow--had I been a few days later, we should probably have met them at
    sea with their ten sail, and made a good day of it.


And he proceeds to append a comment on the news of Lord Melville's
impeachment which had just reached him from Mrs Stanhope.


    Oh! how I lament the fall of Lord Melville! But I never can consent to
    rank him amongst the herd of peculators who prey upon the publick. He
    has been negligent in the economy and management of his office--he has
    paid too little attention to the management of his own money affairs.
    Had he been avaricious and greedy of wealth how many years has he been
    in official situations wherein he might have enriched himself--and is
    yet as poor as poverty, for I have it from good authority that his
    patent of Nobility was several months in office before he could raise
    £2000 to pay the fees of it, and Melville Castle must have been sold
    if his son had not taken it.

    Then the virulence with which he has been pursued from all quarters--
    not merely submitting his case to the calm deliberations of
    Parliament, or the lawful decisions of Courts of Justice, but made a
    subject for Pot house discussion, where the snobby meetings of half-
    drunk mechanicks have been convened to pass judgment on a man whose
    whole life has been devoted to his country's service, and whose
    conduct has been unimpeached till now. It is disgraceful to the
    justice of the country, for it matters little what may be the decision
    of a Court hereafter, when a man is already condemned in the publick
    opinion. Those to whom Lord Melville was before indifferent and those
    who blame the negligence of his office, have acquired a sort of
    respect for his misfortunes, in being the object of such a factious
    hue & cry.

    I was very sorry to hear Mr Collingwood [3] had been so indifferent in
    his health last spring, but I hope the warm weather will be of service
    to him--the last I heard from his home he was better, I beg my best
    and kindest regards to Mrs Stanhope & all your family and wishing you
    & them health and every possible happiness.

    I am, dear Sir,
    Your faithful & most humble servant,
    CUTHBERT COLLINGWOOD.


    _The Same._
    _Sept 23rd._

    It is a long time since I have heard from England.... I have here a
    very laborious and a very anxious time. You will have heard from my
    wife, perhaps the narrow escape I have had from being cut off by the
    combined fleet. At that time I had only three ships with me and a
    frigate--they had 36 sail, and had they managed their affairs with the
    least ingenuity, I should have found it a very difficult thing to have
    fought my way through them, but we made good use of their want of
    skill and after seeing them safe into Port, we continued on our
    Station to blockade the town and prevent all commerce.

    I hope the Admiralty will give me credit for maintaining my station in
    the neighbourhood of so powerfull a fleet, for I never quitted them
    for a day, though I had but four ships; but now that I am reinforced
    by the squadron under Sir R. Calder, I have a fine fleet of 26 ships
    of line and some small frigates; and hope every good--and with God's
    blessing with me will do a good day's work for my country, whenever
    they give me an opportunity. That done, I shall be glad to retire to
    my home & enjoy the comforts of my family, for my strength fails, and
    the mind being on the full stretch, sinks and needs relief.

    I have a gentleman from Newcastle for my Captain, but he is a man of
    no talent as a sea-officer and of little assistance to me.

    How glad I shall be to get to my garden again at Morpeth and quitting
    the foe, see for the rest of my life only friends about me.


Ever through the thunder of cannon or the stress of a watch which ceased
neither day nor night, through the threatenings of death or the
allurements of fame, one thought was paramount in Collingwood's mind. A
yearning for a peaceful garden he had left behind--to him a veritable
garden of Paradise--for the innocent prattle of his children, the sweet
companionship of his wife. A dream of reunion tormented and sustained him.
"Whenever I think how I am to be happy again my thoughts carry me back to
Morpeth," he wrote. Incapable of a dramatic appeal to sympathy, his
letters to Stanhope, in their strong self-repression, breathe a longing
the more profound. For that Paradise of his dreams Collingwood would have
joyfully bartered fame, emolument, all that the world could offer, had not
duty claimed from him a prolonged sacrifice of all which he held dear.
Whether, if he could have looked on through the few remaining years of his
life and have foreseen the end of that longing and those dreams, his weary
spirit could still have borne the burden laid upon it, none may say. But
buoyed up by that ever-present hope he faced the strain of his eternal
watching with an unflinching courage, which may have been occasionally
strengthened by a recollection which visited him, and the remarkable
circumstances of which cannot be ignored.

For the week before the war had broken out, Collingwood, in the peace of
that distant Northumberland home, had been elated by a vision which
contained for him a strange element of great promise. In his sleep he had
seen with extraordinary vividness the English Fleet in battle array; the
details of their position were clear to him, and, later, he beheld an
engagement in progress the incidents of which were extraordinarily
realistic. Finally, the glory of a great victory came upon him, to fill
his waking moments with delight and haunt his recollection. So minute, so
circumstantial had been the particulars of the dream, that, profoundly
impressed at the time, he had related them in full detail to his wife. In
much imaginative, Collingwood was not without the vein of superstition
which seems inseparable from his profession, and he had the simple faith
of a child. He believed in the ultimate fulfilment of that vision and the
thought pursued him.

Meanwhile, his letter to Stanhope of September 23rd, reached its
destination at a moment of increased national suspense. Napoleon's
elaborately planned ruse to entice Nelson to the West Indies had succeeded
only too well. And while Nelson sought his decoy Villeneuve off Barbadoes,
the French Admiral, as pre-arranged, was hastening back to effect, in the
absence of his dupe, the release of the French Fleet blockaded by
Cornwallis. But luck and wit saved England. Nelson chanced upon a ship
which had seen the returning enemy; he succeeded in warning the Admiralty
in time; Villeneuve, intercepted by Calder, suffered an ignominious
defeat, and Napoleon consummated his own disaster by the tactlessness of
his wrath against his unfortunate admiral who had thus succumbed to a
force inferior in numbers. Villeneuve, stung by the bitter taunt of
cowardice, rashly left Cadiz to fight Nelson--a manoeuvre which, at best,
could little advance the cause of the Emperor, which, as the event proved,
courted a catastrophe out of all proportion to any possible gain, and
which was undertaken by the luckless Frenchman for no other end save that
of disproving the imputation of cowardice under which he smarted.

Whether in the placing of the ships at the Battle of Trafalgar that vision
of Collingwood played any part, history will never know--whether it must
be regarded by the curious as in itself prophetic, or merely as a chance
occurrence, the suggestion of which was by chance adopted. Yet it is
obvious that the relation between this remarkable dream and its fulfilment
can scarcely be viewed merely as an interesting coincidence. The inference
is too strong that in any consultation between Collingwood and Nelson with
regard to the order of battle the recollection of the scheme of attack
which had so impressed the former must--even if unconsciously--have
coloured the advice given by him to Nelson. Moreover such reflections give
rise to a further curious speculation. To Nelson posterity is wont to
ascribe the entire merit of the order of battle on that memorable day; he,
it is held, was the active genius who conceived the plan of action,
Collingwood was the acquiescer, a passive though able coadjutor. Yet
Collingwood himself, the most modest of men and the least likely to make
an erroneous statement with regard to such a question of fact, expressly
asserts the contrary. "In this affair," he says, "Nelson did nothing
without my counsel, _we made our line of battle together_ and concerted
the attack." [4] On this point he also insists, in writing to Stanhope, to
whom, as to his wife, he incidentally recalled the circumstances of his
having foreseen the battle in a dream at Morpeth the week before the war
broke out.

Throughout this period, in England, news was awaited with increasing
anxiety. On October 31st, Mrs Stanhope wrote to her son John:--


    The Papers are now quite alarming. I fear it is up with the Austrians
    for the Russians cannot now join them. This horrid Bonaparte is a
    scourge to the whole world. It is wonderful with what enthusiasm he
    seems to inspire his men. They go where he likes and accomplish all
    his plans.

    Your father has written again to Admiral Collingwood to inform him
    that if he does not return home, which, as he has changed his flag
    from the Dreadnought, is not very probable, that he will send William
    to him in the spring. Admiral Roddam, tho' he prefers a frigate,
    approves of his going with Admiral C. as he is both a good man & an
    excellent sailor, & will scrupulously perform that which he promises
    to undertake.


    _Nov. 2nd, 1805._

    Not only Glyn, but all of us must shake with the horrid German
    intelligence. I have little faith in the hope the papers hold out that
    we may yet hear of a victory gained by the united Armies of Russia and
    Austria--a few days must relieve us from our present state of
    uncertainty--though I fear not of anxiety. How thankful I am that I
    have no near connection going on the cruel expedition at this time.


A few days, and the great news came, with its conflicting elements of
glory and of grief.


    _Walter Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._

    My Dear John,

    It is impossible to begin on this day any letter to any person without
    most joyfully and most thankfully celebrating the glorious victory of
    Lord Nelson. I cannot say that my triumph is so much alloyed as that
    of many others seems to be and yet I trust I have as grateful a mind
    and as high an admiration for Military renown as another man. No, it
    is that I think that Nelson's glorious death is more to be envied than
    lamented, and that to die wept by the land we perished for is what he
    himself would have wished.

    Would to God my little William had been on board Collingwood's ship on
    that glorious day, whatever might have been the risque!


    _The Same to the Vicar of Newcastle._

    Although the death of Nelson is in my judgment more to be envied than
    lamented, yet England secured by the loss of his life ought to feel,
    bewail & reward it as far as posthumous honours and benefits to his
    family and general Regret can do it. The late Victory affords peculiar
    satisfaction to me from the brilliant Part that Admiral Collingwood
    has had in it & the exquisitely good account he has given of it in his
    Dispatches.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    CANNON HALL, _November 9th, 1805._

    Your father said he should write you a long letter this morning.... No
    longer have we cause to talk and grieve about the Austrians, we may
    now talk and rejoice at our glorious, and at the moment, unexpected
    victory. What a day it was! but in the midst of our rejoicings we must
    pause to shed a tear over the Hero who fell, though as every Hero must
    wish to fall. Admiral Collingwood's dispatches do him honour, he at
    all times writes well and this was a subject to draw out all his
    powers and show the Feeling and Goodness of his Heart. Your father
    wishes William had been with him. I am satisfied as it is!


    _The Same._
    _November 14th, 1805._

    Your letter my dear John, arrived on Sunday, after mine was sealed,
    and as the carriage was at the door to take us to church, I had not
    time to open it, to add my thanks for your letter of Congratulations
    on our great and glorious Victory. What has followed since, at any
    other time would have been considered great, at all times must be
    thought gallant.

    Yesterday letters from Barnsley, reporting the capture of the
    Rochefort Squadron, were so firmly believed that the Bells were
    ringing.

    The tears of the Nation must be shed over the brave Nelson, but his
    death was that of a Hero, and such he truly was. The Dispatches do
    Admiral Collingwood great honor, and his bravery is already rewarded
    with a peerage. I had a letter from his wife to-day, who says he wrote
    in the greatest grief for his friend. She had not heard since the
    Dispatches were sent, when the Fleet was in a miserable state, she, of
    course, under great anxiety. The Euryalus has, I hope, brought further
    accounts. Probably the funeral of Lord Nelson will be Publick--what a
    thrilling sight it will be. Surely some mark of honour will be
    bestowed upon his Widow. At present his Brother's wife has place of
    her, and she has not been mentioned.


    _Marianne Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._

    I have made a vow not to name Lord Nelson or the Victory or Victories
    in any of my letters, but postscripts are excluded. Every letter Mamma
    has had has been full of nothing else; if care is not taken, it will
    be like the invasion, a constant topick when you have nothing to say.
    --I think it is a great proof of genius to have written a letter
    without naming the event. What say you to Lord Collingwood? I would
    rather have his patent of nobility than the longest pedigree in the
    kingdom. I should glory more in his title than in the Duke of
    Norfolk's.

    Mamma had a letter from Lady Collingwood to-day, still very anxious
    for his safety, as she had heard nothing since the Victory, and his
    ship was then much disabled. He had written to her Lord Nelson's death
    was a most severe blow to him, for he was his greatest friend. I
    almost wish dear William had been with him.


    _November 20th., 1805._
    FARNELY.

    We begin to be impatient for more news. Think of poor Lady
    Collingwood--she was in a shop in Newcastle when the Mail arrived
    covered with ribbands, but the coachman with a black hat-band. He
    immediately declared the great victory, but that Lord Nelson and all
    the Admirals were killed. She immediately fainted. When she heard from
    Lord Collingwood first he wrote in the greatest grief for his friend,
    and said the fleet was in a miserable state. Perhaps that may bring
    him home.

    Are you not pleased with his being created a Peer in so handsome a
    manner. Why has not Lady Nelson some honour conferred upon her? Surely
    the Widow of our Hero ought not to be so neglected.

    Yesterday we drank to the immortal memory of our Hero. Mr Fawkes has
    got a very fine print of him.

    The clock strikes ten which announces breakfast, therefore adieu, my
    dear John.


The wish expressed in the last letter that more tidings would arrive
respecting the great event which had taken place, was speedily gratified.
A letter written by Collingwood to Sir Peter Parker on November 1st, was
sent _via_ Stanhope for his perusal, and he preserved a copy of it.


    _Lord Collingwood to Sir Peter Parker._
    _November 1st., 1805._

    You will have seen from the public accounts that we have fought a
    great battle, and had it not been for the fall of our noble friend who
    was indeed the glory of England and the admiration of all who saw him
    in battle, your pleasure would have been perfect.... It was a severe
    action, no dodging or manoeuvres. They formed their line with nicety
    and waited our attack with composure. They did not give a gun until we
    were close to them & we began first. Our ships were fought with a
    degree of gallantry which would have warmed your heart. Everybody
    exerted themselves and a glorious day they made of it, people who
    cannot comprehend how complicated an affair a battle is at sea and
    judge of an officer's conduct by the number of sufferers in his ship,
    often do him a wrong, and though there will appear great difference in
    the loss of men, all did admirably well; and the conclusion was good
    beyond description, eighteen hulks of the enemy lying amongst the
    British fleet without a stick standing, and the French Achilles
    burning.--But we were close to the rocks of Trafalgar [5] & when I
    made the signal for anchoring, many ships had their cable shot & not
    an anchor ready.

    Providence did for us what no human effort could have done, the wind
    shifted a few points and we drifted off the land. The next day bad
    weather began and with great difficulty we got our captured ships
    towed off the land. The second, Gravina, who is wounded, made an
    effort to cut off some of the ships with a squadron of 9 ships with
    which he retired. In the night the gale increased and two of his
    ships, the "_Mayo_" of 100 guns and "_Indomitable_" of 80 were
    dismasted. The "_Mayo_" anchored amongst our hulks and surrendered;
    the "_Indomitable_" lost on the shore and I am told that every soul
    perished. Among such numbers it is difficult to ascertain what we have
    done, but I believe the truth is 23 sail of the line fell into our
    hands of which three got in again in the gale of wind....

    The storm being violent and many of our own ships in most perilous
    situations, I found it necessary to order the captures,--all without
    masts, some without rudders & many half full of water--to be
    destroyed, except such as were in better plight, for my object was
    their ruin & not what might be made of them. As this filled our ships
    with prisoners and the wounded in a miserable condition, I sent a flag
    to the Marquis of Solana [6] to offer him his wounded men, which was
    received with every demonstration of joy and gratitude, & two French
    Frigates & a Brigg were sent out for them. In return, he offered me
    his Hospitals & the security of Spanish honour that our wounded should
    have every care & every comfort that Spain could afford, so you see,
    my dear Sir, though we fight them, we are upon very good terms.

    But what most astonished them was our keeping the sea after such an
    action, with our injured masts and crippled ships, which I did the
    longer to let them see that no efforts of theirs could drive a British
    Squadron from its station.


This letter is of exceptional interest since it throws fresh light on a
matter which has now afforded food for controversy for over a century.
Nelson's dying injunctions had been that the fleet was to anchor. Owing,
it was contended, to Collingwood having failed promptly to carry out these
instructions of the master mind, many prizes were lost. James, who in his
_Naval History_ is severe in his criticism of Collingwood's error of
judgment in this particular, has further pointed out that four ships which
did anchor on the evening of the engagement weathered the gale
successfully. This letter of Collingwood gives his reasons for his course
of action. It proves that although when he did give the order to anchor
its execution was impracticable, yet that he had strong reason for
destroying a number of the captured ships, which were all but worthless as
prizes. His assertion, "My object was their ruin and not what might be
made of them," bears out the verdict of Lord St Vincent, quoted by Lord
Eldon, that "Collingwood's conduct after the Battle of Trafalgar in
destroying under difficult circumstances the defeated fleet was above all
praise"; while the conclusion of Collingwood's letter contains a sentiment
at which few will cavil.

From Mrs Stanhope's Uncle, Edward Collingwood, in Northumberland, there
was subsequently forwarded to her a letter written by Collingwood in the
first glory of victory and the first bitterness of his grief for Nelson's
death.


    My dear friend received his mortal wound about the middle of the
    fight, and sent an officer to tell me that he should see me no more.

    His loss was the greatest grief to me. There is nothing like him for
    gallantry and conduct in battle. It was not a foolish passion for
    fighting, for he was the most gentle of human creatures, and often
    lamented the cruel necessity of it; but it was a principle of duty,
    which all men owed their country in defence of their laws and liberty.
    He valued his life only as it enabled him to do good, and would not
    preserve it by any act he thought unworthy. He wore four stars upon
    his breast and could not be prevailed to put on a plain coat, scorning
    what he thought a shabby precaution: but that perhaps cost him his
    life, for his dress made him the general mark.

    He is gone, and I shall lament him as long as I live.


To Walter Stanhope he wrote:--


    _Queen, March 6th., 1806._

    I thank you and Mrs Stanhope most sincerely for your kind
    congratulations on the success of the Fleet, and the high honour his
    Majesty has been graciously pleased to confer on me in testimony of
    his approbation, which I am sure will be very gratifying to all my
    friends, and that you will enjoy it as much as any of them.

    I have indeed had a severe loss in the death of my excellent friend
    Lord Nelson. Since the year 73 we have been on terms of the greatest
    intimacy--chance has thrown us very much together in service and on
    many occasions we have acted in concert--there is scarce a Naval
    subject that has not been the subject of our discussion, so that all
    his opinions were familiar to me; and so firmly founded in principles
    of honour, of justice, of attachment to his country, at the same time
    so entirely divested of everything interesting to himself, that it was
    impossible to consider him but with admiration. He liked fame and was
    open to flattery so that people sometimes got about him who were
    unworthy of him. He is a loss to his country that cannot easily be
    replaced.


Thus in a few words, the very reticence of which enhances their
significance, did Collingwood sum up the greatness and the weakness of
Nelson. Gifted, brilliant, faulty by reason of his emotional temperament,
strong by reason of his enthusiasm--his all-enthralling sense of duty,
Nelson flashed like a meteor across the ken of his generation to vanish
in a haze of glory. He died at the psychological moment--his life,
according to this account, the sacrifice to a dazzling folly. And the
man whom he loved--the man whose sterling worth is swamped by Nelson's
more vivid personality, was left to battle on alone through the weary
years. The intoxication of victory did not blind Collingwood to the
colossal task which yet lay before him. To Stanhope he wrote with
undiminished anxiety:--


    The idea that the Victory we gained has so entirely reduced the
    enemy's fleet that no danger is now to be apprehended from them, ought
    not to be encouraged. On the contrary, I believe they will make up for
    their loss by extraordinary exertion. You see they have immediately
    sent all their fleet to sea, and clean as they are from Port, they can
    avoid an encounter when they are not very superior. The ships that I
    have here are many of them the dullest in the British fleet, so that I
    have little chance of getting near them until they come with double
    our number, and when they do, I shall do the best with them I can.
    Whatever their project is, it must be interrupted--defeated if
    possible. Bonaparte seems determined to have the whole of the
    Mediterranean, islands and all. Whenever he is prepared to take
    possession he knows how to make a quarrel with the Court of Madrid.


A few months later he wrote:--


    I have a laborious and anxious life and little time to write even to
    my wife. The only comfort I have here is good health and the
    consciousness that I am doing the best I can for my country--and a
    good deal I believe we shall have to do before we can establish a
    happy and secure peace--for I believe in the heart of the Tyrant
    enmity is so deeply rooted towards England, that it will only be
    extinguished with his natural life. I consider the contest with him
    but in its infancy--our independence as a people is at stake. Wisdom
    in our councils and fortitude in the field was never so necessary to
    us, and I trust neither will be found wanting.

    In every quarter the power of France is increasing,--here the
    Spaniards are but his Puppets, his mandates come to Cadiz as they go
    to Brest. His birthday is kept as that of their Sovereign, the French
    flag is worn upon the Governor's house, upon rejoicing days, with that
    of the Spanish. In Italy they hoist it upon the same staff as that of
    the Pope--it will not be long before the Pope's is worn out with the
    contentions of its bad neighbourhood. Sir Sidney Smith is doing what
    he can to rouse the Calabrians to resistance--he gives them money and
    the mob follow his officers--but the people of property have
    universally attached themselves to the French-not from liking them--
    but in the hope that in the end they may be left with the rag of their
    fortunes.

    At Cadiz they are making great progress in their equipment of a fleet,
    they have 12 sail of the line ready for sea, two more well advanced in
    their fitting,--I have 9, which I consider to be equal to beating
    them, but whenever we meet I would do more-_not a shadow of one
    should be left upon the face of the waters_. They will be cautious
    whenever they come--and my ships sail but ill in general.

    I heard from Lady Collingwood that she had the pleasure of visiting
    you when in town.


And then comes a more personal note:--


    I am totally at a loss about the obtaining my patent--from what
    office does it issue and about what sum is the amount of the fees? I
    suppose I shall be ruined by them. I will be much obliged to you for
    any information you can give me on these subjects--that I may not, by
    delaying to do what is proper, seem negligent of this high honour of
    which I am (I hope) justly proud. Sir Isaac Heard sent me the form of
    a letter which it was necessary to write to the Duke of Norfolk or
    Hereditary Earl Marshal, for his Grace's patent to Garter, to grant me
    supporters of armorial bearings appropriate. I suppose he will let me
    know when that is done.

    I hope you will forgive me, my dear Sir, for mentioning this subject
    to you, but from my total ignorance of everything relating to it, I am
    afraid of neglecting something which I ought to do.


Stanhope furnished his friend with all necessary information, and on the
following December 4th, Mrs Stanhope wrote to her son--


    Lord Collingwood proves himself worthy of the great charge reposed in
    him. Mr Stanhope says he thinks next to Pitt's his is the greatest
    trust. His property must be small. He married a Miss Blackett whose
    father was brother to the late Sir Edward and is Uncle to the present
    Sir William Blackett, a man of large fortune in Northumberland. He has
    two daughters, the eldest must be nearly fourteen. I had this morning
    a long account from my uncle of a ball given by Lady Collingwood at
    Newcastle, where 450 people sat down to supper. Unfortunately the
    Mayor instead of giving Lord Collingwood's health, gave _The Memory
    of Lord Nelson_, with a solemn dirge, which so affected Lady
    Collingwood that she fainted, and was obliged to leave the room. She
    had not heard from Lord Collingwood for some time which made it the
    more affecting.

It was on December 23rd, that Nelson's body preserved in spirits arrived
at Greenwich, and forthwith the favourite toast in Yorkshire was one
perhaps peculiarly characteristic of the county, "Here's to the Hero who
died for his country and came home in spirits!" On January 9th, his
funeral took place at St Paul's Cathedral, and Stanhope, who attended it,
must have felt a tightening of the throat as he realised how soon his
small son was to face dangers such as had occasioned the death of the
gallant man whom all England mourned. Moreover, Lord Collingwood had
encouraged few delusions with regard to his own capability of aiding the
career of the future midshipman. "If Parents were to see how many of their
chicks go to ruin from being sent too early abroad they would not be so
anxious about it," he wrote on one occasion, while on another he pointed
out--"I need not say how glad I shall be to take all the care of William I
can, and do him all the service in my power, but it is rather late in my
day to be very useful to him as I shall be seeking to retire about the
time he is launching into the world." Still more did he emphasise his
inability to obtain promotion for those for whom he might have most
desired it. On one occasion when Stanhope enclosed a letter from his
friend Sir James Graham begging for the advancement of a young lieutenant,
Collingwood replied, "I would gladly show every attention in my power to
any friend of yours, but I have _no opportunity of advancing any officer
beyond a midshipman sometimes_"; and four years after the Battle of
Trafalgar he explained that he had still "some of the Lieutenants who were
with me in action a few years since and no prospect of providing for them
--I have little here but constant labour."

But what he could do in the way of protecting and befriending his little
kinsman he was eager to accomplish, and his letters show how much anxious
thought he devoted to the subject.


    _Admiral Lord Collingwood to Walter Spencer-Stanhope._
    _January 20th, 1806._

    I shall be very glad to see your son William, and will take good care
    of him, and give him the best introduction to this service that I can.
    I hope he has got on a little in mathematicks, because I have not a
    school master now in my ship--I had, but he got hurt in the
    _Sovereign_ and went home. Lord Barham tells me a ship is to be
    sent out to me soon--William might come out conveniently in her....

    With respect to his equipment, do not burden him with baggage--if he
    takes care of it, it is but a miserable occupation, and if he does not
    it will be lost. Therefore, to keep him clean and above want is
    enough; a comfortable bed, that his health requires; two or three Blue
    jackets and waistcoats; his Navigation books that he has been taught
    from--whether it is Robinson's Elements, or Hamilton's Moore; a
    quadrant and a case of instruments. For his reading, you will give him
    such books as you think proper and are least voluminous--a history of
    England--of Rome--and Greece, with voyages or abridgment of them--but
    his baggage must be _light_--for the moment he enters a ship he
    must have no personal cares--all that relates to himself must be
    secondary--or nothing.

    With respect to his supply of money or anything else, when he comes to
    me, he shall want for nothing. I will take care he is sufficiently
    provided and whatever expenses he has, I will tell you that you may
    repay me.

    You would be delighted at the glorious fight we have had. Had but my
    friends Lord Nelson & Duff lived through it, I should have been happy
    indeed. Lord Nelson was well known and universally lamented; Duff had
    all the qualities that adorn a great and good man but was less known.
    He commanded the Mess, and stuck to me in the day's battle as I hope
    my son would have done--it was however a great day, yet I feel we have
    much more to do--the French are venturing out with their squadrons and
    they must be crushed. The powerful armies that are opposed to them on
    the continent will, I hope, do their part well, but I cannot say I
    have a very high opinion of Austrian armies & Austrian generals; their
    military education is good, but they yet seem to want that good &
    independent spirit that should animate a soldier--they are all money-
    making and _will_ trade--and a soldier that makes wealth his
    object will sell an army whenever he can get a good price for it.

    I have received letters from Mr Collingwood and Admiral Roddam and am
    exceedingly happy to hear they were then in good health. The Admiral
    by this time has taken up his quarters at Skillingworth.

    I am rather upon the rack just now. Duckworth went after the French
    Squadron that I had intelligence of near Teneriffe. I am afraid the
    Frenchman has duped him, and by throwing false intelligence in his way
    has sent him to the West Indies--or I ought to have seen him again
    before this; but Sir John Duckworth who is a well-judging man ought
    not to have been so deceived as to suppose that a squadron which had
    been three or four months at sea were on their way to the West Indies
    --but I do not despair of catching them yet, even without him.


Napoleon then believed that he had successfully duped Collingwood in this
manner; "Mon opinion est que Collingwood est parti et est allé aux Grandes
Indes," he wrote at this date, only to discover later that his enemy had
never been deceived.

Meanwhile Stanhope was devoting all his attention to a matter which he had
much at heart. So far Collingwood's great services to his country had been
rewarded with the barren honour of a peerage which had made an unwelcome
claim upon his slender means, and with regard to which his one petition
had been refused--that since he had no son to succeed him the title should
descend to one of his daughters. Stanhope was therefore anxious to procure
for Lord Collingwood a more substantial award in the form of an annuity
which might benefit his family. On February 11th 1806, Mrs Stanhope wrote
to her son--


    News I have none for you to-day, further than that your Father is
    delighted with having had it in his power to be of use to Lord
    Collingwood. His Pension was granted for three generations in the Male
    line; now, as he has no son nor ever likely to have any, it was really
    only rewarding him for his own life. At the Duchess of Gordon's, where
    your Father was last night, he saw Sheridan and Lord Castlereagh [7]
    and he mentioned that if half was settled upon his widow and the other
    half on his daughters after his death, it would be a real advantage to
    him, which both said should be done, if he would attend the House to-
    day. Most probably he will propose it in the House [8] and the
    intelligence will be conveyed by William. I think I sent you word we
    had heard from Lord Collingwood--the date the 20th., of January,
    therefore I imagine he must have been off Cadiz.


Yet even this suggestion to reward the man to whom England owed so much
met with considerable opposition. "Lord Collingwood's Annuity Bill came on
again on Monday," wrote Mrs Stanhope on February 28th. "Your Father still
hopes it will be settled on Lady Collingwood and her daughters, tho' Lord
H. Petty does not approve of the change, Lord Castlereagh and Mr Sheridan
are both of your Father's opinion."

Stanhope, however, carried his point and earned the gratitude of the
family of the absent Admiral. It is true that when the news first reached
Collingwood of the discussion relating to his pension which had taken
place in the House, he was deeply wounded. Some of the speeches seemed to
him to imply that the representation of the slender state of his finances
had been made with his concurrence, and he felt, as he told his wife, that
he had been held up in the House as an object of compassion. "If I had a
favour to ask," he wrote emphatically, "money would be the last thing I
should require from an impoverished country. I have motives for my conduct
which I would not give in exchange for a thousand pensions." But when he
heard of Stanhope's amendment of the original proposition, and that Lady
Collingwood and his daughters would now profit by the thoughtfulness of
his kinsman, he wrote an acknowledgment of such efforts on his behalf with
a sincere gratitude in which pride still mingled.


    I am much obliged to you Sir for your kindness in taking so much
    trouble about my pension--it is a subject I had not thought of myself
    --as my family are amply provided for I left the bounty of the King to
    take its course, but this is so much in addition and I am very much
    obliged for your consideration of what perhaps I should not have
    thought of.


By a strange coincidence, at the very moment when the question of this
annuity was before the House, Collingwood and Stanhope may be said to have
benefited jointly by a legacy from a common kinsman. Edward Collingwood,
Mrs Stanhope's uncle before referred to, expired in February 1806, leaving
his estate of Chirton to Lord Collingwood and his estate of Dissington to
his niece Mrs Stanhope in trust for her third son. The Admiral, however,
expressed little satisfaction in the acquisition of his new property. "I
am sorry the possessor of it is gone," he wrote with his usual warmth of
heart, "for I have lost a friend who I believe sincerely loved me, and
have got an estate which I could have done very well without. I am told
poor Admiral Roddam laments him very much and I love him the more for it."
Much correspondence forthwith ensued between Collingwood and Stanhope with
respect to the distribution of the portion of the furniture and
personalties which had been bequeathed to Stanhope and which he was
anxious to place at the disposal of Lady Collingwood, who, nevertheless,
declined the offer. "Lady Collingwood informed me of your kind attention
to her," wrote Collingwood, gratefully, on hearing of it, "but I think she
judged right, considering the uncertainty at what time I should come to
live there, ... besides, if I should have a son to succeed me, I should
probably rebuild the house, and the present furniture would not be
suitable to the new one. But," he adds again, feelingly, "the subject of
it must become more indifferent to me than it now is before I can
determine anything about it: it never engages my attention but in sorrow.
I lost more real happiness in the death of my friend, whom I esteemed and
reverenced, than his estate can make me amends for--its greatest value to
me is that it is _his_ bequest."

Likewise with regard to Stanhope's proposition of leaving "the moiety of
the books at Chirton which by the will of Mr Collingwood were devised to
the possessor of Dissington," Collingwood decided--"I think in this, as in
every other respect, his will should be literally complied with and
nothing left to future arrangement." He therefore requested his brother-
in-law, Mr Blackett, to choose "some learned and competent gentleman" who
was to act for him in conjunction with any person Stanhope saw fit to
appoint, to make a just division between them "in all the branches of
learning and science and with respect to value." Referring to the fine
classical volumes in the library, he pointed out that this would be a
simple matter, as most of these had duplicates or triplicates, but "God
knows," he exclaimed, "whether any of my family may want any of them! To
me the English authors are valuable and whether I shall ever see any of
them is doubtful."

The amicable discussion with regard to this matter was still in progress
while little William journeyed out to join his kinsman. A month after
Nelson's funeral, Stanhope was taking the preliminary steps for his son's
departure. "I brought William home to be measured," he wrote on February
9th, "and sent him back yesterday in very good spirits. His mind certainly
appears to open very much and he is a good little fellow. At times he is
low and said the other day how odd he should feel to be entirely with
strangers."

On February 26th, the embryo sailor set forth on his perilous adventures,
followed by the thoughts of his family, whose tender solicitude brings
very near that parting of a century ago. "I long to hear how the dear
little midshipman bears his departure," writes one of his brothers, "How
very pretty he will look in his uniform!" and the first details of the
little lad's arrival on board ship, of his quaint sayings and doings, and
how manfully he bore his separation from the last member of his family
circle have been faithfully preserved. But he soon pronounced a favourable
verdict on his new profession--"I like being on bord a ship very much, but
today it has bean a very ruf see," he wrote on March 10th, with a fine
discrimination of the advantages and disadvantages of a nautical career;
while, anxious to prove that he was now become a man of the world, who
could appreciate the exigencies of a situation which had been occupying
the attention of the public, he observes with sudden irrelevance--"What a
sad afair this seems, this deth of Mr Pit!"

Early in April, Collingwood wrote to announce the arrival of his new
midshipman, whom he describes as "a fine sensible boy with great powers of
observation," and William wrote, as he continued to write, gratefully and
enthusiastically of his treatment by Collingwood, whom he explains is "the
kindest and best man who ever lived." Thenceforward every item of
information respecting his son was sent by Collingwood to Stanhope, who in
return retailed to Collingwood everything which he could glean respecting
Lady Collingwood and her daughters. The latter came to London in May, with
a view to completing their education, and both they and their mother seem
to have turned to Stanhope and his family in every perplexity in life. "I
am greatly obliged to you for your account of my daughters," wrote
Collingwood, in a letter which shows how minutely he was kept informed of
every detail relating to them, even to their little tricks of speech and
manner. "I am not impatient for their going in to the North. I hope they
have lost much of their provincial dialect."

And still, at any mention of his home or of those dearest to him, there
breaks involuntarily into his correspondence that longing, which would not
be repressed, for a sorely needed respite from labour and for the balm of
reunion with those he loved. There were, perhaps, few people to whom he
ventured to unburden himself as simply and spontaneously as he did to
Stanhope, a man linked to him by the tie of kinship, yet not so closely as
to make any such self-revelation on his part a possible selfishness. Thus
it is that this hitherto unpublished batch of his correspondence betrays
ever more and more, with a pathos of which the writer was obviously
unconscious, how the strain of watching and of loneliness was undermining
an indomitable brain and soul.

Collingwood's existence, indeed, alternated between an eternal racking
anxiety and a monotony before which the imagination sinks appalled.
"Between days and nights I am almost wore out," he wrote briefly to
Stanhope on April 29th, 1806, "but I do not mean to quit my station while
I have health"; and on September 26th of that same year, after writing an
account of the situation in which he finds himself, he exclaims abruptly,
"It is the dullest life that can be conceived and nothing but the utmost
patience can endure it!" During long months of blockading, dawn after dawn
arose to reveal to his weary gaze the same boundless expanse of rocking
ocean, which he had well-nigh learnt to hate; the same restricted space of
deck to traverse; the same routine of action to contemplate; the same type
of food further to nauseate a reluctant appetite; the same complete lack
of mental and physical relaxation, which is, in itself, almost an
essential to sanity. Thus, soon, to the tension of that perpetual
guardianship was added the haunting dread that an existence which was
undermining his health might also impair his mental faculties, and this at
a time when he was aware that one false step, one error in strategy, and
ignominy might be his portion or the liberties of England herself be the
sacrifice.

In a diary [9] in which, during the last years of his life, he entered
memoranda, ostensibly from which to compile his dispatches, there is
conveyed more eloquently than by any laboured insistence the ceaseless
fret of his guardianship and the impracticability which he experienced of
sifting the truth or falsehood of the information on which his line of
conduct was dependent. Incessantly do its pages recall, with elaborate
care, the details of reported engagements and of reported manoeuvres of
the enemy, supplied from some apparently unimpeachable source, and
incessantly are such memoranda revoked emphatically by a later entry.
Once, after retailing minutely the details of an assault undertaken by the
Portuguese and Spaniards against the French--which he was informed had
continued for six days and during which about 8000 of the former and 6000
of the latter had been killed--and subsequent to which all the inhabitants
of Elvas had been put to the sword by the French--he appends with
pardonable irritation--"_Not a word of this true--the whole a fabrication
for the amusement of country gentlemen and ladies._" Meanwhile he was
confronted by the knowledge that those who were most ready to criticise
his decisions, had least comprehension of the difficulties with which he
had to contend.

On May 15th, 1807, Mrs Stanhope writes:--


    I have had letters from Lord Collingwood and William of so late a date
    as the 29th of April. Lord C. writes out of Spirits, the recent great
    losses have hurt him and the failure at Constantinople, tho' no blame
    attached to him. He sent out one third more force than the Government
    considered necessary and they were at the Dardanelles when they were
    supposed to be with him; but the defences of Constantinople, both
    natural and of art, were little known, the Castles as strong as Cannon
    can make them and of that particular kind the Turks use and from which
    they fire balls of granite or marble;--those would not go far, but
    they do very well for a passage which is so narrow their object cannot
    be far of. One which passed through the _Windsor Castle_ weighed
    800 pounds. He thinks there will be an active campaign in Italy--
    Sicily their object.


On December 19th, Marianne Stanhope retailed--


    Papa has this instant received a most delightful account from Lord
    Collingwood of William, everything that is satisfactory. He says
    everything that we could wish both of his health, disposition and
    capacity, the letter is dated October 13th, off Sicily. He mentions
    his hopes of being able to catch the French if they come to Sicily,
    but the difficulty will be, from the extent of the coast they will
    come from all quarters. He said that the Sicilians finding that we
    take the part of the Court who are most completely detested will make
    for relief from any quarter. The Turks, he says, detest the Russians,
    and lament much the misunderstanding with us, but are completely in
    the power of the French past all relief. The Buenos Ayres expedition,
    he says, he always blamed, and that it turned out exactly as he
    predicted, and that we are most completely detested by the people who
    formerly respected us.


On August 13th, 1808, off Cadiz, Collingwood learnt that the French
General, Dupont, and some officers who had capitulated, had been brought
to Port St Mary, for their better security to be embarked on board a
Spanish Man-o'-war. The mob, however, attacked and wounded Dupont before
he could be got on board, and on August 26th Collingwood relates to Mrs
Stanhope:--


    The Mob of Port Santa Maria seized on Dupont's baggage, for the
    Generals and Juntas may make Conventions as they please, but the
    People is the only _real Power_ at the present moment, and they
    will observe as much of them as they like. On breaking open the Trunks
    they were found to be filled with plunder--Church Plate mostly--but
    everything that was gold or silver was acceptable. I went to see it
    yesterday at the Custom House, and an immense quantity of it there
    was--from a silver Toy to the Crown of Thorns which they had torn from
    the head of Jesus Christ. I heard at first that the mob had been
    raised against the French by the black servant of a Frenchman having
    part of the robe of a Bishop for his dress, but this was not the case.
    The black man had the Bishop's Cross hung with a chain of gold round
    his neck--it was of large amethysts and diamonds worth about 2000
    pounds.

    Dupont was so very silly as to write to the Governor complaining of
    the people who had _robbed_ him, saying that he felt sensibly for
    the honour of Spain and desired that his "property" might be returned
    to him. He had nothing but those trunks of plundered silver!


Collingwood's own reception by the Spanish people afforded a remarkable
instance of the estimation in which he was held and the extraordinary
recognition of his integrity even by a lawless, unreasoning mob. John
Stanhope, some years afterwards, recorded:--

"When, at an earlier period of the war, our expedition under the command
of General Spencer appeared off Cadiz, there prevailed so great a jealousy
against the English Army that the authorities refused to allow them to
land.

"Such, however, was not the case with Lord Collingwood when he appeared
with his fleet.

"He was received by high and low with the greatest enthusiasm. A publick
fête was given to him, and my brother William who accompanied him on shore
described the scene as one of the most striking sights he ever witnessed.
One only feeling seemed to pervade the immense crowd of all ranks
assembled to receive the Admiral, the desire of showing their respect and
admiration for his character. What a triumph for one who, in the hour of
victory, had succeeded to the command of a fleet that had annihilated the
Spanish Navy, and since that time had been constantly blockading their
coasts! But what must have been Lord Collingwood's feelings _when the only
pledge required before they permitted an English force to land in a place
of so much importance, was his word of honour!_ They felt in him a
confidence which they denied to our Government."

But in the midst of a situation so unique, Collingwood ignored the
unparalleled homage paid to him, to revert persistently to each item of
news respecting his distant home. The splendid fetes of which he formed
the central figure, the adulation of an entire nation, find no mention in
his letters to Stanhope, and are of less account to him than the most
trivial circumstance regarding his family or his native county, on which
his thoughts dwell tenderly, lingeringly. From Cadiz, in August, he
laments the tidings conveyed to him by Stanhope of the death, at the age
of eighty-nine, of his former Commander and neighbour, in Northumberland,
Admiral Roddam.


    Poor Admiral Roddam! I have indeed mourned his death, because I lost
    in him a kind friend who had always taken a sincere interest in my
    welfare; but he was become too infirm to enjoy comfort, and then to
    die is a blessing. I am glad he left your son his estate, but it was
    want of knowing the world if he thought of improving the Property by
    keeping him out of it so long.


For little William, on attaining the age of twenty-five, was to succeed to
the estate of Collingwood's former Commander, and this must, if possible,
have strengthened the link between the Admiral and the midshipman in whose
progress he took a profound interest. Collingwood's own character is
perhaps never more clearly portrayed than in his criticism of the little
lad who had been committed to his care. "Of William," he wrote to
Stanhope, in 1808, "everything I have to say is good--and such as must
give you and Mrs Stanhope much satisfaction. He is the best-tempered boy
that can be--has a superior understanding, which makes everything easy to
him. He is very inquisitive in what relates to his duty, and comprehends
it with a facility which few boys do, at this time I believe he has more
knowledge than many twice his standing. He is never engaged in disputes,
and this not from a milkiness and yielding to others, but he seems
superior to contention, and leaves a blockhead to enjoy his own nonsense."
In December of the same year he reiterates, "Your son always gives me
satisfaction. He behaves well and always like a gentleman and I endeavour
to instil in him a contempt for what is trifling and unworthy. When I come
home I will leave him in a frigate and I hope I may soon, for I grow very
weak and languid."

It was to be regretted that while evincing to the utmost his own contempt
for what was "trifling and unworthy," it was impracticable for Collingwood
to follow the example of his small midshipman and contentedly "leave a
blockhead to his own nonsense." The realisation was torment to him that
the very conditions of his service were dictated by those who had only a
partial conception of his requirements, that his representations--his
advice--were alike incessantly ignored, yet, none the less, that his
tactics would subsequently be criticised pitilessly by men incapable of
appreciating the difficulties with which he had been beset at the time of
action. "I have lately had a most anxious and vexatious life," he wrote on
May 16th, 1808, "since the Rochefort ships came into the Mediteranean and
joined the Toulon, I have been in constant pursuit of them, but with bad
intelligence and never knowing whether I was going right or not." Yet
though compelled to act thus blindly, in that torturing uncertainty, the
eyes of the world were upon him, and men, wise in the cognisance of after-
events, would unhesitatingly judge him in the light of that knowledge.

More than once in his letters to Mrs Stanhope did the pent up bitterness
of this recognition find vent. On May 16th, 1807, he wrote:--


    I am sorry to see Mr Pole's speech about the Rochefort Squadron and
    Sir R. Strachan, insinuating that he was well provided with
    everything--and that had he been in the station that it was expected
    he should have held, they could not have escaped. The fact is they
    came here destitute of everything, one of his ships had not 20 tons of
    water, and none of them were in a condition to follow the enemy to a
    distant point. Those insinuations, though they advance nothing
    positive, are disgusting--the season of the year and the situation of
    the fleet on such an errand were sufficient reasons. Let your
    Politicians beware how they sour the minds of such men--men whose
    lives are devoted to their country. If ever they accomplish that, your
    State would not be worth half-a-crown.


And again, in December of that same year, on discovering that he,
personally, had been the subject of brutal slander, his indignation burst
forth:--


    _December 29th, 1808._

    I have just seen in the newspapers what I conceive to be exceedingly
    mischievous, and to officers who are bearing the brunt and severities
    of war, is exceedingly disgusting, when the whole nation is clamorous
    against the convention of Lisbon and the treaty which Sir Chas. Cotton
    made with the Russian Admiral about the ships, it is stated that _I_
    had made a proposition of the same kind to the Russian Commander at
    Trieste which had been rejected. There is not a syllable of truth in
    it. _I_ have had no correspondence with Russia, nor anything happened
    that could have given rise to such a conjecture. It must therefore be
    sheer mischief. There are such diabolical spirits, who, incapable of
    good, cannot rest inactive but fester the world with their malignant
    humours.


And meanwhile the ardent patriotism of Collingwood was deeply wounded by
the attitude of the politicians of his native land.


    OCEAN, OFF TOULON, _May 16th, 1808._

    The contentions in Parliament are disgraceful to our country and have
    more to do with its reduction than Bonaparte has. They grieve my
    heart; when all the energy and wisdom of the Nation is required to
    defend us against such a Power as never appeared in Europe before--the
    contest seems to be who shall hold the most lucrative office. I abhor
    that kind of determined opposition; if the Ministers have not that
    experience it were to be wished they had, they the more need support
    and assistance. We have resources to stand our ground firmly, until
    this storm is over--but it depends on the use we make of our means,
    whether we shall or not.

    It would appear to me good policy to make and preserve peace with all
    the nations who have the smallest pretention to independence--we
    should shut our eyes to many things which during the regular
    Governments in Europe would deserve to be scrutinised--the laws and
    rules of former times are not suited to the present--a man cannot
    build a Palace during the convulsions of an earthquake, and I
    sincerely hope our differences with America will be accommodated--if
    favourable terms we can grant them. Are not _we_ constantly in
    storms obliged to take in our topsail?--and even sometimes limit
    ourselves to no sail at all? But our ship is saved by it and when the
    storm is over we out with them again, and so should the State do.


The truth was that, in much, Collingwood was a more able diplomatist than
the men by whose authority he was circumscribed. His letters to Stanhope
prove that he was a more apt tactician and had a profounder grasp of the
political situation of his day than he has been credited with by
posterity. Again and again, does he foretell that a particular line of
action will be fraught with a particular result, or show how his
representations had been ignored until, too late, events had proved their
accuracy. Again and again, in some apparently trivial situation which he
had the insight to recognise was big with import, did his tactfulness
avert catastrophe which a lesser man would have hastened. "I have always
found that kind language and strong ships have a very powerful effect in
conciliating the people," he says in one letter to Stanhope, with dry
humour. And meanwhile the incompetency of many of those with whom he had
to work in alliance was a further source of trial to him. Only too
shrewdly did he recognise wherein lay the efficiency of Napoleon and the
incapacity of his opponents.


    _October 7th, 1809._

    Should the Austrians make their peace, which I am convinced they must,
    the next object of Bonaparte will be Turkey, and probably the
    Austrians be engaged to assist him in the reduction of it. All the
    south part of Europe seems as if within his grasp the moment peace is
    signed with Austria; he has long been intriguing with those countries,
    sometimes with the Government, in other places with the people against
    their Government; the arts, the dissimulations with which those
    intrigues are conducted, avail him more than even the rapidity of his
    armies--all the people he employs are equal to the task assigned them;
    while in Austria and Spain, the operations are often directed by men
    who, from Court favour, have got situations they are totally unfit
    for. Catalonia has suffered much from this cause and everything has
    gone wrong in Istria and Dalmatia, because there there was wanted a
    man capable of conducting the war. It is true they have been removed,
    but not until everything was lost by their want of skill.


And yet pitted against "such a Power as never appeared in Europe before,"
with the need of every faculty upon the alert, Collingwood was haunted
ever more and more by the dread that his increasing bodily weakness must
engender mental incapacity. A sinister note crept into his correspondence
and so early as August 26th, 1808, he wrote:--


    _August 26th, 1808._

    I have been lately unwell. I grow weak, and the fatigue and anxiety of
    mind I suffer has worn me down to a shadow. I do not think I can go on
    much longer, and intend, whenever I feel my strength less, to request
    that I may be allowed to come to England. I have mentioned this to
    Lord Mulgrave, but have not to the Admiralty Board.


Yet, determined not to abandon his duty, over a year later he was still at
his post.


    "_Ville de Paris,_" PORT MAHON, _December 18th, 1809._

    The truth is that I am so unremittingly occupied, that my life is
    rather a drudgery than a service. I have an anxious mind from nature
    and cannot leave to any what is possible for me to do myself. Now my
    health is suffering very much, which is attributed to the sedentary
    life I lead, and it may well be to the vexation my mind suffers when
    anything goes counter. But when I _do_ come home, I hope I shall
    not be thought to flinch, for I have worn out all the officers and all
    the ships, two or three times over, since I left England.


Within a fortnight he wrote again:--


    _December 29th._

    I have no desire to shrink from a duty which I owe to my country, but
    my declining health--the constant anxiety of my mind and fatigue of my
    body--made me desire to have a little respite, and I asked to be
    relieved from my command--a request which the Ministers seem to have
    no disposition to grant to me, but if his lordship knew me personally
    and was sufficiently acquainted with my sentiments he would know that
    my request was not made without good reason. The service here requires
    the most energetic mind and robust body--they cannot be hoped for in
    an invalid, whose infirmities proceed from too long and unremitted
    exertion of powers, but feeble at first.


Meanwhile, in Grosvenor Square, every item of news respecting the
intentions of Lord Collingwood was eagerly looked for, since on these were
dependent the movements of little William Stanhope. In the autumn of 1809
Mrs Stanhope wrote:--


    William writes word that his height is 5 ft. 4 in., very fair for a
    Stanhope of his age. What an affectionate creature he is, and how I
    should delight in seeing him. I do not like the account he gives of
    Lord Collingwood's health. If the French fleet would but come out and
    he beat them, I doubt not he would then return immediately.


And on the 6th December she mentions an event which served to accentuate
the sadness of that protracted absence:--


    Lord Collingwood has actually a daughter grown up. She has made her
    appearance in Newcastle, very shy and distressed.


     _February 27th, 1810._

    We came to Town, Sunday Se'nnight. Since then Captain Waldegrave, who
    was eleven months in the ship with William, and Dr Gray who was his
    shipmate two years and like a Father to him, have both dined with us
    and agree in their favourable accounts. He is quite well and
    breakfasts every day with Lord Collingwood, with whom he also dines
    three times a week, and he teaches William himself. Your father said--
    "I fear he is a Pet!" To which Waldegrave answered--"It can never do
    anyone harm to be Pet to Lord Collingwood!" As soon as the weather is
    warm I suppose Lord C. will come back, in his last letter he said he
    should leave William in a Frigate, but Dr Gray is inclined to think he
    would bring him home. All the reports respecting the Toulon Fleet
    being out, will, I hear, prove false.


On March 20th Mrs Stanhope wrote--"It is said that Sir C. Cotton is going
out immediately to take Lord Collingwood's command, for that he wrote word
if they did not supersede him quickly he should supersede himself. I fear
his health is very bad." Not till April, however, did this intelligence
receive confirmation--"At last Sir C. Cotton has sailed, so that, by the
end of June, Lord Collingwood may be back, having given up the command to
Sir C. Cotton. He was better the last account. Captain Waldegrave dines
here to-day, you would be exceedingly pleased with him, for his manners
are agreeable and his intelligence great."

Little did Mrs Stanhope, as she penned the reference to her dinner-party,
foresee the conditions under which this was destined to take place. Still
less did the authorities who were sending out that belated relief to the
wearied Admiral, or the family who now so joyously pictured his return,
dream how that service had been already superseded or in what guise that
return would take place. Weeks before, at Cadiz, the last act of a
prolonged tragedy had been performed. Still firmly refusing to forsake his
post till a competent successor had been appointed, Collingwood did not
surrender his command to Rear Admiral Martin till March 3rd, when a
complete collapse of strength made this imperative. Two days subsequently
were lost in the vain endeavour to leave port in the teeth of a contrary
wind, but on March 6th, the _Ville de Paris_ succeeded in setting sail for
England.

The day of days in Collingwood's life had at last arrived--that day to
which he had looked forward throughout the weary years, when, his task
honourably concluded, he could know that every beat of the waves was
bearing him towards home and his loved ones. Yet as, prostrated with
weakness, he lay in his cabin, listening to the familiar fret of the
waters, he understood that the burden had been borne too long, the
promised relief had come too late.

With the same dauntless courage with which he had faced existence he now
accepted the knowledge that this day--the thought of which had sustained
him through loneliness and battle and tempest--was to prove the day of his
death. History indeed presents few events of an irony more profound. At
sunset on March 6th, Collingwood set sail for England; at sunset on the
7th, he lay dead, and that fortitude with which he met a fate, the
harshness of which must have cruelly enhanced his bodily anguish, presents
to all time a sublime ending to a sublime career.

Meanwhile in England those whom he had loved continued to count the
lessening days to his return and to plan with tender solicitude every
means for cherishing and restoring the enfeebled frame which they fondly
believed needed but care and happiness to endow it with renewed health.
Little as they recked of the burden which the waves were, in truth,
bringing them, the knowledge, when it arrived, came with a blow which
stunned. In the first announcement of the news, the very terseness of the
communication seems to recreate more vividly the intense feeling which the
writer knew required no insistence.

On April 17th, 1810, Stanhope wrote briefly to the Vicar of Newcastle:--


    GROSVENOR SQUARE.

    DEAR SMITH,

    You are the fittest person I know at Newcastle to execute with
    propriety a most painful & most melancholy office. I have only this
    moment been apprised of the loss both the public and the Collingwood
    family have sustained, and am so shocked with the intelligence that I
    can hardly write legibly. I enclose the letter. I am sure you will
    communicate it with all delicacy & due Preparation to Lady Collingwood
    & Mr and the Miss Collingwoods. Mrs Stanhope will endeavour to see
    Miss Collingwood to-morrow. Pray assure them of my readiness to be of
    every assistance to them in my power.


Of the manner in which the news arrived, Mrs Stanhope furnishes more
details.


    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _April 23rd, 1810._

    MY DEAR JOHN,

    "I little thought when I wrote to you on Tuesday last that I should,
    before that post went out, hear the afflicting intelligence of the
    death of our great and valuable Friend, Lord Collingwood, whose loss
    is a publick calamity. But I will enter into particulars.

    "Just after I went out at three, a second post arrived from Captain
    Thomas, desiring your father to communicate the dreadful tidings to
    poor Lady Collingwood. It was five when we received the letter; your
    father immediately enclosed the letter to the Vicar, to desire he
    would break it to the family, and I wrote to the Mistress of the
    School to acquaint the second girl. She wished to see no one or I
    should have called the next day. Mr Reay heard of the event before we
    did and recollecting that the Papers at Newcastle were delivered an
    hour before the letters, wisely sent off an Express; therefore I trust
    there was time for her to be somewhat prepared for the worst.

    "With respect to ourselves, I need not tell you how shocked we were,
    and unfortunately, we had not only a large party to dinner that night,
    but some people in the evening. Amongst those who dined with us was
    Captain Waldegrave, who had not heard of it till he came here, and I
    never saw anyone so distressed, for Lord Collingwood had been a Father
    to him as well as to William; and he is one of the most pleasing young
    men I ever met with. Two days afterwards he brought here Mr Brown, the
    flag-lieutenant of the _Ville de Paris_, who gave me many interesting
    particulars, and spoke highly of William.

    Your father has seen Lord Mulgrave twice, and it is settled that a
    monument at the Publick expence shall be executed for Lord
    Collingwood. He cannot have a publick funeral, but they wish the
    family to bury him at St Paul's near Lord Nelson, which your father is
    this day to write to propose, and I think it impossible Lady
    Collingwood can have any objection, in which case it will be attended
    by the Lords of the Admiralty & his own private friends. The Body is
    now at Greenwich, for it arrived at Portsmouth as soon as the letters
    announcing his death. He died like a hero, and when that character is
    added, as it was in him, to the Christian, it is great indeed.


On the same date Mr Stanhope wrote to his son--"I saw Lord Mulgrave the
night before last, who desired I would inform Lady Collingwood and the
family that it was meant to move in the House for a monument for Lord
Collingwood in St Paul's, next to Nelson's. Of course the Body, which has
arrived in the Thames, will be deposited in that Church, and the funeral
must be splendid without ostentation--at the expense of the executors, or
rather of the family." It was not, however, till May 8th that Mrs Stanhope
was enabled to furnish her son with full details of the manner in which
the intended ceremony was to be performed.


    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _May 8th., 1810._

    I can tell you what Lord C.'s funeral is to be. It is to take place on
    Friday at St Paul's. Mr C. and one of his sisters are in town. He is
    anxious that it should be proper & your father has been his adviser,
    but he was determined that it should be as private as possible, as
    Lord Collingwood's wish on that subject was strongly expressed in his
    Will.

    The Body is now at Greenwich where the Hearse & ten mourning Coaches
    will go. The company are to assemble at a room on the other side of
    Blackfriars Bridge, where betwixt 20 & 30 are to get into the mourning
    coaches, & their own are to follow, but no others. The company are, as
    far as I can recollect, besides the ten relations & connections, the
    first Lords of the Admiralty who have been in power since he had the
    Command--Gray, Mulgrave, T. Grenville; Ld St Vincent declined on
    account of health; the Chancellor & Sir Walter Scott; Admirals Ld
    Radstock & Harvey, Capt Waldegrave, Purvis, Irvyn Brown, Haywood--
    perhaps others; Doctors Gray & Fullerton, Sir M. Ridley & Mr Reay.

    Government mean to vote him a national monument to be placed near Lord
    Nelson & the Body will be placed as near his as it can be. You will be
    glad to hear that there is a picture painted about a year & a half ago
    which Waldegrave will get for Mr C. I therefore hope there will be a
    print of him. His loss will be felt every day more & more. They say he
    saved to the country more than any Admiral did before, in repairs of
    the fleet; and to that country his life has been sacrificed.


A reference to Lord Collingwood written by the recipient of this letter,
John Stanhope, although it presents no new reflection upon his career, is
not without a peculiar interest in that it was a contemporary comment and
one of unstudied pathos.


    Lord Collingwood, [he wrote in 1810] has sacrificed his life to his
    country and to the full as much as has done his friend and commander
    Lord Nelson. But Nelson's death was glorious; he fell in the hour of
    victory amidst a nation's tears. Poor Collingwood resigned his life to
    his country, because she required his services; he yielded himself as
    a victim to a painful disease, solely occasioned by his incessant and
    anxious attention to his duties, when he knew from his physician that
    his existence might be spared if he were allowed to return to the
    quiet of domestic life. Must not his mind have sometimes recurred to
    his home; to his two daughters, now grown to the age of womanhood, but
    whom he remembered only as little children; so long had he been
    estranged from his country! Must he not have felt how delightfully he
    could spend his old age in the society of his family, at his own house
    at Chirton, the ancient possession of his ancestors, which had been
    left to him by my uncle, and in the enjoyment of a large fortune,
    which he had gained during his professional career! What a contrast
    did the reverse of the picture show! A lingering disease, a certain
    death. He repeatedly represented the state of his health to the
    Admiralty, but in vain; his country demanded his services; he gave her
    his life; and without even the consolation of thinking that the
    sacrifice he was making would be appreciated. "If Lord Mulgrave knew
    me," said he in one of his letters to my father, "he would know that I
    did not complain without sufficient cause."


It was thus that Collingwood came home--that the long exile ended and the
tired frame attained to rest. On May 11th, he was laid by the side of
Nelson in St Paul's, and the comrades of Trafalgar were re-united in a
last repose. The ceremony on this occasion exhibited none of the pomp and
circumstance which attended the obsequies of the hero of Trafalgar. In
harmony with the wishes and the character of the dead man, so simple was
it that the papers emphasise in surprise that "not even the choir service
is to be sung on the occasion." And this, possibly, constitutes the sole
particular in which England endeavoured to fulfil any desire of the man
who had laid down his life in her service. His earnest request that the
peerage which had been bestowed upon him might descend to his daughter,
his pathetic representation that but for the unremitting nature of that
service he would presumably have had a son to succeed him, were callously
ignored. There were obvious reasons why Nelson's dying bequest to the
nation of the woman he had loved remained unregarded, there was none that
that of Collingwood should not have been granted and his barren honours
thus made sweet to him. But his generation mourned him with idle tears,
and succeeding generations have, possibly, done him scanty justice. Yet
one, a master-mind in English Literature, has raised an eternal testimony
to his worth--"Another true knight errant of those days," proclaims
Thackeray, "was Cuthbert Collingwood, and I think, since Heaven made
gentlemen, there is no record of a better one than that. Of brighter
deeds, I grant you, we may read performed by others; but where of a
nobler, kinder, more beautiful life of duty, of a gentler, truer heart?
Beyond dazzle of success and blaze of genius, I fancy shining a hundred
and a hundred times higher the sublime purity of Collingwood's gentle
glory. His heroism stirs British hearts when we recall it. His love and
goodness and piety make one thrill with happy emotion.... There are no
words to tell what the heart feels in reading the simple phrases of such a
hero. Here is victory and courage, but love sublimer and superior."

Nevertheless there is, in truth, little which appeals to the imagination
of posterity in the story of that drab martyrdom. Moreover Collingwood is
judged, not individually but by comparison. For ever he is obscured by the
more dazzling vision of Nelson. It weighs little in his favour that,
devoid of the vanity and the weakness which made of the latter a lesser
man even though a greater genius, Collingwood, throughout his life,
exhibited a nobility of soul which was never marred by one self-seeking
thought, one mean word, one base action. That very fact militates against
him. Collingwood had no dramatic instinct, and in the great issues of life
he never played to the gallery; he has not even attached to his memory, as
has Nelson, the glamour of a baffling and arresting intrigue. And there
remains eternally to his disfavour that he did not die at the
psychological moment. Whether he was, as some recent researches might lead
us to believe, a greater strategist than Nelson, as he was undoubtedly a
man of stronger principles and more disinterested motives, of wider
education and of profounder political insight, it is not our province here
to inquire. On his column in Trafalgar Square, to all time, Nelson stands
aloft surveying the generations who do him homage; far away, on the shores
of Tynemouth, a solitary figure of Collingwood, not erected till 1845,
gazes out across the ocean of his exile. It is as though the loneliness
which tortured that great soul in life haunts him beyond the grave, as the
adulation which was balm to Nelson's soul remains his portion to all
eternity. There might even be imagined an unconscious irony in the last
reference to Collingwood which occurs in the Stanhope correspondence,
wherein Mrs Stanhope, after the first horror which the news of her
kinsman's death had evoked, sums up thus the immediate effect of that
event upon her family life:--


    _May 10th._

    London is very gay now.... To give you some idea how we go on, I will
    mention some of our engagements. To-night Opera; tomorrow, concerts at
    Mrs Boehms and Lady Castlereagh's; Thursday, Dow. Lady Glyn, Lady de
    Crespygny musick, and Lady Westmorland's; Saturday, Opera; 23rd., 24th
    and 26th Balls. On Friday, of course, there are cards, but I shall not
    go out on account of its being the funeral of our justly-lamented
    friend.




CHAPTER III

1806-1807

ON DITS FROM YORKSHIRE, LONDON AND RAMSGATE


Three years before his death, in the midst of the stress and labour which
was undermining his bodily strength, Collingwood had written with regard
to this same wearing anxiety--"My astonishment is to find that in England
this does not seem to enter into the minds of the people, or at least not
to interrupt their gaieties. England on the verge of ruin requires the
care of all; but when that _all_ is divided and contending for power, then
it is that the foundation shakes."

To the lonely Admiral tossing on the ocean of his exile, absorbed in that
mighty problem of England's defence, the attitude of his countrymen at
home--their callousness and absorption in trivialities--had seemed well-
nigh incredible. But propinquity affects proportion, and as a small object
close at hand looms larger to the eye than a vast object upon a distant
horizon, so the anomaly continued to be witnessed in England which has
often formed part of the history of nations. Possibly one of the strangest
phases of the French Revolution was that in which--while heads fell daily
and the land ran blood--the round of theatres continued without
interruption and the existence of a certain section of the public remained
undisturbed. Thus it is not surprising to find, after the storm of feeling
which was roused by the Battle of Trafalgar, how quickly personal
interests superseded national, and the social life of the country reverted
placidly to its normal groove.

True that Nelson's great victory, even while it had dealt a final and
shattering blow to Napoleon's maritime power, had not been fraught with
the vast consequences which in the moment of exultation it was fondly
believed had been achieved. Bonaparte's supremacy in Europe remained
unshaken, and his victory of Austerlitz, following hard upon Trafalgar,
minimised the latter, while it crushed with despair the dying heart of
Pitt. As we have seen, that year dawned darkly which was to witness the
death of two of England's foremost statesmen, the great Tory in January,
the great Whig in September; but while, big with import, history traced
the tale of such giant upheavals in the national life, in strange contrast
comes the quiet ripple of contemporary gossip.

"The Prince," wrote Mrs Stanhope from Yorkshire in the middle of
September, "returns to attend Fox's funeral & then has said he will
immediately come back to make his promised visits to Wentworth, Raby and
Castle Howard." On the 20th of September Marianne wrote to her brother an
account of H.R.H. attending Doncaster Races.


    Doncaster Races were not near so splendid as they were expected to
    have been, few south country people, none of distinction.

    The Prince of Wales looked wretchedly; he is thought to be in a bad
    state of health and was to be cupped last Monday. He arrived at
    Doncaster about _two_ in the morning, and the yeomanry commanded by Mr
    Wortley met by order to escort him into the town at _nine the next
    morning_, so that was _manqué_. The ball was very ill-managed, the
    Prince arrived at the rooms before they were lighted, neither of the
    stewards there to receive him--quite scandalous, I think.


    _The Same._
    _Nov. 16th._

    The Royal visitors at Wentworth were magnificently received. Lord
    Milton [1] exerts himself much in politicks, his only _forte_ perhaps,
    however, that is better than if it were his only _foible_. Lady Milton
    charms everybody, I have never met with one exception.

    The Prince, of course you know, inspected the Cavalry at Doncaster and
    complimented them much. They were out five days on permanent duty, on
    one of which Mr Foljambe gave the whole regiment a dinner in the
    Mansion House, a whole pipe of wine was consumed.

    Lord Morpeth, [2] I am rejoiced to hear got his election. Mr Howard,
    his brother, is a very gentlemanlike, very handsome young man, worthy
    of his sister Lady Cawdor. [3] Would you believe it he has never been
    at Stackpole.

    We were much disappointed on Friday by the non-arrival of Mr
    Wilberforce, [4] as I had promised myself much pleasure, even from so
    short a visit from such an excellent man. I have been reading some of
    his _Views of Christianity_, and tho' I believe it is in some
    parts rather methodistical, I think it quite an angelic book. If he
    talks as he writes he must be charming.


    CANNON HALL _November 28th, 1806._

    A most dreadful and fatal accident happened on Tuesday at Woolley [5]
    about seven in the Evening. Mrs Fawkes, [6] Mother to Mrs Wentworth,
    went to an unfinished window, fell out & was killed on the spot. She
    fell eleven yards perpendicular height.

    Mr Wentworth, and his brother Mr Armytage, were here. Mrs Wentworth
    was not well, & had not accompanied them, therefore she was at home at
    the Moment, & poor Mrs Farrer, sister to Mrs Fawkes was actually in
    the room. They immediately sent for Mr Wentworth, & you may imagine
    the distress in which he left us. Poor Mrs Wentworth had only just
    recovered from the shock of her Governess dying after an illness of a
    few days.

    To turn to a more cheerful subject--as the occupations of this house
    interest you, I must describe the present drawing-room trio. Hour
    eight; tea ordered; at the top of the table, in a great chair, Anne,
    reading the Roman history. At the bottom, Marianne with two folios,
    making extracts from Palladio on Architecture. My occupation speaks
    for itself. I greatly doubt whether a busier scene could be found at
    Oxford at the same hour.

    Miss Baker [7] mentions that Yarborough has been ill at Cambridge &
    wishes to know whether it arises from their intense studying that the
    young men at the Universities are so frequently indisposed.


    _Mrs Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    GROVE, _January 26th, 1807._

    We are now returning to town, your father arrived there last Thursday.
    The waggon with our goods was overturned twice in going from Cannon
    Hall to Wakefield....

    This day se'nnight we left home, & called at Woolley, but Mrs
    Wentworth was not well enough to see us. Thence we waded through the
    worst possible road to Hensworth where we found Sir Francis (Wood)
    with the gout and Lady Wood like a Ghoul....

    More bad roads to Fryston where we found, including ourselves, a party
    of seventeen, three less than was expected, among others Lord and Lady
    Galway [8] and two Miss Moncktons.

    The noise, riot and confusion of the house I shall not attempt to
    describe.


On the following day they drove from Fryston to a ball in the
neighbourhood, of which Mrs Stanhope relates:--


    We arrived about nine. The ball-room was beautiful. It was hung with
    white Calico, with a wreath of evergreens round the top of the room
    and festoons from it of the same all round; the only fault was _the
    pure white of the Calico made all the ladies look dirty_. There
    were 160 or 170 people, many I did not know, many Men, but where the
    majority came from I cannot pretend to say; Darlingtons, Ramsdens,
    Cookes, Taylors, etc, and our large party the chief from the
    neighbourhood.

    The dances were too long and too crowded, which made it not pleasant
    for the dancers, but it was a fine ball, upon the whole, but much
    inferior in every respect to Kippax.

    Your sisters danced a good deal, and both of them with a Bond Street
    lounger whose name was Carey. I believed he was rouged. He desired his
    hostess to introduce him to a partner, stipulating--"_But let her be
    charming!_" and as she had promised Anne, _she_ had the good fortune,
    and I suppose he found her what he wished, for he afterwards honoured
    Marianne, and they were both vastly amused at his conceit and folly.

    Michael Angelo [9] was _superb_. Since the honour the Prince did
    him, he has been obliged to part with many of his servants as they
    would no longer work.

    We arrived at Fryston from the Ball at 1/2 past six, the rest of the
    party at 1/2 past seven, when they breakfasted before they went to
    bed.

    The next day was breakfast all the morning long, & very jolly they
    were. Miles is as eccentric as ever. So odd a man I never saw.


Of their Yorkshire neighbours who did not live in the immediate vicinity,
the family at Cannon Hall saw but little during the winter months;
therefore, during their journeys to and from town, they invariably took
the opportunity of staying a few nights with those friends whose houses
happened to lie conveniently near the line of route. One of the places
thus constantly visited by them was Fryston, where at this date there
dwelt, with a numerous family, the widow of Richard Slater Milnes,
formerly M.P. for York.

The position of the Milnes in Yorkshire was almost unique. In Wakefield,
during the flight of years, there sprang into prominence certain merchant
princes whose names became household words throughout the county. The
Milnes, Heywoods and Naylors, in turn, rose to affluence; but foremost and
distinct among these remained the Milnes, who from 1670 owned the great
cloth trade of the North, and who, towards the close of the eighteenth
century, were represented by four brothers whose firm had secured a
monopoly of that trade between England and Russia.

These brothers, by reason of their wealth and influence, were received on
terms of intimacy by the older county families. They built themselves each
a substantial house in Wakefield, fashioned out of bricks which they
manufactured and timber which they had imported from Russia, with which
country they were naturally in constant communication in the course of
their business. These houses, which stood close together, facing the main
road through Wakefield, were handsome in construction and luxuriously
furnished; but, by and by, two branches of the family migrated from the
town of their birth; James Milnes built Thornes House, and Richard Slater
Milnes purchased the estate of Fryston, where he took up his residence
about 1790. His new possession was a larger and more comfortable home than
the dwelling he had quitted, and although standing in the centre of the
great West Riding industries, it was beautifully situated on the banks of
the river Aire. Besides extensive gardens and shrubberies, it was
surrounded by a fine park, while adjoining it were miles of beautiful
larch and beech woods. On the death of Richard Slater Milnes it passed
into the possession of his son, Robert Pemberton, who with his brother,
Richard Rodes, were the only two sons in a family of nine children.

The brothers, in some particulars, presented a marked contrast to each
other, though both were fascinating and clever.

Robert Pemberton was extremely eccentric, but brilliant. He was recognised
to be full of promise, and it was anticipated that he would one day make a
considerable stir in the political world. Writing of him many years later,
John Stanhope mentioned the following anecdotes:--

"Mr Milnes of Fryston was one of my earliest friends. After a sharp
contest with Mr Smyth of Heath he was returned for the Borough of
Pontefract. His Maiden speech in Parliament produced a very great
sensation; but a second speech which he made shortly after was considered
as a failure, though Mr Plummer Ward, himself no bad judge, declared it
was superior to the former and spoke highly of it. I rather think that
Milnes terminated it abruptly and was considered to have broken down. He
seems himself to have thought so for he made no further effort, and, soon
after, abandoning all political views, turned his mind entirely to
Agriculture.

"At that date Milnes was a wild, unstable creature, at one time devoting
his days and nights to reading; at another giving them up to play; at
another engrossed entirely with shooting; always agreeable, clever and
sarcastick, he was everything by fits but nothing long, yet always dearly
loved by his friends and companions, always a straightforward man, full of
high feeling and honour.

"Perhaps nothing will give a better idea of the wild spirit of his
character than an occurrence that took place in his youthful days. At a
time when Battues and a system of the preservation of game as it is now
carried on in Norfolk were little known in this part of the country, he
undertook the entire management of the game at Fryston, and succeeded in
stocking the Plantations there with abundance of Pheasants. Not content
with giving his orders to the keepers, he used frequently to accompany
them in their nightly watches.

"On one of these occasions they fell in with a party of poachers, who took
to their heels.

"Milnes, who was the foremost in the chace, succeeded in grappling one of
the fugitives. The man struggled on to the brink of a deep quarry and
finding that Milnes did not slacken his grasp, determined to dare the
jump, calculating, as he afterwards confessed, that as his limbs were
strong and well knit, that he should suffer no damage, but that Milnes,
being slight, would break his leg. Milnes, nothing daunted, kept his hold,
and went down with the poacher, whose calculations were reversed, for _he_
broke his legs, and Milnes escaped, comparatively speaking, unscathed."

Rodes Milnes, the younger brother of Pemberton, though gifted with less
natural genius, at first bid fair to be of a more dependable character;
and while his mother retained an interest in the firm of Milnes, Heywood &
Co., he continued to go into Wakefield regularly two or three times a week
to look after the business, driving himself in a phaeton drawn by a pair
of beautiful black ponies. But later he became closely connected with the
turf, and many lively stories are attached to his name. He and Mr Peter of
Stapleton were racing associates, and their stable won the St Leger no
fewer than five times in eight years; he was also a turf comrade of Lord
Glasgow, and after a successful day at York Races, it is said that these
two friends would station themselves at the window of the inn where they
were staying and stop every passenger to insist that he or she should
drink a glass of wine with them.

Rodes Milnes was exceedingly handsome, but later in life became very
stout, after which he used to enjoy the pleasures of sport in a somewhat
original fashion. In the middle of the plantations at Fryston was a mound
on which he used to seat himself in a revolving chair; the keeper would
then beat the neighbouring woods in order to drive the birds in the
direction of the mound, and as they appeared, Rodes Milnes used to spin
round in his chair and take rapid shots at the flying game.

As the Milnes withdrew themselves more and more from their former
business, the Naylors came to the fore. For long this later firm was
represented by two brothers, John and Jeremiah. The former was the
ornamental partner, the latter the useful. John, clad in faultlessly cut
clothes and a carefully powdered wig, was an impressive figure, and was
well supported in his picturesque rôle by his wife, a handsome and stately
dame. Jeremiah, the working bee, was less polished in manner and more
careless in dress. As Rodes Milnes drove into Wakefield twice a week, so
did Jeremiah Naylor drive into Leeds Market regularly every Tuesday and
Saturday morning, in order to buy white and coloured cloth in its
unfinished state. Thence he would return followed by one or two large
waggons full of the cloth so purchased, which was subsequently finished,
partly at the works of his firm and partly by cloth dressers in the town.
Indeed, Jeremiah, who was noted for his shrewd business capacity and
frugal tendencies, was said to have bought one-third of all the cloth
manufactured in the West Riding.

Only on one occasion is it reported that the shrewd Yorkshireman was
outwitted in a bargain. The story is thus amusingly told by the late Mr
Clarkson of Alverthorpe Hall:--

"Mr Jeremiah Naylor had a favourite mare which used to take him to Leeds
twice a week; but at last, from age, she got past her work, and he
unwillingly consented to sell her. He drove her himself to Doncaster fair,
and early in the day met with a customer; but at a very low price. After
this shabby way of disposing of an old favourite he had to look out for a
successor, and after dinner went again into the fair where, after a
critical search, he saw for sale an animal likely to suit him, which took
his fancy from its resemblance to his old favourite of twenty years
before. The price was a stiff one, but the bargain was concluded at last,
and the new purchase put into the harness, which seemed exactly to fit.

"Mr Naylor was delighted with the pace at which his fresh steed took him
home to Wakefield; but on arriving at his house, was met by his old groom,
who, after scanning the new acquisition, said dryly: 'Well, Sir, you've
brought the old mare back again!' Mr Naylor rather rebuked the man, who
replied by loosening the mare from the harness, when she walked straight
to her own stand in the stable, and doubtless felt there was no place like
home. The poor thing had been cropped and docked and groomed so as
completely to deceive her old master."

As the Naylors waxed in wealth they considered themselves to be the
successful rivals of the former great merchants of Wakefield, the Milnes
and Heywoods, so that it is said a favourite toast of theirs was--"The
Milnes _were_, the Heywoods _are_; and the Naylors _will be_"; a toast
destined never to be realised, for in 1825 the mercantile house of the
Naylors collapsed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another Yorkshire neighbour whom the Stanhopes visited at this date was Mr
Beaumont of Whitley Beaumont, [10] and although on this occasion the entry
regarding their visit is scanty, a fuller description of their eccentric
host, written by Marianne the following autumn, may be here inserted:--


    _Nov. 14th, 1808._

    Last Monday we met the Mills' at Grange, she, delightful as usual. We
    returned the next day, and in our road called on Mr Beaumont of
    Whitley.

    The master of Whitley is a strange creature, half mad. He leads the
    life of a hermit, and has not had a brush, painter or carpenter in his
    house since he came into possession many, many years ago.

    It is more like a haunted house in a romance than anything I ever saw.
    He is now an old man, and has never bought a morsel of furniture; half
    the house never was finished; one of the staircases has got no
    banisters. The stables were burnt down some time ago and have never
    yet been rebuilt. The rooms he lives in have not been put to rights
    for many years--a description of the things they contain would not be
    easy,--hats, wigs, coats, piles of newspapers, magazines and letters,
    draughts, bottles, wash-hand basins, pictures without frames, apples,
    tallow candles and broken tea-cups.

    The whole house looks like a place for lumber. There are some fine
    rooms, but so damp and mouldy it is quite shocking. There is a chapel
    completely filled with old rubbish and a plaid bed which was put up
    for the Pretender.

    In the room Mr Beaumont sleeps in I saw his coffin made of cedar wood.
    He scarcely ever sees a living creature and quite dislikes the sight
    of a woman. He does everything in the room, which no housemaid ever
    enters, nor indeed any part of the house.

    We saw there Jack Mills, the Democrat, and his little boy who is
    christened Alfred Ankerstrom Mirabeau. Ankestrome was the man who
    killed the King of Sweden; Mirabeau the chief author of the French
    Revolution. He was godfather to this boy. Before you re-instate the
    Bourbons, should you not extirpate such a man?


Shortly after the return of the Stanhopes to town in 1807 they entertained
a guest of a very opposite character, but nearly as remarkable for
eccentricity as was the hermit of Whitley. In Walter Stanhope's journal
for January 30th of that year is recorded a dinner party of strangely
incongruous elements. "This night there dined with us Wilberforce,
Wharton, Smedley, Skeffington, Sir Robert Peel and Ward."

John William Ward, afterwards Lord Dudley, was the son of a former
Yorkshire neighbour of the Stanhopes, Julia, second daughter of Godfrey
Bosville of Gunthwaite. As such he was an _habitué_ of their
entertainments both in London and the country, and was much liked by them
in spite of his peculiarities, which occasionally led to most awkward
_contretemps_.

An exceptionally brilliant man, agreeable, a profound scholar, a witty
_raconteur_ and noted for a remarkable memory, of which several surprising
instances are still recorded, Mr Ward, in common with so many of his
contemporaries, was also a celebrated _gourmet_, and experienced the
popularity of the host who provides dinners of unusual excellence for his
friends. In view of these recommendations, his eccentricities were treated
with leniency by those who suffered from them; none the less, they were
apt to occasion most of his acquaintances, including the Stanhopes,
considerable alarm. For, a singularly absent-minded man, Mr Ward was not
only in the habit of unconsciously uttering aloud his most secret
reflections in a voice which could not fail to reach the ears of those
most concerned, but his often uncomplimentary criticisms were sometimes,
in complete mental aberration, actually addressed to the subject of his
thoughts. At a dinner party this was extremely embarrassing, and when he
was seen, according to his usual habit, to be engaged in stroking his chin
contemplatively, preparatory to giving vent unwittingly to severe
strictures upon his host or his fellow guests, universal uneasiness might
be observed to prevail amongst all present.

Still more, such remarks on his part were apt to be uttered in a fashion
calculated further to upset the gravity of those who overheard them. Even
in ordinary conversation Mr Ward had a curious trick of employing two
voices of a totally different type--one, Marianne Stanhope described as
being drawn from the cellar, the other, as having its origin in more
celestial regions. At one moment he spoke in the deepest bass, and the
next in the highest tenor, these different tones sometimes succeeding each
other with a rapidity which was singularly disconcerting, and which
strangers found so perplexing that it was with difficulty they could
believe two different persons were not addressing them in such varied
notes. Yet, with all this eccentricity, his conversation was so well worth
listening to that the matter and not the manner of it remained in the
minds of his guests. Therefore, it was with universal regret that, during
his later years, and after he had been Foreign Secretary under Lord
Goderich, his friends learnt how his peculiarities had developed into
mania, and how he had been placed under restraint.

Nor was he the only guest destined afterwards to be the victim of a tragic
fate, amongst those present at the dinner party with which Mrs Stanhope
began the season of 1807. Another man, then in the heyday of popularity
and fame, was doomed to a yet sadder close to his meteoric career.

Sir Lumley Skeffington, of Skeffington Hall, Leicestershire, was a
celebrated votary of fashion. Descended from "Awly O'Farrell, King of
Conereene," and from innumerable Kings and Princes of Ireland, his ancient
lineage, as well as his pronounced dandyism, gave him a claim upon the
attentions of society, which was further augmented by his literary
pretensions. Nevertheless, he subsequently experienced a reverse of
fortune, typical of the days in which he lived; and of his rise and fall
John Stanhope gives a brief account.

"Poor Skeffington," he relates, "was the Dandy of the day, _par
excellence_. Remarkable for his ugliness, his dress was so exaggerated as
to render his lack of beauty the more marked. He was a very good-natured
man, and had nothing of the impertinence of manner of the fops who
succeeded him. Moreover, he was a _bel-esprit_, writing epilogues and
prologues, and was at one time the observed of all observers. I have seen
him at an assembly literally surrounded by a group of admiring ladies."

Skeffington, in short, in 1805, wrote a play entitled "The Sleeping
Beauty," which, produced at great expense at Drury Lane, gained for him
much fame among his contemporaries and caused him for a time to be looked
upon as a lion in the fashionable world. Enjoying to the full his
reputation as a literary celebrity, he elected to ape certain mannerisms
and eccentricities which he considered in keeping with this character.
"He," Gronow mentions, "used to paint his face like a French toy. He
dressed _à la Robespierre_ and practised other follies, although the
consummate old fop was a man of literary attainments, remarkable for his
politeness and courtly manners, in fact, he was invited everywhere. You
always knew of his approach by an _avant courier_ (sic) of sweet smells,
and as he advanced a little nearer, you might suppose yourself in the
atmosphere of a barber's shop."

Skeffington, after the publication of his play, was known by the nickname
of "The Sleeping Beauty," and a representation of him in that role John
Stanhope describes as "the best caricature I ever saw." Tall, thin, and a
complete slave to his toilet, Sir Lumley not only indulged in an abnormal
use of perfumes and cosmetics, but was incessantly to be seen combing his
scented tresses by the aid of a hand mirror, till it was suggested that
one of his Royal ancestors must have formed a _mésalliance_ with the
mermaid who most appropriately figured in his armorial bearings, similarly
employed. The extreme slimness of his figure was accentuated by a coat
which he made as famous as Lord Petersham did the garment called after his
name; and Byron added to the fame of the beau by mentioning him in the
satire "English Bards and Scotch Reviewers":--

  And sure great Skeffington must claim our praise
  For skirtless coats and skeletons of plays
  Renowned alike; whose genius ne'er confines
  Her flight to garnish Greenwood's gay designs,
  Nor sleeps with 'Sleeping Beauties,' but anon
  In five facetious Acts comes thundering on,
  While poor John Bull, bewildered with the scene,
  Stares, wondering what the devil it can mean.

[Illustration: CARICATURE OF SIR LUMLEY SKEFFINGTON AS "THE SLEEPING
BEAUTY."]

Unfortunately, however, the harmless foibles of Sir Lumley were combined
with an unbounded extravagance which finally involved the luckless dandy
in a ruin as complete as it was pathetic. He disappeared from fashionable
life to undergo a dreary imprisonment, and when he at last issued thence,
the world which had showered blandishments upon him in his prosperity,
would have no more of him. In vain did he dress exquisitely, enunciate
witticisms and assume a gaiety of manner which he was far from feeling.
The friends who had courted his society before his downfall now shunned
his acquaintance, and a _bon-mot_ uttered at his expense elicited the
applause which his most happily-conceived jests failed to evoke. On some
stranger pointing out Skeffington to Lord Alvanley, and inquiring who was
that smart-looking individual, Alvanley responded with a wit more keen
than kind--"It is a second edition of 'The Sleeping Beauty,' bound in
calf, richly gilt and illustrated by _many cuts_."

For long did the luckless beau continue, with a pathetic persistence, to
haunt the scenes of his former triumph. At theatres, at picture auctions,
in the Park, and in all fashionable thoroughfares, he was a familiar
sight, still with the passing of years the butt of the contemporaries who
had once fawned upon him, and, as they gradually diminished, the standard
jest of a younger generation. With the flight of Time, the blackness of
his false ringlets never varied, the brilliant rouge of his cheeks, or the
strange costume which he had worn during the heyday of his existence, and
to which he clung after it had been obsolete for half a century. And with
each year his slim figure became yet thinner, his back more bent, and his
spindle legs more bowed, till at length the man who had been born early in
the reign of George III. witnessed the dawning of the year 1850; after
which the quaint figure of the once-famous Sir Lumley Skeffington was seen
no more.

[Illustration: MADAME CATALANI
_From an engraving by Carten in the collection of Mr A. M. Broadley._]

But of the fate which the future held for their guest, the Stanhopes can
little have dreamed when Sir Lumley dined with them a few months after the
production of his play and at the moment when his society was courted by
all his acquaintances. The little dinner party composed of so many
brilliant conversationalists was enjoyed by all present; the reaction
which it represented to the host and hostess after the comparatively quiet
week in Yorkshire was much appreciated by them; and two nights after the
entry respecting it, Mrs Stanhope records further gaieties:--


    Marianne went to the Opera last night with the charming Miss Glyn. It
    was thin & they were in their old box for the first time this season,
    & that is so high up, no one found them out, but she saw Frank
    Primrose [11] at a distance. The Opera is new done up and beautiful.
    Catalani [12] is very good in the Comic Opera, & there is a new dancer
    who is a scholar of Parisides, and dances delightfully. Kelly's room
    [13] is no longer open, therefore, the only ways out are the great and
    chair doors. However, one good has arisen--the large room has become
    the fashion.

     London is thin, & the only party I have heard of is one at Mrs Knox's
    on the birthnight.


    _Marianne Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    _February 8th, 1807._

    Yesterday, we dined at Sir Richard Glyn's.... Poor Dickey! he was more
    forlorn than ever. I never did see such a little wooden puppet. He
    speechified just in the way you used to say he did at Christ Church to
    all the ladies in rotation. His chief business is getting chairs for
    the company. I think the old description of a husband would very well
    apply to him.... "_It is a thing that sits at the bottom of the
    table & likes legs better than wings of Chicken._"

    The Duke of Norfolk, Papa has heard, just after accepting the Lord
    Lieutenancy of Surrey, at the Whig Club gave his old toasts--"The
    Sovereignty of the People." We have seen the youngest Prince of
    Holstein [14] & the tutor, as agreeable as usual. They heard of you at
    Inverary, the bad news arrived while they were in Ireland, they
    immediately set off for London, expecting to be ordered back to
    Holstein; on the contrary, they found a letter recommending them to
    stay quietly here. Papa means to give them a dinner. He dined the
    other day at his College Club himself & Lord Moira who has promised to
    meet the Princes here.

    Papa is highly delighted with Mr Wilberforce's letter on the Slave
    Trade; Ld. Grenville's speech on that subject, he says, was the finest
    thing he ever heard.

    Your love, Mrs Cator, [15] came to town for Court last Thursday. Miss
    Glyn saw her, and informed her how you were smitten. She laughed very
    hard and was much amused. She gives a curious account of the Cators &
    of the people she lives with at Beckenham, she says, she never was
    used to such people, at her uncle Sligo's; [16] but that Mr Cator [17]
    has known them all his life & likes them. He proposed in a curious
    manner. One day Miss Mahon said she must go & pack up her jewels. He
    asked her how many she had. She said, "About twenty pounds' worth." He
    said, "Well, I have about as many, suppose we club & put them
    together." Which they forthwith decided to do!

    Our Sunday dish, Frank Primrose, is here.... I suppose we shall have
    him every Sunday till the family come to town. The Duchess of Gordon
    has taken a house in this Square, opposite the Law's in Duke St. I saw
    Kinnoull in the Pitt at the Opera last night. Our visitors were, the
    Prince Auguste for about two hours, & Jack Smyth. [18] Young Prince
    Estahazy [19] is one of the greatest beaux in town--he is of the first
    family in Hungary. The Princess of Wales not going to the Drawing-room
    was a sad disappointment. Some attribute it to the Prince, others
    _hope_ it is her health. _Dieu Sait_.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope._
    _February 12th, 1807._

    All the world is going to Court to-day, except  us--& many hope to see
    the Princess there. I  believe they will be disappointed, as there is
    some difficulty about her dressing in Carlton House & I suppose it
    is thought proper she should not go from  any other.

    Lady Chesterfield is to be the new Lady of the  Bedchamber in the room
    of Lady Cardigan who  declines on account of the age of her Lord, that
    she  may dedicate more time to him.


The story of the unhappy marriage of Caroline of Brunswick with the Prince
of Wales, afterwards George IV., is too well known to need repetition.
Since 1796 she had lived apart from the Prince at Shooter's Hill or
Blackheath, and was the object of much sympathy among a large section of
the public. In 1806 reports respecting her conduct had led to there being
instituted against her what was subsequently known as the _delicate
investigation_, proceedings in which the prosecution relied principally on
evidence supplied by Sir J. Douglas. The verdict was that her conduct had
been imprudent but not criminal, and the populace, ever ready to take up
the cause of one whom they considered unjustly treated, sang about the
streets and under the windows of Carlton House, a refrain far from
complimentary to H.R.H:--

  "I married you 'tis true
  Not knowing what to do,
  My affairs at the time were
    So bad, bad, bad;
  But now my debts are paid
  And my fortune it is made,
  You may go home again to
    Your dad, dad, dad!" */

Great excitement naturally prevailed as to whether the Princess would or
would not make her re-appearance at Court, but it was not till May 22nd,
1807, that she succeeded in asserting her right to do so, and on this
occasion she seems to have enjoyed one of the few triumphs achieved in her
unfortunate career.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    _May 22nd, 1807._

    The appearance of the Princess of Wales, both at Court and at the
    Opera you would read with pleasure. At the former place Sir J. Douglas
    was in   the outer room, and a lady near who knew him by sight said
    something handsome of the Princess and that she hoped her Calumniators
    would be brought to justice. All around joined in cordially, and he
    slunk away.


The following year Mrs Stanhope wrote:--


    Lady Hertford [20] is very busy trying to bring about a reconciliation
    between the Prince and Princess, and I hear she has made some
    progress.

Lady Hertford, who was long known by her nickname of the "Sultana," had
become celebrated for her liaison with the Prince of Wales, which was
destined to continue for some years till she was superseded in favour by
Lady Conyngham. She was described as shy and insipid, her manners were
stately and formal, and the impression which she conveyed was that of a
person rigidly correct in comportment and morals. But if, indeed, she ever
attempted to reunite the husband and wife whom her conduct had assisted to
alienate, it was scarcely to be expected that such a mediator would meet
with success in such a task. Of the luckless Princess, however, Mrs
Stanhope was for long a distinct partisan; and on March 19th of that same
year she wrote a description of the tactless Caroline which shows that, on
occasions, the Princess could assume a dignity foreign to the usual tenor
of her conduct.


    Thursday, we attended the Drawingroom; most brilliant. The Princess of
    Wales looked extremely well & _her manners are the most graceful and
    Royal of any I ever saw_.


Ere that date, however, London had been plunged into confusion by the
sudden fall of Lord Grenville's Ministry.


    _Marianne Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    _April 27th, 1807_, GROSVENOR SQUARE.

    As Parliament is to be dissolved to-morrow or Tuesday, conceive the
    bustle which prevails thro'out this great town. The gentlemen are in
    agonies for their purses, and the ladies for their parties, which must
    either be postponed or destitute of beaux.... This last week we have
    been very gay--that is, we have been almost squeezed to death at
    sundry grand crowds, and knocked up with balls. Mrs Robinson's was
    good in everything but dancing, and Lady Scott's [21] was good in
    everything but company. The latter was nothing but a little dance, a
    rehearsal to a magnificent ball she means to give in May, in which she
    has asked us to dance in the French country dances--but hélas! all
    that will now be at an end.... You would have been charmed with Lady
    Scott. I know how much you admire her, and to increase your delight, I
    will tell you what she eats for supper. After having already been at
    one table, she came to ours when everybody had done eating. _She had
    first half a breast of mutton, then half a chicken, then a whole
    lobster, a blanc-manger & a mixed salad._


The Election of 1807 was one long celebrated in the history of Yorkshire,
being unprecedented in the fierceness of the struggle it provoked. As is
well known, there were in those days but two representatives for the
entire county, and there was but one polling booth, which was in the
castle yard at York. The retiring members on this occasion were Mr Walter
Fawkes and William Wilberforce. The former did not seek re-election, for
he took the dissolution so much to heart that he declared he should
withdraw for ever from public life, but the latter speedily made good his
right to represent the county once more. There remained, therefore, but
one seat to be contested, and great was the excitement when it was found
that the candidates were to be chosen from the two great Yorkshire houses
of rival politics--Lord Milton, the son of Earl Fitzwilliam, in the Whig
interest, and the Hon. Henry Lascelles, son of the Earl of Harewood, for
the Tory party. Mr Stanhope, having secured his own election for his old
seat of Carlisle, hastened back to Yorkshire to take part in the contest
in favour of the Tory member there, whose chances of success he hoped
would be enhanced by the youthfulness of Lord Milton, which gave his
opponents a valuable handle for satire. As already pointed out, precocious
in every rôle of life, Lord Milton had married at the age of nineteen, and
having just attained his majority, was now anxious to represent the
county.


    _Walter Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    CANNON HALL, _May 18th, 1807._

    I had no time to write to you this Day Se'nnight from Carlisle after
    my Election. I got to York on Tuesday night, attended the Nomination
    at York the next day, which was carried almost unanimously in Favour
    of Wilberforce, and by a great Majority in favour of Lascelles over
    Lord Milton, but nevertheless, this young Lordling, who was only of
    age the third of this month, told us he would demand a Poll on
    Wednesday next. My Canvass against him has been very successful and I
    mean, having concluded all my arrangements, both here and at
    Horsforth, to give my Vote on Thursday or Friday.

    There has been a flood at Silkstone more tremendous than ever was
    known by the bursting of a cloud on the Hill to the West of the
    Village. An old woman and two children were drowned in one of the
    cottages near the Vicarage, and much damage was done all along the
    Course of the Brook. Strange Events seem becoming frequent in this
    Neighbourhood, for last year, you may have heard, during a violent
    storm a cottage was struck, an old woman and her two sons knocked out
    of the chairs in which they were seated at the table, and the soles of
    one of the Boys' shoes ripped from off his feet, although the entire
    party suffered no other damage.


To York, consequently, Stanhope repaired, where he found Lord Milton
prepared to hold his own with spirit. On being taunted with his youth, he
replied in the well-known words of Lord Chatham that it was a fault he
would remedy every day, while a still more brilliant rejoinder to the
attacks of his opponent gained him many votes. Mr Lascelles, determined to
make a _coup_, on the Nomination day stepped across the hustings, and
referring contemptuously to the age and short stature of his rival,
offered him a whip and a top. Lord Milton took both with unruffled
composure, and throwing the top into the crowd, he handed the whip back to
his adversary with the remark that he thought Mr Lascelles' father might
find greater use for it to flog his slaves in Jamaica. As the most vexed
question at the election was the emancipation of the slaves, this sally
provoked great enthusiasm. None the less, on the first day Mr Lascelles
headed the poll.


    _Walter Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    YORK, _May 22nd, 1807._

    MY DEAR JOHN,

    I have but a moment to tell you I am engaged in the severest contest
    that ever was known. On Wednesday the Poll began, and closed leaving
    Milton in a Minority, but yesterday we got near three hundred ahead,
    by getting early possession of the advances to the Polling Booths. To-
    day, Wilberforce, who was last yesterday, is regaining his lost ground
    fast, and I fully expect Lascelles will beat the young Lord, but the
    contest will be dreadful and the cost enormous. I like your eagerness,
    but you are full as well where you are. Were you here, you would have
    a fair chance of a Fever. I am a good deal heated, but not ill. We
    poll 2 or 3,000 a day.

    What a charming account we have of William. We are all in high spirits
    this day. Wilberforce is the head of the Poll and Lascelles has gained
    upwards of fifty upon Milton.


    _May 27th._--Hoping that Lascelles is above 300 ahead, I left
    York this morning. I send you an Electioneering song I wrote, but you
    must not let anyone have a copy of it.

      SONG.

      Wave the flag, hoist the pennant,
      Hear our great Lord Lieutenant
      Who would save us the trouble of choice.
      "Let not Lascelles content you,
      Milton _shall_ represent you,
      And I'll in the House guide his voice!"

      Wise in speech, look, and act
      (I appeal to the fact),
      At nineteen he determined to marry,
      And all I could say,
      Till his twentieth birthday,
      Would hardly persuade him to tarry.

      Ere at years of discretion,
      He sat a whole Session,
      E'en Grantham made way for the boy.
      Who's the fittest law-maker?
      He that's first a law-breaker;
      To catch thieves you a thief should employ.

      What a lordling it is,
      With his carrotty phiz,
      So cried up, so flattered, so built on.
      You may oft take a rule
      From a nickname at School,
      And the boys named him _old Lady Milton_.

      Oh patriot revered
      Go shave for a beard!
      Hie to Wentworth and finish this strife,
      York, Malton, the county,
      Disdained to be bound t'ye,
      Go and cherish your nice little wife,

      Oh! soon may she bear
      You a fine son and heir;
      Then ten oxen whole you may roast;
      May Fitzwilliam carouse
      With _two boys_ in the house
      Nor bewail _Milton's Paradise Lost_!


The contest lasted three weeks, while the actual polling occupied fifteen
days, during which 25,120 votes were tendered. It is thus described in the
_Annals of Yorkshire_:--


    The county was in a state of the most violent agitation, party spirit
    being wound up to the highest pitch by the friends of the two noble
    families, and everything being done that money or personal exertion
    could accomplish; the roads in all directions were covered night and
    day with coaches, barouches, curricles, gigs, fly-waggons, and
    military cars with eight horses, conveying voters from the most remote
    parts of the county.... On the fifth day Lascelles passed his opponent
    and kept the lead till the 13th day, at the close of which the numbers
    stood,--_Milton_, 10,313; _Lascelles_, 10,255. Now the efforts were
    prodigious and the excitement maddening.


"All parties," wrote Mrs Stanhope, "consider themselves secure. Lord
Milton met with more success than Mr Lascelles at Sheffield, Rotherham,
Doncaster, and, I am sorry to add, Leeds. At Halifax, he had a very cold
reception.... Mr Osbaldiston and another man were almost killed going in
to vote, owing to the enormous crowd."

During all this time the state of York was indescribable, and since the
public-houses were ordered by the candidates to supply gratis whatever
refreshment the voters called for, the roads in every direction were lined
with tipsy men who molested travellers, indulged in rioting, or slumbered
in heaps by the roadside; so that, partly on account of the fatigue of
travelling, but still more owing to the dangerous condition of the roads
and of the city of York, the county gentlemen agreed together that the
ladies who were entitled to vote should not exercise this privilege unless
it should be found essential. [22]

At length the Poll closed, and amid unparalleled excitement it was found
that the numbers stood thus:--

    MR WILBERFORCE   11,806.
    LORD MILTON      11,177.
    Mr Lascelles     10,990.

When the news of Lord Milton's success became known in London on Sunday,
all the Whig families caused their horses to be adorned with large orange
favours, while the ladies at the fashionable promenade in Kensington
Gardens made a lavish display of his colours. In Yorkshire, the event was
celebrated by the victorious party with mad rejoicings, not the least
remarkable being the behaviour of the people of Wakefield who, unable to
do honour in person to the successful candidate, seized upon an old woman
who lived on Clayton Hill and "chaired" her all round the town with wild
enthusiasm. She was ever afterwards known by the nickname of "Lady
Milton," and the street where she lived bore the name of Milton Street.
But even the successful candidate must have found his triumph tempered by
the fabulous cost of the election. The unusual size of the county, and the
fact that voters had to be brought from and returned to such distant
localities, while the cost of their transit and their keep was meanwhile
defrayed by the candidates without stint, brought out the electioneering
expenses at the enormous sum of £100,000 for each candidate. Lord
Harewood, to whose outlay was added the mortification of its uselessness,
is said to have kept a card in his pocket from that day forward with the
ominous figures £100,000 inscribed on it, and whenever he was asked again
to contest the county, he would produce this as an unanswerable argument
against his doing so.

Meanwhile, at Ramsgate, Mrs Stanhope and her party were contenting
themselves with whatever gaieties the place afforded, and on May 31st,
1807, Marianne Stanhope sent her brother an interesting account of the
conditions prevailing there at that date.


    NELSON'S CRESCENT.

    Just now I think you would be very miserable here, for the wind is
    very high and whistles at every corner, the sea is rough and
    everything looks blowing. The night before last was dreadfully
    tempestuous, & all yesterday morning was very stormy, but it cleared
    out, happily for us, in the evening, so that we were able to take a
    turn on the pier.

    That famous pier! The only thing worth seeing, I think, either in or
    out of Ramsgate, for you must know I have now seen almost all the
    lions:--that miserable forlorn Mansion, East Cliff, _ci-devant_
    Lord Keith's; the elegant little cake house of Mr Warne, who is going
    to Russia; the soi-disant cottage of Mr Yarrow, in the romantic
    vicinity of Pegwell Bay, celebrated, I am told for its fisheries; and
    last, though certainly not least, the splendid and deserted King's
    Gate. The building is very classic and elegant, but surely Tully's
    Villa must be a very different thing in the sweet Campagna of Italy,
    than placed on such a barren cliff. Poor fellow! Could he look out of
    the Elysian fields (for there, I suppose, we must place him) I think
    he would not admire the change of situation!

    There is a regiment of Irish Dragoons here. The Colonel has just left
    them to take possession of a large fortune, & another officer has gone
    to Ireland to give a vote. Both the Irish and Germans have very good
    bands which often play before our windows & this is the only gaiety
    there is.

    I am sure all the pleasure of this place must depend upon the company
    & when you have society that you like, what spot will not appear
    pleasant?

    We are not too well off in that respect as you will think when I have
    described our acquaintance.

    Our greatest intimate is Lady Jane Pery, [23] Lord Limerick's
    daughter, who has had so many complaints she is unable to move from
    her chair, though full of life and spirits. Lady Conyngham [24] is the
    great lady of the place, a nice, civil old woman. We were at a party
    at her house where we met all the natives. Her daughter, Miss Burton,
    is 6 ft. 4 in. in height & ugly in proportion, but very agreeable. To-
    morrow we are going to a party there where we are to meet _everybody_,
    for you must know that even in this small society there is an improper
    set. Lady Dunmore [25] & her daughters, Lady Virginia Murray, & the
    married one, Lady Susan Drew, [26] sisters to the Duchess of Sussex,
    [27] and Lord and Lady Edward Bentinck [28] & their two daughters are
    visited by very few _proper_ people, but both these houses are the
    _rendez-vous_ of the officers. Lady Sarah Drew had a ball the other
    night.

    At Lady Conyngham's, we are to meet all these.

    Miss Bentinck [29] is a great beauty; there has been a long affair
    between her and Hay Drummond, which is at last broke off by the lady.
    She had been sent to the Duke of Rutland's to be out of his way.
    Drummond contrived to introduce himself to the servants as her maid's
    beau, by which means he slept in the house and was able to walk with
    her before breakfast & late at night. At last her brother, who was
    shooting one morning early, & knew Drummond by sight well, found them
    out and gave the alarm. The Duke sent Miss Bentinck home directly, &
    they were to be married in September, but lo! she has changed her
    mind.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    NELSON'S CRESCENT, RAMSGATE, _June 1st._

    There are parties here, but the majority of women is quite ridiculous.
    Lord Cranley [30] the other night at Lady Conyngham's for a short time
    found himself the only man amongst twenty women. He said he looked as
    if he had broken into a Convent. I do not like his wit, he is too like
    a thing to be laughed at.


    _June 2_.--We were last night at another party at Lady Conyngham's,
    where there were four card tables, and it was then settled that there
    should be a ball on the Birthday, to the no small pleasure of your
    sisters, who expect to have officers in plenty to dance with.

    I do not believe there is any truth in Lady Glyn's report respecting
    Milnes, though I am convinced he thinks Miss H. Monckton very
    agreeable. [31] I am certain she asked Lady Galway, for she wrote me
    word she did not take Joy, [accept congratulations].

    I have been here long enough to admire the sea, but the country will
    not do for a Yorkshirewoman.


    _June 5th._

    Yesterday was the dullest Birthday I ever remember. The Guns were
    fired and something attempted by the Military on the sands, but it was
    high water, and they, moreover, fired ill. A Ball Miss Burton
    determined to have, and though neither Lady Edward Bentinck's party
    nor the Dunmores chose to attend, they danced nine couple very
    pleasantly. Some of the Gentlemen of the 13th had too loyally
    celebrated the King's Birthday, however, they _did_ dance, and
    thanks to the Germans, we have some new figures, and two of them
    amused us very much with a Waltz, which we were very curious to see.
    [32] Your sisters and two men finished with a Reel, but as we were the
    only ladies remaining at one o'clock, we were obliged to come away,
    tho' the Dragoons all indignantly exclaimed that it was not keeping
    the Birthday. As there were more men than women, the dancing went on
    with spirit.

    Some of the 13th went away early as they ride a race on Barham Downs
    this morning.


From Ramsgate, Mrs Stanhope and her Party appear to have gone a brief
Tour, with which they were much pleased.


    _July 25th, 1807._

    Our tour answered in every respect--the weather continued fine & the
    country through which we passed very pretty. When we arrived at
    Woodstock, we found we could not see the House at Blenheim before
    three, we therefore took fresh horses and drove all round the Park,
    and visited the House where Lord Rochester died. We then ate cold meat
    at the Inn, and at three went thro' the House & over the Pleasure
    Ground--large enough for a tolerable sized place. From thence, drove
    through the Parks of Ditchley & Hey Thorpe to Warwick.

    The next morning we saw the Castle and grounds, and afterwards went to
    Mr Greathead's, Guy's Cliff, a pretty, small place, but noted for some
    beautiful paintings by his only Son who died at the age of 23 abroad.
    There are two pictures of Bonaparte, one with his Court face, the
    other when reviewing; both taken from recollection immediately after
    seeing him & said to be extremely like. He took a third which he
    presented to Louis Bonaparte.


This expedition appears to have terminated in a visit to the Lowthers at
Swillington, where Mrs Stanhope records an instance of the drastic medical
treatment in favour with our ancestors.


    _November 5th, 1807_, SWILLINGTON.

    Lady Lonsdale [33] is living at Leeds with Lady Elizabeth, who I fear
    is little, if any, better. And though Lady Lonsdale is willing to
    flatter herself, I fear she is too ill to be relieved by Grosvenor's
    plan of friction which is what they are now trying. _She has five
    people to rub her at once_.

    Do send me some particulars of Miss Drummond's wedding. I hear such
    various stories--one that she was married in an old riding habit with
    a red scarf round her neck.


The recipient of Mrs Stanhope's correspondence, her son John, was at this
date completing his education at Edinburgh, under the auspices of the
famous Dugald Stewart, Professor of Moral Philosophy, who the year
previously had received from the Whig Government a sinecure worth £600.
Judging, however, by Mrs Stanhope's reference in the following letter to
the kindly ministrations of a certain "Miss Anne," Moral Philosophy was
not the only study which was engrossing the attention of John Stanhope.


    CANNON HALL, _November 23rd, 1807._

    After the long quiz you will this morning receive from Marianne,
    perhaps a matter-of-fact letter from your mother may not be
    unacceptable, and if your weather in any degree resembles ours, the
    post will be a person held by you in great estimation, as you sit
    freezing over your fire.

    I sincerely hope that Miss Anne's pills and grey Dinnark had the
    desired effect and that you are now quite in Ball trim. I like your
    account of Dugald Stewart and hope you retain a great deal of the
    knowledge which flows from his mouth. How I should like to hear him!
    For Moral Philosophy is my favourite study.

    Your account of your dinners amused us. Sir John Sinclair [34] always
    collects from all quarters of the Globe; sometimes he mixes them
    oddly, but I think his dinners are not disagreeable. Knox, with whom
    you dined, lives in Grosvenor Street, his mother gives balls, and Mrs
    Beaumont expects she will be with her at Christmas on her road from
    Ireland.

    It now snows as fast as possible. Thursday was a very bad day, and we
    have had severe frost ever since. I do not ever remember so determined
    a snow before Xmas, and all the old people foretell a hard winter.

    Sir John Smith [35] is dead. Mrs Marriott [36] tried to be sorry, but
    when she recollected it would enable the Smiths to live in town and a
    hundred other _et ceteras_, for the life of her she could not
    grieve; and in truth he was not a man to be much regretted, he was of
    too selfish a character to be either much loved or esteemed.

    We are much amused at the extract which you have sent us from Drummond
    Castle.


The extract in question, which was enclosed in this letter, runs as
follows:--


    PART OF THE JOURNAL OF THE CELEBRATED ELIZABETH WOODVILLE (afterwards
    Queen of Edward IV.) previous to her first marriage with Sir John
    Grey. Extracted from an ancient MS. preserved in Drummond Castle.

    _Monday morning._ Rose at four o'clock & helped Catherine to milk
    the cows, Rachael, the other Dairy Maid having scalded her hands the
    night before. Made a Poultice for Rachael & gave Robin a penny to get
    something comfortable from the Apothecary's.

    _6 o'clock._ The Bullock of Beef rather too much boiled & the
    beer rather stale. Mem: to talk to the Cook about the first fault & to
    mend the second myself by tapping a fresh barrell.

    _7 o'clock._ Went to walk with the Lady Duchess, my Mother, [37]
    in the Courtyard. Fed 25 Men & Women. Chid Roger severely for
    expressing some ill words at attending us with the broken Meat.

    _8 o'clock._ Went into the Paddock behind the house with my maid
    Dorothy, & caught Thump the black Poney & rode a matter of six miles
    without either Saddle or Bridle.

    _10 o'clock._ Went to dinner. John Grey [38] a most comely
    Youth,--but what is that to me? a Virtuous Maiden should be entirely
    under the guidance of her Parents--John ate but little and stole a
    great many looks at me; said "Women could never be handsome in his
    opinion that were not good temper'd." I think my temper is not bad. No
    one finds fault with it but Roger, & he is the most disorderly serving
    man in our Family. John Grey likes white Teeth. My Teeth are of a
    pretty good colour, I think, & my hair is as black as Jet. John Grey,
    if I mistake not, is of the same opinion.

    _11 o'clock._ Rose from table, the Company all desiring a walk in
    the Fields. John Grey would help me over every stile & twice he
    squeezed my hand. I can't say I have any great objections to John
    Grey. He plays at Prison Bars as well as any Country Gentleman; is
    remarkably dutiful to his Parents, my Lord and Lady; & never misses
    Church on a Sunday.

    _3 o'clock._ Poor Robinson's house burnt down by accident. John
    Grey proposed a subscription among the Company for the relief of the
    Farmer & gave no less than 4£ himself. Mem: Never saw him look so
    comely as at that Moment.

    _4 o'clock._ Went to Prayers.

    _6 o'clock._ Fed the Pigs and Poultry.

    _7 o'clock._ Supper on Table, delayed to that hour on account of
    Robinson's misfortune. Mem: the Goose Pie too much baked & the Pork
    roasted to rags.

    _9 o'clock._ The Company fast asleep. These late hours very
    disagreeable. Said my Prayers a second time, John Grey distracting my
    thoughts too much the first. Fell asleep at ten. Dreamed that John
    Grey had demanded me of my Father. [39]




CHAPTER IV

1808-1810

ON DITS FROM GROSVENOR SQUARE AND CANNON HALL


    _Marianne Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _Jan 27th, 1808._

    Poor Philip went to school to-day, to the great regret of all the
    party, for he is a general favourite. Such a lively little monkey I
    never saw.

    On Sunday Roast Beef and Plum Pudding [1] dined with us, and were
    entertaining as usual, also Orator Milnes, who was quite fascinating,
    the first time I ever saw him so! He is perfectly different with his
    town face to what he appears in Yorkshire. Yesterday we had a pleasant
    _dinnette_. In the evening Lady Glyn arrived _bien triste_, and Mrs
    Beaumont all magnificence for Lady Castlereagh's. We were much
    surprised to find Count Holmar [2] in town, but we have had the
    mystery explained. He took the Princes back to their own country, and
    then came back here on account of his love for Miss Gifford, Lady
    Lansdowne's daughter by her first husband. [3] She is pretty and
    clever, without much fortune, but Lord Lansdowne has taken a fancy to
    her, has settled Southampton Castle upon her, and having no child of
    his own, intends making her an heiress. The young lady does not like
    the Count much, but her friends wish it, so there are delicacies and
    difficulties enough for a novel of the first order. He spent three
    months there this autumn, and certainly as far as a pale cheek, sunk
    eyes, and slender form can prove anything, he is either hopelessly
    consumptive or in love. So much for him!

    Mrs Beaumont is quite on her high horse. 'Tis said _he_ has asked
    for a peerage on account of his _overwhelming_ influence in the
    county of York, all of which he employed in favour of Lord Milton!
    Bravo, say I!

    Another story is that he has had the offer of a Swedish order, fees
    £150, a sky-blue ribbon, which gives no place, and the honour of being
    a Sir, not hereditary. I never heard of its being conferred on any but
    dancing masters and medical geniuses.

    My father has become acquainted with Mrs Knox, and is much charmed
    with her. He says they seem to live in prodigious style, have a
    magnificent house, as finely furnished as Bretton. She said her son
    mentioned you in the highest terms.

    We were at the Opera on Saturday. Fuller of men I never saw it; the
    boxes thin. The Duchess of A. was there looking _fade_. Kelly's
    room is at an end; so we had the pleasure of waiting, or rather
    starving in the great room for near an hour.


Marianne Stanhope, later, thus describes this room at the Opera where the
audience assembled on leaving, and where each lady who was unattended by a
cavalier of her own family, strove anxiously to escape the crowning
ignominy of not having a beau to "hand her to her carriage."


    Then came the pleasures of the crush-room, that most singular of all
    places of amusement, where a mob of good company assemble twice a
    week, in a thorough draft of air, to enjoy the pleasure of inhaling
    the odours of expiring lamps, amid the ceaseless din of "Lady
    Townley's carriage stops the way"--"Lord D----'s servants'--"--"the
    Duchess of N---'s carriage"--"Lord P----'s coming down"--"The Duke of
    S---- must drive off," and sounds such as these constantly reiterated.

    Young ladies by the dozens were to be seen freezing, with shawls off
    one shoulder, trying to inveigle some man, by means of sweet words or
    sweeter looks, to hand them to their carriages; the unfortunate mammas
    behind them, looking worn out in the service, ready to expire with the
    cold and bustle, sinking on the sofa opposite to the fireplace to
    await their turn with what patience they might. [4]


And after enlarging upon the various methods by which the representatives
of the _haut ton_ strove likewise to secure the satisfaction of "hearing
their names proclaimed by each passer-by," she exclaims--"Say! ye
frequenters of the Opera round-room, if these are not its chiefest
pleasures?"

Meanwhile the flirtations which were wont to beguile this tedious hour
invariably attracted much attention.


    _January 29th, 1808._

    I have heard some news respecting the little Viscount which surprises
    me--that he is to marry the second Miss Bouverie as soon as she is
    presented. [5] That the eldest was cruel & moreover that he always
    preferred the second, though he has never given the slightest hint &
    did not go near her at the Opera, not even in the crush-room. He is
    gone to Bath, probably to avoid the talk & gossip of London till it is
    publickly declared.


     _February 22nd, 1808._

    On Monday we were charmed at Drury Lane with Mrs Jordan in "_Three
    weeks after Marriage_." I admire her so much I could forgive the
    Duke of Clarence anything. On Friday, we had a dinner party at Mrs
    Glyn's--_hum-drum enough_. The next night we had a dinner here,
    at which we had George Hampson, who is now one of our great flirts; he
    has been much in Edinburgh and likes nothing better than Scotch
    dancing.

    The dear Prims [Primroses] dine here _à l'ordinaire_. I met the
    Viscount in the Park with his love, and he went again in the evening,
    but I wonder they don't dine together of a Sunday. She is a nice
    little girl, very genteel and pleasing, but no beauty like her sister,
    who is all-conquering this year. At Court the other day she had a
    trimming and headdress of her own composition, all pheasant's
    feathers, the plumage of two-and-thirty. As for poor little Frankey
    [Frank Primrose] as Mary Lowther says, all the Roast Beef and Plum
    Pudding will produce nothing.

    Miss de Visme [6] has not yet arrived. She has made great havoc among
    the Staffordshire beaux. Your old Square Flame, Miss Calcraft [7] is
    in a few months to come out a raging belle. She is amazingly admired
    by the few who have seen her. London is pronounced dullissimo, so pray
    continue to amuse yourself in Edinburgh, which by your account must be
    the gayest and pleasantest place in the world.

    We are much obliged to the Duchess of Gordon for giving you so happy
    an opportunity of announcing the beautiful, or extraordinary presents
    we may expect to receive--perhaps Scotch husbands--who knows! Pray
    don't be dilatory. Miss Glyn is smarter, gayer, and a greater flirt
    than ever. A last attempt--may it succeed!


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    _February 26th, 1808._

    Yesterday I had the pleasure of your gay, wild epistle. You remind me
    of the French prisoner who was asked how he spent his time. He
    answered--"We breakfast, then dance; dine, dance again; sup--_encore
    la danse!_" This I begin to suspect is a Scotch life, and very good
    for bile, provided the dinners are such as the prisoner partook of.
    You seem to be the happiest of the happy and the gayest of the gay.

    Peter was quite shocked you had not mentioned Walter Scott. Have you
    ever met with him? Great expectations are formed of his poem. Campbell
    and Rogers are both going to publish poems.


    _March 11th, 1808._

    I believe I have not written to you since your sisters were at the
    Argyle Rooms, [8] which they liked extremely, but where they had small
    opportunity of exhibiting their new steps. There was first an
    Operetta, then a supper, and afterwards an attempt at a dance; but the
    stupid English voted it not _ton_, and there were only about fifteen
    couples who ventured to defy this opinion--Marianne and Mr Macdonald
    one of them. Anne remained a spectator. As the dancing did not seem to
    be approved, Mr Greville said, for the future there should be none
    except upon ball nights.


    _March 16th, 1808._

    We were at the Opera on Saturday and at the Argyle Rooms on Monday. At
    the latter place we had only a concert and supper--thin and I thought
    dull. The men are always in the house and have little time for
    anything but politicks.

    The King is, I understand, quite provoked with the Opposition, and
    says that their present method of proceeding is different to any that
    has ever been in his reign. They depend upon wearing out the
    Constitutions of the Ministers. Your father told Lord Castlereagh he
    was certain it was all owing to his pale face and therefore he ought
    to put on a little rouge. The Lords sending back the Bill on the
    orders of Council had given great spirits to the Opposition.

    The dullness of London is beyond anything I have ever known. The only
    new belle is Miss Hood, daughter to Lord Hood, who is quite beautiful.

    Your friend Mr Macdonald did us the honour to remember us at the
    Argyle Rooms, but he has made so little impression on your sisters,
    they both asked who he was.


Mr Macdonald, who was unfortunate in having made so little impression upon
Mrs Stanhope's daughters, was Archibald, third son of Alexander, Baron
Macdonald of Sleat, called "Lord of the Isles." He was a great friend of
John Stanhope, who, in 1806, had accompanied him on a canvassing tour
through the Hebrides when such an expedition was fraught with discomfort
and even danger, so little had civilization penetrated to that wild region
since the days of Dr Johnson's famous tour seventy years previously.
Failing in his canvass, Archibald Macdonald subsequently made another
attempt to obtain a seat in Parliament, of which he sent the following
account to the former companion of his efforts:--


    _Archibald Macdonald to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    METHVEN CASTLE, _May 26th, 1808._

    My Dear Stanhope,

    You will have heard by this time that I have been half way to the
    North Pole (Kirkwall in the Orkneys) in quest of a seat in Par., and
    perhaps you will also have heard that I did not find it. However, I
    left no stone unturned in my researches--Philosopher's stone
    excepted--and only came back from my transportation four days ago, not
    a little happy to find myself at Methven again, for such a country I
    never beheld. Starvation reigns there with _pinching sway_, as
    both my nose and my stomach very soon informed me, for the one was
    nipped into a sort of beetroot colour by the North Winds, and the
    other was forced thro' a course of Salt Fish and Whiskey, for the hard
    season had laid an embargo on animal food, etc., and this you will say
    was pinching fare for a candidate from the land of plenty! Posts, only
    once a week, were irregular.

    I must not forget to mention that I went to Orkney in the King's
    Cutter (The Royal George), and scarcely had we landed at Kirkwall than
    accounts were brought of a French privateer being within sight. Away
    went the Royal George, and, in 10 hours after, returned to her
    moorings with the _Passepartout_ of 16 guns and 63 men from Dunkirk.
    The French Captain, Vanglieme, was my guest to Leith, and a most
    extraordinary genius he was, full of life and spirits, not in the
    least downcast at his misfortunes. He had a most excellent little band
    of music on board, which amused us all the way home; he is now on his
    Parole at Peebles. His behaviour to some English Captains that he had
    taken was so generous that they came forward to sign a certificate in
    his behalf to be presented by me to the Commander-in-Chief, everything
    that can be done for him I hope will be done--generosity for
    generosity.

    I perceive a very beautiful place to be sold in ye papers, Park
    Place--Lord Malmesbury's. I wonder what they expect for it--it would
    suit me--but rather too high land.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _June 11th, 1808._

    The Princess of Wales danced all night at Burlington House with Lord
    Ebrington.... Mrs Bankes's rout was as full and as good as even she
    could wish, so many men scarcely ever seen at any Assembly, & in every
    respect it was good. The only disappointment was that the night would
    not permit of the world going into the Garden, tho' it was lighted &
    the Pandear Band played. Before we came away they were beginning to
    dance, but to that music I do not think it could be kept up with
    spirit.

    We left dancing also at Lady Neave's, & had thoughts of returning
    there, but Mrs Bankes's was too pleasant to allow of our attempting to
    get away,--no easy thing if we had wished it, for I really believe
    there must have been near 2,000 people there.

    A most desperate flirtation between Miss Glyn & Mr Archibald Grey. How
    fine "my Uncle Portland" would sound! Little Sir D----y would be
    killed with delight.

    To-day and to-morrow we dine fourteen. Your father was at the House
    till past five yesterday morning. However, he stole an hour for Mrs
    Bankes's.


Mrs Bankes, the wife of the M.P. for Corfe Castle, [9] presumably gave
this successful party for her two daughters, one of whom Lord Broughton,
writing a few years later, describes as "lively and entertaining, very
lovely and very clever, but a little odd." This latter characteristic
appears to have been shared by her father, for various stories of his
absent-mindedness have survived, and one mentioned by the same
correspondent was often subsequently quoted with peculiar zest by his
large circle of acquaintance. When Chantrey was thinking of a design for
Satan, Mr Bankes, in the presence of a grave and learned assembly,
volunteered the following unexpected recommendation: "My dear Chantrey,
you had better choose some part of Satan's history and so make your task
more easy--take, for instance, his conflict with _sin and death_!" The
shout of laughter with which this unsolicited advice was received
completely mystified Mr Bankes, who, for some time could not be persuaded
that he had made any inappropriate suggestion. Nevertheless both he and
his wife enjoyed exceptional popularity, and their parties were
appreciated far more than the next entertainment referred to by Mrs
Stanhope:--


    _June 20th._

    Lady Dartmouth gives a breakfast at Blackheath this morning, the heat
    and dust will be dreadful. To-night we expect to be amused at the
    Argyle Rooms, as those who choose may go in masks. Lady Harrington
    goes nowhere, and the Marquis almost lives here.


Meanwhile the news from the continent was again calculated to arrest the
attention of the most frivolous amongst the gay world of London. Events
were assuming a more threatening aspect. The long-protracted Peninsular
war had begun; but Sir Arthur Wellesley, dispatched to the relief of
Portugal, three weeks after landing defeated Junot in a decisive victory
at Roliga, on August 17th, 1808. Had he then pushed on, as it was said he
wished to do, the whole French army must have surrendered; but his
superior officers, Sir Harry Burrard and Sir Hugh Dalrymple, who landed on
the two succeeding days, forbade all pursuit, and, it was asserted,
obliged Wellesley to sign with them the pitiful Convention of Cintra,
which allowed the French army to evacuate Portugal unharmed, and to be
carried on British ships back to France. Junot admitted frankly that his
men would have capitulated had they been pursued but two miles by the
English, and so great was the indignation roused in England by the news of
this fiasco, that the three generals demanded and obtained a court-
martial. All were acquitted; but Wellesley, who had denounced the
Convention vehemently before the Court, was instantly employed again, an
honour which was denied to his superior officers. Hence the refrain, which
became a favourite at the time.

  Sir Arthur and Sir Harry, Sir Harry and Sir Hew,
    Doodle, doodle, doodle, cock a doodle doo!
  Sir Arthur was a gallant knight, but for the other two
    Doodle, doodle, doodle, cock a doodle doo!

Some years afterwards, with regard to this famous occurrence, John
Stanhope wrote in his journal--


    I regret that I did not at the time dwell at a greater length upon the
    Convention of Cintra.... That Convention and even the battle of
    Vimiera, at one time the theme of every tongue, are effaced from the
    memory of even us their contemporaries by the more brilliant
    achievements of the British army--by successes which have blotted out
    all recollections of former errors. I can scarcely recall to my mind
    the arguments that were used for and against that Convention by those
    who were present at the battle; but the feeling against it in England
    was so strong, that, strange as it may appear in these days, at a Race
    Ball at Carlisle where I accompanied my father, then Member for that
    City, when the Steward, Sir James Graham, gave the health of Sir
    Arthur Wellesley, an officer rose and declared that he would not drink
    the health of a General _who had disgraced England_.

    That Sir Arthur Wellesley was fortunate in throwing the blame from his
    own shoulders on to his superiors in command, there can be little
    doubt, as notwithstanding the assertion of his friends, it is not
    possible to consider the signature of such a man in the situation that
    he then held, as a mere matter of official duty.

    If a General is superseded in his command in the hour of victory he
    does not become a mere aide-de-camp or secretary to the officer by
    whom he has been superseded. In conducting a negociation, he stands
    rather in the position of an ambassador, who, though he may not have
    full power himself, is still held to be mainly responsible for the
    treaty that he signs. If Sir Arthur only signed the Convention
    _officially_, he ought, for the sake of his own character, at
    once to have remonstrated openly against all the terms of which he
    disapproved and which tarnished the splendour of his victory.

    The obvious conclusion to be drawn from his signature of the
    Convention was that, the opportunity of following up the victory
    having been lost, the surrender of Lisbon and the evacuation of the
    whole of Portugal by the French troops were advantages too great to be
    rejected and left to the uncertain decision of arms.

    But whatever may have been his private opinion, he was fortunate to
    rise superior to the disgrace which fell upon his commanding officers,
    probably because the victory of Vimiera must have served  to open the
    eyes of our Government to the folly of  submitting a man of his
    abilities to the command of  Generals higher in rank but far inferior
    in military  experience. It can but appear singular that a  General
    should be superseded in his command in the  very moment of battle, and
    that, before his successor  had time to grasp the reins of power, the
    latter  should in turn be himself succeeded, by yet another
    commander! It affords an extraordinary instance  either of indecision
    or of intrigue in the Cabinet!... Suffice it to say that this
    Triumvirate produced  as a monument to their glory the Convention
    of Cintra!


Following upon this event, Sir John Moore took command of the British
troops in Portugal, and advanced into Spain to relieve the Spaniards.
"There was," relates John Stanhope, "at this period no man in the army
whose character stood higher than that of Sir John Moore. He was a man of
the finest principles and of the most undaunted courage; by those under
his command he was adored. In the hour of battle he had the most perfect
self-possession and confidence both in his troops and in himself, which
alone was sufficient to ensure success. Though not a fortunate general, he
was esteemed one of the most able in the British service, and it gives me
pleasure to add, that I have since heard French officers who served
against him give the highest testimony in favour of his military conduct.
But his political opinions, which were hostile to Government, added to the
difficulty of his situation, and that circumstance undoubtedly weighed
upon his mind.... It is to this very susceptibility, this want of moral
courage and readiness to sacrifice his own reputation to the cause in
which he was engaged, that his misfortunes are principally to be
attributed."

The story of Moore's advance into Spain, as John Stanhope points out,
"undoubtedly betrays, both on his part and on that of the Government, a
most lamentable ignorance of the real state of that country. Because they
heard of Spanish armies in the field, they idly supposed that these were
armies in the accepted sense of the word and not a mere collection of
peasants, undisciplined and chiefly unarmed, officered by men as ignorant
of their profession as themselves and commanded by a General yet more
incompetent.--And with armies so composed they actually sent a British
force to co-operate! ... Sir John Moore had not been long in Spain before
he discovered the mistake that had been committed and the danger of his
situation; he saw at once that the course he ought to adopt was to retreat
upon Portugal, fall back upon his resources and rely entirely upon his own
judgment."

The story of his dilemma, and of how he was forced to act against his
convictions, is well known to posterity. After dwelling at length upon the
aspects of the situation, John Stanhope concludes:


    He made a rapid march on Madrid and was on the point of attacking
    Soult when he learnt, by an  intercepted dispatch, that Bonaparte was
    marching against him in person and that he was in immediate danger
    of being surrounded. The consequence  was his famous retreat. As to
    the manner in which that was conducted, I have heard a French
    General, who was employed in the actual army by which Moore was
    pursued, speak of his enemy's tactics with boundless admiration. But
    perhaps the highest praise which can be accorded to it is that the
    pursuit, in the first instance, was conducted by Bonaparte in person,
    and subsequently by Soult and Ney under his express directions, and
    yet that  Sir John Moore succeeded in effecting his escape without
    once being _entraîné_, and crowned his efforts by the victory of
    Corunna--a victory which, sealed as it was with his own blood, ought
    to wash out the memory of any errors which he may have committed. [10]


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope to John Spencer-Stanhope._
    RAMSGATE, _January 27th, 1809._

    You will have experienced the greatest grief for the loss of our
    gallant defender, Sir John Moore--a great blow to this country. But
    while deploring his death, we must not forget to glory in what our
    brave troops performed, tho' 'tis grievous to think how many lives
    have been lost, and what the remaining army have gone through, without
    lamenting that this almost unexampled victory will be of so little
    use.

    Last night this place was thrown into surprise and confusion by the
    arrival of one or two Transports with part of the 52nd, and of two or
    three other Regiments. The poor men were obliged to pass the night in
    the Transports as they could not come on shore till the orders came
    from Canterbury. Your father went last night to see some of them. He
    found a Serjeant who said they had no assistance from the Spaniards,
    but the accounts are so various I do not like to give too ready credit
    to what I hear, tho' I hear there is not the patriotism amongst them
    one should suppose.

    Lady Lilford, [11] that beauty _en masse_ (who is here with two
    daughters ill out of the four she has with her) was made very happy
    last night by the arrival of her Son who was in the 52nd, & of whom
    she had not been able to hear anything.

    We have put on a black ribbon for Major Stanhope, son to Lord
    Stanhope. [12]

    The Knoxs will have been in great anxiety, for they have a son in the
    52nd. Knox would be just in time to receive him.


The excitement occasioned by news of the victory of Corunna and the
lamentable death of Sir John Moore had scarcely abated when the attention
of the public was arrested by a _cause célèbre_ which occasioned an
unprecedented commotion.

The Duke of York, Commander-in-Chief, had for three years had a _liaison_
with Mrs Mary Anne Clarke, a woman of humble origin, but great powers of
fascination. It was at length discovered that she had been selling
commissions in the army for extortionate sums and sinecures in almost
every department of State, so that men of all classes, by her
intervention, had procured places and privileges as a matter of
favouritism or of merchandise. So much was this the case, that a footman
whom she liked was given a commission in the Army, and a clergyman, for
substantial payment, had secured the honour of preaching before the King.
On January 27th, 1809, Colonel Wardle, M.P. for Okehampton, brought
forward a motion of inquiry in the House, charging the Commander-in-Chief,
not only with having been a party to such practices, but of actually
participating in the proceeds. Instead of this inquiry taking place, as he
had intended, before a secret Committee, so great was the belief in the
Duke's innocence, that it was decided to give the investigation all the
publicity possible, and that the witnesses should be examined before the
whole House. This was singularly unfortunate, as the consequent scandal
was great.

On February 14th, 1809, Mrs Stanhope wrote:--


    The House sat till three this morning examining Mrs Clarke, who your
    father says is a lively, clever woman. End as it will, it must be
    disgraceful to the Duke of York. The King is much hurt at it. Except
    the floods, that is the only subject of conversation.


During the progress of the inquiry, Mrs Clarke appeared daily at the bar
of the House exquisitely dressed, witty, impudent, and answering the
attacks of the cross-examiners with a cleverness and fund of smart
repartee which completely foiled them. On March 8th, Mrs Stanhope wrote
again:--


    It is very extraordinary that the day should arrive and Colonel Wardle
    never have signified what his Motion is to be. Tierney wrote to him
    the day before yesterday, to which the answer was that he should not
    be at the House, and referred him to Lord Folkstone who did not appear
    till the Debate was begun; therefore all is conjecture. This conduct
    on the part of Mr Wardle will be in favour of the Duke, who I doubt
    not will be honourably acquitted.

    Mr Burrell says, what a fuss they make about the Duke's having what
    every man in Office must have--_a clerk_.

    Mr Stephens, brother-in-law to Wilberforce, made a speech of four
    hours on the Commission business. For three he commanded attention. It
    will be published.


Although the verdict eventually given declared charitably that the Duke
was exonerated from the charge of personal corruption, it was evident that
he had been guilty of culpable neglect of his duty, that he had signed
papers presented to him without troubling to read them, and had agreed to
every arrangement made by Mrs Clarke, although knowing that she was making
a traffic of such commissions.

The Duke, in consequence, was forced to resign his Commandership, although
in 1811, he was, to the indignation of many people, reinstated in it by
his brother, the Prince Regent.

Ere that date, however, another topic of conversation had been provided
for the social world.


    _February 25th, 1809._

    We are very quiet. To-night, we go to the  Opera, and on Wednesday,
    another dance at Mrs  Knox's and _voilà tout_. Your father was at
    the House till four, but I cannot give you any account of the
    Debate, as our thoughts have been engaged by the fire at Drury Lane.
    The whole fabrick  burned down in a very short time. Fortunately, as
    it is Lent, the Theatre was not open. It took fire during the
    rehearsal, and even some of the stalls are down. Charles has been
    there this morning and says there was only one life lost. It is the
    fifth theatre I remember being burnt. Canning was speaking when the
    account reached the House. The Debate was immediately interrupted,
    and it was proposed to adjourn, but Sheridan requested they would
    not postpone it for him, and it went on. Knox, with his good-humour,
    asked Anne if he was  not to have a ticket in my box, but she told
    him, as he could not want one at present, he should have one from
    the beginning of April.

    Your father and Lord James [13] go to the Speaker's to-night. We are
    grown very good and walk in Hyde Park every day. From Ramsgate, I hear
    that the place is full of poor Irish soldiers who are dying fast. I
    fear the mortality has been so great since the return of the Army that
    it will increase the loss of men largely.


The destruction of Drury Lane was rendered yet more tragic by the
conditions under which the news of such a startling disaster reached those
who were most affected by it. "On the 24th of February," Michael Kelly
relates, "Mr Richard Wilson gave a dinner to the principal actors and
officers of Drury Lane Theatre, at his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields. All
was mirth and glee; it was about 11 o'clock when Mr Wilson rose and drank
'Prosperity and Success to Drury Lane Theatre.' We filled a bumper to the
toast; and at the very moment when we were raising the glasses to our
lips, repeating '_Success to Drury Lane Theatre_' in rushed the younger
Miss Wilson and screamed out, '_Drury Lane Theatre is in flames!_' We ran
into the Square and saw the dreadful sight. The fire raged with such fury
that it perfectly illuminated Lincoln's Inn Fields with the brightness of
day. We proceeded to the scene of destruction. Messrs Peake and Dunn, the
Treasurers, dashed up the stairs, at the hazard of their lives, to the
iron Chest in which papers of the greatest consequence were deposited.
With the aid of two intrepid firemen they succeeded in getting the Chest
into the street--little else was saved.

"I had not only the poignant grief of beholding the magnificent structure
burning with merciless fury, but of knowing that all the scores of operas
which I had composed for the Theatre, the labour of years, were then
consuming. It was an appalling sight! And, with a heavy heart I walked
home to Pall Mall. At the door I found my servant waiting for me, who told
me that two gentlemen had just called, and, finding I was not at home had
said, 'Tell your master when he comes home, that Drury Lane is now in
flames, and that the Opera House shall go next.' I made every effort to
trace these obliging personages, but never heard anything more of them.

"Mr Sheridan was in the House of Commons when the dreadful event was made
known, and the Debate was one in which he was taking a prominent part. In
compliment to his feelings, it was moved that the House should adjourn.

"Mr Sheridan said that he gratefully appreciated such a mark of attention,
but he would not allow an adjournment, for 'Public duty ought to precede
all private interest,' and with Roman fortitude he remained at his post
while his Play House was burning." [14]

Sheridan, indeed, in the midst of such a misfortune, showed a nobility and
disinterestedness which did him infinite credit. Forgetful of self, he
begged the whole Theatrical Company to stand by each other, even at
personal loss, till the Theatre could be rebuilt, pointing out that while
the superior actors would have little difficulty in getting other
engagements, the inferior ones were in far other case. "Let us," he urged,
"make the general good our sole consideration. Elect yourselves into a
Committee and keep in remembrance even the poor sweepers of the stage,
who, with their children, must starve if not protected by your fostering
care."

Although the cause of the disaster was never ascertained, a general
impression prevailed that the Theatre had not been set on fire by
accident, and the mysterious message left at the house of the unhappy
manager seemed to confirm this suspicion. A report was also current that
the Prince of Wales had some time previously received an anonymous letter
telling him that all the principal public buildings should be burnt down
one after the other. Innumerable fires, indeed, occurred, and many people
were afraid of attending the Opera, since it was rumoured that a train of
gunpowder had been found under it. Hence, doubtless, the "good-humoured"
request of Mr Knox for a seat at the post of danger; and shortly
afterwards another mention of him occurs. He had attended a Drawing-room
held by the Queen, which had proved unusually crowded, owing to the
sympathy that all were anxious to show for the Royal family on the
acquittal of the Duke of York.


    GROSVENOR SQUARE, _March, 1809._

    Knox was presented yesterday, and his Mamma takes him to introduce to
    all her acquaintances, which he does not like. Her last ball was much
    too full, she might have opened her whole house, therefore, there was
    no good dancing till just before supper, when the Musick was sent
    away, to the sore annoyance of Anne, who was just beginning the dance
    with Mr Fraser. The Knoxs say that Charlotte Bouverie is a painted
    thing, but Archy was charmed with her, and her dancing. He has given
    up talking of home, both he and Lord James dine here again, the 11th,
    with the Primroses and Mr Knox, Lady Milton, Lord Euston, and some
    others. The Drawingroom was very full yesterday, and I believe the
    Queen spoke to everybody; she thinks there are times to be civil.

    I was surprised at Court to hear Knox say he thought it was
    everybody's duty to go to Court yesterday, as he supposed Queens would
    feel like other Mothers. I was delighted to hear so loyal a speech
    from one of that house, for though his father and his uncle are in
    possession of a place of £10,000 a year, I do not believe they are
    disposed that way.

    Miss Shuckburgh [15] was presented yesterday, and as she has a
    borough, Knox thought she might be worth looking at, but the Borough
    and Twelve Thousand a year must be thought of, by any one disposed to
    think of her.

    The Beaumonts are to be at Cheltenham on Monday, the Colonel is much
    better, a _very_ large Blister has roused his senses. [16]


    _March 22nd._

    You must put on a black coat for the Duchess of Bolton who died
    yesterday. [17]


    _March 30th, 1809._

    Your brother Philip is by the kindness of the Duke of Montrose, the
    Master of the Horse, appointed Page to His Majesty. We are ordering
    him his smart uniform, sword, etc., for him to go to Court in, to kiss
    the King and Queen's hand, the week after next.

    Marianne is busy learning to make shoes. Archy was so pleased that he
    has begun. The Shoemaker says he does very well, but he thinks Lord
    James [Murray] understands better. The Master is a Scotchman. What
    think you of Princess Charlotte learning the trade? It rather
    discomposes me, as it is not an amusement for a Queen of England.


A novel occupation was absorbing the attention of the fashionable world.
The craze for making shoes suddenly obsessed Society. Shoemakers
unexpectedly found themselves the most favoured of mortals. Lessons in
their art were demanded on all sides and at all costs. They were so busy
teaching it, they had little time to practise it. Men and women alike
would forego engagements while they strove to perfect themselves in the
new hobby; and the lady who, at balls, could boast that her feet had been
shod by her own fair hands was an object of envy to all the less talented.
[18]

The Stanhopes threw themselves with avidity into the new pastime, and
still in existence are the little cards which they had printed in jest
announcing that this new profession was "Carried on at Cannon Hall and
Grosvenor Square." Mrs Stanhope apparently viewed the occupation with
equanimity, save when it became the recreation of Royalty. Nevertheless it
seems occasionally to have interfered seriously with her arrangements.
That same month she writes:--


    I have not seen Archy of some days, but I think I shall this morning
    as I have sent an Opera ticket for either him or Lord James yesterday,
    and they neither of them appeared. They are so busy learning to make
    shoes that they can think of nothing else, and all engagements are
    forgotten.

    The new opera last night was excellent. The _Chasse of Henri Quatre_
    when we had _Viva, Viva, Nostro Re_, there was universal applause, and
    it was with spirit encored. The dancing excellent. Miss Gaylon does
    not dance after Saturday, as she is to marry a Mr Murray, a clergyman.

    Knox is gone to Ireland; I believe heartily glad to get from his
    Mamma's introductions. When he was introduced to the Duke of
    Gloucester, H.R.H. inquired what profession he was brought up to--and
    at the reply exclaimed--"What, _no_ profession!" Mrs Knox, who
    had presented him as an eldest son, coloured.

    I must conclude with an extract from the papers:--

    "A few days ago was married by special license, at St George's Church,
    Hanover Square, Mr Tho. Kay of Hickleton, near Doncaster, farrier and
    blacksmith, to Miss Sarah Walker, of Upper Grosvenor Street, London."

    The enclosed paragraph I send you, because the lady is my _laundry-
    maid_, and is at this moment at the wash-tub. She chose to marry a
    day or two before I came to Town, to the rare annoyance of my footman,
    Robert, as there had long been an attachment between them, though she
    is old enough for his mother. She has now announced her decision to
    the fashionable world.


Meanwhile the visit to Ireland does not seem to have been altogether happy
for Mr Knox. Various letters speak of his serious illness, and the
multiplicity of the remedies resorted to in his aid rivalled those
employed on behalf of Lady Elizabeth Lowther. On June 11th a certain Mr
Maconochie, a Scotch friend of John Stanhope, wrote from Edinburgh:--


    We had fine fun at Pitt's dinner. Lord Melville made a very good
    speech; we had good singing too. I went to the evening Collation on
    the King's Birthday where there was about 1,000 people, and the
    immortal memory of Mr Pitt drunk with three times three. The Whigs, I
    can assure you, are quite down in Scotland.

    By the way when I speak of Whigs, you have alarmed me very much about
    poor Knox. What is his complaint? You have never told me, you only say
    he is in great danger--no wonder, poor fellow, _with six physicians
    attending him_.


Later, Mr Maconochie furnished John Stanhope with news of another common
friend.


    I was in Edinburgh on Wednesday last. Mrs Playfair has got three or
    four youths from the South, among whom is the _aimable_ Lord John
    Russell [19] I suppose he intends to honour the speculative with his
    presence as Mrs Playfair told me she hoped I would not vote against
    him. I certainly shall not, as I think any _thing_ of the appearance
    of a gentleman will be of invaluable service.

    You must observe in the newspapers that old Sir William Douglas [20]
    is dead, and I am very sorry to say that owing to the negligence and
    delay of Frank Walker's papa, our friend William does not succeed
    nearly to what his Uncle intended, nor does he indeed get anything
    till after his father's death.

    The state of the Case is this:--Sir William met his agent, Mr Walker,
    at Harrogate, this summer, and he then desired him to make out a
    settlement for him by which he left _everything_ he should die
    possessed of to William. Mr Walker recommended him to delay it till he
    should get to Scotland that he might execute it formally. To this Sir
    William agreed. On his getting to London, however, he found himself so
    very unwell that he wrote to Mr Walker to say that he had no time to
    lose. Mr Walker, none the less, still delayed, and did not send the
    Deeds for above a fortnight, and Sir William had died two days before
    they reached Town. By the Will which is valid, and which was executed
    so long ago as the year 1790, his whole fortune is to be divided
    between three brothers, William's Papa, Mr Douglas (Sir James Shaw's
    partner), and one in America. The American one is since dead, leaving
    an only daughter, and there is a great question whether or not she
    will be entitled to anything.

    But let the worst come to the worst, our friend will have the Castle
    Douglas estate entire, about £7,000 per annum, besides his father's
    estate of Orchardton, £5,000 a year more. This he will in a great
    measure owe to his uncle, Mr Douglas's, kindness, who says that as far
    as possible, the unexecuted Deed shall be complied with. In the
    meantime, you see, he would have nothing till his father's death.

    But I have since heard that the old Boy is going to reside at Castle
    Douglas, and going to give his present place immediately to William.

    Douglas is no doubt disappointed, as he has lost above £150,000
    exclusive of what he will get, for actually the old Curmudgeon died
    worth, £4,000,000!


From such an event as the disposal of a fortune of four hundred thousand,
the thoughts of Mrs Stanhope were again distracted by the news in the
political world. A letter from Archibald Macdonald, dated July 23rd, 1809,
echoes the current gossip respecting Lord Wellesley, afterwards Viceroy of
Ireland, of whose movements with regard to the Continental campaign no one
could speak with certainty. "Is he gone to Spain or not?" questioned Mr
Macdonald. "I have heard it very confidently asserted that he is not
going, and that all his _gout_, etc., is merely affected to prevent his
being sent. In short, that he has changed all his plans and did not
venture to stir one step. On the other hand, it is said, that he is become
nearly quite imbecile." Meanwhile, although Sir Arthur Wellesley had
obtained victories at Oporto and at Talavera, having been unsupported by
the Spaniards he was obliged to retreat; and following on this, an
expedition sent out by the British Government to Walcheren under Lord
Chatham proved a terrible failure. The mutual recriminations of Canning
and Castlereagh led to their resignation and resulted in a duel which took
place between them on September 9th, and of which Archibald Macdonald
writes:--


    When we were at Glasgow Circuit the Lord Advocate shewed me Lord
    Castlereagh's _own_ account of the duel, and really from it I
    think there is no doubt he behaved most infamously. Canning was
    certainly not in the least to blame. I hope the King will still take
    Lord Wellesley and him into the Cabinet.

    Lord Melville intended to have gone to England in the beginning of the
    month; he has now, however, determined not to stir till everything is
    fixed, lest it should be said that he has gone a-place hunting.


In October Perceval succeeded the Duke of Portland as Prime Minister,
First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer, while Lord
Wellesley became Minister for Foreign Affairs. A rumour meanwhile reached
the Stanhopes with regard to their young friend Mr Pemberton Milnes which
roused their curiosity.


    What say you in the South to the Administration? Will it be possible
    for them to go on? 'Tis strongly reported here that Milnes refused
    being Chancellor of the Exchequer. True it is that a King's Messenger
    was sent to him, and I believe that something which he declined was
    offered to him, but surely not that great office. I live in dread of
    the United _Talents_ being called in! Lord Wellesley and Lord
    Melville might enable them to go on, but without them they will never
    do. I am still willing to hope that Peace is not signed and that
    Bonaparte may be ill.


The true story of the offer which was made to Pemberton Milnes was
afterwards thus recorded by John Stanhope:--


    Soon after he left Cambridge, Milnes made a bet of £300 to £500 with
    Kit Wilson, then a great character on the Turf--indeed for a long time
    Father of the Turf--that before seven years were over he should be
    Chancellor of the Exchequer. I do not mention this from mere rumour,
    for I heard Mr Wilson himself tell the story at dinner at Wentworth
    House, adding that the bet was drawn before the seven years were over.
    As will be seen by his letter to me, he was actually offered the
    Chancellorship of the Exchequer at five-and-twenty,--not perhaps
    exactly in the view in which he originally intended, as that place has
    now for years been considered as attached to the position of the Prime
    Minister, but still with a place in the Cabinet.


    _Robert Pemberton Milnes to Walter Spencer-Stanhope._
    _October 23rd, 1809._

    My Dear Sir,

    As I feel as strongly as I can the kind expressions of friendship that
    we have interchanged, and as I flatter myself on this occasion you may
    find an interest in what perhaps may be thought a leading event in my
    life, I sit down to send you a line informing you of my having reached
    London, having received a letter from Perceval which would have made
    it personally disrespectful to him had I declined coming. On my
    arrival here, and after he had submitted in great detail the history
    of the Cabinet discussions, he closed by no less an offer than saying
    he had the King's orders to propose to me the situation either of
    Chancellor of the Exchequer or Secretary of War,--the latter without a
    seat in the Cabinet, if I wished to lessen the responsibility.

    This was on Saturday, and I have employed the interval, not in
    reviewing the grounds upon which he stands as Prime Minister, which
    really on the first statement satisfied me there was no alternative,
    but in duly weighing my own situation and taking my measure (as it
    were) for my fitness for the Office. The result of my reflections has
    been to decline both offers. In so doing, you may imagine I had no
    ordinary feelings of personal vanity to contend with, nor a common
    self-satisfaction in thinking that the proposal had been made me. At
    the same time, dazzling as the place of a high Cabinet situation might
    have been, I do conscientiously assure you that I looked to my country
    more than to myself, and differing from Perceval in thinking that its
    interests would well be entrusted in my hands, I have answered
    decisively that I thought there were others who would conduct them
    better.

    I believe that he proposes offering the Chancellorship of the
    Exchequer to Rose, and the Secretaryship of War to Palmerston.

    In all this business, however well or ill determined on my part, you
    will be glad to hear that I think Perceval's case quite a triumphant
    one, and such as, when well stated to Parliament, will meet with sure
    support.

    I write in the greatest hurry.

    I am, dear Sir,
    Yours most faithfully,

    ROB. P. MILNES.


The tradition of this famous bet has long been related and disputed. The
incident was one of national importance, for it was the refusal of Mr
Milnes to accept this brilliant offer pressed upon him by Perceval which
gave Lord Palmerston admission into the Ministry, and started him on a
career which finally led him to the Premiership. Lord Palmerston's Maiden
Speech in the House was made in reply to one by Mr Milnes.

In Mrs Milnes's Diary, there is given the following account of the
reception of the offer by her husband:--


    One morning when we were at breakfast a King's Messenger drove up in a
    post-chaise-and-four with a despatch from Mr Perceval, offering Mr
    Milnes the choice of a seat in the Cabinet, either as Chancellor of
    the Exchequer or Secretary of War. Mr Milnes immediately said "Oh no!
    I will not accept either. With my temperament I should be dead in a
    year." I knelt and entreated that he should, and represented that it
    might be an advantage to our little boy, please God he lived, but all
    was to no purpose, and he went up to London to decline the most
    flattering and distinguished compliment ever known to have been paid
    to so young a man. [21]


Immediately after Christmas, as was their custom, the Stanhopes returned
to London, and 1810 found them once more resuming their life in Grosvenor
Square.


    _Mrs Spencer-Stanhope._
    _February 27th, 1810._

    London is not yet gay. Of Politicks, whether the present Ministers can
    stand seems doubtful. Lord Chatham in his examination throws blame on
    the Navy; his having presented a paper to the King without any
    communication with the other Ministers, has made sad work. The
    business in the House is every day, and all day, and all night.

    I have not seen any of your friends yet. Miss Acklom is not yet come.
    The body of Mr Eden [22] is found, & though he had been so long in the
    water, some Bank Notes were found perfect in his pocket.

    Sir T. Gascoigne [23] and Sir C. Turner [24] both dead, the former has
    left his fortune to the Olivers, and failing them and their issue to
    Lord Fitzwilliam--very distant, if any relation.

    Sir C. Turner, his house, stud, and plate at Newmarket to his groom
    there; everything else, for ever, to Lady Turner.

    Honoria Blake has married Captain Cadogan--amiable and poor. Lord and
    Lady Barnard to live at the Duchess of Bolton's old house--the two
    Lords of that name so near will make a confusion.


    _March 20th, 1810._

    There are more girls of high fashion just come out than has been known
    for many years.

    London, I never knew so dull.... I hear of no matches, the flirtations
    have not yet begun.


    _March 27th, 1810._

    Ministers have much to do this week. The Walcheren Debate came on
    yesterday and is to last Tuesday; Wednesday they repose from their
    labours, and Thursday and some say Friday the Debate is to last.

    We have sent to Mr Knox for the numbers, he came home at one, and he
    thought there would be no division. I suppose this question will
    decide the fate of the Ministers.

    There was a very interesting debate the other day on a statute,
    precluding all men who have written on hire for newspapers from
    becoming Members of Lincoln's Inn. A lawyer present described a case
    in which a young man of the highest expectations, most distinguished
    education, might be driven by necessity to accept of such an offer for
    existence. After enlarging with great feeling on such a case, he
    concluded by saying he had not described an imaginary situation, but
    his own, thirty years before. The applause of the House was excessive.
    I wish you may meet with the speech for it was very interesting.

    Sir F. Burdett has published a letter to say that the House of Commons
    have no right to imprison Gale Jones. [25] There is to be a debate
    upon it. I fear his conduct will do much mischief. His letter is
    addressed to his Constituents.

    Pole Carew got drunk at Oxford and made such a riot he was sent to the
    Castle. Think of Wentworth (Beaumont) coming from Cambridge to have a
    tooth out without leave!


[Illustration: SIR FRANCIS BURDETT, BT., M P.
_From an engraving by Wm. Sharp, after a picture by J. Northcote, R.A.
Painted while Sir Francis was a prisoner in the Tower._]


    _April, 1810._

    Yesterday early I went into the Park to see between 4,000 & 5,000
    Cavalry pass in Review before the Commander-in-Chief. The sight was
    highly gratifying, the morning beautiful, & as they entered from the
    Kensington Barracks & went down the Ride, all the carriages went up
    the drive, several open carriages and a large concourse of people both
    on foot & horseback. It was well-timed, as this morning there is to be
    a Meeting of the Electors of Westminster in Westminster Hall to
    address, I believe, the Commons for having deprived them of one of
    their Members, but the sight of the army yesterday will, I doubt not,
    keep all quiet.

    Sir F. Burdett is going to Law with the Speaker on the illegality of
    his Warrant. Thursday, the Foot Troops are all to be reviewed in the
    Park, the number about 17,000. Major Gibbs and his Regiment are on
    guard in the Square.... Since Sir F. Burdett was safe in the Tower the
    town has been perfectly quiet & all parties in the House join to
    condemn his conduct.


    _May 10th._

    This year there is quite a new Ball set. Mrs Beaumont's was the best
    of the year--a child's Ball from 8 to 10, and then a grown-up one, two
    suppers, magnificently done, never too full, nor too hot. I had a few
    people before, only 14 or 15 women and plenty of men. They danced to
    the Pianoforte.

    I invited Lady Eleanora Dundas. [26] Our visiting arose from an odd
    mistake. She called here and believed herself at Lady Dalkeith's. I,
    somewhat surprised at her invasion, of course, as in politeness bound,
    returned her visit--at which _she_ must have been much astonished,
    being still unaware she had called on _me_. When she came to return my
    return-visit, she was not a little shocked and surprised to discover
    where she had actually been when she supposed herself to be calling
    upon Lady Dalkeith! Archy says La Belle [27] is to marry the son of
    Picture Davis, at whose house they are, and who has bought Lord
    Leicester's house.

    London is very gay now. Mrs Knox has contributed more to its gaiety
    than anybody yet. Last night she had another excellent dance
    downstairs in two rooms. I was there till five, Esther (Acklom) with
    me, the little Lord still perseveres, but I am told it will not do.

    Archy has got a capital house, elegantly furnished, in Connaught
    Place, close to Tyburn, with a fine view of the Park.


    _May 22nd, 1810._

    To-day all the world are wishing it may continue fair, as Lady
    Buckinghamshire gives a Venetian Breakfast. I scarcely expect she will
    find the world fools enough to mask by daylight.

    The last week has not been gay, we have had nothing but dinners and
    assemblies.

    Lord James Murray was married on Saturday, [28] and this day at twelve
    Miss Dashwood gives her hand to Lord Ely, [29] all her first cousins
    to attend to the amount of forty. I hope he will behave well to her
    for she is truly amiable.

    To-day Esther goes to the Breakfast, to the Opera to-night with us,
    and then to sup at Devonshire House with Lady Caroline Wortley. I see
    no beau likely to succeed at present.


Towards the close of 1810 the mental affliction under which George III.
had so long suffered became more pronounced, and was declared by his
physicians to be incurable. In the February following, the Bill was passed
by which the Prince of Wales became King in all but name; and forthwith,
in the worst possible taste, he determined to celebrate the inauguration
of his regency by a fête at Carlton House, which should surpass all
previous entertainments given by him in its unrivalled magnificence. The
selfishness which prompted such callous indifference to the condition of
his father was accentuated by the fact that he fixed upon the date of the
old King's birthday as an appropriate anniversary on which to hold this
public rejoicing at the incapacity of the unfortunate monarch; while the
occasion was rendered still more memorable by the fact that from this
great festivity, not only was the Princess of Wales perforce excluded and
Mrs Fitzherbert, by a studied slight on his part, prevented from
attending, but even the unoffending Princess Charlotte, now verging on
womanhood and panting to taste that gladness of youth of which she had
known so little, was denied participation in the gaiety for which she
ardently longed.

None the less, all other members of the world of fashion went to the
entertainment, which proved one of surpassing brilliancy. The night was
fine, and the company, which began arriving soon after nine o'clock,
stayed till the small hours of the following morning. The walks adjacent
to the Palace were enclosed and converted into temporary rooms, glittering
with lights and festooned with flowers. The supper took place at two
o'clock in the morning in an exquisite grotto of rare exotics, and along
the centre of the table, which was 200 feet long, a river of pure water
flowed from a beautiful fountain at its head. Gold and silver fish
disported themselves in its limpid waters, while along its banks were
ranged cool green moss and aquatic flowers. In contrast with this scene of
simulated sylvan beauty, the daily papers relate with awe, if with some
lack of humour, that "the gold and silver plate used at the fête amounted
to seven tons. _Nearly a wagon load of it belonged to the late Sir W.
Pulteney and was borrowed for the occasion._" In the midst of this
astonishing display, surrounded by his most favoured friends and waited on
by sixty servitors, sat the Regent, resplendent in his finest clothes and
swelling in the plenitude of his new importance. To him it mattered
nothing that his daughter was breaking her heart in the dullness of
Windsor, that his wife was chafing in her seclusion at Blackheath, or that
the woman who loved him knew herself publicly humiliated by his attitude
towards her; yet the condemnation meted out freely to his conduct, even by
those who accepted his hospitality, finds no echo in the correspondence of
Mrs Stanhope, who with tireless energy attended the royal fête previous to
starting on the long journey to Cannon Hall.


    CANNON HALL, _July 1st, 1811._

    The day before I left Town I attended the most magnificent fête I ever
    saw, given by the Prince Regent. It was to have been on the King's
    Birthday, but the preparations could not be ready in time. Three
    Thousand people were invited and there was room at supper for all, the
    tables were in the temporary rooms in the garden, and it was more like
    Vauxhall than anything I know to compare it to. All our princes, the
    Duke of York & Princess Sophia & the Duke of Gloucester were there.

    We did not get home till 1/2 past 5 & started on our journey to
    Yorkshire at 3. I hear the public are to be admitted to see the
    _Hébris_ of our feast.


Unfortunately, this well-intentioned decision on the part of the Prince
Regent was attended with a dire result. "The condescension of the Prince,"
relate the papers, "in extending the permission to view, for three days
longer, the arrangements for the late fête at Carlton House, has nearly
been attended with fatal consequences. Wednesday being the last day of the
public being admitted, many persons took their station at the gates so
early as seven o'clock. By twelve the line of carriages reached down St
James's Street, as far as Piccadilly, and the crowd of pedestrians halfway
up the Haymarket. At three o'clock the crowd had so much increased, that
the Guards were forced to give way; several ladies were unfortunately
thrown down and trampled upon; and we regret to learn that some were
seriously hurt, among whom were Miss Shum of Bedford Square, and a young
lady, daughter of a gentleman at the British Museum. Another young lady
presented a shocking spectacle; she had been trodden on till her face was
quite black from strangulation, and every part of her body bruised to such
a degree as to leave little hopes of her recovery."

"I hear," wrote Mrs Stanhope from her safe retreat in Yorkshire, "that no
one knew what to do nor how to disperse the people. At last, the Dukes of
Kent and Cumberland ordered ladders to be brought, and, climbing up on to
the wall of the court-yard, they personally announced loudly that the
Prince Regent had given orders that the house should be shut up and no
more people admitted. There were numbers wounded, however, before the
immense crowd could get away. What a mercy Esther Acklom did not go, as I
know that she intended doing!"

Esther Acklom, to whom constant reference is made in the correspondence of
Mrs Stanhope, was the only daughter and heiress of Richard Acklom, Esq.,
of Wiseton Hall, Nottinghamshire. She was much sought after in society on
account of her reputed wealth; and although stout and somewhat plain in
appearance, she was a decided flirt, and extremely fond of amusement.

Partly owing to the fact that her mother was in delicate health, partly to
the proximity of her father's house in Lower Grosvenor Street to that of
Mr Stanhope, she was the constant associate of the young Stanhopes, and
attended many balls and routs chaperoned by their mother. There was,
indeed, much to recommend her companionship. Clever, well-read, lively in
manner and witty in conversation, she was invariably agreeable, despite
the fact that her speech was apt to be too frank and her determination too
unswerving to render her universally popular. Of her extraordinary
decision of character, indeed, her life furnishes more than one striking
instance, and an illustration of this may be given, which occurred when
she was but fifteen years of age.

She was then journeying abroad with her parents, when, in common with some
other English travellers, they were detained at Vienna on its capture by
Napoleon. The danger was imminent. Once plunged into a foreign prison, it
was impossible to say when or by what means they might escape thence. In
such a dilemma none knew what to do or to advise; but Esther Acklom was
equal to the occasion. Hearing that the military commandant was Marshal
Mortier, who had been known to her family in England, she took her maid,
and went off to interview him. She found the great man seated in the Hotel
de Ville, surrounded by a large staff, listening to the complaints of the
burghers and administering justice. She presented her petition, but he
scarcely glanced at it, and roughly bade her to stand aside till others
had been attended to who were of more importance. Her maid, terrified at
his manner, implored her young mistress to come away, but Esther, nothing
daunted, stood her ground. She had shrewdly observed that an aide-de-camp
of the Emperor was by the side of the marshal, and concluding that this
fact might account for his manner, she patiently awaited the turn of
events. Nor was she wrong. In course of time the aide-de-camp departed,
and the commandant then politely inquired in what he could serve her. She
explained, and, evidently struck by her courage, he further asked in the
kindest manner how many passes she required. Again she had presence of
mind to perceive the drift of his question, and to see that he was
anxious, if she so desired, to aid her friends as well as herself. She
boldly answered, three, in the hope of serving two English families of her
father's acquaintance. To her delight, the passes were at once handed to
her, and within a few hours the three carriages were hastening from
Vienna.

Even then her adventures were not at an end. An English family, who had
failed in securing a pass, decided, as a forlorn hope, to follow in the
wake of the other carriages on the chance that, in the confusion of so
many vehicles leaving the city, they might effect their departure under
cover of the passports of their friends. As was to be expected the attempt
failed. The Official on guard allowed the three carriages with passes to
drive through the gates, but the fourth was at once arrested and ordered
to return. Vainly did its frightened occupants entreat and expostulate,
the man was obdurate, and they had given up all for lost, when the clever
girl who had secured the safety of the rest of the party came to their
rescue.

Thrusting her head out of the carriage in which she was seated, Esther
looked back at them with well assumed anger. "Why on earth don't you go
back to your hotel and fetch your pass," she cried impatiently, "instead
of giving all this trouble? It is absurd! We will, of course, wait here
till your return!" So convincing was her indignation, and so complete her
assurance, that the Official was deceived. The fourth carriage received
permission to pass the barrier, and the fugitives hastened to make good
their escape, showering blessings on the young girl whose coolness and
presence of mind had saved them.

A character of so much individuality and resource doubtless appealed
strongly to the young Stanhopes, and Esther, besides being their constant
