ster, nor friend,
nor any other.  None of his blood was there who could share with him the
constructive work he had set out to do.  There was no friend whose fate
was part of his own.  There was the Boss Doctor: but Rockwell was tied to
his own responsibilities, and he could not give up, of course, would not
give up his life to the schemes of another.  There were a dozen men whom
he had helped to forge ahead by his own schemes, but their destinies were
not linked with his.  Only one whose life was linked with his could be
trusted to be his eyes, to be the true reporter of all he did, had done,
or planned to do.  Only one who loved him.

But even one who loved him could not carry through his incompleted work
against the assaults of his enemies, who were powerful, watchful, astute,
and merciless; who had a greed which set money higher than all else in
the world.  They were of the new order of things in the New World.  The
business of life was to them not a system of barter and exchange, a
giving something of value to get something of value, with a margin of
profit for each, and a sense of human equity behind; it was a cockpit
where one man sought to get what another man had--and get it almost
anyhow.

It was the work of the faro-bank man, whose sleight of hand deceived the
man that carried the gun.

All the old humanity and good-fellowship of the trader, the man who
exchanged, as it was in the olden days of the world and continued in
greater or less degree till the present generation--all that was gone.
It was held in contempt.  It had prevailed when men were open robbers and
filibusters and warriors, giving their lives, if need be, to get what
they wanted, making force their god.  It had triumphed over the violence
and robbery of the open road until the dying years of one century and the
young years of a new century.  Then the day of the trickster came--and
men laughed at the idea of fair exchange and strove to give an illusive
value for a thing of real value--the remorseless sleight of hand which
the law could not reach.  The desire to get profit by honest toiling was
dying down to ashes.

Against such men had Ingolby worked--the tricksters, the manipulators.
At the basis of his schemes was organization and the economy which
concentrated and conserved energy begets, together with its profit.
He had been the enemy of waste, the apostle of frugality and thrift;
and it was that which had enabled him, in his short career, to win the
confidence of the big men behind him in Montreal, to make good every
step of the way.  He had worked for profit out of legitimate product
and industry and enterprise, out of the elimination of waste.  It was his
theory (and his practice) that no bit of old iron, no bolt or screw, no
scrap of paper should be thrown away; that the cinders of the engines
could and should be utilized for that which they would make; and that was
why there was a paper-mill and foundry on the Sagalac at Manitou.  That
was why and how, so far, he had beaten the tricksters.

But while his schemes flashed before his mind, as the opiate suspended
him in the middle heaven between sleep and waking, the tricksters and
manipulators came hurrying after him like marauders that waited for the
moment when they could rush the camp in the watches of the night.  His
disordered imagination saw the ruin and wreck of his work, the seizure of
what was his own--the place of control on his railways, the place of the
Master Man who cared infinitely more to see his designs accomplished than
for the profit they would bring to himself.  Yesterday he had been just
at the top of the hill.  The key in his fingers was turning in the lock
which would make safe the securities of his life and career, when it
snapped, and the world grew dark as the black curtain fell and shut out
the lighted room from the wayfarer in the gloom.  Then, it was, came the
opaque blackness which could be felt, and his voice calling in despair:
"Blind!  I am blind!"

He did not know that he had taken an opiate, that his friend had
mercifully atrophied his rebellious nerves.  These visions he was seeing
were terribly true, but they somehow gave him no physical torture.  It
was as though one saw an operation performed upon one's body with the
nerves stilled and deadened by ether.  Yet he was cruelly conscious of
the disaster which had come to him.  For a time at least.  Then his mind
seemed less acute, the visions came, then without seeing them go, they
went.  And others came in broken patches, shreds, and dreams,
phantasmagoria of the brain, and at last all were mingled and confused;
but as they passed they seemed to burn his sight.  How he longed for a
cool bandage over his eyes, for a soft linen which would shut out the
cumuli of broken hopes and designs, life's goals obliterated!  He had had
enough of the black procession of futile things.

His longing was not denied, for even as he roused himself from the
oblivion coming on him, as though by a last effort to remember his dire
misfortune, maybe his everlasting tragedy, something soothing and soft
like linen dipped in dew was laid upon his forehead.  A cool, delicious
hand covered his eyes caressingly; a voice from spheres so far away that
worlds were the echoing points of the sound, came whispering to him like
a stir of wings in a singing grove.  With a last effort to remain in the
waking world, he raised his head so very little, but fell gently back
again with one sighing word on his lips:

"Fleda!"

It was no illusion.  Fleda had come from her own night of trouble to his
motherless, wifeless home, and would not be denied admittance by the
nurse.  It was Jim Beadle who admitted her.

"He'd be mad if he knew we wouldn't let her come," Jim had said to the
nurse.

It was Fleda who had warned Ingolby of the dangers that surrounded him
--the physical as well as business dangers.  She came now to serve the
blind victim of that Fate which she had seen hovering over him.

The renegade daughter of the Romanys, as Jethro Fawe had called her, was,
for the first time, in the house of her master Gorgio.




CHAPTER XIII

THE CHAIN OF THE PAST

For once in its career, Lebanon was absolutely united.  The blow that had
brought down the Master Man had also struck the town between the eyes,
and there was no one--friend or foe of Ingolby--who did not regard it as
an insult and a challenge.  It was now known that the roughs of Manitou,
led by the big river-driver, were about to start on a raid upon Lebanon
and upon Ingolby at the very moment the horseshoe did its work.  All
night there were groups of men waiting outside Ingolby's house.  They
were of all classes-carters, railway workers, bartenders, lawyers,
engineers, bankers, accountants, merchants, ranchmen, carpenters,
insurance agents, manufacturers, millers, horse-dealers, and so on.

Some prayed for Ingolby's life, others swore viciously; and those who
swore had no contempt for those who prayed, while those who prayed were
tolerant of those who swore.  It was a union of incongruous elements.
Men who had nothing in common were one in the spirit of faction; and all
were determined that the Orangeman, whose funeral was fixed for this
memorable Saturday, should be carried safely to his grave.  Civic pride
had almost become civic fanaticism in Lebanon.  One of the men beaten by
Ingolby in the recent struggle for control of the railways said to the
others shivering in the grey dawn: "They were bound to get him in the
back.  They're dagos, the lot of 'em.  Skunks are skunks, even when you
skin 'em."

When, just before dawn, old Gabriel Druse issued from the house into
which he had carried Ingolby the night before, they questioned him
eagerly.  He had been a figure apart from both Lebanon and Manitou, and
they did not regard him as a dago, particularly as it was more than
whispered that Ingolby "had a lien" on his daughter.  In the grey light,
with his long grizzled beard and iron-grey, shaggy hair, Druse looked
like a mystic figure of the days when the gods moved among men like
mortals.  His great height, vast proportions, and silent ways gave him a
place apart, and added to the superstitious feeling by which he was
surrounded.

"How is he?" they asked whisperingly, as they crowded round him.

"The danger is over," was the slow, heavy reply.  He will live, but he
has bad days to face."

"What was the danger?" they asked.  "Fever--maybe brain fever," he
replied.  "We'll see him through," someone said.

"Well, he cannot see himself through," rejoined the old man solemnly.
The enigmatical words made them feel there was something behind.

"Why can't he see himself through?" asked Osterhaut the universal, who
had just arrived from the City Hall.

"He can't see himself through because he is blind," was the heavy answer.

There was a moment of shock, of hushed surprise, and then a voice burst
forth: "Blind--they've blinded him, boys!  The dagos have killed his
sight.  He's blind, boys!"

A profane and angry muttering ran through the crowd, who were thirsty,
hungry, and weary with watching.

Osterhaut held up the horseshoe which had brought Ingolby down.  "Here it
is, the thing that done it.  It's tied with a blue ribbon-for luck," he
added ironically.  "It's got his blood on it.  I'm keeping it till
Manitou's paid the price of it.  Then I'll give it to Lebanon for keeps."

"That's the thing that did it, but where's the man behind the thing?"
snarled a voice.

Again there was a moment's silence, and then Billy Kyle, the veteran
stage-driver, said: "He's in the jug, but a gaol has doors, and doors'll
open with or without keys.  I'm for opening the door, boys."

"What for?" asked a man who knew the answer, but who wanted the thing
said.

"I spent four years in Arizona, same as Jowett," Billy Kyle answered,
"and I got in the way of thinking as they do there, and acting just as
quick as you think.  I drove stage down in the Verde Valley.  Sometimes
there wasn't time to bring a prisoner all the way to a judge and jury,
and people was busy, and hadn't time to wait for the wagon; so they done
what was right, and there was always a tree that would carry that kind o'
fruit for the sake of humanity.  It's the best way, boys."

"This isn't Arizona or any other lyncher's country," said Halliday, the
lawyer, making his way to the front.  "It isn't the law, and in this
country it's the law that counts.  It's the Gover'ment's right to attend
to that drunken dago that threw the horseshoe, and we've got to let the
Gover'ment do it.  No lynching on my plate, thank you.  If Ingolby could
speak to us, you can bet your boots it's what he'd say."

"What's your opinion, boss?" asked Billy Kyle of Gabriel Druse, who had
stood listening, his chin on his breast, his sombre eyes fixed on them
abstractedly.

At Kyle's question his eyes lighted up with a fire that was struck from a
flint in other spheres, and he answered: "It is for the ruler to take
life, not the subject.  If it is a man that rules, it is for him; if it
is the law that rules, it is for the law.  Here, it is the law.  Then it
is not for the subject, and it is not for you."

"If he was your son?" asked Billy Kyle.

"If he was my son, I should be the ruler, not the law," was the grim,
enigmatic reply, and the old man stalked away from them towards the
bridge.

"I'd bet he'd settle the dago's hash that done to his son what the
Manitou dagos done to Ingolby--and settle it quick," remarked Lick
Farrelly, the tinsmith.

"I bet he's been a ruler or something somewhere," remarked Billy Kyle.

"I bet I'm going home to breakfast," interposed Halliday, the lawyer.
"There's a straight day's work before us, gentlemen," he added, "and we
can't do anything here.  Orangemen, let's hoof it."

Twenty Orangemen stepped out from the crowd.  Halliday was a past master
of their lodge, and they all meant what he meant.  They marched away in
procession--to breakfast and to a meeting of the lodge.  Others straggled
after, but a few waited for the appearance of the doctor.  When the sun
came up and Rockwell, pale and downcast, issued forth, they gathered
round him, and walked with him through the town, questioning, listening
and threatening.

A few still remained behind at Ingolby's house.  They were of the devoted
slaves of Ingolby who would follow him to the gates of Hades and back
again, or not back if need be.

The nigger barber, Berry, was one; another was the Jack-of-all-trades,
Osterhaut, a kind of municipal odd-man, with the well-known red hair, the
face that constantly needed shaving, the blue serge shirt with a scarf
for a collar, the suit of canvas in the summer and of Irish frieze in the
winter; the pair of hands which were always in his own pocket, never in
any one else's; the grey eye, doglike in its mildness, and the long nose
which gave him the name of Snorty.  Of the same devoted class also was
Jowett who, on a higher plane, was as wise and discerning a scout as any
leader ever had.

While old Berry and Osterhaut and all the others were waiting at
Ingolby's house, Jowett was scouting among the Manitou roughs for the
Chief Constable of Lebanon, to find out what was forward.  What he had
found was not reassuring, because Manitou, conscious of being in the
wrong, realized that Lebanon would try to make her understand her wrong-
doing; and that was intolerable.  It was clear to Jowett that, in spite
of all, there would be trouble at the Orange funeral, and that the
threatened strike would take place at the same time in spite of Ingolby's
catastrophe.  Already in the early morning revengeful spirits from
Lebanon had invaded the outer portions of Manitou and had taken
satisfaction out of an equal number of "Dogans," as they called the Roman
Catholic labourers, one of whom was carried to the hospital with an elbow
out of joint and a badly injured back.

With as much information as he needed, Jowett made his way back to
Lebanon, when, at the approach to the bridge, he met Fleda hurrying with
bent head and pale, distressed face in his own direction.  Of all Western
men none had a better appreciation of the sex that takes its toll of
every traveller after his kind than Aaron Jowett.  He had been a real
buck in his day among those of his own class, and though the storm of his
romances had become but a faint stirring of leaves which had tinges of
days that are sear, he still had an eye unmatched for female beauty.  The
sun which makes that northern land a paradise in summer caught the gold-
brown hair of Gabriel Druse's daughter, and made it glint and shine.  It
coquetted with the umber of her eyes and they grew luminous as a jewel;
it struck lightly across the pale russet of her cheek and made it like an
apple that one's lips touch lovingly, when one calls it "too good to
eat."  It made an atmosphere of half-silver and half-gold with a touch of
sunrise crimson for her to walk in, translating her form into melting
lines of grace.

Jowett knew that Druse's daughter was on her way to the man who had
looked once, looked twice, looked thrice into her eyes and had seen there
his own image; and that she had done the same; and that the man, it might
be, would never look into their dark depths again.  He might speak once,
he might speak twice, he might speak thrice, but would it ever be the
same as the look that needed no words?

When he crossed Fleda Druse's pathway she stopped short.  She knew that
Jowett was Ingolby's true friend.  She had seen him often, and he was
intimately associated with that day when she had run the Carillon Rapids
and had lain (for how long she never dared to think) in Ingolby's arms in
the sight of all the world.  First among those who crowded round her at
Carillon that day were Jowett and Osterhaut, who had tried to warn her.

"You are going to him?" she said now with confidence in her eyes, and by
the intimacy of the phrase (as though she could speak of Ingolby only as
him) their own understanding was complete.

"To see how he is and then to do other things," Jowett answered.

There was silence for a moment in which they moved slowly forward, and
then she said: "You were at Barbazon's last night?"

"When that Gipsy son of a dog gave him away!" he assented.  "I never
heard anything like the speech Ingolby made.  He had them in the throat.
The Gipsy would have had nothing out of it, if it hadn't been for the
horseshoe.  But in spite of the giveaway, Ingolby was getting them where
they were soft-fairly drugging them with good news.  You never heard such
dope.  My, he was smooth!  The golden, velvet truth it was, too.  That's
the only kind he has in stock; and they were sort of stupefied and locoed
as they chewed his word-plant.  Cicero must have been a saucy singer of
the dictionary, and Paul the Apostle had a dope of his own you couldn't
buy, but the gay gamut that Ingolby run gives them all the cold good-
bye."

She held herself very still as he spoke.  There was, however, a strange,
lonely look in her eyes.  The man lying asleep in the darkness of body
and mind yonder was not really her lover, for he had said no word direct
of love to her, and she knew him so little, how could she love him?  Yet
there was something between them which had its authority over their
lives, overcoming even that maiden modesty which was in contrast to the
bold, physical thing she had done in running the Carillon Rapids those
centuries ago when she was young and glad-wistfully glad.  So much had
come since that day, she had travelled so far on the highway of Fate,
that she looked back from peak to peak of happening to an almost
invisible horizon.  So much had occurred and she felt so old this
morning; and yet there was in her heart the undefined feeling that she
must keep her radiant Spring of life for the blind Gorgio if he needed
it-if he needed it.  Would he need it, robbed of sight and with his life-
work murdered?

She shuddered as she thought of what it meant to him.  If a man is to
work, he must have eyes to see.  Yet what had she to do with it, after
all?  She had no right to go to him even as she was going.  Yet had she
not the right of common humanity?  This Gorgio was her friend.  Did not
the world know that he had saved her life?

As they came to the Lebanon end of the bridge, Fleda turned to Jowett
and, commenting on his description of the scene at Barbazon, said:
"He is a great man, but he trusts too much and risks too much.  That was
no place for him."

"Big men like him think they can do anything," Jowett replied, a little
ironically, subtly trying to force a confession of her preference for
Ingolby.

He succeeded.  Her eye lighted with indignation.  She herself might
challenge him, but she would not allow another to do so.

"It is not the truth," she rejoined sharply.  "He does not measure
himself against the world so.  He is like--like a child," she added.

"It seems to me all big men are like that," Jowett rejoined; "and he's
the biggest man the West has seen.  He knows about every man's business
as though it was his own.  I can get a margin off most any man in the
West on a horse-trade, but I'd look shy about doing a trade with him.
You can't dope a horse so he won't know.  He's on to it, sees it-sees it
like as if it was in glass.  Sees anything and everything, and--" He
stopped short.  The Master Gorgio could no longer see, and his henchman
flushed like a girl at his "break"; though, as a horse-dealer, he had in
his time listened without shame to wilder, angrier reproaches than most
men living.

She glanced at him, saw his confusion, forgave and understood him.

"It was not the horseshoe, it was not the Gipsy," she returned.  "They
did not set it going.  It would not have happened but for one man."

"Yes, it's Marchand, right enough," answered Jowett, "but we'll get him
yet.  We'll get him with the branding-iron hot."

"That will not put things right if--" she paused, then with a great
effort she added: "Does the doctor think he will get it back and that--"

She stopped suddenly in an agitation he did not care to see and he turned
away his head.

"Doctor doesn't know," he answered.  "There's got to be an expert.  It'll
take time before he gets here, but--" he could not help but say it,
seeing how great her distress was--"but it's going to come back.  I've
seen cases--I saw one down on the Border"--how easily he lied!--"just
like his.  It was blasting that done it--the shock.  But the sight come
back all right, and quick too--like as I've seen a paralizite get up all
at once and walk as though he'd never been locoed.  Why, God Almighty
don't let men like Ingolby be done like that by reptiles same's
Marchand."

"You believe in God Almighty?" she said half-wonderingly, yet with
gratitude in her tone.  "You understand about God?"

"I've seen too many things not to try and deal fair with Him and not try
to cheat Him," he answered.  "I see things lots of times that wasn't ever
born on the prairie or in any house.  I've seen--I've seen enough," he
said abruptly, and stopped.

"What have you seen?" she asked eagerly.  "Was it good or bad?"

"Both," he answered quickly.  "I was stalked once--stalked I was by night
and often in the open day, by some sickly, loathsome thing, that even
made me fight it with my hands--a thing I couldn't see.  I used to fire
buckshot at it, enough to kill an army, till I near went mad.  I was
really and truly getting loony.  Then I took to prayin' to the best woman
I ever knowed.  I never had a mother, but she looked after me--my sister,
Sara, it was.  She brought me up, and then died and left me without
anything to hang on to.  I didn't know all I'd lost till she was gone.
But I guess she knew what I thought of her; for she come back--after I'd
prayed till I couldn't see.  She come back into my room one night when
the cursed 'haunt' was prowling round me, and as plain as I see you, I
saw her.  'Be at peace,' she said, and I spoke to her, and said, 'Sara-
why, Sara' and she smiled, and went away into nothing--like a bit o'
cloud in the sun."

He stopped, and was looking straight before him as though he saw a
vision.

"It went?" she asked breathlessly.

"It went like that--" He made a swift, outward gesture.  "It went and it
never came back; and she didn't either--not ever.  My idee is," he added,
"that there's evil things that mebbe are the ghost-shapes of living men
that want to do us harm; though, mebbe, too, they're the ghost-shapes of
men that's dead, but that can't get on Over There.  So they try to get
back to us here; and they can make life Hell while they're stalking us."

"I am sure you are right," she said.

She was thinking of the loathsome thing which haunted her room last
night.  Was it the embodied second self of Jethro Fawe, doing the evil
that Jethro Fawe, the visible corporeal man, wished to do?  She
shuddered, then bent her head and fixed her mind on Ingolby, whose house
was not far away.  She felt strangely, miserably alone this morning.  She
was in that fluttering state which follows a girl's discovery that she is
a woman, and the feeling dawns that she must complete herself by joining
her own life with the life of another.

She showed no agitation, but her repression gave an almost statuesque
character to her face and figure.  The adventurous nature of her early
life had given her a power to meet shock and danger with coolness, and
though the news of Ingolby's tragedy had seemed to freeze the vital
forces in her, and all the world became blank for a moment, she had
controlled herself and had set forth to go to him, come what might.

As she entered the street where Ingolby lived, she suddenly realized the
difficulty before her.  She might go to him, but by only one right could
she stay and nurse him, and that right she did not possess.  He would,
she knew, understand her, no matter how the world babbled.  Why should
the world babble?  What woman could have designs upon a blind man?  Was
not humanity alone sufficient warrant for staying by his side?  Yet would
he wish it?  Suddenly her heart sank; but again she remembered their last
parting, and once more she was sure he would be glad to have her with
him.

It flashed upon her how different it would have been, if he and she had
been Romanys, and this thing had happened over there in the far lands she
knew so well.  Who would have hinted at shame, if she had taken him to
her father's tan or gone to his tan and tended him as a man might tend a
man?  Humanity would have been the only convention; there would have been
no sex, no false modesty, no babble, no reproach.  If it had been a man
as old as the oldest or as young as Jethro Fawe it would have made no
difference.

As young as Jethro Fawe!  Why was it that now she could never think of
the lost and abandoned Romany life without thinking also of Jethro Fawe?
Why should she hate him, despise him, revolt against him, and yet feel
that, as it were by invisible cords, he drew her back to that which she
had forsworn, to the Past which dragged at her feet?  The Romany was not
dead in her; her real struggle was yet to come; and in a vague but
prophetic way she realized it.  She was not yet one with the settled
western world.

As they came close to Ingolby's house she heard marching footsteps, and
in the near distance she saw fourscore or more men tramping in military
order.  "Who are they?" she asked of Jowett.

"Men that are going to see law and order kept in Lebanon," he answered.




CHAPTER XIV

SUCH THINGS MAY NOT BE

A few hours later Fleda slowly made her way homeward through the woods on
the Manitou side of the Sagalac.  Leaving Ingolby's house, she had seen
men from the ranches and farms and mines beyond Lebanon driving or riding
into the town, as though to a fair or fete-day.  Word of anticipated
troubles had sped through the countryside, and the innate curiosity of
a race who greatly love a row brought in sensation-lovers.  Some were
skimming along in one-horse gigs, a small bag of oats dangling beneath
like the pendulum of a great clock.  Others were in double or triple-
seated light wagons--"democrats" they were called.  Women had a bit of
colour in their hats or at their throats, and the men had on clean white
collars and suits of "store-clothes"--a sign of being on pleasure bent.
Young men and girls on rough but serviceable mounts cantered past,
laughing and joking, and their loud talking grated on the ear of the girl
who had seen a Napoleon in the streets of his Moscow.

Presently there crossed her path a gruesomely ugly hearse, with glass
sides and cheap imitation ostrich plumes drawn by gorged ravens of horses
with egregiously long tails, and driven by an undertaker's assistant,
who, with a natural gaiety of soul, displayed an idiotic solemnity by
dragging down the corners of the mouth.  She turned away in loathing.

Her mind fled to a scene far away in the land of the Volga when she was a
child, where she had seen buried two men, who had fought for their
insulted honour till both had died of their wounds.  She remembered the
white and red sashes and the gay scarfs worn by the women at the burial,
the jackets with great silver buttons worn by the men, and the silver-
mounted pistols and bright steel knives in the garish belts.  She saw
again the bodies of the two gladiators, covered with crimson robes,
carried shoulder-high on a soft bed of interlaced branches to the graves
beneath the trees.  There, covered with flowers and sprigs and
evergreens, ribbons and favours, the kindly earth hid them, cloaked for
their long sleep, while women wept, and men praised the dead, and went
back to the open road again cheerily, as the dead would have them do.

If he had died--the man she had just left behind in that torpid sleep
which opiates bring--his body would have been carried to his last home in
just such a hideous equipage as this hearse.  A shiver of revolt went
through her frame, and her mind went to him as she had seen him lying
between the white sheets of his bed, his hands, as they had lain upon the
coverlet, compact of power and grace, knit and muscular and vital--not
the hand for a violin but the hand for a sword.

As she had laid her hand upon his hot forehead and over his eyes, he had
unconsciously spoken her name.  That had told her more of what really was
between them than she had ever known.  In the presence of the catastrophe
that must endanger, if not destroy the work he had done, the career he
had made, he thought of her, spoke her name.

What could she do to prevent his ruin?  She must do something, else she
had no right to think of him.  As though her thoughts had summoned him,
she came suddenly upon Felix Marchand at a point where her path resolved
itself into two, one leading to Manitou, the other to her own home.

There was a malicious glint in the greenish eyes of the dissolute
demagogue as he saw her.  His hat made a half-circle before it found his
head again.

"You pay early visits, mademoiselle," he said, his teeth showing rat-
like.

"And you late ones?" she asked meaningly.

"Not so late that I can't get up early to see what's going on," he
rejoined in a sour voice.

"Is it that those who beat you have to get up early?" she asked
ironically.

"No one has got up earlier than me lately," he sneered.

"All the days are not begun," she remarked calmly.

"You have picked up quite an education since you left the road and the
tan," he said with the look of one who delivers a smashing blow.

"I am not yet educated enough to know how you get other people to commit
your crimes for you," she retorted.

"Who commits my crimes for me?"  His voice was sharp and even anxious.

"The man who told you I was once a Gipsy--Jethro Fawe."

Her instinct had told her this was so.  But had Jethro told all?  She
thought not.  It would need some catastrophe which threw him off his
balance to make him speak to a Gorgio of the inner things of Romany life;
and child--marriage was one of them.

He scoffed.  "Once a Gipsy always a Gipsy.  Race is race, and you can't
put it off and on like--your stocking."

He was going to say chemise, but race was race, and vestiges of native
French chivalry stayed the gross simile on the lips of the degenerate.
Fleda's eyes, however, took on a dark and brooding look which, more
than anything else, showed the Romany in her.  With a murky flood of
resentment rising in her veins, she strove to fight back the half-savage
instincts of a bygone life.  She felt as though she could willingly
sentence this man to death as her father had done Jethro Fawe that very
morning.  Another thought, however, was working and fighting in her--that
Marchand was better as a friend than an enemy; and that while Ingolby's
fate was in the balance, while yet the Orange funeral had not taken place
and the strikes had not yet come, it might be that he could be won over
to Ingolby.  Her mind was thus involuntarily reproducing Ingolby's
policy, as he had declared it to Jowett and Rockwell.  It was to find
Felix Marchand's price, and to buy off his enmity--not by money, for
Marchand did not need that, but by those other coins of value which are
individual to each man's desires, passions and needs.

"Once a Frenchman isn't always a Frenchman," she replied coolly,
disregarding the coarse insolence of his last utterance.  "You yourself
do not now swear faith to the tricolour or the fleur-de-lis."

He flushed.  She had touched a tender nerve.

"I am a Frenchman always," he rejoined angrily.  "I hate the English.
I spit on the English flag."

"Yes, I've heard you are an anarchist," she rejoined.  "A man with no
country and with a flag that belongs to no country--quelle affaire et
quelle drolerie!"

She laughed.  Taken aback in spite of his anger, he stared at her.  How
good her French accent was!  If she would only speak altogether in that
beloved language, he could smother much malice.  She was beautiful and--
well, who could tell?  Ingolby was wounded and blind, maybe for ever, and
women are always with the top dog--that was his theory.  Perhaps her
apparent dislike of him was only a mood.  Many women that he had
conquered had been just like that.  They had begun by disliking him--from
Lil Sarnia down--and had ended by being his.  This girl would never be
his in the way that the others had been, but--who could tell?--perhaps he
would think enough of her to marry her?  Anyway, it was worth while
making such a beauty care for him.  The other kind of women were easy
enough to get, and it would be a piquant thing to have one irreproachable
affaire.  He had never had one; he was not sure that any girl or woman he
had ever known had ever loved him, and he was certain that he had never
loved any girl or woman.  To be in love would be a new and piquant
experience for him.  He did not know love, but he knew what passion was.
He had ever been the hunter.  This trail might be dangerous, too, but he
would take his chances.  He had seen her dislike of him whenever they had
met in the past, and he had never tried to soften her attitude towards
him.  He had certainly whistled, but she had not come.  Well, he would
whistle again--a different tune.

"You speak French much?" he asked almost eagerly, the insolence gone from
his tone.  "Why didn't I know that?"

"I speak French in Manitou," she replied, "but nearly all the French
speak English there, and so I speak more English than French."

"Yes, that's it," he rejoined almost angrily again.  "The English will
not learn French, will not speak French.  They make us learn English,
and--"

"If you don't like the flag and the country, why don't you leave it?" she
interrupted, hardening, though she had meant to try and win him over to
Ingolby's side.

His eyes blazed.  There was something almost real in the man after all.

"The English can kill us, they can grind us to the dust," he rejoined in
French, "but we will not leave the land which has always been ours.  We
settled it; our fathers gave their lives for it in a thousand places.
The Indians killed them, the rivers and the storms, the plague and the
fire, the sickness and the cold wiped them out.  They were burned alive
at the stake, they were flayed; their bones were broken to pieces by
stones--but they blazed trails with their blood in the wilderness from
New Orleans to Hudson's Bay.  They paid for the land with their lives.
Then the English came and took it, and since that time--one hundred and
fifty years--we have been slaves."

"You do not look like a slave," she answered, "and you have not acted
like a slave.  If you were to do the things in France that you've done
here, you wouldn't be free as you are to-day."

"What have I done?" he asked darkly.

"You were the cause of what happened at Barbazon's last night,"--he
smiled evilly--"you are egging on the roughs to break up the Orange
funeral to-day; and there is all the rest you know so well."

"What is the rest I know so well?"  He looked closely at her, his long,
mongrel eyes half-closing with covert scrutiny.

"Whatever it is, it is all bad and it is all yours."

"Not all," he retorted coolly.  "You forget your Gipsy friend.  He did
his part last night, and he's still free."

They had entered the last little stretch of wood in which her home lay,
and she slackened her footsteps slightly.  She felt that she had been
unwise in challenging him; that she ought to try persistently to win him
over.  It was repugnant to her, still it must be done even yet.  She
mastered herself for Ingolby's sake and changed her tactics.

"As you glory in what you have done, you won't mind being responsible
for all that's happened," she replied in a more friendly tone.

She made an impulsive gesture towards him.

"You have shown what power you have--isn't that enough?" she asked.
"You have made the crowd shout, 'Vive Marchand !' You can make everything
as peaceful as it is now upset.  If you don't do so, there will be much
misery.  If peace must be got by force, then the force of government will
get it in the end.  You have the gift of getting hold of the worst men
here, and you have done it; but won't you now master them again in the
other way?  You have money and brains; why not use them to become a
leader of those who will win at last, no matter what the game may be?"

He came close to her.  She shrank inwardly, but she did not move.  His
greenish eyes were wide open in the fulness of eloquence and desire.

"You have a tongue like none I ever heard," he said impulsively.  "You've
got a mind that thinks, you've got dash and can take risks.  You took
risks that day on the Carillon Rapids.  It was only the day before that
I'd met you by the old ford of the Sagalac, and made up to you.  You
choked me off as though I was a wolf or a devil on the loose.  The next
day when I saw Ingolby hand you out to the crowd from his arms, I got
nasty--I have fits like that sometimes, when I've had a little too much
liquor.  I felt it more because you're the only kind of woman that could
ever get a real hold on me.  It was you made me get the boys rampaging
and set the toughs moving.  As you say, I can get hold of a crowd.  It's
not hard--with money and drink.  You can buy human nature cheap.  Every
man has his price they say--and every woman too--bien sur!  The thing is
to find out what is the price, and then how to buy.  You can't buy
everyone in the same way, even if you use a different price.  You've got
to find out how they want the price--whether it's to be handed over the
counter, so to speak, or to be kept on the window-sill, or left in a
pocket, or dropped in a path, or dug up like a potato, with a funny make-
believe that fools nobody, but just plays to the hypocrite in everyone
everywhere.  I'm saying this to you because you've seen more of the
world, I bet, than one in a million, even though you're so young.  I
don't see why we can't come together.  I'm to be bought.  I don't say
that my price isn't high.  You've got your price, too.  You wouldn't fuss
yourself about things here in Manitou and Lebanon, if there wasn't
something you wanted to get.  Tout ca!  Well, isn't it worth while making
the bargain?  You've got such gift of speech that I'm just as if I'd been
drugged, and all round, face, figure, eyes, hair, foot, and girdle,
you're worth giving up a lot for.  I've seen plenty of your sex, and I've
heard crowds of them talk, but they never had anything for me beyond the
minute.  You've got the real thing.  You're my fancy.  You've been
thinking and dreaming of Ingolby.  He's done.  He's a back number.
There's nothing he's done that isn't on the tumble since last night.
The financial gang that he downed are out already against him.  They'll
have his economic blood.  He made a splash while he was at it, but the
alligator's got him.  It's 'Exit Ingolby,' now."

She made a passionate gesture, and seemed about to speak, but he went on:
"No, don't say anything.  I know how you feel.  You've had your face
turned his way, and you can't look elsewhere all at once.  But Time cures
quick, if you're a good healthy human being.  Ingolby was the kind likely
to draw a girl.  He's a six-footer and over; he spangled a lot, and he
smiled pretty--comme le printemps, and was sharp enough to keep clear of
women that could hurt him.  That was his strongest point after all, for a
little, sly sprat of a woman that's made eyes at you and led you on, till
you sent her a note in a hurry some time with some loose hot words in it,
and she got what she'd wanted, will make you pay a hundred times for the
goods you get.  Ingolby was sharp enough to walk shy, until you came his
way, and then he lost his underpinning.  But last night got him in the
vitals--hit him between the eyes; and his stock's not worth ten cents in
the dollar to-day.  But though the pumas are out, and he's done, and'll
never see his way out of the hole he's in"--he laughed at his grisly
joke"--it's natural to let him down easy.  You've looked his way; he did
you a good turn at the Carillon Rapids, and you'd do one for him if you
could.  I'm the only one can stop the worst from happening.  You want to
pay your debt to him.  Good.  I can help you do it.  I can stop the
strikes on the railways and in the mills.  I can stop the row at the
Orange funeral.  I can stop the run on his bank and the drop in his
stock.  I can fight the gang that's against him--I know how.  I'm the
man that can bring things to pass."

He paused with a sly, mean smile of self-approval and conceit, and his
tongue licked the corners of his mouth in a way that drunkards have in
the early morning when the effect of last night's drinking has worn off.
He spread out his hands with the air of a man who had unpacked his soul,
but the chief characteristic of his manner was egregious belief in
himself.

At first, in her desire to find a way to meet the needs of Ingolby, Fleda
had listened to him with fortitude and even without revolt.  But as he
began to speak of women, and to refer to herself with a look of gloating
which men of his breed cannot hide, her angry pulses beat hard.  She did
not quite know where he was leading, but she was sure he meant to say
something which would vex her beyond bearing.  At one moment she meant to
cut short his narrative, but he prevented her, and when at last he ended,
she was almost choking with agitation.  It had been borne in upon her as
his monologue proceeded, that she would rather die than accept anything
from this man--anything of any kind.  To fight him was the only thing.
Nothing else could prevail in the end.  His was the service of the
unpenitent thief.

"And what is it you want to buy from me?" she asked evenly.

He did not notice, and he could not realize that ominous thing in her
voice and face.  "I want to be friends with you.  I want to see you here
in the woods, to meet you as you met Ingolby.  I want to talk with you,
to hear you talk; to learn things from you I never learned before; to--"

She interrupted him with a swift gesture.  "And then--after that?  What
do you want at the end of it all?  One cannot spend one's time talking
and wandering in the woods and teaching and learning.  After that, what?"

"I have a house in Montreal," he said evasively.  "I don't want to live
there alone."  He laughed.  "It's big enough for two, and at the end it
might be us two, if--"

With sharp anger, yet with coolness and dignity, she broke in on his
words.  "Might be us two!" she exclaimed.  "I have never thought of
making my home in a sewer.  Do you think--but, no, it isn't any use
talking!  You don't know how to deal with man or woman.  You are
perverted."

"I did not mean what you mean; I meant that I should want to marry you,"
he protested.  "You think the worst of me.  Someone has poisoned your
mind against me."

"Everyone has poisoned my mind against you," she returned, "and yourself
most of all.  I know you will try to injure Mr. Ingolby; and I know that
you will try to injure me; but you will not succeed."

She turned and moved away from him quickly, taking the path towards her
own front door.  He called something after her, but she did not or would
not hear.

As she entered the open space in front of the house, she heard footsteps
behind her and turned quickly, not without apprehension.  A woman came
hurrying towards her.  She was pale, agitated, haggard with fatigue.

"May I speak with you?" she asked in French.  "Surely," replied Fleda.




CHAPTER XV

THE WOMAN FROM WIND RIVER

"What is it?" asked Fleda, opening the door of the house.

"I want to speak to you about m'sieu'," replied the sad-faced woman.
She made a motion of her head backwards towards the wood.  "About M'sieu'
Marchand."

Fleda's face hardened; she had had more than enough of "M'sieu'
Marchand."  She was bitterly ashamed that she had, even for a moment,
thought of using diplomacy with him.  But this woman's face was so
forlorn, apart, and lonely, that the old spirit of the Open Road worked
its will.  In far-off days she had never seen a human being turned away
from a Romany tent, or driven from a Romany camp.  She opened the door
and stood aside to admit the wayfarer.

A few moments later, the woman, tidied and freshened, sat at the ample
breakfast which was characteristic of Romany home-life.  The woman's
plate was bountifully supplied by Fleda, and her cup filled more than
once by Madame Bulteel, while old Gabriel Druse bulked friendly over all.
His face now showed none of the passion and sternness which had been
present when he passed the Sentence of the Patrin upon Jethro Fawe;
nothing of the gloom filling his eyes as he left Ingolby's house.  The
gracious, bountiful look of the patriarch, of the head of the clan, was
upon him.

The husband of one wife, the father of one child, yet the Ry of Rys had
still the overlooking, protective sense of one who had the care of great
numbers of people.  His keen eyes foresaw more of the story the woman was
to tell presently than either of the women of his household.  He had seen
many such women as this, and had inflexibly judged between them and those
who had wronged them.

"Where have you come from?" he asked, as the meal drew to a close.

"From Wind River and under Elk Mountain," the woman answered with a look
of relief.  Her face was of those who no longer can bear the soul's
secrets.

There was silence while the breakfast things were cleared away, and the
window was thrown wide to the full morning sun.  It broke through the
branches of pine and cedar and juniper; it made translucent the leaves of
the maples; it shimmered on Fleda's brown hair as she pulled a rose from
the bush at the window, and gave it to the forlorn creature in the grey
"linsey-woolsey" dress and the loose blue flannel jacket, whose skin was
coarsened by outdoor life, but who had something of real beauty in the
intense blue of her eyes.  She had been a very comely figure in her best
days, for her waist was small, her bosom gently and firmly rounded, and
her hands were finer than those of most who live and work much in the
open air.

"You said there was something you wished to tell me," said Fleda, at
last.

The woman gazed slowly round at the three, as though with puzzled appeal.
There was the look of the Outlander in her face; of one who had been
exiled from familiar things and places.  In manner she was like a child.
Her glance wandered over the faces of the two women, then her eyes met
those of the Ry, and stayed there.

"I am old and I have seen many sorrows," said Gabriel Druse, divining
what was in her mind.  "I will try to understand."

"I have known all the bitterness of life," interposed the low, soft voice
of Madame Bulteel.

"All ears are the same here," Fleda added, looking the woman in the eyes.

"I will tell everything," was the instant reply.  Her fingers twined and
untwined in her lap with a nervousness shown by neither face nor body.
Her face was almost apathetic in its despair, but her body had an upright
courage.

She sighed heavily and began.

"My name is Arabella Stone.  I was married from my home over against Wind
River by the Jumping Sandhills.

"My father was a lumberman.  He was always captain of the gang in the
woods, and captain of the river in the summer.  My mother was deaf and
dumb.  It was very lonely at times when my father was away.  I loved a
boy--a good boy, and he was killed breaking horses.  When I was twenty-
one years old my mother died.  It was not good for me to be alone, my
father said, so he must either give up the woods and the river, or he or
I must marry.  Well, I saw he would not marry, for my mother's face was
one a man could not forget."

The old man stirred in his seat.  "I have seen such," he said in his deep
voice.

"So it was I said to myself I would marry," she continued, "though I had
loved the Boy that died under the hoofs of the black stallion.  There
weren't many girls at the Jumping Sandhills, and so there were men, now
one, now another, to say things to me which did not touch my heart; but I
did not laugh, because I understood that they were lonely.  Yet I liked
one of them more than all the others.

"So, for my father's sake, I came nearer to Dennis, and at last it seemed
I could bear to look at him any time of the day or night he came to me.
He was built like a pine-tree, and had a playful tongue, and also he was
a ranchman like the Boy that was gone.  It all came about on the day he
rode in from the range the wild wicked black stallion which all range-
riders had tried for years to capture.  It was like a brother of the
horse which had killed my Boy, only bigger.  When Dennis mastered him and
rode him to my door I made up my mind, and when he whispered to me over
the dipper of buttermilk I gave him, I said, 'Yes.' I was proud of him.
He did things that a woman likes, and said the things a woman loves to
hear, though they be the same thing said over and over again."

Madame Bulteel nodded her head as though in a dream, and the Ry of Rys
sat with his two great hands on the chair-arm and his chin dropped on his
chest.  Fleda's hands were clasped in her lap, and her big eyes never
left the woman's face.

"Before a month was gone I had married him," the, low, tired voice went
on.  "It was a gay wedding; and my father was very happy, for he thought
I had got the desire of a woman's life--a home of her own.  For a time
all went well.  Dennis was gay and careless and wilful, but he was easy
to live with, too, except when he came back from the town where he sold
his horses.  Then he was different, because of the drink, and he was
quarrelsome with me--and cruel, too.

"At last when he came home with the drink upon him, he would sleep on the
floor and not beside me.  This wore upon my heart.  I thought that if I
could only put my hand on his shoulder and whisper in his ear, he would
get better of his bad feeling; but he was sulky, and he would not bear
with me.  Though I never loved him as I loved my Boy, still I tried to be
a good wife to him, and never turned my eyes to any other man."

Suddenly she stopped as though the pain of speaking was too great.
Madame Bulteel murmured something, but the only word that reached the
ears of the others was the Arabic word 'mafish'.  Her pale face was
suffused as she said it.

Two or three times the woman essayed to speak again, but could not.  At
last, however, she overcame her emotion and said: "So it was when M'sieu'
Felix Marchand came up from the Sagalac."

The old man started and muttered harshly, but Fleda had foreseen the
entrance of the dissolute Frenchman into the tale, and gave no sign of
surprise.

"M'sieu' Marchand bought horses," the sad voice trailed on.  "One day he
bought the mining-claims Dennis had been holding till he could develop
them or sell them for good money.  When Dennis went to town again he
brought me back a present of a belt with silver clasps; but yet again
that night he slept upon the floor alone.  So it went on.  M. Marchand,
he goes on to the mountains and comes back; and he buys more horses, and
Dennis takes them to Yargo, and M. Marchand goes with him, but comes back
before Dennis does.  It was then M'sieu' begun to talk to me; to say
things that soothe a woman when she is hurt.  I knew now Dennis did not
want me as when he first married me.  He was that kind of man--quick to
care and quicker to forget.  He was weak, he could not fasten where he
stood.  It pleased him to be gay and friendly with me when he was sober,
but there was nothing behind it--nothing, nothing at all.  At last I
began to cry when I thought of it, for it went on and on, and I was too
much alone.  I looked at myself in the glass, and I saw I was not old or
lean.  I sang in the trees beside the brook, and my voice was even a
little better than in the days when Dennis first came to my father's
house.  I looked to my cooking, and I knew that it was as good as ever.
I thought of my clothes, and how I did my hair, and asked myself if I
was as fresh to see as when Dennis first came to me.  I could see no
difference.  There was a clear pool not far away under the little hills
where the springs came together.  I used to bathe in it every morning and
dry myself in the sun; and my body was like a child's.  That being so,
should my own man turn his head away from me day or night?  What had I
done to be used so, less than two years after I had married!"

She paused and hung her head, weeping gently.  "Shame stings a woman like
nothing else," Madame Bulteel said with a sigh.

"It was so with me," continued Dennis's wife.  "Then at last the thought
came that there was another woman.  And all the time M. Marchand kept
coming and going, at first when Dennis was there, and always with some
good reason for coming--horses, cattle, shooting, or furs bought of the
Indians.  When Dennis was not there, he came at first for an hour or two,
as if by chance, then for a whole day, because he said he knew I was
lonely.  One day, I was sitting by the pool--it was in the evening.
I was crying because of the thought that followed me of another woman
somewhere, who made Dennis turn from me.  Then it was M'sieu' came and
put a hand on my shoulder--he came so quietly that I did not hear him
till he touched me.  He said he knew why I cried, and it saddened his
soul."

"His soul--the jackal!" growled the old man in his beard.

The woman nodded wearily and went on.  "For all of ten days I had been
alone, except for the cattlemen camping a mile away and an old Indian
helper who slept in his tepee within call.  Loneliness makes you weak
when there's something tearing at the heart.  So I let M'sieu' Marchand
talk to me.  At last he told me that there was a woman at Yargo--that
Dennis did not go there for business, but to her.  Everyone knew it
except me, he said.  He told me to ask old Throw Hard, the Indian helper,
if he had spoken the truth.  I was shamed, and angry and crazy, too, I
think, so I went to old Throw Hard and asked him.  He said he could not
tell the truth, and that he would not lie to me.  So I knew it was all
true.

"How do I know what was in my mind?  Is a woman not mad at such a time!
There I was, tossed aside for a flyaway, who was for any man that would
come her way.  Yes, I think I was mad.  The pride in me was hurt--as only
a woman can understand."  She paused and looked at the two women who
listened to her.  Fleda's eyes were on the world beyond the window
of the room.

"Surely we understand," whispered Madame Bulteel.

The woman's courage returned, and she continued: "I could not go to my
father, for he was riding the river scores of miles away.  I was terribly
alone.  It was then that M'sieu' Marchand, who had bribed the woman to
draw Dennis away, begged me to go away with him.  He swore I should marry
him as soon as I could be free of Dennis.  I scarcely knew what I said or
thought; but the place I had loved was hateful to me, so I went away with
him."

A sharp, pained exclamation broke from the lips of Madame Bulteel, but
presently she reached out and laid a hand upon the woman's arm.  "Of
course you went with him," she said.  "You could not stay where you were
and face the return of Dennis.  There was no child to keep you, and the
man that tempted you said he adored you?"

The woman looked gratefully at her.  "That was what he said," she
answered.  "He said he was tired of wandering, and that he wanted a home-
and there was a big house in Montreal."

She stopped suddenly upon an angry, smothered word from Fleda's lips.  A
big house in Montreal!  Fleda's first impulse was to break in upon the
woman's story and tell her father what had happened just now outside
their own house; but she waited.

"Yes, there was a big house in Montreal?" said Fleda, her eyes now
resting sadly upon the woman.

"He said it should be mine.  But that did not count.  To be far away from
all that had been was more than all else.  I was not thinking of the man,
or caring for him, I was flying from my shame.  I did not see then the
shame to which I was going.  I was a fool, and I was mad and bad also.
When I waked--and it was soon--there was quick understanding between us.
The big house in Montreal--that was never meant for me.  He was already
married."

The old man stretched heavily to his feet, leaned both hands on the
table, and looked at the woman with glowering eyes, while Fleda's heart
seemed to stop beating.

"Married!" growled Gabriel Druse, with a blur of passion in his voice.
He knew that Felix Marchand had followed his daughter as though he were a
single man.

Fleda saw what was working in his mind.  Since her father suspected, he
should know all.

"He almost offered me the big house in Montreal this morning," she said
evenly and coldly.

A malediction broke from the old man's lips.

"He almost thought he wanted me to marry him," Fleda added scornfully.

"And what did you say?" Druse asked.

"There could only be one thing to say.  I told him I had never thought of
making my home in a sewer."  A grim smile broke over the old man's face,
and he sat down again.

"Because I saw him with you I wanted to warn you," the woman continued.
"Yesterday, I came to warn him of his danger, and he laughed at me.  From
Madame Thibadeau I heard he had said he would make you sing his song.
When I came to tell you, there he was with you.  But when he left you I
was sure there was no need to speak.  Still I felt I must tell you--
perhaps because you are rich and strong, and will stop him from doing
more harm."

"How do you know we are rich?" asked Druse in a rough tone.

"It is what the world says," was the reply.  "Is there harm in that?  In
any case it was right to tell you all; so that one who had herded with a
woman like me should not be friends with you."

"I have seen worse women than you," murmured the old man.

"What danger did you come to warn M. Marchand about?" asked Fleda.

"To his life," answered the woman.

"Do you want to save his life?" asked the old man.

"Ah, is it not always so?" intervened Madame Bulteel in a low, sad
voice.  "To be wronged like that does not make a woman just."

"I am just," answered the woman.  "He deserves to die, but I want to save
the man that will kill him when they meet."

"Who will kill him?" asked Fleda.  "Dennis--he will kill Marchand if he
can."

The old man leaned forward with puzzled, gloomy interest.  "Why?  Dennis
left you for another.  You say he had grown cold.  Was that not what he
wanted--that you should leave him?"

The woman looked at him with tearful eyes.  "If I had known Dennis
better, I should have waited.  What he did is of the moment only.  A man
may fall and rise again, but it is not so with a woman.  She thinks and
thinks upon the scar that shows where she wounded herself; and she never
forgets, and so her life becomes nothing--nothing."

No one saw that Madame Bulteel held herself rigidly, and was so white
that even the sunlight was gold beside her look.  Yet the strangest,
saddest smile played about her lips; and presently, as the eyes of the
others fastened on the woman and did not leave her, she regained her
usual composure.

The woman kept looking at Gabriel Druse.  "When Dennis found that I had
gone, and knew why--for I left word on a sheet of paper--he went mad like
me.  Trailing to the south, to find M'sieu' Marchand, he had an accident,
and was laid up in a shack for weeks on the Tanguishene River, and they
could not move him.  But at last a ranchman wrote to me, and the letter
found me on the very day I left M'sieu'.  When I got that letter begging
me to go to the Tanguishene River, to nurse Dennis who loved me still, my
heart sank.  I said to myself I could not go; and Dennis and I must be
apart always to the end of time.  But then I thought again.  He was ill,
and his body was as broken as his mind.  Well, since I could do his mind
no good, I would try to help his body.  I could do that much for him.  So
I went.  But the letter to me had been long on the way, and when I got to
the Tanguishene River he was almost well."

She paused and rocked her body to and fro for a moment as though in pain.

"He wanted me to go back to him then.  He said he had never cared for the
woman at Yargo, and that what he felt for me now was different from what
it had ever been.  When he had settled accounts we could go back to the
ranch and be at peace.  I knew what he meant by settling accounts, and it
frightened me.  That is why I am here.  I came to warn the man, Marchand,
for if Dennis kills him, then they will hang Dennis.  Do you not see?
This is a country of law.  I saw that Dennis had the madness in his
brain, and so I left him again in the evening of the day I found him, and
came here--it is a long way.  Yesterday, M'sieu' Marchand laughed at me
when I warned him.  He said he could take care of himself.  But such men
as Dennis stop at nothing; there will be killing, if M'sieu' stays here."

"You will go back to Dennis?" asked Fleda gently.  "Some other woman
will make him happy when he forgets me," was the cheerless, grey reply.

The old man got up and, coming over, laid a hand upon her shoulder.

"Where did you think of going from here?" he asked.

"Anywhere--I don't know," was the reply.

"Is there no work here for her?" he asked, turning to Madame Bulteel.

"Yes, plenty," was the reply.  "And room also?" he asked again.

"Was ever a tent too full, when the lost traveller stumbled into camp in
the old days?" rejoined Fleda.  The woman trembled to her feet, a glad
look in her eyes.  "I ought to go, but I am tired and I will gladly
stay," she said and swayed against the table.

Madame Bulteel and Fleda put their arms round her, steadying her.

"This is not the way to act," said Fleda with a touch of sharp reproof.
Had she not her own trouble to face?

The stricken woman drew herself up and looked Fleda in the eyes.  "I will
find the right way, if I can," she said with courage.

A half-hour later, as the old man sat alone in the room where he had
breakfasted, a rifle-shot rang out in the distance.

"The trouble begins," he said, as he rose and hastened into the hallway.

Another shot rang out.  He caught up his wide felt hat, reached for a
great walking-stick in the corner, and left the house hurriedly.




CHAPTER XVI

THE MAYOR FILLS AN OFFICE

It was a false alarm which had startled Gabriel Druse, but it had
significance.  The Orange funeral was not to take place until eleven
o'clock, and it was only eight o'clock when the Ry left his home.  A
rifle-shot had, however, been fired across the Sagalac from the Manitou
side, and it had been promptly acknowledged from Lebanon.  There was a
short pause, and then came another from the Lebanon side.  It was merely
a warning and a challenge.  The only man who could have controlled the
position was blind and helpless.

As Druse walked rapidly towards the bridge, he met Jowett.  Jowett was
one of the few men in either town for whom the Ry had regard, and the
friendliness had had its origin in Jowett's knowledge of horseflesh.
This was a field in which the Ry was himself a master.  He had ever been
too high-placed among his own people to trade and barter horses except
when, sending a score of Romanys on a hunt for wild ponies on the hills
of Eastern Europe, he had afterwards sold the tamed herd to the highest
bidders in some Balkan town; but he had an infallible eye for a horse.

It was a curious anomaly also that the one man in Lebanon who would not
have been expected to love and pursue horse-flesh was the Reverend Reuben
Tripple to whom Ingolby had given his conge, but who loved a horse as he
loved himself.

He was indeed a greater expert in horses than in souls.  One of the
sights of Lebanon had been the appearance in the field of the "Reverend
Tripple," who owned a great, raw-boned bay mare of lank proportions, the
winner of a certain great trotting-race which had delighted the mockers.

For two years Jowett had eyed Mr. Tripple's rawbone with a piratical eye.

Though it had won only a single great race, that, in Jowett's view, was
its master's fault.  As the Arabs say, however, Allah is with the
patient; and so it was that on the evening of the day in which Ingolby
met disaster, Mr. Tripple informed Jowett that he was willing to sell his
rawbone.

He was mounted on the gawky roadster when he met Gabriel Druse making for
the bridge.  Their greeting was as cordial as hasty.  Anxious as was the
Ry to learn what was going on in the towns, Jowett's mount caught his
eye.  It was but a little time since they had met at Ingolby's house, and
they were both full of the grave events afoot, but here was a horse-deal
of consequence, and the bridle-rein was looseflung.

"Yes, I got it," said Jowett, with a chuckle, interpreting the old man's
look.  "I got it for good--a wonder from Wonderville.  Damned queer-
looking critter, but there, I guess we know what I've got.  Outside like
a crinoline, inside like a pair of ankles of the Lady Jane Plantagenet.
Yes, I got it, Mr. Druse, got it dead-on!"

"How?" asked the Ry, feeling the clean fetlocks with affectionate
approval.

"He's off East, so he says," was the joyous reply; "sudden but sure, and
I dunno why.  Anyway, he's got the door-handle offered, and he's off
without his camel."  He stroked the neck of the bay lovingly.  "How
much?"

Jowett held up his fingers.  The old man lifted his eyebrows quizzically.
"That-h'm!  Does he preach as well as that?" he asked.

Jowett chuckled.  "He knows the horse-country better than the New
Jerusalem, I guess; and I wasn't off my feed, nor hadn't lost my head
neither.  I wanted that dust-hawk, and he knew it; but I got in on him
with the harness and the sulky.  The bridle he got from a Mexican that
come up here a year ago, and went broke and then went dead; and there
being no padre, Tripple did the burying, and he took the bridle as his
fee, I s'pose.  It had twenty dollars' worth of silver on it--look at
these conchs."

He trifled with the big beautiful buttons on the head-stall.  "The
sulky's as good as new, and so's the harness almost; and there's the
nose-bag and the blankets, and a saddle and a monkey-wrench and two
bottles of horse-liniment, and odds and ends.  I only paid that"--and he
held up his fingers again as though it was a sacred rite--"for the lot.
Not bad, I want to say.  Isn't he good for all day, this one?"

The old man nodded, then turned towards the bridge.  "The gun-shots--
what?" he asked, setting forward at a walk which taxed the rawbone's
stride.

"An invite--come to the wedding; that's all.  Only it's a funeral this
time, and, if something good doesn't happen, there'll be more than one
funeral on the Sagalac to-morrow.  I've had my try, but I dunno how it'll
come out.  He's not a man of much dictionary is the Monseenoor."

"The Monseigneur Lourde?  What does he say?"

"He says what we all say, that he is sorry.  'But why have the Orange
funeral while things are as they are?' he says, and he asks for the red
flag not to be shook in the face of the bull."

"That is not the talk of a fool, as most priests are," growled the other.

"Sure.  But it wants a real wind-warbler to make them see it in Lebanon.
They've got the needle.  They'll pray to-day with the taste of blood in
their mouths.  It's gone too far.  Only a miracle can keep things right.
The Mayor has wired for the mounted police--our own battalion of militia
wouldn't serve, and there'd be no use ordering them out--but the Riders
can't get here in time.  The train's due the very time the funeral's to
start, but that train's always late, though they say the ingine-driver is
an Orangeman!  And the funeral will start at the time fixed, or I don't
know the boys that belong to the lodge.  So it's up to We, Us & Co.  to
see the thing through, or go bust.  It don't suit me.  It wouldn't have
been like this, if it hadn't been for what happened to the Chief last
night.  There's no holding the boys in.  One thing's sure, the Gipsy that
give Ingolby away has got to lie low if he hasn't got away, or there'll
be one less of his tribe to eat the juicy hedgehog.  Yes, sir-ee!"

To the last words of Jowett the Ry seemed to pay no attention, though his
lips shut tight and a menacing look came into his eyes.  They were now
upon the bridge, and could see what was forward on both sides of the
Sagalac.  There was unusual bustle and activity in the streets and on the
river-bank of both towns.  It was noticeable also that though the mills
were running in Manitou, there were fewer chimneys smoking, and far more
men in the streets than usual.  Tied up to the Manitou shore were a half-
dozen cribs or rafts of timber which should be floating eastward down the
Sagalac.

"If the Monseenoor can't, or don't, step in, we're bound for a shindy
over a corpse," continued Jowett after a moment.

"Can the Monseigneur cast a spell over them all?" remarked the Ry
ironically, for he had little faith in priests, though he had for this
particular one great respect.

"He's a big man, that preelate," answered Jowett quickly and forcibly.
"He kept the Crees quiet when they was going to rise.  If they'd got up,
there'd have been hundreds of settlers massacreed.  He risked his life to
do that--went right into the camp in face of levelled rifles, and sat
down and begun to talk.  A minute afterwards all the chiefs was
squatting, too.  Then the tussle begun between a man with a soul and a
heathen gang that eat dog, kill their old folks, their cripples and their
deformed children, and run sticks of wood through their bleeding chests,
just to show that they're heathens.  But he won out, this Jesueete friend
o' man.  That's why I'm putting my horses and my land and my pants and my
shirt and the buff that's underneath on the little preelate."

Gabriel Druse's face did not indicate the same confidence.  "It is not an
age of miracles; the priest is not enough," he said sceptically.

By twos, by threes, by tens, men from Manitou came sauntering across the
bridge into Lebanon, until a goodly number were scattered at different
points through the town.  They seemed to distribute themselves by a
preconceived plan, and they were all habitants.  There were no Russians,
Finns, Swedes, Norwegians, or Germans among them.  They were low-browed,
sturdy men, dressed in red or blue serge shirts, some with sashes around
their waists, some with ear-rings in their ears, some in knee-boots, and
some with the heavy spiked boots of the river-driver.  None appeared to
carry any weapon that would shoot, yet in their belts was the sheath-
knife, the invariable equipment of their class.  It would have seemed
more suspicious if they had not carried them.  The railwaymen, miners,
carters, mill-hands, however, appeared to carry nothing save their strong
arms and hairy hands, and some were as hairy as animals.  These
backwoodsmen also could, without weapons, turn a town into a general
hospital.  In battle they fought not only with hands but also with teeth
and hoofs like wild stallions.  Teeth tore off an ear or sliced away a
nose, hands smote like hammers or gouged out eyes, and their nailed boots
were weapons of as savage a kind as could be invented.  They could spring
and strike an opponent with one foot in the chest or in the face, and
spoil the face for many a day, or for ever.  It was a gift of the
backwoods and the lumber-camps, practised in hours of stark monotony when
the devils which haunt places of isolation devoid of family life, where
men herd together like dogs in a kennel, break loose.  There the man that
dips his fingers "friendly-like" in the dish of his neighbour one minute
wants the eye of that neighbour the next not so much in innate or
momentary hatred, as in innate savagery and the primeval sense of combat,
the war which was in the blood of the first man.

The unarmed appearance of these men did not deceive the pioneer folk
of Lebanon.  To them the time had come when the reactionary forces of
Manitou must receive a check.  Even those who thought the funeral
fanatical and provocative were ready to defend it.

The person who liked the whole business least was Rockwell.  He was
subject to the same weariness of the flesh and fatigue of the spirit as
all men; yet it was expected of him that at any hour he should be at the
disposal of suffering humanity--of criminal or idiotic humanity--patient,
devoted, calm, nervestrung, complete.  He was the one person in the
community who was the universal necessity, and yet for whom the community
had no mercy in its troubles or out of them.  There were three doctors in
Lebanon, but none was an institution, none had prestige save Rockwell,
and he often wished that he had less prestige, since he cared nothing for
popularity.

He had made his preparations for possible "accidents" in no happy mood.
Fresh from the bedside of Ingolby, having had no sleep, and with many
sick people on his list, he inwardly damned the foolishness of both
towns.  He even sharply rebuked the Mayor, who urged surgical
preparations upon him, for not sending sooner to the Government for a
force which could preserve order or prevent the procession.

It was while he was doing so that Jowett appeared with Gabriel Druse to
interview the Mayor.

"It's like this," said Jowett.  "In another hour the funeral will start.
There's a lot of Manitou huskies in Lebanon now, and their feet is
loaded, if their guns ain't.  They're comin' by driblets, and by-and-bye,
when they've all distributed themselves, there'll be a marching column of
them from Manitou.  It's all arranged to make trouble and break the law.
It's the first real organized set-to we've had between the towns, and
it'll be nasty.  If the preelate doesn't dope them, there'll be pertikler
hell to pay."

He then gave the story of his visit to Monseigneur Lourde, and the
details of what was going forward in Manitou so far as he had learned.
Also the ubiquitous Osterhaut had not been idle, and his bulletin had
just been handed to Jowett.

"There's one thing ought to be done and has got to be done," Jowett
added, "if the Monseenoor don't pull if off.  The leaders have to be
arrested, and it had better be done by one that, in a way, don't belong
to either Lebanon or Manitou."

The Mayor shook his head.  "I don't see how I can authorize Marchand's
arrest--not till he breaks the law, in any case."

"It's against the law to conspire to break the law," replied Jowett.
"You've been making a lot of special constables.  Make Mr. Gabriel Druse
here a special constable, then if the law's broke, he can have a right to
take a hand in."

The giant Ry had stood apart, watchful and ruminant, but he now stepped
forward, as the Mayor turned to him and stretched out a hand.

"I am for peace," the old man said.  "To keep the peace the law must be
strong."

In spite of the gravity of the situation the Mayor smiled.  "You wouldn't
need much disguise to stand for the law, Mr. Druse," he remarked.  "When
the law is seven feet high, it stands well up."

The Ry did not smile.  "Make me the head of the constables, and I will
keep the peace," he said.  There was a sudden silence.  The proposal had
come so quietly, and it was so startling, that even the calm Rockwell was
taken aback.  But his eye and the eye of the Mayor met, and the look in
both their faces was the same.

"That's bold play," the Mayor said, "but I guess it goes.  Yesterday it
couldn't be done.  To-day it can.  The Chief Constable's down with
smallpox.  Got it from an Injun prisoner days ago.  He's been bad for
three days, but hung on.  Now he's down, and there's no Chief.  I was
going to act myself, but the trouble was, if anything happened to me,
there'd be no head of anything.  It's better to have two strings to your
bow.  It's a go-it's a straight go, Mr. Druse.  Seven foot of Chief
Constable ought to have its weight with the roughnecks."

A look of hopefulness came into his face.  This sage, huge, commanding
figure would have a good moral effect on the rude elements of disorder.

"I'll have you read the Riot Act instead of doing it myself," added the
Mayor.  "It'll be a good introduction for you, and as you live in
Manitou, it'll be a knock-out blow to the toughs.  Sometimes one man is
as good as a hundred.  Come on to the Courthouse with me," he continued
cheerfully.  "We'll fix the whole thing.  All the special constables are
waiting there with the regular police.  An extra foot on a captain's
shoulders is as good as a battery of guns."

"You're sure it's according to Hoyle?" asked Jowett quizzically.

He was so delighted that he felt he must "make the Mayor show off self,"
as he put it afterwards.  He did not miscalculate; the Mayor rose to his
challenge.

"I'm boss of this show," he said, "and I can go it alone if necessary
when the town's in danger and the law's being hustled.  I've had a
meeting of the Council and I've got the sailing-orders I want.  I'm boss
of the place, and Mr. Druse is my--" he stopped, because there was a look
in the eyes of the Ry which demanded consideration--"And Mr. Druse is
lawboss," he added.

The old ineradicable look of command shone in the eyes of Gabriel Druse.
Leadership was written all over him.  Power spoke in every motion.  The
square, unbowed shoulders, the heavily lined face, with the patriarchal
beard, the gnarled hands, the rough-hewn limbs, the eye of bright,
brooding force proclaimed authority.

Indeed in that moment there came into the face of the old Nomad the look
it had not worn for many a day.  The self-exiled ruler had paid a heavy
price for his daughter's vow, though he had never acknowledged it to
himself.  His self-ordained impotency, in a camp that was never moved,
within walls which never rose with the sunset and fell with the morning;
where his feet trod the same roadway day after day; where no man asked
for justice or sought his counsel or fell back on his protection; where
he drank from the same spring and tethered his horse in the same paddock
from morn to morn: all these things had eaten at his heart and bowed his
spirit in spite of himself.

He was not now of the Romany world, and he was not of the Gorgio world;
but here at last was the old thing come back to him in a new way, and his
bones rejoiced.  He would entitle his daughter to her place among the
Gorgios.  Perhaps also it would be given him, in the name of the law, to
deal with a man he hated.

"We've got Mister Marchand now," said Jowett softly to the old chieftain.

The Ry's eyes lighted and his jaw set.  He did not speak, but his hands
clenched, opened and clenched again.  Jowett saw and grinned.

"The Mayor and the law-boss'll win out, I guess," he said to himself.




CHAPTER XVII

THE MONSEIGNEUR AND THE NOMAD

Even more than Dr. Rockwell, Berry, the barber, was the most troubled man
in Lebanon on the day of the Orange funeral.  Berry was a good example of
an unreasoning infatuation.  The accident which had come to his idol,
with the certain fall of his fortunes, hit him so hard, that, for the
first time since he became a barber, his razor nipped the flesh of more
than one who sat in his red-upholstered chair.

In his position, Berry was likely to hear whatever gossip was going.  Who
shall have perfect self-control with a giant bib under the chin, tipped
back on a chair that cannot be regulated, with a face covered by lather,
and two plantation fingers holding the nose?  In these circumstances,
with much diplomacy, Berry corkscrewed his way into confidence, and when
he dipped a white cloth in bay-rum and eau-de-cologne, and laid it over
the face of the victim, with the finality of a satisfied inquisitor, it
was like giving the last smother to human individuality.  An artist after
his kind, he no sooner got what he wanted than he carefully coaxed his
victim away from thoughts of the disclosures into the vague distance of
casual gossip once more.

Gradually and slowly he shepherded his patient back to the realms of
self-respect and individual personality.  The border-line was at the
point where the fingers of his customer fluttered at a collar-button; for
Berry, who realized the power that lies in making a man look ridiculous,
never allowed a customer to be shaved or have his hair cut with a collar
on.  When his customers had corns, off came the boots also, and then
Berry's triumph over the white man was complete.  To call attention to an
exaggerated bunion when the odorous towel lay upon the hidden features of
what once was a "human," was the last act in the drama of the Unmaking of
Man.

Only when the client had felt in his pocket for the price of the flaying,
and laid it, with a ten-cent fee, on the ledge beneath the mirror, where
all the implements of the inquisition and the restoration were assembled,
did he feel manhood restored.  If, however, he tried to keep a vow of
silence in the chair of execution, he paid a heavy price; for Berry had
his own methods of punishment.  A little tighter grasp of the nose; a
little rougher scrape of the razor, and some sharp, stinging liquid
suddenly slapped with a cold palm on the excoriated spot, with the
devilish hypocrisy of healing it; a longer smothering-period under the
towel, when the corners of it were tucked behind the ears and a crease of
it in the mouth-all these soon induced vocal expression again, and Berry
started on his inquisition with gentle certainty.  When at last he dusted
the face with a little fine flour of oatmeal, "to heal the cuticle and
'manoor' the roots," and smelled with content the hands which had
embalmed the hair in verbena-scented oil, a man left his presence
feeling that he was ready for the wrath to come.

Such was Berry when he had under his razor one of Ingolby's business foes
of Manitou, who had of late been in touch with Felix Marchand.  Both were
working for the same end, but with different intentions.  Marchand worked
with that inherent devilishness which sometimes takes possession of low
minds; but the other worked as he would have done against his own
brother, for his own business success; and it was his view that one man
could only succeed by taking the place of another, as though the Age of
Expansion had ceased and the Age of Smother had begun.

From this client while in a state of abject subjection, Berry, whose
heart was hard that day, but whose diplomacy was impeccable, discovered
a thing of moment.  There was to be a procession of strikers from two
factories in Manitou, who would throw down their tools or leave their
machines at a certain moment.  Falling into line these strikers would
march across the bridge between the towns at such time as would bring
them into touch with the line of the Orange funeral--two processions
meeting at right angles.  If neither procession gave way, the Orange
funeral could be broken up, ostensibly not from religious fanaticism,
but from the "unhappy accident" of two straight lines colliding.  It was
a juicy plot; and in a few minutes the Mayor and Gabriel Druse knew of
it from the faithful Berry.

The bell of the meeting-house began to toll as the Orangeman whose death
had caused such commotion was carried to the waiting carriage where he
would ride alone.  Almost simultaneously with the starting of the gaudy
yet sombre Orange cortege, with its yellow scarfs, glaring banners,
charcoal plumes and black clothes, the labour procession approached the
Manitou end of the Sagalac bridge.  The strikers carried only three or
four banners, but they had a band of seven pieces, with a drum and a pair
of cymbals.  With frequent discord, but with much spirit, the Bleaters,
as these musicians were called in Lebanon, inspired the steps of the
Manitou fanatics and toughs.  As they came upon the bridge they were
playing a gross paraphrase of The Marseillaise.

At the head of the Orange procession was a silver-cornet band which the
enterprise of Lebanon had made possible.  Its leader was a ne'er-do-well
young Welshman, who had been dismissed from leadership after leadership
of bands in the East till at last he had drifted into Lebanon.  Here,
strange to say, he had never been drunk but once; and that was the night
before he married the widow of a local publican, who had a nice little
block of stock in one of Ingolby's railways, which yielded her seven per
cent., and who knew how to handle the citizens of the City of Booze.
When she married Tom Straker, her first husband, he drank on an average
twenty whiskies a day.  She got him down to one; and then he died and had
as fine a funeral as a judge.  There were those who said that if Tom's
whiskies hadn't been cut down so--but there it was: Tom was in the bosom
of Abraham, and William Jones, who was never called anything else than
Willy Welsh, had been cut down from his unrecorded bibulations to none at
all; but he smoked twenty-cent cigars at the ex-widow's expense.

To-day Willy Welsh played with heart and courage, "I'm Going Home to
Glory," at the head of the Orange procession; for who that has faced such
a widow as was his for one whole year could fear the onset of faction
fighters!  Besides, as the natives of the South Seas will never eat a
Chinaman, so a Western man will never kill a musician.  Senators,
magistrates, sheriffs, police, gamblers, horse-stealers, bankers, and
broncho-riders all die unnatural deaths at times, but a musician in the
West is immune from all except the hand of Fate.  Not one can be spared.
Even a tough convicted of cheating at cards, or breaking a boom on a
river, has escaped punishment because he played the concertina.

The discord and jangle between the two bands was the first collision of
this fateful day.  While yet there was a space between the two
processions, the bands broke into furious contest.  It was then that,
through the long funeral line, men with hard-set faces came closer up
together, and forty, detaching themselves from the well-kept run of
marching lodgemen, closed up around the horses and the hearse, making a
solid flanking force.  At stated intervals also, outside the lodgemen in
the lines, were special constables, many of whom had been the stage-
drivers, hunters, cattlemen, prospectors, and pioneers of the early days.
Most of them had come of good religious stock-Presbyterians, Baptists,
Methodists, Unitarians; and though they had little piety, and had never
been able to regain the religious customs and habits of their childhood,
they "Stood for the Thing the Old Folks stand for."  They were in a mood
which would tear cotton, as the saying was.  There was not one of them
but expected that broken heads and bloodshed would be the order of the
day, and they were stonily, fearlessly prepared for the worst.

Since the appearance of Gabriel Druse on the scene, the feeling had grown
that the luck would be with them.  When he started at the head of the
cortege, they could scarce forbear to cheer.  Such a champion in
appearance had never been seen in the West, and, the night before,
he had proved his right to the title by shaking a knot of toughs into
spots of disconcerted humanity.

As they approached the crossroads of the bridge, his voice, clear and
sonorous, could be heard commanding the Orange band to cease playing.

When the head of the funeral procession was opposite the bridge--the
band, the hearse, the bodyguard of the hearse--Gabriel Druse stood aside,
and took his place at the point where the lines of the two processions
would intersect.

It was at this moment that the collision came.  There were only about
sixty feet of space between the two processions, when a voice rang out in
a challenge so offensive, that the men of Manitou got their cue for
attack without creating it themselves.  Every Orangeman of the Lodge of
Lebanon afterwards denied that he had raised the cry; and the chances are
that every one spoke the truth.  It was like Felix Marchand to arrange
for just such an episode, and so throw the burden of responsibility on
the Orangemen.

"To hell with the Pope!  To hell with the Pope!" the voice rang out, and
it had hardly ceased before the Manitou procession made a rush forward.
The apparent leader of the Manitou roughs was a blackbearded man of
middle height, who spoke raucously to the crowd behind him.

Suddenly a powerful voice rang out.

"Halt, in the name of the Queen!" it called.  Surprise is the very
essence of successful war.  The roughs of Manitou had not looked for
this.  They had foreseen the appearance of the official Chief Constable
of Lebanon; they had expected his challenge and warning in the
vernacular; but here was something which struck them with consternation
--first, the giant of Manitou in the post of command, looking like some
berserker; and then the formal reading of that stately document in the
name of the Queen.

Far back in the minds of every French habitant present was the old
monarchical sense.  He makes, at worst, a poor anarchist, though he is a
good revolutionist; and the French colonials had never been divorced from
monarchical France.

In the eyes of the most forward of those on the Sagalac bridge, there
was a sudden wonderment and confusion.  To the dramatic French mind,
ceremonial is ever welcome; and for a moment it had them in its grip,
as old Gabriel Druse read out in his ringing voice, the trenchant royal
summons.

It was a strange and dramatic scene--the Orange funeral standing still,
garish yet solemn, with hundreds of men, rough and coarse, quiet and
refined, dissolute and careless, sober and puritanic, broad and tolerant,
sharp and fanatical; the labour procession, polyglot in appearance, but
with Gallic features and looseness of dress predominating; excitable,
brutish, generous, cruel; without intellect, but with an intelligence
which in the lowest was acute, and with temperaments responsive to drama.

As Druse read, his eyes now and then flashed, at first he knew not why,
to the slim, bearded figure of the apparent leader.  At length he caught
the feverish eye of the man, and held it for a moment.  It was familiar,
but it eluded him; he could not place it.

He heard, however, Jowett's voice say to him, scarce above a whisper:

"It's Felix Marchand, boss!"

Jowett also had been puzzled at first by the bearded figure, but it
suddenly flashed upon him that the beard and wig were a disguise, that
Marchand had resorted to Ingolby's device.  It might prove as dangerous
a stratagem with him as it had to Ingolby.

There was a moment's hesitation after Druse had finished reading--as
though the men of Manitou had not quite recovered from their surprise--
then the man with the black beard said something to those nearest him.
There was a start forward, and someone cried, "Down with the Orangemen
--et bas l'Orange!"

Like a well-disciplined battalion the Orangemen rolled up quickly into a
compact mass, showing that they had planned their defence well, and the
moment was black with danger, when, suddenly, Druse strode forward.
Flinging right and left two or three river-drivers, he caught the man
with the black beard, snatched him out from among the oncoming crowd,
and tore off the black beard and wig.  Felix Marchand stood exposed.

A cry of fury rang out from the Orangemen behind, and a dozen men rushed
forward, but Gabriel Druse acted with the instant decision of a real
commander.  Seeing that it would be a mistake to arrest Marchand at that
moment, he raised the struggling figure of the wrecker above his head
and, with Herculean effort, threw him up over the heads of the Frenchmen
in front of him.

So extraordinary was the sight that, as if fascinated, the crowd before
and behind followed the action with staring eyes and tense bodies.  The
faces of all the contending forces were as concentrated for the instant,
as though the sun were falling out of the sky.  It was so great a feat,
one so much in consonance with the spirit of the frontier world, that
gasps of praise broke from both crowds.  As though it were a thunderbolt,
the Manitou roughs standing where Marchand was like to fall, instead of
trying to catch him, broke away from beneath the bundle of falling
humanity, and Marchand fell on the dusty cement of the bridge with a dull
thud, like a bag of bones.

For a moment there was no motion on the part of either procession.
Banners drooped and swayed as the men holding them were lost in the
excitement.

Time had only been gained, however.  There was no reason to think that
the trouble was over, or that the special constables who had gathered
close behind Gabriel Druse would not have to strike heavy blows for the
cause of peace.

The sudden appearance of a new figure in the narrow, open space between
the factions in that momentary paralysis was not a coincidence.  It was
what Jowett had planned for, the factor for peace in which he most
believed.

A small, spare man in a scarlet cassock, white chasuble, and black
biretta, suddenly stole out from the crowd on the Lebanon side of the
bridge, carrying the elements of the Mass.  His face was shining white,
and in the eyes was an almost unearthly fire.  It was the beloved
Monseigneur Lourde.

Raising the elements before him toward his own people on the bridge, he
cried in a high, searching voice:

"I prayed with you, I begged you to preserve the peace.  Last night I
asked you in God's name to give up your disorderly purposes.  I thought
then I had done my whole duty; but the voice of God has spoken to me.
An hour ago I carried the elements to a dying woman here in Lebanon, and
gave her peace.  As I did so the funeral bell rang out, and it came to
me, as though the One above had spoken, that peace would be slain and His
name insulted by all of you--by all of you, Catholic and Protestant.
God's voice bade me come to you from the bed of one who has gone hence
from peace to Peace.  In the name of Christ, peace, I say!  Peace, in the
name of Christ!"

He raised the sacred vessel high above his head, so that his eyes looked
through the walls of his uplifted arms.  "Kneel!" he called in a clear,
ringing voice which yet quavered with age.

There was an instant's hush, and then great numbers of the crowd in front
of him, toughs and wreckers, blasphemers, turbulent ones and evil-livers,
yet Catholics all, with the ancient root of the Great Thing in them, sank
down; and the banners of the labour societies drooped before the symbol
of peace won by sacrifice.

Even the Orangemen bared their heads in the presence of that Popery which
was anathema to them, which they existed to combat, and had been taught
to hate.  Some, no doubt, would rather have fought than have had peace at
the price; but they could not free their minds from the sacred force
which had brought most of the crowd of faction-fighters to their knees.

With a wave of the hand, Gabriel Druse ordered the cortege forward, and
silently the procession with its yellow banners and its sable, drooping
plumes moved on.

Once on its way again, Willy Welsh and his silver-cornet band struck up
the hymn, "Lead, Kindly Light."  It was the one real coincidence of the
day that this moving hymn was written by a cardinal of the Catholic
Church.  It was also an irony that, as the crowd of sullen Frenchmen
turned back to Manitou, the train bearing the Mounted Police, for whom
the Mayor had sent to the capital, steamed noisily in, and redcoats
showed at its windows and on the steps of the cars.

The only casualty that the day saw was the broken arm and badly bruised
body of Felix Marchand, who was gloomily helped back to his home across
the Sagalac.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE BEACONS

There were few lights showing in Lebanon or Manitou; but here and
there along the Sagalac was the fading glimmer of a camp-fire, and in
Tekewani's reservation one light glowed softly like a star.  It came
from a finely-made and chased safety-lantern given to Tekewani by the
Government, as a symbol of honour for having kept the braves quiet when
an Indian and half-breed rising was threatened; and to the powerless
chief it had become a token of his authority, the sign of the Great White
Mother's approval.  By day a spray of eagle's feathers waved over his
tepee, but the gleam of the brass lantern every night was like a sentry
at the doorway of a monarch.

It was a solace to his wounded spirit; it allayed the smart of
subjection; made him feel himself a ruler in retirement, even as Gabriel
Druse was a self-ordained exile.

These two men, representing the primitive nomad life, had been drawn
together in friendship.  So much so, that to Tekewani alone of all the
West, Druse gave his confidence and told his story.  It came in the
springtime, when the blood of the young bucks was simmering and, the
ancient spell was working.  There had preceded them generations of
hunters who had slain their thousands and their tens of thousands of wild
animals and the fowls of the air; had killed their enemies in battle; had
seized the comely women of their foes and made them their own.  No thrill
of the hunter's trail now drew off the overflow of desire.  In the days
of rising sap, there were only the young maidens or wives of their own
tribe to pursue, and it lacked in glory.  Also in the springtime,
Tekewani himself had his own trials, for in his blood the old medicine
stirred.  His face turned towards the prairie North and the mountain West
where yet remained the hunter's quarry; and he longed to be away with
rifle and gun, with his squaw and the papooses trailing after like camp-
followers, to eat the fruits of victory.  But that could not be; he must
remain in the place the Great White Mother had reserved for him; he and
his braves must assemble, and draw their rations at the appointed times
and seasons, and grunt thanks to those who ruled over them.

It was on one of these virginal days, when there was a restless stirring
among the young bucks, who smelled the wide waters, the pines and the
wild shrubs; who heard the cry of the loon on the lonely lake and the
whir of the wild duck's wings, who answered to the phantom cry of ancient
war; it was on such a day that the two chiefs opened their hearts to each
other.

Near to the boscage on a little hill overlooking the great river, Gabriel
Druse had come upon Tekewani seated in the pine-dust, rocking to and fro,
and chanting a low, sorrowful refrain, with eyes fixed on the setting
sun.  And the Ry of Rys understood, with the understanding which only
those have who live close to the earth, and also near to the heavens of
their own gods.  He sat down beside the forlorn chief, and in the silence
their souls spoke to each other.  There swept into the veins of the
Romany ruler something of the immitigable sadness of the Indian chief;
and, with a sudden premonition that he also was come to the sunset of his
life, his big nomad eyes sought the westering rim of the heavens, and his
breast heaved.

In that hour the two men declared themselves to each other, and Gabriel
Druse told Tekewani all that he had hidden from the people of the
Sagalac, and was answered in kind.  It seemed to them that they were as
brothers who were one and who had parted in ages long gone; and having
met were to part and disappear once more, beginning still another trail
in an endless reincarnation.

"Brother," said Tekewani, "it was while there was a bridge of land
between the continents at the North that we met.  Again I see it.  I
forgot it, but again I see.  There was war, and you went upon one path
and I upon another, and we met no more under all the moons till now."

"'Dordi', so it was and at such a time," answered the Ry of Rys.  "And
once more we will follow after the fire-flies which give no light to the
safe places but only lead farther into the night."

Tekewani rocked to and fro again, muttering to himself, but presently he
said:

"We eat from the hands of those who have driven away the buffalo, the
deer, and the beaver; and the young bucks do naught to earn the joy of
women.  They are but as lusting sheep, not as the wild-goat that chases
its mate over the places of death, till it comes upon her at last, and
calls in triumph over her as she kneels at his feet.  So it is.  Like
tame beasts we eat from the hand of the white man, and the white man
leaves his own camp where his own women are, and prowls in our camps,
so that not even our own women are left to us."

It was then that Gabriel Druse learned of the hatred of Tekewani for
Felix Marchand, because of what he had done in the reservation, prowling
at night like a fox or a coyote in the folds.

They parted that hour, believing that the epoch of life in which they
were and the fortunes of time which had been or were to come, were but
turns of a wheel that still went on turning; and that whatever chanced
of good or bad fortune in the one span of being, might be repaired in
the next span, or the next, or the next; so, through their creed of
reincarnation, taking courage to face the failure of the life they now
lived.  Not by logic or the teaching of any school had they reached this
revelation, but through an inner sense.  They were not hopeful and
wondering and timid; they were only sure.  Their philosophy, their
religion, whether heathen or human, was inborn.  They had comfort in it
and in each other.

After that day Gabriel Druse always set a light in his window which
burned all night, answering to the lantern-light at the door of
Tekewani's home--the lights of exile and of an alliance which had
behind it the secret influences of past ages and vanished peoples.

There came a night, however, when the light at the door of Tekewani's
tepee did not burn.  At sunset it was lighted, but long before midnight
it was extinguished.  Looking out from the doorway of his home (it was
the night after the Orange funeral), Gabriel Druse, returned from his new
duties at Lebanon, saw no light in the Indian reservation.  With anxiety,
he set forth in the shine of the moon to visit it.

Arrived at the chief's tepee, he saw that the lantern of honour was gone,
and waking Tekewani, he brought him out to see.  When the old Indian knew
his loss, he gave a harsh cry and stooped, and, gathering a handful of
dust from the ground, sprinkled it on his head.  Then with arms
outstretched he cursed the thief who had robbed him of what had been
to him like a never-fading mirage, an illusion blinding his eyes to the
bitter facts of his condition.

To his mind all the troubles come to Lebanon and Manitou had had one
source; and now the malign spirit had stretched its hand to spoil those
already dispossessed of all but the right to live.  One name was upon the
lips of both men, as they stood in the moonlight by Tekewani's tepee.

"There shall be an end of this," growled the Romany.

"I will have my own," said Tekewani, with malediction on the thief who
had so shamed him.

Black anger was in the heart of Gabriel Druse as he turned again towards
his own home, and he was glad of what he had done to Felix Marchand at
the Orange funeral.





CHAPTER XIX

THE KEEPER OF THE BRIDGE

     "Like the darkness of the grave, which is darkness itself--"

Most of those who break out of the zareba of life, who lay violent hands
upon themselves, do so with a complete reasoning, which in itself is
proof of their insanity.  It may be domestic tragedy, or ill-health,
or crime, or broken faith, or shame, or insomnia, or betrayed trust--
whatever it is, many a one who suffers from such things, tries to end it
all with that deliberation, that strategy, and that cunning which belong
only to the abnormal.

A mind which has known a score or more of sleepless nights acquires an
invincible clearness of its own, seeing an end which is without
peradventure.  It finds a hundred perfect reasons for not going on, every
one of which is in itself sufficient; every one of which knits into the
other ninety and nine with inevitable affinity.

To the mind of Ingolby came a hundred such reasons for breaking out of
life's enclosure, as the effect of the opiate Rockwell had given him wore
off, and he regained consciousness.  As he did so, someone in the room
was telling of that intervention of Gabriel Druse and the Monseigneur at
the Orange funeral, which had saved the situation.  At first he listened
to what was said--it was the nurse talking to Jim Beadle with no sharp
perception of the significance of the story; though it slowly pierced the
lethargy of his senses, and he turned over in the bed to face the
watchers.

"What time is it, Jim?" he asked heavily.  They told him it was sunset.

"Is it quiet in both towns?" he asked after a pause.  They told him that
it was.

"Any telegrams for me?" he asked.

There was an instant's hesitation.  They had had no instructions on this
point, and they hardly knew what to say; but Jim's mind had its own
logic, and the truth seemed best to him now.  He answered that there were
several wires, but that they "didn't amount to nothin'."

"Have they been opened?" Ingolby asked with a frown, half-raising
himself.  It was hard to resign the old masterfulness and self-will.

"I'd like to see anybody open 'em 'thout my pe'mision," answered Jim
imperiously.  "When you's asleep, Chief, I'm awake; and I take care of
you' things, same as ever I done.  There ain't no wires been opened, and
there ain't goin' to be whiles I'm runnin' the show for you."

"Open and read them to me," commanded Ingolby.  Again Ingolby was
conscious of hesitation on Jim's part.  Already the acuteness of the
blind was possessing him, sharpening the senses left unimpaired.
Although Jim moved, presumably, towards the place where the telegrams
lay, Ingolby realized that his own authority was being crossed by that
of the doctor and the nurse.

"You will leave the room for a moment, nurse," he said with a brassy
vibration in the voice--a sign of nervous strain.  With a smothered
protest the nurse left, and Jim stood beside the bed with the telegrams.

"Read them to me, Jim," Ingolby repeated irritably.  "Be quick."

They were not wires which Ingolby should have heard at the time, when his
wound was still inflamed, when he was still on the outer circle of that
artificial sleep which the opiates had secured.  They were from Montreal
and New York, and, resolved from their half-hidden suggestion into bare
elements, they meant that henceforth others would do the work he had
done.  They meant, in effect, that save for the few scores of thousand
dollars he had made, he was now where he was when he came West.

When Jim had finished reading them, Ingolby sank back on the pillows and
said quietly:

"All right, Jim.  Put them in the drawer of the table and I'll answer
them to-morrow.  I want to get a little more sleep, so give me a drink,
and then leave me alone--both nurse and you--till I ring the bell.
There's a bell on the table, isn't there?"

He stretched out a hand towards the table beside the bed, and Jim softly
pushed the bell under his fingers.

"That's right," he added.  "Now, I'm not to be disturbed unless the
doctor comes.  I'm all right, and I want to be alone and quiet.  No one
at all in the room is what I want.  You understand, Jim?"

"My head's just as good to get at what you want as ever it was, and you
goin' have what you want, I guess, while I'm on deck," was Jim's reply.

Jim put a glass of water into his hand.  He drank very slowly, was indeed
only mechanically conscious that he was drinking, for his mind was far
away.

After he had put the glass down, Jim still stood beside the bed, looking
at him.

"Why don't you go, as I tell you, Jim?" Ingolby asked wearily.

"I'm goin'"--Jim tucked the bedclothes in carefully--"I'm goin', but,
boss, I jes' want to say dat dis thing goin' to come out all right bime-
by.  There ain't no doubt 'bout dat.  You goin' see everything, come jes'
like what you want--suh!"

Ingolby did not reply.  He held out his hand, and black fingers shot over
and took it.  A moment later the blind man was alone in the room.

The light of day vanished, and the stars came out.  There was no moon,
but it was one of those nights of the West when millions of stars glimmer
in the blue vault above, and every planet and every star and cluster of
stars are so near that it might almost seem they could be caught by an
expert human hand.  The air was very still, and a mantle of peace was
spread over the tender scene.  The window and the glass doors that gave
from Ingolby's room upon the veranda on the south side of the house, were
open, and the air was warm as in Midsummer.  Now and then the note of a
night-bird broke the stillness, but nothing more.

It was such a night as Ingolby loved; it was such a night as often found
him out in the restful gloom of the trees, thinking and brooding,
planning, revelling in memories of books he had read, and in dreaming of
books he might write-if there were time.  Such a night insulated the dark
moods which possessed him occasionally almost as effectively as fishing
did; and that was saying much.

But the darkest mood of all his days was upon him now.  When Rockwell
came, soon after Jim and the nurse left him, he simulated sleep, for he
had no mind to talk; and the doctor, deceived by his even breathing, had
left, contented.  At last he was wholly alone with his own thoughts, as
he desired.  From the moment Jim had read him the wires, which were the
real revelation of the situation to which he had come, he had been
travelling hard on the road leading to a cul-de-sac, from which there
was no egress save by breaking through the wall.  Never, it might have
seemed, had his mind been clearer, but it was a clearness belonging to
the abnormal.  It was a straight line of thought which, in its intensity,
gathered all other thoughts into its wake, reduced them to the control of
an obsession.  It was borne in on his mind that his day was done, that
nothing could right the disorder which had strewn his path with broken
hopes and shattered ambitions.  No life-work left, no schemes to
accomplish, no construction to achieve, no wealth to gain, no public
good to be won, no home to be his, no woman, his very own, to be his
counsellor and guide in the natural way!

As myriad thoughts drove through his brain on this Indian-summer night,
they all merged into the one obsession that he could no longer stay.  The
irresistible logic of the brain stretched to an abnormal tenuity, and an
intolerable brightness was with him.  He was in the throes of that
intense visualization which comes with insomnia, when one is awake yet
apart from the waking world, where nothing is really real and nothing
normal.  He had a call to go hence, and he must go.  Minute after minute
passed, hours passed, and the fight of the soul to maintain itself
against the disordered mind went on.  All his past seemed but part
of a desert, lonely and barren and strange.

In the previous year he had made a journey to Arizona with Jowett, to see
some railway construction there, and at a ranch he had visited he came
upon some verses which had haunted his mind ever since.  They fastened
upon his senses now.  They were like a lonesome monotone which at length
gave calm to his torturing reflections.  In his darkness the verses kept
repeating themselves:

         "I heard the desert calling, and my heart stood still
          There was Winter in my world and in my heart:
          A breath came from the mesa and a message stirred my will,
          And my soul and I arose up to depart.

          I heard the desert calling; and I knew that over there,
          In an olive-sheltered garden where the mesquite grows,
          Was a woman of the sunrise, with the starshine in her hair,
          And a beauty that the almond-blossom blows.

          In the night-time when the ghost-trees glimmered in the moon,
          Where the mesa by the watercourse was spanned,
          Her loveliness enwrapped me like the blessedness of June,
          And all my life was thrilling in her hand.

          I hear the desert calling, and my heart stands still;
          There is Summer in my world and in my heart;
          A breath comes from the mesa, and a will beyond my will
          Binds my footsteps as I rise up to depart."

This strange, half-mystic song of the mesa and the olive-groves, of the
ghost-trees and the moon, kept playing upon his own heated senses like
the spray from a cooling stream, and at last it quieted him.  The dark
spirit of self-destruction loosened its hold.

His brain had been strained beyond the normal, almost unconsciously his
fingers had fastened on the pistol in the drawer of the table by his bed.
It had been there since the day when he had travelled down from Alaska--
loaded as it had been when he had carried it down the southern trail.
But as his fingers tightened on the little engine of death, from the
words which had been ringing in his brain came the flash of a revelation:

              ".  .  .  And a will beyond my will
               Binds my footsteps as I rise up to depart."

A will beyond his will!  It was as though Fleda's fingers were laid upon
his own; as though she whispered in his ear and her breath swept his
cheek; as though she was there in the room beside him, making the
darkness light, tempering the wind of chastisement to his naked soul.
In the overstrain of his nervous system the illusion was powerful.  He
thought he heard her voice.  The pistol slipped from his fingers, and he
fell back on the pillow with a sigh.  The will beyond his will bound his
footsteps.

Who can tell?  The grim, malign experience of Fleda in her bedroom with
the Thing she thought was from beyond the bounds of her own life; the
voice that spoke to Ingolby, and the breath that swept over his cheek
were, perhaps, as real in a sense as would have been the corporeal
presence of Jethro Fawe in one case and of Fleda Druse in the other.
It may be that in very truth Fleda Druse's spirit with its poignant
solicitude controlled his will as he "rose up to depart."  But if it was
only an illusion, it was not less a miracle.  Some power of suggestion
bound his fleeing footsteps, drew him back from the Brink.

He slept.  Once the nurse came and looked at him and returned to the
other room; and twice Jim stole in silently for a moment and retired
again to his own chamber.  The stars shone in at the doors that opened
out from the quiet room into the night, the watch beside the bed ticked
on, the fox-terrier which always slept on a mat at the foot of the bed
sighed in content, while his master breathed heavily in a sleep full of
dreams that hurried past like phantasmagoria--of a hundred things that
had been in his life, and that had never been; of people he had known,
distorted, ridiculous and tremendous.  There were dreams of fiddlers and
barbers, of crowds writhing in passion in a room where there was a
billiard-table and a lucky horseshoe on the wall.  There were dreams that
tossed and mingled in one whirlpool vision; and then at last came a dream
which was so cruel and clear that it froze his senses.

It was the dream of a great bridge over a swiftflowing river; of his own
bridge over the Sagalacof that bridge being destroyed by men who crept
through the night with dynamite in their hands.

With a hoarse, smothered cry he awoke.  His eyes opened wide.  His heart
was beating like a hammer against his side.  Only the terrier at his feet
heard the muttered agony.  With an instinct all its own, it slipped to
the floor.

It watched its master get out of bed, cross the room and feel for a coat
along the wall--an overcoat which he used as a dressing-gown at times.
Putting it on hastily, with outstretched hands Ingolby felt his way to
the glass doors opening on the veranda.  The dog, as though to let him
know he was there, rubbed against his legs.  Ingolby murmured a soft,
unintelligible word, and, in his bare feet, passed out on to the veranda,
and from there to the garden and towards the gate at the front of the
house.

The nurse heard the gate click lightly, but she was only half-awake, and
as all was quiet in the next room, she composed herself in her chair
again with the vain idea that she was not sleeping.  And Jim the faithful
one, as though under a narcotic of fate, was snoring softly beside the
vacant room.  The streets were still.  No lights burned anywhere so far
as eye could see.  But now and then, in the stillness through which the
river flowed on, murmuring and rhythmic, there rose the distant sounds of
disorderly voices.  Ingolby was in a state which was neither sleep nor
waking, which was in part delirium, in part oblivion to all things in the
world save one--an obsession so complete, that he moved automatically
through the street in which he lived towards that which led to the
bridge.

His terrier, as though realizing exactly what he wished, seemed to guide
him by rubbing against his legs, and even pressing hard against them when
he was in any danger of losing the middle of the road, or swerving
towards a ditch or some obstruction.  Only once did they pass any human
being, and that was when they came upon a camp of road-builders, where a
red light burned, and two men slept in the open by a dying fire.  One of
them raised his head when Ingolby passed, but being more than half-
asleep, and seeing only a man and a dog, thought nothing of it, and
dropped back again upon his rough pillow.  He was a stranger to Lebanon,
and there was little chance of his recognizing Ingolby in the semi-
darkness.

As they neared the river, Ingolby became deeply agitated.  He moved with
his hands outstretched.  Had it not been for his dog he would probably
have walked into the Sagalac; for though he seemed to have an instinct
that was extra-natural, he swayed and staggered in the delirium driving
him on.  There was one dreadful moment when, having swerved from the road
leading on to the bridge, he was within a foot of the river-bank.  One
step farther, and he would have plunged down thirty feet into the stream,
to be swept to the Rapids below.

But for the first time the terrier made a sound.  He gave a whining bark
almost human in its meaning, and threw himself at the legs of his master,
pushing him backwards and over towards the road leading upon the bridge,
as a collie guides sheep.  Presently Ingolby felt the floor of the bridge
under his feet; and now he hastened on, with outstretched arms and head
bent forward, listening intently, the dog trotting beside, with what
knowledge working in him Heaven alone knew.

The roar of the Rapids below was a sonorous accompaniment to Ingolby's
wild thoughts.  One thing only he felt, one thing only heard--the men in
Barbazon's Tavern saying that the bridge should be blown up on the
Saturday night; and this was Saturday night--the night of the day
following that of the Orange funeral.  He had heard the criminal hireling
of Felix Marchand say that it should be done at midnight, and that the
explosive should be laid under that part of the bridge which joined the
Manitou bank of the Sagalac.  As though in very truth he saw with his
eyes, he stopped short not far from the point where the bridge joined the
land, and stood still, listening.

For several minutes he was motionless, intent, as an animal waiting for
its foe.  At last his newly-sensitive ears heard footsteps approaching
and low voices. The footsteps came nearer, the voices, though so low,
became more distinct.  They were now not fifty feet away, but to the
delirious Ingolby they were as near as death had been when his fingers
closed on the pistol in his room.

He took a step forward, and with passionate voice and arms outstretched,
he cried:

    "You shall not do it-by God, you shall not touch my bridge!
     I built it.  You shall not touch it.  Back, you devils-back!"


The terrier barked loudly.

The two men in the semi-darkness in front of him cowered at the sight of
this weird figure holding the bridge they had come to destroy.  His
words, uttered in so strange and unnatural a voice, shook their nerves.
They shrank away from the ghostly form with the outstretched arms.

In the minute's pause following on his words, a giant figure suddenly
appeared behind the dynamiters.  It was the temporary Chief Constable of
Lebanon, returning from his visit to Tekewani.  He had heard Ingolby's
wild words, and he realized the situation.

"Ingolby--steady  there,  Ingolby !" he  called.  "Steady!  Steady!
Gabriel Druse is here.  It's all right."

At the first sound of Druse's voice the two wreckers turned and ran.

As they did so, Ingolby's hands fell to his side, and he staggered
forward.

"Druse--Fleda," he murmured, then swayed, trembled and fell.

With words that stuck in his throat Gabriel Druse stooped and lifted him
up in his arms.  At first he turned towards the bridge, as though to
cross over to Lebanon, but the last word Ingolby had uttered rang
in his ears, and he carried him away into the trees towards his own
house, the faithful terrier following.  "Druse--Fleda !"  They were the
words of one who had suddenly emerged from the obsession of delirium into
sanity, and then had fallen into as sudden unconsciousness.

"Fleda!  Fleda!" called Gabriel Druse outside the door of his house a
quarter of an hour later, and her voice in reply was that of one who knew
that the feet of Fate were at her threshold.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

They think that if a vote's worth having it's worth paying for
You never can really overtake a newspaper lie








This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





A ROMANY OF THE SNOWS

BEING A CONTINUATION OF THE PERSONAL HISTORIES OF "PIERRE AND HIS PEOPLE"
AND THE LAST EXISTING RECORDS OF PRETTY PIERRE

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 3.


THE BRIDGE HOUSE
THE EPAULETTES
THE HOUSE WITH THE BROKEN SHUTTER
THE FINDING OF FINGALL
THREE COMMANDMENTS IN THE VULGAR TONGUE




THE BRIDGE HOUSE

It stood on a wide wall between two small bridges.  These were approaches
to the big covered bridge spanning the main channel of the Madawaska
River, and when swelled by the spring thaws and rains, the two flanking
channels divided at the foundations of the house, and rustled away
through the narrow paths of the small bridges to the rapids.  You could
stand at any window in the House and watch the ugly, rushing current,
gorged with logs, come battering at the wall, jostle between the piers,
and race on to the rocks and the dam and the slide beyond.  You stepped
from the front door upon the wall, which was a road between the bridges,
and from the back door into the river itself.

The House had once been a tavern.  It looked a wayfarer, like its patrons
the river-drivers, with whom it was most popular.  You felt that it had
no part in the career of the village on either side, but was like a rock
in a channel, at which a swimmer caught or a vagrant fish loitered.

Pierre knew the place, when, of a night in the springtime or early
summer, throngs of river-drivers and their bosses sauntered at its doors,
or hung over the railing of the wall, as they talked and smoked.

The glory of the Bridge House suddenly declined.  That was because
Finley, the owner, a rich man, came to hate the place--his brother's
blood stained the barroom floor.  He would have destroyed the house but
that John Rupert, the beggared gentleman came to him, and wished to rent
it for a dwelling.

Mr. Rupert was old, and had been miserably poor for many years, but he
had a breeding and a manner superior to anyone at Bamber's Boom.  He was
too old for a labourer, he had no art or craftsmanship; his little money
was gone in foolish speculations, and he was dependent on his
granddaughter's slight earnings from music teaching and needlework.  But
he rented an acre of ground from Finley, and grew vegetables; he gathered
driftwood from the river for his winter fire, and made up the accounts of
the storekeeper occasionally.  Yet it was merely keeping off starvation.
He was not popular.  He had no tongue for the meaningless village talk.
People held him in a kind of awe, and yet they felt a mean satisfaction
when they saw him shouldering driftwood, and piling it on the shore to be
dragged away--the last resort of the poor, for which they blush.

When Mr. Rupert asked for the House, Finley knew the chances were he
would not get the rental; yet, because he was sorry for the old man, he
gave it to him at a low rate.  He closed up the bar-room, however, and it
was never opened afterwards.

So it was that Mr. Rupert and Judith, his granddaughter, came to live
there.  Judith was a blithe, lissome creature, who had never known
comfort or riches: they were taken from her grandfather before she was
born, and her father and mother both died when she was a little child.
But she had been taught by her grandmother, when she lived, and by her
grandfather, and she had felt the graces of refined life.  Withal, she
had a singular sympathy for the rude, strong life of the river.  She was
glad when they came to live at the Bridge House, and shamed too: glad
because they could live apart from the other villagers; shamed because it
exposed her to the curiosity of those who visited the House, thinking it
was still a tavern.  But that was only for a time.

One night Jules Brydon, the young river-boss, camped with his men at
Bamber's Boom.  He was of parents Scotch and French, and the amalgamation
of races in him made a striking product.  He was cool and indomitable,
yet hearty and joyous.  It was exciting to watch him at the head of his
men, breaking up a jam of logs, and it was a delight to hear him of an
evening as he sang:

              "Have you heard the cry of the Long Lachine,
               When happy is the sun in the morning?
               The rapids long and the banks of green,
               As we ride away in the morning,
                  On the froth of the Long Lachine?"

One day, soon after they came, the dams and booms were opened above,
and forests of logs came riding down to Bamber's Boom.  The current was
strong, and the logs came on swiftly.  As Brydon's gang worked, they saw
a man out upon a small raft of driftwood, which had been suddenly caught
in the drive of logs, and was carried out towards the middle channel.
The river-drivers laughed, for they failed to see that the man was old,
and that he could not run across the rolling logs to the shore.  The old
man, evidently hopeless, laid down his pike-pole, folded his hands, and
drifted with the logs.  The river-drivers stopped laughing.  They began
to understand.

Brydon saw a woman standing at a window of the House waving her arms,
and there floated up the river the words, "Father!  father!"  He caught
up a pikepole, and ran over that spinning floor of logs to the raft.  The
old man's face was white, but there was no fear in his eyes.

"I cannot run the logs," he said at once; "I never did; I am too old, and
I slip.  It's no use.  It is my granddaughter at that window.  Tell her
that I'll think of her to the last.  .  .  .  Good-bye!"

Brydon was eyeing the logs.  The old man's voice was husky; he could not
cry out, but he waved his hand to the girl.

"Oh, save him!" came from her faintly.

Brydon's eyes were now on the covered bridge.  Their raft was in the
channel, coming straight between two piers.  He measured his chances.  He
knew if he slipped, doing what he intended, that both might be drowned,
and certainly Mr. Rupert; for the logs were close, and to drop among them
was a bad business.  If they once closed over there was an end of
everything.

"Keep quite still," he said, "and when I throw you catch."

He took the slight figure in his arms, sprang out upon the slippery logs,
and ran.  A cheer went up from the men on the shore, and the people who
were gathering on the bridges, too late to be of service.  Besides, the
bridge was closed, and there was only a small opening at the piers.  For
one of these piers Brydon was making.  He ran hard.  Once he slipped and
nearly fell, but recovered.  Then a floating tree suddenly lunged up and
struck him, so that he dropped upon a knee; but again he was up, and
strained for the pier.  He was within a few feet of it as they came to
the bridge.  The people gave a cry of fear, for they saw that there was
no chance of both making it; because, too, at the critical moment a space
of clear water showed near the pier.  But Brydon raised John Rupert up,
balanced himself, and tossed him at the pier, where two river-drivers
stood stretching out their arms.  An instant afterwards the old man was
with his granddaughter.  But Brydon slipped and fell; the roots of a tree
bore him down, and he was gone beneath the logs!

There was a cry of horror from the watchers, then all was still.  But
below the bridge they saw an arm thrust up between the logs, and then
another arm crowding them apart.  Now a head and shoulders appeared.
Luckily the piece of timber which Brydon grasped was square, and did not
roll.  In a moment he was standing on it.  There was a wild shout of
encouragement.  He turned his battered, blood-stained face to the bridge
for an instant, and, with a wave of the hand and a sharp look towards the
rapids below, once more sprang out.  It was a brave sight, for the logs
were in a narrower channel and more riotous.  He rubbed the blood out of
his eyes that he might see his way.  The rolling forest gave him no
quarter, but he came on, rocking with weakness, to within a few rods of
the shore.  Then a half-dozen of his men ran out on the logs,--they were
packed closely here,--caught him up, and brought him to dry ground.

They took him to the Bridge House.  He was hurt more than he or they
thought.  The old man and the girl met them at the door.  Judith gave a
little cry when she saw the blood and Brydon's bruised face.  He lifted
his head as though her eyes had drawn his, and, their looks meeting,
he took his hat off.  Her face flushed; she dropped her eyes.  Her
grandfather seized Brydon's big hand, and said some trembling words of
thanks.  The girl stepped inside, made a bed for him upon the sofa, and
got him something to drink.  She was very cool; she immediately asked
Pierre to go for the young doctor who had lately come to the place, and
made ready warm water with which she wiped Brydon's blood-stained face
and hands, and then gave him some brandy.  His comrades standing round
watched her admiringly, she was so deft and delicate.  Brydon, as if to
be nursed and cared for was not manly, felt ashamed, and came up quickly
to a sitting posture, saying, "Pshaw!  I'm all right!"  But he turned
sick immediately, and Judith's arms caught his head and shoulders as he
fell back.  His face turned, and was pillowed on her bosom.  At this she
blushed, but a look of singular dignity came into her face.  Those
standing by were struck with a kind of awe; they were used mostly to the
daughters of habitants and fifty-acre farmers.  Her sensitive face spoke
a wonderful language: a divine gratitude and thankfulness; and her eyes
had a clear moisture which did not dim them.  The situation was trying to
the river-drivers--it was too refined; and they breathed more freely when
they got outside and left the girl, her grandfather, Pierre, and the
young doctor alone with the injured man.

That was how the thing began.  Pierre saw the conclusion of events from
the start.  The young doctor did not.  From the hour when he bound up
Brydon's head, Judith's fingers aiding him, he felt a spring in his blood
new to him.  When he came to know exactly what it meant, and acted, it
was too late.  He was much surprised that his advances were gently
repulsed.  He pressed them hard: that was a mistake.  He had an idea,
not uncommon in such cases, that he was conferring an honour.  But he was
very young.  A gold medal in anatomy is likely to turn a lad's head at
the start.  He falls into the error that the ability to demonstrate the
medulla oblongata should likewise suffice to convince the heart of a
maid.  Pierre enjoyed the situation; he knew life all round; he had boxed
the compass of experience.

He believed in Judith.  The old man interested him: he was a wreck out of
an unfamiliar life.

"Well, you see," Pierre said to Brydon one day, as they sat on the high
cross-beams of the little bridge, "you can't kill it in a man--what he
was born.  Look, as he piles up the driftwood over there.  Broken down,
eh?  Yes, but then there is something--a manner, an eye.  He piles the
wood like champagne bottles.  On the raft, you remember, he took off his
hat to death.  That's different altogether from us."

He gave a sidelong glance at Brydon, and saw a troubled look.

"Yes," Brydon said, "he is different; and so is she."

"She is a lady," Pierre said, with slow emphasis.  "She couldn't hide it
if she tried.  She plays the piano, and looks all silk in calico.  Made
for this?"--he waved his hand towards the Bridge House.  "No, no!  made
for--"

He paused, smiled enigmatically, and dropped a bit of wood on the swift
current.

Brydon frowned, then said: "Well, made for what, Pierre?"

Pierre looked over Brydon's shoulder, towards a pretty cottage on the
hillside.  "Made for homes like that, not this," he said, and he nodded
first towards the hillside, then to the Bridge House.  (The cottage
belonged to the young doctor.) A growl like an animal's came from Brydon,
and he clinched the other's shoulder.  Pierre glanced at the hand, then
at Brydon's face, and said sharply: "Take it away."

The hand dropped; but Brydon's face was hot, and his eyes were hard.

Pierre continued: "But then women are strange.  What you expect they will
not--no.  Riches?--it is nothing; houses like that on the hill, nothing.
They have whims.  The hut is as good as the house, with the kitchen in
the open where the river welts and washes, and a man--the great man of
the world to them--to play the little game of life with.  .  .  .  Pshaw!
you are idle: move; you are thick in the head: think hard; you like the
girl: speak."

As he said this, there showed beneath them the front timbers of a small
crib of logs with a crew of two men, making for the rapids and the slide
below.  Here was an adventure, for running the rapids with so slight a
craft and small a crew was smart work.  Pierre, measuring the distance,
and with a "Look out, below!" swiftly let himself down by his arms as
far as he could, and then dropped to the timbers, as lightly as if it
were a matter of two feet instead of twelve.  He waved a hand to Brydon,
and the crib shot on.  Brydon sat eyeing it abstractedly till it ran into
the teeth of the rapids, the long oars of the three men rising and
falling to the monotonous cry.  The sun set out the men and the craft
against the tall dark walls of the river in strong relief, and Brydon was
carried away from what Pierre had been saying.  He had a solid pleasure
in watching, and he sat up with a call of delight when he saw the crib
drive at the slide.  Just glancing the edge, she shot through safely.
His face blazed.

"A pretty sight!" said a voice behind him.

Without a word he swung round, and dropped, more heavily than Pierre,
beside Judith.

"It gets into our bones," he said.  "Of course, though it ain't the same
to you," he added, looking down at her over his shoulder.  "You don't
care for things so rough, mebbe?"

"I love the river," she said quietly.

"We're a rowdy lot, we river-drivers.  We have to be.  It's a rowdy
business."

"I never noticed that," she replied, gravely smiling.  "When I was small
I used to go to the river-drivers' camps with my brother, and they were
always kind to us.  They used to sing and play the fiddle, and joke; but
I didn't think then that they were rowdy, and I don't now.  They were
never rough with us."

"No one'd ever be rough with you," was the reply.  "Oh yes," she said
suddenly, and turned her head away.  She was thinking of what the young
doctor had said to her that morning; how like a foolish boy he had acted:
upbraiding her, questioning her, saying unreasonable things, as young
egoists always do.  In years she was younger than he, but in wisdom much
older: in all things more wise and just.  He had not struck her, but with
his reckless tongue he had cut her to the heart.  "Oh yes," she repeated,
and her eyes ran up to his face and over his great stalwart body; and
then she leaned over the railing and looked into the water.

"I'd break the man into pieces that was rough with you," he said between
his teeth.

"Would you?" she asked in a whisper.  Then, not giving him a chance to
reply, "We are very poor, you know, and some people are rough with the
poor--and proud.  I remember," she went on, simply, dreamily, and as if
talking to herself, "the day when we first came to the Bridge House.  I
sat down on a box and looked at the furniture--it was so little--and
cried.  Coming here seemed the last of what grandfather used to be.  I
couldn't help it.  He sat down too, and didn't say anything.  He was very
pale, and I saw that his eyes ached as he looked at me.  Then I got angry
with myself, and sprang up and went to work--and we get along pretty
well."

She paused and sighed; then, after a minute: "I love the river.  I don't
believe I could be happy away from it.  I should like to live on it, and
die on it, and be buried in it."

His eyes were on her eagerly.  But she looked so frail and dainty that
his voice, to himself, sounded rude.  Still, his hand blundered along the
railing to hers, and covered it tenderly--for so big a hand.  She drew
her fingers away, but not very quickly.  "Don't!" she said, "and--and
someone is coming!"

There were footsteps behind them.  It was her grandfather, carrying
a board fished from the river.  He grasped the situation, and stood
speechless with wonder.  He had never thought of this.  He was a
gentleman, in spite of all, and this man was a common river-boss.
Presently he drew himself up with an air.  The heavy board was still in
his arms.  Brydon came over and took the board, looking him squarely in
the eyes.

"Mr. Rupert," he said, "I want to ask something."  The old man nodded.

"I helped you out of a bad scrape on the river?"  Again the old man
nodded.

"Well, mebbe, I saved your life.  For that I'm going to ask you to draw
no more driftwood from the Madawaska--not a stick, now or ever."

"It is the only way we can keep from freezing in winter."  Mr. Rupert
scarcely knew what he said.  Brydon looked at Judith, who turned away,
then answered: "I'll keep you from freezing, if you'll let me, you--and
Judith."

"Oh, please let us go into the house," Judith said hastily.

She saw the young doctor driving towards them out of the covered bridge!

When Brydon went to join his men far down the river he left a wife behind
him at the Bridge House, where she and her grandfather were to stay until
the next summer.  Then there would be a journey from Bamber's Boom to a
new home.

In the late autumn he came, before he went away to the shanties in the
backwoods, and again in the winter just before the babe was born.  Then
he went far up the river to Rice Lake and beyond, to bring down the
drives of logs for his Company.  June came, and then there was a sudden
sorrow at the Bridge House.  How great it was, Pierre's words as he stood
at the door one evening will testify.  He said to the young doctor: "Save
the child, and you shall have back the I O U on your house."  Which was
also evidence that the young doctor had fallen into the habit of
gambling.

The young doctor looked hard at him.  He had a selfish nature.  "You can
only do what you can do," he said.

Pierre's eyes were sinister.  "If you do not save it, one would guess
why."

The other started, flushed, was silent, and then said: "You think I'm a
coward.  We shall see.  There is a way, but it may fail."

And though he sucked the diphtheria poison from the child's throat, it
died the next night.

Still, the cottage that Pierre and Company had won was handed back with
such good advice as only a worldwise adventurer can give.

Of the child's death its father did not know.  They were not certain
where he was.  But when the mother took to her bed again, the young
doctor said it was best that Brydon should come.  Pierre had time and
inclination to go for him.  But before he went he was taken to Judith's
bedside.  Pierre had seen life and death in many forms, but never
anything quite like this: a delicate creature floating away upon a summer
current travelling in those valleys which are neither of this life nor
of that; but where you hear the echoes of both, and are visited by
solicitous spirits.  There was no pain in her face--she heard a little,
familiar voice from high and pleasant hills, and she knew, so wise are
the dying, that her husband was travelling after her, and that they would
be all together soon.  But she did not speak of that.  For the knowledge
born of such a time is locked up in the soul.

Pierre was awe-stricken.  Unconsciously he crossed himself.

"Tell him to come quickly," she said, "if you find him,"--her fingers
played with the coverlet,--"for I wish to comfort him.  .  .  .  Someone
said that you were bad, Pierre.  I do not believe it.  You were sorry
when my baby went away.  I am--going away--too.  But do not tell him
that.  Tell him I cannot walk about.  I want him to carry me--to carry
me.  Will you?"  Pierre put out his hand to hers creeping along the
coverlet to him; but it was only instinct that guided him, for he could
not see.  He started on his journey with his hat pulled down over his
eyes.

One evening when the river was very high and it was said that Brydon's
drives of logs would soon be down, a strange thing happened at the Bridge
House.

The young doctor had gone, whispering to Mr. Rupert that he would come
back later.  He went out on tiptoe, as from the presence of an angel.
His selfishness had dropped away from him.  The evening wore on, and in
the little back room a woman's voice said:

"Is it morning yet, father?"

"It is still day.  The sun has not set, my child."

"I thought it had gone, it seemed so dark."

"You have been asleep, Judith.  You have come out of the dark."

"No, I have come out into the darkness--into the world."

"You will see better when you are quite awake."

"I wish I could see the river, father.  Will you go and look?"

Then there was a silence.  "Well?" she asked.

"It is beautiful," he said, "and the sun is still bright."

"You see as far as Indian Island?"

"I can see the white comb of the reef beyond it, my dear."

"And no one--is coming?"

"There are men making for the shore, and the fires are burning, but no
one is--coming this way.  .  .  .  He would come by the road, perhaps."

"Oh no, by the river.  Pierre has not found him.  Can you see the Eddy?"

"Yes.  It is all quiet there; nothing but the logs tossing round it."

"We used to sit there--he and I--by the big cedar tree.  Everything was
so cool and sweet.  There was only the sound of the force-pump and the
swallowing of the Eddy.  They say that a woman was drowned there, and
that you can see her face in the water, if you happen there at sunrise,
weeping and smiling also: a picture in the water.  .  .  .  Do you think
it true, father?"

"Life is so strange, and who knows what is not life, my child?"

"When baby was dying I held it over the water beneath that window, where
the sunshine falls in the evening; and it looked down once before its
spirit passed like a breath over my face.  Maybe, its look will stay, for
him to see when he comes.  It was just below where you stand....  Father,
can you see its face?"  "No, Judith; nothing but the water and the
sunshine."

"Dear, carry me to the window."

When this was done she suddenly leaned forward with shining eyes and
anxious fingers.  "My baby!  My baby!" she said.

She looked up the river, but her eyes were fading, she could not see far.
"It is all a grey light," she said, "I cannot see well."  Yet she smiled.
"Lay me down again, father," she whispered.

After a little she sank into a slumber.  All at once she started up.
"The river, the beautiful river!" she cried out gently.  Then, at the
last, "Oh, my dear, my dear!"

And so she came out of the valley into the high hills.  Later he was left
alone with his dead.  The young doctor and others had come and gone.  He
would watch till morning.  He sat long beside her, numb to the world.  At
last he started, for he heard a low clear call behind the House.  He went
out quickly to the little platform, and saw through the dusk a man
drawing himself up.  It was Brydon.  He caught the old man's shoulders
convulsively.  "How is she?" he asked.  "Come in, my son," was the low
reply.  The old man saw a grief greater than his own.  He led the husband
to the room where the wife lay beautiful and still.  "She is better, as
you see," he said bravely.

The hours went, and the two sat near the body, one on either side.  They
knew not what was going on in the world.

As they mourned, Pierre and the young doctor sat silent in that cottage
on the hillside.  They were roused at last.  There came up to Pierre's
keen ears the sound of the river.

"Let us go out," he said; "the river is flooding.  You can hear the
logs."

They came out and watched.  The river went swishing, swilling past, and
the dull boom of the logs as they struck the piers of the bridge or some
building on the shore came rolling to them.

"The dams and booms have burst!" Pierre said.  He pointed to the camps
far up the river.  By the light of the camp-fires there appeared a wide
weltering flood of logs and debris.  Pierre's eyes shifted to the Bridge
House.  In one room was a light.  He stepped out and down, and the other
followed.  They had almost reached the shore, when Pierre cried out
sharply: "What's that?"

He pointed to an indistinct mass bearing down upon the Bridge House.  It
was a big shed that had been carried away, and, jammed between timbers,
had not broken up.  There was no time for warning.  It came on swiftly,
heavily.  There was a strange, horrible, grinding sound, and then they
saw the light of that one room move on, waving a little to and fro-on to
the rapids, the cohorts of logs crowding hard after.

Where the light was two men had started to their feet when the crash
came.  They felt the House move.  "Run-save yourself!" cried the old man
quietly.  "We are lost!"

The floor rocked.

"Go," he said again.  "I will stay with her."

"She is mine," Brydon said; and he took her in his arms.  "I will not
go."

They could hear the rapids below.  The old man steadied himself in the
deep water on the floor, and caught out yearningly at the cold hands.

"Come close, come close," said Brydon.  "Closer; put your arms round
her."

The old man did so.  They were locked in each other's arms--dead and
living.

The old man spoke, with a piteous kind of joy: "We therefore commit her
body to the deep--!"

The three were never found.






THE EPAULETTES

Old Athabasca, chief of the Little Crees, sat at the door of his lodge,
staring down into the valley where Fort Pentecost lay, and Mitawawa his
daughter sat near him, fretfully pulling at the fringe of her fine
buckskin jacket.  She had reason to be troubled.  Fyles the trader had
put a great indignity upon Athabasca.  A factor of twenty years before,
in recognition of the chief's merits and in reward of his services, had
presented him with a pair of epaulettes, left in the Fort by some officer
in Her Majesty's service.  A good, solid, honest pair of epaulettes, well
fitted to stand the wear and tear of those high feasts and functions at
which the chief paraded them upon his broad shoulders.  They were the
admiration of his own tribe, the wonder of others, the envy of many
chiefs.  It was said that Athabasca wore them creditably, and was no more
immobile and grand-mannered than became a chief thus honoured above his
kind.

But the years went, and there came a man to Fort Pentecost who knew not
Athabasca.  He was young, and tall and strong, had a hot temper, knew
naught of human nature, was possessed by a pride more masterful than his
wisdom, and a courage stronger than his tact.  He was ever for high-
handedness, brooked no interference, and treated the Indians more as
Company's serfs than as Company's friends and allies.  Also, he had an
eye for Mitawawa, and found favour in return, though to what depth it
took a long time to show.  The girl sat high in the minds and desires of
the young braves, for she had beauty of a heathen kind, a deft and dainty
finger for embroidered buckskin, a particular fortune with a bow and
arrow, and the fleetest foot.  There were mutterings because Fyles the
white man came to sit often in Athabasca's lodge.  He knew of this, but
heeded not at all.  At last Konto, a young brave who very accurately
guessed at Fyles' intentions, stopped him one day on the Grey Horse
Trail, and in a soft, indolent voice begged him to prove his regard in
a fight without weapons, to the death, the survivor to give the other
burial where he fell.  Fyles was neither fool nor coward.  It would have
been foolish to run the risk of leaving Fort and people masterless for an
Indian's whim; it would have been cowardly to do nothing.  So he whipped
out a revolver, and bade his rival march before him to the Fort; which
Konto very calmly did, begging the favour of a bit of tobacco as he went.

Fyles demanded of Athabasca that he should sit in judgment, and should at
least banish Konto from his tribe, hinting the while that he might have
to put a bullet into Konto's refractory head if the thing were not done.
He said large things in the name of the H.B.C., and was surprised
that Athabasca let them pass unmoved.  But that chief, after long
consideration, during which he drank Company's coffee and ate Company's
pemmican, declared that he could do nothing: for Konto had made a fine
offer, and a grand chance of a great fight had been missed.  This was in
the presence of several petty officers and Indians and woodsmen at the
Fort.  Fyles had vanity and a nasty temper.  He swore a little, and with
words of bluster went over and ripped the epaulettes from the chief's
shoulders as a punishment, a mark of degradation.  The chief said
nothing.  He got up, and reached out his hands as if to ask them back;
and when Fyles refused, he went away, drawing his blanket high over his
shoulders.  It was wont before to lie loosely about him, to show his
badges of captaincy and alliance.

This was about the time that the Indians were making ready for the
buffalo, and when their chief took to his lodge, and refused to leave it,
they came to ask him why.  And they were told.  They were for making
trouble, but the old chief said the quarrel was his own: he would settle
it in his own way.  He would not go to the hunt.  Konto, he said, should
take his place; and when his braves came back there should be great
feasting, for then the matter would be ended.

Half the course of the moon and more, and Athabasca came out of his
lodge--the first time in the sunlight since the day of his disgrace.
He and his daughter sat silent and watchful at the door.  There had been
no word between Fyles and Athabasca, no word between Mitawawa and Fyles.
The Fort was well-nigh tenantless, for the half-breeds also had gone
after buffalo, and only the trader, a clerk, and a half-breed cook
were left.

Mitawawa gave a little cry of impatience: she had held her peace so long
that even her slow Indian nature could endure no more.  "What will my
father Athabasca do?" she asked.  "With idleness the flesh grows soft,
and the iron melts from the arm."

"But when the thoughts are stone, the body is as that of the Mighty Men
of the Kimash Hills.  When the bow is long drawn, beware the arrow."

"It is no answer," she said: "what will my father do?"

"They were of gold," he answered, "that never grew rusty.  My people were
full of wonder when they stood before me, and the tribes had envy as they
passed.  It is a hundred moons and one red midsummer moon since the Great
Company put them on my shoulders.  They were light to carry, but it was
as if I bore an army.  No other chief was like me.  That is all over.
When the tribes pass they will laugh, and my people will scorn me if
I do not come out to meet them with the yokes of gold."

"But what will my father do?" she persisted.

"I have had many thoughts, and at night I have called on the Spirits who
rule.  From the top of the Hill of Graves I have beaten the soft drum,
and called, and sung the hymn which wakes the sleeping Spirits: and I
know the way."

"What is the way?"  Her eyes filled with a kind of fear or trouble,
and many times they shifted from the Fort to her father, and back again.
The chief was silent.  Then anger leapt into her face.

"Why does my father fear to speak to his child?" she said.  "I will
speak plain.  I love the man: but I love my father also."

She stood up, and drew her blanket about her, one hand clasped proudly on
her breast.  "I cannot remember my mother; but I remember when I first
looked down from my hammock in the pine tree, and saw my father sitting
by the fire.  It was in the evening like this, but darker, for the pines
made great shadows.  I cried out, and he came and took me down, and laid
me between his knees, and fed me with bits of meat from the pot.  He
talked much to me, and his voice was finer than any other.  There is no
one like my father--Konto is nothing: but the voice of the white man,
Fyles, had golden words that our braves do not know, and I listened.
Konto did a brave thing.  Fyles, because he was a great man of the
Company, would not fight, and drove him like a dog.  Then he made my
father as a worm in the eyes of the world.  I would give my life for
Fyles the trader, but I would give more than my life to wipe out my
father's shame, and to show that Konto of the Little Crees is no dog.
I have been carried by the hands of the old men of my people, I have
ridden the horses of the young men: their shame is my shame."

The eyes of the chief had never lifted from the Fort: nor from his look
could you have told that he heard his daughter's words.  For a moment he
was silent, then a deep fire came into his eyes, and his wide heavy brows
drew up so that the frown of anger was gone.  At last, as she waited, he
arose, put out a hand and touched her forehead.

"Mitawawa has spoken well," he said.  "There will be an end.  The yokes
of gold are mine: an honour given cannot be taken away.  He has stolen;
he is a thief.  He would not fight Konto: but I am a chief and he shall
fight me.  I am as great as many men--I have carried the golden yokes: we
will fight for them.  I thought long, for I was afraid my daughter loved
the man more than her people: but now I will break him in pieces.  Has
Mitawawa seen him since the shameful day?"

"He has come to the lodge, but I would not let him in unless he brought
the epaulettes.  He said he would bring them when Konto was punished.
I begged of him as I never begged of my own father, but he was hard as
the ironwood tree.  I sent him away.  Yet there is no tongue like his in
the world; he is tall and beautiful, and has the face of a spirit."

From the Fort Fyles watched the two.  With a pair of field-glasses he
could follow their actions, could almost read their faces.  "There'll be
a lot of sulking about those epaulettes, Mallory," he said at last,
turning to his clerk.  "Old Athabasca has a bee in his bonnet."

"Wouldn't it be just as well to give 'em back, sir?"  Mallory had been at
Fort Pentecost a long time, and he understood Athabasca and his Indians.
He was a solid, slow-thinking old fellow, but he had that wisdom of the
north which can turn from dove to serpent and from serpent to lion in the
moment.

"Give 'em back, Mallory?  I'll see him in Jericho first, unless he goes
on his marrow-bones and kicks Konto out of the camp."

"Very well, sir.  But I think we'd better keep an eye open."

"Eye open, be hanged!  If he'd been going to riot he'd have done so
before this.  Besides, the girl--!"  Mallory looked long and earnestly at
his master, whose forehead was glued to the field-glass.  His little eyes
moved as if in debate, his slow jaws opened once or twice.  At last he
said: "I'd give the girl the go-by, Mr. Fyles, if I was you, unless I
meant to marry her."  Fyles suddenly swung round.  "Keep your place,
blast you, Mallory, and keep your morals too.  One'd think you were a
missionary."  Then with a sudden burst of anger: "Damn it all, if my men
don't stand by me against a pack of treacherous Indians, I'd better get
out."

"Your men will stand by you, sir: no fear.  I've served three traders
here, and my record is pretty clean, Mr. Fyles.  But I'll say it to your
face, whether you like it or not, that you're not as good a judge of the
Injin as me, or even Duc the cook: and that's straight as I can say it,
Mr. Fyles."

Fyles paced up and down in anger--not speaking; but presently threw up
the glass, and looked towards Athabasca's lodge.  "They're gone," he said
presently; "I'll go and see them to-morrow.  The old fool must do what
I want, or there'll be ructions."

The moon was high over Fort Pentecost when Athabasca entered the silent
yard.  The dogs growled, but Indian dogs growl without reason, and no one
heeds them.  The old chief stood a moment looking at the windows, upon
which slush-lights were throwing heavy shadows.  He went to Fyles'
window: no one was in the room.  He went to another: Mallory and Duc were
sitting at a table.  Mallory had the epaulettes, looking at them and
fingering the hooks by which Athabasca had fastened them on.  Duc was
laughing: he reached over for an epaulette, tossed it up, caught it and
threw it down with a guffaw.  Then the door opened, and Athabasca walked
in, seized the epaulettes, and went swiftly out again.  Just outside the
door Mallory clapped a hand on one shoulder, and Duc caught at the
epaulettes.

Athabasca struggled wildly.  All at once there was a cold white flash,
and Duc came huddling to Mallory's feet.  For a brief instant Mallory and
the Indian fell apart, then Athabasca with a contemptuous fairness tossed
his knife away, and ran in on his man.  They closed; strained, swayed,
became a tangled wrenching mass; and then Mallory was lifted high into
the air, and came down with a broken back.

Athabasca picked up the epaulettes, and hurried away, breathing hard, and
hugging them to his bare red-stained breast.  He had nearly reached the
gate when he heard a cry.  He did not turn, but a heavy stone caught him
high in the shoulders, and he fell on his face and lay clutching the
epaulettes in his outstretched hands.

Fyles' own hands were yet lifted with the effort of throwing, when he
heard the soft rush of footsteps, and someone came swiftly into his
embrace.  A pair of arms ran round his shoulders--lips closed with his--
something ice-cold and hard touched his neck--he saw a bright flash at
his throat.

In the morning Konto found Mitawawa sitting with wild eyes by her
father's body.  She had fastened the epaulettes on its shoulders.
Fyles and his men made a grim triangle of death at the door of the Fort.






THE HOUSE WITH THE BROKEN SHUTTER

              "He stands in the porch of the world--
                  (Why should the door be shut?)
               The grey wolf waits at his heel,
                  (Why is the window barred?)
               Wild is the trail from the Kimash Hills,
               The blight has fallen on bush and tree,
               The choking earth has swallowed the streams,
               Hungry and cold is the Red Patrol:
                  (Why should the door be shut?)
               The Scarlet Hunter has come to bide--
                  (Why is the window barred?)"

Pierre stopped to listen.  The voice singing was clear and soft, yet
strong--a mezzo-soprano without any culture save that of practice and
native taste.  It had a singular charm--a sweet, fantastic sincerity.
He stood still and fastened his eyes on the house, a few rods away.  It
stood on a knoll perching above Fort Ste. Anne.  Years had passed since
Pierre had visited the Fort, and he was now on his way to it again, after
many wanderings.  The house had stood here in the old days, and he
remembered it very well, for against it John Marcey, the Company's man,
was shot by Stroke Laforce, of the Riders of the Plains.  Looking now,
he saw that the shutter, which had been pulled off to bear the body away,
was hanging there just as he had placed it, with seven of its slats
broken and a dark stain in one corner.  Something more of John Marcey
than memory attached to that shutter.  His eyes dwelt on it long he
recalled the scene: a night with stars and no moon, a huge bonfire to
light the Indians, at their dance, and Marcey, Laforce, and many others
there, among whom was Lucille, the little daughter of Gyng the Factor.
Marcey and Laforce were only boys then, neither yet twenty-three, and
they were friendly rivals with the sweet little coquette, who gave her
favors with a singular impartiality and justice.  Once Marcey had given
her a gold spoon.  Laforce responded with a tiny, fretted silver basket.
Laforce was delighted to see her carrying her basket, till she opened it
and showed the spoon inside.  There were many mock quarrels, in one of
which Marcey sent her a letter by the Company's courier, covered with
great seals, saying, "I return you the hairpin, the egg-shell, and the
white wolf's tooth.  Go to your Laforce, or whatever his ridiculous name
may be."

In this way the pretty game ran on, the little goldenhaired, golden-
faced, golden-voiced child dancing so gayly in their hearts, but nestling
in them too, after her wilful fashion, until the serious thing came--the
tragedy.

On the mad night when all ended, she was in the gayest, the most elf-like
spirits.  All went well until Marcey dug a hole in the ground, put a
stone in it, and, burying it, said it was Laforce's heart.  Then Laforce
pretended to ventriloquise, and mocked Marcey's slight stutter.  That was
the beginning of the trouble, and Lucille, like any lady of the world,
troubled at Laforce's unkindness, tried to smooth things over--tried very
gravely.  But the playful rivalry of many months changed its composition
suddenly as through some delicate yet powerful chemical action, and the
savage in both men broke out suddenly.  Where motives and emotions are
few they are the more vital, their action is the more violent.  No one
knew quite what the two young men said to each other, but presently,
while the Indian dance was on, they drew to the side of the house, and
had their duel out in the half-shadows, no one knowing, till the shots
rang on the night, and John Marcey, without a cry, sprang into the air
and fell face upwards, shot through the heart.

They tried to take the child away, but she would not go; and when they
carried Marcey on the shutter she followed close by, resisting her
father's wishes and commands.  And just before they made a prisoner of
Laforce, she said to him very quietly--so like a woman she was--"I will
give you back the basket, and the riding-whip, and the other things, and
I will never forgive you--never--no, never!"

Stroke Laforce had given himself up, had himself ridden to Winnipeg,
a thousand miles, and told his story.  Then the sergeant's stripes had
been stripped from his arm, he had been tried, and on his own statement
had got twelve years' imprisonment.  Ten years had passed since then--
since Marcey was put away in his grave, since Pierre left Fort Ste.
Anne, and he had not seen it or Lucille in all that time.  But he knew
that Gyng was dead, and that his widow and her child had gone south or
east somewhere; of Laforce after his sentence he had never heard.

He stood looking at the house from the shade of the solitary pine-tree
near it, recalling every incident of that fatal night.  He had the gift
of looking at a thing in its true proportions, perhaps because he had
little emotion and a strong brain, or perhaps because early in life his
emotions were rationalised.  Presently he heard the voice again:

              "He waits at the threshold stone--
                  (Why should the key-hole rust?)
               The eagle broods at his side,
                  (Why should the blind be drawn?)
               Long has he watched, and far has he called
               The lonely sentinel of the North:
               "Who goes there?" to the wandering soul:
               Heavy of heart is the Red Patrol
                  (Why should the key-hole rust?)
               The Scarlet Hunter is sick for home,
                  (Why should the blind be drawn?)"

Now he recognised the voice.  Its golden timbre brought back a young
girl's golden face and golden hair.  It was summer, and the window with
the broken shutter was open.  He was about to go to it, when a door of
the house opened, and a girl appeared.  She was tall, with rich, yellow
hair falling loosely about her head; she had a strong, finely cut chin
and a broad brow, under which a pair of deep blue eyes shone-violet blue,
rare and fine.  She stood looking down at the Fort for a few moments,
unaware of Pierre's presence.  But presently she saw him leaning against
the tree, and she started as from a spirit.

"Monsieur!" she said--"Pierre!" and stepped forward again from the
doorway.

He came to her, and "Ah, p'tite Lucille," he said, "you remember me, eh?
--and yet so many years ago!"

"But you remember me," she answered, "and I have changed so much!"

"It is the man who should remember, the woman may forget if she will."

Pierre did not mean to pay a compliment; he was merely thinking.

She made a little gesture of deprecation.  "I was a child," she said.

Pierre lifted a shoulder slightly.  "What matter?  It is sex that I mean.
What difference to me--five, or forty, or ninety?  It is all sex.  It is
only lovers, the hunters of fire-flies, that think of age--mais oui!"

She had a way of looking at you before she spoke, as though she were
trying to find what she actually thought.  She was one after Pierre's own
heart, and he knew it; but just here he wondered where all that ancient
coquetry was gone, for there were no traces of it left; she was steady of
eye, reposeful, rich in form and face, and yet not occupied with herself.
He had only seen her for a minute or so, yet he was sure that what she
was just now she was always, or nearly so, for the habits of a life leave
their mark, and show through every phase of emotion and incident whether
it be light or grave.

"I think I understand you," she said.  "I think I always did a little,
from the time you stayed with Grah the idiot at Fort o' God, and fought
the Indians when the others left.  Only--men said bad things of you, and
my father did not like you, and you spoke so little to me ever.  Yet I
mind how you used to sit and watch me, and I also mind when you rode the
man down who stole my pony, and brought them both back."

Pierre smiled--he was pleased at this.  "Ah, my young friend," he said,
"I do not forget that either, for though he had shaved my ear with a
bullet, you would not have him handed over to the Riders of the Plains
--such a tender heart!"

Her eyes suddenly grew wide.  She was childlike in her amazement, indeed,
childlike in all ways, for she was very sincere.  It was her great
advantage to live where nothing was required of her but truth, she had
not suffered that sickness, social artifice.

"I never knew," she said, "that he had shot at you--never!  You did not
tell that."

"There is a time for everything--the time for that was not till now."

"What could I have done then?"

"You might have left it to me.  I am not so pious that I can't be
merciful to the sinner.  But this man--this Brickney--was a vile
scoundrel always, and I wanted him locked up.  I would have shot him
myself, but I was tired of doing the duty of the law.  Yes, yes," he
added, as he saw her smile a little.  "It is so.  I have love for
justice, even I, Pretty Pierre.  Why not justice on myself?  Ha!  The
law does not its duty.  And maybe some day I shall have to do its work on
myself.  Some are coaxed out of life, some are kicked out, and some open
the doors quietly for themselves, and go a-hunting Outside."

"They used to talk as if one ought to fear you," she said, "but"--she
looked him straight in the eyes--"but maybe that's because you've never
hid any badness."

"It is no matter, anyhow," he answered.  "I live in the open, I walk in
the open road, and I stand by what I do to the open law and the gospel.
It is my whim--every man to his own saddle."

"It is ten years," she said abruptly.

"Ten years less five days," he answered as sententiously.

"Come inside," she said quietly, and turned to the door.

Without a word he turned also, but instead of going direct to the door
came and touched the broken shutter and the dark stain on one corner with
a delicate forefinger.  Out of the corner of his eye he could see her on
the doorstep, looking intently.

He spoke as if to himself: "It has not been touched since then--no.
It was hardly big enough for him, so his legs hung over.  Ah, yes, ten
years--  Abroad, John Marcey!"  Then, as if still musing, he turned to
the girl: "He had no father or mother--no one, of course; so that it
wasn't so bad after all.  If you've lived with the tongue in the last
hole of the buckle as you've gone, what matter when you go!  C'est egal
--it is all the same."

Her face had become pale as he spoke, but no muscle stirred; only her
eyes filled with a deeper color, and her hand closed tightly on the door-
jamb.  "Come in, Pierre," she said, and entered.  He followed her.
"My mother is at the Fort," she added, "but she will be back soon."

She placed two chairs not far from the open door.  They sat, and Pierre
slowly rolled a cigarette and lighted it.

"How long have you lived here?" he asked presently.

"It is seven years since we came first," she replied.  "After that night
they said the place was haunted, and no one would live in it, but when my
father died my mother and I came for three years.  Then we went east, and
again came back, and here we have been."

"The shutter?" Pierre asked.

They needed few explanations--their minds were moving with the same
thought.

"I would not have it changed, and of course no one cared to touch it.
So it has hung there."

"As I placed it ten years ago," he said.

They both became silent for a time, and at last he said: "Marcey had no
one,--Sergeant Laforce a mother."

"It killed his mother," she whispered, looking into the white sunlight.
She was noting how it was flashed from the bark of the birch-trees near
the Fort.

"His mother died," she added again, quietly.  "It killed her--the gaol
for him!"

"An eye for an eye," he responded.

"Do you think that evens John Marcey's death?" she sighed.

"As far as Marcey's concerned," he answered.  "Laforce has his own
reckoning besides."

"It was not a murder," she urged.

"It was a fair fight," he replied firmly, "and Laforce shot straight."
He was trying to think why she lived here, why the broken shutter still
hung there, why the matter had settled so deeply on her.  He remembered
the song she was singing, the legend of the Scarlet Hunter, the fabled
Savior of the North.

              "Heavy of heart is the Red Patrol--
                  (Why should the key-hole rust?)
               The Scarlet Hunter is sick for home,
                  (Why should the blind be drawn?)"

He repeated the words, lingering on them.  He loved to come at the truth
of things by allusive, far-off reflections, rather than by the sharp
questioning of the witness-box.  He had imagination, refinement in such
things.  A light dawned on him as he spoke the words--all became clear.
She sang of the Scarlet Hunter, but she meant someone else!
That was it--

              "Hungry and cold is the Red Patrol--
                  (Why should the door be shut?)
               The Scarlet Hunter has come to bide,
                  (Why is the window barred?)"

But why did she live here?  To get used to a thought, to have it so near
her, that if the man--if Laforce himself came, she would have herself
schooled to endure the shadow and the misery of it all?  Ah, that was it!
The little girl, who had seen her big lover killed, who had said she
would never forgive the other, who had sent him back the fretted-silver
basket, the riding-whip, and other things, had kept the criminal in her
mind all these years; had, out of her childish coquetry, grown into--
what?  As a child she had been wise for her years--almost too wise.
What had happened?  She had probably felt sorrow for Laforce at first,
and afterwards had shown active sympathy, and at last--no, he felt that
she had not quite forgiven him, that, whatever was, she had not hidden
the criminal in her heart.  But why did she sing that song?  Her heart
was pleading for him--for the criminal.  Had she and her mother gone to
Winnipeg to be near Laforce, to comfort him?  Was Laforce free now, and
was she unwilling?  It was so strange that she should thus have carried
on her childhood into her womanhood.  But he guessed her--she had
imagination.

"His mother died in my arms in Winnipeg," she said abruptly at last.
"I'm glad I was some comfort to her.  You see, it all came through me--
I was so young and spoiled and silly--John Marcey's death, her death,
and his long years in prison.  Even then I knew better than to set the
one against the other.  Must a child not be responsible?  I was--I am!"

"And so you punish yourself?"

"It was terrible for me--even as a child.  I said that I could never
forgive, but when his mother died, blessing me, I did.  Then there came
something else."

"You saw him, there amie?"

"I saw him--so changed, so quiet, so much older--all grey at the temples.
At first I lived here that I might get used to the thought of the thing
--to learn to bear it; and afterwards that I might learn--" She paused,
looking in half-doubt at Pierre.

"It is safe; I am silent," he said.

"That I might learn to bear--him," she continued.

"Is he still--" Pierre paused.

She spoke up quickly.  "Oh no, he has been free two years."

"Where is he now?"

"I don't know."  She waited for a minute, then said again, "I don't know.
When he was free, he came to me, but I--I could not.  He thought, too,
that because he had been in gaol, that I wouldn't--be his wife.  He
didn't think enough of himself, he didn't urge anything.  And I wasn't
ready--no--no--no--how could I be!  I didn't care so much about the gaol,
but he had killed John Marcey.  The gaol--what was that to me!  There was
no real shame in it unless he had done a mean thing.  He had been wicked
--not mean.  Killing is awful, but not shameful.  Think--the difference--
if he had been a thief!"

Pierre nodded.  "Then some one should have killed him!" he said.
"Well, after?"

"After--after--ah, he went away for a year.  Then he came back; but no,
I was always thinking of that night I walked behind John Marcey's body
to the Fort.  So he went away again, and we came here, and here we have
lived."

"He has not come here?"

"No; once from the far north he sent me a letter by an Indian, saying
that he was going with a half-breed to search for a hunting party,
an English gentleman and two men who were lost.  The name of one
of the men was Brickney."

Pierre stopped short in a long whiffing of smoke.  "Holy!" he said,
"that thief Brickney again.  He would steal the broad road to hell if he
could carry it.  He once stole the quarters from a dead man's eyes.  Mon
Dieu! to save Brickney's life, the courage to do that--like sticking your
face in the mire and eating!--But, pshaw!--go on, p'tite Lucille."

"There is no more.  I never heard again."

"How long was that ago?"

"Nine months or more."

"Nothing has been heard of any of them?"

"Nothing at all.  The Englishman belonged to the Hudson's Bay Company,
but they have heard nothing down here at Fort Ste. Anne."

"If he saves the Company's man, that will make up the man he lost for
them, eh--you think that, eh?"  Pierre's eyes had a curious ironical
light.

"I do not care for the Company," she said.  "John Marcey's life was his
own."

"Good!" he added quickly, and his eyes admired her.  "That is the thing.
Then, do not forget that Marcey took his life in his hands himself, that
he would have killed Laforce if Laforce hadn't killed him."

"I know, I know," she said, "but I should have felt the same if John
Marcey had killed Stroke Laforce."

"It is a pity to throw your life away," he ventured.  He said this for a
purpose.  He did not think she was throwing it away.

She was watching a little knot of horsemen coming over a swell of the
prairie far off.  She withdrew her eyes and fixed them on Pierre.  "Do
you throw your life away if you do what is the only thing you are told
to do?"

She placed her hand on her heart--that had been her one guide.

Pierre got to his feet, came over, and touched her on the shoulder.

"You have the great secret," he said quietly.  "The thing may be all
wrong to others, but if it's right to yourself--that's it--mais oui!
If he comes," he added "if he comes back, think of him as well as Marcey.
Marcey is sleeping--what does it matter?  If he is awake, he has better
times, for he was a man to make another world sociable.  Think of
Laforce, for he has his life to live, and he is a man to make this
world sociable.

               'The Scarlet Hunter is sick for home--
                  (Why should the door be shut?)'"

Her eyes had been following the group of horsemen on the plains.  She
again fixed them on Pierre, and stood up.

"It is a beautiful legend--that," she said.

"But?--but?" he asked.

She would not answer him.  "You will come again," she said; "you will--
help me?"

"Surely, p'tite Lucille, surely, I will come.  But to help--ah,
that would sound funny to the Missionary at the Fort and to others!"

"You understand life," she said, "and I can speak to you."

"It's more to you to understand you than to be good, eh?"

"I guess it's more to any woman," she answered.  They both passed out of
the house.  She turned towards the broken shutter.  Then their eyes met.
A sad little smile hovered at her lips.

"What is the use?" she said, and her eyes fastened on the horsemen.

He knew now that she would never shudder again at the sight of it,
or at the remembrance of Marcey's death.

"But he will come," was the reply to her, and her smile almost settled
and stayed.

They parted, and as he went down the hill he saw far over, coming up,
a woman in black, who walked as if she carried a great weight.  "Every
shot that kills ricochets," he said to himself:

"His mother dead--her mother like that!"

He passed into the Fort, renewing acquaintances in the Company's store,
and twenty minutes after he was one to greet the horsemen that Lucille
had seen coming over the hills.  They were five, and one had to be helped
from his horse.  It was Stroke Laforce, who had been found near dead at
the Metal River by a party of men exploring in the north.

He had rescued the Englishman and his party, but within a day of the
finding the Englishman died, leaving him his watch, a ring, and a cheque
on the H. B. C.  at Winnipeg.  He and the two survivors, one of whom was
Brickney, started south.  One night Brickney robbed him and made to get
away, and on his seizing the thief he was wounded.  Then the other man
came to his help and shot Brickney: after that weeks of wandering, and
at last rescue and Fort Ste. Anne.

A half-hour after this Pierre left Laforce on the crest of the hill above
the Fort, and did not turn to go down till he had seen the other pass
within the house with the broken shutter.  And later he saw a little
bonfire on the hill.  The next evening he came to the house again
himself.  Lucille rose to meet him.

"'Why should the door be shut?"' he quoted smiling.

"The door is open," she answered quickly and with a quiet joy.

He turned to the motion of her hand, and saw Laforce asleep on a couch.

Soon afterwards, as he passed from the house, he turned towards the
window.  The broken shutter was gone.

He knew now the meaning of the bonfire the night before.






THE FINDING OF FINGALL

"Fingall!  Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

A grey mist was rising from the river, the sun was drinking it
delightedly, the swift blue water showed underneath it, and the top of
Whitefaced Mountain peaked the mist by a hand-length.  The river brushed
the banks like rustling silk, and the only other sound, very sharp and
clear in the liquid monotone, was the crack of a woodpecker's beak on a
hickory tree.

It was a sweet, fresh autumn morning in Lonesome Valley.  Before night
the deer would bellow reply to the hunters' rifles, and the mountain-goat
call to its unknown gods; but now there was only the wild duck skimming
the river, and the high hilltop rising and fading into the mist, the
ardent sun, and again that strange cry--

"Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!  Fingall!"

Two men, lounging at a fire on a ledge of the hills, raised their eyes to
the mountain-side beyond and above them, and one said presently:

"The second time.  It's a woman's voice, Pierre."  Pierre nodded, and
abstractedly stirred the coals about with a twig.

"Well, it is a pity--the poor Cynthie," he said at last.

"It is a woman, then.  You know her, Pierre--her story?"

"Fingall!  Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

Pierre raised his head towards the sound; then after a moment, said:

"I know Fingall."

"And the woman?  Tell me."

"And the girl.  Fingall was all fire and heart, and devil-may-care.
She--she was not beautiful except in the eye, but that was like a flame
of red and blue.  Her hair, too--then--would trip her up, if it hung
loose.  That was all, except that she loved him too much.  But women--
et puis, when a woman gets a man between her and the heaven above and the
earth beneath, and there comes the great hunger, what is the good!  A man
cannot understand, but he can see, and he can fear.  What is the good!
To play with life, that is not much; but to play with a soul is more than
a thousand lives.  Look at Cynthie."

He paused, and Lawless waited patiently.  Presently Pierre continued:

Fingall was gentil; he would take off his hat to a squaw.  It made no
difference what others did; he didn't think--it was like breathing to
him.  How can you tell the way things happen?  Cynthie's father kept the
tavern at St. Gabriel's Fork, over against the great saw-mill.  Fingall
was foreman of a gang in the lumberyard.  Cynthie had a brother--Fenn.
Fenn was as bad as they make, but she loved him, and Fingall knew it
well, though he hated the young skunk.  The girl's eyes were like two
little fire-flies when Fingall was about.

"He was a gentleman, though he had only half a name--Fingall--like that.
I think he did not expect to stay; he seemed to be waiting for something
--always when the mail come in he would be there; and afterwards you
wouldn't see him for a time.  So it seemed to me that he made up his mind
to think nothing of Cynthie, and to say nothing."

"Fingall!  Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

The strange, sweet, singing voice sounded nearer.  "She's coming this
way, Pierre," said Lawless.

"I hope not to see her.  What is the good!"

"Well, let us have the rest of the story."

"Her brother Fenn was in Fingall's gang.  One day there was trouble.
Fenn called Fingall a liar.  The gang stopped piling; the usual thing did
not come.  Fingall told him to leave the yard, and they would settle some
other time.  That night a wicked thing happened.  We were sitting in the
bar-room when we heard two shots and then a fall.  We ran into the other
room; there was Fenn on the floor, dying.  He lifted himself on his
elbow, pointed at Fingall--and fell back.  The father of the boy stood
white and still a few feet away.  There was no pistol showing--none at
all.

"The men closed in on Fingall.  He did not stir--he seemed to be thinking
of something else.  He had a puzzled, sorrowful look.  The men roared
round him, but he waved them back for a moment, and looked first at the
father, then at the son.  I could not understand at first.  Someone
pulled a pistol out of Fingall's pocket and showed it.  At that moment
Cynthie came in.  She gave a cry.  By the holy!  I do not want to hear a
cry like that often.  She fell on her knees beside the boy, and caught
his head to her breast.  Then with a wild look she asked who did it.
They had just taken Fingall out into the bar-room.  They did not tell
her his name, for they knew that she loved him.

"'Father,' she said all at once, 'have you killed the man that killed
Fenn?'

"The old man shook his head.  There was a sick colour in his face.

"'Then I will kill him,' she said.

"She laid her brother's head down, and stood up.  Someone put in her hand
the pistol, and told her it was the same that had killed Fenn.  She took
it, and came with us.  The old man stood still where he was; he was like
stone.  I looked at him for a minute and thought; then I turned round and
went to the bar-room; and he followed.  Just as I got inside the door,
I saw the girl start back, and her hand drop, for she saw that it was
Fingall; he was looking at her very strange.  It was the rule to empty
the gun into a man who had been sentenced; and already Fingall had heard
his, 'God-have-mercy!'  The girl was to do it.

"Fingall said to her in a muffled voice, 'Fire--Cynthie!'

"I guessed what she would do.  In a kind of a dream she raised the pistol
up--up--up, till I could see it was just out of range of his head, and
she fired.  One!  two!  three!  four!  five!  Fingall never moved a
muscle; but the bullets spotted the wall at the side of his head.  She
stopped after the five; but the arm was still held out, and her finger
was on the trigger; she seemed to be all dazed.  Only six chambers were
in the gun, and of course one chamber was empty.  Fenn had its bullet in
his lungs, as we thought.  So someone beside Cynthie touched her arm,
pushing it down.  But there was another shot, and this time, because of
the push, the bullet lodged in Fingall's skull."

Pierre paused now, and waved with his hand towards the mist which hung
high up like a canopy between the hills.

"But," said Lawless, not heeding the scene, "what about that sixth
bullet?"

"Holy, it is plain!  Fingall did not fire the shot.  His revolver was
full, every chamber, when Cynthie first took it."

"Who killed the lad?"

"Can you not guess?  There had been words between the father and the
boy: both had fierce blood.  The father, in a mad minute, fired; the boy
wanted revenge on Fingall, and, to save his father, laid it on the other.
The old man?  Well, I do not know whether he was a coward, or stupid, or
ashamed--he let Fingall take it."

"Fingall took it to spare the girl, eh?"

"For the girl.  It wasn't good for her to know her father killed his own
son."

"What came after?"

"The worst.  That night the girl's father killed himself, and the two
were buried in the same grave.  Cynthie--"

"Fingall!  Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

"You hear?  Yes, like that all the time as she sat on the floor,
her hair about her like a cloud, and the dead bodies in the next room.
She thought she had killed Fingall, and she knew now that he was
innocent.  The two were buried.  Then we told her that Fingall was not
dead.  She used to come and sit outside the door, and listen to his
breathing, and ask if he ever spoke of her.  What was the good of lying?
If we said he did, she'd have come in to him, and that would do no good,
for he wasn't right in his mind.  By and by we told her he was getting
well, and then she didn't come, but stayed at home, just saying his name
over to herself.  Alors, things take hold of a woman--it is strange!
When Fingall was strong enough to go out, I went with him the first time.
He was all thin and handsome as you can think, but he had no memory,
and his eyes were like a child's.  She saw him, and came out to meet him.
What does a woman care for the world when she loves a man?  Well, he just
looked at her as if he'd never seen her before, and passed by without a
sign, though afterwards a trouble came in his face.  Three days later he
was gone, no one knew where.  That is two years ago.  Ever since she has
been looking for him."

"Is she mad?"

"Mad?  Holy Mother! it is not good to have one thing in the head all the
time!  What do you think?  So much all at once!  And then--"

"Hush, Pierre!  There she is!" said Lawless, pointing to a ledge of rock
not far away.

The girl stood looking out across the valley, a weird, rapt look in her
face, her hair falling loose, a staff like a shepherd's crook in one
hand, the other hand over her eyes as she slowly looked from point to
point of the horizon.

The two watched her without speaking.  Presently she saw them.  She gazed
at them for a minute, then descended to them.  Lawless and Pierre rose,
doffing their hats.  She looked at both a moment, and her eyes settled on
Pierre.  Presently she held out her hand to him. "I knew you--yesterday,"
she said.

Pierre returned the intensity of her gaze with one kind and strong.

"So--so, Cynthie," he said; "sit down and eat."

He dropped on a knee and drew a scone and some fish from the ashes.  She
sat facing them, and, taking from a bag at her side some wild fruits, ate
slowly, saying nothing.  Lawless noticed that her hair had become grey at
her temples, though she was but one-and-twenty years old.  Her face,
brown as it was, shone with a white kind of light, which may, or may not,
have come from the crucible of her eyes, where the tragedy of her life
was fusing.  Lawless could not bear to look long, for the fire that
consumes a body and sets free a soul is not for the sight of the quick.
At last she rose, her body steady, but her hands having that tremulous
activity of her eyes.

"Will you not stay, Cynthie?" asked Lawless very kindly.

She came close to him, and, after searching his eyes, said with a smile
that almost hurt him, "When I have found him, I will bring him to your
camp-fire.  Last night the Voice said that he waits for me where the mist
rises from the river at daybreak, close to the home of the White Swan.
Do you know where is the home of the White Swan?  Before the frost comes
and the red wolf cries, I must find him.  Winter is the time of sleep.

"I will give him honey and dried meat.  I know where we shall live
together.  You never saw such roses!  Hush! I have a place where we can
hide."

Suddenly her gaze became fixed and dream-like, and she said slowly:
"In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour
of death, and in the Day of Judgment, Good Lord, deliver us!"

"Good Lord, deliver us!" repeated Lawless in a low voice.  Without
looking at them, she slowly turned away and passed up the hill-side, her
eyes scanning the valley as before.

"Good Lord, deliver us!" again said Lawless.  "Where did she get it?"

"From a book which Fingall left behind."

They watched her till she rounded a cliff, and was gone; then they
shouldered their kits and passed up the river on the trail of the wapiti.

One month later, when a fine white surf of frost lay on the ground,
and the sky was darkened often by the flight of the wild geese southward,
they came upon a hut perched on a bluff, at the edge of a clump of pines.
It was morning, and Whitefaced Mountain shone clear and high, without a
touch of cloud or mist from its haunches to its crown.

They knocked at the hut door, and, in answer to a voice, entered.  The
sunlight streamed in over a woman, lying upon a heap of dried flowers in
a corner.  A man was kneeling beside her.  They came near, and saw that
the woman was Cynthie.

"Fingall!" broke out Pierre, and caught the kneeling man by the
shoulder.  At the sound of his voice the woman's eyes opened.

"Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!" she said, and reached up a hand.

Fingall stooped and caught her to his breast: "Cynthie! poor girl!  Oh,
my poor Cynthie!" he said.  In his eyes, as in hers, was a sane light,
and his voice, as hers, said indescribable things.

Her head sank upon his shoulder, her eyes closed; she slept.  Fingall
laid her down with a sob in his throat; then he sat up and clutched
Pierre's hand.

"In the East, where the doctors cured me, I heard all," he said, pointing
to her, "and I came to find her.  I was just in time; I found her
yesterday."

"She knew you?" whispered Pierre.

"Yes, but this fever came on."  He turned and looked at her, and,
kneeling, smoothed away the hair from the quiet face.  "Poor girl!"
he said; "poor girl!"

"She will get well?" asked Pierre.

"God grant it!" Fingall replied.  "She is better--better."

Lawless and Pierre softly turned and stole away, leaving the man alone
with the woman he loved.

The two stood in silence, looking upon the river beneath.  Presently a
voice crept through the stillness.  "Fingall!  Oh, Fingall!--Fingall!"

It was the voice of a woman returning from the dead.






THREE COMMANDMENTS IN THE VULGAR TONGUE


I

"Read on, Pierre," the sick man said, doubling the corner of the wolf-
skin pillow so that it shaded his face from the candle.

Pierre smiled to himself, thinking of the unusual nature of his
occupation, raised an eyebrow as if to someone sitting at the other side
of the fire,--though the room was empty save for the two--and went on
reading:

     "Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the
     noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a
     rushing like the rushing of mighty waters!

     "The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but God
     shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased
     as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling
     thing before the whirlwind.

     "And behold at evening-tide trouble; and before the morning he is
     not.  This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them
     that rob us."

The sick man put up his hand, motioning for silence, and Pierre, leaving
the Bible open, laid it at his side.  Then he fell to studying the figure
on the couch.  The body, though reduced by a sudden illness, had an
appearance of late youth, a firmness of mature manhood; but the hair was
grey, the beard was grizzled, and the face was furrowed and seamed as
though the man had lived a long, hard life.  The body seemed thirty years
old, the head sixty; the man's exact age was forty-five.  His most
singular characteristic was a fine, almost spiritual intelligence, which
showed in the dewy brightness of the eye, in the lighted face, in the
cadenced definiteness of his speech.  One would have said, knowing
nothing of him, that he was a hermit; but again, noting the firm,
graceful outlines of his body, that he was a soldier.  Within the past
twenty-four hours he had had a fight for life with one of the terrible
"colds" which, like an unstayed plague, close up the courses of the body,
and carry a man out of the hurly-burly, without pause to say how much or
how little he cares to go.

Pierre, whose rude skill in medicine was got of hard experiences here and
there, had helped him back into the world again, and was himself now a
little astonished at acting as Scripture reader to a Protestant invalid.
Still, the Bible was like his childhood itself, always with him in
memory, and Old Testament history was as wine to his blood.  The lofty
tales sang in his veins: of primitive man, adventure, mysterious and
exalted romance.  For nearly an hour, with absorbing interest, he had
read aloud from these ancient chronicles to Fawdor, who held this Post of
the Hudson's Bay Company in the outer wilderness.

Pierre had arrived at the Post three days before, to find a half-breed
trapper and an Indian helpless before the sickness which was hurrying to
close on John Fawdor's heart and clamp it in the vice of death.  He had
come just in time.  He was now ready to learn, by what ways the future
should show, why this man, of such unusual force and power, should have
lived at a desolate post in Labrador for twenty-five years.

"'This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob
us--'"  Fawdor repeated the words slowly, and then said: "It is good to
be out of the restless world.  Do you know the secret of life, Pierre?"

Pierre's fingers unconsciously dropped on the Bible at his side, drumming
the leaves.  His eyes wandered over Fawdor's face, and presently he
answered, "To keep your own commandments."

"The ten?" asked the sick man, pointing to the Bible.  Pierre's fingers
closed the book.  "Not the ten, for they do not fit all; but one by one
to make your own, and never to break--comme ca!"

"The answer is well," returned Fawdor; "but what is the greatest
commandment that a man can make for himself?"

"Who can tell?  What is the good of saying, 'Thou shalt keep holy the
Sabbath day,' when a man lives where he does not know the days?  What is
the good of saying, 'Thou shalt not steal,' when a man has no heart to
rob, and there is nothing to steal?  But a man should have a heart, an
eye for justice.  It is good for him to make his commandments against
that wherein he is a fool or has a devil.  Justice,--that is the thing."

"'Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour'?" asked
Fawdor softly.

"Yes, like that.  But a man must put it in his own words, and keep the
law which he makes.  Then life does not give a bad taste in the mouth."

"What commandments have you made for yourself, Pierre?"

The slumbering fire in Pierre's face leaped up.  He felt for an instant
as his father, a chevalier of France, might have felt if a peasant had
presumed to finger the orders upon his breast.  It touched his native
pride, so little shown in anything else.  But he knew the spirit behind
the question, and the meaning justified the man.  "Thou shalt think with
the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one woman," he said, and
paused.

"Justice and mercy," murmured the voice from the bed.

"Thou shalt keep the faith of food and blanket."  Again Pierre paused.

"And a man shall have no cause to fear his friend," said the voice again.

The pause was longer this time, and Pierre's cold, handsome face took on
a kind of softness before he said, "Remember the sorrow of thine own
wife."

"It is a good commandment," said the sick man, "to make all women safe
whether they be true--or foolish."

"The strong should be ashamed to prey upon the weak.  Pshaw!  such a
sport ends in nothing.  Man only is man's game."

Suddenly Pierre added: "When you thought you were going to die, you gave
me some papers and letters to take to Quebec.  You will get well.  Shall
I give them back?  Will you take them yourself?"

Fawdor understood: Pierre wished to know his story.  He reached out a
hand, saying, "I will take them myself.  You have not read them?"

"No.  I was not to read them till you died--bien?" He handed the packet
over.

"I will tell you the story," Fawdor said, turning over on his side, so
that his eyes rested full on Pierre.

He did not begin at once.  An Esquimau dog, of the finest and yet wildest
breed, which had been lying before the fire, stretched itself, opened its
red eyes at the two men, and, slowly rising, went to the door and sniffed
at the cracks.  Then it turned, and began pacing restlessly around the
room.  Every little while it would stop, sniff the air, and go on again.
Once or twice, also, as it passed the couch of the sick man, it paused,
and at last it suddenly rose, rested two feet on the rude headboard of
the couch, and pushed its nose against the invalid's head.  There was
something rarely savage and yet beautifully soft in the dog's face,
scarred as it was by the whips of earlier owners.  The sick man's hand
went up and caressed the wolfish head.  "Good dog, good Akim!" he said
softly in French.  "Thou dost know when a storm is on the way; thou dost
know, too, when there is a storm in my heart."

Even as he spoke a wind came crying round the house, and the parchment
windows gave forth a soft booming sound.  Outside, Nature was trembling
lightly in all her nerves; belated herons, disturbed from the freshly
frozen pool, swept away on tardy wings into the night and to the south;
a herd of wolves, trooping by the hut, passed from a short, easy trot to
a low, long gallop, devouring, yet fearful.  It appeared as though the
dumb earth were trying to speak, and the mighty effort gave it pain,
from which came awe and terror to living things.

So, inside the house, also, Pierre almost shrank from the unknown sorrow
of this man beside him, who was about to disclose the story of his life.
The solitary places do not make men glib of tongue; rather, spare of
words.  They whose tragedy lies in the capacity to suffer greatly, being
given the woe of imagination, bring forth inner history as a mother gasps
life into the world.

"I was only a boy of twenty-one," Fawdor said from the pillow, as he
watched the dog noiselessly travelling from corner to corner, "and I had
been with the Company three years.  They had said that I could rise fast;
I had done so.  I was ambitious; yet I find solace in thinking that I saw
only one way to it,--by patience, industry, and much thinking.  I read a
great deal, and cared for what I read; but I observed also, that in
dealing with men I might serve myself and the Company wisely.

"One day the governor of the Company came from England, and with him a
sweet lady, his young niece, and her brother.  They arranged for a tour
to the Great Lakes, and I was chosen to go with them in command of the
boatmen.  It appeared as if a great chance had come to me, and so said
the factor at Lachine on the morning we set forth.  The girl was as
winsome as you can think; not of such wonderful beauty, but with a face
that would be finer old than young; and a dainty trick of humour had she
as well.  The governor was a testy man; he could not bear to be crossed
in a matter; yet, in spite of all, I did not think he had a wilful
hardness.  It was a long journey, and we were set to our wits to make it
always interesting; but we did it somehow, for there were fishing and
shooting, and adventure of one sort and another, and the lighter things,
such as singing and the telling of tales, as the boatmen rowed the long
river.

"We talked of many things as we travelled, and I was glad to listen to
the governor, for he had seen and read much.  It was clear he liked to
have us hang upon his tales and his grand speeches, which seemed a little
large in the mouth; and his nephew, who had a mind for raillery, was now
and again guilty of some witty impertinence; but this was hard to bring
home to him, for he could assume a fine childlike look when he pleased,
confusing to his accusers.  Towards the last he grew bolder, and said
many a biting thing to both the governor and myself, which more than once
turned his sister's face pale with apprehension, for she had a nice sense
of kindness.  Whenever the talk was at all general, it was his delight to
turn one against the other.  Though I was wary, and the girl understood
his game, at last he had his way.

"I knew Shakespeare and the Bible very well, and, like most bookish young
men, phrase and motto were much on my tongue, though not always given
forth.  One evening, as we drew to the camp-fire, a deer broke from the
woods and ran straight through the little circle we were making, and
disappeared in the bushes by the riverside.  Someone ran for a rifle; but
the governor forbade, adding, with an air, a phrase with philosophical
point.  I, proud of the chance to show I was not a mere backwoodsman at
such a sport, capped his aphorism with a line from Shakespeare's
Cymbeline.

"'Tut, tut!' said the governor smartly; 'you haven't it well, Mr. Fawdor;
it goes this way,' and he went on to set me right.  His nephew at that
stepped in, and, with a little disdainful laugh at me, made some galling
gibe at my 'distinguished learning.'  I might have known better than to
let it pique me, but I spoke up again, though respectfully enough, that
I was not wrong.  It appeared to me all at once as if some principle were
at stake, as if I were the champion of our Shakespeare; so will vanity
delude us.

"The governor--I can see it as if it were yesterday--seemed to go like
ice, for he loved to be thought infallible in all such things as well as
in great business affairs, and his nephew was there to give an edge to
the matter.  He said, curtly, that I would probably come on better in the
world if I were more exact and less cock-a-hoop with myself.  That stung
me, for not only was the young lady looking on with a sort of superior
pity, as I thought, but her brother was murmuring to her under his breath
with a provoking smile.  I saw no reason why I should be treated like a
schoolboy.  As far as my knowledge went it was as good as another man's,
were he young or old, so I came in quickly with my reply.  I said that
his excellency should find me more cock-a-hoop with Shakespeare than with
myself.  'Well, well,' he answered, with a severe look, 'our Company has
need of great men for hard tasks.'  To this I made no answer, for I got
a warning look from the young lady,--a look which had a sort of reproach
and command too.  She knew the twists and turns of her uncle's temper,
and how he was imperious and jealous in little things.  The matter
dropped for the time; but as the governor was going to his tent for the
night, the young lady said to me hurriedly, 'My uncle is a man of great
reading--and power, Mr. Fawdor.  I would set it right with him, if I were
you.'  For the moment I was ashamed.  You cannot guess how fine an eye
she had, and how her voice stirred one!  She said no more, but stepped
inside her tent; and then I heard the brother say over my shoulder, 'Oh,
why should the spirit of mortal be proud!'  Afterwards, with a little
laugh and a backward wave of the hand, as one might toss a greeting to
a beggar, he was gone also, and I was left alone."

Fawdor paused in his narrative.  The dog had lain down by the fire again,
but its red eyes were blinking at the door, and now and again it growled
softly, and the long hair at its mouth seemed to shiver with feeling.
Suddenly through the night there rang a loud, barking cry.  The dog's
mouth opened and closed in a noiseless snarl, showing its keen, long
teeth, and a ridge of hair bristled on its back.  But the two men made
no sign or motion.  The cry of wild cats was no new thing to them.

Presently the other continued: "I sat by the fire and heard beasts howl
like that, I listened to the river churning over the rapids below, and I
felt all at once a loneliness that turned me sick.  There were three
people in a tent near me; I could even hear the governor's breathing; but
I appeared to have no part in the life of any human being, as if I were a
kind of outlaw of God and man.  I was poor; I had no friends; I was at
the mercy of this great Company; if I died, there was not a human being
who, so far as I knew, would shed a tear.  Well, you see I was only a
boy, and I suppose it was the spirit of youth hungering for the huge,
active world and the companionship of ambitious men.  There is no one so
lonely as the young dreamer on the brink of life.  "I was lying by the
fire.  It was not a cold night, and I fell asleep at last without
covering.  I did not wake till morning, and then it was to find the
governor's nephew building up the fire again.  'Those who are born
great,' said he, 'are bound to rise.'  But perhaps he saw that I had had
a bad night, and felt that he had gone far enough, for he presently said,
in a tone more to my liking, 'Take my advice, Mr. Fawdor; make it right
with my uncle.  It isn't such fast rising in the Company that you can
afford to quarrel with its governor.  I'd go on the other tack: don't be
too honest.'  I thanked him, and no more was said; but I liked him
better, for I saw that he was one of those who take pleasure in dropping
nettles more to see the weakness of human nature than from malice.

"But my good fortune had got a twist, and it was not to be straightened
that day; and because it was not straightened then it was not to be at
all; for at five o'clock we came to the Post at Lachine, and here the
governor and the others were to stop.  During all the day I had waited
for my chance to say a word of apology to his excellency, but it was no
use; nothing seemed to help me, for he was busy with his papers and
notes, and I also had to finish up my reports.  The hours went by, and
I saw my chances drift past.  I knew that the governor held the thing
against me, and not the less because he saw me more than once that day in
speech with his niece.  For she appeared anxious to cheer me, and indeed
I think we might have become excellent friends had our ways run together.
She could have bestowed her friendship on me without shame to herself,
for I had come of an old family in Scotland, the Sheplaws of Canfire,
which she knew, as did the governor also, was a more ancient family than
their own.  Yet her kindness that day worked me no good, and I went far
to make it worse, since, under the spell of her gentleness, I looked at
her far from distantly, and at the last, as she was getting from the
boat, returned the pressure of her hand with much interest.  I suppose
something of the pride of that moment leaped up in my eye, for I saw the
governor's face harden more and more, and the brother shrugged an
ironical shoulder.  I was too young to see or know that the chief thing
in the girl's mind was regret that I had so hurt my chances; for she
knew, as I saw only too well afterwards, that I might have been rewarded
with a leaping promotion in honour of the success of the journey.  But
though the boatmen got a gift of money and tobacco and spirits, nothing
came to me save the formal thanks of the governor, as he bowed me from
his presence.

"The nephew came with his sister to bid me farewell.  There was little
said between her and me, and it was a long, long time before she knew the
end of that day's business.  But the brother said, 'You've let, the
chance go by, Mr. Fawdor.  Better luck next time, eh?  And,' he went on,
'I'd give a hundred editions the lie, but I'd read the text according to
my chief officer.  The words of a king are always wise while his head is
on,' he declared further, and he drew from his scarf a pin of pearls and
handed it to me.  'Will you wear that for me, Mr. Fawdor?' he asked; and
I, who had thought him but a stripling with a saucy pride, grasped his
hand and said a God-keep-you.  It does me good now to think I said
it.  I did not see him or his sister again.

"The next day was Sunday.  About two o'clock I was sent for by the
governor.  When I got to the Post and was admitted to him, I saw that my
misadventure was not over.  'Mr. Fawdor,' said he coldly, spreading out a
map on the table before him, 'you will start at once for Fort Ungava, at
Ungava Bay, in Labrador.'  I felt my heart stand still for a moment, and
then surge up and down, like a piston-rod under a sudden rush of steam.
'You will proceed now,' he went on, in his hard voice, 'as far as the
village of Pont Croix.  There you will find three Indians awaiting you.
You will go on with them as far as Point St. Saviour and camp for the
night, for if the Indians remain in the village they may get drunk.  The
next morning, at sunrise, you will move on.  The Indians know the trail
across Labrador to Fort Ungava.  When you reach there, you will take
command of the Post and remain till further orders.  Your clothes are
already at the village.  I have had them packed, and you will find there
also what is necessary for the journey.  The factor at Ungava was there
ten years; he has gone--to heaven.'

"I cannot tell what it was held my tongue silent, that made me only bow
my head in assent, and press my lips together.  I knew I was pale as
death, for as I turned to leave the room I caught sight of my face in a
little mirror tacked on the door, and I hardly recognised myself.

"'Good-day, Mr. Fawdor,' said the governor, handing me the map.  'There
is some brandy in your stores; be careful that none of your Indians get
it.  If they try to desert, you know what to do.'  With a gesture of
dismissal he turned, and began to speak with the chief trader.

"For me, I went from that room like a man condemned to die.  Fort Ungava
in Labrador,--a thousand miles away, over a barren, savage country, and
in winter too; for it would be winter there immediately!  It was an exile
to Siberia, and far worse than Siberia; for there are many there to share
the fellowship of misery, and I was likely to be the only white man at
Fort Ungava.  As I passed from the door of the Post the words of
Shakespeare which had brought all this about sang in my ears."  He ceased
speaking, and sank back wearily among the skins of his couch.  Out of the
enveloping silence Pierre's voice came softly:

"Thou shalt judge with the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one
woman."



II

"The journey to the village of Pont Croix was that of a man walking over
graves.  Every step sent a pang to my heart,--a boy of twenty-one, grown
old in a moment.  It was not that I had gone a little lame from a hurt
got on the expedition with the governor, but my whole life seemed
suddenly lamed.  Why did I go?  Ah, you do not know how discipline gets
into a man's bones, the pride, the indignant pride of obedience!  At that
hour I swore that I should myself be the governor of that Company one
day,--the boast of loud-hearted youth.  I had angry visions, I dreamed
absurd dreams, but I did not think of disobeying.  It was an unheard-of
journey at such a time, but I swore that I would do it, that it should go
into the records of the Company.

"I reached the village, found the Indians, and at once moved on to the
settlement where we were to stay that night.  Then my knee began to pain
me.  I feared inflammation; so in the dead of night I walked back to the
village, roused a trader of the Company, got some liniment and other
trifles, and arrived again at St. Saviour's before dawn.  My few clothes
and necessaries came in the course of the morning, and by noon we were
fairly started on the path to exile.

"I remember that we came to a lofty point on the St. Lawrence just before
we plunged into the woods, to see the great stream no more.  I stood and
looked back up the river towards the point where Lachine lay.  All that
went to make the life of a Company's man possible was there; and there,
too, were those with whom I had tented and travelled for three long
months,--eaten with them, cared for them, used for them all the woodcraft
that I knew.  I could not think that it would be a young man's lifetime
before I set eyes on that scene again.  Never from that day to this have
I seen the broad, sweet river where I spent the three happiest years of
my life.  I can see now the tall shining heights of Quebec, the pretty
wooded Island of Orleans, the winding channel, so deep, so strong.  The
sun was three-fourths of its way down in the west, and already the sky
was taking on the deep red and purple of autumn.  Somehow, the thing that
struck me most in the scene was a bunch of pines, solemn and quiet, their
tops burnished by the afternoon light.  Tears would have been easy then.
But my pride drove them back from my eyes to my angry heart.  Besides,
there were my Indians waiting, and the long journey lay before us.  Then,
perhaps because there was none nearer to make farewell to, or I know not
why, I waved my hand towards the distant village of Lachine, and, with
the sweet maid in my mind who had so gently parted from me yesterday, I
cried, 'Good-bye, and God bless you.'"

He paused.  Pierre handed him a wooden cup, from which he drank, and then
continued:

"The journey went forward.  You have seen the country.  You know what it
is: those bare ice-plains and rocky unfenced fields stretching to all
points, the heaving wastes of treeless country, the harsh frozen lakes.
God knows what insupportable horror would have settled on me in that
pilgrimage had it not been for occasional glimpses of a gentler life--for
the deer and caribou which crossed our path.  Upon my soul, I was so full
of gratitude and love at the sight that I could have thrown my arms round
their necks and kissed them.  I could not raise a gun at them.  My
Indians did that, and so inconstant is the human heart that I ate
heartily of the meat.  My Indians were almost less companionable to me
than any animal would have been.  Try as I would, I could not bring
myself to like them, and I feared only too truly that they did not like
me.  Indeed, I soon saw that they meant to desert me,--kill me, perhaps,
if they could, although I trusted in the wholesome and restraining fear
which the Indian has of the great Company.  I was not sure that they were
guiding me aright, and I had to threaten death in case they tried to
mislead me or desert me.  My knee at times was painful, and cold, hunger,
and incessant watchfulness wore on me vastly.  Yet I did not yield to my
miseries, for there entered into me then not only the spirit of
endurance, but something of that sacred pride in suffering which
was the merit of my Covenanting forefathers.

"We were four months on that bitter travel, and I do not know how it
could have been made at all, had it not been for the deer that I had
heart to eat and none to kill.  The days got shorter and shorter, and we
were sometimes eighteen hours in absolute darkness.  Thus you can imagine
how slowly we went.  Thank God, we could sleep, hid away in our fur bags,
more often without a fire than with one,--mere mummies stretched out on a
vast coverlet of white, with the peering, unfriendly sky above us; though
it must be said that through all those many, many weeks no cloud perched
in the zenith.  When there was light there was sun, and the courage of it
entered into our bones, helping to save us.  You may think I have been
made feeble-minded by my sufferings, but I tell you plainly that, in the
closing days of our journey, I used to see a tall figure walking beside
me, who, whenever I would have spoken to him, laid a warning finger on
his lips; but when I would have fallen, he spoke to me, always in the
same words.  You have heard of him, the Scarlet Hunter of the Kimash
Hills.  It was he, the Sentinel of the North, the Lover of the Lost.
So deep did his words go into my heart that they have remained with
me to this hour."

"I saw him once in the White Valley," Pierre said in a low voice.  "What
was it he said to you?"

The other drew a long breath, and a smile rested on his lips.  Then,
slowly, as though liking to linger over them, he repeated the words of
the Scarlet Hunter:

        "'O son of man, behold!
          If thou shouldest stumble on the nameless trail,
          The trail that no man rides,
          Lift up thy heart,
          Behold, O son of man, thou hast a helper near!

        "'O son of man, take heed!
          If thou shouldst fall upon the vacant plain,
          The plain that no man loves,
          Reach out thy hand,
          Take heed, O son of man, strength shall be given thee!

        "'O son of man, rejoice!
          If thou art blinded even at the door,
          The door of the Safe Tent,
          Sing in thy heart,
          Rejoice, O son of man, thy pilot leads thee home?'

"I never seemed to be alone after that--call it what you will, fancy or
delirium.  My head was so light that it appeared to spin like a star, and
my feet were so heavy that I dragged the whole earth after me.  My
Indians seldom spoke.  I never let them drop behind me, for I did not
trust their treacherous natures.  But in the end, as it would seem, they
also had but one thought, and that to reach Fort Ungava; for there was no
food left, none at all.  We saw no tribes of Indians and no Esquimaux,
for we had not passed in their line of travel or settlement.

"At last I used to dream that birds were singing near me,--a soft,
delicate whirlwind of sound; and then bells all like muffled silver rang
through the aching, sweet air.  Bits of prayer and poetry I learned when
a boy flashed through my mind; equations in algebra; the tingling scream
of a great buzz-saw; the breath of a racer as he nears the post under the
crying whip; my own voice dropping loud profanity, heard as a lad from
a blind ferryman; the boom! boom! of a mass of logs as they struck a
house on a flooding river and carried it away.  .  .  .

"One day we reached the end.  It was near evening, and we came to the top
of a wooded knoll.  My eyes were dancing in my head with fatigue and
weakness, but I could see below us, on the edge of the great bay, a large
hut, Esquimau lodges and Indian tepees near it.  It was the Fort, my
cheerless prison-house."

He paused.  The dog had been watching him with its flaming eyes; now it
gave a low growl, as though it understood, and pitied.  In the interval
of silence the storm without broke.  The trees began to quake and cry,
the light snow to beat upon the parchment windows, and the chimney to
splutter and moan.  Presently, out on the bay they could hear the young
ice break and come scraping up the shore.  Fawdor listened a while, and
then went on, waving his hand to the door as he began: "Think! this, and
like that always: the ungodly strife of nature, and my sick, disconsolate
life."

"Ever since?" asked Pierre.  "All the time."

"Why did you not go back?"

"I was to wait for orders, and they never came."

"You were a free man, not a slave."

"The human heart has pride.  At first, as when I left the governor at
Lachine, I said, 'I will never speak, I will never ask nor bend the knee.
He has the power to oppress; I can obey without whining, as fine a man as
he.'"

"Did you not hate?"

"At first, as only a banished man can hate.  I knew that if all had gone
well I should be a man high up in the Company, and here I was, living
like a dog in the porch of the world, sometimes without other food for
months than frozen fish; and for two years I was in a place where we had
no fire,--lived in a snow-house, with only blubber to eat.  And so year
after year, no word!"

"The mail came once every year from the world?"  "Yes, once a year the
door of the outer life was opened.  A ship came into the bay, and by that
ship I sent out my reports.  But no word came from the governor, and no
request went from me.  Once the captain of that ship took me by the
shoulders, and said, 'Fawdor, man, this will drive you mad.  Come away to
England,--leave your half-breed in charge,--and ask the governor for a
big promotion.'  He did not understand.  Of course I said I could not go.
Then he turned on me, he was a good man,--and said, 'This will either
make you madman or saint, Fawdor.'  He drew a Bible from his pocket and
handed it to me.  'I've used it twenty years,' he said, 'in evil and out
of evil, and I've spiked it here and there; it's a chart for heavy seas,
and may you find it so, my lad.'

"I said little then; but when I saw the sails of his ship round a cape
and vanish, all my pride and strength were broken up, and I came in a
heap to the ground, weeping like a child.  But the change did not come
all at once.  There were two things that kept me hard."

"The girl?"

"The girl, and another.  But of the young lady after.  I had a half-breed
whose life I had saved.  I was kind to him always; gave him as good to
eat and drink as I had myself; divided my tobacco with him; loved him as
only an exile can love a comrade.  He conspired with the Indians to seize
the Fort and stores, and kill me if I resisted.  I found it out."

"Thou shalt keep the faith of food and blanket," said Pierre.  "What did
you do with him?"

"The fault was not his so much as of his race and his miserable past.  I
had loved him.  I sent him away; and he never came back."

"Thou shalt judge with the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one
woman."

"For the girl.  There was the thing that clamped my heart.  Never a
message from her or her brother.  Surely they knew, and yet never,
thought I, a good word for me to the governor.  They had forgotten the
faith of food and blanket.  And she--she must have seen that I could have
worshipped her, had we been in the same way of life.  Before the better
days came to me I was hard against her, hard and rough at heart."

"Remember the sorrow of thine own wife."  Pierre's voice was gentle.

"Truly, to think hardly of no woman should be always in a man's heart.
But I have known only one woman of my race in twenty-five years!"

"And as time went on?"

"As time went on, and no word came, I ceased to look for it.  But I
followed that chart spiked with the captain's pencil, as he had done it
in season and out of season, and by and by I ceased to look for any word.
I even became reconciled to my life.  The ambitious and aching cares of
the world dropped from me, and I stood above all--alone in my suffering,
yet not yielding.  Loneliness is a terrible thing.  Under it a man--"

"Goes mad or becomes a saint--a saint!"  Pierre's voice became reverent.

Fawdor shook his head, smiling gently.  "Ah no, no.  But I began to
understand the world, and I loved the north, the beautiful hard north."

"But there is more?"

"Yes, the end of it all.  Three days before you came I got a packet of
letters, not by the usual yearly mail.  One announced that the governor
was dead.  Another--"

"Another?" urged Pierre.

--"was from Her.  She said that her brother, on the day she wrote, had by
chance come across my name in the Company's records, and found that I had
been here a quarter of a century.  It was the letter of a good woman.
She said she thought the governor had forgotten that he had sent me here
--as now I hope he had, for that would be one thing less for him to think
of, when he set out on the journey where the only weight man carries is
the packload of his sins.  She also said that she had written to me twice
after we parted at Lachine, but had never heard a word, and three years
afterwards she had gone to India.  The letters were lost, I suppose,
on the way to me, somehow--who can tell?  Then came another thing, so
strange, that it seemed like the laughter of the angels at us.  These
were her words: 'And, dear Mr. Fawdor, you were both wrong in that
quotation, as you no doubt discovered long ago.'  Then she gave me the
sentence as it is in Cymbeline.  She was right, quite right.  We were
both wrong.  Never till her letter came had I looked to see.  How vain,
how uncertain, and fallible, is man!"

Pierre dropped his cigarette, and stared at Fawdor.  "The knowledge of
books is foolery," he said slowly.  "Man is the only book of life.  Go
on."

"There was another letter, from the brother, who was now high up in the
Company, asking me to come to England, and saying that they wished to
promote me far, and that he and his sister, with their families, would be
glad to see me."

"She was married then?"

The rashness of the suggestion made Fawdor wave his hand impatiently.
He would not reply to it.  "I was struck down with all the news," he
said.  "I wandered like a child out into a mad storm.  Illness came; then
you, who have nursed me back to life.  .  .  .  And now I have told all."

"Not all, bien sur.  What will you do?"

"I am out of the world; why tempt it all again?  See how those twenty-
five years were twisted by a boy's vanity and a man's tyranny!"

"But what will you do?" persisted Pierre.  "You should see the faces of
women and children again.  No man can live without that sight, even as a
saint."

Suddenly Fawdor's face was shot over with a storm of feeling.  He lay
very still, his thoughts busy with a new world which had been disclosed
to him.  "Youth hungers for the vanities," he said, "and the middle-aged
for home."  He took Pierre's hand.  "I will go," he added.  "A door will
open somewhere for me."

Then he turned his face to the wall.  The storm had ceased, the wild dog
huddled quietly on the hearth, and for hours the only sound was the
crackling of the logs as Pierre stirred the fire.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Advantage to live where nothing was required of her but truth
Don't be too honest
Every shot that kills ricochets
Not good to have one thing in the head all the time
Remember the sorrow of thine own wife
Secret of life: to keep your own commandments
She had not suffered that sickness, social artifice
Some people are rough with the poor--and proud
They whose tragedy lies in the capacity to suffer greatly
Think with the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one woman
Youth hungers for the vanities








This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





THE WORLD FOR SALE

By Gilbert Parker



BOOK III

XX.       TWO LIFE PIECES
XXI.      THE SNARE OF THE FOWLER
XXII.     THE SECRET MAN
XXIII.    THE RETURN OF BELISARIUS
XXIV.     AT LONG LAST
XXV.      MAN PROPOSES
XXVI.     THE SLEEPER
XXVII.    THE WORLD FOR SALE




CHAPTER XX

TWO LIFE PIECES

"It's a fine day."

"Yes, it's beautiful."

Fleda wanted to ask how he knew, but hesitated from feelings of delicacy.
Ingolby seemed to understand.  A faint reflection of the old whimsical
smile touched his lips, and his hands swept over the coverlet as though
smoothing out a wrinkled map.

"The blind man gets new senses," he said dreamily.  "I feel things where
I used to see them.  How did I know it was a fine day?  Simple enough.
When the door opened there was only the lightest breath of wind, and the
air was fresh and crisp, and I could smell the sun.  One sense less, more
degree of power to the other senses.  The sun warms the air, gives it a
flavour, and between it and the light frost, which showed that it was dry
outside, I got the smell of a fine Fall day.  Also, I heard the cry of
the wild fowl going South, and they wouldn't have made a sound if it
hadn't been a fine day.  And also, and likewise, and besides, and
howsomever, I heard Jim singing, and that nigger never sings in bad
weather.  Jim's a fair-weather raven, and this morning he was singing
like a 'lav'rock in the glen.'"

Being blind, he could not see that, suddenly, a storm of emotion swept
over her face.

His cheerfulness, his boylike simplicity, his indomitable spirit, which
had survived so much, and must still face so much, his almost childlike
ways, and the naive description of a blind man's perception, waked in her
an almost intolerable yearning.  It was not the yearning of a maid for a
man.  It was the uncontrollable woman in her, the mother-thing, belonging
to the first woman that ever was-protection of the weak, hovering love
for the suffering, the ministering spirit.

Since Ingolby had been brought to the house in the pines, Madame Bulteel
and herself, with Jim, had nursed him through the Valley of the Shadow.
They had nursed him through brain-fever, through agonies which could not
have been borne with consciousness.  The tempest of the mind and the
pains of misfortune went on from hour to hour, from day to day, almost
without ceasing, until at last, a shadow of his former self, but with a
wonderful light on his face which came from something within, he waited
patiently for returning strength, propped up with pillows in the bed
which had been Fleda's own, in the room outside which Jethro Fawe had
sung his heathen serenade.

It was the room of the house which, catching the morning sun, was best
suited for an invalid.  So she had given it to him with an eagerness
behind which was the feeling that somehow it made him more of the inner
circle of her own life; for apart from every other feeling she had, there
was in her a deep spirit of comradeship belonging to far-off times when
her life was that of the open road, the hillside and the vale.  In those
days no man was a stranger; all belonged.

To meet, and greet, and pass was the hourly event, but the meeting and
the greeting had in it the familiarity of a common wandering, the
sympathy of the homeless.  Had Ingolby been less to her than he was,
there would still have been the comradeship which made her the great
creature she was fast becoming.  It was odd that, as Ingolby became
thinner and thinner, and ever more wan, she, in spite of her ceaseless
nursing, appeared to thrive physically.  She had even slightly increased
the fulness of her figure.  The velvet of her cheeks had grown richer,
and her eyes deeper with warm fire.  It was as though she flourished on
giving: as though a hundred nerves of being and feeling had opened up
within her and had expanded her life like some fine flower.

Gazing at Ingolby now there was a great hungering desire in her heart.
She looked at the sightless eyes, and a passionate protest sprang to her
lips which, in spite of herself, broke forth in a sort of moan.

"What is it?" Ingolby asked, with startled face.

"Nothing," she answered, "nothing.  I pricked my finger badly, that's
all."

And, indeed, she had done so, but that would not have brought the moan to
her lips.

"Well, it didn't sound like a pricked finger complaint," he remarked.
"It was the kind of groan I'd give if I had a bad pain inside."

"Ah, but you're a man!" she remarked lightly, though two tears fell down
her cheeks.

With an effort she recovered herself.  "It's time for your tonic," she
added, and she busied herself with giving it to him.  "As soon as you
have taken it, I'm going for a walk, so you must make up your mind to
have some sleep."

"Am I to be left alone?" he asked, with an assumed grievance in his
voice.

"Madame Bulteel will stay with you," she replied.

"Do you need a walk so very badly?" he asked presently.

"I don't suppose I need it, but I want it," she answered.  "My feet and
the earth are very friendly."

"Where do you walk?" he asked.

"Just anywhere," was her reply.  "Sometimes up the river, sometimes down,
sometimes miles away in the woods."

"Do you never take a gun with you?"

"Of course," she answered, nodding, as though he could see.  "I get wild
pigeons and sometimes a wild duck or a prairie-hen."

"That's right," he remarked; "that's right."

"I don't believe in walking just for the sake of walking," she continued.
"It doesn't do you any good, but if you go for something and get it,
that's what puts the mind and the body right."

Suddenly his face grew grave.  "Yes, that's it," he remarked.

"To go for something you want, a long way off.  You don't feel the fag
when you're thinking of the thing at the end; but you've got to have the
thing at the end, to keep making for it, or there's no good going--none
at all.  That's life; that's how it is.  It's no good only walking--
you've got to walk somewhere.  It's no good simply going--you've got to
go somewhere.  You've got to fight for something.  That's why, when they
take the something you fight for away--when they break you and cripple
you, and you can't go anywhere for what you want badly, life isn't worth
living."

An anxious look came into her face.  This was the first time, since
recovering consciousness, that he had referred, even indirectly, to all
that had happened.  She understood him well--ah, terribly well!  It was
the tragedy of the man stopped in his course because of one mistake,
though he had done ten thousand wise things.  The power taken from his
hands, the interrupted life, the dark future, the beginning again, if
ever his sight came back: it was sickening, heartbreaking.

She saw it all in his face, but as if some inward voice had spoken to
him, his face cleared, the swift-moving hands clasped in front of him,
and he said quietly: "But because it's life, there it is.  You have to
take it as it comes."

He stopped a moment, and in the pause she reached out her hand with a
sudden passionate gesture, to touch his shoulder, but she restrained
herself in time.

He seemed to feel what she was doing, and turned his face towards her,
a slight flush coming to his cheeks.  He smiled, and then he said: "How
wonderful you are!  You look--"

He checked himself, then added with a quizzical smile:

"You are looking very well to-day, Miss Fleda Druse, very well indeed.
I like that dark-red dress you're wearing."

An almost frightened look came into her eyes.  It was as though he could
see, for she was wearing a dark-red dress--"wine-coloured," her father
called it, "maroon," Madame Bulteel called it.  Could he then see, after
all?

"How did you know it was dark-red?" she asked, her voice shaking.

"Guessed it!  Guessed it!" he answered almost gleefully.  "Was I right?
Is it dark-red?"

"Yes, dark-red," she answered.  "Was it really a guess?"

"Ah, but the guessiest kind of a guess," he replied.  "But who can tell?
I couldn't see it, but is there any reason why the mind shouldn't see
when the eyes are no longer working?  Come now," he added, "I've a
feeling that I can tell things with my mind just as if I saw them.  I do
see.  I'll guess the time now--with my mind's eye."

Concentration came into his face.  "It's three minutes to twelve
o'clock," he said decisively.

She took up the watch which lay on the table beside the bed.

"Yes, it's just three minutes to twelve," she declared in an awe-struck
voice.  "That's marvellous--how wonderful you are!"

"That's what I said of you a minute ago," he returned.  Then, with a
swift change of voice and manner, he added, "How long is it?"

"You mean, since you came here?" she asked, divining what was in his
mind.

"Exactly.  How long?"

"Six weeks," she answered.  "Six weeks and three days."

"Why don't you add the hour, too," he urged half-plaintively, though he
smiled.

"Well, it was three o'clock in the morning to the minute," she answered.

"Old Father Time ought to make you his chief of staff," he remarked
gaily.  "Now, I want to know," he added, with a visible effort of
determination, "what has happened since three o'clock in the morning,
six weeks and three days ago.  I want you to tell me what has happened
to my concerns--to the railways, and also to the towns.  I don't want you
to hide anything, because, if you do, I'll have Jim in, and Jim, under
proper control, will tell me the whole truth, and perhaps more than the
truth.  That's the way with Jim.  When he gets started he can't stop.
Tell me exactly everything."

Anxiety drove the colour from her cheeks.  She shrank back.

"You must tell me," he urged.  "I'd rather hear it from you than from
Dr. Rockwell, or Jim, or your father.  Your telling wouldn't hurt as much
as anybody else's, if there has to be any hurt.  Don't you understand--
but don't you understand?" he urged.

She nodded to herself in the mirror on the wall opposite.  "I'll try to
understand," she replied presently; "Tell me, then: have they put someone
in my place?"

"I understand so," she replied.

He remained silent for a moment, his face very pale.  "Who is running the
show?" he asked.

She told him.

"Oh, him!" he exclaimed.  "He's dead against my policy.  He'll make a
mess."

"They say he's doing that," she remarked.

He asked her a series of questions which she tried to answer frankly, and
he came to know that the trouble between the two towns, which, after the
Orange funeral and his own disaster had subsided, was up again; that the
railways were in difficulties; that there had been several failures in
the town; that one of the banks--the Regent-had closed its doors; that
Felix Marchand, having recovered from the injury he had received from
Gabriel Druse on the day of the Orange funeral, had gone East for a month
and had returned; that the old trouble was reviving in the mills, and
that Marchand had linked himself with the enemies of the group
controlling the railways hitherto directed by himself.

For a moment after she had answered his questions, there was strong
emotion in his face, and then it cleared.

He reached out a hand towards her.  How eagerly she clasped it!  It was
cold, and hers was so warm and firm and kind.

"True friend o' mine!" he said with feeling.  "How wonderful it is that
somehow it all doesn't seem to matter so much.  I wonder why?  I wonder--
Tell me about yourself, about your life," he added abruptly, as though it
had been a question he had long wished to ask.  In the tone was a quiet
certainty suggesting that she would not hesitate to answer.

"We have both had big breaks in our lives," he went on.  "I know that.
I've lost everything, in a way, by the break in my life, and I've an idea
that you gained everything when the break in yours came.  I didn't
believe the story Jethro Fawe told me, but still I knew there was some
truth in it; something that he twisted to suit himself.  I started life
feeling I could conquer the world like another Alexander or Napoleon.
I don't know that it was all conceit.  It was the wish to do, to see how
far this thing on my shoulders"--he touched his head--"and this great
physical machine"--he touched his breast with a thin hand--"would carry
me.  I don't believe the main idea was vicious.  It was wanting to work
a human brain to its last volt of capacity, and to see what it could do.
I suppose I became selfish as I forged on.  I didn't mean to be, but
concentration upon the things I had to do prevented me from being the
thing I ought to be.  I wanted, as they say, to get there.  I had a lot
of irons in the fire--too many--but they weren't put there deliberately.
One thing led to another, and one thing, as it were, hung upon another,
until they all got to be part of the scheme.  Once they got there, I had
to carry them all on, I couldn't drop any of them; they got to be my
life.  It didn't matter that it all grew bigger and bigger, and the risks
got greater and greater.  I thought I could weather it through, and so I
could have done, if it hadn't been for a mistake and an accident; but the
mistake was mine.  That's where the thing nips--the mistake was mine.
I took too big a risk.  You see, I'd got so used to being lucky, it
seemed as if I couldn't go wrong.  Everything had come my way.  Ever
since I began in that Montreal railway office, after leaving college,
I hadn't a single setback.  I pulled things off.  I made money, and I
plumped it all into my railways and the Regent Bank; and as you said
a minute ago, the Regent Bank has closed down.  That cuts me clean out
of the game.  What was the matter with the bank?  The manager?"

His voice was almost monotonous in its quietness.  It was as though he
told the story of something which had passed beyond chance or change.
As it unfolded to her understanding, she had seated herself near to his
bed.  The door of the room was open, and in view outside on the landing
sat Madame Bulteel reading.  She was not, however, near enough to hear
the conversation.

Ingolby's voice was low, but it sounded as loud as a waterfall in the
ears of the girl, who, in a few weeks, had travelled great distances on
the road called Experience, that other name for life.

"It was the manager?" he repeated.

"Yes, they say so," she answered.  "He speculated with bank money."

"In what?"

"In your railways," she answered hesitatingly.  "Curious--I dreamed
that," Ingolby remarked quietly, and leaned down and stroked the dog
lying at his feet.  It had been with him through all his sickness.
"It must have been part of my delirium, because, now that I've got my
senses back, it's as though someone had told me about it.  Speculated in
my railways, eh?  Chickens come home to roost, don't they?  I suppose I
ought to be excited over it all," he continued.  "I suppose I ought.  But
the fact is, you only have just the one long, big moment of excitement
when great trouble and tragedy come, or else it's all excitement, all the
time, and then you go mad.  That's the test, I think.  When you're struck
by Fate, as a hideous war-machine might strike you, and the whole terror
of loss and ruin bears down on you, you're either swept away in an
excitement that hasn't any end, or you brace yourself, and become
master of the shattering thing."

"You are a master," she interposed.  "You are the Master Man," she
repeated admiringly.

He waved a hand deprecatingly.  "Do you know, when we talked together in
the woods soon after you ran the Rapids--you remember the day--if you had
said that to me then, I'd have cocked my head and thought I was a jim-
dandy, as they say.  A Master Man was what I wanted to be.  But it's a
pretty barren thing to think, or to feel, that you're a Master Man;
because, if you are--if you've had a 'scoop' all the way, as Jowett calls
it, you can be as sure as anything that no one cares a rap farthing what
happens to you.  There are plenty who pretend they care, but it's only
because they're sailing with the wind, and with your even keel.  It's
only the Master Man himself that doesn't know in the least he's that who
gets anything out of it all."

"Aren't you getting anything out of it?" she asked softly.  "Aren't you
--Chief?"

At the familiar word--Jowett always called him Chief--a smile slowly
stole across his face.  "I really believe I am, thanks to you," he said
nodding.

He was going to say, "Thanks to you, Fleda," but he restrained himself.
He had no right to be familiar, to give an intimate turn to things.  His
game was over; his journey of ambition was done.  He saw this girl with
his mind's eye--how much he longed to see her with the eyes of the body
--in all her strange beauty; and he knew that even if she cared for him,
such a sacrifice as linking her life with his was impossible.  Yet her
very presence there was like a garden of bloom to him: a garden full of
the odour of life, of vital things, of sweet energy and happy being.
Somehow, he and she were strangely alike.  He knew it.  From the time
he held her in his arms at Carillon, he knew it.  The great adventurous
spirit which was in him belonged also to her.  That was as sure as light
and darkness.

"No, there's no master man in me, but I think I know what one could be
like," he remarked at last.  He straightened himself against the pillows.
The old look of power came to a face hardly strong enough to bear it.
It was so fine and thin now, and the spirit in him was so prodigious.

"No one cares what happens to the man who always succeeds; no one loves
him," he continued.  "Do you know, in my trouble I've had more out of
nigger Jim's affection than I've ever had in my life.  Then there's
Rockwell, Osterhaut and Jowett, and there's your father.  It was worth
while living to feel the real thing."  His hands went out as though
grasping something good and comforting.  "I don't suppose every man needs
to be struck as hard as I've been to learn what's what, but I've learned
it.  I give you my word of honour, I've learned it."

Her face flushed and her eyes kindled greatly.  "Jim, Rockwell,
Osterhaut, Jowett, and my father!" she exclaimed.  "Of course trouble
wouldn't do anything but make them come closer round you.  Poor people
live so near to misfortune all the time--I mean poor people like Jim,
Osterhaut, and Jowett--that changes of fortune are just natural things to
them.  As for my father, he has had to stretch out his hands so often to
those in trouble--"

"That he carried me home on his shoulders from the bridge six weeks and
three days ago, at three o'clock in the morning," interjected Ingolby
with a quizzical smile.

"Why did you omit Madame Bulteel and myself when you mentioned those who
showed their--friendship?" she asked, hesitating at the last word.
"Haven't we done our part?"

"I was talking of men," he answered.  "One knows what women do.  They may
leave you in the bright days, not in the dark days.  On the majority of
them you couldn't rely in prosperity, but in misfortune you couldn't do
anything else.  They are there with you.  They're made that way.  The
best life can give you in misfortune is a woman.  It's the great
beginning-of-the-world thing in them.  Men can't stand prosperity, but
women can stand misfortune.  Why, if Jim and Osterhaut and Jowett and all
the men of Lebanon and Manitou had deserted me, I shouldn't have been
surprised; but I'd have had to recast my philosophy if Fleda Druse had
turned her bonny brown head away."

It was evident he was making an effort to conquer emotions which were
rising in him; that he was playing on the surface to prevent his deep
feelings from breaking forth.  "Instead of which," he added jubilantly,
"here I am, in the nicest room in the world, in a fine bed with springs
like an antelope's heels."

He laughed, and hunched his back into the mattress.  It was the laugh of
the mocker, but he was mocking himself.  She did not misunderstand.  It
was a nice room, as he said.  He had never seen it with his eyes, but if
he had seen it he would have realized how like herself it was--adorably
fresh, happily coloured, sumptuous and fine.  It had simple curtains,
white sheets, and a warm carpet on the floor; and yet with something,
too, that struck the note of a life outside.  A pennant of many colours
hung where two soft pink curtains joined, and at the window and over the
door was an ancient cross in bronze and gold.  It was not the simple
Christian cross of the modern world, but an ancient one which had become
a symbol of the Romanys, a sign to mark the highways, the guide of the
wayfarers.  The pennant had been on the pole of the Ry's tent in far-off
days in the Roumelian country.  In the girl herself there was that which
corresponded to the gorgeous pennant and the bronze cross.  It was not in
dress or in manner, for there was no sign of garishness, of the unusual
anywhere--in manner she was as well controlled as any woman of fashion,
in dress singularly reserved--but in the depths of the eyes there was
some restless, unsettled thing, some flicker of strange banners akin to
the pennant at the joining of the pink curtains.  There had been
something of the same look in Ingolby's eyes in the past, only with him
it was the sense of great adventure, intrepid enterprise, a touch of
vision and the beckoning thing.  That look was not in his eyes now.
Nothing was there; no life, no soul; only darkness.  But did that look
still inhabit the eyes of the soul?

He answered the question himself.  "I'd start again in a different way if
I could," he said musingly, his face towards the girl.  "It's easy to say
that, but I would.  It isn't only the things you get, it's how you use
them.  It isn't only the things you do, it's why you do them.  But I'll
never have a chance now; I'll never have a chance to try the new way.
I'm done."

Something almost savage leaped into her eyes--a wild, bitter protest, for
it was her tragedy, too, if he was not to regain his sight.  The great
impulse of a nature which had been disciplined into reserve broke forth.

"It isn't so," she said with a tremor in her voice.  All that he--and
she--was in danger of losing came home to her.  "It isn't so.  You shall
get well again.  Your sight will come back.  To-morrow; perhaps to-day,
Hindlip, the great oculist comes from New York.  Mr. Warbeck, the
Montreal man, holds out hopes.  If the New York man says the same,
why despair?  Perhaps in another month you will be on your feet again,
out in the world, fighting, working, mastering, just as you used to do."

A sudden stillness seemed to take possession of him.  His lips parted;
his head was thrust forwards slightly as though he saw something in the
distance.  He spoke scarcely above a whisper.

"I didn't know the New York man was coming.  I didn't know there was any
hope at all," he said with awe in his tones.

"We told you there was," she answered.

"Yes, I know.  But I thought you were all only trying to make it easier
for me, and I heard Warbeck say to Rockwell, when they thought I was
asleep, 'It's ten to one against him.'"

"Did you hear that?" she said sorrowfully.  "I'm so sorry; but Mr.
Warbeck said afterwards--only a week ago--that the chances were even.
That's the truth.  On my soul and honour it's the truth.  He said the
chances were even.  It was he suggested Mr. Hindlip, and Hindlip is
coming now.  He's on the way.  He may be here to-day.  Oh, be sure, be
sure, be sure, it isn't all over.  You said your life was broken.  It
isn't.  You said my life had been broken.  It wasn't.  It was only the
wrench of a great change.  Well, it's only the wrench of a great change
in your life.  You said I gained everything in the great change of my
life.  I did; and the great change in your life won't be lost, it will be
gain, too.  I know it; in my heart I know it."

With sudden impulse she caught his hand in both of hers, and then with
another impulse, which she could not control, she caught his head to her
bosom.  For one instant her arms wrapped him round, and she murmured
something in a language he did not understand--the language of the
Roumelian country.  It was only one swift instant, and then with shocked
exclamation she broke away from him, dropped into a chair, and buried her
face in her hands.

He blindly reached out his hand towards her as if to touch her.  "Mother-
girl, dear mother-girl--that's what you are," he said huskily.  "What a
great, kind heart you've got!"

She did not reply, but sat with face hidden in her hands, rocking
backwards and forwards.  He understood; he tried to help her.  There was
a great joy in his heart, but he dared not give it utterance.

"Please tell me about your life--about that great change in it," he said
at last in a low voice.  "Perhaps it would help me.  Anyhow, I'd like to
know, if you feel you can tell me."

For a moment she was silent.  Then she said to him with an anxious note
in her voice: "What do you know about my life-about the 'great change,'
as you call it?"

He reached out over the coverlet, felt for a sock which he had been
learning to knit and, slowly plying the needles, replied: "I only know
what Jethro Fawe told me, and he was a promiscuous liar."

"I don't think he lied about me," she answered quietly.  "He told you I
was a Gipsy; he told you that I was married to him.  That was true.  I
was a Gipsy.  I was married to him in the Romany way, when I was a child
of three, and I never saw him again until here, the other day, on the
Sagalac."

"You were married to him as much as I am," he interjected scornfully.
"That was a farce.  It was only a promise to pay on the part of your
father.  There was nothing in that.  Jethro Fawe could not claim on
that."

"He has tried to do so," she answered, "and if I were still a Gipsy he
would have the right to do so from his standpoint."

"That sounds silly to me," Ingolby remarked, his fingers moving now more
quickly with the needles.  "No, it isn't silly," she said, her voice
almost as softly monotonous as his had been when he told her of his life
a little while before.  It was as though she was looking into her own
mind and heart and speaking to herself.  "It isn't silly," she repeated.
"I don't think you understand.  Just because a race like the Gipsies have
no country and no home, so they must have things that bind them which
other people don't need in the same way.  Being the vagrants of the
earth, so they must have things that hold them tighter than any written
laws made by King or Parliament.  Unless the Gipsies kept their laws
sacred they couldn't hold together at all.  They're iron and steel, the
Gipsy laws.  They can't be stretched, and they can't be twisted.  They
can only be broken, and then there's no argument about it.  When they are
broken, there's the penalty, and it has to be met."

Ingolby stopped knitting for a moment.  "You don't mean that a penalty
could touch you?" he asked incredulously.

"Not for breaking a law," she answered.  "I'm not a Gipsy any more.
I gave my word about that, and so did my father; and I'll keep it."

"Please tell me about it," he urged.  "Tell me, so that I can understand
everything."

There was a long pause in which Ingolby inspected carefully with his
fingers the work which he was doing, but at last Fleda's voice came to
him, as it seemed out of a great distance, while she began to tell of her
first memories: of her life by the Danube and the Black Sea, and drew
for him a picture, so far as she could recall it, of her marriage with
Jethro, and of the years that followed.  Now and again as she told of
some sordid things, of the challenge of the law in different countries,
of the coarse vagabondage of the Gipsy people in this place or in that,
and some indignity put upon her father, or some humiliating incident, her
voice became low and pained.  It seemed as if she meant that he should
see all she had been in that past, which still must be part of the
present and have its place in the future, however far away all that
belonged to it would be.  She appeared to search her mind to find that
which would prejudice him against her.  While speaking with slow scorn
of the life which she had lived as a Gipsy, yet she tried to make him
understand, too, that, in the days when she belonged to it, it all seemed
natural to her, and that its sordidness, its vagabondage did not produce
repugnance in her mind when she was part of it.  Unwittingly she over-
coloured the picture, and he knew she did.

In spite of herself, however, some aspects of the old life called forth
pictures of happy Nature, of busy animal life of wood and glen and stream
and footpath which was exquisite in its way.  She was in spirit at one
with the multitudinous world of nature among which so many men and women
lived, without seeing or knowing.  It was all undesignedly a part of
herself, and she was one of a population in a universal nation whose
devout citizen she was.  Sometimes, in response to an interjection from
Ingolby, deftly made, she told of some incident which revealed as great a
poetic as dramatic instinct.  As she talked, Ingolby in his imagination
pictured her as a girl of ten or twelve, in a dark-red dress, brown curls
falling in profusion on her shoulders, with a clear, honest, beautiful
eye, and a face that only spoke of a joy of living, in which the small
things were the small things and the great things were the great: the
perfect proportion of sane life in a sane world.

Now and again, carried away by the history of things remembered, she
visualized scenes for him with the ardour of an artist and a lover of
created things.  He realized how powerful a hold the old life still had
upon her.  She understood it, too, for when at last she told of the great
event in England which changed her life, and made her a deserter from
Gipsy life; when she came to the giving of the pledge to a dying woman,
and how she had kept that pledge, and how her father had kept it,
sternly, faithfully, in spite of all it involved, she said to him:

"It may seem strange to you, living as I live now in one spot, with
everything to make life easy, that I should long sometimes for that old
life.  I hate it in my heart of hearts, yet there's something about it
that belongs to me, that's behind me, if that tells you anything.  It's
as though there was some other self in me which reached far, far back
into centuries, that wills me to do this and wills me to do that.  It
sounds mad to you of course, but there have been times when I have had a
wild longing to go back to it all, to what some Gorgio writers call the
pariah world--the Ishmaelites."

More than once Ingolby's heart throbbed heavily against his breast as he
felt the passion of her nature, its extraordinary truthfulness, making it
clear to him by indirect phrases that even Jethro Fawe, whom she
despised, still had a hateful fascination for her.  It was all at
variance to her present self, but it summoned her through the long
avenues of ancestry, predisposition; through the secret communion of
those who, being dead, yet speak.

"It's a great story told in a great way," he said, when she had finished.
"It's the most honest thing I ever heard, but it's not the most truthful
thing I ever heard.  I don't think we can tell the exact truth about
ourselves.  We try to be honest; we are savagely in earnest about it,
and so we exaggerate the bad things we do, and we often show distrust of
the good things we do.  That's not a fair picture.  I believe you've told
me the truth as you see it and feel it, but I don't think it's the real
truth.  In my mind I sometimes see an oriel window in the college where I
spent three years.  I used to work and think for hours in that oriel
window, and in the fights I've been having lately I've looked back and
thought I wanted it again; wanted to be there in the peace of it all,
with the books, and the lectures, and the drone of history, and the
drudgery of examinations; but if I did go back to it, three days'd sicken
me, and if you went back to the Gipsy life three days'd sicken you."

"Yes, I know.  Three hours would sicken me.  But what might not happen in
those three hours!  Can't you understand?"

Suddenly she got to her feet with a passionate exclamation, her
clenched hands went to her temples in an agony of emotion.  "Can't you
understand?" she repeated.  "It's the going back at all for three days,
for three hours, for three minutes that counts.  It might spoil
everything; it might kill my life."

His face flushed, crimsoned, then became pale; his hands ceased moving;
the knitting lay still on his knee.  "Maybe, but you aren't going back
for three minutes, any more than I'm going back to the oriel window for
three seconds," he said.  "We dreamers have a lot of agony in thinking
about the things we're never going to do--just as much agony as in
thinking about the things we've done.  Every one of us dreamers ought to
be insulated.  We ought to wear emotional lightning-rods to carry off the
brain-waves into the ground.

"I've never heard such a wonderful story," he added, after an instant,
with an intense longing to hold out his arms to her, and a still more
intense will to do no such wrong.  A blind man had no right or title to
be a slave-owner, for that was what marriage to him would be.  A wife
would be a victim.  He saw himself, felt himself being gradually
devitalized, with only the placid brain left, considering only the
problem of hourly comfort, and trying to neutralize the penalties of
blindness.  She must not be sacrificed to that, for apart from all else
she had greatness of a kind in her.  He knew far better than he had said
of the storm of emotion in her, and he knew that she had not exaggerated
the temptation which sang in her ears.  Jethro Fawe--the thought of the
man revolted him; and yet there was something about the fellow,
a temperamental power, the glamour and garishness of Nature's gifts,
prostituted though they were, finding expression in a striking
personality, in a body of athletic grace--a man-beauty.

"Have you seen Jethro Fawe lately?" he asked.  "Not since"--she was
going to say not since the morning her father had passed the sentence of
the patrin upon him; but she paused in time.  "Not since everything
happened to you," she added presently.

"He knows the game is up," Ingolby remarked with forced cheerfulness.
"He won't be asking for any more."

"It's time for your milk and brandy," she said suddenly, emotion
subsiding and a look of purpose coming into her face.  She poured out the
liquid, and gave the glass into his hand.  His fingers touched hers.

"Your hands are cold," she said to him.  "Cold hands, warm heart," he
chattered.

A curious, wilful, rebellious look came into her eyes.  "I shouldn't
have thought it in your case," she said, and with sudden resolve turned
towards the door.  "I'll send Madame Bulteel," she added.  "I'm going for
a walk."

She had betrayed herself so much, had shown so recklessly what she felt,
and yet, yet why did he not--she did not know what she wanted him to do.
It was all a great confusion.  Vaguely she realized what had been working
in him, but yet the knowledge was dim indeed.  She was a woman.  In her
heart of hearts she knew that he did care for her, and yet in her heart
of hearts she denied that he cared.

She was suddenly angry with herself, angry with him, the poor blind man,
back from the Valley of the Shadow.  She had not reached the door,
however, when Madame Bulteel entered the room.

"The doctor from New York has come," she said, holding out a note from
Dr. Rockwell.  "He will be here in a couple of hours."

Fleda turned back towards the bed.

"Good luck!" she said.  "You'll see, it will be all right."

"Certainly I'll see if it's all right," he said cheerfully.  "Am I tidy?
Have I used Pears' soap?"  He would have his joke at his own funeral if
possible.

"There are two hours to get you fit to be seen," she rejoined with
raillery, infected by his cheerfulness in spite of herself.  "Madame
Bulteel is very brave.  Nothing is too hard for her!"

An instant later she was gone, with her heart telling her to go back to
him, not to leave him, but yet with a longing stronger still driving her
to the open world, to which she could breathe her trouble in great gasps,
as she sped onward through the woods and by the river.  To love a blind
man was sheer madness, but in her was a superstitious belief that he
would see again.  It prevailed against the doubts and terrors.  It made
her resent his own sense of fatality, his own belief that he would be in
darkness all his days.

In the room where he awaited the verdict of the expert, he kept saying to
himself:

"She would have made everything else look cheap--if it could have been."




CHAPTER XXI

THE SNARE OF THE FOWLER

The last rays of the setting sun touched the gorgeous Autumn woods with
a loving, bright glow, and the day stole pensively away into a purple bed
beyond the sight of the eyes.  From a lonely spot by the river, Fleda
watched the westering gleam until it vanished, her soul alive to the
melancholy beauty of it all.  Not a human being seemed to be within the
restricted circle of her vision.  There were only to be seen the deep
woods, in myriad tints of bronze and red and saffron, and the swift-
flowing river.  Overhead was the Northern sky, so clear, so thrilling,
and the stars were beginning to sparkle in the incredibly swift twilight
which links daytime and nighttime in that Upper Land.  Lonely and
delicately sad it all looked, but there was no feeling of loneliness
among those who lived the life of the Sagalac.  Many a man has stood on a
wide plain of snow, white to the uttermost horizon, or in the yellow-
brown grass of the Summer prairie, empty of all human life so far as eye
could see, and yet has felt no solitude.  It is as though the air itself
is inhabited by a throng of happy comrades whispering in the communion of
the invisible world.

As a child Fleda had often gazed upon just such scenes, lonely and
luminous, but she was only conscious then of a vague and pleasant awe,
a kindly confusion, which, like the din of innumerable bees, lulled
wonder to sleep.  Even as a child, however, something of what it meant
had pierced her awe and wonder.  Once as she crossed a broken, bare
mountain of Roumania she had seen a wild ass perched upon a high summit
gazing, as it were, over the wide valley, where beneath, among the rocks,
other wild asses wandered.  There was something so statue-like in this
immovable wild creature that Fleda had watched it till it was hid from
her view by a jutting rock.  But the thing which made a lasting
impression, drawing her nearer to nature-life than all that had chanced
since she was born, was the fact that on returning, hours after, the wild
ass was still standing upon the summit of the hill, still gazing across
the valley.  Or was it gazing across the valley?  Was there some other
vision commanding its sight?

So a young wife not yet a mother loses herself for hours together in a
vista of unexplored experience.  Fleda had passed on, out of sight of the
wild ass on the hills, but for ever after the memory of it remained with
her and the picture of it sprang to her eye innumerable times.  The
hypnotized wild thing--hypnotized by its own vague instincts, or by
something outside itself-became to her as the Sphinx to the Egyptian, the
everlasting question of existence.

Now, as she watched the day fleeing, and night with swift stealthiness
coming on, that unforgettable picture of the Roumanian hills came to her
again.  The instinct of those far-off days which had been little removed
from the finest animal intelligence had now developed into thought.
Brain and soul strove to grasp what it all meant, and what the revelation
was between Nature and herself.  Nature was so vast; she was so
insignificant; changes in its motionless inorganic life were
imperceptible save through the telescopes of years; but she, like the
wind, the water, and the clouds, was variable, inconstant.  Was there any
real relation between the vast, imperturbable earth, its seas, its
forests, its mountains and its plains, its life of tree and plant and
flower and the men and women dotted on its surface?  Did they belong to
each other, or were mankind only, as it were, vermin infesting the
desirable world?  Did they belong to each other?  It meant so much if
they did belong, and she loved to think they did.  Many a time she kissed
the smooth bole of a maple or whispered to it; or laid her cheek against
a mossy rock and murmured a greeting in the spirit of a companionship as
old as the making of the world.

On the evening of this day of her destiny--carrying the story of her own
fate within its twenty-four hours--she was in a mood of detachment from
life's routine.  As at a great opera, a sensitive spirit loses itself in
visions alien to the music and yet born of it, so she, lost in this
primeval scene before her, saw visions of things to be.

If Ingolby's sight came back!  In her abstraction she saw him with sight
restored and by her side, and even in that joy her mind felt a hovering
sense of invasion, no definite, visible thing, but a presence which made
shadow.  Suddenly oppressed by it, she turned back into the woods from
the river-bank to make for home.  She had explored nearly every portion
of this river-country for miles up and down, but on this evening, lost in
her dreams, she had wandered into less familiar regions.  There was no
chance of her being lost, so long as she kept near to the river, and
indeed by instinct and not by thought or calculation she made her way
about at all times.  Turned homeward, she walked for about a quarter of a
mile, retreading the path by which she had come.  It was growing darker,
and, being in unfamiliar surroundings, she hurried on, though she knew
well what course to take.  Following the bank of the river she would have
increased her walk greatly, as the stream made a curve at a point above
Manitou, and then came back again to its original course; so she cut
across the promontory, taking the most direct line homeward.

Presently, however, she became conscious of other people in the wood
besides herself.  She saw no one, but she heard breaking twigs, the stir
of leaves, the flutter of a partridge which told of human presence.  The
underbrush was considerable, darkness was coming on, and she had a sense
of being surrounded.  It agitated her, but she pulled herself together,
stood still and admonished herself.  She called herself a fool; she asked
herself if she was going to be a coward.  She laughed out loud at her own
apprehension; but a chill stole into her blood when she heard near by--
there was no doubt about it now--mockery of her own laughter.  Then
suddenly, before she could organize her senses, a score of men seemed to
rise up from the ground around her, to burst out from the bushes, to drop
from the trees, and to storm upon her.  She had only time to realize that
they were Romanys, before scarfs were thrown around her head, bound
around her body, and, unconscious, she was carried away into the deep
woods.

When she regained consciousness Fleda found herself in a tent, set in a
kind of prairie amphitheatre valanced by shrubs and trees.  Bright fires
burned here and there, and dark-featured men squatted upon the ground,
cared for their horses, or busied themselves near two large caravans, at
the doors or on the steps of which now and again appeared a woman.

She had waked without moving, had observed the scene without drawing the
attention of a man--a sentry--who sat beside the tent-door.  The tent was
empty save for herself.  There was little in it besides the camp-bed
against the tent wall, upon which she lay, and the cushions supporting
her head.  She had waked carefully, as it were: as though some inward
monitor had warned her of impending danger.  She realized that she had
been kidnapped by Romanys, and that the hand behind the business was that
of Jethro Fawe.  The adventurous and reckless Fawe family had its many
adherents in the Romany world, and Jethro was its head, the hereditary
claimant for its leadership.

Notwithstanding the Ry of Rys' prohibition, there had drawn nearer and
ever nearer to him, from the Romany world he had abandoned, many of his
people, never, however, actually coming within his vision till the
appearance of Jethro Fawe.  Here and there on the prairie, to a point
just beyond Gabriel Druse's horizon, they had come from all parts of the
world; and Jethro, reckless and defiant under the Sentence, and knowing
that the chances against his life were a million to one, had determined
on one bold stroke which, if it failed, would make his fate no worse,
and, if it succeeded, would give him his wife and, maybe, headship over
all the Romany world.  For weeks he had planned, watched and waited,
filling the woods with his adherents, secretly following Fleda day by
day, until, at last, the place, the opportunity, seemed perfect; and here
she lay in a Romany tan once more, with the flickering fires outside in
the night, and the sentry at her doorway.  This watchman was not Jethro
Fawe, but she knew well that Jethro was not far off.

Through the open door of the tent, for some minutes, her eyes studied the
segment of the circle within her vision, and she realized that here was
an organized attempt to force her back into the Romany world.  If she
repudiated the Gorgio life and acknowledged herself a Romany once again,
she knew her safety would be secured; but in truth she had no fear for
her life, for no one would dare to defy the Ry of Rys so far as to kill
his daughter.  But she was in danger of another kind--in deep and
terrible danger; and she knew it well.  As the thought of it took
possession of her, her heart seemed almost to burst.  Not fear, but anger
and emotion possessed her.  All the Romany in her stormed back again from
the past.  It sent her to her feet with a scarcely smothered cry.  She
was not quicker, however, than was the figure at the tent door, which,
with a half-dozen others, sprang up as she appeared.  A hand was raised,
and, as if by magic, groups of Gipsies, some sitting, some standing, some
with the Gipsy fiddle, one or two with flutes, began a Romany chant in a
high, victorious key, and women threw upon the fire powders from which
flamed up many coloured lights.

In a moment the camp was transformed.  From the woods around came
swarthy-faced men, with great gold rings in their ears and bright scarfs
around their necks or waists, some of them handsome, dirty and insolent;
others ugly, watchful, and quiet in manner and face; others still most
friendly and kind in face and manner.  All showed instant respect for
Fleda.  They raised their hands in a gesture of salutation as a Zulu
chief thrusts up a long arm and shouts "Inkoos!" to one whom he honours.
Some, however, made the sweeping Oriental gesture of the right hand, palm
upward, and almost touching the ground--a sign of obedience and infinite
respect.  It had all been well arranged.  Skilfully managed as it was,
however, there was something in it deeper than theatrical display or
dramatic purpose.

It was clear that many of them were deeply moved at being in the presence
of the daughter of the Ry of Rys, who had for so long exiled himself.
Racial, family, clan feeling spoke in voice and gesture, in look and
attitude; but yet there were small groups of younger men whose
salutations were perfunctory, not to say mocking.  These were they who
resented deeply Fleda's defection, and truthfully felt that she had
passed out of their circle for ever; that she despised them, and looked
down on them from another sphere.  They were all about the age of Jethro
Fawe, but were of a less civilized type, and had semi-barbarism written
all over them.  Unlike Jethro they had never known the world of cities.
They repudiated Fleda, because their ambition could not reach to her.
They recognized the touch of fashion and of form, of a worldly education,
of a convention which lifted her away from the tan and the caravan, from
the everlasting itinerary.  They had not had Jethro's experiences in
fashionable hotels of Europe, at midnight parties, at gay suppers, at
garish dances, where Gorgio ladies answered the amorous looks of the
ambitious Romany with the fiddle at his chin.  Because these young
Romanys knew they dare not aspire, they were resentful; but Jethro,
the head of the rival family and the son of the dead claimant to the
headship, had not such compulsory modesty.  He had ranged far and wide,
and his expectations were extensive.  He was nowhere to be seen in the
groups which sang and gestured in the light of the many coloured fires,
though once or twice Fleda's quickened ear detected his voice, exulting,
in the chorus of song.

Presently, as she stood watching, listening, and strangely moved in spite
of herself by the sudden dramatic turn which things had taken, a seat was
brought to her.  It was a handsome stool, looted perhaps from some
chateau in the Old World, and over it was thrown a dark-red cloth which
gave a semblance of dignity to the seat of authority, which it was meant
to be.

Fleda did not refuse the honour.  She had choked back the indignant words
which had rushed to her lips as she left the tent where she had been
lying.  Prudence had bade her await developments.  She could not yet make
up her mind what to do.  It was clear that a bold and deep purpose lay
behind it all, and she could not tell how far-reaching it was, nor what
it represented of rebellion against her father's authority.  That it did
represent rebellion she had no doubt.  She was well enough aware of the
claims of Jethro's dead father to the leadership, abandoned for three
thousand pounds and marriage with herself; and she was also aware that
while her father's mysterious isolation might possibly have developed a
reverence for him, yet active pressure and calumny might well have done
its work.  Also, if the marriage was repudiated, Jethro would be
justified in resuming the family claim to the leadership.

She seated herself upon the scarlet seat with a gesture of thanks, while
the salutations and greetings increased; then she awaited events,
thrilled by the weird and pleasant music, with its touches of Eastern
fantasy.  In spite of herself she was moved, as Romanys, men and women,
ran forward in excitement with arms raised towards her as though they
meant to strike her, then suddenly stopped short, made obeisance, called
a greeting, and ran backwards to their places.

Presently a group of men began a ceremony or ritual, before which the
spectators now and again covered their eyes, or bent their heads low,
or turned their backs, and raised their hands in a sort of ascription.
As the ceremony neared its end, with its strange genuflections, a woman
dressed in white was brought forward, her hands bound behind her, her
hair falling over her shoulders, and after a moment of apparent
denunciation on the part of the head of the ceremony, she was suddenly
thrown to the ground, and the pretence of drawing a knife across her
throat was made.  As Fleda watched it she shuddered, but presently braced
herself, because she knew that this ritual was meant to show what the end
must be of those who, like herself, proved traitor to the traditions of
race.

It was at this point, when fifty knives flashed in the air, with vengeful
exclamations, that Jethro Fawe appeared in the midst of the crowd.  He
was dressed in the well-known clothes which he had worn since the day he
first declared himself at Gabriel Druse's home, and, compared with his
friends around him, he showed to advantage.  There was command in his
bearing, and experience of life had given him primitive distinction.

For a moment he stood looking at Fleda in undisguised admiration, for
she made a remarkable picture.  Animal beauty was hers, too.  There was a
delicate, athletic charm in her body and bearing; but it added to, rather
than took away from, the authority of her presence, so differing from
Jethro.  She had never compared herself with others, and her passionate
intelligence would have rebelled against the supremacy of the body.  She
had no physical vanity, but she had some mental vanity, and it placed
mind so far above matter that her beauty played no part in her
calculations.  At sight of him, Fleda's blood quickened, but in
indignation and in no other sense.  As he came towards her, however,
despising his vanity as she did, she felt how much he was above all those
by whom he was surrounded.  She realized his talent, and it almost made
her forget his cunning and his loathsomeness.  As he came near to her he
made a slight gesture to someone in the crowd, and a chorus of
salutations rose.

Composed and still she waited for him to come quite close to her, and the
look in her face was like that of one who was scarcely conscious of what
was passing around her, whose eyes saw distant things of infinite moment.

A few feet away from her he spoke.

"Daughter of the Ry of Rys, you are among your own people once again,"
he said.  "From everywhere in the world they have come to show their love
for you.  You would not have come to them of your own free will, because
a madness 'got hold of you, and so they came to you.  You cut yourself
off from them and told yourself you had become a Gorgio.  But that was
only your madness; and madness can be cured.  We are the Fawes, the
ancient Fawes, who ruled the Romany people before the Druses came to
power.  We are of the ancient blood, yet we are faithful to the Druse
that rules over us.  His word prevails, although his daughter is mad.
Daughter of the Ry of Rys, you have seen us once again.  We have sung to
you; we have spoken to you; we have told you what is in our hearts; we
have shown you how good is the end of those who are faithful, and how
terrible is the end of the traitor.  Do not forget it.  Speak to us."

Fleda had a fierce desire to spring to her feet and declare to them all
that the sentence of the patrin had been passed upon Jethro Fawe, but she
laid a hand upon herself.  She knew they were unaware that the Sentence
had been passed, else they would not have been with Jethro.  In that case
none would give him food or shelter or the hand of friendship; none dare
show him any kindness; and it was the law that any one against whom he
committed an offence, however small, might take his life.  The Sentence
had been like a cloud upon her mind ever since her father had passed it;
she could not endure the thought of it.  She could not bring herself to
speak of it--to denounce him.  Sooner or later the Sentence would reach
every Romany everywhere, and Jethro would pass into the darkness of
oblivion, not in his own time nor in the time of Fate.  The man was
abhorrent to her, yet his claim was there.  Mad and bad as it was, he
made his claim of her upon ancient rights, and she was still enough a
Romany to see his point of view.

Getting to her feet slowly, she ignored Jethro, looked into the face of
the crowd, and said:

"I am the daughter of the Ry of Rys still, though I am a Romany no
longer.  I made a pledge to be no more a Romany and I will keep it; yet
you and all Romany people are dear to me because through long generations
the Druses have been of you.  You have brought me here against my will.
Do you think the Ry of Rys will forgive that?  In your words you have
been kind to me, but yet you have threatened me.  Do you think that a
Druse has any fear?  Did a Druse ever turn his cheek to be smitten?  You
know what the Druses are.  I am a Druse still.  I will not talk longer,
I have nothing to say to you all except that you must take me back to my
father, and I will see that he forgives you.  Some of you have done this
out of love; some of you have done it out of hate; yet set me free again
upon the path to my home, and I shall forget it, and the Ry of Rys will
forget it."

At that instant there suddenly came forward from the doorway of a tent
on the outskirts of the crowd a stalwart woman, with a strong face and
a self-reliant manner.  She was still young, but her slightly pockmarked
countenance showed the wear and tear of sorrow of some kind.  She had,
indeed, lost her husband and her father in the Montenegrin wars.
Hastening forward to Fleda she reached out a hand.

"Come with me," she said; "come and sleep in my tent to-night.  To-morrow
you shall go back to the Ry of Rys, perhaps.  Come with me."

There was a sudden murmuring in the crowd, which was stilled by a motion
of Jethro Fawe's hand, and a moment afterwards Fleda gave her hand to the
woman.

"I will go with you," Fleda said.  Then she turned to Jethro: "I wish to
speak to you alone, Jethro Fawe," she added.

He laughed triumphantly.  "The wife of Jethro Fawe wishes to speak with
him," he bombastically cried aloud to the assembled people, and he
prepared to follow Fleda.

As Fleda entered the woman's tent a black-eyed girl, with tousled hair
and a bold, sensual face, ran up to Jethro, and in an undertone of evil
suggestion said to him:

"To-night is yours, Jethro.  You can make tomorrow sure."




CHAPTER XXII

THE SECRET MAN

"You are wasting your time."

Fleda said the words with a quiet determination, and yet in the tone was
a slight over-emphasis which was like a call upon reserve forces within
herself.

"Time is nothing to me," was the complete reply, clothed in a tone of
soft irony.  "I'm young enough to waste it.  I've plenty of it in my
knapsack."

"Have you forgotten the Sentence of the Patrin?"  Fleda asked the
question in a voice which showed a sudden access of determination.

"He will have to wipe it out after to-morrow," replied the other with a
gleam of sulky meaning and furtive purpose in his eyes.

"If you mean that I will change my mind to-morrow, and be your wife, and
return to the Gipsy life, it is the thought of a fool.  I asked you to
come here to speak with me because I was sure I could make you see things
as they truly are.  I wanted to explain why I did not tell the Romanys
outside there that the Sentence had been passed on you.  I did not tell
them because I can't forget that your people and my people have been sib
for hundreds of years; that you and I were children together; that we
were sealed to one another when neither of us could have any say about
it.  If I had remained a Gipsy, who can tell--my mind might have
become like yours!  I think there must be something rash and bad in me
somewhere, because I tell you frankly now that a chord in my heart rang
when you made your wild speeches to me there in the hut in the Wood
months ago, even when I hated you, knowing you for what you are."

"That was because there was another man," interjected Jethro.

She inclined her head.  "Yes, it was partly because of another man,"
she replied.  "It is a man who suffers because of you.  When he was alone
among his foes, a hundred to one, you betrayed him.  That itself would
have made me despise you to the end of my life, even if the man had been
nothing at all to me.

"It was a low, cowardly thing to do.  You did it; and if you were my
brother, I would hate you for it; if you were my father, I should leave
your house; if you were my husband, I should kill you.  I asked you to
speak with me now because I thought that if you would go away--far away--
promising never to cross my father's path, or my path, again, I could get
him to withdraw the Sentence.  You have kidnapped me.  Where do you think
you are?  In Mesopotamia?  You can't break the law of this country and
escape as you would there.  They don't take count of Romany custom here.
Not only you, but every one of the Fawes here will be punished if the law
reaches for your throat.  I want you to escape, and I tell you to go now.
Go back to Europe.  I advise you this for your own sake--because you are
a Fawe and of the clan."

The blood mounted to Jethro's forehead, and he made an angry gesture.
"And leave you here for him!  'Mi Duvel!'  I can only die once, and I
would rather die near you than far away," he exclaimed.

His eyes had a sardonic look, there was a savage edge to his tongue, yet
his face was flushed with devouring emotion and he was quivering with
hope.  That which he called love was flooding the field of his feelings,
and the mad thing--the toxic impulse which is deep in the brain of
Eastern races bled into his brain now.  He was reckless, rebellious
against fate, insanely wilful, and what she had said concerning Ingolby
had roused in him the soul of Cain.

She realized it, and she was apprehensive of some desperate act; yet she
had no physical fear of him.  Something seemed to tell her that, no
matter what happened, Ingolby would not wait for her in vain, and that
he would yet see her enter to him again with the love-light in her eyes.

"But listen to me," Jethro said, with an unnatural shining in his eyes,
his voice broken in its passion.  "You think you can come it over me with
your Gorgio talk and the clever things you've learned in the Gorgio
world.  You try to look down on me.  I'm as well born or as ill born as
you.  The only difference between us is the way you dress, the way you
live and use your tongue.  All that belongs to the life of the cities.
Anyone can learn it.  Anyone well born like you and me, with a little
practice, can talk like Gorgio dukes and earls.  I've been among them and
I know.  I've had my friends among them, too.  I've got the hang of it
all.  It's no good to me, and I don't want it.  It's all part of a set
piece.  There's no independence in that life; you live by rule.  Diable!
I know.  I've been in palaces; I've played my fiddle to the women in high
places who can't blush.  It's no good; it brings nothing in the end.
It's all hollow.  Look at our people there."  He swept a hand to the tent
door.

"They're tanned and rough, as all out-door things are rough, but they've
got their share of happiness, and every day has its pleasures.  Listen to
them!" he cried with a gesture of exultation.  "Listen to that!"

The colour slowly left Fleda's face.  Outside in the light of the dying
fires, under the glittering stars, in the shade of the trees, groups of
Romanys were singing the Romany wedding melody, called "The Song of the
Sealing."  It was not like the ringing of wedding bells alone, it sealed
blessing upon the man and the woman.  It was a poem in praise of marriage
passion; it was a paean proclaiming the accomplishment of life.  Crude,
primitive, it thrilled with Eastern feeling; a weird charm was showered
from its notes.

"Listen!" exclaimed Jethro again, a fire burning in his face.  "That's
for you and me.  To them you are my wife, and I am your man.  'Mi Duvel'
--it shall be so!  I know women.  For an hour you will hate me; for a day
you will resent me, and then you will begin to love me.  You will fight
me, but I will conquer.  I know you--I know you--all you women.  But no,
it will not be I that will conquer.  It's my love that will do it.  It's
a den of tigers.  When it breaks loose it will have its way.  Here it is.
Can't you see it in my face?  Can't you hear it in my voice?  Don't you
hear my heart beating?  Every throb says, 'Fleda--Fleda--Fleda, come to
me.'  I have loved you since you were three.  I want you now.  We can be
happy.  Every night we will make a new home.  The world will be ours; the
best that is in it will come to us.  We will tap the trees of happiness
--they're hid from the Gorgio world.  You and I will know where to find
them.  Every land shall be ours; every gift of paradise within our reach
--riches, power, children.  Come back to your own people; be a true
daughter of the Ry of Rys; live with your Romany chal.  You will never be
at home anywhere else.  It's in your bones; it's in your blood; it's
deeper than all.  Here, now, come to me--my wife."

He flung the flap of the tent door across the opening, shutting out the
camp-fires and the people.  "Here--now--come.  Be mine while they sing."

For one swift moment the great passion and eloquence of the man lifted
her off her feet; for one instant the Romany in her triumphed, and a
thrill of passion passed through her, storming her senses, like a mist
shutting out all the rest of the world.  This Romany was right; there was
in her the wild thing--the everlasting strain of race and years breaking
down all the defences which civilized life had built up within her.  Just
for one instant so--and then there flashed before her a face with two
blind eyes.

Like a stream of ether playing upon warm flesh, making it icy cold, so
something of the ineradicable good in her swept like a frozen spray upon
the elements of emotion, and with both hands she made a gesture of
repulsion.

His eyes with their reddish glow burned nearer and nearer to her.  He
bulked over her, driving her back against the couch by the tent wall.
For an instant like that--and then, with clenched hand, she struck him in
the face.

Swift as had been the change in her, so a change like a cyclone swept
over him.  The hysterical passion which had possessed him suddenly
passed, and a dark, sullen determination swept into his eyes and over his
face.  His lips parted in a savage smile.

"Hell, so that's what you've learned in the Gorgio world, is it?" he
asked malevolently.  "Then I'll teach you what they do in the Romany
world; and to-morrow you can put the two together and see what they look
like."

With a Romany expletive, he flung back the curtain of the tent and passed
out into the night.

For a long time Fleda sat stunned and overcome by the side of the
couch, her brain tortured by a thousand thoughts.  She knew there was no
immediate escape from the encampment.  She could only rely upon the hue
and cry which would be raised and the certain hunt which would be made
for her.  But what might not happen before any rescue came?  The ancient
grudge of the Fawes against the Druses had gained power and activity by
the self-imposed exile of Gabriel Druse; and Jethro had worked upon it.
The veiled threats which Jethro had made she did not despise.  He was a
barbarian.  He would kill what he loved; he would have his way with what
he loved, whether or not it was the way of law or custom or right.
Outside, the wedding song still made musical the night.  Women's voices,
shrill, and with falsetto notes, made the trees ring with it; low, bass
voices gave it a kind of solemnity.  The view which the encampment took
of her captivity was clear.  Where was the woman that brought her to the
tent--whose tent it was?  She seemed kind.  Though her face had a hard
look, surely she meant to be friendly.  Or did she only mean to betray
her; to give her a fancied security, and leave her to Jethro--and the
night?  She looked round for some weapon.  There was nothing available
save two brass candlesticks.  Though the door of the tent was closed, she
knew that there were watchers outside; that any break for liberty would
only mean defeat, and yet she was determined to save herself.

As she tried to take the measure of the situation and plan what she would
do, the noise of the music suddenly ceased, and she heard a voice, though
low in tone, give some sort of command.  Then there was a cry, and what
seemed the chaotic noise of a struggle followed; then a voice a little
louder speaking, a voice of someone she remembered, though she could not
place it.  Something vital was happening outside, something punctuated by
sharp, angry exclamations; afterwards a voice speaking soothingly,
firmly, prevailed; and then there was silence.  As she listened there was
a footstep at the door of the tent, a voice called to her softly, and a
hand drew aside the tent curtain.  The woman who had brought her to this
place entered.

"You are all safe now," she said, reaching out both hands to Fleda.  "By
long and by last, but it was a close shave!  He meant to make you his
wife to-night, whether you would or no.  I'm a Fawe, but I'd have none of
that.  I was on my way to your father's house when I met someone--someone
that you know.  He carries your father's voice in his mouth."

She stepped to the tent door and beckoned; and out of the darkness, only
faintly lightened by the dying fires, there entered one whom Fleda had
seen not more than fifty times in her life, and never but twice since she
had ceased to be a Romany.  It was her father's secret agent, Rhodo, the
Roumelian, now grizzled and gaunt, but with the same vitality which had
been his in the days when she was a little child.

Here and there in the world went Rhodo, the voice of the Ry of Rys to do
his bidding, to say his say.  No minister of a Czar was ever more dreaded
or loved.  His words were ever few, but his deeds had been many.  Now, as
he looked at Fleda, his old eyes gleamed, and he showed a double row of
teeth, not one of which was imperfect, though he was seventy years of
age.

"Would you like to come?" he asked.  "Would you like to come home to the
Ry?"

With a cry she flung herself upon him.  "Rhodo!  Rhodo!" she exclaimed,
and now the tears broke forth, and her body shook with sobs.

A few moments later he said to her: "It's fifteen years since you kissed
me last.  I thought you were ashamed of old Rhodo."

She did not answer, but looked at him with eyes streaming, drawing back
from him.  Her embrace was astonishing even to herself, for as a child
Rhodo had been a figure of awe to her, and the feeling had deepened as
the years had gone on, knowing as she did his work throughout the world
for the Ry of Rys.  In his face was secrecy, knowledge, and some tragic
underthing which gave him, apart from his office, a singular loneliness
of figure and manner.  He was so closely knit in form; there was such
concentration in face, bearing and gesture, that the isolation of his
position was greatly deepened.

"No, you never kissed me after you were old enough to like or dislike,"
he said with mournful and ironical reflection.

There crept into his face a kind of yearning such as one might feel who
beheld afar off a promised land, and yet was denied its joys.  Rhodo was
wifeless, childless, and had been so for forty years.  He had had no
intimates among the Romany people.  His life he lived alone.  That the
daughter of the Ry of Rys should kiss him was a thing of which he would
dream when deeds were done and over and the shadows threatened.

"I will kiss you again in another fifteen years," she said half-smiling
through her tears.  "But tell me--tell me what has happened."

"Jethro Fawe has gone," he answered with a sweeping outward gesture.

"Where has he gone?" she asked, apprehension seizing her.

"A journey into the night," responded the old man with scorn and wrath in
his tone, and his lips were set.

"Is he going far?" 