ors of college to all Americans.

With our support, nearly every state has set higher academic standards for
public schools and a voluntary national test is being developed to measure
the progress of our students. With over $1 billion in discounts available
this year, we are well on our way to our goal of connecting every classroom
and library to the Internet.

Last fall, you passed our proposal to start hiring 100,000 new teachers to
reduce class size in the early grades. Now I ask you to finish the job.

You know our children are doing better. SAT scores are up. Math scores have
risen in nearly all grades. But there's a problem. While our fourth-graders
out performed their peers in other countries in math and science, our
eighth-graders are around average, and our 12th-graders rank near the
bottom. We must do better.

Now each year the national government invests more than $15 billion in our
public schools. I believe we must change the way we invest that money to
support what works and to stop supporting what does not work.

First, later this year I will send to Congress a plan that for the first
time holds states and school districts accountable for progress and rewards
them for results. My Education Accountability Act will require every school
district receiving federal help to take the following five steps:

First, all schools must end social promotion.

Now, no child, no child should graduate from high school with a diploma he
or she can't read. We do our children no favors when we allow them to pass
from grade to grade without mastering the material. But we can't just hold
students back because the system fails them.

So my balanced budget triples the funding for summer school and
after-school programs to keep a million children learning. Now, if--if you
doubt this will work, just look at Chicago, which ended social promotion
and made summer school mandatory for those who don't master the basics.
Math and reading scores are up three years running with some of the biggest
gains in some of the poorest neighborhoods. It will work, and we should do
it.

Second, all states and school districts must turn around their worst
performing schools or shut them down. That's the policy established in
North Carolina by Governor Jim Hunt. North Carolina made the biggest gains
in test scores in the nation last year. Our budget includes $200 million to
help states turn around their own failing schools.

Third, all states and school districts must be held responsible for the
quality of their teachers. The great majority of our teachers do a fine
job, but in too many schools teachers don't have college majors or even
minors in the subjects they teach. New teachers should be required to pass
performance exams, and all teachers should know the subject their
teaching.

This year's balanced budget contains resources to help them reach higher
standards. And to attract talented young teachers to the toughest
assignments, I recommend a six-fold increase in our program for college
scholarships for students who commit to teach in the inner-cities and
isolated rural areas and in Indian communities. Let us bring excellence to
every part of America.

Fourth, we must empower parents with more information and more choices. In
too many communities it's easier to get information on the quality of the
local restaurants than on the quality of the local schools.

Every school district should issue report cards on every school. And
parents should be given more choices in selecting their public schools.

When I became president, there was just one independent public charter
school in all America. With our support on a bipartisan basis, today there
are 1,100. My budget assures that early in the next century, there will be
3,000.

Fifth, to assure that our classrooms are truly places of learning, and to
respond to what teachers have been asking us to do for years, we should say
that all states and school districts must both adopt and implement sensible
discipline policies.

Now let's do one more thing for our children. Today, too many schools are
so old they're falling apart, or so overcrowded students are learning in
trailers. Last fall, Congress missed the opportunity to change that. This
year, with 53 million children in our schools, Congress must not miss that
opportunity again. I ask you to help our communities build or modernize
5,000 schools.

If we do these things--end social promotion, turn around failing schools,
build modern ones, support qualified teachers, promote innovation,
competition and discipline--then we will begin to meet our generation's
historic responsibility to create to 21st century schools.

Now, we also have to do more to support the millions of parents who give
their all every day at home and at work.

The most basic tool of all is a decent income. So let's raise the minimum
wage by a dollar an hour over the next two years.

And let's make sure that women and men get equal pay for equal work by
strengthening enforcement of the equal pay laws.

That was encouraging, you know? There was more balance on the seesaw. I
like that. Let's give them a hand. That's great.

Working parents also need quality child care. So, again this year, I ask
Congress to support our plan for tax credits and subsidies for working
families, for improved safety and quality, for expanded after-school
program. And our plan also includes a new tax credit for stay-at-home
parents, too. They need support as well.

Parents should never have to worry about choosing between their children
and their work. Now, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the very first bill
I signed into law, has now, since 1993, helped millions and millions of
Americans to care for a newborn baby or an ailing relative without risking
their jobs. I think it's time, with all of the evidence that it has been so
little burdensome to employers, to extend family leave to 10 million more
Americans working for smaller companies, and I hope you will support it.

Finally, on the matter of work, parents should never have to face
discrimination in the workplace. So I want to ask Congress to prohibit
companies from refusing to hire or promote workers simply because they have
children. That is not right.

America's families deserve the world's best medical care. Thanks to
bipartisan federal support for medical research, we are not on the verge of
new treatments to prevent or delay diseases from Parkinson's to Alzheimer's
to arthritis to cancer. But as we continue our advances in medical science,
we can't let our medical system lag behind.

Managed care has literally transformed medicine in America, driving down
costs, but threatening to drive down quality as well.

I think we ought to say to every American, you should have the right to
know all you medical options, not just the cheapest. If you need a
specialist, you should have a right to see one. You have a right to the
nearest emergency care if you're in an accident. These are things that we
ought to say. And I think we ought to say you should have a right to keep
your doctor during a period of treatment whether it's a pregnancy or a
chemotherapy treatment or anything else. I believe this.

Now I've ordered these rights to be extended to the 85 million Americans
served by Medicare, Medicaid and other federal health programs. But only
Congress can pass a Patients' Bill of Rights for all Americans.

Last year, Congress missed that opportunity, and we must not miss that
opportunity again. For the sake of our families, I ask us to join together
across party lines and pass a strong enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights.

As more of our medical records are stored electronically, the threats to
all of our privacy increase. Because Congress has given me the authority to
act if it does not do so by August, one way or another, we can all say to
the American people, we will protect the privacy of medical records this
year.

Now, two years ago, we acted to extend health coverage to up to five
million children. Now we should go beyond that. We should make it easier
for small businesses to offer health insurance. We should give people
between the ages of 55 and 65 who lose their health insurance the chance to
buy into Medicare.

And we should continue to ensure access to family planning. No one should
have to choose between keeping health care and taking a job. And therefore,
I especially ask you tonight to join hands to pass the landmark bipartisan
legislation proposed by Sens. Kennedy and Jeffords, Roth and Moynihan, to
allow people with disabilities to keep their health insurance when they go
to work.

We need to enable our public hospitals, our community, our university
health centers to provide basic, affordable care for all the millions of
working families who don't have any insurance. They do a lot of that today,
but much more can be done. And my balanced budget makes a good down payment
toward that goal. I hope you will think about them and support that
provision.

Let me say we must step up our efforts to treat and prevent mental illness.
No American should ever be able--afraid ever to address this disease. This
year we will host a White House Conference on Mental Health. With
sensitivity, commitment and passion, Tipper Gore is leading our efforts
here, and I'd like to thank her for what she's done. Thank you. Thank you.

As everyone knows, our children are targets of a massive media campaign to
hook them on cigarettes. Now, I ask this Congress to resist the tobacco
lobby, to reaffirm the FDA's authority to protect our children from tobacco
and to hold tobacco companies accountable, while protecting tobacco
farmers.

Smoking has cost taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars under Medicare
and other programs. You know, the states have been right about this.
Taxpayers shouldn't pay for the cost of lung cancer, emphysema, and other
smoking-related illnesses, the tobacco companies should.

So tonight I announce that the Justice Department is preparing a litigation
plan to take the tobacco companies to court and with the funds we recover
to strengthen Medicare.

Now, if we act in these areas--minimum wage, family leave, child care,
health care, the safety of our children--then we will begin to meet our
generation's historic responsibilities to strengthen our families for the
21st century.

Today, America is the most dynamic, competitive, job-creating economy in
history, but we can do even better in building a 21st century economy that
embraces all Americans.

Today's income gap is largely a skills gap. Last year, the Congress passed
a law enabling workers to get a skills grant to choose the training they
need. And I applaud all of you here who were part of that.

This year, I recommend a five-year commitment to the new system, so that we
can provide over the next five years appropriate training opportunities for
all Americans who lose their jobs and expand rapid response teams to help
all towns which have been really hurt when businesses close. I hope you
will support this.

Also, I ask your support for a dramatic increase in federal support for
adult literacy to mount a national campaign aimed at helping the millions
and millions of working people who still read at less than a fifth-grade
level. We need to do this.

Here's some good news. In the past six years, we have cut the welfare rolls
nearly in half.

Two years ago, from this podium, I asked five companies to lead a national
effort to hire people off welfare. Tonight our welfare-to-work partnership
includes 10,000 companies who have hired hundreds of thousands of people,
and our balanced budget will help another 200,000 people move to the
dignity and pride of work. I hope you will support it.

We must bring the spark of private enterprise to every corner of America,
to build a bridge from Wall Street to Appalachia to the Mississippi Delta,
to our Native American communities, with more support for community
development banks for empowerment zones, for 100,000 more vouchers for
affordable housing.

And I ask Congress to support our bold new plan to help businesses raise up
to $15 billion in private sector capital, to bring jobs and opportunities
and inner cities, rural areas, with tax credits, loan guarantees, including
the new American Private Investment Companies, modeled on the Overseas
Private Investment Companies.

Now, for years and years we've had this OPIC, this Overseas Private
Investment Corporation, because we knew we had untapped markets overseas.
But our greatest untapped markets are not overseas--they are right here at
home. And we should go after them.

We must work hard to help bring prosperity back to the family farm.

As this Congress knows very well, dropping prices and the loss of foreign
markets have devastated too many family farmers. Last year, the Congress
provided substantial assistance to help stave off a disaster in American
agriculture, and I am ready to work with lawmakers of both parties to
create a farm safety net that will include crop insurance reform and farm
income assistance.

I ask you to join with me and do this. This should not be a political
issue. Everyone knows what an economic problem is going on out there in
rural America today, and we need an appropriate means to address it.

We must strengthen our lead in technology. It was government investment
that led to the creation of the Internet. I propose a 28-percent increase
in long-term computing research.

We also must be ready for the 21st century from its very first moment by
solving the so-called Y2K computer problem. We had one member of Congress
stand up and applaud. And we may have about that ration out there
applauding at home in front of their television sets. But remember, this is
a big, big problem, and we've been working hard on it. Already we've made
sure that the Social Security checks will come on time.

But I want all the folks at home listening to this to know that we need
every state and local government, every business large and small to work
with us to make sure that this Y2K computer bug will be remembered as the
last headache of the 20th century, not the first crisis of the 21st.

For our own prosperity, we must support economic growth abroad. You know,
until recently a third of our economic growth came from exports. But over
the past year and a half, financial turmoil has put that growth at risk.
Today, much of the world is in recession, with Asia hit especially hard.
This is the most serious financial crisis in half a century.

To meet it, the U.S. and other nations have reduced interest rates and
strengthened the International Monetary Fund and while the turmoil is not
over, we have worked very hard with other nations to contain it.

At the same time, we will continue to work on the long-term project:
building a global financial system for the 21st century that promotes
prosperity and tames the cycle of boom and bust that has engulfed so much
of Asia. This June, I will meet with other world leaders to advance this
historic purpose and I ask all of you to support our endeavors. I also ask
you to support creating a freer and fairer trading system for 21st century
America.

You know, I'd like to say something really serious to everyone in this
chamber in both parties. I think trade has divided us and divided Americans
outside this chamber for too long. Somehow, we have to find a common ground
on which business and workers and environmentalists and farmers and
government can stand together. I believe these are the things we ought to
all agree on. So, let me try.

First, we ought to tear down barriers, open markets and expand trade, but
at the same time, we must ensure that ordinary citizens in all countries
actually benefit from trade; a trade that promotes the dignity of work and
the rights of workers and protects the environment.

We must insist that international trade organizations be open to public
scrutiny instead of mysterious, secret things subject to wild criticism.

When you come right down to it, now that the world economy is becoming more
and more integrated, we have to do in the world what we spent the better
part of this century doing here at home. We have got to put a human face on
the global economy.

Now, we must enforce our trade laws when imports unlawfully flood our
nation. I have already informed the government of Japan if that nation's
sudden surge of steel imports into our country is not reversed, America
will respond.

We must help all manufacturers hit hard by the present crisis with loan
guarantees, and other incentives to increase American exports by nearly $2
billion. I'd like to believe we can achieve a new consensus on trade based
on these principles. And I ask the Congress to join me again in this common
approach and to give the president the trade authority long used and now
overdue and necessary to advance our prosperity in the 21st century.

Tonight, I issue a call to the nations of the world to join the United
States in a new round of global trade negotiation to expand exports of
services, manufactures and farm products.

Tonight, I say, we will work with the International Labor Organization on a
new initiative to raise labor standards around the world. And this year, we
will lead the international community to conclude a treaty to ban abusive
child labor everywhere in the world.

If we do these things--invest in our people, our communities, our
technology--and lead in the global economy, then we will begin to meet our
historic responsibility to build a 21st century prosperity for America.

You know, no nation in history has had the opportunity and the
responsibility we now have to shape a world that is more peaceful, more
secure, more free.

All Americans can be proud that our leadership helped to bring peace in
Northern Ireland.

All Americans can be proud that our leadership has put Bosnia on the path
to peace. And with our NATO allies we are pressing the Serbian government
to stop its brutal repression in Kosovo--to bring those responsible to
justice and to give the people of Kosovo the self-government they deserve.

All Americans can be proud that our leadership renewed hope for lasting
peace in the Middle East. Some of you were with me last December as we
watched the Palestinian National Council completely renounce its call for
the destruction of Israel.

Now, I ask Congress to provide resources so that all parties can implement
the Wye Agreement, to protect Israel's security, to stimulate the
Palestinian economy, to support our friends in Jordan. We must not, we dare
not, let them down. I hope you will help me.

As we work for peace, we must also meet threats to our nation's security,
including increased danger from outlaw nations and terrorism.

We will defend our security wherever we are threatened, as we did this
summer when we struck at Osama bin Laden's network of terror. The bombing
of our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania reminds us again of the risks faced
every day by those who represent America to the world. So let's give them
the support they need, the safest possible workplaces, and the resources
they must have so America can continue to lead.

We must work to keep terrorists from disrupting computer networks. We must
work to prepare local communities for biological and chemical emergencies,
to support research into vaccines and treatments. We must increase our
efforts to restrain the spread of nuclear weapons and missiles, from Korea
to India and Pakistan. We must expand our work with Russia, Ukraine and
other former Soviet nations to safeguard nuclear materials and technology
so they never fall into the wrong hands. Our balanced budget will increase
funding for these critical efforts by almost two-thirds over the next five
years.

With Russia we must continue to reduce our nuclear arsenals. The START II
Treaty and the framework we have already agreed to for START III could cut
them by 80 percent from their Cold War height.

It's been two years since I signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. If we
don't do the right thing, other nations won't either. I ask the Senate to
take this vital step, approve the treaty now to make it harder for other
nations to develop nuclear arms, and to make sure we can end nuclear
testing for ever.

For nearly a decade, Iraq has defied its obligations to destroy its weapons
of terror and the missiles to deliver them.

America will continue to contain [Iraqi President] Saddam [Hussein] and we
will work for the day when Iraq has a government worthy of its people. Now,
last month, in our action over Iraq, our troops were superb. Their mission
was so flawlessly executed, that we risk taking for granted the bravery and
skill it required. Captain Jeff Taliaferro, a 10-year Air Force veteran of
the Air Force, flew a B-1B bomber over Iraq as we attacked Saddam's war
machine. He is here with us tonight. I would like to ask you to honor him
and all the 33,000 men and women of Operation Desert Fox.

It is time to reverse the decline in defense spending that began in 1985.

Since April, together we have added nearly $6 billion to maintain our
military readiness. My balanced budget calls for a sustained increase over
the next six years for readiness, for modernization, and for pay and
benefits for our troops and their families.

You know, we are the heirs of a legacy of bravery represented in every
community in America by millions of our veterans. America's defenders today
still stand ready at a moments notice to go where comforts are few and
dangers are many, to do what needs to be done as no one else can. They
always come through for America. We must come through for them.

The new century demands new partnerships for peace and security. The United
Nations plays a crucial role, with allies sharing burdens America might
otherwise bear alone. America needs a strong and effective U.N. I want to
work with this new Congress to pay our dues and our debts.

We must continue to support security and stability in Europe and Asia--
expanding NATO and defining its new missions, maintaining our alliance with
Japan, with Korea, with our other Asian allies, and engaging China.

In China last year, I said to the leaders and the people what I'd like to
say again tonight: Stability can no longer be bought at the expense of
liberty.

But I'd also like to say again to the American people, it's important not
to isolate China. The more we bring China into the world, the more the
world will bring change and freedom to China.

Last spring, with some of you, I traveled to Africa, where I saw democracy
and reform rising, but still held back by violence and disease. We must
fortify African democracy and peace by launching radio democracy for
Africa, supporting the transition to democracy now beginning to take place
in Nigeria, and passing the African Trade and Development Act.

We must continue to deepen our ties to the Americas and the Caribbean, our
common work to educate children, fight drugs, strengthen democracy and
increase trade. In this hemisphere, every government but one is freely
chosen by its people. We are determined that Cuba, too, will know the
blessings of liberty.

The American people have opened their arms and their hearts and their arms
to our Central American and Caribbean neighbors who have been so devastated
by the recent hurricanes. Working with Congress, I am committed to help
them rebuild.

When the first lady and Tipper Gore visited the region, they saw thousands
of our troops and thousands of American volunteers. In the Dominican
Republic, Hillary helped to rededicate a hospital that had been rebuilt by
Dominicans and Americans working side by side. With her was some one else
who has been very important to the relief efforts. You know sports records
are made and sooner or later, they're broken. But making other people's
lives better and showing our children the true meaning of brotherhood, that
lasts forever. So for far more than baseball, Sammy Sosa, you're a hero in
two countries tonight. Thank you.

So I say to all of you, if we do these things, if we pursue peace, fight
terrorism, increase our strength, renew our alliances, we will begin to
meet our generation's historic responsibility to build a stronger 21st
century America in a freer, more peaceful world.

As the world has changed, so have our own communities. We must make the
safer, more livable, and more united. This year, we will reach our goal of
100,000 community police officers ahead of schedule and under budget.

The Brady Bill has stopped a quarter million felons, fugitives, and
stalkers from buying handguns and now, the murder rate is the lowest in 30
years, and the crime rate has dropped for six straight years.

Tonight, I propose a 21st Century Crime Bill to deploy the latest
technologies and tactics to make our communities even safer. Our balanced
budget will help put up to 50,000 more police on the street in the areas
hardest hit by crime, and then to equip them with new tools from
crime-mapping computers to digital mug shots. We must break the deadly
cycle of drugs and crime.

Our budget expands support for drug testing and treatment, saying to
prisoners, "If you stay on drugs, you have to stay behind bars." And to
those on parole, "If you want to keep your freedom, you must stay free of
drugs."

I ask Congress to restore the five-day waiting period for buying a handgun
and extend the Brady Bill to prevent juveniles who commit violent crimes
from buying a gun.

We must do more to keep our schools the safest places in our communities.
Last year, every American was horrified and heartbroken by the tragic
killings in Jonesboro, Paducah, Pearl, Edinboro, Springfield. We were
deeply moved by the courageous parents now working to keep guns out of the
hands of children and to make other efforts so that other parents don't
have to live through their loss.

After she lost her daughter, Suzann Wilson of Jonesboro, Arkansas, came
here to the White House with a powerful plea. She said "Please, please for
the sake of your children, lock up your guns. Don't let what happened in
Jonesboro, happen in your town."

It's a message she is passionately advocating every day. Suzann is here
with us tonight, with the first lady. I would like to thank her for her
courage and her commitment.

In memory of all the children who lost their lives to school violence, I
ask you to strengthen the Safe And Drug Free School Act, to pass
legislation to require child trigger locks, to do everything possible to
keep our children safe.

Today, we're--excuse me--a century ago, President Theodore Roosevelt
defined our great central task as leaving this land even a better land for
our descendants than it is for us. Today, we're restoring the Florida
Everglades, saving Yellowstone, preserving the red rock canyons of Utah,
protecting California's redwoods, and our precious coasts.

But our most fateful new challenge is the threat of global warming.
Nineteen ninety-eight was the warmest year ever recorded. Last year's heat
waves, floods and storm are but a hint of what future generations may
endure if we do not act now.

Tonight, I propose a new clean air fund to help communities reduce
greenhouse and other pollutions, and tax incentives and investment to spur
clean energy technologies. And I want to work with members of Congress in
both parties to reward companies that take early, voluntary action to
reduce greenhouse gases.

Now, all our communities face a preservation challenge as they grow, and
green space shrinks. Seven thousand acres of farmland and open space are
lost every day. In response, I propose two major initiatives. First, a $1
billion livability agenda to help communities save open space, ease traffic
congestion, and grow in ways that enhance every citizen's quality of life.
And second, a $1 billion lands legacy initiative to preserve places of
natural beauty all across America, from the most remote wilderness to the
nearest city park.

These are truly landmark initiatives, which could not have been developed
without the visionary leadership of the vice president and I want to thank
him very much for his commitment here. Thank you.

Now, to get the most out of your community, you have to give something
back. That's why we created AmeriCorps, our national service program that
gives today's generation a chance to serve their communities and earn money
for college.

So far, in just four years, 100,000 young Americans have built low-income
homes with Habitat for Humanity, helped tutor children with churches, work
with FEMA to ease the burden of natural disasters and performed countless
other acts of service that has made America better. I ask Congress to give
more young Americans the chance to follow their lead and serve America in
AmeriCorps.

Now, we must work to renew our national community as well for the 21st
century. Last year, the House passed the bipartisan campaign finance reform
legislation sponsored by Representatives [Christopher] Shays (R-Conn.) and
[Martin T.] Meehan (D-Mass.) and Sens. [John] McCain (R-Ariz.) and
[Russell] Feingold (D-Wis.). But a partisan minority in the Senate blocked
reform. So I would like to say to the House, pass it again--quickly.

And I'd like to say to the Senate, I hope you will say yes to a stronger
American democracy in the year 2000.

Since 1997, our Initiative on Race has sought to bridge the divides between
and among our people. In its report last fall, the Initiatives Advisory
Board found that Americans really do want to bring our people together
across racial lines.

We know it's been a long journey. For some it goes back to before the
beginning of our republic. For others, back since the Civil War; for
others, throughout the 21st century. But for most of us alive today, in a
very real sense this journey began 43 years ago, when a woman named Rosa
Parks sat down on a bus in Alabama and wouldn't get up.

She's sitting down with the first lady tonight, and she may get up or not
as she chooses.

We know that our continuing racial problems are aggravated, as the
presidential initiative said, by opportunity gaps.

The initiative I've outlined tonight will help to close them. But we know
that the discrimination gap has not been fully closed either.
Discrimination or violence because of race or religion, ancestry or gender,
disability or sexual orientation, is wrong and it ought to be illegal.
Therefore, I ask Congress to make the Employment Non-Discrimination Act and
the Hate Crimes Prevention Act the law of the land.

You know, now since every person in America counts, every American ought to
be counted. We need a census that uses modern scientific methods to do
that.

Our new immigrants must be part of our one America. After all, they're
revitalizing our cities, they're energizing our culture, they're building
up our economy. We have a responsibility to make them welcome here, and
they have a responsibility to enter the mainstream of American life.

That means learning English and learning about our democratic system of
government. There are now long waiting lines of immigrants that are trying
to do just that.

Therefore, our budget significantly expands our efforts to help them meet
their responsibility. I hope you will support it.

Whether our ancestors came here on the Mayflower, on slave ships; whether
they came to Ellis Island or LAX in Los Angeles; whether they came
yesterday or walked this land 1,000 years ago, our great challenge for the
21st century is to find a way to be one America. We can meet all the other
challenges if we can go forward as one America.

You know, barely more than 300 days from now we will cross that bridge into
the new millennium. This is a moment, as the first lady has said, to honor
the past and imagine the future.

I'd like to take just a minute to honor her, for leading our Millennium
Project, for all she's done for our children. For all she has done in her
historic role to serve our nation and our best ideals at home and abroad, I
honor her.

Last year--last year I called on Congress and every citizen to mark the
millennium by saving America's treasures. Hillary's traveled all across the
country to inspire recognition and support for saving places like Thomas
Edison's invention factory or Harriet Tubman's home.

Now we have to preserve our treasures in every community. And tonight,
before I close, I want to invite every town, every city, every community to
become a nationally recognized millennium community by launching projects
that save our history, promote our arts and humanities, prepare our
children for the 21st century.

Already the response has been remarkable. And I want to say a special word
of thanks to our private sector partners and to members in Congress of both
parties for their support. Just one example. Because of you, the Star
Spangled Banner will be preserved for the ages.

In ways large and small, as we look to the millennium, we are keeping alive
what George Washington called the "sacred fire of liberty."

Six years ago, I came to office in a time of doubt for America, with our
economy troubled, our deficit high, our people divided. Some even wondered
whether our best days were behind us. But across this nation, in a thousand
neighborhoods, I have seen, even amidst the pain and uncertainty of
recession, the real heart and character of America.

I knew then we Americans could renew this country.

Tonight, as I deliver the last State of the Union Address for the 20th
century, no one anywhere in the world can doubt the enduring resolve and
boundless capacity of the American people to work toward that "more perfect
union" of our founders' dreams.

We are now, at the end of a century, when generation after generation of
Americans answered the call to greatness, overcoming Depression, lifting up
the dispossessed, bringing down barriers to racial prejudice, building the
largest middle class in history, winning two world wars and the "long
twilight struggle" of the Cold War.

We must all be profoundly grateful for the magnificent achievements of our
forbearers in this century.

Yet perhaps in the daily press of events, in the clash of controversy, we
don't see our own time for what it truly is--a new dawn for America.

A hundred years from tonight, another American president will stand in this
place and report on the State of the Union. He--or she--will look back on
the 21st century shaped in so many ways by the decisions we make here and
now.

So let it be said of us then that we were thinking not only of our time,
but of their time; that we reached as high as our ideals; that we put aside
our divisions and found a new hour of healing and hopefulness; that we
joined together to serve and strengthen the land we love.

My fellow Americans, this is our moment. Let us lift our eyes as one
nation, and from the mountaintop of this American century, look ahead to
the next one--asking God's blessing on our endeavors and on our beloved
country.

Thank you, and good evening.

***

State of the Union Address
William J. Clinton
January 27, 2000

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, honored guests, my
fellow Americans:

We are fortunate to be alive at this moment in history. Never before has
our nation enjoyed, at once, so much prosperity and social progress with so
little internal crisis or so few external threats. Never before have we had
such a blessed opportunity--and, therefore, such a profound obligation--
to build the more perfect union of our founders' dreams.

We begin the new century with over 20 million new jobs. The fastest
economic growth in more than 30 years; the lowest unemployment rates in 30
years; the lowest poverty rates in 20 years; the lowest African-American
and Hispanic unemployment rates on record; the first back-to-back budget
surpluses in 42 years.

Next month, America will achieve the longest period of economic growth in
our entire history.

We have built a new economy.

Our economic revolution has been matched by a revival of the American
spirit: Crime down by 20 percent, to its lowest level in 25 years. Teen
births down seven years in a row and adoptions up by 30 percent. Welfare
rolls cut in half to their lowest levels in 30 years.

My fellow Americans, the state of our union is the strongest it has ever
been.

As always, the credit belongs to the American people.

My gratitude also goes to those of you in this chamber who have worked with
us to put progress above partisanship.

Eight years ago, it was not so clear to most Americans there would be much
to celebrate in the year 2000. Then our nation was gripped by economic
distress, social decline, political gridlock. The title of a best-selling
book asked: "America: What went wrong?"

In the best traditions of our nation, Americans determined to set things
right. We restored the vital center, replacing outdated ideologies with a
new vision anchored in basic, enduring values: opportunity for all,
responsibility from all, and a community of all Americans.

We reinvented government, transforming it into a catalyst for new ideas
that stress both opportunity and responsibility, and give our people the
tools to solve their own problems.

With the smallest federal workforce in 40 years, we turned record deficits
into record surpluses, and doubled our investment in education. We cut
crime: with 100,000 community police and the Brady Law, which has kept guns
out of the hands of half a million criminals.

We ended welfare as we knew it--requiring work while protecting health
care and nutrition for children, and investing more in child care,
transportation, and housing to help their parents go to work. We have
helped parents to succeed at work and at home--with family leave, which 20
million Americans have used to care for a newborn child or a sick loved
one. We have engaged 150,000 young Americans in citizen service through
AmeriCorps--while also helping them earn their way through college.

In 1992, we had a roadmap. Today, we have results. More important, America
again has the confidence to dream big dreams. But we must not let our
renewed confidence grow into complacency. We will be judged by the dreams
and deeds we pass on to our children. And on that score, we will be held to
a high standard, indeed. Because our chance to do good is so great.

My fellow Americans, we have crossed the bridge we built to the 21st
Century. Now, we must shape a 21st-Century American revolution--of
opportunity, responsibility, and community. We must be, as we were in the
beginning, a new nation.

At the dawn of the last century, Theodore Roosevelt said, "the one
characteristic more essential than any other is foresight. . . It should be
the growing nation with a future which takes the long look ahead."

Tonight let us take our look long ahead--and set great goals for our
nation.

To 21st Century America, let us pledge that:

Every child will begin school ready to learn and graduate ready to succeed.
Every family will be able to succeed at home and at work--and no child
will be raised in poverty. We will meet the challenge of the aging of
America. We will assure quality, affordable healthcare for all Americans.
We will make America the safest big country on earth. We will bring
prosperity to every American community. We will reverse the course of
climate change and leave a cleaner, safer planet. America will lead the
world toward shared peace and prosperity, and the far frontiers of science
and technology. And we will become at last what our founders pledged us to
be so long ago--one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and
justice for all.

These are great goals, worthy of a great nation. We will not reach them all
this year. Not even in this decade. But we will reach them. Let us remember
that the first American revolution was not won with a single shot. The
continent was not settled in a single year. The lesson of our history--and
the lesson of the last seven years--is that great goals are reached step
by step: always building on our progress, always gaining ground.

Of course, you can't gain ground if you're standing still. For too long
this Congress has been standing still on some of our most pressing national
priorities. Let's begin with them.

I ask you again to pass a real patient's bill of rights. Pass common-sense
gun-safety legislation. Pass campaign finance reform. Vote on long overdue
judicial nominations and other important appointees. And, again, I ask you
to raise the minimum wage.

Two years ago, as we reached our first balanced budget, I asked that we
meet our responsibility to the next generation by maintaining our fiscal
discipline. Because we refused to stray from that path, we are doing
something that would have seemed unimaginable seven years ago: We are
actually paying down the national debt. If we stay on this path, we can pay
down the debt entirely in 13 years and make America debt-free for the first
time since Andrew Jackson was president in 1835.

In 1993, we began to put our fiscal house in order with the Deficit
Reduction Act, winning passage in both houses by just one vote. Your former
colleague, my first Secretary of the Treasury, led that effort. He is here
tonight. Lloyd Bentsen, you have served America well.

Beyond paying off the debt, we must ensure that the benefits of debt
reduction go to preserving two of the most important guarantees we make to
every American--Social Security and Medicare. I ask you tonight to work
with me to make a bipartisan down payment on Social Security reform by
crediting the interest savings from debt reduction to the Social Security
Trust Fund to ensure that it is strong and sound for the next 50 years.

But this is just the start of our journey. Now we must take the right steps
toward reaching our great goals.

Opportunity and Responsibility in Education

First and foremost, we need a 21st Century revolution in education, guided
by our faith that every child can learn. Because education is more than
ever the key to our children's future, we must make sure all our children
have that key. That means quality preschool and afterschool, the best
trained teachers in every classroom, and college opportunities for all our
children.

For seven years, we have worked hard to improve our schools, with
opportunity and responsibility: Investing more, but demanding more in
return.

Reading, math, and college entrance scores are up. And some of the most
impressive gains are in schools in poor neighborhoods.

All successful schools have followed the same proven formula: higher
standards, more accountability, so all children can reach those standards.
I have sent Congress a reform plan based on that formula. It holds states
and school districts accountable for progress, and rewards them for
results. Each year, the national government invests more than $15 billion
in our schools. It's time to support what works and stop supporting what
doesn't.

As we demand more than ever from our schools, we should invest more than
ever in our schools.

Let's double our investment to help states and districts turn around their
worst-performing schools--or shut them down.

Let's double our investment in afterschool and summer school programs--
boosting achievement, and keeping children off the street and out of
trouble. If we do, we can give every child in every failing school in
America the chance to meet high standards.

Since 1993, we've nearly doubled our investment in Head Start and improved
its quality. Tonight, I ask for another $1 billion to Head Start, the
largest increase in the program's history.

We know that children learn best in smaller classes with good teachers. For
two years in a row, Congress has supported my plan to hire 100,000 new,
qualified teachers, to lower class sizes in the early grades. This year, I
ask you to make it three in a row.

And to make sure all teachers know the subjects they teach, tonight I
propose a new teacher quality initiative--to recruit more talented people
into the classroom, reward good teachers for staying there, and give all
teachers the training they need.

We know charter schools provide real public school choice. When I became
President, there was just one independent public charter school in all
America. Today there are 1,700. I ask you to help us meet our goal of 3,000
by next year.

We know we must connect all our classrooms to the Internet. We're getting
there. In 1994, only three percent of our classrooms were connected. Today,
with the help of the Vice President's E-rate program, more than half of
them are; and 90 percent of our schools have at least one connection to the
Internet.

But we can't finish the job when a third of all schools are in serious
disrepair, many with walls and wires too old for the Internet. Tonight, I
propose to help 5,000 schools a year make immediate, urgent repairs. And
again, to help build or modernize 6,000 schools, to get students out of
trailers and into high-tech classrooms.

We should double our bipartisan GEAR UP program to mentor 1.4 million
disadvantaged young people for college. And let's offer these students a
chance to take the same college test-prep courses wealthier students use to
boost their test scores.

To make the American Dream achievable for all, we must make college
affordable for all. For seven years, on a bipartisan basis, we have taken
action toward that goal: larger Pell grants, more-affordable student loans,
education IRAs, and our HOPE scholarships, which have already benefited 5
million young people. 67 percent of high school graduates now go on to
college, up almost 10 percent since 1993. Yet millions of families still
strain to pay college tuition. They need help.

I propose a landmark $30-billion college opportunity tax cut--a
middle-class tax deduction for up to $10,000 in college tuition costs.
We've already made two years of college affordable for all. Now let's make
four years of college affordable for all.

If we take all these steps, we will move a long way toward making sure
every child starts school ready to learn and graduates ready to succeed.

Rewarding Work and Strengthening Families

We need a 21st Century revolution to reward work and strengthen families--
by giving every parent the tools to succeed at work and at the most
important work of all--raising their children. That means making sure that
every family has health care and the support to care for aging parents, the
tools to bring their children up right, and that no child grows up in
poverty.

From my first days as President, we have worked to give families better
access to better health care. In 1997, we passed the Children's Health
Insurance Program--CHIP--so that workers who don't have health care
coverage through their employers at least can get it for their children. So
far, we've enrolled 2 million children, and we're well on our way to our
goal of 5 million.

But there are still more than 40 million Americans without health
insurance, more than there were in 1993. Tonight I propose that we follow
Vice President Gore's suggestion to make low income parents eligible for
the insurance that covers their kids. Together with our children's
initiative, we can cover nearly one quarter of the uninsured in America.

Again, I ask you to let people between 55 and 65--the fastest growing
group of uninsured--buy into Medicare. And let's give them a tax credit to
make that choice an affordable one.

When the Baby Boomers retire, Medicare will be faced with caring for twice
as many of our citizens--and yet it is far from ready to do so. My
generation must not ask our children's generation to shoulder our burden.
We must strengthen and modernize Medicare now.

My budget includes a comprehensive plan to reform Medicare, to make it more
efficient and competitive. And it dedicates nearly $400 billion of our
budget surplus to keep Medicare solvent past 2025; and, at long last, to
give every senior a voluntary choice of affordable coverage for
prescription drugs.

Lifesaving drugs are an indispensable part of modern medicine. No one
creating a Medicare program today would even consider excluding coverage
for prescription drugs. Yet more than three in five seniors now lack
dependable drug coverage which can lengthen and enrich their lives.
Millions of older Americans who need prescription drugs the most pay the
highest prices for them.

In good conscience, we cannot let another year pass without extending to
all seniors the lifeline of affordable prescription drugs.

Record numbers of Americans are providing for aging or ailing loved ones at
home. Last year, I proposed a $1,000 tax credit for long-term care.
Frankly, that wasn't enough. This year, let's triple it to $3,000--and
this year, let's pass it.

And we must make needed investments to expand access to mental health care.
I want to thank the person who has led our efforts to break down the
barriers to the decent treatment of mental illness: Tipper Gore.

Taken together, these proposals would mark the largest investment in health
care in the 35 years since the creation of Medicare--a big step toward
assuring health care for all Americans, young and old.

We must also make investments that reward work and support families.
Nothing does that better than the Earned Income Tax Credit, the EITC. The
"E" in "EITC" is about earning; working; taking responsibility and being
rewarded for it. In my first Address to you, I asked Congress to greatly
expand this tax credit; and you did. As a result, in 1998 alone, the EITC
helped more than 4.3 million Americans work their way out of poverty and
toward the middle class--double the number in 1993.

Tonight, I propose another major expansion. We should reduce the marriage
penalty for the EITC, making sure it rewards marriage just as it rewards
work. And we should expand the tax credit for families with more than two
children to provide up to $1,100 more in tax relief.

We can't reward work and family unless men and women get equal pay for
equal work. The female unemployment rate is the lowest in 46 years. Yet
women still earn only about 75 cents for every dollar men earn. We must do
better by providing the resources to enforce present equal pay laws,
training more women for high-paying, high-tech jobs, and passing the
Paycheck Fairness Act.

Two-thirds of new jobs are in the suburbs, far away from many low-income
families. In the past two years, I have proposed and Congress has approved
110,000 new housing vouchers--rent subsidies to help working families live
closer to the workplace. This year, let us more than double that number. If
we want people to go to work, they have to be able to get to work.

Many working parents spend up to a quarter of their income on child care.
Last year, we helped parents provide child care for about two million
children. My child care initiative, along with funds already secured in
welfare reform, would make child care better, safer, and more affordable
for another 400,000 children.

For hard-pressed middle-income families, we should also expand the child
care tax credit. And we should take the next big step. We should make that
tax credit refundable for low-income families. For those making under
$30,000 a year, that could mean up to $2,400 for child-care costs. We all
say we're pro-work and pro-family. Passing this proposal would prove it.

Tens of millions of Americans live from paycheck to paycheck. As hard as
they work, they still don't have the opportunity to save. Too few can make
use of IRAs and 401-K retirement plans. We should do more to help working
families save and accumulate wealth. That's the idea behind so-called
Individual Development Accounts. Let's take that idea to a new level, with
Retirement Savings Accounts that enable every low- and moderate-income
family in America to save for retirement, a first home, a medical
emergency, or a college education. I propose to match their contributions,
however small, dollar for dollar, every year they save. And to give a major
new tax credit for any small business that provides a meaningful pension to
its workers.

Nearly one in three American children grows up in a home without a father.
These children are five times more likely to live in poverty than children
with both parents at home. Clearly, demanding and supporting responsible
fatherhood is critical to lifting all children out of poverty.

We have doubled child support collections since 1992, and I am proposing
tough new measures to hold still more fathers responsible. But we should
recognize that a lot of fathers want to do right by their children--and
need help to do it. Carlos Rosas of St. Paul, Minnesota, got that help. Now
he has a good job and he supports his son Ricardo. My budget will help
40,000 fathers make the choices Carlos did. And I thank him for being
here.

If there is any issue on which we can reach across party lines it is in our
common commitment to reward work and strengthen families. Thanks to
overwhelming bipartisan support from this Congress, we have improved foster
care, supported those who leave it when they turn eighteen, and
dramatically increased the number of foster children going to adoptive
homes. I thank you for that. Of course, I am especially grateful to the
person who has led our efforts from the beginning, and who has worked
tirelessly for children and families for thirty years now: my wife,
Hillary.

If we take all these steps, we will move a long way toward empowering
parents to succeed at home and at work and ensuring that no child is raised
in poverty. We can make these vital investments in health care, education
and support for working families--and still offer tax cuts to help pay for
college, for retirement, to care for aging parents and reduce the marriage
penalty--without forsaking the path of fiscal discipline that got us here.
Indeed, we must make these investments and tax cuts in the context of a
balanced budget that strengthens and extends the life of Social Security
and Medicare and pays down the national debt.

Responsibility and Crime

Crime in America has dropped for the past seven years--the longest decline
on record, thanks to a national consensus we helped to forge on community
police, sensible gun safety laws, and effective prevention. But nobody
believes America is safe enough. So let's set a higher goal: let's make
America the safest big country in the world.

Last fall, Congress supported my plan to hire--in addition to the 100,000
community police we have already funded--50,000 more, concentrated in
high-crime neighborhoods. I ask your continued support.

Soon after the Columbine tragedy, Congress considered common-sense gun
safety legislation to require Brady background checks at gun shows, child
safety locks for all new handguns, and a ban on the importation of
large-capacity ammunition clips. With courage--and a tie-breaking vote by
the Vice President--the Senate faced down the gun lobby, stood up for the
American people, and passed this legislation. But the House failed to
follow suit.

We've all seen what happens when guns fall into the wrong hands. Daniel
Mauser was only 15 years old when he was gunned down at Columbine. He was
an amazing kid, a straight-A student, a good skier. Like all parents who
lose their children, his father Tom has borne unimaginable grief. Somehow
Tom has found the strength to honor his son by transforming his grief into
action. Earlier this month, he took a leave of absence from his job to
fight for tougher gun safety laws. I pray that his courage and wisdom will
move this Congress to make common-sense gun safety legislation the very
next order of business. Tom, thank you for being here tonight.

We must strengthen gun laws and better enforce laws already on the books.
Federal gun crime prosecutions are up 16 percent since I took office. But
again, we must do more. I propose to hire more federal and local gun
prosecutors, and more ATF agents to crack down on illegal gun traffickers
and bad-apple dealers. And we must give law enforcement the tools to trace
every gun--and every bullet--used in a crime in America.

Listen to this: the accidental gun death rate of children under 15 in the
United States is nine times higher than in the other 25 industrialized
nations--combined. Technologies now exist that could lead to guns that can
only be fired by the adults who own them. I ask Congress to fund research
in Smart Gun technology. I also call on responsible leaders in the gun
industry to work with us on smart guns and other steps to keep guns out of
the wrong hands and keep our children safe.

Every parent I know worries about the impact of violence in the media on
their children. I thank the entertainment industry for accepting my
challenge to put voluntary ratings on TV programs and video and Internet
games. But the ratings are too numerous, diverse, and confusing to be
really useful to parents. Therefore, I now ask the industry to accept the
First Lady's challenge--to develop a single, voluntary rating system for
all children's entertainment, one that is easier for parents to understand
and enforce.

If we take all these steps, we will be well on our way to making America
the safest big country in the world.

Opening New Markets

To keep our historic economic expansion going, we need a 21st Century
revolution to open new markets, start new businesses, and hire new workers
right here in America--in our inner cities, poor rural areas, and on
Indian reservations.

Our nation's prosperity has not yet reached these places. Over the last six
months, I have traveled to many of them--joined by many of you, and many
far-sighted business people--to shine a spotlight on the enormous
potential in communities from Appalachia to the Mississippi Delta, from
Watts to the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. Everywhere I've gone, I've met
talented people eager for opportunity, and able to work. Let's put them to
work.

For business, it's the smart thing to do. For America, it's the right thing
to do. And if we don't do it now, when will we ever get around to it?

I ask Congress to give businesses the same incentives to invest in
America's new markets that they now have to invest in foreign markets.
Tonight, I propose a large New Markets Tax Credit and other incentives to
spur $22 billion in private-sector capital--to create new businesses and
new investments in inner cities and rural areas.

Empowerment Zones have been creating these opportunities for five years
now. We should also increase incentives to invest in them and create more
of them.

This is not a Democratic or a Republican issue. It is an American issue.
Mr. Speaker, it was a powerful moment last November when you joined me and
the Reverend Jesse Jackson in your home state of Illinois, and committed to
working toward our common goal, by combining the best ideas from both sides
of the aisle. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working with you.

We must maintain our commitment to community development banks and keep the
community reinvestment act strong so all Americans have access to the
capital they need to buy homes and build businesses.

We need to make special efforts to address the areas with the highest rates
of poverty. My budget includes a special $110 million initiative to promote
economic development in the Mississippi Delta; and $1 billion to increase
economic opportunity, health care, education and law enforcement for Native
American communities. In this new century, we should honor our historic
responsibility to empower the first Americans. I thank leaders and members
from both parties who have already expressed an interest in working with us
on these efforts.

There's another part of our American community in trouble today--our
family farmers. When I signed the Farm Bill in 1996, I said there was a
great danger it would work well in good times but not in bad. Well,
droughts, floods, and historically low prices have made times very bad for
our farmers. We must work together to strengthen the farm safety net,
invest in land conservation, and create new markets by expanding our
program for bio-based fuels and products.

Today, opportunity for all requires something new: having access to a
computer and knowing how to use it. That means we must close the digital
divide between those who have these tools and those who don't.

Connecting classrooms and libraries to the Internet is crucial, but it's
just a start. My budget ensures that all new teachers are trained to teach
21st Century skills and creates technology centers in 1,000 communities to
serve adults. This spring, I will invite high-tech leaders to join me on
another New Markets tour--to close the digital divide and open opportunity
for all our people. I thank the high-tech companies that are already doing
so much in this area--and I hope the new tax incentives I have proposed
will encourage others to join us.

If we take these steps, we will go a long way toward our goal of bringing
opportunity to every community.

Global Change and American Leadership

To realize the full possibilities of the new economy, we must reach beyond
our own borders, to shape the revolution that is tearing down barriers and
building new networks among nations and individuals, economies and
cultures: globalization.

It is the central reality of our time. Change this profound is both
liberating and threatening. But there is no turning back. And our open,
creative society stands to benefit more than any other--if we understand,
and act on, the new realities of interdependence. We must be at the center
of every vital global network, as a good neighbor and partner. We cannot
build our future without helping others to build theirs.

First, we must forge a new consensus on trade. Those of us who believe
passionately in the power of open trade must ensure that it lifts both our
living standards and our values, never tolerating abusive child labor or a
race to the bottom on the environment and worker protection. Still, open
markets and rules-based trade are the best engines we know for raising
living standards, reducing global poverty and environmental destruction,
and assuring the free flow of ideas. There is only one direction for
America on trade: we must go forward.

And we must make developing economies our partners in prosperity--which is
why I ask Congress to finalize our groundbreaking African and Caribbean
Basin trade initiatives.

Globalization is about more than economics. Our purpose must be to bring
the world together around democracy, freedom, and peace, and to oppose
those who would tear it apart.

Here are the fundamental challenges I believe America must meet to shape
the 21st Century world.

First, we must continue to encourage our former adversaries, Russia and
China, to emerge as stable, prosperous, democratic nations. Both are being
held back from reaching their full potential: Russia by the legacy of
communism, economic turmoil, a cruel and self-defeating war in Chechnya;
China by the illusion that it can buy stability at the expense of freedom.
But think how much has changed in the past decade: thousands of former
Soviet nuclear weapons eliminated; Russian soldiers serving with ours in
the Balkans; Russian people electing their leaders for the first time in a
thousand years. And in China, an economy more open to the world than ever
before. No one can know for sure what direction these great countries will
choose. But we must do everything in our power to increase the chance they
will choose wisely, to be constructive members of the global community.

That is why we must support those Russians struggling for a democratic,
prosperous future; continue to reduce both our nuclear arsenals; and help
Russia safeguard weapons and materials that remain.

That is why Congress should support the agreement we negotiated to bring
China into the WTO, by passing Permanent Normal Trade Relations as soon as
possible this year. Our markets are already open to China. This agreement
will open China's markets to us. And it will advance the cause of peace in
Asia and promote the cause of change in China.

A second challenge is to protect our security from conflicts that pose the
risk of wider war and threaten our common humanity. America cannot prevent
every conflict or stop every outrage. But where our interests are at stake
and we can make a difference, we must be peacemakers.

We should be proud of America's role in bringing the Middle East closer
than ever to a comprehensive peace; building peace in Northern Ireland;
working for peace in East Timor and Africa; promoting reconciliation
between Greece and Turkey and in Cyprus; working to defuse crises between
India and Pakistan; defending human rights and religious freedom.

And we should be proud of the men and women of our armed forces and those
of our allies who stopped the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo--enabling a
million innocent people to return to their homes.

When Slobodan Milosevic unleashed his terror on Kosovo, Captain John
Cherrey was one of the brave airmen who turned the tide. And when another
American plane went down over Serbia, he flew into the teeth of enemy air
defenses to bring his fellow pilot home. Thanks to our armed forces' skill
and bravery, we prevailed without losing a single American in combat.
Captain Cherrey, we honor you, and promise to finish the job you began.

A third challenge is to keep the inexorable march of technology from giving
terrorists and potentially hostile nations the means to undermine our
defenses. The same advances that have shrunk cell phones to fit in the
palms of our hands can also make weapons of terror easier to conceal and
easier to use.

We must meet this threat: by making effective agreements to restrain
nuclear and missile programs in North Korea, curbing the flow of lethal
technology to Iran; preventing Iraq from threatening its neighbors;
increasing our preparedness against chemical and biological attack;
protecting our vital computer systems from hackers and criminals; and
developing a system to defend against new missile threats--while working
to preserve our Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with Russia.

I hope we can have a constructive bipartisan dialogue this year to build a
consensus which will lead eventually to the ratification of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

A fourth challenge is to ensure that the stability of our planet is not
threatened by the huge gulf between rich and poor. We cannot accept a world
in which part of humanity lives on the cutting edge of a new economy, while
the rest live on the bare edge of survival. We must do our part, with
expanded trade, expanded aid, and the expansion of freedom.

From Nigeria to Indonesia, more people won the right to choose their
leaders in 1999 than in 1989, the year the Berlin Wall fell. We must stand
by democracies--like Colombia, fighting narco-traffickers for its people's
lives, and our children's lives. I have proposed a strong two-year package
to help Colombia win this fight; and I ask for your support. And I will
propose tough new legislation to go after what drug barons value most--
their money.

In a world where 1.2 billion people live on less than a dollar a day, we
must do our part in the global endeavor to reduce the debts of the poorest
countries so they can invest in education, health and economic growth--as
the Pope and other religious leaders have urged. Last year, Congress made a
down payment on America's share. And I ask for your continued support.

And America must help more nations break the bonds of disease. Last year in
Africa, AIDS killed ten times as many people as war did. My budget invests
$150 million more in the fight against this and other infectious killers.
Today, I propose a tax credit to speed the development of vaccines for
diseases like malaria, TB and AIDS. I ask the private sector and our
partners around the world to join us in embracing this cause. Together, we
can save millions of lives.

Our final challenge is the most important: to pass a national security
budget that keeps our military the best trained and best equipped in the
world, with heightened readiness and 21st Century weapons; raises salaries
for our service men and women; protects our veterans; fully funds the
diplomacy that keeps our soldiers out of war; and makes good on our
commitment to pay our UN dues and arrears. I ask you to pass this budget
and I thank you for the extraordinary support you have given--Republicans
and Democrats alike--to our men and women in uniform. I especially want to
thank Secretary Cohen for symbolizing our bipartisan commitment to our
national security--and Janet Cohen, I thank you for tirelessly traveling
the world to show our support for the troops.

If we meet all these challenges, America can lead the world toward peace
and freedom in an era of globalization.

Responsibility, Opportunity, and the Environment

I am grateful for the opportunities the Vice President and I have had to
work hard to protect the environment and finally to put to rest the notion
that you can't expand the economy while protecting the environment. As our
economy has grown, we have rid more than 500 neighborhoods of toxic waste
and ensured cleaner air and water for millions of families. In the past
three months alone, we have acted to preserve more than 40 million acres of
roadless lands in our National Forests and created three new National
Monuments.

But as our communities grow, our commitment to conservation must grow as
well. Tonight, I propose creating a permanent conservation fund to restore
wildlife, protect coastlines, and save natural treasures from California
redwoods to the Everglades. This Lands Legacy endowment represents by far
the most enduring investment in land preservation ever proposed.

Last year, the Vice President launched a new effort to help make
communities more livable--so children will grow up next to parks, not
parking lots, and parents can be home with their children instead of stuck
in traffic. Tonight, we propose new funding for advanced transit systems--
for saving precious open spaces--for helping major cities around the Great
Lakes protect their waterways and enhance their quality of life.

The greatest environmental challenge of the new century is global warming.
Scientists tell us that the 1990s were the hottest decade of the entire
millennium. If we fail to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, deadly heat
waves and droughts will become more frequent, coastal areas will be
flooded, economies disrupted.

Many people in the United States and around the world still believe we
can't cut greenhouse gas pollution without slowing economic growth. In the
Industrial Age that may have been true. In the digital economy, it isn't.
New technologies make it possible to cut harmful emissions and provide even
more growth. For example, just last week, automakers unveiled cars that get
70 to 80 miles a gallon--the fruits of a unique research partnership
between government and industry. Before you know it, efficient production
of biofuels will give us the equivalent of hundreds of miles from a gallon
of gas.

To speed innovations in environmental technologies, I propose giving major
tax incentives to businesses for the production of clean energy--and to
families for buying energy-saving homes and appliances and the next
generation of super-efficient cars when they hit the showroom floor. I also
call on the auto industry to use available technologies to make all new
cars more fuel efficient right away. And on Congress to make more of our
clean-energy technologies available to the developing world--creating
cleaner growth abroad and new jobs at home.

The Opportunity and Responsibility of Science and Technology

In the new century, innovations in science and technology will be the key
not only to the health of the environment but to miraculous improvements in
the quality of our lives and advances in the economy.

Later this year, researchers will complete the first draft of the entire
human genome--the very blueprint of life. It is important for all
Americans to recognize that your tax dollars have fueled this research--
and that this and other wise investments in science are leading to a
revolution in our ability to detect, treat, and prevent disease.

For example, researchers have identified genes that cause Parkinson's
Disease, diabetes, and certain types of cancer--and they are designing
precision therapies that will block the harmful effects of these faulty
genes for good. Researchers are already using this new technique to target
and destroy cells that cause breast cancer. Soon, we may be able to use it
to prevent the onset of Alzheimer's Disease. Scientists are also working on
an artificial retina to help many blind people to see and microchips that
would directly stimulate damaged spinal cords and allow people who are now
paralyzed to stand up and walk.

Science and engineering innovations are also propelling our remarkable
prosperity. Information technology alone now accounts for a third of our
economic growth, with jobs that pay almost 80 percent above the private
sector average. Again, we should keep in mind: government-funded research
brought supercomputers, the Internet, and communications satellites into
being. Soon researchers will bring us devices that can translate foreign
languages as fast as you can speak; materials 10 times stronger than steel
at a fraction of the weight; and molecular computers the size of a teardrop
with the power of today's fastest supercomputers.

To accelerate the march of discovery across all disciplines of science and
technology, my budget includes an unprecedented $3 billion increase in the
21st Century Research Fund, the largest increase in civilian research in a
generation.

These new breakthroughs must be used in ways that reflect our most
cherished values. First and foremost, we must safeguard our citizens'
privacy. Last year, we proposed rules to protect every citizen's medical
records. This year, we will finalize those rules. We have also taken the
first steps to protect the privacy of bank and credit card statements and
other financial records. Soon I will send legislation to the Congress to
finish that job. We must also act to prevent any genetic discrimination by
employers or insurers.

These steps will allow America to lead toward the far frontiers of science
and technology--enhancing our health, environment, and economy in ways we
cannot even imagine today.

Community

At a time when science, technology and the forces of globalization are
bringing so many changes into our lives, it is more important than ever
that we strengthen the bonds that root us in our local communities and in
our national communities.

No tie binds different people together like citizen service. There is a new
spirit of service in America--a movement we have supported with
AmeriCorps, an expanded Peace Corps, and unprecedented new partnerships
with businesses, foundations, and community groups. Partnerships to enlist
12,000 companies in moving 650,000 of our fellow citizens from welfare to
work. To battle drug abuse and AIDS. To teach young people to read. To Save
America's Treasures. To strengthen the arts. To fight teen pregnancy. To
prevent youth violence. To promote racial healing.

We can do even more to help Americans help each other. We should help
faith-based organizations do more to fight poverty and drug abuse and help
young people get back on the right track with initiatives like Second
Chance Homes to help unwed teen mothers. We should support Americans who
tithe and contribute to charities, but don't earn enough to claim a tax
deduction for it. Tonight, I propose new tax incentives to allow low- and
middle-income citizens to get that deduction.

We should do more to help new immigrants fully participate in the American
community--investing more to teach them civics and English. And since
everyone in our community counts, we must make sure everyone is counted in
this year's census.

Within ten years there will be no majority race in our largest state,
California. In a little more than 50 years, there will be no majority race
in America. In a more interconnected world, this diversity can be our
greatest strength. Just look around this chamber. We have members from
virtually every racial, ethnic, and religious background. And America is
stronger for it. But as we have seen, these differences all too often spark
hatred and division, even here at home.

We have seen a man dragged to death in Texas simply because he was black. A
young man murdered in Wyoming simply because he was gay. In the last year
alone, we've seen the shootings of African Americans, Asian Americans, and
Jewish children simply because of who they were. This is not the American
way. We must draw the line. Without delay, we must pass the Hate Crimes
Prevention Act and the Employment Non-Discrimination Act. And we should
reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act.

No American should be subjected to discrimination in finding a home,
getting a job, going to school, or securing a loan. Tonight, I propose the
largest ever investment to enforce America's civil rights laws. Protections
in law must be protections in fact.

Last February, I created the White House Office of One America to promote
racial reconciliation. That's what Hank Aaron, has done all his life. From
his days as baseball's all-time homerun king to his recent acts of healing,
he has always brought Americans together. We're pleased he's with us
tonight.

This fall, at the White House, one of America's leading scientists said
something we should all remember. He said all human beings, genetically,
are 99.9 percent the same. So modern science affirms what ancient faith has
always taught: the most important fact of life is our common humanity.

Therefore, we must do more than tolerate diversity--we must honor it and
celebrate it.

My fellow Americans, each time I prepare for the State of the Union, I
approach it with great hope and expectations for our nation. But tonight is
special--because we stand on the mountaintop of a new millennium. Behind
us we see the great expanse of American achievement; before us, even
grander frontiers of possibility.

We should be filled with gratitude and humility for our prosperity and
progress; with awe and joy at what lies ahead; and with absolute
determination to make the most of it.

When the framers finished crafting our Constitution, Benjamin Franklin
stood in Independence Hall and reflected on a painting of the sun, low on
the horizon. He said, "I have often wondered whether that sun was rising or
setting. Today," Franklin said, "I have the happiness to know it is a
rising sun." Well, today, because each generation of Americans has kept the
fire of freedom burning brightly, lighting those frontiers of possibility,
we still bask in the warmth of Mr. Franklin's rising sun.

After 224 years, the American Revolution continues. We remain a new nation.
As long as our dreams outweigh our memories, America will be forever young.
That is our destiny. And this is our moment.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.







This eBook was produced by James Linden.

The addresses are separated by three asterisks: ***

Dates of addresses by Calvin Coolidge in this eBook:
  December 6, 1923
  December 3, 1924
  December 8, 1925
  December 7, 1926
  December 6, 1927
  December 4, 1928



***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 6, 1923

Since the close of the last Congress the Nation has lost President Harding
. The world knew his kindness and his humanity, his greatness and his
character. He has left his mark upon history. He has made justice more
certain and peace more secure. The surpassing tribute paid to his memory as
he was borne across the continent to rest at last at home revealed the
place lie held in the hearts of the American people. But this is not the
occasion for extended reference to the man or his work. In this presence,
among these who knew and loved him, that is unnecessary. But we who were
associated with him could not resume together the functions of our office
without pausing for a moment, and in his memory reconsecrating ourselves to
the service of our country. He is gone. We remain. It is our duty, under
the inspiration of his example, to take up the burdens which he was
permitted to lay down, and to develop and support the wise principles of
government which he represented.

FOREIGN AFFAIRS

For us peace reigns everywhere. We desire to perpetuate it always by
granting full justice to others and requiring of others full justice to
ourselves.

Our country has one cardinal principle to maintain in its foreign policy.
It is an American principle. It must be an American policy. We attend to
our own affairs, conserve our own strength, and protect the interests of
our own citizens; but we recognize thoroughly our obligation to help
others, reserving to the decision of our own Judgment the time, the place,
and the method. We realize the common bond of humanity. We know the
inescapable law of service.

Our country has definitely refused to adopt and ratify the covenant of the
League of Nations. We have not felt warranted in assuming the
responsibilities which its members have assumed. I am not proposing any
change in this policy; neither is the Senate. The incident, so far as we
are concerned, is closed. The League exists as a foreign agency. We hope it
will be helpful. But the United States sees no reason to limit its own
freedom and independence of action by joining it. We shall do well to
recognize this basic fact in all national affairs and govern ourselves
accordingly.

WORLD COURT

Our foreign policy has always been guided by two principles. The one is the
avoidance of permanent political alliances which would sacrifice our proper
independence. The other is the peaceful settlement of controversies between
nations. By example and by treaty we have advocated arbitration. For nearly
25 years we have been a member of The Hague Tribunal, and have long sought
the creation of a permanent World Court of Justice. I am in full accord
with both of these policies. I favor the establishment of such a court
intended to include the whole world. That is, and has long been, an
American policy.

Pending before the Senate is a proposal that this Government give its
support to the Permanent Court of International Justice, which is a new and
somewhat different plan. This is not a partisan question. It should not
assume an artificial importance. The court is merely a convenient
instrument of adjustment to ?which we could go, but to which we could not
be brought. It should be discussed with entire candor, not by a political
but by a judicial method, without pressure and without prejudice.
Partisanship has no place in our foreign relations. As I wish to see a
court established, and as the proposal presents the only practical plan on
which many nations have ever agreed, though it may not meet every desire, I
therefore commend it to the favorable consideration of the Senate, with the
proposed reservations clearly indicating our refusal to adhere to the
League of Nations. RUSSIA

Our diplomatic relations, lately so largely interrupted, are now being
resumed, but Russia presents notable difficulties. We have every desire to
see that great people, who are our traditional friends, restored to their
position among the nations of the earth. We have relieved their pitiable
destitution with an. enormous charity. Our Government offers no objection
to the carrying on of commerce by our citizens with the people of Russia.
Our Government does not propose, however, to enter into relations with
another regime which refuses to recognize the sanctity of international
obligations. I do not propose to barter away for the privilege of trade any
of the cherished rights of humanity. I do not propose to make merchandise
of any American principles. These rights and principles must go wherever
the sanctions of our Government go.

But while the favor of America is not for sale, I am willing to make very
large concessions for the purpose of rescuing the people of Russia. Already
encouraging evidences of returning to the ancient ways of society can be
detected. But more are needed. Whenever there appears any disposition to
compensate our citizens who were despoiled, and to recognize that debt
contracted with our Government, not by the Czar, but by the newly formed
Republic of Russia; whenever the active spirit of enmity to our
institutions is abated; whenever there appear works mete for repentance;
our country ought to be the first to go to the economic and moral rescue of
Russia. We have every desire to help and no desire to injure. We hope the
time is near at hand when we can act. DEBTS

The current debt and interest due from foreign Governments, exclusive of
the British debt of $4,600,000,000, is about $7,200,000,000. 1 do not favor
the cancellation of this debt, but I see no objection to adjusting it in
accordance with the principle adopted for the British debt. Our country
would not wish to assume the role of an oppressive creditor, but would
maintain the principle that financial obligations between nations are
likewise moral obligations which international faith and honor require
should be discharged.

Our Government has a liquidated claim against Germany for the expense of
the army of occupation of over $255,000,000. Besides this, the Mixed Claims
Commission have before them about 12,500 claims of American citizens,
aggregating about $1,225,000,000. These claims have already been reduced by
a recent decision, but there are valid claims reaching well toward
$500,000,000. Our thousands of citizens with credits due them of hundreds
of millions of dollars have no redress save in the action of our
Government. These are very substantial interests, which it is the duty of
our Government to protect as best it can. That course I propose to pursue.

It is for these reasons that we have a direct interest in the economic
recovery of Europe. They are enlarged by our desire for the stability of
civilization and the welfare of humanity. That we are making sacrifices to
that end none can deny. Our deferred interest alone amounts to a million
dollars every day. But recently we offered to aid with our advice and
counsel. We have reiterated our desire to see France paid and Germany
revived. We have proposed disarmament. We have earnestly sought to compose
differences and restore peace. We shall persevere in well-doing, not by
force, but by reason.

FOREIGN PAPERS

Under the law the papers pertaining to foreign relations to be printed are
transmitted as a part of this message. Other volumes of these papers will
follow.

FOREIGN SERVICE

The foreign service of our Government needs to be reorganized and
improved.

FISCAL CONDITION

Our main problems are domestic problems. Financial stability is the first
requisite of sound government. We can not escape the effect of world
conditions. We can not avoid the inevitable results of the economic
disorders which have reached all nations. But we shall diminish their harm
to us in proportion as we continue to restore our Government finances to a
secure and endurable position. This we can and must do. Upon that firm
foundation rests the only hope of progress and prosperity. From that source
must come relief for the people.

This is being, accomplished by a drastic but orderly retrenchment, which is
bringing our expenses within our means. The origin of this has been the
determination of the American people, the main support has been the courage
of those in authority, and the effective method has been the Budget System.
The result has involved real sacrifice by department heads, but it has been
made without flinching. This system is a law of the Congress. It represents
your will. It must be maintained, and ought to be strengthened by the
example of your observance. Without a Budget System there can be no fixed
responsibility and no constructive scientific economy.

This great concentration of effort by the administration and Congress has
brought the expenditures, exclusive of the self-supporting Post. Office
Department, down to three billion dollars. It is possible, in consequence,
to make a large reduction in the taxes of the people, which is the sole
object of all curtailment. This is treated at greater length in the Budget
message, and a proposed plan has been presented in detail in a statement by
the Secretary of the Treasury which has my unqualified approval. I
especially commend a decrease on earned incomes, and further abolition of
admission, message, and nuisance taxes. Tile amusement and educational
value of moving pictures ought not to be taxed. Diminishing charges against
moderate incomes from investment will afford immense relief, while a
revision of the surtaxes will not only provide additional money for capital
investment, thus stimulating industry and employing more but will not
greatly reduce the revenue from that source, and may in the future actually
increase it.

Being opposed to war taxes in time of peace, I am not in favor of
excess-profits taxes. A very great service could be rendered through
immediate enactment of legislation relieving the people of some of the
burden of taxation. To' reduce war taxes is to give every home a better
chance.

For seven years the people have borne with uncomplaining courage the
tremendous burden of national and local taxation. These must both be
reduced. The taxes of the Nation must be reduced now as much as prudence
will permit, and expenditures must be reduced accordingly. High taxes reach
everywhere and burden everybody. They gear most heavily upon the poor. They
diminish industry and commerce. They make agriculture unprofitable. They
increase the rates on transportation. They are a charge on every necessary
of life. Of all services which the Congress can render to the country, I
have no hesitation in declaring t neglect it, to postpone it, to obstruct
it by unsound proposals, is to become unworthy of public confidence and
untrue to public trust. The country wants this measure to have the right of
way over an others.

Another reform which is urgent in our fiscal system is the abolition of the
right to issue tax-exempt securities. The existing system not only permits
a large amount of the wealth of the Notion to escape its just burden but
acts as a continual stimulant to municipal extravagance. This should be
prohibited by constitutional amendment. All the wealth of the Nation ought
to contribute its fair share to the expenses of the Nation.

TARIFF TAW

The present tariff law has accomplished its two main objects. It has
secured an abundant revenue and been productive of an abounding prosperity.
Under it the country has had a very large export and import trade. A
constant revision of the tariff by the Congress is disturbing and harmful.
The present law contains an elastic provision authorizing the President to
increase or decrease present schedules not in excess of 50 per centum to
meet the difference in cost of production at home and abroad. This does
not, to my mind, warrant a rewriting g of the whole law, but does mean, and
will be so administered, that whenever the required investigation shows
that inequalities of sufficient importance exist in any schedule, the power
to change them should and will be applied. SHIPPING

The entire well being of our country is dependent upon transportation by
sea and land. Our Government during the war acquired a large merchant fleet
which should be transferred, as soon as possible, to private ownership and
operation under conditions which would secure two results: First, and of
?prime importance, adequate means for national defense; second, adequate
service to American commerce. Until shipping conditions are such that our
fleet can be disposed of advantageously under these conditions, it will be
operated as economically as possible under such plans as may be devised
from time to time by the Shipping Board. We must have a merchant marine
which meets these requirements, and we shall have to pay the cost of its
service.

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

The time has come to. resume in a moderate way the opening of our
intracoastal waterways; the control of flood waters of the Mississippi and
of the Colorado Rivers; the improvement of the waterways from the Great
Lakes toward the Gulf of Mexico; and the development of the great power and
navigation project of the St. Lawrence River, for which efforts are now
being made to secure the necessary treaty with Canada. These projects can
not all be undertaken at once, but all should have the immediate
consideration of the Congress and be adopted as fast as plans can be
matured and the necessary funds become available. This is not incompatible
with economy, for their nature does not require so much a public
expenditure as a capital investment which will be reproductive, as
evidenced by the marked increase in revenue from the Panama Canal. Upon
these projects depend much future industrial and agricultural progress.
They represent the protection of large areas from flood and the addition of
a great amount of cheap power and cheap freight by use of navigation, chief
of which is the bringing of ocean-going ships to the Great Lakes.

Another problem of allied character is the superpower development of the
Northeastern States, consideration of which is growing under the direction
of the Department of Commerce by joint conference with the local
authorities. RAILROADS

Criticism of the railroad law has been directed, first, to the section
laying down the rule by which rates are fixed, and providing for payment to
the Government and use of excess earnings; second, to the method for the
adjustment of wage scales; and third, to the authority permitting
consolidations.

It has been erroneously assumed that the act undertakes to guarantee
railroad earnings. The law requires that rates should be just and
reasonable. That has always been the rule under which rates have been
fixed. To make a rate that does not yield a fair return results in
confiscation, and confiscatory rates are of course unconstitutional. Unless
the Government adheres to the rule of making a rate that will yield a fair
return, it must abandon rate making altogether. The new and important
feature of that part of the law is the recapture and redistribution of
excess rates. The constitutionality of this method is now before the
Supreme Court for adjudication. Their decision should be awaited before
attempting further legislation on this subject. Furthermore, the importance
of this feature will not be great if consolidation goes into effect.

The settlement of railroad labor disputes is a matter of grave public
concern. The Labor Board was established to protect the public in the
enjoyment of continuous service by attempting to insure justice between the
companies and their employees. It has been a great help, but is not
altogether satisfactory to the public, the employees, or the companies. If
a substantial agreement can be reached among the groups interested, there
should be no hesitation in enacting such agreement into law. If it is not
reached, the Labor Board may very well be left for the present to protect
the public welfare.

The law for consolidations is not sufficiently effective to be expeditious.
Additional legislation is needed giving authority for voluntary
consolidations, both regional and route, and providing Government machinery
to aid and stimulate such action, always "subject to the approval of the
Interstate Commerce Commission. This should authorize the commission to
appoint committees for each proposed group, representing the public and the
component roads, with power to negotiate with individual security holders
for an exchange of their securities for those of the, consolidation on such
terms and conditions as the commission may prescribe for avoiding any
confiscation and preserving fair values. Should this permissive
consolidation prove ineffective after a limited period, the authority of
the Government will have to be directly invoked.

Consolidation appears to be the only feasible method for the maintenance of
an adequate system of transportation with an opportunity so to adjust
freight rates as to meet such temporary conditions as now prevail in some
agricultural sections. Competent authorities agree that an entire
reorganization of the rate structure for freight is necessary. This should
be ordered at once by the Congress.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

As no revision of the laws of the United States has been made since 1878, a
commission or committee should be created to undertake this work. The
Judicial Council reports that two more district judges are needed in the
southern district of New York, one in the northern district of Georgia, and
two more circuit judges in the Circuit Court of Appeals of the Eighth
Circuit. Legislation should be considered for this purpose.

. It is desirable to expedite the hearing and disposal of cases. A
commission of Federal judges and lawyers should be created to recommend
legislation by which the procedure in the Federal trial courts may be
simplified and regulated by rules of court, rather than by statute; such
rules to be submitted to the Congress and to be in force until annulled or
modified by the Congress. The Supreme Court needs legislation revising and
simplifying the laws governing review by that court, and enlarging the
classes of cases of too little public importance to be subject to review.
Such reforms would expedite the transaction of the business of the courts.
The administration of justice is likely to fail if it be long delayed.

The National Government has never given adequate attention to its prison
problems. It ought to provide employment in such forms of production as can
be used by the Government, though not sold to the public in competition
with private business, for all prisoners who can be placed at work, and for
which they should receive a reasonable compensation, available for their
dependents.

Two independent reformatories are needed; one for the segregation of women,
and another for the segregation of young men serving their first sentence.

The administration of justice would be facilitated greatly by including in
the Bureau of Investigation of the Department of Justice a Division of
Criminal Identification, where there would be collected this information
which is now indispensable in the suppression of crime. PROHIBITION

The prohibition amendment to the Constitution requires the Congress. and
the President to provide adequate laws to prevent its violation. It is my
duty to enforce such laws. For that purpose a treaty is being negotiated
with Great Britain with respect to the ri lit of search of hovering
vessels. To prevent smuggling, the Coast Card should be greatly
strengthened, and a supply of swift power boats should be provided. The
major sources of production should be rigidly regulated, and every effort
should be made to suppress interstate traffic. With this action on the part
of the National Government, and the cooperation which is usually rendered
by municipal and State authorities, prohibition should be made effective.
Free government has no greater menace than disrespect for authority and
continual violation of law. It is the duty of a citizen not only to observe
the law but to let it be known that he is opposed to its violation.

THE NEGRO

Numbered among our population are some 12,000,000 colored people. Under our
Constitution their rights are just as sacred as those of any other citizen.
It is both a public and a private duty to protect those rights. The
Congress ought to exercise all its powers of prevention and punishment
against the hideous crime of lynching, of which the negroes are by no means
the sole sufferers, but for which they furnish a majority of the victims.

Already a considerable sum is appropriated to give the negroes vocational
training in agriculture. About half a million dollars is recommended for
medical courses at Howard University to help contribute to the education of
500 colored doctors needed each year. On account of the integration of
large numbers into industrial centers, it has been proposed that a
commission be created, composed of members from both races, to formulate a
better policy for mutual understanding and confidence. Such an effort is to
be commended. Everyone would rejoice in the accomplishment of the results
which it seeks. But it is well to recognize that these difficulties are to
a large extent local problems which must be worked out by the mutual
forbearance and human kindness of each community. Such a method gives much
more promise of a real remedy than outside interference.

CIVIL SERVICE

The maintenance and extension of the classified civil service is
exceedingly important. There are nearly 550,000 persons in the executive
civil service drawing about $700,000,000 of yearly compensation.
Four-fifths of these are in the classified service. This method of
selection of the employees of the United States is especially desirable for
the Post Office Department. The Civil Service Commission has recommended
that postmasters at first, second, and third class offices be classified.
Such action, accompanied by a repeal of the four-year term of office, would
undoubtedly be an improvement. I also recommend that the field force for
prohibition enforcement be brought within the classified civil service
without covering in the present membership. The best method for selecting
public servants is the merit system.

PUBLIC BUILDINGS

Many of the departments in Washington need better housing facilities. Some
are so crowded that their work is impeded, others are so scattered that
they lose their identity. While I do not favor at this time a general
public building law, I believe it is now necessary, in accordance with
plans already sanctioned for a unified and orderly system for the
development of this city, to begin the carrying out of those plans by
authorizing the erection of three or four buildings most urgently needed by
an annual appropriation of $5,000,000.

REGULATORY LEGISLATION

Cooperation with other maritime powers is necessary for complete protection
of our coast waters from. pollution. Plans for this are under way, but
await certain experiments for refuse disposal. Meantime laws prohibiting
spreading oil and oil refuse from vessels in our own territorial waters
would be most helpful against this menace and should be speedily enacted.

Laws should be passed regulating aviation.

Revision is needed of the laws regulating radio interference.

Legislation and regulations establishing load liner, to provide safe
loading of vessels leaving our ports are necessary and recodification of
our navigation laws is vital.

Revision of procedure of the Federal Trade Commission will give more
constructive purpose to this department.

If our Alaskan fisheries are to be saved from destruction, there must be
further legislation declaring a general policy and delegating the authority
to make rules and regulations to an administrative body.

ARMY AND NAVY

For several years we have been decreasing the personnel of the Army and
Navy, and reducing their power to the danger point. Further reductions
should not be made. The Army is a guarantee of the security of our citizens
at home; the Navy is a guarantee of the security of our citizens abroad.
Both of these services should be strengthened rather than weakened.
Additional planes are needed for the Army, and additional submarines for
the Navy. The defenses of Panama must be perfected. We want no more
competitive armaments. We want no more war. But we want no weakness that
invites imposition. A people who neglect their national defense are putting
in jeopardy their national honor.

INSULAR POSSESSIONS

Conditions in the insular possessions on the whole have been good. Their
business has been reviving. They are being administered according to law.
That effort has the full support of the administration. Such
recommendations as may conic from their people or their governments should
have the most considerate attention.

EDUCATION AND WELFARE

Our National Government is not doing as much as it legitimately can do to
promote the welfare of the people. Our enormous material wealth, our
institutions, our whole form of society, can not be considered fully
successful until their benefits reach the merit of every individual. This
is not a suggestion that the Government should, or could, assume for the
people the inevitable burdens of existence. There is no method by which we
can either be relieved of the results of our own folly or be guaranteed a
successful life. There is an inescapable personal responsibility for the
development of character, of industry, of thrift, and of self-control.
These do not come from the Government, but from the people themselves. But
the Government can and should always be expressive of steadfast
determination, always vigilant, to maintain conditions under which these
virtues are most likely to develop and secure recognition and reward. This
is the American policy.

It is in accordance with this principle that we have enacted laws for the
protection of the public health and have adopted prohibition in narcotic
drugs and intoxicating liquors. For purposes of national uniformity we
ought to provide, by constitutional amendment and appropriate legislation,
for a limitation of child labor, and in all cases under the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Federal Government a minimum wage law for women, which
would undoubtedly find sufficient power of enforcement in the influence of
public opinion.

Having in mind that education is peculiarly a local problem, and that it
should always be pursued with the largest freedom of choice by students and
parents, nevertheless, the Federal Government might well give the benefit
of its counsel and encouragement more freely in this direction. If anyone
doubts the need of concerted action by the States of the Nation for this
purpose, it is only necessary to consider the appalling figures of
illiteracy representing a condition which does not vary much in all parts
of the Union. I do not favor the making of appropriations from the National
Treasury to be expended directly on local education, but I do consider it a
fundamental requirement of national activity which, accompanied by allied
subjects of welfare, is worthy of a separate department and a place in the
Cabinet. The humanitarian side of government should not be repressed, but
should be cultivated.

Mere intelligence, however, is not enough. Enlightenment must be
accompanied by that moral power which is the product of the home and of
rebellion. Real education and true welfare for the people rest inevitably
on this foundation, which the Government can approve and commend, but which
the people themselves must create. IMMIGRATION

American institutions rest solely on good citizenship. They were created by
people who had a background of self-government. New arrivals should be
limited to our capacity to absorb them into the ranks of good citizenship.
America must be kept American. For this i purpose, it is necessary to
continue a policy of restricted immigration. It would be well to make such
immigration of a selective nature with some inspection at the source, and
based either on a prior census or upon the record of naturalization. Either
method would insure the admission of those with the largest capacity and
best intention of becoming citizens. I am convinced that our present
economic and social conditions warrant a limitation of those to be
admitted. We should find additional safety in a law requiring the immediate
registration of all aliens. Those' who do not want to be partakers of the
American spirit ought not to settle in America. VETERANS

No more important duty falls on the Government of the United States than
the adequate care of its veterans. Those suffering disabilities incurred in
the service must have sufficient hospital relief and compensation. Their
dependents must be supported. Rehabilitation and vocational training must
be completed. All of this service must be clean, must be prompt and
effective, and it must be administered in a spirit of the broadest and
deepest human sympathy. If investigation reveals any present defects of
administration or need Of legislation, orders will be given for the
immediate correction of administration, and recommendations for legislation
should be given the highest preference.

At present there are 9,500 vacant beds in Government hospitals, I recommend
that all hospitals be authorized at once to receive and care for, without
hospital pay, the veterans of all wars needing such care, whenever there
are vacant beds, and that immediate steps be taken to enlarge and build new
hospitals to serve all such cases.

The American Legion will present to the Congress a legislative pro 'gram
too extensive for detailed discussion here. It is a carefully matured plan.
While some of it I do not favor, with much of it I am in hearty accord, and
I recommend that a most painstaking effort be made to provide remedies for
any defects in the administration of the present laws which their
experience has revealed. The attitude of the Government toward these
proposals should be one of generosity. But I do not favor the granting of a
bonus. COAL

The cost of coal has become unbearably high. It places a great burden on
our industrial and domestic life. The public welfare requires a reduction
in the price of fuel. With the enormous deposits in existence, failure of
supply ought not to be tolerated. Those responsible for the conditions in
this industry should undertake its reform and free it from any charge of
profiteering

The report of the Coal Commission will be before the Congress. It comprises
all the facts. It represents the mature deliberations and conclusions of
the best talent and experience that ever made a national survey of the
production and distribution of fuel. I do not favor Government ownership or
operation of coal mines. The need is for action under private ownership
that will secure greater continuity of production and greater public
protection. The Federal Government probably has no peacetime authority to
regulate wages, prices, or profits in coal at the mines or among dealers,
but by ascertaining and publishing facts it can exercise great influence.

The source of the difficulty in the bituminous coal fields is the
intermittence of operation which causes great waste of both capital and
labor. That part of the report dealing with this problem has much
significance, and is suggestive of necessary remedies. By amending, the car
rules, by encouraging greater unity of ownership, and possibly by
permitting common selling agents for limited districts on condition that
they accept adequate regulations and guarantee that competition between
districts be unlimited, distribution, storage, and continuity ought to be
improved.

The supply of coal must be constant. In case of its prospective
interruption, the President should have authority to appoint a commission
empowered to deal with whatever emergency situation might arise, to aid
conciliation and voluntary arbitration, to adjust any existing or
threatened controversy between the employer and the employee when
collective bargaining fails, and by controlling distribution to prevent
profiteering in this vital necessity. This legislation is exceedingly
urgent, and essential to the exercise of national authority for the
protection of the people. Those who undertake the responsibility of
management or employment in this industry do so with the full knowledge
that the public interest is paramount, and that to fail through any motive
of selfishness in its service is such a betrayal of duty as warrants
uncompromising action by the Government. REORGANIZATION

A special joint committee has been appointed to work out a plan for a
reorganization of the different departments and bureaus of the Government
more scientific and economical than the present system. With the exception
of the consolidation of the War and Navy Departments and some minor
details, the plan has the general sanction of the President and the
Cabinet. It is important that reorganization be enacted into law at the
present session. AGRICULTURE

Aided by the sound principles adopted by the Government, the business of
the country has had an extraordinary revival. Looked at as a whole, the
Nation is in the enjoyment of remarkable prosperity. Industry and commerce
are thriving. For the most tart agriculture is successful, eleven staples
having risen in value from about $5,300,000,000 two years ago to about.
$7,000,000,000 for the current year. But range cattle are still low in
price, and some sections of the wheat area, notably Minnesota, North
Dakota, and on west, have many cases of actual distress. With his products
not selling on a parity with the products of industry, every sound remedy
that can be devised should be applied for the relief of the farmer. He
represents a character, a type of citizenship, and a public necessity that
must be preserved and afforded every facility for regaining prosperity.

The distress is most acute among those wholly dependent upon one crop..
Wheat acreage was greatly expanded and has not yet been sufficiently
reduced. A large amount is raised for export, which has to meet the
competition in the world market of large amounts raised on land much
cheaper and much more productive.

No complicated scheme of relief, no plan for Government fixing of prices,
no resort to the public Treasury will be of any permanent value in
establishing agriculture. Simple and direct methods put into operation by
the farmer himself are the only real sources for restoration.

Indirectly the farmer must be relieved by a reduction of national and local
taxation. He must be assisted by the reorganization of the freight-rate
structure which could reduce charges on his production. To make this fully
effective there ought to be railroad consolidations. Cheaper fertilizers
must be provided.

He must have organization. His customer with whom he exchanges products o
he farm for those of industry is organized, labor is organized, business is
organized, and there is no way for agriculture to meet this unless it, too,
is organized. The acreage of wheat is too large. Unless we can meet the
world market at a profit, we must stop raising for export. Organization
would help to reduce acreage. Systems of cooperative marketing created by
the farmers themselves, supervised by competent management, without doubt
would be of assistance, but, the can not wholly solve the problem.' Our
agricultural schools ought to have thorough courses in the theory of
organization and cooperative marketing.

Diversification is necessary. Those farmers who raise their living on their
land are not greatly in distress. Such loans as are wisely needed to assist
buying stock and other materials to start in this direction should be
financed through a Government agency as a temporary and emergency
expedient.

The remaining difficulty is the disposition of exportable wheat. I do not
favor the permanent interference of the Government in this problem. That
probably would increase the trouble by increasing production. But it seems
feasible to provide Government assistance to exports, and authority should
be given the War Finance Corporation to grant, in its discretion, the most
liberal terms of payment for fats and grains exported for the direct
benefit of the farm.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The Government is undertaking to develop a great water-power project known
as Muscle Shoals, on which it has expended many million dollars. The work
is still going on. Subject to the right to retake in time of war, I
recommend that this property with a location for auxiliary steam plant and
rights of way be sold. This would end the present burden of expense and
should return to the Treasury the largest price possible to secure.

While the price is an important element, there is another consideration
even more compelling. The agriculture of the Nation needs a greater supply
and lower cost of fertilizer. This is now imported in large quantities. The
best information I can secure indicates that present methods of power
production would not be able profitably to meet the price at which these
imports can be sold. To obtain a supply from this water power would require
long and costly experimentation to perfect a process for cheap production.
Otherwise our purpose would fail completely. It seems desirable, therefore,
in order to protect and promote the public welfare, to have adequate
covenants that such experimentation be made and carried on to success. The
great advantage of low-priced nitrates must be secured for the direct
benefit of the farmers and the indirect benefit of the public in time of
peace, and of the Government in time of war. If this main object be
accomplished, the amount of money received for the property is not a
primary or major consideration.

Such a solution will involve complicated negotiations, and there is no
authority for that purpose. therefore recommend that the Congress appoint a
small joint committee to consider offers, conduct negotiations, and report
definite recommendations. RECLAMATION

By reason of many contributing causes, occupants of our reclamation
projects are in financial difficulties, which in some cases are acute.
Relief should be granted by definite authority of law empowering the
Secretary of the Interior in. his discretion to suspend, readjust, and
reassess all charges against water users. This whole question is being
considered by experts. You will have the advantage of the facts and
conclusions which they may develop. This situation, involving a Government
investment of more than $135,000,000, and affecting more than 30,000 water
users, is serious. While relief which is necessary should be granted, yet
contracts with the Government which can be met should be met. The
established general policy of these projects should not be abandoned for
any private control.

HIGHWAYS AND FORESTS

Highways and reforestation should continue to have the interest and support
of the Government. Everyone is anxious for good highways. I have made a
liberal proposal in the Budget for the continuing payment to the States by
the Federal Government of its share for this necessary public improvement.
No expenditure of public money contributes so much to the national wealth
as for building good roads.

Reforestation has an importance far above the attention it usually secures.
A special committee of the Senate is investigating this need, and I shall
welcome a constructive policy based on their report.

It is 100 years since our country announced the Monroe doctrine. This
principle has been ever since, and is now, one of the main foundations of
our foreign relations. It must be maintained. But in maintaining it we must
not be forgetful that a great change has taken place. We are no longer a
weak Nation, thinking mainly of defense, dreading foreign imposition. We
are great and powerful. New powers bring new responsibilities. Our ditty
then was to protect ourselves. Added to that, our duty now is to help give
stability to. the world. We want idealism. We want that vision which lifts
men and nations above themselves. These are virtues by reason of their own
merit. But they must not be cloistered; they must not be impractical; they
must not be ineffective.

The world has had enough of the curse of hatred and selfishness, of
destruction and war. It has had enough of the wrongful use of material
power. For the healing of the nations there must be good will and charity,
confidence and peace. The time has come for a more practical use of moral
power, and more reliance upon the principle that right makes its own might.
Our authority among the nations must be represented by justice and mercy.
It is necessary not only to have faith, but to make sacrifices for our
faith. The spiritual forces of the world make all its final determinations.
It is with these voices that America should speak. Whenever they declare a
righteous purpose there need be no doubt that they will be heard. America
has taken her place in the world as a Republic--free, independent,
powerful. The best service that can be rendered to humanity is the
assurance that this place will be maintained.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 3, 1924

To the Congress of the United States:

The present state of the Union, upon which it is customary for the
President to report to the Congress under the provisions of the
Constitution, is such that it may be regarded with encouragement and
satisfaction by every American. Our country is almost unique in its ability
to discharge fully and promptly all its obligations at home and abroad, and
provide for all its inhabitants an increase in material resources, in
intellectual vigor and in moral power. The Nation holds a position
unsurpassed in all former human experience. This does not mean that we do
not have any problems. It is elementary that the increasing breadth of our
experience necessarily increases the problems of our national life. But it
does mean that if all will but apply ourselves industriously and honestly,
we have ample powers with which to meet our problems and provide for I heir
speedy solution. I do not profess that we can secure an era of perfection
in human existence, but we can provide an era of peace and prosperity,
attended with freedom and justice and made more and more satisfying by the
ministrations of the charities and humanities of life.

Our domestic problems are for the most part economic. We have our enormous
debt to pay, and we are paying it. We have the high cost of government to
diminish, and we are diminishing it. We have a heavy burden of taxation to
reduce, and we are reducing it. But while remarkable progress has been made
in these directions, the work is yet far from accomplished. We still owe
over $21,000,000,000, the cost of the National Government is still about
$3,500,000,000, and the national taxes still amount to about $27 for each
one of our inhabitants. There yet exists this enormous field for the
application of economy.

In my opinion the Government can do more to remedy the economic ills of the
people by a system of rigid economy in public expenditure than can be
accomplished through any other action. The costs of our national and local
governments combined now stand at a sum close to $100 for each inhabitant
of the land. A little less than one-third of this is represented by
national expenditure, and a little more than two-thirds by local
expenditure. It is an ominous fact that only the National Government is
reducing its debt. Others are increasing theirs at about $1,000,000,000
each year. The depression that overtook business, the disaster experienced
in agriculture, the lack of employment and the terrific shrinkage in all
values which our country experienced in a most acute form in 1920, resulted
in no small measure from the prohibitive taxes which were then levied on
all productive effort. The establishment of a system of drastic economy in
public expenditure, which has enabled us to pay off about one-fifth of the
national debt since 1919, and almost cut in two the national tax burden
since 1921, has been one of the main causes in reestablishing a prosperity
which has come to include within its benefits almost every one of our
inhabitants. Economy reaches everywhere. It carries a blessing to
everybody.

The fallacy of the claim that the costs of government are borne by the rich
and those who make a direct contribution to the National Treasury can not
be too often exposed. No system has been devised, I do not think any system
could be devised, under which any person living in this country could
escape being affected by the cost of our government. It has a direct effect
both upon the rate and the purchasing power of wages. It is felt in the
price of those prime necessities of existence, food, clothing, fuel and
shelter. It would appear to be elementary that the more the Government
expends the more it must require every producer to contribute out of his
production to the Public Treasury, and the less he will have for his own
benefit. The continuing costs of public administration can be met in only
one way -- by the work of the people. The higher they become, the more the
people must work for the Government. The less they are, the more the people
can work for themselves.

The present estimated margin between public receipts and expenditures for
this fiscal year is very small. Perhaps the most important work that this
session of the Congress can do is to continue a policy of economy and
further reduce the cost of government, in order that we may have a
reduction of taxes for the next fiscal year. Nothing is more likely to
produce that public confidence which is the forerunner and the mainstay of
prosperity, encourage and enlarge business opportunity with ample
opportunity for employment at good wages, provide a larger market for
agricultural products, and put our country in a stronger position to be
able to meet the world competition in trade, than a continuing policy of
economy. Of course necessary costs must be met, proper functions of the
Government performed, and constant investments for capital account and
reproductive effort must be carried on by our various departments. But the
people must know that their Government is placing upon them no unnecessary
burden. TAXES

Everyone desires a reduction of taxes, and there is a great preponderance
of sentiment in favor of taxation reform. When I approved the present tax
law, I stated publicly that I did so in spite of certain provisions which I
believed unwise and harmful. One of the most glaring of these was the
making public of the amounts assessed against different income-tax payers.
Although that damage has now been done, I believe its continuation to be
detrimental To the public welfare and bound to decrease public revenues, so
that it ought to be repealed.

Anybody can reduce taxes, but it is not so easy to stand in the gap and
resist the passage of increasing appropriation bills which would make tax
reduction impossible. It will be very easy to measure the strength of the
attachment to reduced taxation by the power with which increased
appropriations are resisted. If at the close of the present session the
Congress has kept within the budget which I propose to present, it will
then be possible to have a moderate amount of tax reduction and all the tax
reform that the Congress may wish for during the next fiscal year. The
country is now feeling the direct stimulus which came from the passage of
the last revenue bill, and under the assurance of a reasonable system of
taxation there is every prospect of an era of prosperity of unprecedented
proportions. But it would be idle to expect any such results unless
business can continue free from excess profits taxation and be accorded a
system of surtaxes at rates which have for their object not the punishment
of success or the discouragement of business, but the production of the
greatest amount of revenue from large incomes. I am convinced that the
larger incomes of the country would actually yield more revenue to the
Government if the basis of taxation were scientifically revised downward.
Moreover the effect of the present method of this taxation is to increase
the cost of interest. on productive enterprise and to increase the burden
of rent. It is altogether likely that such reduction would so encourage and
stimulate investment that it would firmly establish our country in the
economic leadership of the world. WATERWAYS

Meantime our internal development should go on. Provision should be made
for flood control of such rivers as the Mississippi and the Colorado, and
for the opening up of our inland waterways to commerce. Consideration is
due to the project of better navigation from the Great Lakes to the Gulf.
Every effort is being made to promote an agreement with Canada to build
the, St. Lawrence waterway. There are pending before the Congress bills for
further development of the Mississippi Basin, for the taking over of the
Cape Cod Canal in accordance with a moral obligation which seems to have
been incurred during the war, and for the improvement of harbors on both
the Pacific and the Atlantic coasts. While this last should be divested of
some of its projects and we must proceed slowly, these bills in general
have my approval. Such works are productive of wealth and in the long run
tend to a reduction of the tax burden. RECLAMATION

Our country has a well defined policy of reclamation established under
statutory authority. This policy should be continued and made a
self-sustaining activity administered in a manner that will meet local
requirements and bring our and lands into a profitable state of cultivation
as fast as there is a market for their products. Legislation is pending
based on the report of the Fact Finding Commission for the proper relief of
those needing extension of time in which to meet their payments on
irrigated land, and for additional amendments and reforms of our
reclamation laws, which are all exceedingly important and should be enacted
at once.

No more important development has taken place in the last year than the
beginning of a restoration of agriculture to a prosperous condition. We
must permit no division of classes in this country, with one occupation
striving to secure advantage over another. Each must proceed under open
opportunities and with a fair prospect of economic equality. The Government
can not successfully insure prosperity or fix prices by legislative fiat.
Every business has its risk and its times of depression. It is well known
that in the long run there will be a more even prosperity and a more
satisfactory range of prices under the natural working out of economic laws
than when the Government undertakes the artificial support of markets and
industries. Still we can so order our affairs, so protect our own people
from foreign competition, so arrange our national finances, so administer
our monetary system, so provide for the extension of credits, so improve
methods of distribution, as to provide a better working machinery for the
transaction of the business of the Nation with the least possible friction
and loss. The Government has been constantly increasing its efforts in
these directions for the relief and permanent establishment of agriculture
on a sound and equal basis with other business.

It is estimated that the value of the crops for this harvest year may reach
$13,000,000,000, which is an increase of over $3,000,000,000 in three
years. It compares with $7,100,000,000 in 1913, arid if we make deduction
from the figures of 1924 for the comparatively decreased value of the
dollar, the yield this year still exceeds 1913 in purchasing power by over
$1,000,000,000, and in this interval there has been no increase in the
number of farmers. Mostly by his own effort the farmer has decreased the
cost of production. A marked increase in the price of his products and some
decrease in the price of his supplies has brought him about to a parity
with the rest of the Nation. The crop area of this season is estimated at
370,000,000 acres, which is a decline of 3,000,000 acres from last year,
and 6,000,000 acres from 1919. This has been a normal and natural
application of economic laws, which has placed agriculture on a foundation
which is undeniably sound and beginning to be satisfactory.

A decrease in the world supply of wheat has resulted in a very large
increase in the price of that commodity. The position of all agricultural
products indicates a better balanced supply, but we can not yet conclude
that agriculture is recovered from the effects of the war period or that it
is permanently on a prosperous basis. The cattle industry has not yet
recovered and in some sections has been suffering from dry weather. Every
effort must be made both by Government activity and by private agencies to
restore and maintain agriculture to a complete normal relationship with
other industries.

It was on account of past depression, and in spite of present more
encouraging conditions, that I have assembled an Agricultural Conference
made up of those who are representative of this great industry in both its
operating and economic sides. Everyone knows that the great need of the
farmers is markets. The country is not suffering on the side of production.
Almost the entire difficulty is on the side of distribution. This reaches
back, of course, to unit costs and diversification, and many allied
subjects. It is exceedingly intricate, for our domestic and foreign trade,
transportation and banking, and in fact our entire economic system, are
closely related to it. In time for action at this session, I hope to report
to the Congress such legislative remedies as the conference may recommend.
An appropriation should be made to defray their necessary expenses.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The production of nitrogen for plant food in peace and explosives in war is
more and more important. It is one of the chief sustaining elements of
life. It is estimated that soil exhaustion each year is represented by
about 9,000,000 tons and replenishment by 5,450,000 tons. The deficit of
3,550,000 tons is reported to represent the impairment of 118,000,000 acres
of farm lands each year.

To meet these necessities the Government has been developing a water power
project at Muscle Shoals to be equipped to produce nitrogen for explosives
and fertilizer. It is my opinion that the support of agriculture is the
chief problem to consider in connection with this property. It could by no
means supply the present needs for nitrogen, but it would help and its
development would encourage bringing other water powers into like use.

Several offers have been made for the purchase of this property. Probably
none of them represent final terms. Much costly experimentation is
necessary to produce commercial nitrogen. For that reason it is a field
better suited to private enterprise than to Government operation. I should
favor a sale of this property, or long-time lease, tinder rigid guaranties
of commercial nitrogen production at reasonable prices for agricultural
use. There would be a surplus of power for many years over any possibility
of its application to a developing manufacture of nitrogen. It may be found
advantageous to dispose of the right to surplus power separately with such
reservations as will allow its gradual withdrawal and application to
nitrogen manufacture. A subcommittee of the Committees on Agriculture
should investigate this field and negotiate with prospective purchasers. If
no advantageous offer be made, the development should continue and the
plant should be dedicated primarily to the production of materials for the
fertilization of the soil. RAILWAYS

The railways during the past year have made still further progress in
recuperation from the war, with large rains in efficiency and ability
expeditiously to handle the traffic of the country. We have now passed
through several periods of peak traffic without the car shortages which so
frequently in the past have brought havoc to our agriculture and
industries. The condition of many of our great freight terminals is still
one of difficulty and results in imposing, large costs on the public for
inward-bound freight, and on the railways for outward-bound freight. Owing
to the growth of our large cities and the great increase in the volume of
traffic, particularly in perishables, the problem is not only difficult of
solution, but in some cases not wholly solvable by railway action alone.

In my message last year I emphasized the necessity for further legislation
with a view to expediting the consolidation of our rail ways into larger
systems. The principle of Government control of rates and profits, now
thoroughly imbedded in our governmental attitude toward natural monopolies
such as the railways, at once eliminates the need of competition by small
units as a method of rate adjustment. Competition must be preserved as a
stimulus to service , but this will exist and can be increased tinder
enlarged systems. Consequently the consolidation of the railways into
larger units for the purpose of securing the substantial values to the
public which will come from larger operation has been the logical
conclusion of Congress in its previous enactments, and is also supported by
the best opinion in the country. Such consolidation will assure not only a
greater element of competition as to service, but it will afford economy in
operation, greater stability in railway earnings, and more economical
financing. It opens large possibilities of better equalization of rates
between different classes of traffic so as to relieve undue burdens upon
agricultural products and raw materials generally, which are now not
possible without ruin to small units owing to the lack of diversity of
traffic. It would also tend to equalize earnings in such fashion as to
reduce the importance of section 15A, at which criticism, often misapplied,
has been directed. A smaller number of units would offer less difficulties
in labor adjustments and would contribute much to the, solution of terminal
difficulties.

The consolidations need to be carried out with due regard to public
interest and to the rights and established life of various communities in
our country. It does not seem to me necessary that we endeavor to
anticipate any final plan or adhere to an artificial and unchangeable
project which shall stipulate a fixed number of systems, but rather we
ought to approach the problem with such a latitude of action that it can be
worked out step by step in accordance with a comprehensive consideration of
public interest. Whether the number of ultimate systems shall be more or
less seems to me can only be determined by time and actual experience in
the development of such consolidations.

Those portions of the present law contemplating consolidations ore not,
sufficiently effective in producing expeditious action and need
amplification of the authority of the Interstate Commerce Commission,
particularly in affording a period for voluntary proposals to the
commission and in supplying Government pressure to secure action after the
expiration of such a period.

There are other proposals before Congress for amending the transportation
acts. One of these contemplates a revision of the method of valuation for
rate-making purposes to be followed by a renewed valuation of the railways.
The valuations instituted by the Interstate Commerce Commission 10 years
ago have not yet been completed. They have cost the Government an enormous
sum, and they have imposed great expenditure upon the railways, most of
which has in effect come out of the public in increased rates. This work
should not be abandoned or supplanted until its results are known and can
be considered.

Another matter before the Congress is legislation affecting the labor
sections of the transportation act. Much criticism has been directed at the
workings of this section and experience has shown that some useful
amendment could be made to these provisions.

It would be helpful if a plan could be adopted which, while retaining the
practice of systematic collective bargaining with conciliation voluntary
arbitration of labor differences, could also provide simplicity in
relations and more direct local responsibility of employees and managers.
But such legislation will not meet the requirements of the situation unless
it recognizes the principle that t e public has a right to the
uninterrupted service of transportation, and therefore a right to be heard
when there is danger that the Nation may suffer great injury through the
interruption of operations because of labor disputes. If these elements are
not comprehended in proposed legislation, it would be better to gain
further experience with the present organization for dealing with these
questions before undertaking a change.

SHIPPING BOARD

The form of the organization of the Shipping Board was based originally on
its functions as a semi judicial body in regulation of rates. During the
war it was loaded with enormous administrative duties. It has been
demonstrated time and again that this form of organization results in
indecision, division of opinion and administrative functions, which make a
wholly inadequate foundation for the conduct of a great business
enterprise. The first principle in securing the objective set out by
Congress in building up the American merchant marine upon the great trade
routes and subsequently disposing of it into private operation can not
proceed with effectiveness until the entire functions of the board are
reorganized. The immediate requirement is to transfer into the Emergency
Fleet, Corporation the whole responsibility of operation of the fleet and
other property, leaving to the Shipping Board solely the duty of
determining certain major policies which require deliberative action.

The procedure under section 28 of the merchant marine act has created great
difficulty and threatened friction during the past 12 months. Its attempted
application developed not only great opposition from exporters,
particularly as to burdens that may be imposed upon agricultural products,
but also great anxiety in the different seaports as to the effect upon
their relative rate structures. This trouble will certainly recur if action
is attempted under this section. It is uncertain in some of its terms and
of great difficulty in interpretation.

It is my belief that action under this section should be suspended until
the Congress can reconsider the entire question in the light of the
experience that has been developed since its enactment.

NATIONAL ELECTIONS

Nothing is so fundamental to the integrity of a republican form of
government as honesty in all that relates to the conduct of elections. I am
of the opinion that the national laws governing the choice of members of
the Congress should be extended to include appropriate representation of
the respective parties at the ballot box ant equality of representation on
the various registration boards, wherever they exist.

THE JUDICIARY

The docket of the Supreme Court is becoming congested. At the opening term
last year it had 592 cases, while this year it had 687 cases. Justice long
delayed is justice refused. Unless the court be given power by preliminary
and summary consideration to determine the importance of cases, and by
disposing of those which are not of public moment reserve its time for the
more extended consideration of the remainder, the congestion of the docket
is likely to increase. It is also desirable that Supreme Court should have
power to improve and reform procedure in suits at law in the Federal courts
through the adoption of appropriate rules. The Judiciary Committee of the
Senate has reported favorably upon two bills providing for these reforms
which should have the immediate favorable consideration of the Congress.

I further recommend that provision be made for the appointment of a
commission, to consist of two or three members of the Federal judiciary and
as many members of the bar, to examine the present criminal code of
procedure and recommend to the Congress measures which may reform and
expedite court procedure in the administration and enforcement of our
criminal laws.

PRISON REFORM

Pending before the Congress is a bill which has already passed one House
providing for a reformatory to which could be committed first offenders and
young men for the purpose of segregating them from contact with banned
criminals and providing them with special training in order to reestablish
in them the power to pursue a law-abiding existence in the social and
economic life of the Nation. This is a matter of so much importance as to
warrant the early attention of the present session. Further provision
should also be made, for a like reason, for a separate reformatory for
women.

NATIONAL POLICE BUREAU

Representatives of the International Police Conference will bring to t e
attention of the Congress a proposal for the establishment of a national
police bureau. Such action would provide a central point for gathering,
compiling, and later distributing to local police authorities much
information which would be helpful in the prevention and detection of
crime. I believe this bureau is needed, and I recommend favorable
consideration of this proposal.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA WELFARE

The welfare work of the District of Columbia is administered by several
different boards dealing with charities and various correctional efforts.
It would be an improvement if this work were consolidated and placed under
the direction of a single commission.

FRENCH SPOLIATION CLAIMS

During the last session of the Congress legislation was introduced looking
to the payment of the remaining claims generally referred to as the French
spoliation claims. The Congress has provided for the payment of many
similar claims. Those that remain unpaid have been long pending. The
beneficiaries thereunder have every reason to expect payment. These claims
have been examined by the Court of Claims and their validity and amount
determined. The United States ought to pay its debts. I recommend action by
the Congress which will permit of the payment of these remaining claims.

THE WAGE EARNER

Two very important policies have been adopted by this country which, while
extending their benefits also in other directions, have been of the utmost
importance to the wage earners. One of these is the protective tariff,
which enables our people to live according to a better standard and receive
a better rate of compensation than any people, any time, anywhere on earth,
ever enjoyed. This saves the American market for the products of the
American workmen. The other is a policy of more recent origin and seeks to
shield our wage earners from the disastrous competition of a great influx
of foreign peoples. This has been done by the restrictive immigration law.
This saves the American job for the American workmen. I should like to see
the administrative features of this law rendered a little more humane for
the purpose of permitting those already here a greater latitude in securing
admission of members of their own families. But I believe this law in
principle is necessary and sound, and destined to increase greatly the
public welfare. We must maintain our own economic position, we must defend
our own national integrity.

It is gratifying to report that the progress of industry, the enormous
increase in individual productivity through labor-saving devices, and the
high rate of wages have all combined to furnish our people in general with
such an abundance not only of the necessaries but of the conveniences of
life that we are by a natural evolution solving our problems of economic
and social justice.

THE NEGRO

These developments have brought about a very remarkable improvement in the
condition of the negro race. Gradually, but surely, with the almost
universal sympathy of those among whom they live, the colored people are
working out their own destiny. I firmly believe that it is better for all
concerned that they should be cheerfully accorded their full constitutional
rights, that they should be protected from all of those impositions to
which, from their position, they naturally fall a prey, especially from the
crime of lynching and that they should receive every encouragement to
become full partakers in all the blessings of our common American
citizenship.

CIVIL SERVICE

The merit system has long been recognized as the correct basis for
employment in our, civil service. I believe that first second, and third
class postmasters, and without covering in the present membership tile
field force of prohibition enforcement, should be brought within the
classified service by statute law. Otherwise the Executive order of one
administration is changed by the Executive order of another administration,
and little real progress is made. Whatever its defects, the merit system is
certainly to be preferred to the spoils system.

DEPARTMENTAL REORGANIZATION

One way to save public money would be to pass the pending bill for the
reorganization of the various departments. This project has been pending
for some time, and has had the most careful consideration of experts and
the thorough study of a special congressional committee. This legislation
is vital as a companion piece to the Budget law. Legal authority for a
thorough reorganization of the Federal structure with some latitude of
action to the Executive in the rearrangement of secondary functions would
make for continuing economy in the shift of government activities which
must follow every change in a developing country. Beyond this many of the
independent agencies of the Government must be placed under responsible
Cabinet officials, if we are to have safeguards of efficiency, economy, and
probity.

ARMY AND NAVY

Little has developed in relation to our national defense which needs
special attention. Progress is constantly being made in air navigation and
requires encouragement and development. Army aviators have made a
successful trip around the world, for which I recommend suitable
recognition through provisions for promotion, compensation, and retirement.
Under the direction of the Navy a new Zeppelin has been successfully
brought from Europe across the Atlantic to our own country.

Due to the efficient supervision of the Secretary of War the Army of the
United States has been organized with a small body of Regulars and a
moderate National Guard and Reserve. The defense test of September 12
demonstrated the efficiency of the operating plans. These methods and
operations are well worthy of congressional support.

Under the limitation of armaments treaty a large saving in outlay and a
considerable decrease in maintenance of the Navy has been accomplished. We
should maintain the policy of constantly working toward the full treaty
strength of the Navy. Careful investigation is being made in this
department of the relative importance of aircraft, surface and submarine
vessels, in order that we may not fail to take advantage of all modern
improvements for our national defense. A special commission also is
investigating the problem of petroleum oil for the Navy, considering the
best policy to insure the future supply of fuel oil and prevent the
threatened drainage of naval oil reserves. Legislative action is required
to carry on experiments in oil shale reduction, as large deposits of this
type have been set aside for the use of the Navy.

We have been constantly besought to engage in competitive armaments.
Frequent reports will reach us of the magnitude of the military equipment
of other, nations. We shall do well to be little impressed by such reports
or such actions. Any nation undertaking to maintain a military
establishment with aggressive and imperialistic designs will find itself
severely handicapped in the economic development of the world. I believe
thoroughly in the Army and Navy, in adequate defense and preparation. But I
am opposed to any policy of competition in building and maintaining land or
sea armaments.

Our country has definitely relinquished the old standard of dealing with
other countries by terror and force, and is definitely committed to the new
standard of dealing with them through friendship and understanding. This
new policy should be constantly kept in mind by the guiding forces of the
Army and Navy, by the. Congress and by the country at large. I believe it
holds a promise of great benefit to humanity. I shall resist any attempt to
resort to the old methods and the old standards. I am especially solicitous
that foreign nations should comprehend the candor and sincerity with which
we have adopted this position. While we propose to maintain defensive and
supplementary police forces by land and sea, and to train them through
inspections and maneuvers upon appropriate occasions in order to maintain
their efficiency, I wish every other nation to understand that this does
not express any unfriendliness or convey any hostile intent. I want the
armed forces of America to be considered by all peoples not as enemies but
as friends as the contribution which is made by this country for the
maintenance of the peace and security of the world. VETERANS

With the authorization for general hospitalization of the veterans of all
wars provided during the present year, the care and treatment of those who
have served their country in time of peril and the attitude of the
Government toward them is not now so much one of needed legislation as one
of careful, generous and humane administration. It will ever be recognized
that their welfare is of the first concern and always entitled to the most
solicitous consideration oil the part of their fellow citizens. They are
organized in various associations, of which the chief and most
representative is the American Legion. Through its officers the Legion will
present to the Congress numerous suggestions for legislation. They cover
such a wide variety of subjects that it is impossible to discuss them
within the scope of this message. With many of the proposals I join in
hearty approval and commend them all to the sympathetic investigation and
consideration of the Congress.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

At no period in the past 12 years have our foreign relations been in such a
satisfactory condition as they are at the present time. Our actions in the
recent months have greatly strengthened the American policy of permanent
peace with independence. The attitude which our Government took and
maintained toward an adjustment of European reparations, by pointing out
that it wits not a political but a business problem, has demonstrated its
wisdom by its actual results. We desire to see Europe restored that it may
resume its productivity in the increase of industry and its support in the
advance of civilization. We look with great gratification at the hopeful
prospect of recuperation in Europe through the Dawes plan. Such assistance
as can be given through the action of the public authorities and of our
private citizens, through friendly counsel and cooperation, and through
economic and financial support, not for any warlike effort but for
reproductive enterprise, not to provide means for unsound government
financing but to establish sound business administration ' should be
unhesitatingly provided.

Ultimately nations, like individuals, can not depend upon each other but
must depend upon themselves. Each one must work out its own salvation. We
have every desire to help. But with all our resources we are powerless to
save unless our efforts meet with a constructive response. The situation in
our own country and all over the world is one Chat can be improved only by
bard work and self-denial. It is necessary to reduce expenditures, increase
savings and liquidate debts. It is in this direction that there lies the
greatest hope of domestic tranquility and international peace. Our own
country ought to finish the leading example in this effort. Our past
adherence to this policy, our constant refusal to maintain a military
establishment that could be thought to menace the security of others, our
honorable dealings with other nations whether great or small, has left us
in the almost constant enjoyment of peace.

It is not necessary to stress the general desire of all the people of this
country for the promotion of peace. It is the leading principle of all our
foreign relations. We have on every occasion tried to cooperate to this end
in all ways that were consistent with our proper independence and our
traditional policies. It will be my constant effort to maintain these
principles, and to reinforce them by all appropriate agreements and
treaties. While we desire always to cooperate and to help, we are equally
determined to be independent and free. Right and truth and justice and
humanitarian efforts will have the moral support of this country all over
the world. But we do not wish to become involved in the political
controversies of others. Nor is the country disposed to become a member of
the League of Nations or to assume the obligations imposed by its
covenant.

INTERNATIONAL COURT

America has been one of the foremost nations in advocating tribunals for
the settlement of international disputes of a justiciable character. Our
representatives took a leading in those conferences which resulted in the
establishment of e ague Tribunal, and later in providing for a Permanent
Court of International Justice. I believe it would be for the advantage of
this country and helpful to the stability of other nations for us to adhere
to the protocol establishing, that court upon the conditions stated in the
recommendation which is now before the Senate, and further that our country
shall not be bound by advisory opinions which may be, rendered by the court
upon questions which we have not voluntarily submitted for its judgment.
This court would provide a practical and convenient tribunal before which
we could go voluntarily, but to which we could not be summoned, for a
determination of justiciable questions when they fail to be resolved by
diplomatic negotiations.

DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE

Many times I have expressed my desire to see the work of the Washington
Conference on Limitation of Armaments appropriately supplemented by further
agreements for a further reduction M for the purpose of diminishing the
menace and waste of the competition in preparing instruments of
international war. It has been and is my expectation that we might
hopefully approach other great powers for further conference on this
subject as soon as the carrying out of the present reparation plan as the
established and settled policy of Europe has created a favorable
opportunity. But on account of proposals which have already been made by
other governments for a European conference, it will be necessary to wait
to see what the outcome of their actions may be. I should not wish to
propose or have representatives attend a conference which would contemplate
commitments opposed to the freedom of action we desire to maintain
unimpaired with respect to our purely domestic policies.

INTERNATIONAL LAW

Our country should also support efforts which are being made toward the
codification of international law. We can look more hopefully, in the first
instance, for research and studies that are likely to be productive of
results, to a cooperation among representatives of the bar and members of
international law institutes and societies, than to a conference of those
who are technically representative of their respective governments,
although, when projects have been developed, they must go to the
governments for their approval. These expert professional studies are going
on in certain quarters and should have our constant encouragement and
approval.

OUTLAW OF WAR

Much interest has of late been manifested in this country in the discussion
of various proposals to outlaw aggressive war. I look with great sympathy
upon the examination of this subject. It is in harmony with the traditional
policy of our country, which is against aggressive war and for the
maintenance of permanent and honorable peace. While, as I have said, we
must safeguard our liberty to deal according to our own judgment with our
domestic policies, we can not fail to view with sympathetic interest all
progress to this desired end or carefully to study the measures that may be
proposed to attain it.

LATIN AMERICA

While we are desirous of promoting peace in every quarter of the globe, we
have a special interest in the peace of this hemisphere. It is our constant
desire that all causes of dispute in this area may be tranquilly and
satisfactorily adjusted. Along with our desire for peace is the earnest
hope for the increased prosperity of our sister republics of Latin America,
and our constant purpose to promote cooperation with them which may be
mutually beneficial and always inspired by the most cordial friendships.

FOREIGN DEBTS

About $12,000,000,000 is due to our Government from abroad, mostly from
European Governments. Great Britain, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania and Poland
have negotiated settlements amounting close to $5,000,000,000. This
represents the funding of over 42 per cent of the debt since the creation
of the special Foreign Debt Commission. As the life of this commission is
about to expire, its term should be extended. I am opposed to the
cancellation of these debts and believe it for the best welfare of the
world that they should be liquidated and paid as fast as possible. I do not
favor oppressive measures, but unless money that is borrowed is repaid
credit can not be secured in time of necessity, and there exists besides a
moral obligation which our country can not ignore and no other country can
evade. Terms and conditions may have to conform to differences in the
financial abilities of the countries concerned, but the principle that each
country should meet its obligation admits of no differences and is of
universal application.

It is axiomatic that our country can not stand still. It would seem to be
perfectly plain from recent events that it is determined to go forward. But
it wants no pretenses, it wants no vagaries. It is determined to advance in
an orderly, sound and common-sense way. It does not propose to abandon the
theory of the Declaration that the people have inalienable rights which no
majority and no power of government can destroy. It does not propose to
abandon the practice of the Constitution that provides for the protection
of these rights. It believes that within these limitations, which are
imposed not by the fiat of man but by the law of the Creator,
self-government is just and wise. It is convinced that it will be
impossible for the people to provide their own government unless they
continue to own their own property.

These are the very foundations of America. On them has been erected a
Government of freedom and equality, of justice and mercy, of education and
charity. Living under it and supporting it the people have come into great
possessions on the material and spiritual sides of life. I want to continue
in this direction. I know that the Congress shares with me that desire. I
want our institutions to be more and more expressive of these principles. I
want the people of all the earth to see in the American flag the symbol of
a Government which intends no oppression at home and no aggression abroad,
which in the spirit of a common brotherhood provides assistance in time of
distress.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 8, 1925

Members of the Congress:

In meeting the constitutional requirement of informing the Congress upon
the state of the Union, it is exceedingly gratifying to report that the
general condition is one of progress and prosperity. Here and there are
comparatively small and apparently temporary difficulties needing
adjustment and improved administrative methods, such as are always to be
expected, but i ii the fundamentals of government and business the results
demonstrate that we are going in the right direction. The country does not
appear to require radical departures from the policies already adopted so
much as it needs a further extension of these policies and the improvement
of details. The age of perfection is still in the somewhat distant future,
but it is more in danger of being retarded by mistaken Government activity
than it is from lack of legislation. We are by far the most likely to
accomplish permanent good if we proceed with moderation.

In our country the people are sovereign and independent, and must accept
the resulting responsibilities. It is their duty to support themselves and
support the Government. That is the business of the Nation, whatever the
charity of the Nation may require. The functions which the Congress are to
discharge are not those of local government but of National Government. The
greatest solicitude should be exercised to prevent any encroachment upon
the rights of the States or their various political subdivisions. Local
self-government is one of our most precious possessions. It is the greatest
contributing factor to the stability strength liberty, and progress of the
Nation. It ought not to be in ringed by assault or undermined by purchase.
It ought not to abdicate its power through weakness or resign its authority
through favor. It does not at all follow that because abuses exist it is
the concern of the Federal Government to attempt the r reform.

Society is in much more danger from encumbering the National Government
beyond its wisdom to comprehend, or its ability to administer, than from
leaving the local communities to bear their own burdens and remedy their
own evils. Our local habit and custom is so strong, our variety of race and
creed is so great the Federal authority is so tenuous, that the area within
which it can function successfully is very limited. The wiser policy is to
leave the localities, so far as we can, possessed of their own sources of
revenue and charged with their own obligations.

GOVERNMENT ECONOMY

It is a fundamental principle of our country that the people are sovereign.
While they recognize the undeniable authority of the state, they have
established as its instrument a Government of limited powers. They hold
inviolate in their own hands the jurisdiction over their own freedom and
the ownership of their own property. Neither of these can be impaired
except by due process of law. The wealth of our country is not public
wealth, but private wealth. It does not belong to the Government, it
belongs to the people. The Government has no justification in taking
private Property except for a public purpose. It is always necessary to
keep these principles in mind in the laying of taxes and in the making of
appropriations. No right exists to levy on a dollar, or to order the
expenditure of a dollar, of the money of the people, except for a necessary
public purpose duly authorized by the Constitution. The power over the
purse is the power over liberty.

That is the legal limitation within which the Congress can act, How it
will, proceed within this limitation is always a question of policy. When
the country is prosperous and free from debt, when the rate of taxation is
low, opportunity exists for assuming new burdens and undertaking new
enterprises. Such a condition now prevails only to a limited extent. All
proposals for assuming new obligations ought to be postponed, unless they
are reproductive capital investments or are such as are absolutely
necessary at this time. We still have an enormous debt of over
$20,000,000,000, on which the interest and sinking-fund requirements are
$1,320,000,000. Our appropriations for the Pension Office and the Veterans'
Bureau are $600,000,000. The War and Navy Departments call for
$642,000,000. Other requirements, exclusive of the Post Office ' which is
virtually self-sustaining, brought the appropriations for the current year
up to almost C3,100,060,000. This shows an expenditure of close to $30 for
every inhabitant of our country. For the average family of five it means a
tax, directly or indirectly paid, of about $150 for national purposes
alone. The local tax adds much more. These enormous expenditures ought not
to be increased, but through every possible effort they ought to be
reduced.

Only one of these great items can be ultimately extinguished. That is the
item of our war debt. Already this has been reduced to about
$6,000,000,000, which means an annual saving in interest of close to
$250,000,000. The present interest charge is about $820,000,000 yearly. It
would seem to be obvious that the sooner this debt can be retired the more
the taxpayers will save in interest and the easier it will be to secure
funds with which to prosecute needed running expenses, constructions, and
improvements. This item of $820,000,000 for interest is a heavy charge on
all the people of the country, and it seems to me that we might well
consider whether it is not greatly worth while to dispense with it as early
as possible by retiring the principal debt which it is required to serve.

It has always been our policy to retire our debts. That of the
Revolutionary War period, notwithstanding the additions made in 1812, was
paid by 1835. and the Civil War debt within 23 years. Of the amount already
paid, over $1,000,000,000 is a reduction in cash balances. That source is
exhausted. Over one and two-thirds billions of dollars was derived from
excess receipts. Tax reduction eliminates that. The sale of surplus war
materials has been another element of our income. That is practically
finished. With these eliminated, the reduction of the debt has been only
about $500,000,000 each year, not an excessive sum on so large a debt.

Proposals have been made to extend the payment over a period of 62 years.
If $1,000,000,000 is paid at the end of 20 years, the cost to the taxpayers
is the principal and, I f the interest is 4% per cent, a total of
$1,850,000,000. If the same sum is paid at the end of 62 years, the cost is
$3,635,000,000, or almost double. Here is another consideration: Compared
with its purchasing power in 1913, the dollar we borrowed represented but
52 cents. As the value of our dollar increases, due to the falling prices
of commodities, the burden of our debt increases. It has now risen to 631/2
cents. The taxpayer will be required to produce nearly twice the amount of
commodities to pay his debt if the dollar returns to the 1913 value. The
more we pay while prices are high, the easier it will be.

Deflation of government after a war period is slower than deflation of
business, where curtailment is either prompt and effective or disaster
follows. There is room for further economy in the cost of the Federal
Government, but a co n of current expenditures with pre-war expenditures is
not able to the efficiency with which Government business is now being
done. The expenditures of 19161 the last pre-war year, were $742,000,000,
and in 1925 over $3,500,000,000, or nearly five times as great. If we
subtract expenditures for debt retirements and interest, veterans' relief,
increase of pensions, and other special outlays, consisting of refunds,
trust investments, and like charges, we find that the general expenditures
of the Government in 1925 were slightly more than twice as large as in
1916.

As prices in 1925 were approximately 40 per cent higher than in 1916, the
cost of the same Government must also have increased. But the Government is
not 'the same. It is more expensive to collect the much greater revenue
necessary and to administer our great debt. We have given enlarged and
improved services to agriculture and commerce. Above all, America has grown
in population and wealth. Government expenditures must always share in

this growth. Taking into account the factors I have mentioned, I believe
that present Federal expenses are not far out of line with pre-war
expenses. We have nearly accomplished the deflation.

This does not mean that further economies will not come. As we reduce our
debt our interest charges decline. There are many details yet to correct.
The real improvement, however, must come not from additional curtailment of
expenses, but by a more intelligent, more ordered spending. Our economy
must be constructive. While we should avoid as far as possible increases in
permanent current expenditures, oftentimes a capital outlay like internal
improvements will result in actual constructive saving. That is economy in
its best sense. It is an avoidance of waste that there may be the means for
an outlay to-day which will bring larger returns to-morrow. We should
constantly engage in scientific studies of our future requirements and
adopt an orderly program for their service. Economy is the method by which
we prepare to-day to afford the improvements of to-morrow.

A mere policy of economy without any instrumentalities for putting it into
operation would be very ineffective. The Congress has wisely set up the
Bureau of the Budget to investigate and inform the President what
recommendations he ought to make for current appropriations. This gives a
centralized authority where a general and comprehensive understanding can
be reached of the sources of income and the most equitable distribution of
expenditures. How well it has worked is indicated by the fact that the
departmental estimates for 1922, before the budget law, were $4,068,000,000
while the Budget estimates for 1927 are $3,156,000,000. This latter figure
shows the reductions in departmental estimates for the coming year made
possible by the operation of the Budget system that the Congress has
provided.

But it is evidently not enough to have care in making appropriations
without any restraint upon expenditure. The Congress has provided that
check by establishing the office of Comptroller General.

The purpose of maintaining the Budget Director and the Comptroller General
is to secure economy and efficiency in Government expenditure. No better
method has been devised for the accomplishment of that end. These offices
can not be administered in all the various details without making some
errors both of fact and of judgment. But the important consideration
remains that these are the instrumentalities of the Congress and that no
other plan has ever been adopted which was so successful in promoting
economy and efficiency. The Congress has absolute authority over the
appropriations and is free to exercise its judgment, as the evidence may
warrant, in increasing or decreasing budget recommendations. But it ought
to resist every effort to weaken or break down this most beneficial system
of supervising appropriations and expenditures. Without it all the claim of
economy would be a mere pretense. TAXATION

The purpose of reducing expenditures is to secure a reduction in taxes.
That purpose is about to be realized. With commendable promptness the Ways
and Means Committee of the House has undertaken in advance of the meeting
of the Congress to frame a revenue act. As the bill has proceeded through
the committee it has taken on a nonpartisan character, and both Republicans
and Democrats have joined in a measure which embodies many sound principles
of tax reform. The bill will correct substantially the economic defects
injected into the revenue act of 1924, as well as many which have remained
as war-time legacies. In its present form it should provide sufficient
revenue for the Government.

The excessive surtaxes have been reduced, estate tax rates arv restored to
more reasonable figures, with every prospect of withdrawing from the field
when the States have had the opportunity to correct the abuses in their own
inheritance tax laws, the gift tax and publicity section are to be repealed
many miscellaneous taxes are lowered or abandoned, and the Board of Tax
Appeals and the administrative features of the law are improved and
strengthened. I approve of the bill in principle. In so far as income-tax
exemptions are concerned, it seems, to me the committee has gone as far as
it is Safe to go and somewhat further than I should have gone. Any further
extension along these lines would, in my opinion, impair tile integrity of
our income-tax system.

I am advised that the bill will. be through the House by Christmas. For
this prompt action the country call thank the good sense of the Ways and
Means Committee in framing an economic measure upon economic
considerations. If this attitude continues to be reflected through the
Congress, the taxpayer will have his relief by the time his March 15th
installment of income taxes is due. Nonpartisan effort means certain, quick
action. Determination of a revenue law definitely, promptly and solely as a
revenue law, is one of the greatest gifts a legislature can bestow upon its
constituents. I commend the example of file Ways and Means Committee. If
followed, it will place sound legislation upon the books in time to give
the taxpayers the full benefit of tax reduction next year. This means that
the bill should reach me prior to March 15.

All these economic results are being sought not to benefit the rich, but to
benefit the people. They are for the purpose of encouraging industry in
order that employment may be plentiful. They seek to make business good in
order that wages may be good. They encourage prosperity in order that
poverty may be banished from the home. They, seek to lay the foundation
which, through increased production, may, give the people a more bountiful
supply of the necessaries of life, afford more leisure for the improvement
of the mind, the appreciation of the arts of music and literature,
sculpture and painting, and the beneficial enjoyment of outdoor sports and
recreation, enlarge the resources which minister to charity and by aU these
means attempting to strengthen the spiritual life of the Nation.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

The policy of our foreign relations, casting aside any suggestion of force,
rests solely on the foundation of peace, good will, and good works. We have
sought, in our intercourse with other nations, better understandings
through conference and exchange of views its befits beings endowed with
reason. The results have been the gradual elimination of disputes, the
settlement of controversies, and the establishment of a firmer friendship
between America and the rest of the world that has ever existed tit any
previous time.

The example of this attitude has not been without its influence upon other
countries. Acting upon it, an adjustment was made of the difficult problem
of reparations. This was the second step toward peace in Europe. It paved
the way for the agreements which were drawn tip at the Locarno Conference.
When ratified, these will represent the third step toward peace. While they
do not of themselves provide an economic rehabilitation, which is necessary
for the progress of Europe, by strengthening the guarantees of peace they
diminish the need for great armaments. If the energy which now goes into
military effort is transferred to productive endeavor it will greatly
assist economic progress.

The Locarno agreements were made by the, European countries directly
interested without ;any formal intervention of America, although on July 3
1 publicly advocated such agreements in an address made in Massachusetts.
We have consistently refrained from intervening except when our help has
been sought and we have felt it could be effectively given, as in the
settlement of reparations and the London Conference. These recent Locarno
agreements represent the success of this policy which we have been
insisting ought to be adopted, of having European countries settle their
own political problems without involving this country. This beginning seems
to demonstrate that this policy is sound. It is exceedingly gratifying to
observe this progress, both in its method and in its result promises so
much that is beneficial to the world.

When these agreements are finally adopted, they will provide guarantees of
peace that make the present prime reliance upon force in some parts of
Europe very much less necessary. The natural corollary to these treaties
should be further international contracts for the limitation of armaments.
This work was successfully begun at the Washington Conference. Nothing was
done at that time concerning land forces because of European objection. Our
standing army has been reduced to around 118,000, about the necessary
police force for 115,000,000 people. We are not proposing to increase it,
nor is it supposable that any foreign country looks with the slightest
misapprehension upon our land forces. They do not menace anybody. They are
rather a protection to everybody.

The question of disarming upon land is so peculiarly European in its
practical aspects that our country would look with particular gratitude
upon any action which those countries might take to reduce their own
military forces. This is in accordance with our policy of not intervening
unless the European powers are unable to agree and make request for our
assistance. Whenever they are able to agree of their own accord it is
especially gratifying to its, and such agreements may be sure of our
sympathetic support.

It seems clear that it is the reduction of armies rather than of navies
that is of the first importance to the world at the present time. We shall
look with great satisfaction upon that effort and give it our approbation
and encouragement. If that can be settled, we may more easily consider
further reduction and limitation of naval armaments. For that purpose our
country has constantly through its Executive, and through repeated acts of
Congress, indicated its willingness to call such a conference. Under
congressional sanction it would seem to be wise to participate in any
conference of the great powers for naval limitation of armament proposed
upon such conditions that it would hold a fair promise of being effective.
The general policy of our country is for disarmament, and it ought not to
hesitate to adopt any practical plan that might reasonably be expected to
succeed. But it would not care to attend a conference which from its
location or constituency would in all probability prove futile.

In the further pursuit, of strengthening the bonds of peace and good will
we have joined with other nations in an international conference held at
Geneva and signed an agreement which will be laid before the Senate for
ratification providing suitable measures for control and for publicity in
international trade in arms, ammunition. and implements of war, and also
executed a protocol providing for a prohibition of the use of poison gas in
war, in accordance with the principles of Article 5 of the treaty relating
thereto signed at tile Washington Conference. We are supporting the Pan
American efforts that are being made toward the codification of
international. law, and looking with sympathy oil the investigations
conducted under philanthropic auspices of the proposal to agreements
outlawing war. In accordance with promises made at the Washington
Conference, we have urged the calling of and are now represented at the
Chinese Customs Conference and on the Commission on Extraterritoriality,
where it will be our policy so far as possible to meet the, aspirations of
China in all ways consistent with the interests of the countries involved.

COURT OF INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE

Pending before the Senate for nearly three years is the proposal to adhere
to the protocol establishing the Permanent Court of International Justice.
A well-established line of precedents mark America's effort to effect the
establishment of it court of this nature.. We took a leading part in laying
the foundation on which it rests in the establishment of The Hague Court of
Arbitration. It is that tribunal which nominates the judges who are elected
by tile Council and Assembly of the League of Nations.

The proposal submitted to the Senate was made dependent upon four
conditions, the first of which is that by supporting the court we do not
assume any obligations under the league; second, that we may participate
upon an equality with other States in the election of judges; third, that
the Congress shall determine what part of the expenses we shall bear;
fourth, that the statute creating tile court shall not be amended without
out consent; and to these I have proposed an additional condition to the
effect that we are not to be bound by advisory opinions rendered without
our consent.

The court appears to be independent of the league. It is true tile judges
are elected by tile Assembly and Council, but they are nominated by the
Court of Arbitration, which we assisted to create and of which we are a
part. The court was created by it statute, so-called, which is really a
treaty made among some forty-eight different countries, that might properly
be called a constitution of the court. This statute provides a method by
which the judges are chosen ' so that when the Court of Arbitration
nominates them and the Assembly and Council of the League elect them, they
are not acting as instruments of the Court of Arbitration or instruments of
the league, but as instruments of the statute.

This will be even more apparent if our representatives sit with the members
of the council and assembly in electing the judges. It is true they are
paid through the league though not by the league, but by the countries
which are members of the league and by our country if we accept the
protocol. The judges are paid by the league only in the same sense that it
could be said United States judges are paid by the Congress. The court
derives all its authority from the statute and is so completely independent
of the league that it could go on functioning if the league were disbanded,
at least until the terms of the judges expired.

The most careful provisions are made in the statute as to the
qualifications of judges. Those who make the nominations are recommended to
consult with their highest court of justice, their law schools and
academies. The judges must be persons of high moral character, qualified to
hold the highest judicial offices in that country, or be jurisconsults of
recognized competence in international law. It must be assumed that these
requirements will continue to be carefully met, and with America joining
the countries already concerned it is difficult to comprehend how human
ingenuity could better provide for the establishment of a court which would
maintain its independence. It has to be recognized that independence is to
a considerable extent a matter of ability, character, and personality. Some
effort was made in the early beginnings to interfere with the independence
of our Supreme Court. It did not succeed because of the quality of the men
who made up that tribunal.

It does not seem that the authority to give advisory opinions interferes
with the independence of the court. Advisory opinions in and of themselves
are not harmful, but may be used in such a way as to be very beneficial
because they undertake to prevent injury rather than merely afford a remedy
after the injury has been done. As a principle that only implies that the
court shall function when proper application is made to it. Deciding the
question involved upon issues submitted for an advisory opinion does not
differ materially from deciding the question involved upon issues submitted
by contending parties. Up to the present time the court has given an
advisory opinion when it judged it had jurisdiction, and refused to give
one when it judged it did not have jurisdiction. Nothing in the work of the
court has yet been an indication that this is an impairment of its
independence or that its practice differs materially from the giving of
like opinions under the authority of the constitutions of several of our
States.

No provision of the statute seems to me to give this court any authority to
be a political rather than a judicial court. We have brought cases in this
country before our courts which, when they have been adjudged to be
political, have been thereby dismissed. It is not improbable that political
questions will be submitted to this court, but again up to the present time
the court has refused to pass on political questions and our support would
undoubtedly have a tendency to strengthen it in that refusal.

We are not proposing to subject ourselves to any compulsory jurisdiction.
If we support the court, we can never be obliged to submit any case which
involves our interests for its decision. Our appearance before it would
always be voluntary, for the purpose of presenting a case which we had
agreed might be presented. There is

no more danger that others might bring cases before the court involving our
interests which we did not wish to have brought, after we have adhered, and
probably not so much, than there would be of bringing such cases if we do
not adhere. I think that we would have the same legal or moral right to
disregard such a finding in the one case that we would in the other.

If we are going to support any court, it will not be one that we have set
tip alone or which reflects only our ideals. Other nations have their
customs and their institutions, their thoughts and their methods of life.
If a court is going to be international, its composition will have to yield
to what is good in all these various elements. Neither will it be possible
to support a court which is exactly perfect, or under which we assume
absolutely no obligations. If we are seeking that opportunity, we might as
well declare that we are opposed to supporting any court. If any agreement
is made, it will be because it undertakes to set up a tribunal which can do
some of the things that other nations wish to have done. We shall not find
ourselves bearing a disproportionate share of the world's burdens by our
adherence, and we may as well remember that there is absolutely no escape
for our country from bearing its share of the world's burdens in any case.
We shall do far better service to ourselves and to others if we admit this
and discharge our duties voluntarily, than if we deny it and are forced to
meet the same obligations unwillingly

It is difficult to imagine anything that would be more helpful to the world
than stability, tranquility and international justice. We may say that we
are contributing to these factors independently, but others less
fortunately located do not and can not make a like contribution except
through mutual cooperation. The old balance of power, mutual alliances, and
great military forces were not brought bout by any mutual dislike for
independence, but resulted from the domination of circumstances. Ultimately
they were forced on us. Like all others engaged in the war whatever we said
as a matter of fact we joined an alliance, we became a military power, we
impaired our independence. We have more at stake than any one else in
avoiding a repetition of that calamity. Wars do not, spring into existence.
They arise from small incidents and trifling irritations which can be
adjusted by an international court. We can contribute greatly to the
advancement of our ideals by joining with other nations in maintaining such
a tribunal.

FOREIGN DEBTS

Gradually, settlements have been made which provide for the liquidation of
debts due to our Government from foreign governments. Those made with Great
Britain, Finland, Hungary Lithuania, and Poland have already been approved
by the Congress. Since the adjournment, further agreements have been
entered into with Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Latvia, Estonia, Italy, and
Rumania. These 11 nation,,, which have already made settlements, represent
$6,419,528,641 of the original principal of the loans. The principal sums
without interest, still pending, are the debt of France, of $3,340,000,000;
Greece, $15,000,000; Yugoslavia, $.51,000,000; Liberia, $26,000; Russia,
$192,000,000, which those at present in control have undertaken, openly to
repudiate; Nicaragua, $84,000, which is being paid currently; and Austria,
$24,000,000, on which by act of Congress a moratorium of 20 years has been
granted. The only remaining sum is $12,000,000, due from Armenia, which has
now ceased to exist as an independent nation.

In accordance with the settlements made, the amount of principal and
interest which is to be paid to the United States under these agreements
aggregate $15,200,688,253.93. It is obvious that the remaining settlements,
which will undoubtedly be made, will bring this sum up to an amount which
will more than equal the principal due on our present national debt. While
these settlements are very large in the aggregate, it has been felt that
the terms granted were in all cases very generous. They impose no undue
burden and are mutually beneficial in the observance of international faith
and the improvement of international credit.

Every reasonable effort will be made to secure agreements for liquidation
with the remaining countries, whenever they are in such condition that they
can be made. Those which have already been negotiated under the bipartisan
commission established by the Congress have been made only after the most
thoroughgoing and painstaking investigation, continued for a long time
before meeting with the representatives of the countries concerned. It is
believed that they represent in each instance the best that can be done and
the wisest settlement that can be secured. One very important result is the
stabilization of foreign currency, making exchange assist rather than
embarrass our trade. Wherever sacrifices have been made of money, it will
be more than amply returned in better understanding and friendship, while
in so far as these adjustments will contribute to the financial stability
of the debtor countries, to their good order, prosperity, and progress,
they represent hope of improved trade relations and mutual contributions to
the civilization of the world.

ALIEN PROBLEM

Negotiations are progressing among the interested parties in relation to
the final distribution of the assets in the hands of the Alien Property
Custodian. Our Government and people are interested as creditors; the
German Government and people are interested as debtors and owners of the
seized property. Pending the outcome of these negotiations, I do not
recommend any affirmative legislation. For the present we should continue
in possession of this property which we hold as security for the settlement
of claims due to our people and our Government. IMMIGRATION

While not enough time has elapsed to afford a conclusive demonstration,
such results as have been secured indicate that our immigration law is on
the whole beneficial. It is undoubtedly a protection to the wage earners of
this country. The situation should however, be carefully surveyed, in order
to ascertain whether it is working a' needless hardship upon our own
inhabitants. If it deprives them of the comfort and society of those bound
to them by close family ties, such modifications should be adopted as will
afford relief, always in accordance with the principle that our Government
owes its first duty to our own people and that no alien, inhabitant of
another country, has any legal rights whatever under our Constitution and
laws. It is only through treaty, or through residence here that such rights
accrue. But we should not, however, be forgetful of the obligations of a
common humanity.

While our country numbers among its best citizens many of those of foreign
birth, yet those who now enter in violation of our laws bi that very act
thereby place themselves in a class of undesirables. T investigation
reveals that any considerable number are coming here in defiance of our
immigration restrictions, it will undoubtedly create the necessity for the
registration of all aliens. We ought to have no prejudice against an alien
because lie is an alien. The standard which we apply to our inhabitants is
that of manhood, not place of birth. Restrictive immigration is to a large
degree for economic purposes. It is applied in order that we may not have a
larger annual increment of good people within our borders than we can weave
into our economic fabric in such a way as to supply their needs without
undue injury to ourselves.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Never before in time of peace has our country maintained so large and
effective a military force. as it now has. The Army, Navy, Marine Corps,
National Guard, and Organized Reserves represent a strength of about
558,400 men. These forces are well trained, well equipped, and high in
morale.

A sound selective service act giving broad authority for the mobilization
in time of peril of all the resources of the country, both persons and
materials, is needed to perfect our defense policy in accordance with our
ideals of equality. The provision for more suitable housing to be paid for
out of funds derived from the sale of excess lands, pending before the last
Congress, ought to be brought forward and passed. Reasonable replacements
ought to be made to maintain a sufficient ammunition reserve.

The Navy has the full treaty tonnage of capital ships. Work is going
forward in modernizing the older ones, building aircraft carriers,
additional fleet submarines, and fast scout cruisers, but we are carefully
avoiding anything that might be construed as a competition in armaments
with other nations. The joint Army and Navy maneuvers at Hawaii, followed
by the cruise of a full Battle Fleet to Australia and New Zealand, were
successfully carried out. These demonstrations revealed a most satisfactory
condition of the ships and the men engaged.

Last year at my suggestion the General Board of the Navy made an
investigation and report on the relation of aircraft to warships. As a
result authorizations and appropriations were made for more scout cruisers
and fleet submarines and for completing aircraft carriers and equipping
them with necessary planes. Additional training in aviation was begun at
the Military and Naval Academies. A method of coordination and cooperation
of the Army and Navy and the principal aircraft builders is being
perfected. At the suggestion of the Secretaries of War and Navy I appointed
a special board to make a further study of the problem of aircraft.

The report of the Air Board ought to be reassuring to the country,
gratifying to the service and satisfactory to the Congress. It is
thoroughly complete and represents the mature thought of the best talent in
the country. No radical change in organization of the service seems
necessary. The Departments of War, Navy, and Commerce should each be
provided with an additional assistant secretary, not necessarily with
statutory duties but who would be available under the direction of the
Secretary to give especial attention to air navigation. We must have an air
strength worthy of America. Provision should be made for two additional
brigadier generals for the Army Air Service. Temporary rank corresponding
to their duties should be awarded to active flying officers in both Army
and Navy.

Aviation is of great importance both for national defense and commercial
development. We ought to proceed in its improvement by the necessary
experiment and investigation. Our country is not behind in this art. It has
made records for speed and for the excellence of its planes. It ought to go
on maintaining its manufacturing plants capable of rapid production, giving
national assistance to tile la in out of airways, equipping itself with a
moderate number of planes and keeping an air force trained to the highest
efficiency.

While I am a thorough believer in national defense and entirely committed
to the policy of adequate preparation, I am just as thoroughly opposed to
instigating or participating in a policy of competitive armaments. Nor does
preparation mean a policy of militarizing. Our people and industries are
solicitous for the cause of 0111, country, and have great respect for the
Army and Navy and foil the uniform worn by the men who stand ready at all
times for our protection to encounter the dangers and perils necessary to
military service, but all of these activities are to be taken not in behalf
of aggression but in behalf of peace. They are the instruments by which we
undertake to do our part to promote good will and support stability among
all peoples. VETERANS

If any one desires to estimate the esteem in which the veterans of America
are held by their fellow citizens, it is but necessary to remember that the
current budget calls for an expenditure of about $650,000.000 in their
behalf. This is nearly the amount of the total cost of the National
Government, exclusive of the post office, before we entered the last war.

At the two previous sessions of Congress legislation affecting veterans'
relief was enacted and the law liberalized. This legislation brought into
being a number of new provisions tending more nearly to meet the needs of
our veterans, as well as afford the necessary authority to perfect the
administration of these laws.

Experience with the new legislation so far has clearly demonstrated its
constructive nature. It has increased the benefits received by many and bas
made eligible for benefits many others. Direct disbursements to the veteran
or his dependents exceeding $21,000,000 have resulted, which otherwise
would not have been made. The degree of utilization of our hospitals has
increased through making facilities available to the incapacitated veteran
regardless of service origin of the disability. This new legislation also
has brought about a marked improvement of service to the veteran.

The organizations of ex-service men have proposed additional legislative
changes which you will consider, but until the new law and the
modifications made at the last session of Congress are given a more
thorough test further changes in the basic law should be few and made only
after careful though sympathetic consideration.

The principal work now before the Veterans' Bureau is the perfection of its
organization and further improvements in service. Some minor legislative
changes are deemed necessary to enable the bureau to retain that high grade
of professional talent essential in handling the problems of the bureau.
Such changes as tend toward the improvement of service and the carrying
forward to completion of the hospital construction program are recommended
for the consideration of the proper committees of Congress.

With the enormous outlay that is now being made in behalf of the veterans
and their dependents, with a tremendous war debt still requiring great
annual expenditure, with the still high rate of taxation, while. every
provision should be made for the relief of the disabled and the necessary
care of dependents, the Congress may well consider whether the financial
condition of the Government is not such that further bounty through the
enlargement of general pensions and other emoluments ought not to be
postponed. AGRICULTURE

No doubt the position of agriculture as a whole has very much improved
since the depression of three and four years ago. But there are many
localities and many groups of individuals, apparently through no fault of
their own, sometimes due to climatic conditions and sometimes to the
prevailing price of a certain crop, still in a distressing condition. This
is probably temporary, but it is none the less acute. National Government
agencies, the Departments of Agriculture and Commerce, the Farm Loan Board,
the intermediate credit banks, and the Federal Reserve Board are all
cooperating to be of assistance and relief. On the other hand, there are
localities and individuals who have had one of their most prosperous years.
The general price level is fair, but here again there are exceptions both
ways, some items being poor while others are excellent. In spite of a
lessened production the farm income for this year will be about the same as
last year and much above the three preceding years.

Agriculture is a very complex industry. It does not consist of one problem,
but of several. They can not be solved at one stroke. They have to be met
in different ways, and small gains are not to be despised.

It has appeared from all the investigations that I have been able to make
that the farmers as a whole are determined to maintain the independence of
their business., They do not wish to have meddling on the part of the
Government or to be placed under the inevitable restrictions involved in
any system of direct or indirect price-fixing, which would result from
permitting the Government to operate in the agricultural markets. They are
showing a very commendable skill in organizing themselves to transact their
own business through cooperative. marketing, which will this year turn over
about $2,500,000,000, or nearly one-fifth of the total agricultural
business. In this they are receiving help from the Government. The
Department of Agriculture should be strengthened in this facility, in order
to be able to respond when these marketing associations 'want help. While
it ought not to undertake undue regulation, it should be equipped to give
prompt information on crop prospects, supply, demand, current receipts,
imports, exports, and prices.

A bill embodying these principles, which has been drafted under the advice
and with the approval of substantially all the leaders and managers in the
cooperative movement, will be presented to the Congress for its enactment.
Legislation should also be considered to provide for leasing the
unappropriated public domain for grazing purposes and adopting a uniform
policy relative to grazing on the public lands and in the national
forests.

A more intimate relation should be established between agriculture and the
other business activities of the Nation. They are mutually dependent and
can each advance their own prosperity most by advancing the prosperity of
the other. Meantime the Government will continue those activities which
have resulted in an unprecedented amount of legislation and the pouring out
of great sums of money during the last five years. The work for good roads,
better land and water transportation, increased support for agricultural
education, extension of credit facilities through the Farm Loan Boards and
the intermediate credit banks, the encouragement of orderly marketing and a
repression of wasteful speculation, will all be continued.

Following every other depression, after a short period the price of farm
produce has taken and maintained the lead in the advance. This advance had
reached a climax before the war. Everyone will recall the discussion that
went on for four or five years prior to 1914 concerning the high cost of
living. This history is apparently beginning to repeat itself. While
wholesale prices of other commodities have been declining, farm prices have
been increasing. There is every reason to suppose that a new era in
agricultural prosperity lies just before us, which will probably be
unprecedented.

MUSCLE SHOALS

The problem of Muscle Shoals seems to me to have assumed a place all out of
proportion with its real importance. It probably does not represent in
market value much more than a first-class battleship, yet it has been
discussed in the Congress over a period of years and for months at a time.
It ought to be developed for the production of nitrates primarily, and
incidentally for power purposes. This would serve defensive, agricultural,
and industrial purposes. I am in favor of disposing of this property to
meet these purposes. The findings of the special commission will be
transmitted to the Congress for their information. I am convinced that the
best possible disposition can be made by direct authorization of the
Congress. As a means of negotiation I recommend the immediate appointment
of a small joint special committee chosen from the appropriate general
standing committees of the House and Senate to receive bids, which when
made should be reported with recommendations as to acceptance, upon which a
law should be enacted, effecting a sale to the highest bidder who will
agree to carry out these purposes.

If anything were needed to demonstrate the almost utter incapacity of the
National Government to deal directly with an industrial and commercial
problem, it has been provided by our experience with this property. We have
expended vast fortunes, we have taxed everybody, but we are unable to
secure results, which benefit anybody. This property ought, to be
transferred to private management under conditions which will dedicate it
to the public purpose for which it was conceived. RECLAMATION

The National Government is committed to a policy of reclamation and
irrigation which it desires to establish on a sound basis and continue in
the interest of the localities concerned. Exhaustive studies have recently
been made of Federal reclamation, which have resulted in improving the
projects and adjusting many difficulties. About one third of the projects
is in good financial condition, another third can probably be made
profitable, while the other third is under unfavorable conditions. The
Congress has already provided for a survey which will soon be embodied in a
report. That ought to suggest a method of relief which will make
unnecessary further appeals to the Congress. Unless this can be done,
Federal reclamation will be considerably retarded. With the greatly
increased cost of construction and operation, it has become necessary to
plan in advance, by community organization and selective agriculture,
methods sufficient to repay these increasing outlays.

The human and economic interests of the farmer citizens suggest that the
States should be required to exert some effort and assume some
responsibility, especially in the intimate, detailed, and difficult work of
securing settlers and developing farms which directly profit them, but only
indirectly and remotely can reimburse the 'Nation. It is believed that the
Federal Government should continue to be the agency for planning and
constructing the great undertakings needed to regulate and bring into use
the rivers the West, many of which are interstate in character, but the
detailed work of creating agricultural communities and a rural civilization
on the land made ready for reclamation ought to be either transferred to
the State 'in its entirety or made a cooperative effort of the State and
Federal Government. SHIPPING

The maintenance of a merchant marine is of the utmost importance for
national defense and the service of our commerce. We have a large number of
ships engaged in that service. We also have a surplus supply, costly to
care for, which ought to be sold. All the investigations that have been
made under my direction, and those which have been prosecuted
independently, have reached the conclusion that the fleet should be under
the direct control of a single executive head, while the Shipping Board
should exercise its judicial and regulatory functions in Accordance with
its original conception. The report of Henry G. Dalton, a business man of
broad experience, with a knowledge of shipping, made to me after careful
investigation, will be transmitted for the information of the Congress, the
studies pursued under the direction of the United States Chamber of
Commerce will also be accessible, and added to these will be the report of
the special committee of the House.

I do not advocate the elimination of regional considerations, but it has
become apparent that without centralized executive action the management of
this great business, like the management of any other great business, will
flounder in incapacity and languish under a division of council. A plain
and unmistakable reassertion of this principle of unified control, which I
have always been advised was the intention of the Congress to apply, is
necessary to increase the efficiency of our merchant fleet. COAL

The perennial conflict in the coal industry is still going on to the great
detriment of the wage earners, the owners, and especially to the public.
With deposits of coal in this country capable of supplying its needs for
hundreds of years, inability to manage and control this great resource for
the benefit of all concerned is very close to a national economic failure.
It has been the subject of repeated investigation and reiterated
recommendation. Yet the industry seems never to have accepted modern
methods of adjusting differences between employers and employees. The
industry could serve the public much better and become subject to a much
more effective method of control if regional consolidations and more
freedom in the formation of marketing associations, under the supervision
of the Department of Commerce, were permitted.

At the present time the National Government has little or no authority to
deal with this vital necessity of the life of the country. It has permitted
itself to remain so powerless that its only attitude must be humble
supplication. Authority should be lodged with the President and the
Departments of Commerce and Labor, giving them power to deal with an
emergency. They should be able to appoint temporary boards with authority
to call for witnesses and documents, conciliate differences, encourage
arbitration, and in case of threatened scarcity exercise control over
distribution. Making the facts public under these circumstances through a
statement from an authoritative source would be of great public benefit.
The report of the last coal commission should be brought forward,
reconsidered, and acted upon. PROHIBITION

Under the orderly processes of our fundamental institutions the
Constitution was lately amended providing for national prohibition. The
Congress passed an act for its enforcement, and similar acts have been
provided by most of the States. It is the law of the land. It is the duty
of all who come under its, jurisdiction to observe the spirit of that law,
and it is the duty of the Department of Justice and the Treasury Department
to enforce it. Action to prevent smuggling, illegal transportation in
interstate commerce, abuse in the use of permits, and existence of sources
of supply for illegal traffic is almost entirely imposed upon the Federal
Government.

Through treaties with foreign governments and increased activities of the
Coast Guard, revenue agents, district attorneys and enforcement agents
effort is being made to prevent these violations. But the Constitution also
puts a concurrent duty on the States. We need their active and energetic
cooperation, the vigilant action of their police, and the jurisdiction of
their courts to assist in enforcement. I request of the people observance,
of the public officers continuing." efforts for enforcement, and of the
Congress favorable action on the budget recommendation for the prosecution
of this work.

WATERWAY DEVELOPMENT

For many years our country has been employed in plans and M for the
development of our intracoastal and inland waterways. This work along our
coast is an important adjunct to our commerce. It will be carried on,
together with the further opening up of our harbors, as our resources
permit. The Government made an agreement during the war to take over the
Cape Cod Canal, under which the owners made valuable concessions. This
pledged faith of the Government ought to be redeemed.

Two other main fields are under consideration. One is the Great Lakes and
St. Lawrence, including the Erie Canal. This includes stabilizing the lake
level, and is both a waterway and power project. A joint commission of the
United States and Canada is working on plans and surveys which will not be
completed until next April. No final determination can be made, apparently,
except under treaty as to the participation of both countries. The other is
the Mississippi River stem. This is almost entirely devoted to navigation.
Work on the Ohio River will be completed in about three years. A modern
channel connecting Chicago, New Orleans, Kansas City, and Pittsburgh should
be laid out and work on the tributaries prosecuted. Some work is being done
of a preparatory nature along the Missouri, and large expenditures are
being made yearly in the lower reaches of the Mississippi and its
tributaries which contribute both to flood control and navigation.
Preliminary measures are being" taken on tile Colorado River project, which
is exceedingly important for flood control, irrigation, power development,
and water supply to the area concerned. It would seem to be very doubtful,
however, whether it is practical to secure affirmative action of the
Congress, except under a Joint agreement of the several States.

The Government has already expended large sums upon scientific research and
engineering investigation in promotion of this Colorado River project. The
actual progress has been retarded for many years by differences among the
seven States in the basin over their relative water rights and among
different groups as to methods. In an attempt to settle the primary
difficulty of the water rights, Congress authorized the Colorado River
Commission which agreed on November 24, 1922, upon an interstate compact to
settle these rights, subject to the ratification of the State legislatures
and Congress. All seven States except Arizona at one time ratified, the
Arizona Legislature making certain reservations which failed to meet the
approval of the governor. Subsequently an attempt was made to establish the
compact upon a six-State basis, but in this case California imposed
reservations. There appears to be no division of opinion upon the major
principles of the compact, but difficulty in separating contentions to
methods of development from the discussion of it. It is imperative that
flood control be undertaken for California and Arizona. preparation made
for irrigation, for power, and for domestic water.

Some or all of these questions are combined in every proposed development.
The Federal Government is interested in some of these phases, State
governments and municipalities and irrigation districts in others, and
private corporations in still others. Because of all this difference of
view it is most desirable that Congress should consider the creation of
some agency that will be able to determine methods of improvement solely
upon economic and engineering facts, that would be authorized to negotiate
and settle, subject to the approval of Congress, the participation, rights,
and obligations of each group in any particular works. Only by some such
method can early construction be secured.

WATER POWER

Along with the development of navigation should go every possible
encouragement for the development of our water power. While steam. still
plays a dominant part, this is more and more becoming an era of
electricity. Once installed, the cost is moderate, has not tended greatly
to increase, and is entirely free from the unavoidable dirt and
disagreeable features attendant upon the burning of coal. Every facility
should be extended for the connection of the various units into a
superpower plant, capable at all times of a current increasing uniformity
over the entire system. RAILROADS

The railroads throughout the country are in a fair state of prosperity.
Their service is good and their supply of cars is abundant. Their condition
would be improved and the public better served by a system of
consolidations. I recommend that the Congress authorize such consolidations
tinder the supervision of the Interstate Commerce Commission, with power to
approve or disapprove when proposed parts are excluded or new parts added.
I am informed that the railroad managers and their employees have reached a
substantial agreement as to what legislation is necessary to regulate and
improve their relationship. Whenever they bring forward such proposals,
which seem sufficient also to protect the interests of the public, they
should be enacted into law.

It is gratifying to report that both the railroad managers and railroad
employees are providing boards for the mutual adjustment of differences in
harmony with the principles of conference, conciliation, and arbitration.
The solution of their problems ought to be an example to all other
industries. Those who ask the protections of civilization should be ready
to use the methods of civilization.

A strike in modern industry has many of the aspects of war in the modern
world. It injures labor and it injures capital. If the industry involved is
a basic one, it reduces the necessary economic surplus and, increasing the
cost of living, it injures the economic welfare and general comfort of the
whole people. It also involves a deeper cost. It tends to embitter and
divide the community into warring classes and thus weakens the unity and
power of our national life.

Labor can make no permanent gains at the cost of the general welfare. All
the victories won by organized labor in the past generation have been won
through the support of public opinion. The manifest inclination of the
managers and employees of the railroads to adopt a policy of action in
harmony with these principles marks a new epoch in our industrial life.

OUTLYING POSSESSIONS

The time has come for careful investigation of the expenditures and success
of the laws by which we have undertaken to administer our outlying
possessions. A very large amount of money is being expended for
administration in Alaska. It appears so far out of proportion to the number
of inhabitants and the amount of production as to indicate cause for
thorough investigation. Likewise consideration should be given to the
experience under the law which governs the Philippines. From such reports
as reach me there are indications that more authority should be given to
the Governor General, so that he will not be so dependent upon the local
legislative body to render effective our efforts to set an example of the,,
sound administration and good government, which is so necessary for the
preparation of the Philippine people for self-government under ultimate
independence. If they are to be trained in these arts, it is our duty to
provide for them the best that there is.

RETIREMENT OF JUDGES

The act of March 3, 1911, ought to be amended so that the term of years of
service of judges of any court of the United States requisite for
retirement with pay shall 6e computed to include not only continuous but
aggregate service.

MOTHERS' AID

The Government ought always to be alert on the side of the humanities. It
Ought to encourage provisions for economic justice for the defenseless. It
ought to extend its relief through its national and local agencies, as may
be appropriate in each case, to the suffering and the needy. It ought to be
charitable.

Although more than 40 of our States have enacted measures in aid of
motherhood, the District of Columbia is still without such a law. A
carefully considered bill will be presented, which ought to have most
thoughtful consideration in order that the Congress may adopt a measure
which will be hereafter a model for all parts of the Union.

CIVIL SERVICE

In 1883 the Congress passed the civil service act, which from a modest
beginning of 14,000 employees has grown until there are now 425,000 in the
classified service. This has removed the clerical force of the Nation from
the wasteful effects of the spoils system and made it more stable and
efficient. The time has come to consider classifying all postmasters,
collectors of customs, collectors of internal revenue, and prohibition
agents, by an act covering in those at present in office, except when
otherwise provided by Executive order.

The necessary statistics are now being gathered to form the basis of a
valuation of the civil service retirement fund based on current conditions
of the service. It is confidently expected that this valuation will be
completed in time to be made available to the Congress during the present
session. It will afford definite knowledge of existing, and future
liabilities under the present law and determination OF liabilities under
any proposed change in the present law. We should have this information
before creating further obligations for retirement annuities which will
become liabilities to be met in the future from the money of the taxpayer.

The classification act of 1923, with the subsequent legislative action
providing for adjustment of the compensation of field service positions,
has operated materially to improve employment conditions in the Federal
service. The administration of the act is in the hands of an impartial
board, functioning without the necessity of a direct appropriation. It
would be inadvisable at this time to place in other hands the
administration of this act.

FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION

The proper function of the Federal Trade Commission is to supervise and
correct those practices in commerce which are detrimental to fair
competition. In this it performs a useful function and should be continued
and supported. It was designed also to be a help to honest business. In my
message to the Sixty-eighth Congress I recommended that changes in the
procedure then existing be made. Since then the commission by its own
action has reformed its rules, giving greater speed and economy in the
disposal of its cases and full opportunity for those accused to be heard.
These changes are improvements and, if necessary, provision should be made
for their permanency. REORGANIZATION

No final action has yet been taken on the measure providing for the
reorganization of the various departments. I therefore suggest that this
measure, which will be of great benefit to the efficient and economical
administration of the business of the Government, be brought forward and
passed.

THE NEGRO

Nearly one-tenth of our population consists of the Negro race. The progress
which they have made in all the arts of civilization in the last 60 years
is almost beyond belief. Our country has no more loyal citizens. But they
do still need sympathy, kindness, and helpfulness. They need reassurance
that the requirements of the Government and society to deal out to them
even-handed justice will be met. They should be protected from all violence
and supported in the peaceable enjoyment of the fruits of their labor.
Those who do violence to them should be punished for their crimes. No other
course of action is worthy of the American people.

Our country has many elements in its population, many different modes of
thinking and living, all of which are striving in their own way to be loyal
to the high ideals worthy of the crown of American citizenship. It is
fundamental of our institutions that they seek to guarantee to all our
inhabitants the right to live their own lives under the protection of the
public law. This does not include any license to injure others materially,
physically, morally, to Incite revolution, or to violate the established
customs which have long bad the sanction of enlightened society.

But it does mean the full right to liberty and equality before the law
without distinction of race or creed. This condition can not be granted to
others, or enjoyed by ourselves, except by the application of the principle
of broadest tolerance. Bigotry is only another name for slavery. It reduces
to serfdom not only those against whom it is directed, but also those who
seek to apply it. An enlarged freedom can only be secured by the
application of the golden rule. No other utterance ever presented such a
practical rule of life. CONCLUSION

It is apparent that we are reaching into an era of great general
prosperity. It will continue only so long as we shall use it properly.
After all, there is but a fixed quantity of wealth in this country at any
fixed time. The only way that we can all secure more of it is to create
more. The element of time enters into production, If the people have
sufficient moderation and contentment to be willing to improve their
condition by the process of enlarging production, eliminating waste, and
distributing equitably, a prosperity almost without limit lies before its.
If the people are to be dominated by selfishness, seeking immediate riches
by nonproductive speculation and by wasteful quarreling over the returns
from industry, they will be confronted by the inevitable results of
depression and privation. If they will continue industrious and thrifty,
contented with fair wages and moderate profits, and the returns which
accrue from tile development of oar natural resources, our prosperity will
extend itself indefinitely.

In all your deliberations you should remember that the purpose of
legislation is to translate principles into action. It is an effort to have
our country be better by doing better. Because the thoughts and ways of
people are firmly fixed and not easily changed, the field within which
immediate improvement can be secured is very narrow. Legislation can
provide opportunity. Whether it is taken advantage of or not depends upon
the people themselves. The Government of the United States has been created
by the people. It is solely responsible to them. It will be most successful
if it is conducted solely for their benefit. All its efforts would be of
little avail unless they brought more justice, more enlightenment, more
happiness and prosperity into the home. This means an opportunity to
observe religion, secure education, and earn a living under a reign of law
and order. It is the growth and improvement of the material and spiritual
life of the Nation. We shall not be able to gain these ends merely by our
own action. If they come at all, it will be because we have been willing to
work in harmony with the abiding purpose of a Divine Providence.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 7, 1926

Members of the Congress:

In reporting to the Congress the state of the Union, I find it impossible
to characterize it other than one of general peace and prosperity. In some
quarters our diplomacy is vexed with difficult and as yet unsolved
problems, but nowhere are we met with armed conflict. If some occupations
and areas are not flourishing, in none does there remain any acute chronic
depression. What the country requires is not so much new policies as a
steady continuation of those which are already being crowned with such
abundant success. It can not be too often repeated that in common with all
the world we are engaged in liquidating the war.

In the present short session no great amount of new legislation is
possible, but in order to comprehend what is most desirable some survey of
our general situation is necessary. A large amount of time is consumed in
the passage of appropriation bills. If each Congress in its opening session
would make appropriations to continue for two years, very much time would
be saved which could either be devoted to a consideration of the general
needs of the country or would result in decreasing the work of legislation.
ECONOMY

Our present state of prosperity has been greatly promoted by three
important causes, one of which is economy, resulting in reduction and
reform in national taxation. Another is the elimination of many kinds of
waste. The third is a general raising of the standards of efficiency. This
combination has brought the perfectly astonishing result of a reduction in
the index price of commodities and an increase in the index rate of wages.
We have secured a lowering of the cost to produce and a raising of the
ability to consume. Prosperity resulting from these causes rests on the
securest of all foundations. It gathers strength from its own progress.

In promoting this progress the chief part which the National Government
plays lies in the field of economy. Whatever doubts may have been
entertained as to the necessity of this policy and the beneficial results
which would accrue from it to all the people of the Nation, its wisdom must
now be considered thoroughly demonstrated. It may not have appeared to be a
novel or perhaps brilliant conception, but it has turned out to be
preeminently sound. It has

not failed to work. It has surely brought results. It does not have to be
excused as a temporary expedient adopted as the lesser evil to remedy some
abuse, it is not. a palliative seeking to treat symptoms, but a major
operation for the, eradication at the source of a large number of social
diseases.

Nothing is easier than the expenditure of public money. It does not appear
to belong to anybody. The temptation is overwhelming to bestow it on
somebody. But the results of extravagance are ruinous. The property of the
country, like the freedom of the country, belongs to the people of the
country. They have not empowered their Government to take a dollar of it
except for a necessary public purpose. But if the Constitution conferred
such right, sound economics would forbid it. Nothing is more, destructive
of the progress of the Nation than government extravagance. It means an
increase in the burden of taxation, dissipation of the returns from
enterprise, a decrease in the real value of wages, with ultimate stagnation
and decay. The whole theory of our institutions is based on the liberty and
independence of the individual. He is dependent on himself for support and
therefore entitled to the rewards of his own industry. He is not to be
deprived of what he earns that others may be benefited by what they do not
earn. What lie saves through his private effort is not to be wasted by
Government extravagance.

Our national activities have become so vast that it is necessary to
scrutinize each item of public expenditure if we are to apply the principle
of economy. At the last session we made an immediate increase in the annual
budget of more than $100,000,000 in benefits conferred on the veterans of
three wars, public buildings, and river and harbor improvement. Many
projects are being broached requiring further large outlays. I am convinced
that it would be greatly for the welfare of the country if we avoid at the
present session all commitments except those of the most pressing nature.
From a reduction of the debt and taxes will accrue a wider benefit to all
the people of this country than from embarking on any new enterprise. When
our war debt is decreased we shall have resources for expansion. Until that
is accomplished we should confine ourselves to expenditures of the most
urgent necessity.

The Department of Commerce has performed a most important function in
making plans and securing support of all kinds of national enterprise for
the elimination of waste. Efficiency has been greatly promoted through good
management and the constantly increasing cooperation of the wage earners
throughout the whole realm of private business. It is my opinion that this
whole development has been predicated on the foundation of a protective
tariff.

TAX REDUCTION

As a result of economy of administration by the Executive and of
appropriation by the Congress, the end of this fiscal year will leave a
surplus in the Treasury estimated at $383,000,000. Unless otherwise
ordered, such surplus is used for the retirement of the war debt. A bond
which can be retired today for 100 cents will cost the, people 104 1/4
cents to retire a year from now. While I favor a speedy reduction of the
debt as already required by law and in accordance with the promises made to
the holders of our Liberty bonds when they were issued, there is no reason
why a balanced portion of surplus revenue should not be applied to a
reduction of taxation. It can not be repeated too often that the enormous
revenues of this Nation could not be collected without becoming a charge on
all the people whether or not they directly pay taxes. Everyone who is
paying or the bare necessities of fool and shelter and clothing, without
considering the better things of life, is indirectly paying a national tax.
The nearly 20,000,000 owners of securities, the additional scores of
millions of holders of insurance policies and depositors in savings banks,
are all paying a national tax. Millions of individuals and corporations are
making a direct contribution to the National Treasury which runs from 11/2
to 25 per cent of their income, besides a number of special requirements,
like automobile and admission taxes. Whenever the state of the Treasury
will permit, I believe in a reduction of taxation. I think the taxpayers
are entitled to it. But I am not advocating tax reduction merely for the
benefit of the taxpayer; I am advocating it for the benefit of the
country.

If it appeared feasible, I should welcome permanent tax reduction at this
time. The estimated surplus, however, for June 30, 1928, is not much larger
than is required in a going business of nearly $4,000,000,000. We have had
but a few months' experience under the present revenue act and shall need
to know what is developed by the returns of income produced under it, which
are not required t o be made until about the time this session terminates,
and what the economic probabilities of the country are in the latter part
of 1927, before we can reach any justifiable conclusion as to permanent tax
reduction. Moreover the present surplus results from many nonrecurrent
items. Meantime, it is possible to grant some real relief by a simple
measure making reductions in the payments which accrue on the 15th of March
and June, 1927. 1 am very strongly of the conviction that this is so much a
purely business matter that it ought not to be dealt with in a partisan
spirit. The Congress has already set the notable example of treating tax
problems without much reference to party, which might well be continued.
What I desire to advocate most earnestly is relief for the country from
unnecessary tax burdens. We can not secure that if we stop to engage in a
partisan controversy. As I do not think any change in the special taxes, or
tiny permanent reduction is practical, I therefore urge both parties of the
House Ways and Means Committee to agree on a bill granting the temporary
relief which I have indicated. Such a reduction would directly affect
millions of taxpayers, release large sums for investment in new enterprise,
stimulating industrial production and agricultural consumption, and
indirectly benefiting every family in the whole country. These are my
convictions stated with full knowledge that it is for the Congress to
decide whether they judge it best to make such a reduction or leave the
surplus for the present year to be applied to retirement of the war debt.
That also is eventually tax reduction.

PROTECTIVE TARIFF

It is estimated that customs receipts for the present fiscal year will
exceed $615,000,000, the largest which were ever secured from that source.
The value of our imports for the last fiscal year was $4,466,000,000, an
increase of more than 71 per cent since the present tariff law went into
effect. Of these imports about 65 per cent, or, roughly, $2,900,000,000,
came in free of duty, which means that the United States affords a
duty-free market to other countries almost equal in value to the total
imports of Germany and greatly exceeding the total imports of France. We
have admitted a greater volume of free imports than any other country
except England.

We are, therefore, levying duties on about $1,550,000,000 of imports.
Nearly half of this, or $700,000,000, is subject to duties for the
protection of agriculture and have their origin in countries other than
Europe. They substantially increased the prices received by our farmers for
their produce. About $300,000.000 more is represented by luxuries such as
costly rugs, furs, precious stones, etc. This leaves only about
$550,000,000 of our imports under a schedule of duties which is in general
under consideration when there is discussion of lowering the tariff. While
the duties on this small portion, representing only about 12 per cent of
our imports, undoubtedly represent the difference between a fair degree of
prosperity or marked depression to many of our industries and the
difference between good pay and steady work or wide unemployment to many of
our wage earners, it is impossible to conceive how other countries or our
own importers could be greatly benefited if these duties are reduced. Those
who are starting an agitation for a reduction of tariff duties, partly at
least for the benefit of those to whom money has been lent abroad, ought to
know that there does not seem to be a very large field within the area of
our imports in which probable reductions would be advantageous to foreign
goods. Those who wish to benefit foreign producers are much more likely to
secure that result by continuing the present enormous purchasing power
which comes from our prosperity that hall?' increased our imports over 71
per cent in four years than from any advantages that are likely to accrue
from a general tariff reduction. AGRICULTURE

The important place which agriculture holds in the economic and social life
of the Nation can not be overestimated. The National Government is
justified in putting forth every effort to make the open country a
desirable place to live. No condition meets this requirement which fails to
supply a fair return on labor expended and capital invested. While some
localities and some particular crops furnish exceptions, in general
agriculture is continuing to make progress in recovering from the
depression of 1921 and 1922. Animal products and food products are in a
more encouraging position, while cotton, due to the high prices of past
years supplemented by ideal weather conditions, has been stimulated to a
point of temporary over production. Acting on the request of the cotton
growing interests, appointed a committee to assist in carrying out their
plans. As it result of this cooperation sufficient funds have been pledged
to finance the storage and carrying of 4,000,000 bales of cotton. Whether
those who own the cotton are willing to put a part of their stock into this
plan depends on themselves. The Federal Government has cooperated in
providing ample facilities. No method of meeting the situation would be
adequate which does not contemplate a reduction of about one-third in the
acreage for the coming year. The responsibility for making the plan
effective lies with those who own and finance cotton and cotton lands.

The Department of Agriculture estimates the net income of agriculture for
the year 1920-21 at only $375,000,000; for 1924-25, $2,656,000,000; for
1925-26, $2,757,000,000. This increase has been brought about in part by
the method already referred to, of Federal tax reduction, the elimination
of waste, and increased efficiency in industry. The wide gap that existed a
few years ago between the index price of agricultural products and the
index price of other products has been gradually closing up, though the
recent depression in cotton has somewhat enlarged it. Agriculture had on
the whole been going higher while industry had been growing lower.
Industrial and commercial activities, being carried on for the most part by
corporations, are taxed at a much higher rate than farming, which is
carried on by individuals. This will inevitably make industrial commodity
costs high while war taxation lasts. It is because of this circumstance
that national tax reduction has a very large indirect benefit upon the
farmer, though it can not relieve him from the very great burden of the
local taxes which he pays directly. We have practically relieved the farmer
of any Federal income tax.

There is agreement on all sides that some portions of our agricultural
industry have lagged behind other industries in recovery from the war and
that further improvement in methods of marketing of agricultural products
is most desirable. There is belief also that the Federal Government can
further contribute to these ends beyond the many helpful measures taken
during the last five years through the different acts of Congress for
advancing the interests of the farmers.

The packers and stockyards act,

Establishing of the intermediate credit banks for agricultural purposes,

The Purnell Act for agricultural research,

The Capper-Volstead Cooperative Marketing Act,

The cooperative marketing act of 1926,

Amendments to the warehousing act,

The enlargement of the activities of the Department of Agriculture,

Enlargement of the scope of loans by the Farm Loan Board,

The tariff on agricultural products,

The large Federal expenditure in improvement of waterways and highways,

The reduction of Federal taxes, in all comprise a great series of
governmental actions in the advancement of the special interest of
agriculture.

In determination of what further measures may be undertaken it seems to me
there are certain pitfalls which must be avoided and our test in avoiding
them should be to avoid disaster to the farmer himself.

Acting upon my recommendation, the Congress has ordered the interstate
Commerce Commission to investigate the freight-rate structure, directing
that such changes shall be made in freight rates as will promote freedom of
movement of agricultural products. Railroad consolidation which I am
advocating would also result in a situation where rates could be made more
advantageous for farm produce, as has recently been done in the revision of
rates on fertilizers in the South. Additional benefit will accrue from the
development of our inland waterways. The Mississippi River system carries a
commerce of over 50,000,000 tons at a saving of nearly $18,000,000
annually. The Inland Waterways Corporation operates boats on 2,500 miles of
navigable streams and through its relation with 165 railroads carries
freight into and out of 45 States of the Union. During the past six months
it has handled over 1,000,000 bushels of grain monthly and by its lower
freight rates has raised the price of such grain to the farmer probably
21/2 cents to 3 cents a bushel. The highway system on which the Federal
Government expends about $85,000,000 a year is of vital importance to the
rural regions.

The advantages to be derived from a more comprehensive and less expensive
system. of transportation for agriculture ought to be supplemented by
provision for an adequate supply of fertilizer at a lower cost than it is
at. present obtainable. This advantage we are attempting to secure by the
proposed development at Muscle Shoals, and there are promising experiments
being made in synthetic chemistry for the production of nitrates.

A survey should be made of the relation of Government grazing lands to the
livestock industry. Additional legislation is desirable more definitely to
establish the place of grazing in the administration of the national
forests, properly subordinated to their functions of producing timber and
conserving the water supply. Over 180,000,000 acres of grazing lands are
still pastured as commons in the public domain with little or no
regulation. This has made their use so uncertain that it has contributed
greatly to the instability of the livestock industry. Very little of this
land is suited to settlement or private ownership. Some plan ought to be
adopted for its use in grazing, corresponding broadly to that already
successfully applied to the national forests.

The development of sound and strong cooperative associations is of
fundamental importance to our agriculture. It is encouraging to note,
therefore, that a vigorous and healthy growth in the cooperative movement
is continuing. Cooperative associations reporting to the Department of
Agriculture at the end of 1925 had on their membership rolls a total of
2,700,000 producers. Their total business in 1925 amounted to approximately
$2,400,000,000, compared with $635,800,000 in 1915. Legislative action to
assist cooperative associations and supplement their efforts was passed at
the last session of Congress. Important credit measures were also provided
by Congress in 1923 which have been of inestimable value to the cooperative
associations. Although the Federal credit agencies have served agriculture
well, I think it may be possible to broaden and strengthen the service of
these institutions.

Attention is again directed to the surplus problem of agriculture by the
present cotton situation. Surpluses often affect prices of various farm
commodities in a disastrous manner, and the problem urgently demand?, a
solution. Discussions both in and out of Congress during the past few years
have given us a better understanding of the subject, and it is my hope that
out of the various proposals made the basis will be found for a sound and
effective solution upon which agreement can be reached. In my opinion
cooperative marketing associations will be important aids to the ultimate
solution of the problem. It may well be, however, that additional measures
will be needed to supplement their efforts. I believe all will agree that
such measures should not conflict with the best interests of the
cooperatives, but rather assist and strengthen them. In working out this
problem to any sound conclusion it is necessary to avoid putting the
Government into the business of production or marketing or attempting to
enact legislation for the purpose of price fixing. The farmer does not
favor any attempted remedies that partake of these elements. He has a
sincere and candid desire for assistance. If matched by an equally sincere
and candid consideration of the different remedies proposed ' a sound
measure of relief ought to result. It is unfortunate that no general
agreement has been reached by the various agricultural interests upon any
of the proposed remedies. Out of the discussion of various proposals which
can be had before the Committees of Agriculture some measure ought to be
perfected which would be generally satisfactory.

Due to the emergency arising from a heavy tropical storm in southern
Florida, I authorized the Secretary of Agriculture to use certain funds in
anticipation of legislation to enable the farmers in that region to plant
their crops. The department will present a bill ratifying the loans which
were made for this purpose.

Federal legislation has been adopted authorizing the cooperation of the
Government with States and private owners in the protection of forest lands
from fire. This preventive measure is of such great importance that I have
recommended for it an increased appropriation.

Another preventive measure of great economic and sanitary importance is the
eradication of tuberculosis in cattle. Active work is now in progress in
one-fourth of the counties of the United States to secure this result. Over
12,000,000 cattle have been under treatment, and the average degree of
infection has fallen from 4.9 per cent to 2.8 per cent. he Federal
Government is making substantial expenditures for this purpose.

Serious damage is threatened to the corn crop by the European corn borer.
Since 1917 it has spread from eastern New England westward into Indiana and
now covers about 100,000 square miles. It is one of the most formidable
pests because it spreads rapidly and is exceedingly difficult of control.
It has assumed a menace that is of national magnitude and warrants the
Federal Government in extending its cooperation to the State and local
agencies which are attempting to prevent its further spread and secure its
eradication.

The whole question of agriculture needs most careful consideration. In the
past few years the Government has given this subject more attention than
any other and has held more consultations in relation to it than on any
other subject. While the Government is not to be blamed for failure to
perform the impossible, the agricultural regions are entitled to know that
they have its constant solicitude and sympathy. Many of the farmers are
burdened with debts and taxes which they are unable to carry. We are
expending in this country many millions of dollars each year to increase
farm production. We ought now to put more emphasis on the question of farm
marketing. If a sound solution of a permanent nature can be found for this
problem, the Congress ought not to hesitate to adopt it.

DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES

In previous messages I have referred to the national importance of the
proper development of our water resources. The great projects of extension
of the Mississippi system, the protection an development of the lower
Colorado River, are before Congress, and I have previously commented upon
them. I favor the necessary legislation to expedite these projects.
Engineering studies are being made for connecting the Great Lakes with the
North Atlantic either through an all-American canal or by way of the St.
Lawrence River. These reports will undoubtedly be before the Congress
during its present session. It is unnecessary to dwell upon the great
importance of such a waterway not only to our mid-continental basin but to
the commerce and development of practically the whole Nation. Our river and
harbor improvement should be continued in accordance with the present
policy. Expenditure of this character is compatible with economy; it is in
the nature of capital investment. Work should proceed on the basic trunk
lines if this work is to be a success. If the country will be content to be
moderate and patient and permit improvements to be made where they will do
the greatest general good, rather than insisting on expenditures at this
time on secondary projects, our internal Waterways can be made a success.
If proposes legislation results in a gross manifestation of local
jealousies and selfishness, this program can not be carried out. Ultimately
we can take care of extensions, but our first effort should be confined to
the main arteries.

Our inland commerce has been put to great inconvenience and expense by
reason of the lowering of the water level of the Great Lakes. This is an
international problem on which competent engineers are making reports. Out
of their study it is expected that a feasible method will be developed for
raising the level to provide relief for our commerce and supply water for
drainage. Whenever a practical plan is presented it ought to be speedily
adopted. RECLAMATION

It is increasingly evident that the Federal Government must in the future
take a leading part in the impounding of water for conservation with
incidental power for the development of the irrigable lands of the and
region. The unused waters of the West are found mainly in large rivers.
Works to store and distribute these have such magnitude and cost that they
are not attractive to private enterprise. Water is the irreplaceable
natural resource. Its precipitation can not be increased. Its storage on
the higher reaches of streams, to meet growing needs, to be used repeatedly
as it flows toward the seas, is a practical and prudent business policy.

The United States promises to follow the course of older irrigation
countries, where recent important irrigation developments have been carried
out as national undertakings. It is gratifying, therefore, that conditions
on Federal reclamation projects have become satisfactory. The gross value
of crop,, grown with water from project works increased from $110,000,000
in 1924 to $131,000,000 in 1925. The adjustments made last year by Congress
relieved irrigators from paying construction costs on unprofitable land,
and by so doing inspired new hope and confidence in ability to meet the
payments required. Construction payments by water users last year were the
largest in the history of the bureau.

The anticipated reclamation fund will be fully absorbed for a number of
years in the completion of old projects and the construction of projects
inaugurated in the past three years. We should, however, continue to
investigate and study the possibilities of a carefully planned development
of promising projects, logically of governmental concern because of their
physical magnitude, immense cost, and the interstate and international
problems involved. Only in this way may we be fully prepared to meet
intelligently the needs of our fast-growing population in the years to
come. TRANSPORTATION

It would be difficult to conceive of any modern activity which contributes
more to the necessities and conveniences of life than transportation.
Without it our present agricultural production and practically all of our
commerce would ?be completely prostrated. One of the large contributing
causes to the present highly satisfactory state of our economic condition
is the prompt and dependable service, surpassing all our previous records,
rendered by the railroads. This power has been fostered by the spirit of
cooperation between Federal and State regulatory commissions. To render
this service more efficient and effective and to promote a more scientific
regulation, the process of valuing railroad properties should be simplified
and the primary valuations should be completed as rapidly as possible. The
problem of rate reduction would be much simplified by a process of railroad
consolidations. This principle has already been adopted as Federal law.
Experience has shown that a more effective method must be provided. Studies
have already been made and legislation introduced seeking to promote this
end. It would be of great advantage if it could be taken up at once and
speedily enacted. The railroad systems of the country and the convenience
of all the people are waiting on this important decision.

MERCHANT MARINE

It is axiomatic that no agricultural and industrial country can get the
full benefit of its own advantages without a merchant marine. We have been
proceeding under the act of Congress that contemplates the establishment of
trade routes to be ultimately transferred to private ownership and
operation. Due to temporary conditions abroad and at home we have a large
demand just now for certain types of freight vessels. Some suggestion has
been made for new construction. I do not feel that we are yet warranted in
entering, that field. Such ships as we might build could not be sold after
they are launched for anywhere near what they would cost. We have expended
over $250,000,000 out of the public Treasury in recent years to make up the
losses of operation, not counting the depreciation or any cost whatever of
our capital investment. The great need of our merchant marine is not for
more ships but for more freight.

Our merchants are altogether too indifferent about using American ships for
the transportation of goods which they send abroad or bring home. Some of
our vessels necessarily need repairs, which should be made. I do not
believe that the operation of our fleet is as economical and efficient as
it could be made if placed under a single responsible head, leaving the
Shipping Board free to deal with general matters of policy and regulation.

RADIO LEGISLATION

The Department of Commerce has for some years urgently presented the
necessity for further legislation in order to protect radio listeners from
interference between broadcasting stations and to carry out other
regulatory functions. Both branches of Congress at the last session passed
enactments intended to effect such regulation, but the two bills yet remain
to be brought into agreement and final passage.

Due to decisions of the courts, the authority of the department under the
law of 1912 has broken down; many more stations have been operating than
can be accommodated within the limited number of wave lengths available;
further stations are in course of construction; many stations have departed
from the scheme of allocation set down by the department, and the whole
service of this most important public function has drifted into such chaos
as seems likely, if not remedied, to destroy its great value. I most
urgently recommend that this legislation should be speedily enacted.

I do not believe it is desirable to set tip further independent agencies in
the Government. Rather I believe it advisable to entrust the important
functions of deciding who shall exercise the privilege of radio
transmission and under what conditions, the assigning of wave lengths and
determination of power, to a board to be assembled whenever action on such
questions becomes necessary. There should be right of appeal to the courts
from the decisions of such board. The administration of the decisions of
the board and the other features of regulation and promotion of radio in
the public interest, together with scientific research, should remain in
the Department of Commerce. Such an arrangement makes for more expert, more
efficient, and more economical administration that an independent agency or
board, whose duties, after initial stages, require but little attention, in
which administrative functions are confused with semijudicial functions and
from which of necessity there must be greatly increased personnel and
expenditure.

THE WAGE EARNER

The great body of our people are made up of wage earners. Several hundred
thousands of them are on the pay rolls of the United States Government.
Their condition very largely is fixed by legislation. We have recently
provided increases in compensation under a method of reclassification and
given them the advantage of a liberal retirement system as a support for
their declining years. Most of them are under the merit system, which is a
guaranty of

their intelligence, and the efficiency of their service is a demonstration
of their loyalty. The Federal Government should continue to set a good
example for all other employers.

In the industries the condition of the wage earner has steadily improved.
The 12-hour day is almost entirely unknown. Skilled labor is well
compensated. But there are unfortunately a multitude of workers who have
not yet come to share in the general prosperity of the Nation. Both the
public authorities and private enterprise should be solicitous to advance
the welfare of this class. The Federal Government has been seeking to
secure this end through a protective tariff, through restrictive
immigration, through requiring safety devices for the prevention of
accidents, through the granting of workman's compensation, through civilian
vocational rehabilitation and education, through employment information
bureaus, and through such humanitarian relief as was provided in the
maternity and infancy legislation. It is a satisfaction to report that a
more general condition of contentment exists among wage earners and the
country is more free from labor disputes than it has been for years. While
restrictive immigration has been adopted in part for the benefit of the
wage earner, and in its entirety for the benefit of the country, it ought
not to cause a needless separation of families and dependents from their
natural source of support contrary to the dictates of humanity.

BITUMINOUS COAL

No progress appears to have been made within large areas of the bituminous
coal industry toward creation of voluntary machinery by which greater
assurance can be given to the public of peaceful adjustment of wage
difficulties such as has been accomplished in the anthracite industry. This
bituminous industry is one of primary necessity and bears a great
responsibility to the Nation for continuity of supplies. As the wage
agreements in the unionized section of the industry expire on April 1 next,
and as conflicts may result which may imperil public interest, and have for
many years often called for action of the Executive in protection of the
public, I again recommend the passage of such legislation as will assist
the Executive in dealing with such emergencies through a special temporary
board of conciliation and mediation and through administrative agencies for
the purpose of distribution of coal and protection of the consumers of coal
from profiteering. At present the Executive is not only without authority
to act but is actually prohibited by law from making any expenditure to
meet the emergency of a coal famine. JUDICIARY

The Federal courts hold a high position in the administration of justice in
the world. While individual judicial officers have sometimes been subjected
to just criticism, the courts as a whole have maintained an exceedingly
high standard. The Congress may well consider the question of supplying
fair salaries and conferring upon the Supreme Court the same rule-making
power on the law side of the district courts that they have always
possessed on the equity side. A bill is also pending providing for
retirement after a certain number of years of service, although they have
not been consecutive, which should have your favorable consideration. These
faithful servants of the Government are about the last that remain to be
provided for in the postwar readjustments. BANKING

There has been pending in Congress for nearly three years banking
legislation to clarify the national bank act and reasonably to increase the
powers of the national banks. I believe that within the limitation of sound
banking principles Congress should now and for the future place the
national banks upon a fair equality with their competitors, the State
banks, and I trust that means may be found so that the differences on
branch-banking legislation between the Senate and the House of
Representatives may be settled along sound lines and the legislation
promptly enacted.

It would be difficult to overestimate the service which the Federal reserve
system has already rendered to the country. It is necessary only to recall
the chaotic condition of our banking organization at the time the Federal
reserve system was put into operation. The old system consisted of a vast
number of independent banking units, with scattered bank reserves which
never could be mobilized in times of greatest need. In spite of vast
banking resources, there was no coordination of reserves or any credit
elasticity. As a consequence, a strain was felt even during crop-moving
periods and when it was necessary to meet other seasonal and regularly
recurring needs.

The Federal reserve system is not a panacea for all economic or financial
ills. It can not prevent depression in certain industries which are
experiencing overexpansion of production or contraction of their markets.
Its business is to furnish adequate credit and currency facilities. This it
has succeeded in doing, both during the war and in the more difficult
period of deflation and readjustment which followed. It enables us to look
to the future with confidence and to make plans far ahead, based on the
belief that the Federal reserve system will exercise a steadying influence
on credit conditions and thereby prevent tiny sudden or severe reactions
from the period of prosperity which we are now enjoying. In order that
these plans may go forward, action should be taken at the present session
on the question of renewing the banks' charters and thereby insuring a
continuation of the policies and present usefulness of the Federal reserve
system.

FEDERAL REGULATION

I am in favor of reducing, rather than expanding, Government bureaus which
seek to regulate and control the business activities of the people.
Everyone is aware that abuses exist and will exist so long as we are
limited by human imperfections. Unfortunately, human nature can not be
changed by an act of the legislature. When practically the sole remedy for
many evils lies in the necessity of the people looking out for themselves
and reforming their own abuses, they will find that they are relying on a
false security if the Government assumes to hold out the promise that it is
looking out for them and providing reforms for them. This principle is
preeminently applicable to the National Government. It is too much assumed
that because an abuse exists it is the business of the National Government
to provide a remedy. The presumption should be that it is the business of
local and State governments. Such national action results in encroaching
upon the salutary independence of the States and by undertaking to
supersede their natural authority fills the land with bureaus and
departments which are undertaking to do what it is impossible for them to
accomplish and brings our whole system of government into disrespect and
disfavor. We ought to maintain high standards. We ought to punish
wrongdoing. Society has not only the privilege but the absolute duty of
protecting itself and its individuals. But we can not accomplish this end
by adopting a wrong method. Permanent success lies in local, rather than
national action. Unless the locality rises to its own requirements, there
is an almost irresistible impulse for the National Government to intervene.
The States and the Nation should both realize that such action is to be
adopted only as a last resort.

THE NEGRO

The social well-being of our country requires our constant effort for the
amelioration of race prejudice and the extension to all elements of equal
opportunity and equal protection under the laws which are guaranteed by
the. Constitution. The Federal Government especially is charged with this
obligation in behalf of the colored people of the Nation. Not only their
remarkable progress, their devotion and their loyalty, but, our duty to
ourselves under our claim that we are an enlightened people requires us to
use all our power to protect them from the crime of lynching. Although
violence of this kind has very much decreased, while any of it remains we
can not justify neglecting to make every effort to eradicate it by law.

The education of the colored race under Government encouragement is
proceeding successfully and ought to have continuing support. An increasing
need exists for properly educated and trained medical skill to be devoted
to the service of this race.

INSULAR POSSESSIONS

This Government holds in sacred trusteeship islands which it has acquired
in the East and West Indies. In all of them the people are more prosperous
than at any previous time. A system of good roads, education, and general
development is in progress. The people are better governed than ever before
and generally content.

In the Philippine Islands Maj. Gen. Leonard Wood has been Governor General
for five years and has administered his office with tact and ability
greatly to the success of the Filipino people. These are a proud and
sensitive race, who are making such progress with our cooperation that we
can view the results of this experiment with great satisfaction. As we are
attempting to assist this race toward self-government, we should look upon
their wishes with great respect, granting their requests immediately when
they are right, yet maintaining a frank firmness in refusing when they are
wrong. We shall measure their progress in no small part by their acceptance
of the terms of the organic law under which the islands are governed and
their faithful observance of its provisions. Need exists for clarifying the
duties of the auditor and declaring them to be what everyone had supposed
they were. We have placed our own expenditures under the supervision of the
Comptroller General. It is not likely that the expenditures in the
Philippine Islands need less supervision than our own. The Governor General
is hampered in his selection of subordinates by the necessity of securing a
confirmation, which has oftentimes driven him to the expediency of using
Army officers in work for which civilian experts would be much better
fitted. Means should be provided for this and such other purposes as he may
require out of the revenue which this Government now turns back to the
Philippine treasury.

In order that these possessions might stiffer no seeming neglect, I have
recently sent Col. Carmi A Thompson to the islands to make a survey in
cooperation with the Governor General to suggest what might be done to
improve conditions. Later, I may make a more extended report including
recommendations. The economic development of the islands is very important.
They ought not to be turned back to the people until they are both
politically fitted for self-government and economically independent. Large
areas are adaptable to the production of rubber. No one contemplates any
time in the future either under the present or a more independent form of
government when we should not assume some responsibility for their defense.
For their economic advantage, for the employment of their people, and as a
contribution to our power of defense which could not be carried on without
rubber, I believe this industry should be encouraged. It is especially
adapted to the Filipino people themselves, who might cultivate it
individually on a small acreage. It could be carried on extensively by
American capital in a way to furnish employment at good wages. I am opposed
to the promotion of any policy that does not provide for absolute freedom
on the part of the wage earners and do not think we should undertake to
give power for large holdings of land in the islands against the opposition
of the people of the locality. Any development of the islands must be
solely with the first object of benefiting the people of the islands. At an
early day, these possessions should be taken out from under all military
control and administered entirely on the civil side of government.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Our policy of national defense is not one of making war, but of insuring
peace. The land and sea force of America, both in its domestic and foreign
implications, is distinctly a peace force. It is an arm of the police power
to guarantee order and the execution of the law at home and security to our
citizens abroad. No self-respecting nation would neglect to provide an army
and navy proportionate to its population, the extent of its territory, and
the dignity of the place which it occupies in the world. When it is
considered that no navy in the world, with one exception, approaches ours
and none surpasses it, that our Regular Army of about 115,000 men is the
equal of any other like number of troops, that our entire permanent and
reserve land and sea force trained and training consists of a personnel of
about 610,000, and that our annual appropriations are about $680,000,000 a
year, expended under the direction of an exceedingly competent staff, it
can not be said that our country is neglecting its national defense. It is
true that a cult of disparagement exists, but that candid examination made
by the Congress through its various committees has always reassured the
country and demonstrated that it is maintaining the most adequate defensive
forces in these present years that it has ever supported in time of peace.

This general policy should be kept in effect. Here and there temporary
changes may be made in personnel to meet requirements in other directions.
Attention should be given to submarines, cruisers, and air forces.
Particular points may need strengthening, but as a whole our military power
is sufficient.

The one weak place in the whole line is our still stupendous war debt. In
any modern campaign the dollars are the shock troops. With a depleted
treasury in the rear, no army can maintain itself in the field. A country
loaded with debt is a country devoid of the first line of defense. Economy
is the handmaid of preparedness. If we wish to be able to defend ourselves
to the full extent of our power in the future, we shall discharge as soon
as possible the financial burden of the last war. Otherwise we would face a
crisis with a part of our capital resources already expended.

The amount and kind of our military equipment is preeminently a question
for the decision of the Congress, after giving due consideration to the
advice of military experts and the available public revenue. Nothing is
more laudable than the cooperation of the agricultural and industrial
resources of the country for the purpose of supplying the needs of national
defense. In time of peril the people employed in these interests
volunteered in a most self-sacrificing way, often at the nominal charge of
a dollar a year. But the Army and Navy are not supported for the benefit of
supply concerns; supply concerns are supported for the benefit of the Army
and Navy. The distribution of orders on what is needed from different
concerns for the purpose of keeping up equipment and organization is
perfectly justified, but any attempt to prevail upon the Government to
purchase beyond its needs ought not to be tolerated. It is eminently fair
that those who deal with the Government should do so at a reasonable
profit. However, public money is expended not that some one may profit by
it, but in order to serve a public purpose.

While our policy of national defense will proceed in order that we may be
independent and self-sufficient, I am opposed to engaging in any attempt at
competitive armaments. No matter how much or how little some other country
may feel constrained to provide, we can well afford to set the example, not
of being dictated to by others, but of adopting our own standards. We are
strong enough to pursue that method, which will be a most wholesome model
for the rest of the world. We are eminently peaceful, but we are by no
means weak. While we submit our differences with others, not to the
adjudication of force, but of reason, it is not because we are unable to
defend our rights. While we are doing our best to eliminate all resort to
war for the purpose of settling disputes, we can not but remember that the
peace we now enjoy had to be won by the sword and that if the rights of our
country are to be defended we can not rely for that purpose upon anyone but
ourselves. We can not shirk the responsibility, which is the first
requisite of all government, of preserving its own integrity and
maintaining the rights of its own citizens. It is only in accordance with
these principles that we can establish any lasting foundations for an
honorable and permanent peace.

It is for these reasons that our country, like any other country, proposes
to provide itself with an army and navy supported by a merchant marine. Yet
these are not for competition with any other power. For years we have
besought nations to disarm. We have recently expressed our willingness at
Geneva to enter into treaties for the limitation of all types of warships
according to the ratio adopted at the Washington Conference. This offer is
still pending. While we are and shall continue to be armed it is not as a
menace, but rather a common assurance of tranquility to all the peaceloving
people of the world. For us to do any less would be to disregard our
obligations, evade our responsibilities, and jeopardize our national honor.
VETERANS

This country, not only because it is bound by honor but because of the
satisfaction derived from it, has always lavished its bounty upon its
veterans. For years a service pension has been bestowed upon the Grand Army
on reaching a certain age. Like provision has been made for the survivors
of the Spanish War. A liberal future compensation has been granted to all
the veterans of the World War. But it is in the case of the, disabled and
the dependents that the Government exhibits its greatest solicitude. This
work is being well administered by the Veterans' Bureau. The main
unfinished feature is that of hospitalization. This requirement is being
rapidly met. Various veteran bodies will present to you recommendations
which should have your careful consideration. At the last session we
increased our annual expenditure for pensions and relief on account of the
veterans of three wars. While I approve of proper relief for all suffering,
I do not favor any further extension of our pension system at this time.

ALIEN PROPERTY

We still have in the possession of the Government the alien property. It
has always been the policy of America to hold that private enemy property
should not be confiscated in time of war. This principle we have
scrupulously observed. As this property is security for the claims of our
citizens and our Government, we can not relinquish it without adequate
provision for their reimbursement. Legislation for the return of this
property, accompanied by suitable provisions for the liquidation of the
claims of our citizens and our Treasury, should be adopted. If our
Government releases to foreigners the security which it holds for
Americans, it must at the same time provide satisfactory safeguards for
meeting American claims. PROHIBITION

The duly authorized public authorities of this country have made
prohibition the law of the land. Acting under the Constitution the Congress
and the legislatures of practically all the, States have adopted
legislation for its enforcement. Some abuses have arisen which require
reform. Under the law the National Government has entrusted to the Treasury
Department the especial duty of regulation and enforcement. Such
supplementary legislation as it requires to meet existing conditions should
be carefully and speedily enacted. Failure to support the Constitution and
observe the law ought not to be tolerated by public opinion. Especially
those in public places, who have taken their oath to support the
Constitution, ought to be most scrupulous in its observance. Officers of
the Department of Justice throughout the country should be vigilant in
enforcing the law, but local authorities, which had always been mainly
responsible for the enforcement of law in relation to intoxicating liquor,
ought not to seek evasion by attempting to shift the burden wholly upon the
Federal agencies. Under the Constitution the States are jointly charged
with the Nation in providing for the enforcement of the prohibition
amendment. Some people do not like the amendment, some do not like other
parts of the Constitution, some do not like any of it. Those who entertain
such sentiments have a perfect right to seek through legal methods for a
change. But for any of our inhabitants to observe such parts of the
Constitution as they like, while disregarding others, is a doctrine that
would break down all protection of life and property and destroy the
American system of ordered liberty.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

The foreign policy of this Government is well known. It is one of peace
based on that mutual respect that arises from mutual regard for
international rights arid the discharge of international obligations. It is
our purpose to promote understanding and good will between ourselves and
all other people. The American people are altogether lacking in an
appreciation of the tremendous good fortune that surrounds their
international position. We have no traditional enemies. We are not
embarrassed over any disputed territory. We have no possessions that are
coveted by others; they have none that are coveted by us. Our borders are
unfortified. We fear no one; no one fears us. All the world knows that the
whole extent of our influence is against war and in favor of peace, against
the use of force and in favor of negotiation, arbitration, and adjudication
as a method of adjusting international differences. We look with disfavor
upon all aggressive warfare. We are strong enough so that no one can charge
us with weakness if we are slow to anger. Our place is sufficiently
established so that we need not be sensitive over trifles. Our resources,
are large enough so that we can afford to be generous. At the same time we
are a nation among nations and recognize a responsibility not only to
ourselves, but in the interests of a stable and enlightened civilization,
to protect and defend the international rights of our Government and our
citizens.

It is because of our historical detachment and the generations of
comparative indifference toward it by other nations that our public is
inclined to consider altogether too seriously the reports that we are
criticized abroad. We never had a larger foreign trade than at the present
time. Our good offices were never more sought and the necessity for our
assistance and cooperation was never more universally declared in any time
of peace. We know that the sentiments which we entertain toward all other
nations are those of the most sincere friendship and good will and of all
unbounded desire to help, which we are perfectly willing to have judged by
their fruits. In our efforts to adjust our international obligations we
have met with a response which, when everything is considered, I believe
history will record as a most remarkable and gratifying demonstration of
the sanctity with which civilized nations undertake to discharge their
mutual obligations. Debt settlements have been negotiated with practically
all of those who owed us and all finally adjusted but two, which are, in
process of ratification. When we consider the real sacrifice that will be
necessary on the part of other nations, considering all their
circumstances, to meet their agreed payments, we ought to hold them in
increased admiration and respect. It is true that we have extended to them
very generous treatment, but it is also true that they have agreed to repay
its all that we loaned to them and some interest.

A special conference on the Chinese customs tariff provided for by the
treaty between the nine powers relating to the Chinese customs tariff
signed at Washington on February 6, 1922, was called by the Chinese
Government to meet at Peking, on October 26, 1925. We participated in this
conference through fully empowered delegates and, with good will,
endeavored to cooperate with the other participating powers with a view to
putting into effect promises made to China at the Washington conference,
and considering any reasonable proposal that might be made by the Chinese
Government for the revision of the treaties on the subject of China's
tariff. With these aims in view the American delegation at the outset of
the conference proposed to put into effect the surtaxes provided for by the
Washington treaty and to proceed immediately to the negotiation of a
treaty, which, among other things, was to make provision for the abolition
of taxes collected on goods in transit, remove the tariff restrictions in
existing treaties, and put into effect the national tariff law of China.

Early in April of the present year the central Chinese Government was
ousted from power by opposing warring factions. It became impossible under
the circumstances to continue the negotiations. Finally, on July 3, the
delegates of the foreign powers, including those of the United States,
issued a statement expressing their unanimous and earnest desire to proceed
with the work of the conference at the earliest possible moment when the
delegates of the Chinese Government are in a position to resume discussions
with the foreign delegates of the problems before the conference. We are
prepared to resume the negotiations thus interrupted whenever a Government
representing the Chinese people and acting on their behalf presents itself.
The fact that constant warfare between contending Chinese factions has
rendered it impossible to bring these negotiations to a successful
conclusion is a matter of deep regret. Throughout these conflicts we have
maintained a position of the most careful neutrality. Our naval vessels in
Asiatic waters, pursuant to treaty rights, have been used only for the
protection of American citizens.

Silas H. Strawn, Esq., was sent to China as American commissioner to
cooperate with commissioners of the other powers in the establishment of a
commission to inquire into the present practice of extraterritorial
jurisdiction in China, with a view to reporting to the Governments of the
several powers their findings of fact in regard to these matters. The
commission commenced its work in January, 1926, and agreed upon a joint
report which was signed on September 16, 1926. The commission's report has
been received and is being studied with a view to determining our future
policy in regard to the question of extraterritorial privileges under
treaties between the United States and China.

The Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference met at Geneva on
May 18 and its work has been proceeding almost continuously since that
date. It would be premature to attempt to form a judgment as to the
progress that has been made. The commission has had before it a
comprehensive list of questions touching upon all aspects of the question
of the limitation of armament. In the commission's discussions many
differences of opinion have developed. However, I am hopeful that at least
some measure of agreement will be reached as the discussions continue. The
American representation on the commission has consistently tried to be
helpful, and has kept before it the practical objective to which the
commission is working, namely, actual agreements for the limitation of
armaments. Our representatives will continue their work in that direction.

One of the most encouraging features of the commission's work thus far has
been the agreement in principle among the naval experts of a majority of
the powers parties to the Washington treaty limiting naval armament upon
methods and standards for the comparison and further limitation of naval
armament. It is needless to say that at the proper time I shall be prepared
to proceed along practical lines to the conclusion of agreements carrying
further the work begun at the Washington Conference in 1921.

DEPARTMENT REPORTS

Many important subjects which it is impossible even to mention in the short
space of an annual message you will find fully discussed in the
departmental reports. A failure to include them here is not to be taken as
indicating any lack of interest, but only a disinclination to state
inadequately what has been much better done in other documents.

THE CAPITAL CITY

We are embarking on an ambitious building program for the city of
Washington. The Memorial Bridge is under way with all that it holds for use
and beauty. New buildings are soon contemplated. This program should
represent the best that exists in the art and science of architecture. Into
these structures which must be considered as of a permanent nature ought to
go the aspirations of the Nation, its ideals expressed in forms of beauty.
If our country wishes to compete with others, let it not be in the support
of armaments but in the making of a beautiful capital city. Let it express
the soul of America. Whenever an American is at the seat of his Government,
however traveled and cultured he may be, he ought to find a city of stately
proportion, symmetrically laid out and adorned with the best that there is
in architecture, which would arouse his imagination and stir his patriotic
pride. In the coming years Washington should be not only the art center of
our own country but the art center of the world. Around it should center
all that is best in science, in learning, in letters, and in art. These are
the results that justify the creation of those national resources with
which we have been favored.

AMERICAN IDEALS

America is not and must not be a country without ideals. They are useless
if they are only visionary; they are only valuable if they are practical. A
nation can not dwell constantly on the mountain tops. It has to be
replenished and sustained through the ceaseless toil of the less inspiring
valleys. But its face ought always to be turned upward, its vision ought
always to be fixed on high.

We need ideals that can be followed in daily life, that can be translated
into terms of the home. We can not expect to be relieved from toil, but we
do expect to divest it of degrading conditions. Work is honorable; it is
entitled to an honorable recompense. We must strive mightily, but having
striven there is a defect in our political and social system if we are not
in general rewarded with success. To relieve the land of the burdens that
came from the war, to release to the individual more of the fruits of his
own industry, to increase his earning capacity and decrease his hours of
labor, to enlarge the circle of his vision through good roads and better
transportation, to lace before him the opportunity for education both in
science and in art, to leave him free to receive the inspiration of
religion, all these are ideals which deliver him from the servitude of the
body and exalt him to the service of the soul. Through this emancipation
from the things that are material, we broaden our dominion over the things
that are spiritual.

***

State of the Union Address
Calvin Coolidge
December 6, 1927

Members of the Congress:

It is gratifying to report that for the fourth consecutive year the state
of the Union in general is good. We are at peace. The country as a whole
has had a prosperity never exceeded. Wages are at their highest range,
employment is plentiful. Some parts of agriculture and industry have
lagged; some localities have suffered from storm and flood. But such losses
have been absorbed without serious detriment to our great economic
structure. Stocks of goods are moderate and a wholesome caution is
prevalent. Rates of interest for industry, agriculture, and government have
been reduced. Savers and investors are providing capital for new
construction in industry and public works. The purchasing power of
agriculture has increased. If the people maintain that confidence which
they are entitled to have in themselves, in each other, and in America, a
comfortable prosperity will continue.

CONSTRUCTIVE ECONOMY

Without constructive economy in Government expenditures we should not now
be enjoying these results or these prospects. Because we are not now
physically at war, some people are disposed to forget that our war debt
still remains. The Nation must make financial sacrifices, accompanied by a
stern self-denial in public expenditures, until we have conquered the
disabilities of our public finance. While our obligation to veterans and
dependents is large and continuing, the heavier burden of the national debt
is being steadily eliminated. At the end of this fiscal year it will be
reduced from about $26,600,000,000 to about $17,975,000,000. Annual
interest, including war savings, will have been reduced from $1,055,000,000
to $670,0001,000. The sacrifices of the people, the economy of the
Government, are showing remarkable results. They should be continued for
the purpose of relieving the Nation of the burden of interest and debt and
releasing revenue for internal improvements and national development.

Not only the amount, but the rate, of Government interest has been reduced.
Callable bonds have been refunded and paid, so that during this year the
average rate of interest on the present public debt for the first time fell
below 4 per cent. Keeping the credit of the Nation high is a tremendously
profitable operation.

TAX REDUCTION

The immediate fruit of economy and the retirement of the public debt is tax
reduction. The annual saving in interest between 1925 and 1929 is
$212,000,000. Without this no bill to relieve the taxpayers would be worth
proposing. The three measures already enacted leave our Government revenues
where they are not oppressive. Exemptions, have been increased until
115,000,000 people make but 2,500,000 individual taxable returns, so that
further reduction should be mainly for the purpose of removing
inequalities. The Secretary of the Treasury has recommended a measure which
would give us a much better balanced system of taxation and without
oppression produce sufficient revenue. It has my complete support.

Unforeseen contingencies requiring money are always arising. Our probable
surplus for June 30, 1929, is small. A slight depression in business would
greatly reduce our revenue because of our present method of taxation. The
people ought to take no selfish attitude of pressing for removing moderate
and fair taxes which might produce a deficit. We must keep our budget
balanced for each year. That is the corner stone of our national credit,
the trifling price we pay to command the lowest rate of interest of any
great power in the world. Any surplus can be applied to debt reduction, and
debt reduction is tax reduction. Under the present circumstances it would
be far better to leave the rates as they are than to enact a bill carrying
the peril of a deficit. This is not a problem to be approached in a narrow
or partisan spirit. All of those who participate in finding a reasonable
solution will be entitled to participate in any credit that accrues from it
without regard to party. The Congress has already demonstrated that tax
legislation can be removed from purely political consideration into the
realm of patriotic business principles.

Any bill for tax reduction should be written by those who are responsible
for raising, managing, and expending the finances of the Government. If
special interests, too often selfish, always uninformed of the national
needs as a whole, with hired agents using their proposed beneficiaries as
engines of propaganda, are permitted to influence the withdrawal of their
property from taxation, we shall have a law that is unbalanced and unjust,
bad for business, bad for the country, probably resulting in a deficit,
with disastrous financial Consequences. The Constitution has given the
Members of the Congress sole authority to decide what tax measures shall be
presented for approval. While welcoming information from any quarter, the
Congress should continue to exercise its own judgment in a matter so vital
and important to all the interests of the country as taxation.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Being a nation relying not on force, but on fair dealing and good will, to
maintain peace with others, we have provided a moderate military force in a
form adapted solely to defense. It should be continued with a very generous
supply of officers and with the present base of personnel, subject to
fluctuations which may be temporarily desirable.

The five-year program for our air forces is in keeping with this same
policy and commensurate with the notable contributions of America to the
science of aeronautics. The provisions of the law lately enacted are being
executed as fast as the practical difficulties of an orderly and stable
development permit.

While our Army is small, prudence requires that it should be kept in a high
state of efficiency and provided with such supplies as would permit of its
immediate expansion. The garrison ration has lately been increased.
Recommendations for an appropriation of $6,166,000 for new housing made to
the previous Congress failed to pass. While most of the Army is well
housed, some of it which is quartered in wartime training camps is becoming
poorly housed. In the past three years $12,533,000 have been appropriated
for reconstruction and repairs, and an authorization has been approved of
$22,301,000 for new housing, under which $8,070,000 has already been
appropriated. A law has also been passed, complying with the request of the
War Department, allocating funds received from the sale of buildings and
land for housing purposes. The work, however, is not completed, so that
other appropriations are being recommended.

Our Navy is likewise a weapon of defense. We have a foreign commerce and
ocean lines of trade unsurpassed by any other country. We have outlying
territory in the two great oceans and long stretches of seacoast studded
with the richest cities in the world. We are responsible for the protection
of a large population and the greatest treasure ever bestowed upon any
people. We are charged with an international duty of defending the Panama
Canal. To meet these responsibilities we need a very substantial sea
armament. It needs aircraft development, which is being provided under the
five-year program. It needs submarines as soon as the department decides
upon the best type of construction. It needs airplane carriers and a
material addition to its force of cruisers. We can plan for the future and
begin a moderate building program.

This country has put away the Old World policy of competitive armaments. It
can never be relieved of the responsibility of adequate national d