ame back; and with their help we arrived at _Sobee_ at seven
o'clock. On the road we passed the _last_ of the St. Jago asses, the
whole forty having either died or been abandoned on the road at
different places. We were all very wet, for it rained almost the whole
way; and all very hungry, having tasted nothing since the preceding
evening. The town of _Sobee_ has changed its situation _three_ times. It
was taken about ten years ago by Daisy, King of Kaarta, with thirteen
horsemen and some of his slaves on foot. They carried off five hundred
slaves, two hundred of which were women. Such as escaped rebuilt the
town about a mile to the East of its former situation; but when it had
acquired some degree of prosperity, it was destroyed by Mansong, King of
Bambarra. The present town is built nearer the foot of the hills; part
of it is walled, which serves as a sort of citadel. There is plenty of
corn and rice here on moderate terms; but they have not yet had time to
recruit their herds of cattle.

July 31st.--Rained hard all the morning, and flying showers all day.
Halted at _Sobee_. During the night one of the town's-people attempted
to steal one of the soldier's pieces, some of which were standing
against a tree close to the tent. Lieutenant Martyn was sleeping under
the tree; and hearing somebody moving the muskets, he no sooner observed
that it was a Negro, than he snatched one of the muskets and fired at
the thief as he was running off with one of the muskets. Whether the
ball touched him or not we could not learn; but the thief dropped the
musket, and we found it with the pouch and bayonet in the morning.

August 1st.--Early this morning purchased an ass for a pistol, a baft,
and a Mandingo cloth. We set out at seven o'clock. Immediately on the
East of the town came to another stream flowing towards the S.S.W. It
was so deep, that the whole of the bundles had to be carried over on
men's heads. During this, being surrounded by thieves on all sides,
Isaaco unfortunately struck two of the soldiers; which action had nearly
cost him his life, one of the soldiers attempting to stab him with his
bayonet, when Mr. Anderson prevented him; and as I reproved Isaaco for
his conduct in the sharpest manner, he went off in a _pet_ with his
people, leaving us to find our way across the river in the best manner
we could. I hired four people to carry over the loads; and stood myself
as sentry over the thieves. In this manner the whole of the baggage was
carried over with much less loss than we had sustained at any other
river. The asses were swam over, and the whole only cost one string of
No. 5; but I had to pay fifty stones to the Dooty's son for asses going
on the corn. As soon as all was over we loaded the asses and set
forwards. At sunset we reached _Balanding_. We had only time to pitch
our tent, when the rain came on; indeed we had no time for cooking our
victuals, for though all the soldiers cooked, yet the rain came on
before our kettle was ready; and Messrs. Anderson, Scott, Martyn, and
myself, all slept without having tasted any thing during the day.

August 2d.--Rainy. Halted at Balanding.

August 3d.--Sun rose E. 3 deg.S. Departed from Balanding, and halted at
Balandoo, a walled village about four miles to the East by South. Bought
two sheep for one barraloolo.

August 4th.--Departed from Balandoo. About a mile to the East saw the
hill of Sobee bearing N.W. by compass. About this place Lawrence Cahill,
one of the soldiers, who had complained of sickness for some days, fell
behind; and I hired a person to drive his ass, telling him to come on at
his leisure. At eleven o'clock crossed a stream running S.E. which gave
us great trouble, the banks being very steep and slippery. Crossed the
same stream again at half past twelve, running E. by N. In the course of
this day's march four of the soldiers were unable to attend to their
asses. Mr. Scott, being very sick, rode my horse; and I drove one of the
asses. So very much weakened were the men, that when their loads fell
off, they could not lift them on again. I assisted in loading thirteen
asses in the course of the march. We reached Koolihori at three o'clock.
This town is partly walled; but the greater part of the huts are without
the walls. As soon as the tents were pitched, the rain commenced, and
continued all night. We had not time to cook, and the rain prevented the
watch fire from burning; owing to which one of our asses was killed by
the wolves. It was only sixteen feet distant from a bush under which one
of the men was sleeping.

August 5th.--Morning hazy. Halted, resolving to travel at two o'clock,
and sleep in the woods, the Ba Woolli being too far to reach in one
march. Bought some ripe maize of this year's growth.

                           deg.  '  "
Obser. mer. alt. Sun--  172 45  0
                        ---------
                         86 22  0-1/2
                          0 16  0
                        ---------
                         86 38  0-1/2
                        ---------
                          3 22  0
                         17  3  0
                        ---------
Latitude--               13 41  0

The whole route from Bangassi is marked with ruined towns and villages;
some of them are rebuilt, but by far the greater number are still in
ruins. We saw scarcely any cattle on the route, and the avidity of the
people of Koolihori for animal food, or perhaps their own peculiar
taste, made them eat what the wolves had left of our ass. The wolves had
eat only the bowels and heart, &c. so that the people had the four
quarters and head. The day having clouded up for rain, resolved to halt
here for the night. In the course of the afternoon Lawrence Cahill came
up; but William Hall, who had gone into a ruined hut near the road, and
who did not appear to be very sick, did not arrive. Suspected that he
might be killed by the wolves in the hut during the night. At sun-set
had all the asses properly tied near the tents; and watched myself with
the sentries all night, as the wolves kept constantly howling round us.




CHAPTER V.

Departure from Koolihori--Ganifarra--Scarcity of provisions--Distressing
situation of the Author from deaths and sickness of the party--Escapes
from three lions--Intricate route to Koomikoomi--Dombila--Visit from
Karfa Taura--View of the Niger--Reduced state of the party--Bambakoo--
Losses from wolves--Bosradoo; embark on the Niger; incidents in the
voyage to Marraboo--Isaaco sent to Sego with presents for Mansong--
Message from Mansong--Course to Koolikorro--Deena--Yamina--Samee--
Return of Isaaco; account of his interview with Mansong--Messengers
sent by Mansong, and enquiries respecting the Author's journey--Quit
Samee--Excessive heat--Reach Sansanding--Account of that city and its
trade--Death of Mr. Anderson--Preparations for continuing the voyage
eastward--Information collected respecting various districts.




CHAPTER V.


August 6th.--Having hired two more ass drivers at one bar and their
victuals per day, we left Koolihori early in the morning, and travelled
with considerable dispatch till three o'clock; at which time we reached
Ganifarra, a small beggarly village. In the course of this march _L.
Cakill_ and _J. Bird_, two of the soldiers, and _William Cox_, one of
the seamen, fell behind, and laid down. As soon as the front of the
coffle had reached Ganifarra, it came on a very heavy rain. Being in the
rear I was completely drenched; and two of the asses carrying four
trunks, in which were the gun stocks, pistols, looking glasses, &c. fell
down in a stream of water near the town, and all the contents were
completely wet. I could purchase nothing here, not so much as a fowl.
Served out a short allowance of rice, being very short of that article.

August 7th.--During the night, some person had stolen one of our best
asses; and as the load must be left if we could not recover it, Isaaco's
people having traced the foot marks to a considerable distance, agreed
to go in search of it. Isaaco gave them the strictest orders, if they
came up to the thief in the woods to shoot him; and, if not, to follow
him to a town and demand the ass from the Dooty; if he refused to give
it up, to return as soon as possible.

Spent the day in drying such things as were wet; cleaned and greased
with Shea butter all the ornamented pistols, _ten pair_. Dried the
looking glasses, which were quite spoiled. In the afternoon sent two of
the natives away with goods to a neighbouring town to purchase rice and
corn. At sun-set _Bird_ came up, but had seen nothing of _Cox_ nor
_Cahill_.

August 8th.--People not yet returned. Opened the trunk which contained
the double barrelled gun stocks; cleaned and greased them. About noon
people returned with the rice and corn, but not quite sufficient for one
day. Nearly at the same time Isaaco's people came up with the ass; they
had traced his foot-marks past Koolihori, and found him at Balandoo. Did
not see the thief, but learned his name; which Isaaco promised to write
to his friend at Bangassi, to inform Serinummo of him. In the afternoon
agreed with the Dooty for thirty five bars to carry every thing over.
Rained heavily all the evening.

August 9th.--Michael May, a soldier, having died during the night,
buried him at day break. Had all the loads taken to the crossing place
by eight o'clock. The Ba Woolli is nearly of the same size as the one we
formerly crossed of that name; it appeared to be exceedingly deep, and
flowed at the rate of four or five miles per hour. There is a very good
canoe here, which can carry over four ass loads at once. As it
threatened rain, sent over three men with one of the tents, and pitched
it on the East side about half a mile from the river; the ground near
the bank being marshy. Hired people to carry down the bundles, and put
them into the canoe; and others to receive them on the other side, and
carry them up the bank; so that the soldiers had nothing to move, being
all weak and sickly.

By one o'clock all the baggage was over; but we found some difficulty in
transporting the asses; the rapidity of the stream swept the canoe and
the first six past the landing place; and they went so far down the
river, that I really thought the asses must be drowned; which would have
been an irreparable loss in our situation. However, by the exertions of
the Negroes, who swam in with ropes to the canoe, the asses were landed
on the other side; where they stood by the water's edge until the
Negroes with their corn hoes made a path for them up the steep bank. To
prevent such an accident, we took the ropes from several of our loads,
and fastened them together, so as to reach across the river; with this
we hauled over the loaded canoe, and the Negroes paddled it back when
empty. In this manner all the asses and horses were swam over without
any loss.

When the bundles were all carried up to the tent, we found that we had
not more rice than was barely sufficient for the present day; and as no
more could be purchased, we had no alternative, but to march early in
the morning for Bambarra; the distance by all accounts would not exceed
fourteen or fifteen miles.

August 10th.--William Ashton declared that he was unable to travel; but
as there was no place to leave him at, I advised him to make an exertion
and come on, though slowly, till he should reach a place where he could
have food. At eight o'clock set forwards; and travelled very
expeditiously without halting till four in the afternoon, at which time
the front of the coffle reached _Dababoo_, a village of Bambarra. Being
in the rear, I found many of the men very much fatigued with the length
of the journey and the heat of the day. At half past four I arrived with
the ass I drove at a stream flowing to the Westwards.

Here I found many of the soldiers sitting, and Mr. Anderson lying under
a bush, apparently dying. Took him on my back, and carried him across
the stream, which came up to my middle. Carried over the load of the ass
which I drove, got over the ass, Mr. Anderson's horse, &c. Found myself
much fatigued, having crossed the stream sixteen times. Left here four
soldiers with their asses, being unable to carry over their loads.
Having loaded my ass and put Mr. Anderson on his horse, we went on to
the village; but was sorry to find that no rice could be had, and I was
only able to buy one solitary fowl.

August 11th.--Bought a small bullock of the Moorish breed for one
barraloolo; and having purchased some corn, had it cleaned and dressed
for the people instead of rice. This morning hired Isaaco's people to go
back, and bring up the loads of the soldiers who had halted by the side
of the stream. In the course of the day all the loads arrived; but was
sorry to find that in the course of the last two marches we had lost
_four men_, viz. _Cox_, _Cahill_, _Bird_, and _Ashton_. Mr. Anderson
still in a very dangerous way, being unable to walk or sit upright. Mr.
Scott much recovered. I found that I must here leave one load, one of
the horses being quite finished. Left the _seine nets_ in charge of the
Dooty, till I should send for them.

August 12th.--Rained all the morning. About eleven o'clock, the sky
being clear, loaded the asses. None of the Europeans being able to lift
a load, Isaaco made the Negroes load the whole. Saddled Mr. Anderson's
horse; and having put a sick soldier on mine, took Mr. Anderson's horse
by the bridle, that he might have no trouble but sitting upright on the
saddle. We had not gone far before I found one of the asses with a load
of gunpowder, the driver (Dickinson) being unable to proceed (I never
heard of him afterwards); and shortly after the sick man dismounted from
my horse, and laid down by a small pool of water, refusing to rise.
Drove the ass and horse on before me. Passed a number of sick. At half
past twelve o'clock Mr. Anderson declared he could ride no farther. Took
him down and laid him in the shade of a bush, and sat down beside him.
At half past two o'clock he made another attempt to proceed; but had not
rode above an hundred yards before I had to take him down from the
saddle, and lay him again in the shade. I now gave up all thoughts of
being able to carry him forwards till the cool of the evening; and
having turned the horses and ass to feed, I sat down to watch the
pulsations of my dying friend. At four o'clock four of the sick came up;
three of them agreed to take charge of the ass with the gunpowder; and I
put a fourth, who had a sore leg, on my horse, telling him if he saw Mr.
Scott on the road to give him the horse.

At half past five o'clock, there being a fine breeze from the South
West; Mr. Anderson agreed to make another attempt, and having again
placed him on the saddle, I led the horse on pretty smartly in hopes of
reaching Koomikoomi before dark. We had not proceeded above a mile,
before we heard on our left a noise very much like the barking of a
large mastiff, but ending in a hiss like the fuf [Footnote: Thus is Mr.
Park's MS] of a cat. I thought it must be some large monkey; and was
observing to Mr. Anderson "what a bouncing fellow that must be," when we
heard another bark nearer to us, and presently a third still nearer,
accompanied with a growl. I now suspected that some wild animal meant to
attack us, but could not conjecture of what species it was likely to be.
We had not proceeded an hundred yards farther, when coming to an opening
in the bushes, I was not a little surprised to see three lions coming
towards us. They were not so red as the lion I formerly saw in
Barnbarra, [Footnote: Park's Travels, p. 208] but of a dusky colour,
like the colour of an ass. They were very large, and came bounding over
the long grass, not one after another, but all abreast of each other. I
was afraid, if I allowed them to come too near us, and my piece should
miss fire, that we should be all devoured by them. I therefore let go
the bridle, and walked forwards to meet them. As soon as they were
within a long shot of me, I fired at the centre one. I do not think I
hit him; but they all stopt, looked at each other, and then bounded away
a few paces, when one of them stopt, and looked back at me. I was too
busy in loading my piece to observe their motions as they went away, and
was very happy to see the last of them march slowly off amongst the
bushes. We had not proceeded above half a mile farther, when we heard
another bark and growl close to us amongst the bushes. This was
doubtless one of the lions before seen, and I was afraid they would
follow us till dark, when they would have too many opportunities of
springing on us unawares. I therefore got Mr. Anderson's call, and made
as loud a whistling and noise as possible. We heard no more of them.

Just at dark we descended into a valley where was a small stream of
water; but the ascent on the opposite side was through a species of
broken ground, which I have never seen any where but in Africa. It is of
the following nature. A stratum of stiff yellow clay fourteen or twenty
feet thick, (which, unless when it rains, is as hard as rock) is washed
by the annual rains into fissures of a depth equal to the thickness of
the stratum. There is no vegetation on these places, except on the
summit or original level. Amongst these horrid gullies I unfortunately
lost sight of the footmarks of the asses which had gone before; and
finding no way to get out, led the horse up a very steep place in order
to gain the original level, hoping there to find the foot path. But
unluckily the ground was all broken as far as I could see; and after
travelling some little way, we came to a gulley which we could not
cross; and finding no possibility of moving without the danger of being
killed by falling into some of these ravines, or over some precipice, I
thought it advisable to halt till the morning. On this rugged summit we
fell in with Jonas Watkins, one of the sick; and with his assistance I
lighted a fire. Wrapped Mr. Anderson in his cloak, and laid him down
beside it. Watched all night to keep the fire burning, and prevent our
being surprised by the lions, which we knew were at no great distance.
About two o'clock in the morning two more of the sick joined us. Mr.
Anderson slept well during the night, and as soon as day dawned,

August 13th,--having found the footmarks of the asses, and having with
difficulty even in day light traced our way through this labyrinth, we
found Mr. Scott and three more of the sick. They too had lost their way,
and had slept about half a mile to the East of us. We reached Koomikoomi
at ten o'clock. This is an unwalled village, but surrounded with
extensive corn fields.

August 13th.--Halted; rested at Koomikoomi

August 14th.--Jonas Watkins died this morning; buried him. Halted here
to day to see which way Mr. Anderson's fever was likely to terminate;
and in the mean time sent two loaded asses forward to Doombila, the
asses to return in the evening and carry loads to-morrow morning.

                             deg.    '   "
Obser. Mer. Alt. ---- ---- 177   7   0
                             0  32   0
                           ------------
                           177  39   0
                           ------------
                            88  49   0-1/2
                           -------------
                 Z D. ----   1  11   0
                   D.       14   8   0
                           -------------
             Latitude ----  12  57   0 [*]
                           -------------

[Footnote *: Mr. Park took a wrong day's declination, i.e. the 15th
instead of the 14th. It should be,

                             deg.    '    "
              ZD. ---- ----  1   11    0
             Dec. ---- ---- 14   27   29
                           ---------------
         Latitude ---- ---- 13   16   29
                           ---------------
]

It is a common observation of the Negroes, that when the Indian corn is
in blossom the rain stops for eleven days. The stopping of the rain
evidently depends on the sun approaching the zenith of the place; the
sun by this day's observation being only seventy-one miles North of us:
and it is a wonderful institution of providence, that at this time the
maize here is all in full blossom; and on passing through the fields,
one is like to be blinded with the pollen of the male flowers.

August 15th.--Having slung a cloak like a hammock under a straight
stick, had Mr. Anderson put into it, and carried on two men's heads: two
more following to relieve them. Mr. Scott complained this morning of
sickness and head ach. Made one of the soldiers saddle Mr. Anderson's
horse for him; and having seen him mount, and given him his canteen with
water, I rode forwards to look after four Negroes whom I had hired to
carry loads on their heads; but being strangers, I was apprehensive they
might run away with them. Found every thing going on well; and we
travelled with such expedition, that we reached Doombila in four hours
and a half, though the distance cannot be less than sixteen or eighteen
miles, nearly South. It rained hard all the afternoon, and it was not
till dark that all the sick soldiers came up. Only three of the soldiers
were able to drive their asses to day.

When I entered the town I was happy to meet _Karfa Taura_, [Footnote:
Park's Travels, p. 253.] the worthy Negro mentioned in my former
travels; he heard a report at _Boori_ (where he now resides) that a
coffle of white people were passing through Fooladoo for Bambarra; and
that they were conducted by a person of the name of Park, who spoke
Mandingo. He heard this report in the evening; and in the morning he
left his house, determined if possible to meet me at Bambakoo, a
distance of six days travel. He came to Bambakoo with three of his
slaves to assist me in going forward to Sego, but when he found I had
not come up, he came forwards to meet me. He instantly recognised me,
and you may judge of the pleasure I felt on seeing my old benefactor.

At four o'clock, as Mr. Scott had not come up, and the people in the
rear had not seen him lately, I sent one of Isaaco's people back on my
horse as far as the next village, suspecting that he might have halted
there when the rain came on. The man returned after dark, having been
nearly at Koomikoomi without seeing or hearing any thing of Mr. Scott.
We all concluded that he had returned to Koomikoomi.

August 17th--Halted at Doombila in order to dry the baggage, and in
hopes of Mr. Scott coming up. Told the four Negroes, who carried Mr.
Anderson, and who returned to Koomikoomi this morning, to make every
possible enquiry concerning Mr. Scott; and if he was able to ride, I
would pay them handsomely for coming with him. If he had returned to
Koomikoomi, I desired them to assure the Dooty that I would pay for
every expence he might incur, and pay for a guide to conduct him to
Marraboo. Received from the Dooty of Doombila a small bullock and a
sheep. Paid him a barraloolo, five bars of amber, and fifty gun flints.

August 18th.--Hearing no account of Mr. Scott, concluded he was still at
Koomikoomi, but unable to travel. At seven o'clock left Doombila, and as
the asses were now very weak, it was not long before I had to dismount
and put a load on my horse. Only one of the soldiers able to drive an
ass. Road very bad; did not reach _Toniba_ till sun set, being a
distance of eighteen or twenty miles S.E. by S. Mr. Anderson's bearers
halted with him at a village on the road, where there was some good
beer. As soon as we had pitched the tent, it began to rain, and rained
all night; the soldiers run all into the village. I passed a very
disagreeable night, having to keep our asses from eating the people's
corn, which caused me to keep walking about almost the whole night.

In case it should escape my memory, I take this opportunity of
observing, that the standard law of Africa runs thus: If an ass should
break a single stem of corn, the proprietor of the corn has a right to
seize the ass; and if the owner of the ass will not satisfy him for the
damage he thinks he has sustained, he can _retain_ the ass. He cannot
_sell_ or _work_ him, but he can _kill_ him; and as the Bambarrans
esteem ass-flesh as a great luxury, this part of the law is often put in
force.

August 19th.--Mr. Anderson's bearers having brought him forward early in
the morning, we immediately loaded the asses, and departed from Toniba
(Sergeant McKeal appears to be slightly delirious). We kept ascending
the mountains to the South of Toniba till three o'clock, at which time
having gained the summit of the ridge which separates the Niger from the
remote branches of the Senegal, I went on a little before; and coming to
the brow of the hill, I _once more saw the Niger_ rolling its immense
stream along the plain!

After the fatiguing march which we had experienced, the sight of this
river was no doubt pleasant, as it promised an end to, or to be at least
an alleviation of our toils. But when I reflected that three-fourths of
the soldiers had died on their march, and that in addition to our weakly
state we had no carpenters to build the boats, in which we proposed to
prosecute our discoveries; the prospect appeared somewhat gloomy. It
however afforded me peculiar pleasure, when I reflected that in
conducting a party of _Europeans_, with immense baggage, through an
extent of more than five hundred miles, I had always been able to
preserve the most friendly terms with the natives. In fact, this journey
plainly demonstrates, 1st. that with common prudence any quantity of
merchandize may be transported from the Gambia to the Niger, without
danger of being robbed by the natives: 2dly, that if this journey be
performed in the dry season, one may calculate on losing not more than
three or at most four men out of fifty.

But to return to the Niger. The river was much swelled by the rains, but
did not appear to overflow its banks. It certainly is larger even here
than either the Senegal or the Gambia. We descended with difficulty down
the steep side of the hill towards Bambakoo, which place we reached at
half past six o'clock, and pitched our tents under a tree near the town.
Of thirty-four soldiers and four carpenters, who left the Gambia, only
six soldiers and one carpenter reached the Niger.

During the night the wolves carried away two large cloth bundles from
the tent door to a considerable distance; where they eat off the skins
with which they were covered, and left them.

August 20th--Received a bullock from the Dooty as a present. It was in
the afternoon, and we fastened it to the tree close to the tent, where
all the asses were tied. As soon as it was dark the wolves tore its
bowels out, though within ten yards of the tent door where we were all
sitting. The wolves here are the largest and most ferocious we have yet
seen.

August 21st.--Dried a bundle of beads, the strings of which were all
rotten with the rain. Opened a leather bag which contained about thirty
pounds of gunpowder for present use. Found it all wet and damaged.
Spread it out in the sun; resolved to make something of it. Spoke for a
canoe to carry down the baggage to Marraboo, the river being navigable
over the rapids at this season. In the course of our march from Toniba
to Bambakoo, we lost Sergeant _McKeil_, _Purvey_, and _Samuel Hill_.

August 22nd.--Early in the morning had all the bundles put on the asses,
and carried to the place of embarkation, which is a village called
Bossradoo, about a mile and a half East of Bambakoo. It rained hard all
the forenoon. The canoes could not carry any of the soldiers, or any
person except two to look after the goods. I resolved to go down with
Mr. Anderson, leaving Mr. Martyn to come down with the men by land. They
rode on the asses.

We embarked at ten minutes past three o'clock. The current, which is
nearly five knots per hour, set us along without the trouble of rowing
any more than was necessary to keep the canoe in the proper course. The
river is full an English mile over, and at the rapids it is spread out
to nearly twice that breadth. The rapids seem to be formed by the river
passing through a ridge of hills in a South Easterly direction: they are
very numerous, and correspond with the jetting angles of the hills.
There are _three_ principal ones, where the water breaks with
considerable noise in the middle of the river; but the canoe men easily
avoided them by paddling down one of the branches near the shore. Even
in this manner the velocity was such as to make me sigh.

We passed two of the principal rapids, and three smaller ones, in the
course of the afternoon. We saw on one of the islands, in the middle of
the river, a large elephant; it was of a red clay colour with black
legs. I was very unwell of the dysentery; otherwise I would have had a
shot at him, for he was quite near us. We saw three hippopotami close to
another of these islands. The canoe men were afraid they might follow us
and overset the canoes. The report of a musket will in all cases
frighten them away. They blow up the water exactly like a whale. As we
were gliding along shore, one of the canoe men speared a fine turtle, of
the same species as the one I formerly saw, and made a drawing of in
Gambia. At sun set we rowed to the shore, landed on some flat rocks, and
set about cooking the turtle and rice for our supper; but before this
aldermanic repast was half dressed, the rain came on us, and continued
with great violence all night.

August 23d.--At day break embarked again, very wet and sleepy. Passed
the third rapid, and arrived at Marraboo at nine o'clock. Our guide soon
found a large passage hut in which to deposit our baggage, for one stone
of small amber per load. We carried the whole of it up in a few minutes.
In the evening Mr. Martyn arrived, and all the people, except two, who
came up next day.

August 24th.--Received from the Dooty a small black bullock in a
present, which our guide would not allow us to kill, it being of a jet
black colour. The Dooty's name is Sokee; and so superstitious was he,
that all the time we remained at Marraboo he kept himself in his hut,
conceiving that if he saw a white man, he would never prosper after.

August 25th--Paid Isaaco goods to the full value of two prime slaves,
according to agreement. I likewise gave him several articles; and I told
him, that when the palaver was adjusted at Sego, he should then have all
the asses and horses for his trouble.

August 26th.--Took out such things as I meant to give to Mansong, viz.

A handsome silver plated tureen.
*Two double barrelled guns, silver mounted.
Two pair of pistols mounted in the same manner.
A sabre with Morocco scabbard.
Thirty-two yards scarlet broad cloth.
Twelve ditto blue.
Twelve ditto yellow.
Twelve ditto light green.
*Half a load of gunpowder, or two kegs and a half.

   To Mansong's eldest son Da.

*A double barrelled gun, silver mounted.
A pair of pistols, ditto.
A sabre, ditto.

I wished to put a stop to the malicious reports of the Moors and
Mahomedans at Sego as soon as possible. I therefore resolved to send
Isaaco forward to Sego with all the articles beforementioned, except
those marked thus [Symbol: *], which I desired him to say to Modibinne
would be given as soon as I heard accounts that Mansong would befriend
us. This Modibinne is Mansong's prime minister; he is a Mahomedan, but
not intolerant in his principles. Isaaco accordingly departed on the
28th with his wife and all his goods. Ever since my arrival at Marraboo
I had been subject to attacks of the dysentery; and as I found that my
strength was failing very fast, I resolved to charge myself with
mercury. I accordingly took calomel till it affected my mouth to such a
degree, that I could not speak or sleep for six days. The salivation put
an immediate stop to the dysentery, which had proved fatal to so many of
the soldiers. On the 2d of September, I observed the

                           deg.  '  "
Mer. alt. of the Sun--  169 54  0
                        ---------
                         84 57  0
                          0 16  0
                        ---------
                         85 13  0
                        ---------
                          4 47  0
                          8  1  0
                        ---------
Marraboo Latitude--      12 48  0

As soon as I recovered, I set about exchanging some amber and coral for
cowries, which are the current money of Bambarra.

                        Cowries.
Coral No. 4 each stone     60
Amber No. 5                60
Blue agates per string    100

With these three articles I bought about twenty thousand cowries. It is
curious that in counting the cowries, they call eighty a hundred; whilst
in all other things they calculate by the common hundred. Sixty is
called a Manding hundred.

On the 6th Thomas Dyer (a private) died of the fever. I had to pay one
thousand shells to Dooty Sokee, before he would allow me to bury him;
alleging that if the ground was not bought where he was buried, it would
never grow good corn after.

There is no wood proper for boat building in this neighbourhood; the
best wood is near Kankaree, on a large navigable branch of the Niger;
and almost all the Bambarra canoes come from thence; many of them are
mahogany.

The travellers from Sego brought us every day some unfavourable news or
other. At one time it was reported, and believed all over Marraboo, that
Mansong had killed Isaaco with his own hand, and would do the same with
all the whites who should come into Bambarra. Our fears were at length
dispelled by the arrival of Bookari, Mansong's singing man, on the 8th,
with six canoes. He told us he came by Mansong's orders to convey us and
our baggage to Sego. That Mansong thought highly of the presents which
Isaaco had brought, and wished us to be brought to Sego before he
received them from Isaaco. We accordingly put our baggage in order; but
it was not till the 12th that the singing man and his _Somonies_ (canoe
people) could be prevailed on to leave the Dooty _Sokee's_ good beef,
and beer. We embarked, and left Marraboo at ten minutes past three
o'clock.

Time. Course.    Objects.                 Bearing.   Distance.

3.10  E. 1/2 N.  The North extreme        E.
                   of the South hills.
                 Little hump on           E.S.E.
                   South hills.
                 Cubic hill on North      E. by N.   Distant 12
                  side.                              or 14 miles.

0 25  E. by N.
0 30  E. N. E.
0 45  E. 1/2 S.
4  0  E.
0 45  E. by N. 1/2 W.
5  0  N. E.      Cubic hill.              N.         Distant 1/4 of
0 10             Halted for the                      a mile.
                   night at Koolikorro

September 13th.--Bookari sent four of the Somonies over to a town on the
opposite side of the river, to put in requisition a canoe for carrying
part of our baggage. The people refused to give the canoe, and sent the
Somonies back without it. Bookari immediately went with all the Somonies
(38); and having cut the owner of the canoe across the forehead with his
sword, and broke his brother's head with a canoe paddle, he seized one
of his sons, and brought him away as a slave along with the canoe. He
however set the boy at liberty, his father paying two thousand shells
for his release.

We left Koolikorro at thirty-five minutes past eleven. I will not
trouble your Lordship with transcribing the courses and compass bearings
from this to Sansanding. The latitude of the places will give a
sufficient idea of the course of the river; and I hope to give a
tolerable correct chart of all its turnings and widings, when I return
to Great Britain.

                               deg.  '  "
Observed mer. alt. Sun.--    80 45  0
                              0 16  0
                             --------
                             81  1  0
                             --------
                    ZD.--     8 59  0 N
                     D.--     3 53  0
                             --------
Koolikorro     Latitude--    12 52  0 N
                             --------

_The horizon_ was an oblique view across the river. Distance of the land
seven miles; height of the eye sixteen inches above the surface of the
water.

We travelled very pleasantly all day; in fact nothing can be more
beautiful than the views of this immense river; sometimes as smooth as a
mirror, at other times ruffled with a gentle breeze, but at all times
sweeping us along at the rate of six or seven miles per hour. We halted
for the night at Deena, a Somoni village on the south side. Had a
tornado in the night, which wetted our baggage much. Most of us slept in
the canoes to prevent theft.

September 14th.--Departed from Deena early in the morning, and arrived
at Yamina at forty-five minutes past four o'clock. Halted here the 15th,
in order to purchase cowries.

                          deg.  ' "
Observ. alt. Sun--      79 63 0
                         0 16 0
                        -------
                        79 52 0
                        -------
                        10  8 0
                         3  7 0
                        -------
Yamina    Latitude--    13 15 0

On the 16th left Yamina, and in the evening reached Samee, where we
landed our baggage; and Bookari went forward to Sego to inform Mansong
of our arrival.

September 17th.--
                            deg.  ' "
Obser. mer. alt. Sun--    78 47 0
                           0 16 0
                          -------
                           79 3 0
                          -------
                          10 57 0
                           2 20 0
                          -------
Samee       Latitude--    13 17 0
                          -------

September 18th.--No accounts from Sego.

September 19th.--About two o'clock in the morning, Isaaco arrived in a
canoe from Sego, with all the articles I had sent to Mansong. Mansong
had never yet seen any of them; and when he heard that I was arrived at
Samee, he desired Modibinne to inform Isaaco that he had best take the
articles up to Samee; and he would send a person to receive them from my
own hand. Isaaco informed me that Mansong, at all the interviews he had
with him, uniformly declared that he would allow us to pass; but
whenever Isaaco mentioned us particularly, or related any incident that
had happened on the journey, Mansong immediately began to make squares
and triangles in the sand before him with his finger, and continued to
do so, so long as Isaaco spoke about us. Isaaco said, that he thought
Mansong was rather afraid of us; particularly as he never once expressed
a wish to see us, but rather the contrary.

September 22d.--In the evening, Modibinne and four more of Mansong's
friends arrived in a canoe. They sent for me, and Modibinne told me,
that they were come by Mansong's orders to hear, from my own mouth, what
had brought me into Bambarra. He said I might think on it during the
night, and they would visit me in the morning; he said Mansong had sent
me a bullock, which he shewed me: it was very fat, and _milk white_.

September 23d.--As soon as we had breakfasted, Modibinne and the four
grandees came to visit us. When they had seated themselves, and the
usual compliments passed, Modibinne desired me to acquaint them with the
motives which had induced me to come into their country. I spoke to them
in the Bambarra language as follows. "I am the white man who nine years
ago came into Bambarra. I then came to Sego, and requested Mansong's
permission to pass to the Eastwards; he not only permitted me to pass,
but presented me with five thousand cowries to purchase provisions on
the road; [Footnote: Park's Travels, p. 199.] for you all know that the
Moors had robbed me of my goods. This generous conduct of Mansong
towards me, has made his name much respected in the land of the white
people. The King of that country has sent me again into Bambarra; and if
Mansong is inclined to protect me, and you who are here sitting, wish to
befriend me, I will inform you of the real object of my coming into your
country."

(Here Modibinne desired me to speak on, as they were all my friends),
"You all know that the white people are a trading people; and that all
the articles of value, which the Moors and the people of Jinnie bring to
Sego, are made by us. If you speak of a _good gun_, who made it? the
_white people_. If you speak of a good pistol or sword, or piece of
scarlet or baft, or beads or gunpowder, who made them? the _white
people_. We sell them to the Moors; the Moors bring them to Tombuctoo,
where they sell them at a _higher rate_. The people of Tombuctoo sell
them to the people of Jinnie at a still higher price; and the people of
Jinnie sell them to you. Now the King of the white people wishes to find
out a way by which we may bring our own merchandize to you, and sell
every thing at a much cheaper rate than you now have them. For this
purpose, if Mansong will permit me to pass, I propose sailing down the
Joliba to the place where it mixes with the salt water; and if I find no
rocks or danger in the way, the white men's small vessels will come up
and trade at Sego, if Mansong wishes it. What I have now spoken, I hope
and trust you will not mention to any person, except Mansong and his
son; for if the Moors should hear of it, I shall certainly be murdered
before I reach the salt water."

Modibinne answered, "We have heard what you have spoken. Your journey is
a good one, and may God prosper you in it; Mansong will protect you. We
will carry your words to Mansong this afternoon; and tomorrow we will
bring you his answer." I made Isaaco shew them the different things,
which I had allotted for Mansong and his son. They were delighted with
the tureen, the double-barrelled guns, and in fact every thing was far
superior to any thing of the kind they had ever before seen.

When I had laid out every thing for Mansong and his son, I then made
each of the grandees, and Modibinne, a present of scarlet cloth.
Modibinne now said that they had seen what I laid out for Mansong and
his son, and that the present was great, and worthy of Mansong; but,
added he, Mansong has heard so many reports concerning your baggage,
that he wishes us to examine it. "Such of the bundles as are covered
with skin, we will not open; you will tell us what is in them, and that
will be sufficient." I told them that I had nothing but what was
necessary for purchasing provisions; and that it would please me much if
they could dispense with opening the bundles. They however persisted;
and I ordered the bundles to be brought out, taking care, with the
assistance of the soldiers, to secrete all the good amber and coral.

When all the loads were inspected, I asked Modibinne what he thought of
my baggage? If he had seen any more silver tureens, or double barrelled
guns? He said he had seen nothing that was _bad_, and nothing but what
was necessary for purchasing provisions; that he would report the same
to Mansong. They accordingly went away to Sego; but without taking
Mansong's present, till they had heard his answer.

September 24th.--_Seed_ and _Barber_ (soldiers) died during the night;
one of the fever, the other of the dysentery. Paid the Somonies twenty
stones of amber for burying them.

September 25th.--Modibinne and the same people returned with Mansong's
answer, a literal translation of which I give as follows. "Mansong says
he will protect you; that a road is open for you every where, as far as
his hand (power) extends. If you wish to go to the East, no man shall
harm you from Sego till you pass Tombuctoo. If you wish to go to the
West, you may travel through Fooladoo and Manding, through Kasson and
Bondou; the name of Mansong's stranger will be a sufficient protection
for you. If you wish to build your boats at Samee or Sego, at Sansanding
or Jinnie, name the town, and Mansong will convey you thither." He
concluded by observing, that Mansong wished me to sell him four of the
_blunderbusses_, _three swords_, _a fiddle_ (violin) which belonged to
Mr. Scott, and some _Birmingham bead necklaces_, which pleased above
every thing; that he had sent us a bullock, and his son another, with a
fine sheep. I told Modibinne that Mansong's friendship was of more value
to me than the articles he had mentioned, and that I would be happy if
Mansong would accept them from me as a farther proof of my esteem.

I made choice of Sansanding for fitting out our canoe, because Mansong
had never said he wished to see me, and because I could live quieter and
freer from begging than at Sego. I therefore sent down the bullocks by
land to Sansanding.

September 26th. We departed from Samee. The canoes were not covered with
mats; and there being no wind, the sun became insufferably hot. I felt
myself affected with a violent head-ach, which encreased to such a
degree as to make me almost delirious. I never felt so hot a day; there
was _sensible heat_ sufficient to have roasted a _sirloin_; but the
thermometer was in a bundle in the other canoe, so that I could not
ascertain the _actual_ heat. We passed down a small stream to the north
of Sego Korro, and halted opposite to _Segosee Korro_, near the sand
hills, where I formerly waited for a passage. We waited here about an
hour for Isaaco, who had gone to Segosee Korro to inform Mansong of our
passing. When Isaaco returned, he made a sort of shade over our canoe
with four sticks and a couple of cloaks; and in the evening I found
myself more collected and less feverish. At sun-set we rowed towards the
north bank, where there are some flat rocks, on which passengers by
water often sleep. We found the place occupied by a number of people. I
counted between thirty and forty fires; we therefore passed on a little
to the Eastwards, and slept on a sand bank covered with verdure.

September 27th.--At day-break we again proceeded, and in stretching over
to gain the middle of the river, we passed a Somoni fishing village on
an island; the huts occupied the whole of the dry ground, and it
appeared, even when close to it, like a floating village. We reached
Sansanding at ten o'clock. Such crowds of people came to the shore to
see us, that we could not land our baggage till the people were beaten
away with sticks, by Koontie Mamadie's orders, on whose premises we were
accommodated with a large hut for sitting in, having another hut opening
into it, in which we deposited our baggage.

October 2d.--_Marshall_ and _W. Garland_ (privates) died; one of the
fever, the other of the dysentery. During the night the wolves carried
away Garland, the door of the hut where he died being left open. Buried
Marshall on the morning following, in a corn field near the church.

October 4th.--Mansong sent down two broken gunlocks, and a large pewter
plate with a hole in the bottom of it, for me to repair; and it was with
much difficulty that I could persuade the messenger that none of us knew
any thing about such occupations.

October 6th.--_Da_, Mansong's eldest son, sent one canoe as a present,
and requested me to sell him a bunderbuss, and three swords, with some
blue and yellow broad cloth. Sent him three swords, and ten spans of
yellow cloth; received in return six thousand cowries.

Sansanding contains, according to Koontie Mamadie's account, eleven
thousand inhabitants. It has no public buildings, except the mosques,
two of which, though built of mud, are by no means inelegant. The market
place is a large square, and the different articles of merchandize are
exposed for sale on stalls covered with mats, to shade them from the
sun. The market is crowded with people from morning to night: some of
the stalls contain nothing but beads; others indigo in balls; others
wood-ashes in balls; others Houssa and Jinnie cloth. I observed one
stall with nothing but antimony in small bits; another with sulphur, and
a third with copper and silver rings and bracelets. In the houses
fronting the square is sold, scarlet, amber, silks from Morocco, and
tobacco, which looks like Levant tobacco, and comes by way of Tombuctoo.
Adjoining this is the salt market, part of which occupies one corner of
the square. A slab of salt is sold commonly for eight thousand cowries;
a large butcher's stall, or shade, is in the centre of the square, and
as good and fat meat sold every day as any in England. The beer market
is at a little distance, under two large trees; and there are often
exposed for sale from eighty to one hundred calabashes of beer, each
containing about two gallons. Near the beer market is the place where
red and yellow leather is sold.

Besides these market-places, there is a very large space, which is
appropriated for the great market every Tuesday. On this day astonishing
crowds of people come from the country to purchase articles in
wholesale, and retail them in the different villages, &c. There are
commonly from sixteen to twenty large fat Moorish bullocks killed on the
market morning.

October 8th.--As Mansong had delayed much longer in sending the canoes
he promised, than I expected, I thought it best to be provided with a
sufficient quantity of shells to purchase two; particularly when I
reflected that the river would subside in the course of a few days,
having sunk this morning about four inches by the shore. I therefore
opened shop in great style, and exhibited a choice assortment of
European articles to be sold in wholesale or retail. I had of course a
_great run_, which I suppose drew on me the envy of my brother
merchants; for the Jinnie people, the Moors, and the merchants here
joined with those of the same description at Sego, and (in presence of
Modibinne, from whose mouth I had it) offered to give Mansong a quantity
of merchandize of greater value than all the presents I had made him, if
he would seize our baggage, and either kill us, or send us back again
out of Bambarra. They alleged, that my object was to kill Mansong and
his sons by means of charms, that the white people might come and seize
on the country. Mansong, much to his honour, rejected the proposal,
though it was seconded by two-thirds of the people of Sego, and almost
all Sansanding.

From the 8th to the 16th nothing of consequence occurred, I found my
shop every day more and more crowded with customers; and such was my run
of business, that I was sometimes forced to employ _three tellers at
once_ to count my cash. I turned one market day twenty-five thousand
seven hundred and fifty-six pieces of money (cowries.)

The second day after my arrival at Marraboo, as no accounts whatever had
arrived concerning Mr. Scott, I sent a messenger to Koomikoomi, desiring
him to bring Mr. Scott, or some account of him. He returned in four
days, and told us that _Mr. Scott was dead_, and that the natives had
stolen the pistols out of the holsters; but he had brought the horse to
Bambakoo.

When Modibinne enquired of Isaaco what sort of a _return of presents_
would be most agreeable to me, Isaaco (being instructed before) said he
believed two large canoes, and Modibinne assured me, that the canoes
would be sent down to Sansanding immediately on our arrival there.

In order to give a just idea of the trade and profits on different
articles sold at Sansanding, I have annexed a list of _European_ and
_African_ articles, with their respective values in _cowries_, the great
medium of exchange and the general currency of Bambarra.

EUROPEAN ARTICLES.

                       Value in Cowries.

A musket ---- ---- ----     6 to 7000

A cutlass ---- ---- ---- 1500 to 2000

A flint ---- ---- ---- ----        40

Gunpowder, one bottle ---- ----  3000

Amber No. 1. ---- ---- ---- ---- 1000

Ditto No. 2. ---- ---- ---- ----  800

Ditto No. 3. ---- ---- ---- ----  400

Amber No. 4. ---- ---- ---- ----  160

Ditto No. 5. ---- ----  ---- ----  80

Ditto No. 6. ---- ---- ---- ----   60

Coral No. 4. each stone ---- ----  60

Black points, per bead ---- ----   20

Red garnets, per string ---- ----  40

White ditto, per string ---- ----  40

Blue agates, per string ---- ---- 100

Round rock coral, per bead ----     5

Long ditto, per bead ---- ----      5

Short arrangoes, per bead  ----    40

Gold beads, per bead ---- ----     10

An Indian baft ---- ----       20,000

A barraloolo, or five-bar piece 8,000

Scarlet cloth 10 spans ----    20,000

If sold to the Karankeas _in retail_  30,000

_Light yellow_ cloth nearly the same as scarlet;

_blue_ not so high

Paper per sheet ---- ---- 40

A dollar ---- ---- from 6 to 12,000

Or from 1L. 5s. to 2L. 10s

AFRICAN PRODUCE.

A _minkalli_ of gold (12s. 6d. sterling) ----   3000

Four minkallies are equal to L3. 3s.       Value in Cowries.

_Ivory_, the very largest teeth, each ----    10,000

The medium size ---- ---- ---- ---- ----       7,000

The smaller ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----  3 or 4000

_Indigo leaves_ beat and dried in lumps larger

than ones fist, each ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     40

A prime slave, (male) ---- ---- ---- ----     40,000

A ditto, (female) ---- ---- ----  from 80 to 100,000

A girl ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     40,000

A horse from two to ten prime male slaves

A cow (fat) ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     15,000

An ass ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     17,000

A sheep ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     3 to 5,000

A fowl ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----      250 to 300

As much _excellent fat beef_ as will be sufficient

  for seven men one day ---- ---- ---- ----      620

As much _good beer_ as the same number can

  drink in one day ---- ---- ---- ---- ----      300

October 16th.--Modibinne and Jower arrived, and told me that they had
brought a canoe from Mansong. I went to see it, and objected to one half
of it, which was quite rotten. They sent up to Sego for another half;
but when it arrived, it would not fit the one already sent. I was
therefore forced to send Isaaco again to Sego; and as Mansong had
requested me by Modibinne to sell him any spare arms I might have, I
sent two blunderbusses, two fowling pieces, two pair of pistols, and
five unserviceable muskets; requesting in return that Mansong would
either send a proper canoe, or permit me to purchase one that I might
proceed on my journey. Isaaco returned on the 20th with a large canoe;
but half of it was very much decayed and patched, I therefore set about
joining the best half to the half formerly sent; and with the assistance
of Abraham Bolton (private) took out all the rotten pieces; and repaired
all the holes, and sewed places; and with eighteen days _hard labour,
changed the_ Bambarra canoe into _His Majesty's schooner Joliba_; the
length forty feet, breadth six feet; being flat bottomed, draws only one
foot water when loaded.

October 28th.--At a quarter past five o'clock in the morning my dear
friend Mr. Alexander Anderson died after a sickness of four months. I
feel much inclined to speak of his merits; but as his worth was known
only to a few friends, I will rather cherish his memory in silence, and
imitate his cool and steady conduct, than weary my friends with a
panegyric in which they cannot be supposed to join. I shall only observe
that no event which took place during the journey, ever threw the
smallest gloom over my mind, till I laid Mr. Anderson in the grave. I
then felt myself, as if left a second time lonely and friendless amidst
the wilds of Africa.

November 14th.--The schooner is now nearly ready for our departure; I
only wait for Isaaco's return from Sego, that I may give him this paper
in charge.

November 15th.--Isaaco returned; and told us that Mansong was anxious
that I should depart as soon as possible, before the Moors to the East
had intimation of my coming. Bought bullock hides to form an awning to
secure us from the spears and arrows of the _Surka_ or _Soorka_ and
_Mahinga_ who inhabit the North bank of the river betwixt Jinnie and
Tombuctoo.

November 16.--All ready and we sail to-morrow morning, or evening. I
will therefore conclude this long epistle with some miscellaneous
information.

  _Variation_ of the compass.

West of the Faleme river ---- ----      14 11 West.

At Badoo, near Sibikillin ---- ----     14 56

Near the _Bafing_ ---- ---- ----        16 30

At Marraboo on the Niger ---- ----      16 36

At Yamina ---- ---- ---- ---- ----      17 11

At Sansanding ---- ----  ---- ----      17 40

In case any one should be inclined to doubt the accuracy of the
latitudes taken by the back observation with Troughton's pocket sextant;
I think it proper to mention that I have observed at Sansanding
alternately with the _horizon of the river_, and the _back observation_
in water and the artificial horizon; and never found them to vary more
than four minutes, but generally much nearer.

A fac-simile sketch of the course of the Niger, made by an old Somonie,
who had been seven times at Tombuctoo, and is now going the eighth.

_Ba Nimma_ rises in the Kong mountains South of Marraboo; it passes one
day's journey South of Sego; and having received a branch from Miniana,
empties itself into the lake Dibbie. It is not quite half so large as
the Niger. I have not the least doubt of the truth of this, having heard
it from so many people. We shall not see Jinnie in going to Tombuctoo.

_Route from Sego to Miniana._

From Sego in one day,

Deena, across the Ba Nimma in canoes, and halt on
the south side; thence in one day,
Dahmaroo,
Sijirri,
Neaguana,
Mullo Soo,
Billi Soo;
In all seven days.

The inhabitants of Miniana eat their enemies, and strangers, if they die
in the country. They eat the flesh of horses; but such is their
veneration for the cow that she is never killed; when she dies, they eat
the flesh. Miniana is hilly; all the grains are cultivated the same as
in Bambarra.

                 _Route from Sego to Badoo_.
From Sego in one day.
    Koogoo,
    N. goi, [Footnote: Thus written in Park's MS.]
    Jeenna,
    Doo-Wassoo.
    Choyna,
    Guandoo on the banks of the Badingfing, a small
      river from Miniana.
    Cheraboo,
    Baboo,
    Blendoo,
    Koolokoo,
    Kay-a,
    Wangeera,
    Jibbi,
    Nemansana,
    Kooli,
    Chemosoo,
    N. jeera,
    Chekora,
    Koonteela,
    Doomba,
    Chongi,
  Teng: gera, a great Juli town; a Juli is called in
        Baedoo, Kirko Bimba;
  Teeleemagee,
  Soomasoo,
  Koorinsoo,
  Jondoo; Juli town,
  Sala,
  N. Kannoo, Juli town.

The whole of the foregoing places are in Bambarra.

  Totti, a town in Baedoo.
  Baedoo, the capital.

The Julis are people who understand the language of Baedoo and Miniana,
and are employed as interpreters and brokers by the salt merchants. One
month's travel South of Baedoo through the kingdom of Gotto, will bring
the traveller to the country of the Christians, who have their houses on
the banks of the _Ba Sea feena_; this water they represent as being
imcomparably larger than the lake Dibbie, and that the water sometimes
flows one way, sometimes another. There are no Shea trees in Kong or
Gotto, and very few in Baedoo.




ISAACO'S JOURNAL.

VOL. II.


_Government House

Sierra Leone, 10th December, 1811._

"MY LORD,

"With reference to my letter of the 8th of March 1810, communicating
having engaged a person to go in search, and ascertain the fate of the
late Mr. Mungo Park; I have the honour to communicate to Your Lordship,
that this person returned to Senegal on the 1st of September; but I am
concerned to state that his information confirms the various reports of
Mr. Park's death.

"I have enclosed a copy of the Journal of the person whom I sent, which
was kept in Arabic, and has been translated into English by a person
resident in Senegal.

"Isaaco has been paid the promised reward, which I hope will be approved
by your Lordship.

"I have the honour to be,

"MY LORD,

"Your Lordship's most obedient

"humble Servant,

"C.W. MAXWELL.

"_Governor._"


_To the Right Honourable
The Earl of Liverpool._



ISAACO'S JOURNAL.


I, Isaaco, left Senegal on Sunday, the 22d day of the moon Tabasky;
[Footnote: Seventh of January, 1810.] in the afternoon we came to an
anchor at the foot of the bar. We passed the bar next morning, and had
like to have lost ourselves; we got on board the George. Weighed anchor
in the night of the 23d, from the roads, and anchored at Goree the 24th
at about 4 P.M. [Footnote: These times of the day are not very exact,
being regulated by the Mahometan times of prayer.] On my arrival there,
I found some of my effects had been stolen; I signified to the
commandant of Goree my intention to postpone my voyage, until my stolen
goods were found. The commandant sent me back on board the George, and
ordered the vessel to return to Senegal, that I might make there my
complaint to Governor Maxwell. We were nine days at sea with heavy
weather, and could not fetch; we were obliged to return to Goree on the
tenth day.

The commandant next day (Friday) after my arrival, sent a courier to
Senegal to the Governor, with the account of my goods being stolen; and
on the Friday following the courier brought me my effects. [Footnote:
These goods had been stolen in the lighter outside of the bar.] The same
day in the afternoon, I left Goree in the George, and arrived in Gambia,
the night after at Yoummy. We left Yoummy on the Sunday following, and
arrived on Monday at Jilifrey. We left Jilifrey the same day; passed
Tancrowaly, in the night, and on Tuesday came opposite a forest. Passed
this spot, and came to anchor at Baling. From Baling came to an anchor
opposite a forest at four P.M. We got under weigh in the night and came
to in the morning. Departed after breakfast, and came to at noon.
Departed immediately after, and came to after sunset. Passed Caour in
the night, and came to anchor at four A.M. (Thursday). Weighed in the
evening and came to Yanimmarou at noon. We left Yanimmarou in the
morning of Friday, and came to Mongha. Left the Mongha the same day at
sunset, and came to Mariancounda late in the evening, and Robert Ainsley
being there, I landed and presented to him the Governor's letter; making
in all eight days from Goree to my arrival at Mariancounda.

Robert Ainsley kept me five days with him. He gave me, by the Governor's
desire, one horse, one ass, and twenty bars of beads. I left Robert
Ainsley on Wednesday morning, and went to the village of the king of
Cataba to pay my respects. I had previously sent the same day, my
baggage and people, to Giammalocoto. On my arrival before Cataba, I gave
him one musket, and one string of amber No. 4. which he distributed to
his attendants. In the evening of the same day, I took leave of the
king, and arrived at Giammalocoto, after sunset, where I met my people
and effects. I left Giammalocoto, on Friday morning, and slept at
Tandacounda. I departed next morning (Saturday) and slept at Guenda. On
Sunday crossed a rivulet and slept under a tamarind tree close to the
village of Sandougoumanna. I sent to Sallatigua-koura, king of that
country, five bars of tobacco (ten heads). I went and slept at
Woullimanna. I gave to Mansancoije, the chief, two bars of scarlet cloth
and two bars of tobacco, and to his son, one bar of scarlet cloth. I
also gave to my landlord three bars of tobacco. Departed next day early;
stopped at Carropa at noon, and went to Coussage, where we slept. I
there found my family, who had been driven away by the Bambarra army. I
staid at Coussage two days and gave Maitafodey, chief of the village,
three bottles of powder. [Footnote: One bottle of powder passes for five
bars.] We left Coussage in the evening, with all my family; arrived at
Montogou in the morning, where my family resided before the Bambarra
army entered this country. I here found my mother. I staid at Montogou
about one month and a half, or forty-six days.

Having disposed of such of my property as I could not carry with me, I
left Montogou at about nine A.M. with my family and people, stopped at
Moundoundon, having crossed three rivulets; slept there. Mamadou, the
chief, killed me a sheep: I gave him one bottle of powder. We departed
in the morning, stopped at Couchiar at noon, under a bark-tree, where we
passed the rest of the day. We filled our leather bags with water and
departed about four P.M. We travelled all night and came to Saabie at
three A.M. This village is inhabited by Marabous (priests). We stayed
there two days. I found there a relation of one of my wives. I gave him
one bottle of powder and three pagnes (a piece of cloth the natives make
use of in their dresses). We left Saabie in the morning, stopped at noon
at Joumajaoury, and arrived at Tallimangoly. I there met a relation who
killed a sheep. I gave him three grains of amber. We slept there. Next
morning we departed, and arrived at midnight at Baniscrilla, where I
found the King of Bondou with the Bambarra army. I went to pay my
respects to him, and gave him ten bottles of powder, thirteen grains of
amber No. 1, two grains of coral No. 1, and one handsome tin box. To his
first valet one pagne, worth one piece of baft; to his goldsmith four
pagnes; to the Chief of the village two bottles of powder. (Ten bars.)
Slept there two nights; departed early, so did the army on their way to
Gambia. We stopped at noon at Cambaya, being very hungry: we departed in
the evening; and slept on the road. At about eight A.M. on the next day,
we passed Gnary and Sangnongagy; received at this last village some peas
without stopping. We stopped at noon at Dougay. Next morning early we
departed, and stopped at noon at Daacada; in the evening we stopped and
slept at Bougoldanda. Next day we stopped at noon at Saamcolo. Some
singers of the village paid me a visit; I gave them a few trinkets. I
had here a grand palaver (dispute) about one of my dogs, who had, as was
said, bit a man; with great difficulty I prevented the animal from being
killed.

Departed next day early; arrived at noon at Soumbourdaga, and slept
there. Next morning at nine A.M. arrived at Debbou; my friend Saloumou
gave me two sheep; I gave him two bottles of powder. Saloumou told me he
would keep me company to Sego if I pleased; I readily agreed, and gave
him ten pagnes to give to his wife to support her until his return. Next
morning, Saloumou being ready, we departed from Debbou: we crossed the
Faleme, and stopped on the other side at a village also called Debbou. I
bought there two sheep and some corn; we staid there three days, and had
our corn converted into kouskous. We departed from Debbou early on
Monday, the first day of Raky Gamon, [Footnote: May 4, 1810.] and
arrived at noon at the village of Diggichoucoumee, the residence of the
King of Bondou: we stayed there four days and killed two sheep. I gave
to Almami Sega two bottles of powder; bought one sheep. Departed early
and went to Sabcouria, where we slept; it is the last village of Bondou
to the northward.

Left Sabcouria early, and passed Gouloumbo: we slept on the road. Next
morning at nine A. M. we stopt at Dramana, in sight of Saint Joseph, the
Fort of Galam; we staid there five days. I was forced to stay there so
long, on account of a palaver I had with the family of one of my wives,
who opposed her going on the voyage with me: I was divorced, and she had
to give me what she had received at our marriage, which is the law among
us Mahomedans. I received one bullock and four sheep. I gave the Chief
Euchoumana fourteen bars in amber and powder; to the people one bottle
and a half of powder, and two bars of amber; to the Chief of Galam two
bottles of powder and twenty flints.

We departed early; crossed _Choligota_ [Footnote: The Ch must be
pronounced through the throat.] and Taning_ch_olee, two rivulets, and
arrived at noon at Moussala; slept there. We were well treated by the
Chief. I gave him two flints and thirty loads of powder. Departed very
early, and arrived at Tambouncana on the Senegal River. I there saw a
Moor who had a very fine mare, which I bought with the goods which were
returned to me in my palaver at Dramana. The King of Bambarra built
there a large fort. We departed, and arrived at noon at Samicouta; we
then went to Gui_ch_alel, where we slept at the house of Amady face,
Chief of the village. We stopt there the next day, owing to one of my
slaves running away, whom I got back again. Early in the morning we
crossed the Senegal River at Settoucoule, on the Moors' side. I bought
one sheep; slept there, and was well treated.

Departed early; stopt at nine A.M. at Coulou, and slept there; we found
there only the women, the men had followed the Bambarra army. Departed
early, crossed _Ch_olibinne and arrived at Challimancounna, where I
staid two days. Ourigiague, the Chief, received me well, and killed a
bullock. I gave him one bottle of powder. We departed long before
day-break, crossed Fallaou, stopt at day-break at the Lake of Douro to
take water; we went on, and arrived at nine A.M. at Medina. I was
obliged to stay there twelve days, to wait the return of one of my
fellow travellers; not hearing any thing of him, I sent a man after him,
because I had lent him my mare and a musket. The man brought me back my
mare and musket. I was there well treated by the Chief and village
people, who gave me five sheep. I gave them in return one bottle of
powder, and one and a half bars. I bought a sheep. This completed the
three moons from my departure from Montogou.

We departed early, and crossed Kirgout, a river full of hippopotami and
alligators. At noon arrived at Cougnacary, formerly the metropolis of
the kingdom of Casso, but now occupied by Bambarras. Received one sheep,
and gave one bottle of powder and five flints. We slept there, and next
day early went round and crossed the river Kirgout again. At nine A.M.
passed Maretoumane; farther on, passed a large rock called Tap-pa.
Arrived at noon at Camatingue, after crossing five rivers; we staid
there two days; received a bullock and a sheep from the Seracoolies
residing in Casso. I gave to Nare-Moussa, the Chief, half a bottle of
powder, and ten grains of amber. One of my slaves was there redeemed,
and I received another in exchange. I met there the King of Bambarra's
messenger; I gave him half a bottle of powder. We departed early,
crossed Garry between two rocks; arrived at noon at Lambatara; slept
there. We were all the way surrounded by mountains and rocks. We started
early, after taking water for our provisions, and had to ascend high
mountains. About noon we arrived at the top of one of them; a part of my
people went forward. When on the very top of the hill, they were
surrounded and attacked by such a quantity of bees, that my people and
beasts of burden were scattered; [Footnote: The bees in those parts of
the country are very numerous, especially on the tops of the mountains.
A similar accident from the attack of bees is mentioned by Park in his
Journal, p. 37. See also Vol. I. p. 331.] when they were a little
appeased, we went after our beasts, who had thrown away every thing they
had on their backs. I found one of my asses dead, being stifled by the
bees getting into its nostrils, and one of my men almost dead by their
stings. I had to give him something to bring him to life, and that with
a great deal of pains. We slept at the foot of that mountain, under a
monkey-bread tree.

Departed early; at nine A.M. we met on the road one of the King of
Bambarra's messengers, who was sent after me; we stopped and sat under a
tree together; he told me he was sent by his master, to let me know if
he met me at Cougnacary, he was ordered to procure me plenty of
provisions, and keep me there to rest myself; but as he had met me on
the road, and a long way past Cougnacary, he would lead me to the first
village, would get me some provisions, and that I might stay there to
rest myself; to which I agreed. We passed Goundouguede and arrived at
four P.M. at Jyggiting Yalla; on my arrival I told the messenger my
intention of sending somebody to the King, to let him know of my being
in his dominions, and near him. I then sent Saloumon my friend to
Giocha, where the King resided. I told him on his arrival at Giocha, to
go to Sabila, the chief of all the King's slaves, and a confident of
his, to give him thirteen grains of amber No. 1, one pair of scissars,
one snuff-box, and one looking-glass; and tell him I sent him those
things as a present, and let him know of my arrival. After this man's
departure, I sent another messenger, and desired him to go to Giocha, to
endeavour to see my old friend Allasana-Bociara, one of the King of
Sego's messengers, who were sent as ambassadors, and tell him that I
send him this grain of amber, and that piece [Footnote: One round half
dollar.] of silver, as a mark of my being near him, and not to leave
Giocha before he saw me. I had learnt his arrival there by a caravan of
slaves I met on the road.

After I had sent these two messengers unknown to one another, the King's
messenger came in the evening, and told me he was going away, but should
give orders to the first village he should come to, to receive me well
and give me provisions and all assistance; and that I should wait there
for further orders. I then slept there: in the course of the night, the
Chief of the village where I was ordered to go and stop for further
orders, sent a messenger to his son here, where I was, desiring him to
stop me here. Next morning his son came to me, and said it was useless
for me to go any farther; that his father had sent to him and desired he
would furnish me with whatever I wanted and keep me here. I told him, if
I staid where I was, I should die with all my family, of hunger and
thirst; and that I would go on where I was ordered, unless I was stopped
by force. I immediately got every thing ready and departed.

At noon, we arrived at Maribougou, where I was ordered to stop. Foula
Massa, the Chief, sent me to his brother to take up lodgings. When I
came to his brother's house I was refused lodgings; I then went under a
large monkey-bread tree and made halt there. The Chief came and told me
to stay here; I said I could not, as water was very scarce, and my
company very numerous. He immediately gave orders that no one in the
village should draw water, so that I might not want, and that I should
have no excuse. I took that opportunity to give drink to all my people
and cattle, and filled my skins. Being ready to depart from thence, the
two men I had sent to Giocha from Jyggiting Yalla, arrived; one told me
he had seen Sabila, and delivered my message and present to him; that
Sabila said, he perceived I wanted to be his friend, to which he had no
objection; the other messenger told me, that the King of Sego's
ambassador said I might be assured he would not leave Giocha before he
saw me, according to my desire.

I had in my caravan a merchant I met at Dramana; he came from Senegal,
and had some friends in this village, who sent to tell him to take away
his goods from mine and put them aside, as I was in great danger of
being plundered, and his goods would be lost to him if found amongst
mine; to which he objected; which gave me a proof of his good
intentions, and of his friendship to me. I was then convinced something
unpleasant was planning against me. I therefore forced this merchant to
take away his goods from mine; as it would be unjust he should suffer on
my account. I then placed myself and people against the tree, well
armed. I had two double-barrelled guns and a musket in good order, and
well loaded; and waited for what should happen.

While I was in this state of defence, a messenger from the King came to
me, the same man I had met first, who told me, that as I was complaining
of want of water, he would conduct me to another village. We accordingly
departed, and arrived at Wassaba; when there, the messenger shewed me a
house where I was to take up my lodging, and have my things in safety.
He then wanted to separate my people from me and scatter them in the
village, so as to have a better chance to plunder me; to which I
strongly objected. I went with my people, baggage, &c. into the middle
of the yard of the house appointed for my lodging, and staid there.

The Chief of the village came to me, and desired I should give him my
people to go and fetch me a bullock: the King's messenger took him aside
and spoke a little while to him: he came again and told me he could not
give me now the bullock, as his cattle were too far off among the King's
herd. When the messenger saw me settle in the yard, and disposed to
spend the evening there, he left me and went away.

When I was sure of his departure, I sent another man to Giocha, and
ordered him to go to Madiguijou Marabou, who would introduce him to
Sabila; and when there, to give Sabila seven grains of amber, and tell
him to go and let the King know, that wherever I went, I met some of his
people who stopped me from one place to another; and my intention was
positively to go to him, and to beg Sabila to obtain my request. My
courier came back the next day, and told me that Sabila said, the King,
his master's pleasure was, that I should stay where I was, and come to
see him (the King) on the next day, with which I complied.

Next day the King sent a messenger to me with orders to lead me to him.
I left my family and baggage, taking three horsemen of my people with me
and four footmen, and departed with the messenger. I had, previous to
that, sent a man before me with five grains of the largest amber No. 1.
with orders to wait at Giocha for me. We arrived at the back of the
village at three P.M. on Tuesday; the man I had sent before me, was
there waiting for me; he told me softly that where I was going we were
betrayed; and not to let the King know of my going to Sego, as our lives
depended upon it. I told him, that he well knew, I was sent by the
Governor of Senegal to Sego; and to Sego I must go, unless I was
prevented by death or force. I then entered the village and went
straight to the King's door, followed by his messenger, I there
alighted; the messenger made me wait at the door, and went in to take
the King's orders. He came back immediately and told me the King was
sleeping; the guard took possession of my people and me, and lodged us
in the guard-room with them. It was then about sunset, and not a single
soul of my friends and acquaintances or relations came to see me. I then
began to think seriously what was to be done. A griot [Footnote: Ballad
singer and dancer.] woman was the only person who came to comfort me in
my distress.

This woman on leaving me went immediately to the ambassadors of Sego
(which I afterwards learnt), and said to them, "Oh me, oh me, my back is
broke." [Footnote: An expression of sorrow among the cassonkes.] The
ambassadors asked her the reason; she said, "Because Isaaco our friend
is here, and they are going to kill him." Sabila being a very powerful
man, and not hearing from him, I sent my boy to Madiguijou; and begged
he would introduce the boy to Sabila, and when there, to give him the
five grains of amber. Not being well guarded, I sent another man to my
landlord where I always resided when I passed in this village, with my
compliments, and my surprise at not seeing him since my arrival. He sent
me word that he was happy to hear of my being so near him and in good
health, and that nobody had given him any notice of my arrival: which
last words I attributed to his being afraid to meddle with me while in
the King's hands. I sent in the night the merchant who was advised to
draw his goods from mine at Maribougou, to the Sego ambassadors; and
informed them of my being here.

Seeing the guards' carelessness, I went (still in the night) to my
landlord, who had still some influence near the king, and gave him one
of my wives necklaces, nine grains of amber, and seven grains of coral.
From thence I went to Madiguijou, and told him I was sent on a mission
to the King of Sego, with some papers; in order to facilitate me on my
voyage in search of a white man gone in the interior of this country
long ago. I went from there to Sabila and told him the same thing.
Afterwards I went back to the guard-house, and laid myself down to
sleep; while the guards were amusing themselves in dancing, singing, and
drinking. My slumber being disturbed by my uneasy mind, I awoke and
found all the guards gone.

I went to take the air, and returned again to sleep, but could not. I
heard the feet of several horsemen in the street, going, I presumed, to
Sabila's house. Early in the morning I sent another message to the
ambassadors, to let them know how critically I was situated; that I
heard they were going away to Sego without me; and my uneasiness at not
hearing a word from them. They sent to ask me why I did not follow this
time the same road I had followed on my other voyage. I sent back the
man to let them know as the two kingdoms were at peace, I thought it
secure and safe to travel through this part; that Mungo Park had
promised King Mansong a present; and Mungo Park not returning, the
Governor of Senegal had entrusted this same present to me for Mansong,
and that I was now the bearer of it. However, since they were determined
to go without me, they might do so, and whether I should be released or
die; they should hear it soon enough at Sego. They sent to
Tiguing-Coroba [Footnote: Vulgarly Tiguing-coro.] (the King) a message
saying; We have heard that Isaaco our friend is at Giocha, bearer of a
present to Dacha (King of Sego) which Mr. Park had promised to Mansong
(Dacha's father); that Mr. Park not returning in time to his country,
his friends had appointed Isaaco to be the bearer of that present, which
is with him now, and is destined for Sego, to the King our master. In
case Isaaco wishes to go back, we beg you will not let him do so; but if
he wishes to go on, on his mission to Sego, we also beg and hope you
will give him all assistance, and some trusty persons to conduct him to
Sego. [Footnote: This equivocal invitation was given to the King, who
well knew that the King of Sego was more powerful than him; and if he
should injure Isaaco in any manner, he would be driven from his
dominions.]

Then came Massatan Wague, a Marabou, who told me what I have above
related, and how I had been arrested with an intention to destroy me,
and take what I had; that Sibila had been the means of my escaping such
danger, and had saved my life; to which story I gave little credit,
knowing well the reason why they shewed me such mercy; but I thanked God
alone for my preservation. Massatan Wague advised me to give the King's
only son something. I went to that prince, and gave him half a piece of
white baft, and two grains of amber No. 1. I went back to the
guard-house, where I passed the following night.

Next morning my landlord went to the King to beg (as every thing was
settled and appeared favourable on my side) that he might take me to his
lodging; to which the King consented. He immediately came and took me
away to his house with my people. I went with my land-lord
(Tong-Manchong) and my people to the King: on arriving, after the usual
salutations, I presented him with a fine tin box. The King addressed
Sabila, and said with a nod, "Here is the business." Sabila said, "This
man is our old friend, and is a good man." My landlord said the same.
The King turned to me and said, "No; here is your box and keep it; what
else you have brought in my country I shall keep; you may return to the
place you first started from, and travel on your mission by the same
road you travelled first, with the white men; but your goods, and every
thing else you have with you, I shall keep. I know what you have is
destined to the King of Sego." I said, "I might, it is true, have
traveiled by other roads, and you would never have heard of me; but in
my way, I heard you lived in peace and friendship with the King of Sego;
I therefore thought I might with security travel through your country."
He stopped me, saying, "What I have said to you is enough."

I left the house with part of his slaves. I went to my lodging, and
immediately completed the amount of sixty bars in powder, amber, &c. I
took the horse Robert Ainsley had bought for me, three ducks, and the
tin box he refused. I gathered all these things, and went with my
landlord and offered them as presents to the King, which he accepted: in
his presence I gave Sabila one bottle of powder; to the King's singer
one snuff-box. The King, on seeing these presents, (the only thing to
cool his anger) told me he would lend me somebody who would conduct me
straight to Sego. I said, "I could not go so soon; because if I did,
whoever would see me would think I deserted from him; and I therefore
thought proper to stay where I was and rest myself awhile." The King
said to Sabila, "You see Isaaco appears to be a courageous man; if he
had been of a weak-spirited mind, he would have run away, and left his
things in my hands." I went home, and spent the rest of the day and the
night.

In the morning I departed with my people to Wassaba, to fetch my family
and things; I staid there two days; but being uneasy in my mind, and
being afraid of something planning against me, and as I had good reason
to think so by the few words I heard at different times, I went back to
Giocha, presented myself to the King; and told him that before I left
his dominions, I had thought proper to come and swear fidelity and
friendship to him; and that whenever I should go backwards or forwards
from Senegal to Sego, I should always pass through his country and see
him; but that I should wish also at the same time that he would swear to
protect and treat me well, and be my friend; even should he be at war
with the King of Sego. He sent for Chiaman, the eldest son of the royal
family, who swore the same to me in his and the King's name. I likewise
swore before them what I related above. After swearing, Chiaman told me
to give him a handsome gun or a coussabi (shirt) by way of cementing our
oaths. I told him, I had none at present fit to present to him, but gave
him my word, that if I should go back to the white men's country, on my
return I would bring him one of those two objects.

I staid in the village until the next morning. I had in the mean while
wrote a prayer (Grisgris) or amulet, to a man who gave me a bullock,
which I carried to Wassaba; I slept there. Next morning I had the
bullock killed. The next day Iaque, Chiaman's brother, sent me word to
wait there for him. I immediately sent my family and things by another
road, and waited for Iaque. He came and presented me with an ass loaded
with kouskous to help me in my travels. I gave him half a piece of fine
white baft, five bottles of powder, two looking-glasses, and two
snuff-boxes. He then left me, and I went the same day to Giocha, to take
leave of the King, and beg he would let me have the promised conductor
(between Wassaba and Giocha there being seven rivulets to cross.) He
gave me a man named Mourocouro, who went on foot. He then shook hands
with me, saying, "Isaaco, I bear you no malice now; but did so once,
because you conducted white men to Sego; and never passed here to let me
have something from them, whilst every body else shared their
generosity." I took my leave of him and went to Chicouray, Chiaman's
village, where I met my family and things safe. I staid there two days.
Chaiman killed me a bullock, and I gave him one pagne, worth two pieces
of bafts, one bottle of powder, twenty flints, and one bar of scarlet
cloth.

We started in the evening and arrived at Chicouray. [Footnote: These two
last villages bear the same name.] Sambabile (Chiaman's other brother)
gave me some corn and a sheep. I gave him a blue pagne, a striped ditto,
one bottle of powder, twenty flints, and one bar of scarlet cloth; which
pagnes I got by the sale of three slaves I was obliged to sell to help
me in my expenses. I staid there two days; in the morning I started, and
arrived at noon at Jyallacoro; where resided Madifoutane, the King's
son, to whom I had given half a piece of fine cotton and two grains of
amber; he gave me some corn. Madimarian, a Marabou, killed me a bullock;
I give him one bottle of powder.

Next morning I started from thence, passed three villages, and arrived
at three P.M. at Cobla. I received cooked victuals from the village; I
gave two flints. We departed next morning early, and arrived at noon at
Amadifalouma bougou, the last village belonging to King Tiguing-coro, it
being on Wednesday, and six moons [Footnote: July 2, 1810.] after my
departure from Senegal. I bought there an ass.

Having before me a large forest to cross, and uncertain of the right
road, I hired four men to conduct me. I departed next morning, and
crossed a small river near the village. We entered the forest at noon,
and came to a large muddy pond, where the hogs could not pass safely;
our guides shewed us a better road, where we crossed easily. At two P.M.
we stopped where had been formerly a village. We found in our way after
sun-set, a large land turtle, which we killed; and passed the night
there. Departed early; at ten A.M. passed Sarina, formerly a village;
stopped awhile. The four men I had charged to go as guides, wished to go
back; they were afraid to go on further. I was much disappointed at such
behaviour, and got angry with them, and said I would sooner go back than
be left in such a forest. They shewed me a road, and told me to follow
it straight along, and to be careful not to turn either to the right or
left, and that I should soon find a village inhabited. I gave them half
a bottle of powder and ten flints, and let them go, as I could not do
otherwise.

I went on, and found the road the King of Sego's army had taken nine
years ago. [Footnote: When at war with Tiguing-coro.] Farther on we met
a small pond; being very thirsty, we spent there the best part of the
day; a little farther we found a large pond, where we made a halt, and
past the night under a tree. Departed early; arrived at noon at the
lakes of Chinchare and Tirinn. These lakes are never dry; and the King's
army always stops at them to take water. After dinner we started, and at
five P.M. arrived at another lake. We went on, and came to the village
of Giangounte after sun-set; where we stopped five days, on account of
one of my people being sick; received the first night a few provisions;
next day they killed me a bullock. Here I thanked God for my escape.

On the third day the King's people came; the village gave them a bullock
and a sheep, which I killed myself; they gave me a quarter of each for
my share. This village is surrounded by a mud wall, is well fortified,
and I presume is well secured against any attack. One of the hogs being
very large and fat, I could not carry it any farther, but with great
difficulty: I told the Chief of the village to take charge of the hog,
and have it conveyed to the King his master; to which he objected, being
afraid to take charge of an unknown animal, and the additional
responsibility of taking charge of it for his master. I told him I found
it impossible for me to carry it any farther; I should therefore leave
it with him, and he might do with it as he pleased. That the village
belonged to his master, so did the hog, and I was sure he would take
good care of it.

We departed early and arrived at noon at Fabougou. After dinner we went
to Giongoey, where we arrived after sun-set; we staid there two days.
Early in the morning we departed, and at ten A.M. arrived at the lake
Sonne; stopped a little under a tree; crossed the lake; stopped awhile
at Tonneguela; arrived and stopped at Gommingtora, where we spent the
night; received a sheep. Departed early, and at ten A. M. arrived at
Wattere. Departed in the evening and came to a large open field, very
dangerous for travellers, on account of the Moors passing there very
often. We therefore travelled during the day and all the night.

At three A.M. came to Toucha. On my way from Gommingtora here, I saw a
tree grown on the top of the dried stump of another large tree; the wood
of the above tree is employed in the composition of our gunpowder. There
is also near the tree a large and high rock, forming a pyramid, and a
large stone on the top of its head. On my arrival at Toucha, I missed a
chest which my nephew carried, and which contained some looking glasses,
beads, my fine coussabi, and my wife's bracelets, which were given me by
Governor Maxwell. I asked the boy what was become of it; he said, that
being fatigued on the way, he had given the chest to a man who had
followed our caravan from Giocha. I suspected the man had stolen it, by
not seeing him with us. I left my family and things there, and went
immediately with some of the King's people to Wattera in search of the
thief. I had the Chief of Toucha's son and the son of the Chief of
Wattera with me. From Wattera we went to Tagoubou, where we found the
thief, who had broken the chest and taken away the things; he had on my
coussabi, had sold some things, and had in hand the remainder, looking
after a slave to purchase. We seized him. The Chief of Tagoubou begged
me not to hurt him in his village, but to carry him to Dinghang. Arrived
at Dinghang. Maineoro, the Chief, told me, since I caught the thief, I
might take him away, and do as I thought proper with him.

We went and slept at Togouboo, and next morning went to Wattera.
Departed in the evening and arrived at night at Toucha, and joined my
family. On our way the thief shewed me where he had destroyed the chest.
I found the boards useless, and left them. I left Toucha early next
morning, and at nine A.M. arrived at Douabougou. The Chief wished me to
stay, but I refused, and he gave me a sheep. Farther on we passed
Dilla-faa Courna and Bonabougou, where we staid awhile, and went to see
Magnacoro at sunset: (these villages are all surrounded by Ronn-trees;
[Footnote: A species of palm tree. (I do not know the particular
name.)]) the thief carrying all the way the remaining hog. On my way
there, one of my people staid on the road, having a sore leg. I was well
treated at Magnacoro and slept there; the man with the sore leg came
next day. I staid two days. There is in this village a fine Doualli
tree, the first I had seen on my way from Senegal; this tree is most
beautiful, always green and in blossom, but bearing no fruit whatever.
On the back of the village there is a foundery for casting iron; at a
little distance on the river there is a cataract, not quite so high as
the Feloups. I took guides to shew me the right road. Departed early; at
noon arrived at Soubacarra, passed Tacoutalla; crossed there a small
rivulet; farther on crossed another, and stopped at Sirecaime, a village
situated between two mountains, where we slept. Next morning received
ten moulles [Footnote: A small measure made out of a calabash.] of corn
and departed.

At noon arrived at Camecon; received there from Fiong, the Chief, a
sheep, some milk, and corn. In the afternoon departed, and passed
Sidong. At sun-set arrived at Sannanba, where we slept. I found here my
sister and one of my wives I had left in my voyage with Mr. Park, and
where they waited for my return. I asked them what they heard concerning
Mr. Park. They assured me that they had seen Alhagi Biraim, who told
them that Mr. Park was dead; and that he saw the canoe in which he died
in the country of Haoussa; to which country, he, Alhagi, had been, and
to the place where Mr. Park died. Yamme Marabou gave me bullock; so did
Moulina one; Guiniba one; and Facoro, the Chief, also one and some corn.
Two sheep were given to me by Alhagi; one by Fatuna-bougou; one by
Amadibinne-doucara, and three by Dimba Soumares. We staid there eight
days.

On the ninth day the hog I had left behind was brought here. I received
one ass from Mouline: I gave to Amadibinne one musket and five yards of
white cotton; to Yamme half a bottle of powder; to my sister ten dollars
and one muslin pagne; to the Chief one bottle of powder and twenty
flints. I released here the thief, who all the way had carried the hog;
I released him, because I was certain, that, if once in the King's
power, he would be put to death. Four days after the hog came, being the
thirteenth day of my stay at Sannamba (Saturday), and the seventh moon
of my voyage.

I departed early, and ordered the hog to be brought along by the same
people; passed Baromba, took water at a large fountain; passed
Bancoumalla. After passing a large lake, stopped and slept at Sirberra,
at the house of Babamerine, who killed a sheep: received from Manchia
the Chief, one sheep; I gave them twenty loads of powder and ten flints.
Departed in the night, and arrived at two in the morning at Counnow.
There is but one well for the whole village, and three beautiful large
Doualli trees are round it. Found there the King's army.

There is on the east of the village an enormous large tree, inhabited by
a great number of bats; another such tree is on the west side of the
village, likewise full of bats; but what is most extraordinary, the bats
of the east constantly go at night to the west, and return to the east
at the approach of day; those of the west never go to the east. The bats
are all of the same kind. The natives say that their lawful king lies on
the west. [Footnote: Tiguing-coro, the descendant of the lawful Kings of
Sego.] The army departed about three, and I about day-light; we met on
the road the rear guard on its way to join the army. At four P.M.
arrived at Gargnie, a large village, where we slept. There is but one
door to enter it, and two large trees on each side of the door; the
village is situated in the front of a beautiful large lake, which
supplies them with water. We met there a caravan from Cancare; received
from them a few collas. Departed early, and at ten A.M. arrived at
Dedougou, where we slept. The people of Gargnie had brought here the hog
and gone back; and the people of this village being all out in their
fields, I was obliged to wait until next morning, so as to have the hog
carried; received three fowls; I gave three loads of powder. Next
morning I required four hands to carry the hog (which imposition I laid
on every village I came to) and departed. Passed Issicora and five
deserted villages; at four P. M. arrived at Yaminna, and stayed there
three days, at the house of Boya Modiba, who killed me a sheep. I gave
him two bars of scarlet cloth. A woman who had been redeemed at
Montogou, and who had followed my caravan, found here her husband, who
gave me a sheep and a hundred collas.

Departed early and arrived at noon at Yaminna, [Footnote: Bearing the
same name as the last place.] on the river Joliba (Niger). I wanted to
cross the river immediately, but the rain prevented me; at four P.M.
embarked in a canoe, and went on till about ten P.M. Arrived at
Mognongo, on the other side of the river, having passed nine villages.
The river here is very wide. Departed again, and arrived at noon at
Samman; lodged with Guinguina, where we formerly lodged with Mr. Park,
and where we lost three white men by sickness. At four P.M. departed,
and arrived at sun-set at Sego-coro, on the opposite side of Samman,
having passed four villages; lodged with Sego Somma.

This village was formerly the residence of the kings; and to this day,
when the King wishes to go to war, he always goes there to have his
gris-gris (amulets) made, and to prepare himself. When they take a king,
a prince, or a man of high rank, whether a stranger, or of the country,
they confine him until the fasting moon is come. He is brought in that
moon to this village, and laid down in a house appropriated for this
purpose only. His throat is then cut across. When the blood has
completely stained the ground, the body is carried into the open field,
and left a prey to the wild beasts. There is not a fasting moon, but
that one or more are butchered in the house, and for the space of eight
days after these executions, no man, whatever he may be, is allowed to
pass by that house (called Kognoba) without pulling off his shoes or
cap.

Departed early, passed Segobougou, Segocoura, and Douabougou, and
arrived about eight A.M. at Sego-chicoro, the residence of Dacha King of
the Bambarras, on Monday 11th of the moon. [Footnote: August 26, 1810.]
This town was built by Dacha's grandfather, [Footnote: Mansong's father,
named Wolloo.] who rebelled against the lawful king; being chosen leader
at the head of his party, drove the king from his dominions, who retired
to the west, [Footnote: He is obliged to gather another army and go
himself at the head of it, to revenge the first, should it be
destroyed.] and was proclaimed king himself. Being a great warrior, he
maintained himself on the usurped throne, and left it to his posterity,
who enjoy it peaceably now.

I lodged with Guiawe, a man attached to the King. Next morning the King
hearing of my arrival, sent to tell me he was going to Douabougou, and
wished I would go and see him there. He had got on his horse and was
proceeding, when a heavy shower of rain came on; he dismounted and went
back to his house. After the rain, he ordered me to come to him, and
bring him the hogs in the manner I had tied them for travelling. On my
entrance in the first yard I found a guard of forty men, young, strong,
and without beards. On entering another yard I met another guard, well
armed and very numerous, lying in the shade. A little farther on I found
the king sitting; there were four broad swords stuck in the ground, on
each side and behind him, which had been given to him by Mr. Park. He
had on his military coat, which he is obliged to wear when he sends out
an army, and cannot leave off until the army returns. He commonly wears
dresses of white or blue cotor, or silk, with a great many gris-gris,
covered with plates of gold or silver, sewed about his dresses. I sat
down on one side of him, and my landlord on the other side. After the
usual salutations, I laid before him the drum, the two blunderbusses,
the bed, the two hogs, the scarlet cloth, &c. and one dog. [Footnote:
The other got away on leaving Mariancounda, and was lost.] I said to
him: "Maxwell, Governor of Senegal, salutes you, and sends his
compliments to you; here is the present which Manchong (or Mansong) your
father asked of Mr. Park, and which he promised to send him." He said,
"Is the Governor well?" I said, "Yes, he is well, and desired me to beg
your assistance in his endeavours to discover what is become of Mr.
Park, and ascertain whether he is dead or alive; and that you would give
me a vessel to facilitate my voyage; and the Governor will reward you
for so doing." He replied, "What does the Governor mean to give me?" I
said, "If you render me all the assistance in your power, the Governor
will give you two hundred bars." He asked me, how the Governor could
give him that sum, being so far from him? I told him, the Governor, it
was true, was far from him; but that I was there to represent and answer
for him. He then accepted my offer and promised me his assistance. The
King ordered a bullock to be killed for me. I staid to the end of that
moon. [Footnote: September 13, 1810.]

The first [Footnote: September 14, 1810. They reckon one day when the
moon is seen.] of the following moon, being the day I intended to
depart, a prince of Tombuctoo came to Sego, to demand a wife who had
been promised him. The King went out to meet him with a guard of six
hundred men, almost naked and well armed. The prince said, that being a
friend of his father (Manchong), he thought it his duty to come and let
him know of his coming to take the wife promised him; the King replied,
"Why have you permitted the people of your country to plunder one my
caravans, [Footnote: My landlord lost his share in that caravan; seven
hundred gros of gold and a slave.] and why did you not prevent it, and
why did you yourself plunder another, belonging also to me?" The King
left the prince out, and returned to his house with the guards, after
unloading their muskets. The prince went to his lodging. He reflected
how critically he was situated, and that by his bad behaviour, the wife
which he had once been promised, had been given to another; and that the
people of the caravan he had plundered, had been before the King and
there had denounced him; and that his life was at stake. He immediately
sent three horses to the King, and half a piece of cotor [Footnote: So
in the MS. of this translation.] to all the chiefs present.

Next day the ambassadors of Giocha came together with the ambassadors of
Tiguing-coro. The day after the King went to Impebara. I next day went
to meet him there. After staying there nine days, and hearing nothing, I
was much displeased; some one went to the King and told him that I was
angry, and was about to depart. He sent to tell me he was going to
Banangcoro, and that I should go with him; he did depart from
Banangcoro, but I staid; he sent me a courier to order me near him. I
went to Banangcoro, and lodged with Inche, the King's slave and
confident. The motive of the King's journey was to see one of his
children. He has six now living: and three he had destroyed. The custom
is when a male child of the King's wives is born on a Friday, that the
throat should be cut; which is done immediately. The King sent for me. I
went to him at ten A.M.; he ordered part of the presents to be brought
before him; which was done, and among which were the hogs. [Footnote:
The remaining hog died shortly after my arrival at Sego.] They were left
loose before him and pleased him much.

On the next day (Friday) he gave me a canoe with three hands
(fishermen), and I departed on my voyage after Mr. Park the following
tide; we passed ten villages, and arrived at supper time at Sansanding,
[Footnote: This village is two days journey by land from Banangcoro.]
where we slept; departed by land at three P.M. and arrived at sunset at
Madina, and lodged with Alihou. I found there Amadi fatouma, [Footnote:
Amadou fatooma.] the very guide I had recommended to Mr. Park, and who
went with him on his voyage from Sansanding. I sent for him; he came
immediately. I demanded of him a faithful account of what had happened
to Mr. Park. On seeing me, and hearing me mention Mr. Park, he began to
weep; and his first words were, "They are all dead." I said, "I am come
to see after you, and intended to look every way for you, to know the
truth from your own mouth, how they died." He said that they were lost
for ever, and it was useless to make any further enquiry after them; for
to look after what was irrecoverably lost, was losing time to no
purpose. I told him I was going back to Sansanding, and requested he
would come the next day there to meet me, to which he agreed. I went to
Sansanding and slept there; next day I sent back the canoe to Impebara.
Amadi fatouma came at the appointed time to meet me, being the 21st day
of the moon. [Footnote: 4th October, 1810.] I desired he would let me
know what passed to his knowledge concerning Mr. Park.




AMADI FATOUMA'S JOURNAL.


We departed from Sansanding in a canoe the 27th [Footnote: This Journal
mentions no moon nor year.] day of the moon, and went in two days to
Sellee, [Footnote: Called Siila in Mr. Park's first voyage.] where Mr.
Park ended his first voyage. Mr. Park bought a slave to help him in the
navigation of the canoe. There was Mr. Park, Martyn, three other white
men, three slaves and myself as guide and interpreter; nine in number,
to navigate the canoe: without landing we bought the slave. We went in
two days to Ginne. We gave the Chief one piece of baft and went on. In
passing Sibby, [Footnote: Here no mention is made of times. Called
Dibbie in the plan.] three canoes came after us, armed with pikes,
lances, bows and arrows, &c. but no fire-arms. Being sure of their
hostile intentions, we ordered them to go back; but to no effect; and
were obliged to repulse them by force. Passed on; we passed Rakbara;
[Footnote: Called Kabra in the plan.] three came up to stop our passage,
which we repelled by force. On passing Tombuctoo we were again attacked
by three canoes; which we beat off, always killing many of the natives.
On passing Gouroumo seven canoes came after us; which we likewise beat
off. We lost one white man by sickness; we were reduced to eight hands;
having each of us fifteen muskets, always in order and ready for action.
Passed by a village (of which I have forgotten the name), the residence
of King Gotoijege; after passing which we counted sixty canoes coming
after us, which we repulsed, and killed a great number of men. Seeing so
many men killed, and our superiority over them, I took hold of Martyn's
hand, saying, "Martyn, let us cease firing; for we have killed too many
already"; on which Martyn wanted to kill me, had not Mr. Park
interfered. After passing Gotoijege a long way, we met a very strong
army on one side of the river; composed of the Poul nation; they had no
beasts of any kind. We passed on the other side and went on without
hostilities.

On going along we struck on the rocks. An hippopotamus rose near us, and
had nearly overset the canoe; we fired on the animal and drove it away.
After a great deal of trouble we got off the canoe without any material
danger. We came to an anchor before Kaffo, and passed the day there. We
had in the canoe before we departed from Sansanding, a very large stock
of provisions, salted and fresh of all kinds; which enabled us to go
along without stopping at any place, for fear of accident. The canoe was
large enough to contain with ease one hundred and twenty people. In the
evening we started and came to before an island; we saw on shore a great
quantity of hippopotami; on our approach they went into the water in
such confusion, that they almost upset our canoe. We passed the island
and sailed. In the morning three canoes from Kaffo came after us, which
we beat off. We came to near a small island, and saw some of the
natives; I was sent on shore to buy some milk. When I got among them I
saw two canoes go on board to sell fresh provisions, such as fowls,
rice, &c. One of the natives wanted to kill me; at last he took hold of
me, and said I was his prisoner. Mr. Park seeing what was passing on
shore, suspected the truth. He stopped the two canoes and people,
telling the people belonging to them, that if they should kill me, or
keep me prisoner on shore, he would kill them all and carry their canoes
away with him. Those on shore suspecting Mr. Park's intentions, sent me
off in another canoe on board; they were then released. After which we
bought some provisions from them, and made them some presents.

A short time after our departure, twenty canoes came after us from the
same place; on coming near, they hailed and said, "Amadi fatouma, how
can you pass through our country without giving us any thing." I
mentioned what they had said to Mr. Park; and he gave them a few grains
of amber and some trinkets, and they went back peaceably. On coming to a
shallow part of the river, we saw on the shore a great many men sitting
down; coming nearer to them they stood up; we presented our muskets to
them, which made them run off to the interior. A little farther on we
came to a very difficult passage. The rocks had barred the river; but
three passages were still open between them. On coming near one of them,
we discovered the same people again, standing on the top of a large
rock; which caused great uneasiness to us, especially to me, and I
seriously promised never to pass there again without making considerable
charitable donations to the poor. We returned and went to a pass of less
danger, where we passed unmolested.

We came to before Carmasse, and gave the Chief one piece of baft. We
went on and anchored before Gourinon. Mr. Park sent me on shore with
forty thousand cowries to buy provisions. I went and bought rice,
onions, fowls, milk, &c. and departed late in the evening. The Chief of
the village sent a canoe after us, to let us know of a large army
encamped on the top of a very high mountain, waiting for us; and that we
had better return, or be on our guard. We immediately came to an anchor,
and spent there the rest of the day, and all the night. We started in
the morning; on passing the above-mentioned mountain, we saw the army,
composed of Moors, with horses and camels; but without any fire-arms. As
they said nothing to us, we passed on quietly, and entered the country
of Haoussa, and came to an anchor. Mr. Park said to me, "Now, Amadi, you
are at the end of your journey; I engaged you to conduct me here; you
are going to leave me, but before you go, you must give me the names of
the necessaries of life, &c. in the language of the countries through
which I am going to pass;" to which I agreed, and we spent two days
together about it, without landing. During our voyage I was the only one
who had landed. We departed and arrived at Yaour.

I was sent on shore the next morning with a musket and a sabre, to carry
to the chief of the village, also with three pieces of white baft for
distribution. I went and gave the Chief his present: I also gave one
piece to Alhagi, one to Alhagi-biron, and the other to a person whose
name I forget, all Marabous. The Chief gave us a bullock, a sheep, three
jars of honey, and four men's loads of rice. Mr. Park gave me seven
thousand cowries, and ordered me to buy provisions, which I did; he told
me to go to the Chief and give him five silver rings, some powder and
flints, and tell him that these presents were given to the King
[Footnote: The King staid a few hundred yards from the river.] by the
white men, who were taking leave of him before they went away. After the
Chief had received these things, he enquired if the white men intended
to come back. Mr. Park being informed of this enquiry, replied that he
could not return any more. [Footnote: These words occasioned his death;
for the certainty of Mr. Park's not returning induced the Chief to
withhold the presents from the King.] Mr. Park had paid me for my voyage
before we left Sansanding: I said to him, "I agreed to carry you into
the kingdom of Haoussa; we are now in Haoussa. I have fulfilled my
engagements with you; I am therefore going to leave you here and
return."

Next day (Saturday) Mr. Park departed, and I slept in the village
(Yaour). Next morning, I went to the King to pay my respects to him; on
entering the house I found two men who came on horseback; they were sent
by the Chief of Yaour. They said to the King, "we are sent by the Chief
of Yaour to let you know that the white men went away, without giving
you or him (the Chief) any thing; they have a great many things with
them, and we have received nothing from them; and this Amadou fatouma
now before you is a bad man, and has likewise made a fool of you both."
The king immediately ordered me to be put in irons; which was
accordingly done, and every thing I had taken from me; some were for
killing me, and some for preserving my life. The next morning early the
King sent an army to a village called Boussa near the river side. There
is before this village a rock across the whole breadth of the river. One
part of the rocks is very high; there is a large opening in that rock in
the form of a door, which is the only passage for the water to pass
through; the tide current is here very strong. This army went and took
possession of the top of this opening. Mr. Park came there after the
army had posted itself; he nevertheless attempted to pass. The people
began to attack him, throwing lances, pikes, arrows and stones. Mr. Park
defended himself for a long time; two of his slaves at the stern of the
canoe were killed; they threw every thing they had in the canoe into the
river, and kept firing; but being overpowered by numbers and fatigue,
and unable to keep up the canoe against the current, and no probability
of escaping, Mr. Park took hold of one of the white men, and jumped into
the water; Martyn did the same, and they were drowned in the stream in
attempting to escape. The only slave remaining in the boat, seeing the
natives persist in throwing weapons at the canoe without ceasing, stood
up and said to them, "Stop throwing now, you see nothing in the canoe,
and nobody but myself, therefore cease. Take me and the canoe, but don't
kill me." They took possession of the canoe and the man, and carried
them to the King.

I was kept in irons three months; the King released me and gave me a
slave (woman). I immediately went to the slave taken in the canoe, who
told me in what manner Mr. Park and all of them had died, and what I
have related above. I asked him if he was sure nothing had been found in
the canoe after its capture; he said that nothing remained in the canoe
but himself and a sword-belt. I asked him where the sword-belt was; he
said the King took it, and had made a girth for his horse with it.




ISAACO'S JOURNAL IN CONTINUATION.


I immediately sent a Poule to Yaour to get me the belt by any means and
at any price, and any thing else he could discover belonging to Mr.
Park. I left Madina and went to Sansanding, and from thence to Sego. On
my arrival I went to Dacha, the King, and related to him the above
facts. He said he would have gone himself to destroy that country, if it
had not been so far. He gathered an army and went with it to Banangcoro.
I followed him there. He ordered the army to go and destroy the kingdom
of Haoussa. The army went away, passed Tombuctoo a long way, and made a
halt at Sacha; and dispatched a courier back to the King, to let him
know where they were, and that Haoussa was at too great a distance for
an army to go, without running many dangers of all kinds. The King
ordered them to go to Massina, a small country belonging to the Poule
nation, to take away all the Poules' cattle, and return. They did so,
and brought with them a great many cattle. The vanguard came with the
cattle after a voyage of three months; and the army came one month
after, which made four months they had been out. The King was much
displeased with the Chiefs' conduct, and wanted to punish them for not
going where he sent them; but they observed that they went as far as
they possibly could; that the distance was too great and would have
destroyed an army; and that prudence and the hardships they had already
sustained, had dictated the necessity of returning, though very contrary
to their inclinations. We all returned to Sego.

I went back to Sansanding and staid there, waiting for the arrival of
the Poule I had sent to Yaour. Four months after he came back, having
been eight months on his voyage, and having suffered greatly. He brought
me the belt; and said that he had bribed a young slave girl belonging to
the King, who had stole it from him; and that he could not get any thing
more, as nothing else was to be found which had belonged to Mr. Park or
his companions.

I went to Sego and informed the King of what I had got belonging to Mr.
Park, and that I was going to Senegal immediately. The King was desirous
that I should spend the rainy season with him. I said I could not stay;
as the object of my mission was attained, I wished to go as soon as
possible. Amadi fatouma being a good, honest, and upright man, I had
placed him with Mr. Park; what he related to me being on his oath,
having no interest, nor any hopes of reward whatever: nothing remaining
of Mr. Park or his effects; the relations of several travellers who had
passed the same country, agreeing with Amadou's Journal; being certain
of the truth of what he had said, and of the dangers I should have run
to no purpose in such a distant part; all these reasons induced me to
proceed no farther. After obtaining the belt, I thought it best to
return to Senegal.

_Further Intelligence from Isaaco._

Isaaco says that Mr. Park gave him his papers to carry to Gambia to
Robert Ainsley, with an order on Robert Ainsley for ten bars. That Mr.
Park went away from Sansanding with Amadi fatouma, in his presence; that
he cannot tell precisely the date, but that Mr. Park died four months
after his departure from Sansanding, which date may be nearly taken from
the date of Mr. Park's papers brought by him (Isaaco) to Robert Ainsley.
That Mr. Park had lost all his companions but four men. He arrived at
Foolah Dougou with thirty-three white men, and from Foolah Dougou to
Sego (which was eight days march, but which is generally performed in
three days by a Negro) they lost twenty-six men by rains, the damps, &c.
Mr. Park went away from Sansanding, with four men, and he himself making
five.








Produced by John Bilderback, Eric Eldred, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




MEN, WOMEN, AND BOATS

By Stephen Crane

Edited With an Introduction by Vincent Starrett




NOTE

A Number of the tales and sketches here brought together appear now for
the first time between covers; others for the first time between covers
in this country. All have been gathered from out-of-print volumes and
old magazine files.

"The Open Boat," one of Stephen Crane's finest stories, is used with the
courteous permission of Doubleday, Page & Co., holders of the copyright.
Its companion masterpiece, "The Blue Hotel," because of copyright
complications, has had to be omitted, greatly to the regret of the
editor.

After the death of Stephen Crane, a haphazard and undiscriminating
gathering of his earlier tales and sketches appeared in London under the
misleading title, "Last Words." From this volume, now rarely met with, a
number of characteristic minor works have been selected, and these will
be new to Crane's American admirers; as follows: "The Reluctant
Voyagers," "The End of the Battle," "The Upturned Face," "An Episode of
War," "A Desertion," "Four Men in a Cave," "The Mesmeric Mountain,"
"London Impressions," "The Snake."

Three of our present collection, printed by arrangement, appeared in the
London (1898) edition of "The Open Boat and Other Stories," published by
William Heinemann, but did not occur in the American volume of that
title. They are "An Experiment in Misery," "The Duel that was not
Fought," and "The Pace of Youth."

For the rest, "A Dark Brown Dog," "A Tent in Agony," and "The Scotch
Express," are here printed for the first time in a book.

For the general title of the present collection, the editor alone is
responsible.

V. S.



MEN, WOMEN AND BOATS

CONTENTS

STEPHEN CRANE: _An Estimate_

THE OPEN BOAT

THE RELUCTANT VOYAGERS

THE END OF THE BATTLE

THE UPTURNED FACE

AN EPISODE OF WAR

AN EXPERIMENT IN MISERY

THE DUEL THAT WAS NOT FOUGHT

A DESERTION

THE DARK-BROWN DOG

THE PACE OF YOUTH

SULLIVAN COUNTY SKETCHES

  A TENT IN AGONY

  FOUR MEN IN A CAVE

  THE MESMERIC MOUNTAIN

THE SNAKE

LONDON IMPRESSIONS

THE SCOTCH EXPRESS




STEPHEN CRANE: _AN ESTIMATE_


It hardly profits us to conjecture what Stephen Crane might have written
about the World War had he lived. Certainly, he would have been in it,
in one capacity or another. No man had a greater talent for war and
personal adventure, nor a finer art in describing it. Few writers of
recent times could so well describe the poetry of motion as manifested
in the surge and flow of battle, or so well depict the isolated deed of
heroism in its stark simplicity and terror.

To such an undertaking as Henri Barbusse's "Under Fire," that powerful,
brutal book, Crane would have brought an analytical genius almost
clairvoyant. He possessed an uncanny vision; a descriptive ability
photographic in its clarity and its care for minutiae--yet
unphotographic in that the big central thing often is omitted, to be
felt rather than seen in the occult suggestion of detail. Crane would
have seen and depicted the grisly horror of it all, as did Barbusse, but
also he would have seen the glory and the ecstasy and the wonder of it,
and over that his poetry would have been spread.

While Stephen Crane was an excellent psychologist, he was also a true
poet. Frequently his prose was finer poetry than his deliberate essays
in poesy. His most famous book, "The Red Badge of Courage," is
essentially a psychological study, a delicate clinical dissection of the
soul of a recruit, but it is also a _tour de force_ of the
imagination. When he wrote the book he had never seen a battle: he had
to place himself in the situation of another. Years later, when he came
out of the Greco-Turkish _fracas_, he remarked to a friend: "'The
Red Badge' is all right."

Written by a youth who had scarcely passed his majority, this book has
been compared with Tolstoy's "Sebastopol" and Zola's "La Debacle," and
with some of the short stories of Ambrose Bierce. The comparison with
Bierce's work is legitimate; with the other books, I think, less so.
Tolstoy and Zola see none of the traditional beauty of battle; they
apply themselves to a devoted--almost obscene--study of corpses and
carnage generally; and they lack the American's instinct for the rowdy
commonplace, the natural, the irreverent, which so materially aids his
realism. In "The Red Badge of Courage" invariably the tone is kept down
where one expects a height: the most heroic deeds are accomplished with
studied awkwardness.

Crane was an obscure free-lance when he wrote this book. The effort, he
says, somewhere, "was born of pain--despair, almost." It was a better
piece of work, however, for that very reason, as Crane knew. It is far
from flawless. It has been remarked that it bristles with as many
grammatical errors as with bayonets; but it is a big canvas, and I am
certain that many of Crane's deviations from the rules of polite
rhetoric were deliberate experiments, looking to effect--effect which,
frequently, he gained.

Stephen Crane "arrived" with this book. There are, of course, many who
never have heard of him, to this day, but there was a time when he was
very much talked of. That was in the middle nineties, following
publication of "The Red Badge of Courage," although even before that he
had occasioned a brief flurry with his weird collection of poems called
"The Black Riders and Other Lines." He was highly praised, and highly
abused and laughed at; but he seemed to be "made." We have largely
forgotten since. It is a way we have.

Personally, I prefer his short stories to his novels and his poems;
those, for instance, contained in "The Open Boat," in "Wounds in the
Rain," and in "The Monster." The title-story in that first collection is
perhaps his finest piece of work. Yet what is it? A truthful record of
an adventure of his own in the filibustering days that preceded our war
with Spain; the faithful narrative of the voyage of an open boat, manned
by a handful of shipwrecked men. But Captain Bligh's account of
_his_ small boat journey, after he had been sent adrift by the
mutineers of the _Bounty_, seems tame in comparison, although of
the two the English sailor's voyage was the more perilous.

In "The Open Boat" Crane again gains his effects by keeping down the
tone where another writer might have attempted "fine writing" and have
been lost. In it perhaps is most strikingly evident the poetic cadences
of his prose: its rhythmic, monotonous flow is the flow of the gray
water that laps at the sides of the boat, that rises and recedes in
cruel waves, "like little pointed rocks." It is a desolate picture, and
the tale is one of our greatest short stories. In the other tales that
go to make up the volume are wild, exotic glimpses of Latin-America. I
doubt whether the color and spirit of that region have been better
rendered than in Stephen Crane's curious, distorted, staccato sentences.

"War Stories" is the laconic sub-title of "Wounds in the Rain." It was
not war on a grand scale that Crane saw in the Spanish-American
complication, in which he participated as a war correspondent; no such
war as the recent horror. But the occasions for personal heroism were no
fewer than always, and the opportunities for the exercise of such powers
of trained and appreciative understanding and sympathy as Crane
possessed, were abundant. For the most part, these tales are episodic,
reports of isolated instances--the profanely humorous experiences of
correspondents, the magnificent courage of signalmen under fire, the
forgotten adventure of a converted yacht--but all are instinct with the
red fever of war, and are backgrounded with the choking smoke of battle.
Never again did Crane attempt the large canvas of "The Red Badge of
Courage." Before he had seen war, he imagined its immensity and painted
it with the fury and fidelity of a Verestchagin; when he was its
familiar, he singled out its minor, crimson passages for briefer but no
less careful delineation.

In this book, again, his sense of the poetry of motion is vividly
evident. We see men going into action, wave on wave, or in scattering
charges; we hear the clink of their accoutrements and their breath
whistling through their teeth. They are not men going into action at
all, but men going about their business, which at the moment happens to
be the capture of a trench. They are neither heroes nor cowards. Their
faces reflect no particular emotion save, perhaps, a desire to get
somewhere. They are a line of men running for a train, or following a
fire engine, or charging a trench. It is a relentless picture, ever
changing, ever the same. But it contains poetry, too, in rich, memorable
passages.

In "The Monster and Other Stories," there is a tale called "The Blue
Hotel". A Swede, its central figure, toward the end manages to get
himself murdered. Crane's description of it is just as casual as that.
The story fills a dozen pages of the book; but the social injustice of
the whole world is hinted in that space; the upside-downness of
creation, right prostrate, wrong triumphant,--a mad, crazy world. The
incident of the murdered Swede is just part of the backwash of it all,
but it is an illuminating fragment. The Swede was slain, not by the
gambler whose knife pierced his thick hide: he was the victim of a
condition for which he was no more to blame than the man who stabbed
him. Stephen Crane thus speaks through the lips of one of the
characters:--

    "We are all in it! This poor gambler isn't even
    a noun. He is a kind of an adverb. Every sin is
    the result of a collaboration. We, five of us, have
    collaborated in the murder of this Swede. Usually
    there are from a dozen to forty women really involved
    in every murder, but in this case it seems
    to be only five men--you, I, Johnnie, Old Scully,
    and that fool of an unfortunate gambler came
    merely as a culmination, the apex of a human movement,
    and gets all the punishment."

And then this typical and arresting piece of irony:--

    "The corpse of the Swede, alone in the saloon,
    had its eyes fixed upon a dreadful legend that
    dwelt atop of the cash-machine: 'This registers the
    amount of your purchase.'"

In "The Monster," the ignorance, prejudice and cruelty of an entire
community are sharply focussed. The realism is painful; one blushes for
mankind. But while this story really belongs in the volume called
"Whilomville Stories," it is properly left out of that series. The
Whilomville stories are pure comedy, and "The Monster" is a hideous
tragedy.

Whilomville is any obscure little village one may happen to think of. To
write of it with such sympathy and understanding, Crane must have done
some remarkable listening in Boyville. The truth is, of course, he was a
boy himself--"a wonderful boy," somebody called him--and was possessed
of the boy mind. These tales are chiefly funny because they are so true
--boy stories written for adults; a child, I suppose, would find them
dull. In none of his tales is his curious understanding of human moods
and emotions better shown.

A stupid critic once pointed out that Crane, in his search for striking
effects, had been led into "frequent neglect of the time-hallowed rights
of certain words," and that in his pursuit of color he "falls
occasionally into almost ludicrous mishap." The smug pedantry of the
quoted lines is sufficient answer to the charges, but in support of
these assertions the critic quoted certain passages and phrases. He
objected to cheeks "scarred" by tears, to "dauntless" statues, and to
"terror-stricken" wagons. The very touches of poetic impressionism that
largely make for Crane's greatness, are cited to prove him an ignoramus.
There is the finest of poetic imagery in the suggestions subtly conveyed
by Crane's tricky adjectives, the use of which was as deliberate with
him as his choice of a subject. But Crane was an imagist before our
modern imagists were known.

This unconventional use of adjectives is marked in the Whilomville
tales. In one of them Crane refers to the "solemn odor of burning
turnips." It is the most nearly perfect characterization of burning
turnips conceivable: can anyone improve upon that "solemn odor"?

Stephen Crane's first venture was "Maggie: A Girl of the Streets." It
was, I believe, the first hint of naturalism in American letters. It was
not a best-seller; it offers no solution of life; it is an episodic bit
of slum fiction, ending with the tragic finality of a Greek drama. It
is a skeleton of a novel rather than a novel, but it is a powerful
outline, written about a life Crane had learned to know as a newspaper
reporter in New York. It is a singularly fine piece of analysis, or a
bit of extraordinarily faithful reporting, as one may prefer; but not a
few French and Russian writers have failed to accomplish in two volumes
what Crane achieved in two hundred pages. In the same category is
"George's Mother," a triumph of inconsequential detail piling up with a
cumulative effect quite overwhelming.

Crane published two volumes of poetry--"The Black Riders" and "War is
Kind." Their appearance in print was jeeringly hailed; yet Crane was
only pioneering in the free verse that is today, if not definitely
accepted, at least more than tolerated. I like the following love poem
as well as any rhymed and conventionally metrical ballad that I know:--

  "Should the wide world roll away,
  Leaving black terror,
  Limitless night,
  Nor God, nor man, nor place to stand
  Would be to me essential,
  If thou and thy white arms were there
  And the fall to doom a long way."

"If war be kind," wrote a clever reviewer, when the second volume
appeared, "then Crane's verse may be poetry, Beardsley's black and white
creations may be art, and this may be called a book";--a smart summing
up that is cherished by cataloguers to this day, in describing the
volume for collectors. Beardsley needs no defenders, and it is fairly
certain that the clever reviewer had not read the book, for certainly
Crane had no illusions about the kindness of war. The title-poem of the
volume is an amazingly beautiful satire which answers all criticism.

  "Do not weep, maiden, for war is kind.
  Because your lover threw wild hands toward the sky
  And the affrighted steed ran on alone,
  Do not weep.
  War is kind.

  "Hoarse, booming drums of the regiment,
  Little souls who thirst for fight,
  These men were born to drill and die.
  The unexplained glory flies above them,
  Great is the battle-god, and his kingdom--
  A field where a thousand corpses lie.

       *       *       *       *       *

  "Mother whose heart hung humble as a button
  On the bright splendid shroud of your son,
  Do not weep.
  War is kind."

Poor Stephen Crane! Like most geniuses, he had his weaknesses and his
failings; like many, if not most, geniuses, he was ill. He died of
tuberculosis, tragically young. But what a comrade he must have been,
with his extraordinary vision, his keen, sardonic comment, his
fearlessness and his failings!

Just a glimpse of Crane's last days is afforded by a letter written from
England by Robert Barr, his friend--Robert Barr, who collaborated with
Crane in "The 0' Ruddy," a rollicking tale of old Ireland, or, rather,
who completed it at Crane's death, to satisfy his friend's earnest
request. The letter is dated from Hillhead, Woldingham, Surrey, June 8,
1900, and runs as follows:--

    "My Dear ----

    "I was delighted to hear from you, and was much
    interested to see the article on Stephen Crane you
    sent me. It seems to me the harsh judgment of an
    unappreciative, commonplace person on a man of
    genius. Stephen had many qualities which lent
    themselves to misapprehension, but at the core he
    was the finest of men, generous to a fault, with
    something of the old-time recklessness which used
    to gather in the ancient literary taverns of London.
    I always fancied that Edgar Allan Poe revisited the
    earth as Stephen Crane, trying again, succeeding
    again, failing again, and dying ten years sooner
    than he did on the other occasion of his stay on
    earth.

    "When your letter came I had just returned from
    Dover, where I stayed four days to see Crane off
    for the Black Forest. There was a thin thread of
    hope that he might recover, but to me he looked like
    a man already dead. When he spoke, or, rather,
    whispered, there was all the accustomed humor in
    his sayings. I said to him that I would go over to
    the Schwarzwald in a few weeks, when he was getting
    better, and that we would take some convalescent
    rambles together. As his wife was listening
    he said faintly: 'I'll look forward to that,' but he
    smiled at me, and winked slowly, as much as to say:
    'You damned humbug, you know I'll take no more
    rambles in this world.' Then, as if the train of
    thought suggested what was looked on before as the
    crisis of his illness, he murmured: 'Robert, when
    you come to the hedge--that we must all go over--
    it isn't bad. You feel sleepy--and--you don't
    care. Just a little dreamy curiosity--which world
    you're really in--that's all.'

    "To-morrow, Saturday, the 9th, I go again to
    Dover to meet his body. He will rest for a little
    while in England, a country that was always good
    to him, then to America, and his journey will be
    ended.

    "I've got the unfinished manuscript of his last
    novel here beside me, a rollicking Irish tale, different
    from anything he ever wrote before. Stephen
    thought I was the only person who could finish it,
    and he was too ill for me to refuse. I don't know
    what to do about the matter, for I never could work
    up another man's ideas. Even your vivid imagination
    could hardly conjecture anything more ghastly
    than the dying man, lying by an open window overlooking
    the English channel, relating in a sepulchral
    whisper the comic situations of his humorous hero
    so that I might take up the thread of his story.

    "From the window beside which I write this I
    can see down in the valley Ravensbrook House,
    where Crane used to live and where Harold Frederic,
    he and I spent many a merry night together. When
    the Romans occupied Britain, some of their legions,
    parched with thirst, were wandering about these dry
    hills with the chance of finding water or perishing.
    They watched the ravens, and so came to the stream
    which rises under my place and flows past Stephen's
    former home; hence the name, Ravensbrook.

    "It seems a strange coincidence that the greatest
    modern writer on war should set himself down
    where the greatest ancient warrior, Caesar, probably
    stopped to quench his thirst.

    "Stephen died at three in the morning, the same
    sinister hour which carried away our friend Frederic
    nineteen months before. At midnight, in Crane's
    fourteenth-century house in Sussex, we two tried
    to lure back the ghost of Frederic into that house of
    ghosts, and to our company, thinking that if reappearing
    were ever possible so strenuous a man as
    Harold would somehow shoulder his way past the
    guards, but he made no sign. I wonder if the less
    insistent Stephen will suggest some ingenious method
    by which the two can pass the barrier. I can imagine
    Harold cursing on the other side, and welcoming
    the more subtle assistance of his finely fibred
    friend.

    "I feel like the last of the Three Musketeers, the
    other two gone down in their duel with Death. I
    am wondering if, within the next two years, I also
    shall get the challenge. If so, I shall go to the competing
    ground the more cheerfully that two such
    good fellows await the outcome on the other side.

    "Ever your friend,

    "ROBERT BARR."

The last of the Three Musketeers is gone, now, although he outlived his
friends by some years. Robert Barr died in 1912. Perhaps they are still
debating a joint return.

There could be, perhaps, no better close for a paper on Stephen Crane
than the subjoined paragraph from a letter written by him to a Rochester
editor:--

    "The one thing that deeply pleases me is the
    fact that men of sense invariably believe me to be
    sincere. I know that my work does not amount to
    a string of dried beans--I always calmly admit it--but
    I also know that I do the best that is in me
    without regard to praise or blame. When I was
    the mark for every humorist in the country, I went
    ahead; and now when I am the mark for only fifty
    per cent of the humorists of the country, I go
    ahead; for I understand that a man is born into the
    world with his own pair of eyes, and he is not at all
    responsible for his vision--he is merely responsible
    for his quality of personal honesty. To keep
    close to this personal honesty is my supreme ambition."

VINCENT STARRETT.




THE OPEN BOAT

A Tale intended to be after the fact. Being the experience of four men
from the sunk steamer "Commodore"


I

None of them knew the color of the sky. Their eyes glanced level, and
were fastened upon the waves that swept toward them. These waves were of
the hue of slate, save for the tops, which were of foaming white, and
all of the men knew the colors of the sea. The horizon narrowed and
widened, and dipped and rose, and at all times its edge was jagged with
waves that seemed thrust up in points like rocks. Many a man ought to
have a bath-tub larger than the boat which here rode upon the sea. These
waves were most wrongfully and barbarously abrupt and tall, and each
froth-top was a problem in small-boat navigation.

The cook squatted in the bottom and looked with both eyes at the six
inches of gunwale which separated him from the ocean. His sleeves were
rolled over his fat forearms, and the two flaps of his unbuttoned vest
dangled as he bent to bail out the boat. Often he said: "Gawd! That was
a narrow clip." As he remarked it he invariably gazed eastward over the
broken sea.

The oiler, steering with one of the two oars in the boat, sometimes
raised himself suddenly to keep clear of water that swirled in over the
stern. It was a thin little oar and it seemed often ready to snap.

The correspondent, pulling at the other oar, watched the waves and
wondered why he was there.

The injured captain, lying in the bow, was at this time buried in that
profound dejection and indifference which comes, temporarily at least,
to even the bravest and most enduring when, willy nilly, the firm fails,
the army loses, the ship goes down. The mind of the master of a vessel
is rooted deep in the timbers of her, though he commanded for a day or a
decade, and this captain had on him the stern impression of a scene in
the greys of dawn of seven turned faces, and later a stump of a top-mast
with a white ball on it that slashed to and fro at the waves, went low
and lower, and down. Thereafter there was something strange in his
voice. Although steady, it was, deep with mourning, and of a quality
beyond oration or tears.

"Keep 'er a little more south, Billie," said he.

"'A little more south,' sir," said the oiler in the stern.

A seat in this boat was not unlike a seat upon a bucking broncho, and by
the same token, a broncho is not much smaller. The craft pranced and
reared, and plunged like an animal. As each wave came, and she rose for
it, she seemed like a horse making at a fence outrageously high. The
manner of her scramble over these walls of water is a mystic thing, and,
moreover, at the top of them were ordinarily these problems in white
water, the foam racing down from the summit of each wave, requiring a
new leap, and a leap from the air. Then, after scornfully bumping a
crest, she would slide, and race, and splash down a long incline, and
arrive bobbing and nodding in front of the next menace.

A singular disadvantage of the sea lies in the fact that after
successfully surmounting one wave you discover that there is another
behind it just as important and just as nervously anxious to do
something effective in the way of swamping boats. In a ten-foot dingey
one can get an idea of the resources of the sea in the line of waves
that is not probable to the average experience which is never at sea in
a dingey. As each slatey wall of water approached, it shut all else from
the view of the men in the boat, and it was not difficult to imagine
that this particular wave was the final outburst of the ocean, the last
effort of the grim water. There was a terrible grace in the move of the
waves, and they came in silence, save for the snarling of the crests.

In the wan light, the faces of the men must have been grey. Their eyes
must have glinted in strange ways as they gazed steadily astern. Viewed
from a balcony, the whole thing would doubtless have been weirdly
picturesque. But the men in the boat had no time to see it, and if they
had had leisure there were other things to occupy their minds. The sun
swung steadily up the sky, and they knew it was broad day because the
color of the sea changed from slate to emerald-green, streaked with
amber lights, and the foam was like tumbling snow. The process of the
breaking day was unknown to them. They were aware only of this effect
upon the color of the waves that rolled toward them.

In disjointed sentences the cook and the correspondent argued as to the
difference between a life-saving station and a house of refuge. The cook
had said: "There's a house of refuge just north of the Mosquito Inlet
Light, and as soon as they see us, they'll come off in their boat and
pick us up."

"As soon as who see us?" said the correspondent.

"The crew," said the cook.

"Houses of refuge don't have crews," said the correspondent. "As I
understand them, they are only places where clothes and grub are stored
for the benefit of shipwrecked people. They don't carry crews."

"Oh, yes, they do," said the cook.

"No, they don't," said the correspondent.

"Well, we're not there yet, anyhow," said the oiler, in the stern.

"Well," said the cook, "perhaps it's not a house of refuge that I'm
thinking of as being near Mosquito Inlet Light. Perhaps it's a life-
saving station."

"We're not there yet," said the oiler, in the stern.


II

As the boat bounced from the top of each wave, the wind tore through the
hair of the hatless men, and as the craft plopped her stern down again
the spray splashed past them. The crest of each of these waves was a
hill, from the top of which the men surveyed, for a moment, a broad
tumultuous expanse, shining and wind-riven. It was probably splendid. It
was probably glorious, this play of the free sea, wild with lights of
emerald and white and amber.

"Bully good thing it's an on-shore wind," said the cook; "If not, where
would we be? Wouldn't have a show."

"That's right," said the correspondent.

The busy oiler nodded his assent.

Then the captain, in the bow, chuckled in a way that expressed humor,
contempt, tragedy, all in one. "Do you think We've got much of a show
now, boys?" said he.

Whereupon the three were silent, save for a trifle of hemming and
hawing. To express any particular optimism at this time they felt to be
childish and stupid, but they all doubtless possessed this sense of the
situation in their mind. A young man thinks doggedly at such times. On
the other hand, the ethics of their condition was decidedly against any
open suggestion of hopelessness. So they were silent.

"Oh, well," said the captain, soothing his children, "We'll get ashore
all right."

But there was that in his tone which made them think, so the oiler
quoth: "Yes! If this wind holds!"

The cook was bailing: "Yes! If we don't catch hell in the surf."

Canton flannel gulls flew near and far. Sometimes they sat down on the
sea, near patches of brown seaweed that rolled on the waves with a
movement like carpets on a line in a gale. The birds sat comfortably in
groups, and they were envied by some in the dingey, for the wrath of the
sea was no more to them than it was to a covey of prairie chickens a
thousand miles inland. Often they came very close and stared at the men
with black bead-like eyes. At these times they were uncanny and sinister
in their unblinking scrutiny, and the men hooted angrily at them,
telling them to be gone. One came, and evidently decided to alight on
the top of the captain's head. The bird flew parallel to the boat and
did not circle, but made short sidelong jumps in the air in chicken-
fashion. His black eyes were wistfully fixed upon the captain's head.
"Ugly brute," said the oiler to the bird. "You look as if you were made
with a jack-knife." The cook and the correspondent swore darkly at the
creature. The captain naturally wished to knock it away with the end of
the heavy painter; but he did not dare do it, because anything
resembling an emphatic gesture would have capsized this freighted boat,
and so with his open hand, the captain gently and carefully waved the
gull away. After it had been discouraged from the pursuit the captain
breathed easier on account of his hair, and others breathed easier
because the bird struck their minds at this time as being somehow
grewsome and ominous.

In the meantime the oiler and the correspondent rowed And also they
rowed.

They sat together in the same seat, and each rowed an oar. Then the
oiler took both oars; then the correspondent took both oars; then the
oiler; then the correspondent. They rowed and they rowed. The very
ticklish part of the business was when the time came for the reclining
one in the stern to take his turn at the oars. By the very last star of
truth, it is easier to steal eggs from under a hen than it was to change
seats in the dingey. First the man in the stern slid his hand along the
thwart and moved with care, as if he were of Sevres. Then the man in the
rowing seat slid his hand along the other thwart. It was all done with
most extraordinary care. As the two sidled past each other, the whole
party kept watchful eyes on the coming wave, and the captain cried:
"Look out now! Steady there!"

The brown mats of seaweed that appeared from time to time were like
islands, bits of earth. They were traveling, apparently, neither one way
nor the other. They were, to all intents, stationary. They informed the
men in the boat that it was making progress slowly toward the land.

The captain, rearing cautiously in the bow, after the dingey soared on a
great swell, said that he had seen the light-house at Mosquito Inlet.
Presently the cook remarked that he had seen it. The correspondent was
at the oars then, and for some reason he too wished to look at the
lighthouse, but his back was toward the far shore and the waves were
important, and for some time he could not seize an opportunity to turn
his head. But at last there came a wave more gentle than the others, and
when at the crest of it he swiftly scoured the western horizon.

"See it?" said the captain.

"No," said the correspondent slowly, "I didn't see anything."

"Look again," said the captain. He pointed. "It's exactly in that
direction."

At the top of another wave, the correspondent did as he was bid, and
this time his eyes chanced on a small still thing on the edge of the
swaying horizon. It was precisely like the point of a pin. It took an
anxious eye to find a light house so tiny.

"Think we'll make it, captain?"

"If this wind holds and the boat don't swamp, we can't do much else,"
said the captain.

The little boat, lifted by each towering sea, and splashed viciously by
the crests, made progress that in the absence of seaweed was not
apparent to those in her. She seemed just a wee thing wallowing,
miraculously top-up, at the mercy of five oceans. Occasionally, a great
spread of water, like white flames, swarmed into her.

"Bail her, cook," said the captain serenely.

"All right, captain," said the cheerful cook.


III

It would be difficult to describe the subtle brotherhood of men that was
here established on the seas. No one said that it was so. No one
mentioned it. But it dwelt in the boat, and each man felt it warm him.
They were a captain, an oiler, a cook, and a correspondent, and they
were friends, friends in a more curiously iron-bound degree than may be
common. The hurt captain, lying against the water-jar in the bow, spoke
always in a low voice and calmly, but he could never command a more
ready and swiftly obedient crew than the motley three of the dingey. It
was more than a mere recognition of what was best for the common safety.
There was surely in it a quality that was personal and heartfelt. And
after this devotion to the commander of the boat there was this
comradeship that the correspondent, for instance, who had been taught to
be cynical of men, knew even at the time was the best experience of his
life. But no one said that it was so. No one mentioned it.

"I wish we had a sail," remarked the captain. "We might try my overcoat
on the end of an oar and give you two boys a chance to rest." So the
cook and the correspondent held the mast and spread wide the overcoat.
The oiler steered, and the little boat made good way with her new rig.
Sometimes the oiler had to scull sharply to keep a sea from breaking
into the boat, but otherwise sailing was a success.

Meanwhile the lighthouse had been growing slowly larger. It had now
almost assumed color, and appeared like a little grey shadow on the sky.
The man at the oars could not be prevented from turning his head rather
often to try for a glimpse of this little grey shadow.

At last, from the top of each wave the men in the tossing boat could see
land. Even as the lighthouse was an upright shadow on the sky, this land
seemed but a long black shadow on the sea. It certainly was thinner than
paper. "We must be about opposite New Smyrna," said the cook, who had
coasted this shore often in schooners. "Captain, by the way, I believe
they abandoned that life-saving station there about a year ago."

"Did they?" said the captain.

The wind slowly died away. The cook and the correspondent were not now
obliged to slave in order to hold high the oar. But the waves continued
their old impetuous swooping at the dingey, and the little craft, no
longer under way, struggled woundily over them. The oiler or the
correspondent took the oars again.

Shipwrecks are _a propos_ of nothing. If men could only train for
them and have them occur when the men had reached pink condition, there
would be less drowning at sea. Of the four in the dingey none had slept
any time worth mentioning for two days and two nights previous to
embarking in the dingey, and in the excitement of clambering about the
deck of a foundering ship they had also forgotten to eat heartily.

For these reasons, and for others, neither the oiler nor the
correspondent was fond of rowing at this time. The correspondent
wondered ingenuously how in the name of all that was sane could there be
people who thought it amusing to row a boat. It was not an amusement; it
was a diabolical punishment, and even a genius of mental aberrations
could never conclude that it was anything but a horror to the muscles
and a crime against the back. He mentioned to the boat in general how
the amusement of rowing struck him, and the weary-faced oiler smiled in
full sympathy. Previously to the foundering, by the way, the oiler had
worked double-watch in the engine-room of the ship.

"Take her easy, now, boys," said the captain. "Don't spend yourselves.
If we have to run a surf you'll need all your strength, because we'll
sure have to swim for it. Take your time."

Slowly the land arose from the sea. From a black line it became a line
of black and a line of white, trees and sand. Finally, the captain said
that he could make out a house on the shore. "That's the house of
refuge, sure," said the cook. "They'll see us before long, and come out
after us."

The distant lighthouse reared high. "The keeper ought to be able to make
us out now, if he's looking through a glass," said the captain. "He'll
notify the life-saving people."

"None of those other boats could have got ashore to give word of the
wreck," said the oiler, in a low voice. "Else the lifeboat would be out
hunting us."

Slowly and beautifully the land loomed out of the sea. The wind came
again. It had veered from the north-east to the south-east. Finally, a
new sound struck the ears of the men in the boat. It was the low thunder
of the surf on the shore. "We'll never be able to make the lighthouse
now," said the captain. "Swing her head a little more north, Billie,"
said he.

"'A little more north,' sir," said the oiler.

Whereupon the little boat turned her nose once more down the wind, and
all but the oarsman watched the shore grow. Under the influence of this
expansion doubt and direful apprehension was leaving the minds of the
men. The management of the boat was still most absorbing, but it could
not prevent a quiet cheerfulness. In an hour, perhaps, they would be
ashore.

Their backbones had become thoroughly used to balancing in the boat, and
they now rode this wild colt of a dingey like circus men. The
correspondent thought that he had been drenched to the skin, but
happening to feel in the top pocket of his coat, he found therein eight
cigars. Four of them were soaked with sea-water; four were perfectly
scathless. After a search, somebody produced three dry matches, and
thereupon the four waifs rode impudently in their little boat, and with
an assurance of an impending rescue shining in their eyes, puffed at the
big cigars and judged well and ill of all men. Everybody took a drink of
water.


IV

"Cook," remarked the captain, "there don't seem to be any signs of life
about your house of refuge."

"No," replied the cook. "Funny they don't see us!"

A broad stretch of lowly coast lay before the eyes of the men. It was of
dunes topped with dark vegetation. The roar of the surf was plain, and
sometimes they could see the white lip of a wave as it spun up the
beach. A tiny house was blocked out black upon the sky. Southward, the
slim lighthouse lifted its little grey length.

Tide, wind, and waves were swinging the dingey northward. "Funny they
don't see us," said the men.

The surf's roar was here dulled, but its tone was, nevertheless,
thunderous and mighty. As the boat swam over the great rollers, the men
sat listening to this roar. "We'll swamp sure," said everybody.

It is fair to say here that there was not a life-saving station within
twenty miles in either direction, but the men did not know this fact,
and in consequence they made dark and opprobrious remarks concerning the
eyesight of the nation's life-savers. Four scowling men sat in the
dingey and surpassed records in the invention of epithets.

"Funny they don't see us."

The lightheartedness of a former time had completely faded. To their
sharpened minds it was easy to conjure pictures of all kinds of
incompetency and blindness and, indeed, cowardice. There was the shore
of the populous land, and it was bitter and bitter to them that from it
came no sign.

"Well," said the captain, ultimately, "I suppose we'll have to make a
try for ourselves. If we stay out here too long, we'll none of us have
strength left to swim after the boat swamps."

And so the oiler, who was at the oars, turned the boat straight for the
shore. There was a sudden tightening of muscle. There was some thinking.

"If we don't all get ashore--" said the captain. "If we don't all get
ashore, I suppose you fellows know where to send news of my finish?"

They then briefly exchanged some addresses and admonitions. As for the
reflections of the men, there was a great deal of rage in them.
Perchance they might be formulated thus: "If I am going to be drowned--
if I am going to be drowned--if I am going to be drowned, why, in the
name of the seven mad gods who rule the sea, was I allowed to come thus
far and contemplate sand and trees? Was I brought here merely to have my
nose dragged away as I was about to nibble the sacred cheese of life? It
is preposterous. If this old ninny-woman, Fate, cannot do better than
this, she should be deprived of the management of men's fortunes. She is
an old hen who knows not her intention. If she has decided to drown me,
why did she not do it in the beginning and save me all this trouble? The
whole affair is absurd.... But no, she cannot mean to drown me. She dare
not drown me. She cannot drown me. Not after all this work." Afterward
the man might have had an impulse to shake his fist at the clouds: "Just
you drown me, now, and then hear what I call you!"

The billows that came at this time were more formidable. They seemed
always just about to break and roll over the little boat in a turmoil of
foam. There was a preparatory and long growl in the speech of them. No
mind unused to the sea would have concluded that the dingey could ascend
these sheer heights in time. The shore was still afar. The oiler was a
wily surfman. "Boys," he said swiftly, "she won't live three minutes
more, and we're too far out to swim. Shall I take her to sea again,
captain?"

"Yes! Go ahead!" said the captain.

This oiler, by a series of quick miracles, and fast and steady
oarsmanship, turned the boat in the middle of the surf and took her
safely to sea again.

There was a considerable silence as the boat bumped over the furrowed
sea to deeper water. Then somebody in gloom spoke. "Well, anyhow, they
must have seen us from the shore by now."

The gulls went in slanting flight up the wind toward the grey desolate
east. A squall, marked by dingy clouds, and clouds brick-red, like smoke
from a burning building, appeared from the south-east.

"What do you think of those life-saving people? Ain't they peaches?'

"Funny they haven't seen us."

"Maybe they think we're out here for sport! Maybe they think we're
fishin'. Maybe they think we're damned fools."

It was a long afternoon. A changed tide tried to force them southward,
but the wind and wave said northward. Far ahead, where coast-line, sea,
and sky formed their mighty angle, there were little dots which seemed
to indicate a city on the shore.

"St. Augustine?"

The captain shook his head. "Too near Mosquito Inlet."

And the oiler rowed, and then the correspondent rowed. Then the oiler
rowed. It was a weary business. The human back can become the seat of
more aches and pains than are registered in books for the composite
anatomy of a regiment. It is a limited area, but it can become the
theatre of innumerable muscular conflicts, tangles, wrenches, knots, and
other comforts.

"Did you ever like to row, Billie?" asked the correspondent.

"No," said the oiler. "Hang it!"

When one exchanged the rowing-seat for a place in the bottom of the
boat, he suffered a bodily depression that caused him to be careless of
everything save an obligation to wiggle one finger. There was cold sea-
water swashing to and fro in the boat, and he lay in it. His head,
pillowed on a thwart, was within an inch of the swirl of a wave crest,
and sometimes a particularly obstreperous sea came in-board and drenched
him once more. But these matters did not annoy him. It is almost certain
that if the boat had capsized he would have tumbled comfortably out upon
the ocean as if he felt sure that it was a great soft mattress.

"Look! There's a man on the shore!"

"Where?"

"There! See 'im? See 'im?"

"Yes, sure! He's walking along."

"Now he's stopped. Look! He's facing us!"

"He's waving at us!"

"So he is! By thunder!"

"Ah, now we're all right! Now we're all right! There'll be a boat out
here for us in half-an-hour."

"He's going on. He's running. He's going up to that house there."

The remote beach seemed lower than the sea, and it required a searching
glance to discern the little black figure. The captain saw a floating
stick and they rowed to it. A bath-towel was by some weird chance in the
boat, and, tying this on the stick, the captain waved it. The oarsman
did not dare turn his head, so he was obliged to ask questions.

"What's he doing now?"

"He's standing still again. He's looking, I think.... There he goes
again. Toward the house.... Now he's stopped again."

"Is he waving at us?"

"No, not now! he was, though."

"Look! There comes another man!"

"He's running."

"Look at him go, would you."

"Why, he's on a bicycle. Now he's met the other man. They're both waving
at us. Look!"

"There comes something up the beach."

"What the devil is that thing?"

"Why it looks like a boat."

"Why, certainly it's a boat."

"No, it's on wheels."

"Yes, so it is. Well, that must be the life-boat. They drag them along
shore on a wagon."

"That's the life-boat, sure."

"No, by ----, it's--it's an omnibus."

"I tell you it's a life-boat."

"It is not! It's an omnibus. I can see it plain. See? One of these big
hotel omnibuses."

"By thunder, you're right. It's an omnibus, sure as fate. What do you
suppose they are doing with an omnibus? Maybe they are going around
collecting the life-crew, hey?"

"That's it, likely. Look! There's a fellow waving a little black flag.
He's standing on the steps of the omnibus. There come those other two
fellows. Now they're all talking together. Look at the fellow with the
flag. Maybe he ain't waving it."

"That ain't a flag, is it? That's his coat. Why, certainly, that's his
coat."

"So it is. It's his coat. He's taken it off and is waving it around his
head. But would you look at him swing it."

"Oh, say, there isn't any life-saving station there. That's just a
winter resort hotel omnibus that has brought over some of the boarders
to see us drown."

"What's that idiot with the coat mean? What's he signaling, anyhow?"

"It looks as if he were trying to tell us to go north. There must be a
life-saving station up there."

"No! He thinks we're fishing. Just giving us a merry hand. See? Ah,
there, Willie!"

"Well, I wish I could make something out of those signals. What do you
suppose he means?"

"He don't mean anything. He's just playing."

"Well, if he'd just signal us to try the surf again, or to go to sea and
wait, or go north, or go south, or go to hell--there would be some
reason in it. But look at him. He just stands there and keeps his coat
revolving like a wheel. The ass!"

"There come more people."

"Now there's quite a mob. Look! Isn't that a boat?"

"Where? Oh, I see where you mean. No, that's no boat."

"That fellow is still waving his coat."

"He must think we like to see him do that. Why don't he quit it? It
don't mean anything."

"I don't know. I think he is trying to make us go north. It must be that
there's a life-saving station there somewhere."

"Say, he ain't tired yet. Look at 'im wave."

"Wonder how long he can keep that up. He's been revolving his coat ever
since he caught sight of us. He's an idiot. Why aren't they getting men
to bring a boat out? A fishing boat--one of those big yawls--could come
out here all right. Why don't he do something?"

"Oh, it's all right, now."

"They'll have a boat out here for us in less than no time, now that
they've seen us."

A faint yellow tone came into the sky over the low land. The shadows on
the sea slowly deepened. The wind bore coldness with it, and the men
began to shiver.

"Holy smoke!" said one, allowing his voice to express his impious mood,
"if we keep on monkeying out here! If we've got to flounder out here all
night!"

"Oh, we'll never have to stay here all night! Don't you worry. They've
seen us now, and it won't be long before they'll come chasing out after
us."

The shore grew dusky. The man waving a coat blended gradually into this
gloom, and it swallowed in the same manner the omnibus and the group of
people. The spray, when it dashed uproariously over the side, made the
voyagers shrink and swear like men who were being branded.

"I'd like to catch the chump who waved the coat. I feel like soaking him
one, just for luck."

"Why? What did he do?"

"Oh, nothing, but then he seemed so damned cheerful."

In the meantime the oiler rowed, and then the correspondent rowed, and
then the oiler rowed. Grey-faced and bowed forward, they mechanically,
turn by turn, plied the leaden oars. The form of the lighthouse had
vanished from the southern horizon, but finally a pale star appeared,
just lifting from the sea. The streaked saffron in the west passed
before the all-merging darkness, and the sea to the east was black. The
land had vanished, and was expressed only by the low and drear thunder
of the surf.

"If I am going to be drowned--if I am going to be drowned--if I am going
to be drowned, why, in the name of the seven mad gods who rule the sea,
was I allowed to come thus far and contemplate sand and trees? Was I
brought here merely to have my nose dragged away as I was about to
nibble the sacred cheese of life?"

The patient captain, drooped over the water-jar, was sometimes obliged
to speak to the oarsman.

"Keep her head up! Keep her head up!"

"'Keep her head up,' sir." The voices were weary and low.

This was surely a quiet evening. All save the oarsman lay heavily and
listlessly in the boat's bottom. As for him, his eyes were just capable
of noting the tall black waves that swept forward in a most sinister
silence, save for an occasional subdued growl of a crest.

The cook's head was on a thwart, and he looked without interest at the
water under his nose. He was deep in other scenes. Finally he spoke.
"Billie," he murmured, dreamfully, "what kind of pie do you like best?"


V

"Pie," said the oiler and the correspondent, agitatedly. "Don't talk
about those things, blast you!"

"Well," said the cook, "I was just thinking about ham sandwiches, and--"

A night on the sea in an open boat is a long night. As darkness settled
finally, the shine of the light, lifting from the sea in the south,
changed to full gold. On the northern horizon a new light appeared, a
small bluish gleam on the edge of the waters. These two lights were the
furniture of the world. Otherwise there was nothing but waves.

Two men huddled in the stern, and distances were so magnificent in the
dingey that the rower was enabled to keep his feet partly warmed by
thrusting them under his companions. Their legs indeed extended far
under the rowing-seat until they touched the feet of the captain
forward. Sometimes, despite the efforts of the tired oarsman, a wave
came piling into the boat, an icy wave of the night, and the chilling
water soaked them anew. They would twist their bodies for a moment and
groan, and sleep the dead sleep once more, while the water in the boat
gurgled about them as the craft rocked.

The plan of the oiler and the correspondent was for one to row until he
lost the ability, and then arouse the other from his sea-water couch in
the bottom of the boat.

The oiler plied the oars until his head drooped forward, and the
overpowering sleep blinded him. And he rowed yet afterward. Then he
touched a man in the bottom of the boat, and called his name. "Will you
spell me for a little while?" he said, meekly.

"Sure, Billie," said the correspondent, awakening and dragging himself
to a sitting position. They exchanged places carefully, and the oiler,
cuddling down in the sea-water at the cook's side, seemed to go to sleep
instantly.

The particular violence of the sea had ceased. The waves came without
snarling. The obligation of the man at the oars was to keep the boat
headed so that the tilt of the rollers would not capsize her, and to
preserve her from filling when the crests rushed past. The black waves
were silent and hard to be seen in the darkness. Often one was almost
upon the boat before the oarsman was aware.

In a low voice the correspondent addressed the captain. He was not sure
that the captain was awake, although this iron man seemed to be always
awake. "Captain, shall I keep her making for that light north, sir?"

The same steady voice answered him. "Yes. Keep it about two points off
the port bow."

The cook had tied a life-belt around himself in order to get even the
warmth which this clumsy cork contrivance could donate, and he seemed
almost stove-like when a rower, whose teeth invariably chattered wildly
as soon as he ceased his labor, dropped down to sleep.

The correspondent, as he rowed, looked down at the two men sleeping
under-foot. The cook's arm was around the oiler's shoulders, and, with
their fragmentary clothing and haggard faces, they were the babes of the
sea, a grotesque rendering of the old babes in the wood.

Later he must have grown stupid at his work, for suddenly there was a
growling of water, and a crest came with a roar and a swash into the
boat, and it was a wonder that it did not set the cook afloat in his
life-belt. The cook continued to sleep, but the oiler sat up, blinking
his eyes and shaking with the new cold.

"Oh, I'm awful sorry, Billie," said the correspondent contritely.

"That's all right, old boy," said the oiler, and lay down again and was
asleep.

Presently it seemed that even the captain dozed, and the correspondent
thought that he was the one man afloat on all the oceans. The wind had a
voice as it came over the waves, and it was sadder than the end.

There was a long, loud swishing astern of the boat, and a gleaming trail
of phosphorescence, like blue flame, was furrowed on the black waters.
It might have been made by a monstrous knife.

Then there came a stillness, while the correspondent breathed with the
open mouth and looked at the sea.

Suddenly there was another swish and another long flash of bluish light,
and this time it was alongside the boat, and might almost have been
reached with an oar. The correspondent saw an enormous fin speed like a
shadow through the water, hurling the crystalline spray and leaving the
long glowing trail.

The correspondent looked over his shoulder at the captain. His face was
hidden, and he seemed to be asleep. He looked at the babes of the sea.
They certainly were asleep. So, being bereft of sympathy, he leaned a
little way to one side and swore softly into the sea.

But the thing did not then leave the vicinity of the boat. Ahead or
astern, on one side or the other, at intervals long or short, fled the
long sparkling streak, and there was to be heard the whirroo of the dark
fin. The speed and power of the thing was greatly to be admired. It cut
the water like a gigantic and keen projectile.

The presence of this biding thing did not affect the man with the same
horror that it would if he had been a picnicker. He simply looked at the
sea dully and swore in an undertone.

Nevertheless, it is true that he did not wish to be alone. He wished one
of his companions to awaken by chance and keep him company with it. But
the captain hung motionless over the water-jar, and the oiler and the
cook in the bottom of the boat were plunged in slumber.


VI

"If I am going to be drowned--if I am going to be drowned--if I am going
to be drowned, why, in the name of the seven mad gods who rule the sea,
was I allowed to come thus far and contemplate sand and trees?"

During this dismal night, it may be remarked that a man would conclude
that it was really the intention of the seven mad gods to drown him,
despite the abominable injustice of it. For it was certainly an
abominable injustice to drown a man who had worked so hard, so hard. The
man felt it would be a crime most unnatural. Other people had drowned at
sea since galleys swarmed with painted sails, but still--

When it occurs to a man that nature does not regard him as important,
and that she feels she would not maim the universe by disposing of him,
he at first wishes to throw bricks at the temple, and he hates deeply
the fact that there are no brick and no temples. Any visible expression
of nature would surely be pelleted with his jeers.

Then, if there be no tangible thing to hoot he feels, perhaps, the
desire to confront a personification and indulge in pleas, bowed to one
knee, and with hands supplicant, saying: "Yes, but I love myself."

A high cold star on a winter's night is the word he feels that she says
to him. Thereafter he knows the pathos of his situation.

The men in the dingey had not discussed these matters, but each had, no
doubt, reflected upon them in silence and according to his mind. There
was seldom any expression upon their faces save the general one of
complete weariness. Speech was devoted to the business of the boat.

To chime the notes of his emotion, a verse mysteriously entered the
correspondent's head. He had even forgotten that he had forgotten this
verse, but it suddenly was in his mind.

  "A soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers,
   There was a lack of woman's nursing, there was dearth of
     woman's tears;
   But a comrade stood beside him, and he took that comrade's hand,
   And he said: 'I shall never see my own, my native land.'"

In his childhood, the correspondent had been made acquainted with the
fact that a soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers, but he had never
regarded the fact as important. Myriads of his school-fellows had
informed him of the soldier's plight, but the dinning had naturally
ended by making him perfectly indifferent. He had never considered it
his affair that a soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers, nor had it
appeared to him as a matter for sorrow. It was less to him than the
breaking of a pencil's point.

Now, however, it quaintly came to him as a human, living thing. It was
no longer merely a picture of a few throes in the breast of a poet,
meanwhile drinking tea and warming his feet at the grate; it was an
actuality--stern, mournful, and fine.

The correspondent plainly saw the soldier. He lay on the sand with his
feet out straight and still. While his pale left hand was upon his chest
in an attempt to thwart the going of his life, the blood came between
his fingers. In the far Algerian distance, a city of low square forms
was set against a sky that was faint with the last sunset hues. The
correspondent, plying the oars and dreaming of the slow and slower
movements of the lips of the soldier, was moved by a profound and
perfectly impersonal comprehension. He was sorry for the soldier of the
Legion who lay dying in Algiers.

The thing which had followed the boat and waited, had evidently grown
bored at the delay. There was no longer to be heard the slash of the
cut-water, and there was no longer the flame of the long trail. The
light in the north still glimmered, but it was apparently no nearer to
the boat. Sometimes the boom of the surf rang in the correspondent's
ears, and he turned the craft seaward then and rowed harder. Southward,
some one had evidently built a watch-fire on the beach. It was too low
and too far to be seen, but it made a shimmering, roseate reflection
upon the bluff back of it, and this could be discerned from the boat.
The wind came stronger, and sometimes a wave suddenly raged out like a
mountain-cat, and there was to be seen the sheen and sparkle of a broken
crest.

The captain, in the bow, moved on his water-jar and sat erect. "Pretty
long night," he observed to the correspondent. He looked at the shore.
"Those life-saving people take their time."

"Did you see that shark playing around?"

"Yes, I saw him. He was a big fellow, all right."

"Wish I had known you were awake."

Later the correspondent spoke into the bottom of the boat.

"Billie!" There was a slow and gradual disentanglement. "Billie, will
you spell me?"

"Sure," said the oiler.

As soon as the correspondent touched the cold comfortable sea-water in
the bottom of the boat, and had huddled close to the cook's life-belt he
was deep in sleep, despite the fact that his teeth played all the
popular airs. This sleep was so good to him that it was but a moment
before he heard a voice call his name in a tone that demonstrated the
last stages of exhaustion. "Will you spell me?"

"Sure, Billie."

The light in the north had mysteriously vanished, but the correspondent
took his course from the wide-awake captain.

Later in the night they took the boat farther out to sea, and the
captain directed the cook to take one oar at the stern and keep the boat
facing the seas. He was to call out if he should hear the thunder of the
surf. This plan enabled the oiler and the correspondent to get respite
together. "We'll give those boys a chance to get into shape again," said
the captain. They curled down and, after a few preliminary chatterings
and trembles, slept once more the dead sleep. Neither knew they had
bequeathed to the cook the company of another shark, or perhaps the same
shark.

As the boat caroused on the waves, spray occasionally bumped over the
side and gave them a fresh soaking, but this had no power to break their
repose. The ominous slash of the wind and the water affected them as it
would have affected mummies.

"Boys," said the cook, with the notes of every reluctance in his voice,
"she's drifted in pretty close. I guess one of you had better take her
to sea again." The correspondent, aroused, heard the crash of the
toppled crests.

As he was rowing, the captain gave him some whisky-and-water, and this
steadied the chills out of him. "If I ever get ashore and anybody shows
me even a photograph of an oar--"

At last there was a short conversation.

"Billie.... Billie, will you spell me?"

"Sure," said the oiler.


VII

When the correspondent again opened his eyes, the sea and the sky were
each of the grey hue of the dawning. Later, carmine and gold was painted
upon the waters. The morning appeared finally, in its splendor, with a
sky of pure blue, and the sunlight flamed on the tips of the waves.

On the distant dunes were set many little black cottages, and a tall
white windmill reared above them. No man, nor dog, nor bicycle appeared
on the beach. The cottages might have formed a deserted village.

The voyagers scanned the shore. A conference was held in the boat.
"Well," said the captain, "if no help is coming we might better try a
run through the surf right away. If we stay out here much longer we will
be too weak to do anything for ourselves at all." The others silently
acquiesced in this reasoning. The boat was headed for the beach. The
correspondent wondered if none ever ascended the tall wind-tower, and if
then they never looked seaward. This tower was a giant, standing with
its back to the plight of the ants. It represented in a degree, to the
correspondent, the serenity of nature amid the struggles of the
individual--nature in the wind, and nature in the vision of men. She did
not seem cruel to him then, nor beneficent, nor treacherous, nor wise.
But she was indifferent, flatly indifferent. It is, perhaps, plausible
that a man in this situation, impressed with the unconcern of the
universe, should see the innumerable flaws of his life, and have them
taste wickedly in his mind and wish for another chance. A distinction
between right and wrong seems absurdly clear to him, then, in this new
ignorance of the grave-edge, and he understands that if he were given
another opportunity he would mend his conduct and his words, and be
better and brighter during an introduction or at a tea.

"Now, boys," said the captain, "she is going to swamp, sure. All we can
do is to work her in as far as possible, and then when she swamps, pile
out and scramble for the beach. Keep cool now, and don't jump until she
swamps sure."

The oiler took the oars. Over his shoulders he scanned the surf.
"Captain," he said, "I think I'd better bring her about, and keep her
head-on to the seas and back her in."

"All right, Billie," said the captain. "Back her in." The oiler swung
the boat then and, seated in the stern, the cook and the correspondent
were obliged to look over their shoulders to contemplate the lonely and
indifferent shore.

The monstrous in-shore rollers heaved the boat high until the men were
again enabled to see the white sheets of water scudding up the slanted
beach. "We won't get in very close," said the captain. Each time a man
could wrest his attention from the rollers, he turned his glance toward
the shore, and in the expression of the eyes during this contemplation
there was a singular quality. The correspondent, observing the others,
knew that they were not afraid, but the full meaning of their glances
was shrouded.

As for himself, he was too tired to grapple fundamentally with the fact.
He tried to coerce his mind into thinking of it, but the mind was
dominated at this time by the muscles, and the muscles said they did not
care. It merely occurred to him that if he should drown it would be a
shame.

There were no hurried words, no pallor, no plain agitation. The men
simply looked at the shore. "Now, remember to get well clear of the boat
when you jump," said the captain.

Seaward the crest of a roller suddenly fell with a thunderous crash, and
the long white comber came roaring down upon the boat.

"Steady now," said the captain. The men were silent. They turned their
eyes from the shore to the comber and waited. The boat slid up the
incline, leaped at the furious top, bounced over it, and swung down the
long back of the wave. Some water had been shipped and the cook bailed
it out.

But the next crest crashed also. The tumbling, boiling flood of white
water caught the boat and whirled it almost perpendicular. Water swarmed
in from all sides. The correspondent had his hands on the gunwale at
this time, and when the water entered at that place he swiftly withdrew
his fingers, as if he objected to wetting them.

The little boat, drunken with this weight of water, reeled and snuggled
deeper into the sea.

"Bail her out, cook! Bail her out," said the captain.

"All right, captain," said the cook.

"Now, boys, the next one will do for us, sure," said the oiler. "Mind to
jump clear of the boat."

The third wave moved forward, huge, furious, implacable. It fairly
swallowed the dingey, and almost simultaneously the men tumbled into the
sea. A piece of lifebelt had lain in the bottom of the boat, and as the
correspondent went overboard he held this to his chest with his left
hand.

The January water was icy, and he reflected immediately that it was
colder than he had expected to find it on the coast of Florida. This
appeared to his dazed mind as a fact important enough to be noted at the
time. The coldness of the water was sad; it was tragic. This fact was
somehow so mixed and confused with his opinion of his own situation that
it seemed almost a proper reason for tears. The water was cold.

When he came to the surface he was conscious of little but the noisy
water. Afterward he saw his companions in the sea. The oiler was ahead
in the race. He was swimming strongly and rapidly. Off to the
correspondent's left, the cook's great white and corked back bulged out
of the water, and in the rear the captain was hanging with his one good
hand to the keel of the overturned dingey.

There is a certain immovable quality to a shore, and the correspondent
wondered at it amid the confusion of the sea.

It seemed also very attractive, but the correspondent knew that it was a
long journey, and he paddled leisurely. The piece of life-preserver lay
under him, and sometimes he whirled down the incline of a wave as if he
were on a handsled.

But finally he arrived at a place in the sea where travel was beset
with difficulty. He did not pause swimming to inquire what manner of
current had caught him, but there his progress ceased. The shore was set
before him like a bit of scenery on a stage, and he looked at it and
understood with his eyes each detail of it.

As the cook passed, much farther to the left, the captain was calling to
him, "Turn over on your back, cook! Turn over on your back and use the
oar."

"All right, sir." The cook turned on his back, and, paddling with an
oar, went ahead as if he were a canoe.

Presently the boat also passed to the left of the correspondent with the
captain clinging with one hand to the keel. He would have appeared like
a man raising himself to look over a board fence, if it were not for the
extraordinary gymnastics of the boat. The correspondent marvelled that
the captain could still hold to it.

They passed on, nearer to shore--the oiler, the cook, the captain--and
following them went the water-jar, bouncing gaily over the seas.

The correspondent remained in the grip of this strange new enemy--a
current. The shore, with its white slope of sand and its green bluff,
topped with little silent cottages, was spread like a picture before
him. It was very near to him then, but he was impressed as one who in a
gallery looks at a scene from Brittany or Holland.

He thought: "I am going to drown? Can it be possible Can it be possible?
Can it be possible?" Perhaps an individual must consider his own death
to be the final phenomenon of nature.

But later a wave perhaps whirled him out of this small, deadly current,
for he found suddenly that he could again make progress toward the
shore. Later still, he was aware that the captain, clinging with one
hand to the keel of the dingey, had his face turned away from the shore
and toward him, and was calling his name. "Come to the boat! Come to the
boat!"

In his struggle to reach the captain and the boat, he reflected that
when one gets properly wearied, drowning must really be a comfortable
arrangement, a cessation of hostilities accompanied by a large degree of
relief, and he was glad of it, for the main thing in his mind for some
months had been horror of the temporary agony. He did not wish to be
hurt.

Presently he saw a man running along the shore. He was undressing with
most remarkable speed. Coat, trousers, shirt, everything flew magically
off him.

"Come to the boat," called the captain.

"All right, captain." As the correspondent paddled, he saw the captain
let himself down to bottom and leave the boat. Then the correspondent
performed his one little marvel of the voyage. A large wave caught him
and flung him with ease and supreme speed completely over the boat and
far beyond it. It struck him even then as an event in gymnastics, and a
true miracle of the sea. An over-turned boat in the surf is not a
plaything to a swimming man.

The correspondent arrived in water that reached only to his waist, but
his condition did not enable him to stand for more than a moment. Each
wave knocked him into a heap, and the under-tow pulled at him.

Then he saw the man who had been running and undressing, and undressing
and running, come bounding into the water. He dragged ashore the cook,
and then waded towards the captain, but the captain waved him away, and
sent him to the correspondent. He was naked, naked as a tree in winter,
but a halo was about his head, and he shone like a saint. He gave a
strong pull, and a long drag, and a bully heave at the correspondent's
hand. The correspondent, schooled in the minor formulae, said: "Thanks,
old man." But suddenly the man cried: "What's that?" He pointed a swift
finger. The correspondent said: "Go."

In the shallows, face downward, lay the oiler. His forehead touched sand
that was periodically, between each wave, clear of the sea.

The correspondent did not know all that transpired afterward. When he
achieved safe ground he fell, striking the sand with each particular
part of his body. It was as if he had dropped from a roof, but the thud
was grateful to him.

It seems that instantly the beach was populated with men with blankets,
clothes, and flasks, and women with coffeepots and all the remedies
sacred to their minds. The welcome of the land to the men from the sea
was warm and generous, but a still and dripping shape was carried slowly
up the beach, and the land's welcome for it could only be the different
and sinister hospitality of the grave.

When it came night, the white waves paced to and fro in the moonlight,
and the wind brought the sound of the great sea's voice to the men on
shore, and they felt that they could then be interpreters.




THE RELUCTANT VOYAGERS


CHAPTER I

Two men sat by the sea waves.

"Well, I know I'm not handsome," said one gloomily. He was poking holes
in the sand with a discontented cane.

The companion was watching the waves play. He seemed overcome with
perspiring discomfort as a man who is resolved to set another man right.

Suddenly his mouth turned into a straight line.

"To be sure you are not," he cried vehemently.

"You look like thunder. I do not desire to be unpleasant, but I must
assure you that your freckled skin continually reminds spectators of
white wall paper with gilt roses on it. The top of your head looks like
a little wooden plate. And your figure--heavens!"

For a time they were silent. They stared at the waves that purred near
their feet like sleepy sea-kittens.

Finally the first man spoke.

"Well," said he, defiantly, "what of it?"

"What of it?" exploded the other. "Why, it means that you'd look like
blazes in a bathing-suit."

They were again silent. The freckled man seemed ashamed. His tall
companion glowered at the scenery.

"I am decided," said the freckled man suddenly. He got boldly up from the
sand and strode away. The tall man followed, walking sarcastically and
glaring down at the round, resolute figure before him.

A bath-clerk was looking at the world with superior eyes through a hole
in a board. To him the freckled man made application, waving his hands
over his person in illustration of a snug fit. The bath-clerk thought
profoundly. Eventually, he handed out a blue bundle with an air of
having phenomenally solved the freckled man's dimensions.

The latter resumed his resolute stride.

"See here," said the tall man, following him, "I bet you've got a
regular toga, you know. That fellow couldn't tell--"

"Yes, he could," interrupted the freckled man, "I saw correct
mathematics in his eyes."

"Well, supposin' he has missed your size. Supposin'--"

"Tom," again interrupted the other, "produce your proud clothes and
we'll go in."

The tall man swore bitterly. He went to one of a row of little wooden
boxes and shut himself in it. His companion repaired to a similar box.

At first he felt like an opulent monk in a too-small cell, and he turned
round two or three times to see if he could. He arrived finally into his
bathing-dress. Immediately he dropped gasping upon a three-cornered
bench. The suit fell in folds about his reclining form. There was
silence, save for the caressing calls of the waves without.

Then he heard two shoes drop on the floor in one of the little coops. He
began to clamor at the boards like a penitent at an unforgiving door.

"Tom," called he, "Tom--"

A voice of wrath, muffled by cloth, came through the walls. "You go t'
blazes!"

The freckled man began to groan, taking the occupants of the entire row
of coops into his confidence.

"Stop your noise," angrily cried the tall man from his hidden den. "You
rented the bathing-suit, didn't you? Then--"

"It ain't a bathing-suit," shouted the freckled man at the boards. "It's
an auditorium, a ballroom, or something. It isn't a bathing-suit."

The tall man came out of his box. His suit looked like blue skin. He
walked with grandeur down the alley between the rows of coops. Stopping
in front of his friend's door, he rapped on it with passionate knuckles.

"Come out of there, y' ol' fool," said he, in an enraged whisper. "It's
only your accursed vanity. Wear it anyhow. What difference does it make?
I never saw such a vain ol' idiot!"

As he was storming the door opened, and his friend confronted him. The
tall man's legs gave way, and he fell against the opposite door.

The freckled man regarded him sternly.

"You're an ass," he said.

His back curved in scorn. He walked majestically down the alley. There
was pride in the way his chubby feet patted the boards. The tall man
followed, weakly, his eyes riveted upon the figure ahead.

As a disguise the freckled man had adopted the stomach of importance. He
moved with an air of some sort of procession, across a board walk, down
some steps, and out upon the sand.

There was a pug dog and three old women on a bench, a man and a maid
with a book and a parasol, a seagull drifting high in the wind, and a
distant, tremendous meeting of sea and sky. Down on the wet sand stood a
girl being wooed by the breakers.

The freckled man moved with stately tread along the beach. The tall man,
numb with amazement, came in the rear. They neared the girl.

Suddenly the tall man was seized with convulsions. He laughed, and the
girl turned her head.

She perceived the freckled man in the bathing-suit. An expression of
wonderment overspread her charming face. It changed in a moment to a
pearly smile.

This smile seemed to smite the freckled man. He obviously tried to swell
and fit his suit. Then he turned a shrivelling glance upon his
companion, and fled up the beach. The tall man ran after him, pursuing
with mocking cries that tingled his flesh like stings of insects. He
seemed to be trying to lead the way out of the world. But at last he
stopped and faced about.

"Tom Sharp," said he, between his clenched teeth, "you are an
unutterable wretch! I could grind your bones under my heel."

The tall man was in a trance, with glazed eyes fixed on the bathing-
dress. He seemed to be murmuring: "Oh, good Lord! Oh, good Lord! I never
saw such a suit!"

The freckled man made the gesture of an assassin.

"Tom Sharp, you--"

The other was still murmuring: "Oh, good Lord! I never saw such a suit!
I never--"

The freckled man ran down into the sea.


CHAPTER II

The cool, swirling waters took his temper from him, and it became a
thing that is lost in the ocean. The tall man floundered in, and the two
forgot and rollicked in the waves.

The freckled man, in endeavoring to escape from mankind, had left all
save a solitary fisherman under a large hat, and three boys in bathing-
dress, laughing and splashing upon a raft made of old spars.

The two men swam softly over the ground swells.

The three boys dived from their raft, and turned their jolly faces
shorewards. It twisted slowly around and around, and began to move
seaward on some unknown voyage. The freckled man laid his face to the
water and swam toward the raft with a practised stroke. The tall man
followed, his bended arm appearing and disappearing with the precision
of machinery.

The craft crept away, slowly and wearily, as if luring. The little
wooden plate on the freckled man's head looked at the shore like a
round, brown eye, but his gaze was fixed on the raft that slyly appeared
to be waiting. The tall man used the little wooden plate as a beacon.

At length the freckled man reached the raft and climbed aboard. He lay
down on his back and puffed. His bathing-dress spread about him like a
dead balloon. The tall man came, snorted, shook his tangled locks and
lay down by the side of his companion.

They were overcome with a delicious drowsiness. The planks of the raft
seemed to fit their tired limbs. They gazed dreamily up into the vast
sky of summer.

"This is great," said the tall man. His companion grunted blissfully.

Gentle hands from the sea rocked their craft and lulled them to peace.
Lapping waves sang little rippling sea-songs about them. The two men
issued contented groans.

"Tom," said the freckled man.

"What?" said the other.

"This is great."

They lay and thought.

A fish-hawk, soaring, suddenly, turned and darted at the waves. The tall
man indolently twisted his head and watched the bird plunge its claws
into the water. It heavily arose with a silver gleaming fish.

"That bird has got his feet wet again. It's a shame," murmured the tall
man sleepily. "He must suffer from an endless cold in the head. He
should wear rubber boots. They'd look great, too. If I was him, I'd--
Great Scott!"

He had partly arisen, and was looking at the shore.

He began to scream. "Ted! Ted! Ted! Look!"

"What's matter?" dreamily spoke the freckled man. "You remind me of when
I put the bird-shot in your leg." He giggled softly.

The agitated tall man made a gesture of supreme eloquence. His companion
up-reared and turned a startled gaze shoreward.

"Lord!" he roared, as if stabbed.

The land was a long, brown streak with a rim of green, in which sparkled
the tin roofs of huge hotels. The hands from the sea had pushed them
away. The two men sprang erect, and did a little dance of perturbation.

"What shall we do? What shall we do?" moaned the freckled man, wriggling
fantastically in his dead balloon.

The changing shore seemed to fascinate the tall man, and for a time he
did not speak.

Suddenly he concluded his minuet of horror. He wheeled about and faced
the freckled man. He elaborately folded his arms.

"So," he said, in slow, formidable tones. "So! This all comes from your
accursed vanity, your bathing-suit, your idiocy; you have murdered your
best friend."

He turned away. His companion reeled as if stricken by an unexpected
arm.

He stretched out his hands. "Tom, Tom," wailed he, beseechingly, "don't
be such a fool."

The broad back of his friend was occupied by a contemptuous sneer.

Three ships fell off the horizon. Landward, the hues were blending. The
whistle of a locomotive sounded from an infinite distance as if tooting
in heaven.

"Tom! Tom! My dear boy," quavered the freckled man, "don't speak that
way to me."

"Oh, no, of course not," said the other, still facing away and throwing
the words over his shoulder. "You suppose I am going to accept all this
calmly, don't you? Not make the slightest objection? Make no protest at
all, hey?"

"Well, I--I----" began the freckled man.

The tall man's wrath suddenly exploded. "You've abducted me! That's the
whole amount of it! You've abducted me!"

"I ain't," protested the freckled man. "You must think I'm a fool."

The tall man swore, and sitting down, dangled his legs angrily in the
water. Natural law compelled his companion to occupy the other end of
the raft.

Over the waters little shoals of fish spluttered, raising tiny tempests.
Languid jelly-fish floated near, tremulously waving a thousand legs. A
row of porpoises trundled along like a procession of cog-wheels. The sky
became greyed save where over the land sunset colors were assembling.

The two voyagers, back to back and at either end of the raft, quarrelled
at length.

"What did you want to follow me for?" demanded the freckled man in a
voice of indignation.

"If your figure hadn't been so like a bottle, we wouldn't be here,"
replied the tall man.


CHAPTER III

The fires in the west blazed away, and solemnity spread over the sea.
Electric lights began to blink like eyes. Night menaced the voyagers
with a dangerous darkness, and fear came to bind their souls together.
They huddled fraternally in the middle of the raft.

"I feel like a molecule," said the freckled man in subdued tones.

"I'd give two dollars for a cigar," muttered the tall man.

A V-shaped flock of ducks flew towards Barnegat, between the voyagers
and a remnant of yellow sky. Shadows and winds came from the vanished
eastern horizon.

"I think I hear voices," said the freckled man.

"That Dollie Ramsdell was an awfully nice girl," said the tall man.

When the coldness of the sea night came to them, the freckled man found
he could by a peculiar movement of his legs and arms encase himself in
his bathing-dress. The tall man was compelled to whistle and shiver. As
night settled finally over the sea, red and green lights began to dot
the blackness. There were mysterious shadows between the waves.

"I see things comin'," murmured the freckled man.

"I wish I hadn't ordered that new dress-suit for the hop to-morrow
night," said the tall man reflectively.

The sea became uneasy and heaved painfully, like a lost bosom, when
little forgotten heart-bells try to chime with a pure sound. The
voyagers cringed at magnified foam on distant wave crests. A moon came
and looked at them.

"Somebody's here," whispered the freckled man.

"I wish I had an almanac," remarked the tall man, regarding the moon.

Presently they fell to staring at the red and green lights that twinkled
about them.

"Providence will not leave us," asserted the freckled man.

"Oh, we'll be picked up shortly. I owe money," said the tall man.

He began to thrum on an imaginary banjo.

"I have heard," said he, suddenly, "that captains with healthy ships
beneath their feet will never turn back after having once started on a
voyage. In that case we will be rescued by some ship bound for the
golden seas of the south. Then, you'll be up to some of your confounded
devilment and we'll get put off. They'll maroon us! That's what they'll
do! They'll maroon us! On an island with palm trees and sun-kissed
maidens and all that. Sun-kissed maidens, eh? Great! They'd--"

He suddenly ceased and turned to stone. At a distance a great, green eye
was contemplating the sea wanderers.

They stood up and did another dance. As they watched the eye grew
larger.

Directly the form of a phantom-like ship came into view. About the
great, green eye there bobbed small yellow dots. The wanderers could
hear a far-away creaking of unseen tackle and flapping of shadowy sails.
There came the melody of the waters as the ship's prow thrust its way.

The tall man delivered an oration.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, "here come our rescuers. The brave fellows! How I
long to take the manly captain by the hand! You will soon see a white
boat with a star on its bow drop from the side of yon ship. Kind sailors
in blue and white will help us into the boat and conduct our wasted
frames to the quarter-deck, where the handsome, bearded captain, with
gold bands all around, will welcome us. Then in the hard-oak cabin,
while the wine gurgles and the Havanas glow, we'll tell our tale of
peril and privation."

The ship came on like a black hurrying animal with froth-filled maw. The
two wanderers stood up and clasped hands. Then they howled out a wild
duet that rang over the wastes of sea.

The cries seemed to strike the ship.

Men with boots on yelled and ran about the deck. They picked up heavy
articles and threw them down. They yelled more. After hideous creakings
and flappings, the vessel stood still.

In the meantime the wanderers had been chanting their song for help. Out
in the blackness they beckoned to the ship and coaxed.

A voice came to them.

"Hello," it said.

They puffed out their cheeks and began to shout. "Hello! Hello! Hello!"

"Wot do yeh want?" said the voice.

The two wanderers gazed at each other, and sat suddenly down on the
raft. Some pall came sweeping over the sky and quenched their stars.

But almost the tall man got up and brawled miscellaneous information. He
stamped his foot, and frowning into the night, swore threateningly.

The vessel seemed fearful of these moaning voices that called from a
hidden cavern of the water. And now one voice was filled with a menace.
A number of men with enormous limbs that threw vast shadows over the sea
as the lanterns flickered, held a debate and made gestures.

Off in the darkness, the tall man began to clamor like a mob. The
freckled man sat in astounded silence, with his legs weak.

After a time one of the men of enormous limbs seized a rope that was
tugging at the stem and drew a small boat from the shadows. Three giants
clambered in and rowed cautiously toward the raft. Silver water flashed
in the gloom as the oars dipped.

About fifty feet from the raft the boat stopped. "Who er you?" asked a
voice.

The tall man braced himself and explained. He drew vivid pictures, his
twirling fingers illustrating like live brushes.

"Oh," said the three giants.

The voyagers deserted the raft. They looked back, feeling in their
hearts a mite of tenderness for the wet planks. Later, they wriggled up
the side of the vessel and climbed over the railing.

On deck they met a man.

He held a lantern to their faces. "Got any chewin' tewbacca?" he
inquired.

"No," said the tall man, "we ain't."

The man had a bronze face and solitary whiskers. Peculiar lines about
his mouth were shaped into an eternal smile of derision. His feet were
bare, and clung handily to crevices.

Fearful trousers were supported by a piece of suspender that went up the
wrong side of his chest and came down the right side of his back,
dividing him into triangles.

"Ezekiel P. Sanford, capt'in, schooner 'Mary Jones,' of N'yack, N. Y.,
genelmen," he said.

"Ah!" said the tall man, "delighted, I'm sure."

There were a few moments of silence. The giants were hovering in the
gloom and staring.

Suddenly astonishment exploded the captain.

"Wot th' devil----" he shouted. "Wot th' devil yeh got on?"

"Bathing-suits," said the tall man.


CHAPTER IV

The schooner went on. The two voyagers sat down and watched. After a
time they began to shiver. The soft blackness of the summer night passed
away, and grey mists writhed over the sea. Soon lights of early dawn
went changing across the sky, and the twin beacons on the highlands grew
dim and sparkling faintly, as if a monster were dying. The dawn
penetrated the marrow of the two men in bathing-dress.

The captain used to pause opposite them, hitch one hand in his
suspender, and laugh.

"Well, I be dog-hanged," he frequently said.

The tall man grew furious. He snarled in a mad undertone to his
companion. "This rescue ain't right. If I had known--"

He suddenly paused, transfixed by the captain's suspender. "It's goin'
to break," cried he, in an ecstatic whisper. His eyes grew large with
excitement as he watched the captain laugh. "It'll break in a minute,
sure."

But the commander of the schooner recovered, and invited them to drink
and eat. They followed him along the deck, and fell down a square black
hole into the cabin.

It was a little den, with walls of a vanished whiteness. A lamp shed an
orange light. In a sort of recess two little beds were hiding. A wooden
table, immovable, as if the craft had been builded around it, sat in the
middle of the floor. Overhead the square hole was studded with a dozen
stars. A foot-worn ladder led to the heavens.

The captain produced ponderous crackers and some cold broiled ham. Then
he vanished in the firmament like a fantastic comet.

The freckled man sat quite contentedly like a stout squaw in a blanket.
The tall man walked about the cabin and sniffed. He was angered at the
crudeness of the rescue, and his shrinking clothes made him feel too
large. He contemplated his unhappy state.

Suddenly, he broke out. "I won't stand this, I tell you! Heavens and
earth, look at the--say, what in the blazes did you want to get me in
this thing for, anyhow? You're a fine old duffer, you are! Look at that
ham!"

The freckled man grunted. He seemed somewhat blissful. He was seated
upon a bench, comfortably enwrapped in his bathing-dress.

The tall man stormed about the cabin.

"This is an outrage! I'll see the captain! I'll tell him what I think
of--"

He was interrupted by a pair of legs that appeared among the stars. The
captain came down the ladder. He brought a coffee pot from the sky.

The tall man bristled forward. He was going to denounce everything.

The captain was intent upon the coffee pot, balancing it carefully, and
leaving his unguided feet to find the steps of the ladder.

But the wrath of the tall man faded. He twirled his fingers in
excitement, and renewed his ecstatic whisperings to the freckled man.

"It's going to break! Look, quick, look! It'll break in a minute!"

He was transfixed with interest, forgetting his wrongs in staring at the
perilous passage.

But the captain arrived on the floor with triumphant suspenders.

"Well," said he, "after yeh have eat, maybe ye'd like t'sleep some! If
so, yeh can sleep on them beds."

The tall man made no reply, save in a strained undertone. "It'll break
in about a minute! Look, Ted, look quick!"

The freckled man glanced in a little bed on which were heaped boots and
oilskins. He made a courteous gesture.

"My dear sir, we could not think of depriving you of your beds. No,
indeed. Just a couple of blankets if you have them, and we'll sleep very
comfortable on these benches."

The captain protested, politely twisting his back and bobbing his head.
The suspenders tugged and creaked. The tall man partially suppressed a
cry, and took a step forward.

The freckled man was sleepily insistent, and shortly the captain gave
over his deprecatory contortions. He fetched a pink quilt with yellow
dots on it to the freckled man, and a black one with red roses on it to
the tall man.

Again he vanished in the firmament. The tall man gazed until the last
remnant of trousers disappeared from the sky. Then he wrapped himself up
in his quilt and lay down. The freckled man was puffing contentedly,
swathed like an infant. The yellow polka-dots rose and fell on the vast
pink of his chest.

The wanderers slept. In the quiet could be heard the groanings of
timbers as the sea seemed to crunch them together. The lapping of water
along the vessel's side sounded like gaspings. A hundred spirits of the
wind had got their wings entangled in the rigging, and, in soft voices,
were pleading to be loosened.

The freckled man was awakened by a foreign noise. He opened his eyes and
saw his companion standing by his couch.

His comrade's face was wan with suffering. His eyes glowed in the
darkness. He raised his arms, spreading them out like a clergyman at a
grave. He groaned deep in his chest.

"Good Lord!" yelled the freckled man, starting up. "Tom, Tom, what's th'
matter?"

The tall man spoke in a fearful voice. "To New York," he said, "to New
York in our bathing-suits."

The freckled man sank back. The shadows of the cabin threw mysteries
about the figure of the tall man, arrayed like some ancient and potent
astrologer in the black quilt with the red roses on it.


CHAPTER V

Directly the tall man went and lay down and began to groan.

The freckled man felt the miseries of the world upon him. He grew angry
at the tall man awakening him. They quarrelled.

"Well," said the tall man, finally, "we're in a fix."

"I know that," said the other, sharply.

They regarded the ceiling in silence.

"What in the thunder are we going to do?" demanded the tall man, after a
time. His companion was still silent. "Say," repeated he, angrily, "what
in the thunder are we going to do?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said the freckled man in a dismal voice.

"Well, think of something," roared the other. "Think of something, you
old fool. You don't want to make any more idiots of yourself, do you?"

"I ain't made an idiot of myself."

"Well, think. Know anybody in the city?"

"I know a fellow up in Harlem," said the freckled man.

"You know a fellow up in Harlem," howled the tall man. "Up in Harlem!
How the dickens are we to--say, you're crazy!"

"We can take a cab," cried the other, waxing indignant.

The tall man grew suddenly calm. "Do you know any one else?" he asked,
measuredly.

"I know another fellow somewhere on Park Place."

"Somewhere on Park Place," repeated the tall man in an unnatural manner.
"Somewhere on Park Place." With an air of sublime resignation he turned
his face to the wall.

The freckled man sat erect and frowned in the direction of his
companion. "Well, now, I suppose you are going to sulk. You make me ill!
It's the best we can do, ain't it? Hire a cab and go look that fellow up
on Park--What's that? You can't afford it? What nonsense! You are
getting--Oh! Well, maybe we can beg some clothes of the captain. Eh?
Did I see 'im? Certainly, I saw 'im. Yes, it is improbable that a man
who wears trousers like that can have clothes to lend. No, I won't wear
oilskins and a sou'-wester. To Athens? Of course not! I don't know where
it is. Do you? I thought not. With all your grumbling about other
people, you never know anything important yourself. What? Broadway? I'll
be hanged first. We can get off at Harlem, man alive. There are no cabs
in Harlem. I don't think we can bribe a sailor to take us ashore and
bring a cab to the dock, for the very simple reason that we have nothing
to bribe him with. What? No, of course not. See here, Tom Sharp, don't
you swear at me like that. I won't have it. What's that? I ain't,
either. I ain't. What? I am not. It's no such thing. I ain't. I've got
more than you have, anyway. Well, you ain't doing anything so very
brilliant yourself--just lying there and cussin'." At length the tall
man feigned prodigiously to snore. The freckled man thought with such
vigor that he fell asleep.

After a time he dreamed that he was in a forest where bass drums grew on
trees. There came a strong wind that banged the fruit about like empty
pods. A frightful din was in his ears.

He awoke to find the captain of the schooner standing over him.

"We're at New York now," said the captain, raising his voice above the
thumping and banging that was being done on deck, "an' I s'pose you
fellers wanta go ashore." He chuckled in an exasperating manner. "Jes'
sing out when yeh wanta go," he added, leering at the freckled man.

The tall man awoke, came over and grasped the captain by the throat.

"If you laugh again I'll kill you," he said.

The captain gurgled and waved his legs and arms.

"In the first place," the tall man continued, "you rescued us in a
deucedly shabby manner. It makes me ill to think of it. I've a mind to
mop you 'round just for that. In the second place, your vessel is bound
for Athens, N. Y., and there's no sense in it. Now, will you or will you
not turn this ship about and take us back where our clothes are, or to
Philadelphia, where we belong?"

He furiously shook the captain. Then he eased his grip and awaited a
reply.

"I can't," yelled the captain, "I can't. This vessel don't belong to me.
I've got to--"

"Well, then," interrupted the tall man, "can you lend us some clothes?"

"Hain't got none," replied the captain, promptly. His face was red, and
his eyes were glaring.

"Well, then," said the tall man, "can you lend us some money?"

"Hain't got none," replied the captain, promptly. Something overcame him
and he laughed.

"Thunderation," roared the tall man. He seized the captain, who began to
have wriggling contortions. The tall man kneaded him as if he were
biscuits. "You infernal scoundrel," he bellowed, "this whole affair is
some wretched plot, and you are in it. I am about to kill you."

The solitary whisker of the captain did acrobatic feats like a strange
demon upon his chin. His eyes stood perilously from his head. The
suspender wheezed and tugged like the tackle of a sail.

Suddenly the tall man released his hold. Great expectancy sat upon his
features. "It's going to break!" he cried, rubbing his hands.

But the captain howled and vanished in the sky.

The freckled man then came forward. He appeared filled with sarcasm.

"So!" said he. "So, you've settled the matter. The captain is the only
man in the world who can help us, and I daresay he'll do anything he can
now."

"That's all right," said the tall man. "If you don't like the way I run
things you shouldn't have come on this trip at all."

They had another quarrel.

At the end of it they went on deck. The captain stood at the stern
addressing the bow with opprobrious language. When he perceived the
voyagers he began to fling his fists about in the air.

"I'm goin' to put yeh off!" he yelled. The wanderers stared at each
other.

"Hum," said the tall man.

The freckled man looked at his companion. "He's going to put us off, you
see," he said, complacently.

The tall man began to walk about and move his shoulders. "I'd like to
see you do it," he said, defiantly.

The captain tugged at a rope. A boat came at his bidding.

"I'd like to see you do it," the tall man repeated, continually. An
imperturbable man in rubber boots climbed down in the boat and seized
the oars. The captain motioned downward. His whisker had a triumphant
appearance.

The two wanderers looked at the boat. "I guess we'll have to get in,"
murmured the freckled man.

The tall man was standing like a granite column. "I won't," said he. "I
won't! I don't care what you do, but I won't!"

"Well, but--" expostulated the other. They held a furious debate.

In the meantime the captain was darting about making sinister gestures,
but the back of the tall man held him at bay. The crew, much depleted by
the departure of the imperturbable man into the boat, looked on from the
bow.

"You're a fool," the freckled man concluded his argument.

"So?" inquired the tall man, highly exasperated.

"So! Well, if you think you're so bright, we'll go in the boat, and then
you'll see."

He climbed down into the craft and seated himself in an ominous manner
at the stern.

"You'll see," he said to his companion, as the latter floundered heavily
down. "You'll see!"

The man in rubber boots calmly rowed the boat toward the shore. As they
went, the captain leaned over the railing and laughed. The freckled man
was seated very victoriously.

"Well, wasn't this the right thing after all?" he inquired in a pleasant
voice. The tall man made no reply.


CHAPTER VI

As they neared the dock something seemed suddenly to occur to the
freckled man.

"Great heavens!" he murmured. He stared at the approaching shore.

"My, what a plight, Tommy!" he quavered.

"Do you think so?" spoke up the tall man. "Why, I really thought you
liked it." He laughed in a hard voice. "Lord, what a figure you'll cut."

This laugh jarred the freckled man's soul. He became mad.

"Thunderation, turn the boat around!" he roared. "Turn 'er round, quick!
Man alive, we can't--turn 'er round, d'ye hear!"

The tall man in the stern gazed at his companion with glowing eyes.

"Certainly not," he said. "We're going on. You insisted Upon it." He
began to prod his companion with words.

The freckled man stood up and waved his arms.

"Sit down," said the tall man. "You'll tip the boat over."

The other man began to shout.

"Sit down!" said the tall man again.

Words bubbled from the freckled man's mouth. There was a little torrent
of sentences that almost choked him. And he protested passionately with
his hands.

But the boat went on to the shadow of the docks. The tall man was intent
upon balancing it as it rocked dangerously during his comrade's oration.

"Sit down," he continually repeated.

"I won't," raged the freckled man. "I won't do anything." The boat
wobbled with these words.

"Say," he continued, addressing the oarsman, "just turn this boat round,
will you? Where in the thunder are you taking us to, anyhow?"

The oarsman looked at the sky and thought. Finally he spoke. "I'm doin'
what the cap'n sed."

"Well, what in th' blazes do I care what the cap'n sed?" demanded the
freckled man. He took a violent step. "You just turn this round or--"

The small craft reeled. Over one side water came flashing in. The
freckled man cried out in fear, and gave a jump to the other side. The
tall man roared orders, and the oarsman made efforts. The boat acted for
a moment like an animal on a slackened wire. Then it upset.

"Sit down!" said the tall man, in a final roar as he was plunged into
the water. The oarsman dropped his oars to grapple with the gunwale. He
went down saying unknown words. The freckled man's explanation or
apology was strangled by the water.

Two or three tugs let off whistles of astonishment, and continued on
their paths. A man dozing on a dock aroused and began to caper.

The passengers on a ferry-boat all ran to the near railing. A miraculous
person in a small boat was bobbing on the waves near the piers. He
sculled hastily toward the scene. It was a swirl of waters in the midst
of which the dark bottom of the boat appeared, whale-like.

Two heads suddenly came up.

"839," said the freckled man, chokingly. "That's it! 839!"

"What is?" said the tall man.

"That's the number of that feller on Park Place. I just remembered."

"You're the bloomingest--" the tall man said.

"It wasn't my fault," interrupted his companion. "If you hadn't--" He
tried to gesticulate, but one hand held to the keel of the boat, and the
other was supporting the form of the oarsman. The latter had fought a
battle with his immense rubber boots and had been conquered.

The rescuer in the other small boat came fiercely. As his craft glided
up, he reached out and grasped the tall man by the collar and dragged
him into the boat, interrupting what was, under the circumstances, a
very brilliant flow of rhetoric directed at the freckled man. The
oarsman of the wrecked craft was taken tenderly over the gunwale and
laid in the bottom of the boat. Puffing and blowing, the freckled man
climbed in.

"You'll upset this one before we can get ashore," the other voyager
remarked.

As they turned toward the land they saw that the nearest dock was lined
with people. The freckled man gave a little moan.

But the staring eyes of the crowd were fixed on the limp form of the man
in rubber boots. A hundred hands reached down to help lift the body up.
On the dock some men grabbed it and began to beat it and roll it. A
policeman tossed the spectators about. Each individual in the heaving
crowd sought to fasten his eyes on the blue-tinted face of the man in
the rubber boots. They surged to and fro, while the policeman beat them
indiscriminately.

The wanderers came modestly up the dock and gazed shrinkingly at the
throng. They stood for a moment, holding their breath to see the first
finger of amazement levelled at them.

But the crowd bended and surged in absorbing anxiety to view the man in
rubber boots, whose face fascinated them. The sea-wanderers were as
though they were not there.

They stood without the jam and whispered hurriedly.

"839," said the freckled man.

"All right," said the tall man.

Under the pommeling hands the oarsman showed signs of life. The voyagers
watched him make a protesting kick at the leg of the crowd, the while
uttering angry groans.

"He's better," said the tall man, softly; "let's make off."

Together they stole noiselessly up the dock. Directly in front of it
they found a row of six cabs.

The drivers on top were filled with a mighty curiosity. They had driven
hurriedly from the adjacent ferry-house when they had seen the first
running sign of an accident. They were straining on their toes and
gazing at the tossing backs of the men in the crowd.

The wanderers made a little detour, and then went rapidly towards a cab.
They stopped in front of it and looked up.

"Driver," called the tall man, softly.

The man was intent.

"Driver," breathed the freckled man. They stood for a moment and gazed
imploringly.

The cabman suddenly moved his feet. "By Jimmy, I bet he's a gonner," he
said, in an ecstacy, and he again relapsed into a statue.

The freckled man groaned and wrung his hands. The tall man climbed into
the cab.

"Come in here," he said to his companion. The freckled man climbed in,
and the tall man reached over and pulled the door shut. Then he put his
head out the window.

"Driver," he roared, sternly, "839 Park Place--and quick."

The driver looked down and met the eye of the tall man. "Eh?--Oh--839?
Park Place? Yessir." He reluctantly gave his horse a clump on the back.
As the conveyance rattled off the wanderers huddled back among the
dingy cushions and heaved great breaths of relief.

"Well, it's all over," said the freckled man, finally. "We're about out
of it. And quicker than I expected. Much quicker. It looked to me
sometimes that we were doomed. I am thankful to find it not so. I am
rejoiced. And I hope and trust that you--well, I don't wish to--perhaps
it is not the proper time to--that is, I don't wish to intrude a moral
at an inopportune moment, but, my dear, dear fellow, I think the time is
ripe to point out to you that your obstinacy, your selfishness, your
villainous temper, and your various other faults can make it just as
unpleasant for your ownself, my dear boy, as they frequently do for
other people. You can see what you brought us to, and I most sincerely
hope, my dear, dear fellow, that I shall soon see those signs in you
which shall lead me to believe that you have become a wiser man."




THE END OF THE BATTLE


A sergeant, a corporal, and fourteen men of the Twelfth Regiment of the
Line had been sent out to occupy a house on the main highway. They would
be at least a half of a mile in advance of any other picket of their own
people. Sergeant Morton was deeply angry at being sent on this duty. He
said that he was over-worked. There were at least two sergeants, he
claimed furiously, whose turn it should have been to go on this arduous
mission. He was treated unfairly; he was abused by his superiors; why
did any damned fool ever join the army? As for him he would get out of
it as soon as possible; he was sick of it; the life of a dog. All this
he said to the corporal, who listened attentively, giving grunts of
respectful assent. On the way to this post two privates took occasion to
drop to the rear and pilfer in the orchard of a deserted plantation.
When the sergeant discovered this absence, he grew black with a rage
which was an accumulation of all his irritations. "Run, you!" he howled.
"Bring them here! I'll show them--" A private ran swiftly to the rear.
The remainder of the squad began to shout nervously at the two
delinquents, whose figures they could see in the deep shade of the
orchard, hurriedly picking fruit from the ground and cramming it within
their shirts, next to their skins. The beseeching cries of their
comrades stirred the criminals more than did the barking of the
sergeant. They ran to rejoin the squad, while holding their loaded
bosoms and with their mouths open with aggrieved explanations.

Jones faced the sergeant with a horrible cancer marked in bumps on his
left side. The disease of Patterson showed quite around the front of his
waist in many protuberances. "A nice pair!" said the sergeant, with
sudden frigidity. "You're the kind of soldiers a man wants to choose for
a dangerous outpost duty, ain't you?"

The two privates stood at attention, still looking much aggrieved. "We
only--" began Jones huskily.

"Oh, you 'only!'" cried the sergeant. "Yes, you 'only.' I know all about
that. But if you think you are going to trifle with me--"

A moment later the squad moved on towards its station. Behind the
sergeant's back Jones and Patterson were slyly passing apples and pears
to their friends while the sergeant expounded eloquently to the
corporal. "You see what kind of men are in the army now. Why, when I
joined the regiment it was a very different thing, I can tell you. Then
a sergeant had some authority, and if a man disobeyed orders, he had a
very small chance of escaping something extremely serious. But now! Good
God! If I report these men, the captain will look over a lot of beastly
orderly sheets and say--'Haw, eh, well, Sergeant Morton, these men seem
to have very good records; very good records, indeed. I can't be too
hard on them; no, not too hard.'" Continued the sergeant: "I tell you,
Flagler, the army is no place for a decent man."

Flagler, the corporal, answered with a sincerity of appreciation which
with him had become a science. "I think you are right, sergeant," he
answered.

Behind them the privates mumbled discreetly. "Damn this sergeant of
ours. He thinks we are made of wood. I don't see any reason for all this
strictness when we are on active service. It isn't like being at home in
barracks! There is no great harm in a couple of men dropping out to raid
an orchard of the enemy when all the world knows that we haven't had a
decent meal in twenty days."

The reddened face of Sergeant Morton suddenly showed to the rear. "A
little more marching and less talking," he said.

When he came to the house he had been ordered to occupy the sergeant
sniffed with disdain. "These people must have lived like cattle," he
said angrily. To be sure, the place was not alluring. The ground floor
had been used for the housing of cattle, and it was dark and terrible. A
flight of steps led to the lofty first floor, which was denuded but
respectable. The sergeant's visage lightened when he saw the strong
walls of stone and cement. "Unless they turn guns on us, they will never
get us out of here," he said cheerfully to the squad. The men, anxious
to keep him in an amiable mood, all hurriedly grinned and seemed very
appreciative and pleased. "I'll make this into a fortress," he
announced. He sent Jones and Patterson, the two orchard thieves, out on
sentry-duty. He worked the others, then, until he could think of no more
things to tell them to do. Afterwards he went forth, with a major-
general's serious scowl, and examined the ground in front of his
position. In returning he came upon a sentry, Jones, munching an apple.
He sternly commanded him to throw it away.

The men spread their blankets on the floors of the bare rooms, and
putting their packs under their heads and lighting their pipes, they
lived an easy peace. Bees hummed in the garden, and a scent of flowers
came through the open window. A great fan-shaped bit of sunshine smote
the face of one man, and he indolently cursed as he moved his primitive
bed to a shadier place.

Another private explained to a comrade: "This is all nonsense anyhow. No
sense in occupying this post. They--"

"But, of course," said the corporal, "when she told me herself that she
cared more for me than she did for him, I wasn't going to stand any of
his talk--" The corporal's listener was so sleepy that he could only
grunt his sympathy.

There was a sudden little spatter of shooting. A cry from Jones rang
out. With no intermediate scrambling, the sergeant leaped straight to
his feet. "Now," he cried, "let us see what you are made of! If," he
added bitterly, "you are made of anything!"

A man yelled: "Good God, can't you see you're all tangled up in my
cartridge belt?"

Another man yelled: "Keep off my legs! Can't you walk on the floor?"

To the windows there was a blind rush of slumberous men, who brushed
hair from their eyes even as they made ready their rifles. Jones and
Patterson came stumbling up the steps, crying dreadful information.
Already the enemy's bullets were spitting and singing over the house.

The sergeant suddenly was stiff and cold with a sense of the importance
of the thing. "Wait until you see one," he drawled loudly and calmly,
"then shoot."

For some moments the enemy's bullets swung swifter than lightning over
the house without anybody being able to discover a target. In this
interval a man was shot in the throat. He gurgled, and then lay down on
the floor. The blood slowly waved down the brown skin of his neck while
he looked meekly at his comrades.

There was a howl. "There they are! There they come!" The rifles
crackled. A light smoke drifted idly through the rooms. There was a
strong odor as if from burnt paper and the powder of firecrackers. The
men were silent. Through the windows and about the house the bullets of
an entirely invisible enemy moaned, hummed, spat, burst, and sang.

The men began to curse. "Why can't we see them?" they muttered through
their teeth. The sergeant was still frigid. He answered soothingly as if
he were directly reprehensible for this behavior of the enemy. "Wait a
moment. You will soon be able to see them. There! Give it to them!" A
little skirt of black figures had appeared in a field. It was really
like shooting at an upright needle from the full length of a ballroom.
But the men's spirits improved as soon as the enemy--this mysterious
enemy--became a tangible thing, and far off. They had believed the foe
to be shooting at them from the adjacent garden.

"Now," said the sergeant ambitiously, "we can beat them off easily if
you men are good enough."

A man called out in a tone of quick, great interest. "See that fellow on
horseback, Bill? Isn't he on horseback? I thought he was on horseback."

There was a fusilade against another side of the house. The sergeant
dashed into the room which commanded the situation. He found a dead
soldier on the floor. He rushed out howling: "When was Knowles killed?
When was Knowles killed? When was Knowles killed? Damn it, when was
Knowles killed?" It was absolutely essential to find out the exact
moment this man died. A blackened private turned upon his sergeant and
demanded: "How in hell do I know?" Sergeant Morton had a sense of anger
so brief that in the next second he cried: "Patterson!" He had even
forgotten his vital interest in the time of Knowles' death.

"Yes?" said Patterson, his face set with some deep-rooted quality of
determination. Still, he was a mere farm boy.

"Go in to Knowles' window and shoot at those people," said the sergeant
hoarsely. Afterwards he coughed. Some of the fumes of the fight had made
way to his lungs.

Patterson looked at the door into this other room. He looked at it as if
he suspected it was to be his death-chamber. Then he entered and stood
across the body of Knowles and fired vigorously into a group of plum
trees.

"They can't take this house," declared the sergeant in a contemptuous
and argumentative tone. He was apparently replying to somebody. The man
who had been shot in the throat looked up at him. Eight men were firing
from the windows. The sergeant detected in a corner three wounded men
talking together feebly. "Don't you think there is anything to do?" he
bawled. "Go and get Knowles' cartridges and give them to somebody who
can use them! Take Simpson's too." The man who had been shot in the
throat looked at him. Of the three wounded men who had been talking, one
said: "My leg is all doubled up under me, sergeant." He spoke
apologetically.

Meantime the sergeant was re-loading his rifle. His foot slipped in the
blood of the man who had been shot in the throat, and the military boot
made a greasy red streak on the floor.

"Why, we can hold this place!" shouted the sergeant jubilantly. "Who
says we can't?"

Corporal Flagler suddenly spun away from his window and fell in a heap.

"Sergeant," murmured a man as he dropped to a seat on the floor out of
danger, "I can't stand this. I swear I can't. I think we should run
away."

Morton, with the kindly eyes of a good shepherd, looked at the man. "You
are afraid, Johnston, you are afraid," he said softly. The man struggled
to his feet, cast upon the sergeant a gaze full of admiration, reproach,
and despair, and returned to his post. A moment later he pitched
forward, and thereafter his body hung out of the window, his arms
straight and the fists clenched. Incidentally this corpse was pierced
afterwards by chance three times by bullets of the enemy.

The sergeant laid his rifle against the stonework of the window-frame
and shot with care until his magazine was empty. Behind him a man,
simply grazed on the elbow, was wildly sobbing like a girl. "Damn it,
shut up!" said Morton, without turning his head. Before him was a vista
of a garden, fields, clumps of trees, woods, populated at the time with
little fleeting figures.

He grew furious. "Why didn't he send me orders?" he cried aloud. The
emphasis on the word "he" was impressive. A mile back on the road a
galloper of the Hussars lay dead beside his dead horse.

The man who had been grazed on the elbow still set up his bleat.
Morton's fury veered to this soldier. "Can't you shut up? Can't you shut
up? Can't you shut up? Fight! That's the thing to do. Fight!"

A bullet struck Morton, and he fell upon the man who had been shot in
the throat. There was a sickening moment. Then the sergeant rolled off
to a position upon the bloody floor. He turned himself with a last
effort until he could look at the wounded who were able to look at him.

"Kim up, the Kickers," he said thickly. His arms weakened and he dropped
on his face.

After an interval a young subaltern of the enemy's infantry, followed by
his eager men, burst into this reeking interior. But just over the
threshold he halted before the scene of blood and death. He turned with
a shrug to his sergeant. "God, I should have estimated them at least one
hundred strong."




UPTURNED FACE


"What will we do now?" said the adjutant, troubled and excited.

"Bury him," said Timothy Lean.

The two officers looked down close to their toes where lay the body of
their comrade. The face was chalk-blue; gleaming eyes stared at the sky.
Over the two upright figures was a windy sound of bullets, and on the
top of the hill Lean's prostrate company of Spitzbergen infantry was
firing measured volleys.

"Don't you think it would be better--" began the adjutant. "We might
leave him until tomorrow."

"No," said Lean. "I can't hold that post an hour longer. I've got to
fall back, and we've got to bury old Bill."

"Of course," said the adjutant, at once. "Your men got intrenching
tools?"

Lean shouted back to his little line, and two men came slowly, one with
a pick, one with a shovel. They started in the direction of the Rostina
sharp-shooters. Bullets cracked near their ears. "Dig here," said Lean
gruffly. The men, thus caused to lower their glances to the turf, became
hurried and frightened merely because they could not look to see whence
the bullets came. The dull beat of the pick striking the earth sounded
amid the swift snap of close bullets. Presently the other private began
to shovel.

"I suppose," said the adjutant, slowly, "we'd better search his clothes
for--things."

Lean nodded. Together in curious abstraction they looked at the body.
Then Lean stirred his shoulders suddenly, arousing himself.

"Yes," he said, "we'd better see what he's got." He dropped to his
knees, and his hands approached the body of the dead officer. But his
hands wavered over the buttons of the tunic. The first button was brick-
red with drying blood, and he did not seem to dare touch it.

"Go on," said the adjutant, hoarsely.

Lean stretched his wooden hand, and his fingers fumbled the blood-
stained buttons. At last he rose with ghastly face. He had gathered a
watch, a whistle, a pipe, a tobacco pouch, a handkerchief, a little case
of cards and papers. He looked at the adjutant. There was a silence. The
adjutant was feeling that he had been a coward to make Lean do all the
grisly business.

"Well," said Lean, "that's all, I think. You have his sword and
revolver?"

"Yes," said the adjutant, his face working, and then he burst out in a
sudden strange fury at the two privates. "Why don't you hurry up with
that grave? What are you doing, anyhow? Hurry, do you hear? I never saw
such stupid--"

Even as he cried out in his passion the two men were laboring for their
lives. Ever overhead the bullets were spitting.

The grave was finished, It was not a masterpiece--a poor little shallow
thing. Lean and the adjutant again looked at each other in a curious
silent communication.

Suddenly the adjutant croaked out a weird laugh. It was a terrible
laugh, which had its origin in that part of the mind which is first
moved by the singing of the nerves. "Well," he said, humorously to Lean,
"I suppose we had best tumble him in."

"Yes," said Lean. The two privates stood waiting, bent over their
implements. "I suppose," said Lean, "it would be better if we laid him
in ourselves."

"Yes," said the adjutant. Then apparently remembering that he had made
Lean search the body, he stooped with great fortitude and took hold of
the dead officer's clothing. Lean joined him. Both were particular that
their fingers should not feel the corpse. They tugged away; the corpse
lifted, heaved, toppled, flopped into the grave, and the two officers,
straightening, looked again at each other--they were always looking at
each other. They sighed with relief.

The adjutant said, "I suppose we should--we should say something. Do you
know the service, Tim?"

"They don't read the service until the grave is filled in," said Lean,
pressing his lips to an academic expression.

"Don't they?" said the adjutant, shocked that he had made the mistake.

"Oh, well," he cried, suddenly, "let us--let us say something--while he
can hear us."

"All right," said Lean. "Do you know the service?"

"I can't remember a line of it," said the adjutant.

Lean was extremely dubious. "I can repeat two lines, but--"

"Well, do it," said the adjutant. "Go as far as you can. That's better
than nothing. And the beasts have got our range exactly."

Lean looked at his two men. "Attention," he barked. The privates came to
attention with a click, looking much aggrieved. The adjutant lowered his
helmet to his knee. Lean, bareheaded, he stood over the grave. The
Rostina sharpshooters fired briskly.

"Oh, Father, our friend has sunk in the deep waters of death, but his
spirit has leaped toward Thee as the bubble arises from the lips of the
drowning. Perceive, we beseech, O Father, the little flying bubble,
and--".

Lean, although husky and ashamed, had suffered no hesitation up to this
point, but he stopped with a hopeless feeling and looked at the corpse.

The adjutant moved uneasily. "And from Thy superb heights--" he began,
and then he too came to an end.

"And from Thy superb heights," said Lean.

The adjutant suddenly remembered a phrase in the back part of the
Spitzbergen burial service, and he exploited it with the triumphant
manner of a man who has recalled everything, and can go on.

"Oh, God, have mercy--"

"Oh, God, have mercy--" said Lean.

"Mercy," repeated the adjutant, in quick failure.

"Mercy," said Lean. And then he was moved by some violence of feeling,
for he turned suddenly upon his two men and tigerishly said, "Throw the
dirt in."

The fire of the Rostina sharpshooters was accurate and continuous.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the aggrieved privates came forward with his shovel. He lifted
his first shovel-load of earth, and for a moment of inexplicable
hesitation it was held poised above this corpse, which from its chalk-
blue face looked keenly out from the grave. Then the soldier emptied his
shovel on--on the feet.

Timothy Lean felt as if tons had been swiftly lifted from off his
forehead. He had felt that perhaps the private might empty the shovel
on--on the face. It had been emptied on the feet. There was a great
point gained there--ha, ha!--the first shovelful had been emptied on
the feet. How satisfactory!

The adjutant began to babble. "Well, of course--a man we've messed with
all these years--impossible--you can't, you know, leave your intimate
friends rotting on the field. Go on, for God's sake, and shovel, you!"

The man with the shovel suddenly ducked, grabbed his left arm with his
right hand, and looked at his officer for orders. Lean picked the shovel
from the ground. "Go to the rear," he said to the wounded man. He also
addressed the other private. "You get under cover, too; I'll finish this
business."

The wounded man scrambled hard still for the top of the ridge without
devoting any glances to the direction whence the bullets came, and the
other man followed at an equal pace; but he was different, in that he
looked back anxiously three times.

This is merely the way--often--of the hit and unhit.

Timothy Lean filled the shovel, hesitated, and then in a movement which
was like a gesture of abhorrence he flung the dirt into the grave, and
as it landed it made a sound--plop! Lean suddenly stopped and mopped his
brow--a tired laborer.

"Perhaps we have been wrong," said the adjutant. His glance wavered
stupidly. "It might have been better if we hadn't buried him just at
this time. Of course, if we advance to-morrow the body would have
been--"

"Damn you," said Lean, "shut your mouth!" He was not the senior officer.

He again filled the shovel and flung the earth. Always the earth made
that sound--plop! For a space Lean worked frantically, like a man
digging himself out of danger.

Soon there was nothing to be seen but the chalk-blue face. Lean filled
the shovel. "Good God," he cried to the adjutant. "Why didn't you turn
him somehow when you put him in? This--" Then Lean began to stutter.

The adjutant understood. He was pale to the lips. "Go on, man," he
cried, beseechingly, almost in a shout. Lean swung back the shovel. It
went forward in a pendulum curve. When the earth landed it made a sound
--plop!




AN EPISODE OF WAR


The lieutenant's rubber blanket lay on the ground, and upon it he had
poured the company's supply of coffee. Corporals and other
representatives of the grimy and hot-throated men who lined the
breastwork had come for each squad's portion.

The lieutenant was frowning and serious at this task of division. His
lips pursed as he drew with his sword various crevices in the heap until
brown squares of coffee, astoundingly equal in size, appeared on the
blanket. He was on the verge of a great triumph in mathematics, and the
corporals were thronging forward, each to reap a little square, when
suddenly the lieutenant cried out and looked quickly at a man near him
as if he suspected it was a case of personal assault. The others cried
out also when they saw blood upon the lieutenant's sleeve.

He had winced like a man stung, swayed dangerously, and then
straightened. The sound of his hoarse breathing was plainly audible. He
looked sadly, mystically, over the breastwork at the green face of a
wood, where now were many little puffs of white smoke. During this
moment the men about him gazed statue-like and silent, astonished and
awed by this catastrophe which happened when catastrophes were not
expected--when they had leisure to observe it.

As the lieutenant stared at the wood, they too swung their heads, so
that for another instant all hands, still silent, contemplated the
distant forest as if their minds were fixed upon the mystery of a
bullet's journey.

The officer had, of course, been compelled to take his sword into his
left hand. He did not hold it by the hilt. He gripped it at the middle
of the blade, awkwardly. Turning his eyes from the hostile wood, he
looked at the sword as he held it there, and seemed puzzled as to what
to do with it, where to put it. In short, this weapon had of a sudden
become a strange thing to him. He looked at it in a kind of
stupefaction, as if he had been endowed with a trident, a sceptre, or a
spade.

Finally he tried to sheath it. To sheath a sword held by the left hand,
at the middle of the blade, in a scabbard hung at the left hip, is a
feat worthy of a sawdust ring. This wounded officer engaged in a
desperate struggle with the sword and the wobbling scabbard, and during
the time of it he breathed like a wrestler.

But at this instant the men, the spectators, awoke from their stone-like
poses and crowded forward sympathetically. The orderly-sergeant took the
sword and tenderly placed it in the scabbard. At the time, he leaned
nervously backward, and did not allow even his finger to brush the body
of the lieutenant. A wound gives strange dignity to him who bears it.
Well men shy from this new and terrible majesty. It is as if the wounded
man's hand is upon the curtain which hangs before the revelations of all
existence--the meaning of ants, potentates, wars, cities, sunshine,
snow, a feather dropped from a bird's wing; and the power of it sheds
radiance upon a bloody form, and makes the other men understand
sometimes that they are little. His comrades look at him with large eyes
thoughtfully. Moreover, they fear vaguely that the weight of a finger
upon him might send him headlong, precipitate the tragedy, hurl him at
once into the dim, grey unknown. And so the orderly-sergeant, while
sheathing the sword, leaned nervously backward.

There were others who proffered assistance. One timidly presented his
shoulder and asked the lieutenant if he cared to lean upon it, but the
latter waved him away mournfully. He wore the look of one who knows he
is the victim of a terrible disease and understands his helplessness. He
again stared over the breastwork at the forest, and then turning went
slowly rearward. He held his right wrist tenderly in his left hand as if
the wounded arm was made of very brittle glass.

And the men in silence stared at the wood, then at the departing
lieutenant--then at the wood, then at the lieutenant.

As the wounded officer passed from the line of battle, he was enabled to
see many things which as a participant in the fight were unknown to him.
He saw a general on a black horse gazing over the lines of blue infantry
at the green woods which veiled his problems. An aide galloped
furiously, dragged his horse suddenly to a halt, saluted, and presented
a paper. It was, for a wonder, precisely like an historical painting.

To the rear of the general and his staff a group, composed of a bugler,
two or three orderlies, and the bearer of the corps standard, all upon
maniacal horses, were working like slaves to hold their ground,
preserve, their respectful interval, while the shells boomed in the air
about them, and caused their chargers to make furious quivering leaps.

A battery, a tumultuous and shining mass, was swirling toward the right.
The wild thud of hoofs, the cries of the riders shouting blame and
praise, menace and encouragement, and, last the roar of the wheels, the
slant of the glistening guns, brought the lieutenant to an intent pause.
The battery swept in curves that stirred the heart; it made halts as
dramatic as the crash of a wave on the rocks, and when it fled onward,
this aggregation of wheels, levers, motors, had a beautiful unity, as if
it were a missile. The sound of it was a war-chorus that reached into
the depths of man's emotion.

The lieutenant, still holding his arm as if it were of glass, stood
watching this battery until all detail of it was lost, save the figures
of the riders, which rose and fell and waved lashes over the black mass.

Later, he turned his eyes toward the battle where the shooting sometimes
crackled like bush-fires, sometimes sputtered with exasperating
irregularity, and sometimes reverberated like the thunder. He saw the
smoke rolling upward and saw crowds of men who ran and cheered, or stood
and blazed away at the inscrutable distance.

He came upon some stragglers, and they told him how to find the field
hospital. They described its exact location. In fact, these men, no
longer having part in the battle, knew more of it than others. They told
the performance of every corps, every division, the opinion of every
general. The lieutenant, carrying his wounded arm rearward, looked upon
them with wonder.

At the roadside a brigade was making coffee and buzzing with talk like a
girls' boarding-school. Several officers came out to him and inquired
concerning things of which he knew nothing. One, seeing his arm, began
to scold. "Why, man, that's no way to do. You want to fix that thing."
He appropriated the lieutenant and the lieutenant's wound. He cut the
sleeve and laid bare the arm, every nerve of which softly fluttered
under his touch. He bound his handkerchief over the wound, scolding away
in the meantime. His tone allowed one to think that he was in the habit
of being wounded every day. The lieutenant hung his head, feeling, in
this presence, that he did not know how to be correctly wounded.

The low white tents of the hospital were grouped around an old school-
house. There was here a singular commotion. In the foreground two
ambulances interlocked wheels in the deep mud. The drivers were tossing
the blame of it back and forth, gesticulating and berating, while from
the ambulances, both crammed with wounded, there came an occasional
groan. An interminable crowd of bandaged men were coming and going.
Great numbers sat under the trees nursing heads or arms or legs. There
was a dispute of some kind raging on the steps of the school-house.
Sitting with his back against a tree a man with a face as grey as a new
army blanket was serenely smoking a corn-cob pipe. The lieutenant wished
to rush forward and inform him that he was dying.

A busy surgeon was passing near the lieutenant. "Good-morning," he said,
with a friendly smile. Then he caught sight of the lieutenant's arm and
his face at once changed. "Well, let's have a look at it." He seemed
possessed suddenly of a great contempt for the lieutenant. This wound
evidently placed the latter on a very low social plane. The doctor cried
out impatiently, "What mutton-head had tied it up that way anyhow?" The
lieutenant answered, "Oh, a man."

When the wound was disclosed the doctor fingered it disdainfully.
"Humph," he said. "You come along with me and I'll 'tend to you." His
voice contained the same scorn as if he were saying, "You will have to
go to jail."

The lieutenant had been very meek, but now his face flushed, and he
looked into the doctor's eyes. "I guess I won't have it amputated," he
said.

"Nonsense, man! Nonsense! Nonsense!" cried the doctor. "Come along, now.
I won't amputate it. Come along. Don't be a baby."

"Let go of me," said the lieutenant, holding back wrathfully, his glance
fixed upon the door of the old school-house, as sinister to him as the
portals of death.

And this is the story of how the lieutenant lost his arm. When he
reached home, his sisters, his mother, his wife sobbed for a long time
at the sight of the flat sleeve. "Oh, well," he said, standing
shamefaced amid these tears, "I don't suppose it matters so much as all
that."




AN EXPERIMENT IN MISERY


It was late at night, and a fine rain was swirling softly down, causing
the pavements to glisten with hue of steel and blue and yellow in the
rays of the innumerable lights. A youth was trudging slowly, without
enthusiasm, with his hands buried deep in his trousers' pockets, toward
the downtown places where beds can be hired for coppers. He was clothed
in an aged and tattered suit, and his derby was a marvel of dust-covered
crown and torn rim. He was going forth to eat as the wanderer may eat,
and sleep as the homeless sleep. By the time he had reached City Hall
Park he was so completely plastered with yells of "bum" and "hobo," and
with various unholy epithets that small boys had applied to him at
intervals, that he was in a state of the most profound dejection. The
sifting rain saturated the old velvet collar of his overcoat, and as the
wet cloth pressed against his neck, he felt that there no longer could
be pleasure in life. He looked about him searching for an outcast of
highest degree that they too might share miseries, but the lights threw
a quivering glare over rows and circles of deserted benches that
glistened damply, showing patches of wet sod behind them. It seemed that
their usual freights had fled on this night to better things. There were
only squads of well-dressed Brooklyn people who swarmed towards the
bridge.

The young man loitered about for a time and then went shuffling off down
Park Row. In the sudden descent in style of the dress of the crowd he
felt relief, and as if he were at last in his own country. He began to
see tatters that matched his tatters. In Chatham Square there were
aimless men strewn in front of saloons and lodging-houses, standing
sadly, patiently, reminding one vaguely of the attitudes of chickens in
a storm. He aligned himself with these men, and turned slowly to occupy
himself with the flowing life of the great street.

Through the mists of the cold and storming night, the cable cars went in
silent procession, great affairs shining with red and brass, moving with
formidable power, calm and irresistible, dangerful and gloomy, breaking
silence only by the loud fierce cry of the gong. Two rivers of people
swarmed along the sidewalks, spattered with black mud, which made each
shoe leave a scarlike impression. Overhead elevated trains with a shrill
grinding of the wheels stopped at the station, which upon its leglike
pillars seemed to resemble some monstrous kind of crab squatting over
the street. The quick fat puffings of the engines could be heard. Down
an alley there were somber curtains of purple and black, on which street
lamps dully glittered like embroidered flowers.

A saloon stood with a voracious air on a corner. A sign leaning against
the front of the door-post announced "Free hot soup to-night!" The swing
doors, snapping to and fro like ravenous lips, made gratified smacks as
the saloon gorged itself with plump men, eating with astounding and
endless appetite, smiling in some indescribable manner as the men came
from all directions like sacrifices to a heathenish superstition.

Caught by the delectable sign the young man allowed himself to be
swallowed. A bartender placed a schooner of dark and portentous beer on
the bar. Its monumental form upreared until the froth a-top was above
the crown of the young man's brown derby.

"Soup over there, gents," said the bartender affably. A little yellow
man in rags and the youth grasped their schooners and went with speed
toward a lunch counter, where a man with oily but imposing whiskers
ladled genially from a kettle until he had furnished his two mendicants
with a soup that was steaming hot, and in which there were little
floating suggestions of chicken. The young man, sipping his broth, felt
the cordiality expressed by the warmth of the mixture, and he beamed at
the man with oily but imposing whiskers, who was presiding like a priest
behind an altar. "Have some more, gents?" he inquired of the two sorry
figures before him. The little yellow man accepted with a swift gesture,
but the youth shook his head and went out, following a man whose
wondrous seediness promised that he would have a knowledge of cheap
lodging-houses.

On the sidewalk he accosted the seedy man. "Say, do you know a cheap
place to sleep?"

The other hesitated for a time, gazing sideways. Finally he nodded in
the direction of the street, "I sleep up there," he said, "when I've got
the price."

"How much?"

"Ten cents."
 The young man shook his head dolefully. "That's too rich for me."

At that moment there approached the two a reeling man in strange
garments. His head was a fuddle of bushy hair and whiskers, from which
his eyes peered with a guilty slant. In a close scrutiny it was possible
to distinguish the cruel lines of a mouth which looked as if its lips
had just closed with satisfaction over some tender and piteous morsel.
He appeared like an assassin steeped in crimes performed awkwardly.

But at this time his voice was tuned to the coaxing key of an
affectionate puppy. He looked at the men with wheedling eyes, and began
to sing a little melody for charity.

"Say, gents, can't yeh give a poor feller a couple of cents t' git a
bed? I got five, and I gits anudder two I gits me a bed. Now, on th'
square, gents, can't yeh jest gimme two cents t' git a bed? Now, yeh
know how a respecter'ble gentlem'n feels when he's down on his luck, an'
I--"

The seedy man, staring with imperturbable countenance at a train which
clattered overhead, interrupted in an expressionless voice--"Ah, go t'
h----!"

But the youth spoke to the prayerful assassin in tones of astonishment
and inquiry. "Say, you must be crazy! Why don't yeh strike somebody that
looks as if they had money?"

The assassin, tottering about on his uncertain legs, and at intervals
brushing imaginary obstacles from before his nose, entered into a long
explanation of the psychology of the situation. It was so profound that
it was unintelligible.

When he had exhausted the subject, the young man said to him:

"Let's see th' five cents."

The assassin wore an expression of drunken woe at this sentence, filled
with suspicion of him. With a deeply pained air he began to fumble in
his clothing, his red hands trembling. Presently he announced in a voice
of bitter grief, as if he had been betrayed--"There's on'y four."

"Four," said the young man thoughtfully. "Well, look here, I'm a
stranger here, an' if ye'll steer me to your cheap joint I'll find the
other three."

The assassin's countenance became instantly radiant with joy. His
whiskers quivered with the wealth of his alleged emotions. He seized the
young man's hand in a transport of delight and friendliness.

"B' Gawd," he cried, "if ye'll do that, b' Gawd, I'd say yeh was a
damned good fellow, I would, an' I'd remember yeh all m' life, I would,
b' Gawd, an' if I ever got a chance I'd return the compliment"--he spoke
with drunken dignity--"b' Gawd, I'd treat yeh white, I would, an' I'd
allus remember yeh."

The young man drew back, looking at the assassin coldly. "Oh, that's all
right," he said. "You show me th' joint--that's all you've got t' do."

The assassin, gesticulating gratitude, led the young man along a dark
street. Finally he stopped before a little dusty door. He raised his
hand impressively. "Look-a-here," he said, and there was a thrill of
deep and ancient wisdom upon his face, "I've brought yeh here, an'
that's my part, ain't it? If th' place don't suit yeh, yeh needn't git
mad at me, need yeh? There won't be no bad feelin', will there?"

"No," said the young man.

The assassin waved his arm tragically, and led the march up the steep
stairway. On the way the young man furnished the assassin with three
pennies. At the top a man with benevolent spectacles looked at them
through a hole in a board. He collected their money, wrote some names on
a register, and speedily was leading the two men along a gloom-shrouded
corridor.

Shortly after the beginning of this journey the young man felt his liver
turn white, for from the dark and secret places of the building there
suddenly came to his nostrils strange and unspeakable odors, that
assailed him like malignant diseases with wings. They seemed to be from
human bodies closely packed in dens; the exhalations from a hundred
pairs of reeking lips; the fumes from a thousand bygone debauches; the
expression of a thousand present miseries.

A man, naked save for a little snuff-colored undershirt, was parading
sleepily along the corridor. He rubbed his eyes, and, giving vent to a
prodigious yawn, demanded to be told the time.

"Half-past one."

The man yawned again. He opened a door, and for a moment his form was
outlined against a black, opaque interior. To this door came the three
men, and as it was again opened the unholy odors rushed out like fiends,
so that the young man was obliged to struggle as against an overpowering
wind.

It was some time before the youth's eyes were good in the intense gloom
within, but the man with benevolent spectacles led him skilfully,
pausing but a moment to deposit the limp assassin upon a cot. He took
the youth to a cot that lay tranquilly by the window, and showing him a
tall locker for clothes that stood near the head with the ominous air of
a tombstone, left him.

The youth sat on his cot and peered about him. There was a gas-jet in a
distant part of the room, that burned a small flickering orange-hued
flame. It caused vast masses of tumbled shadows in all parts of the
place, save where, immediately about it, there was a little grey haze.
As the young man's eyes became used to the darkness, he could see upon
the cots that thickly littered the floor the forms of men sprawled out,
lying in deathlike silence, or heaving and snoring with tremendous
effort, like stabbed fish.

The youth locked his derby and his shoes in the mummy case near him, and
then lay down with an old and familiar coat around his shoulders. A
blanket he handed gingerly, drawing it over part of the coat. The cot
was covered with leather, and as cold as melting snow. The youth was
obliged to shiver for some time on this affair, which was like a slab.
Presently, however, his chill gave him peace, and during this period of
leisure from it he turned his head to stare at his friend the assassin,
whom he could dimly discern where he lay sprawled on a cot in the
abandon of a man filled with drink. He was snoring with incredible
vigor. His wet hair and beard dimly glistened, and his inflamed nose
shone with subdued lustre like a red light in a fog.

Within reach of the youth's hand was one who lay with yellow breast and
shoulders bare to the cold drafts. One arm hung over the side of the
cot, and the fingers lay full length upon the wet cement floor of the
room. Beneath the inky brows could be seen the eyes of the man exposed
by the partly opened lids. To the youth it seemed that he and this
corpse-like being were exchanging a prolonged stare, and that the other
threatened with his eyes. He drew back, watching his neighbor from the
shadows of his blanket edge. The man did not move once through the
night, but lay in this stillness as of death like a body stretched out
expectant of the surgeon's knife.

And all through the room could be seen the tawny hues of naked flesh,
limbs thrust into the darkness, projecting beyond the cots; upreared
knees, arms hanging long and thin over the cot edges. For the most part
they were statuesque, carven, dead. With the curious lockers standing
all about like tombstones, there was a strange effect of a graveyard
where bodies were merely flung.

Yet occasionally could be seen limbs wildly tossing in fantastic
nightmare gestures, accompanied by guttural cries, grunts, oaths. And
there was one fellow off in a gloomy corner, who in his dreams was
oppressed by some frightful calamity, for of a sudden he began to utter
long wails that went almost like yells from a hound, echoing wailfully
and weird through this chill place of tombstones where men lay like the
dead.

The sound in its high piercing beginnings, that dwindled to final
melancholy moans, expressed a red and grim tragedy of the unfathomable
possibilities of the man's dreams. But to the youth these were not
merely the shrieks of a vision-pierced man: they were an utterance of
the meaning of the room and its occupants. It was to him the protest of
the wretch who feels the touch of the imperturbable granite wheels, and
who then cries with an impersonal eloquence, with a strength not from
him, giving voice to the wail of a whole section, a class, a people.
This, weaving into the young man's brain, and mingling with his views of
the vast and sombre shadows that, like mighty black fingers, curled
around the naked bodies, made the young man so that he did not sleep,
but lay carving the biographies for these men from his meagre
experience. At times the fellow in the corner howled in a writhing agony
of his imaginations.

Finally a long lance-point of grey light shot through the dusty panes of
the window. Without, the young man could see roofs drearily white in the
dawning. The point of light yellowed and grew brighter, until the golden
rays of the morning sun came in bravely and strong. They touched with
radiant color the form of a small fat man, who snored in stuttering
fashion. His round and shiny bald head glowed suddenly with the valor of
a decoration. He sat up, blinked at the sun, swore fretfully, and pulled
his blanket over the ornamental splendors of his head.

The youth contentedly watched this rout of the shadows before the bright
spears of the sun, and presently he slumbered. When he awoke he heard
the voice of the assassin raised in valiant curses. Putting up his head,
he perceived his comrade seated on the side of the cot engaged in
scratching his neck with long finger-nails that rasped like files.

"Hully Jee, dis is a new breed. They've got can-openers on their feet."
He continued in a violent tirade.

The young man hastily unlocked his closet and took out his shoes and
hat. As he sat on the side of the cot lacing his shoes, he glanced about
and saw that daylight had made the room comparatively commonplace and
uninteresting. The men, whose faces seemed stolid, serene or absent,
were engaged in dressing, while a great crackle of bantering
conversation arose.

A few were parading in unconcerned nakedness. Here and there were men of
brawn, whose skins shone clear and ruddy. They took splendid poses,
standing massively like chiefs. When they had dressed in their ungainly
garments there was an extraordinary change. They then showed bumps and
deficiencies of all kinds.

There were others who exhibited many deformities. Shoulders were
slanting, humped, pulled this way and pulled that way. And notable among
these latter men was the little fat man who had refused to allow his
head to be glorified. His pudgy form, builded like a pear, bustled to
and fro, while he swore in fishwife fashion. It appeared that some
article of his apparel had vanished.

The young man attired speedily, and went to his friend the assassin. At
first the latter looked dazed at the sight of the youth. This face
seemed to be appealing to him through the cloud wastes of his memory. He
scratched his neck and reflected. At last he grinned, a broad smile
gradually spreading until his countenance was a round illumination.
"Hello, Willie," he cried cheerily.

"Hello," said the young man. "Are yeh ready t' fly?"

"Sure." The assassin tied his shoe carefully with some twine and came
ambling.

When he reached the street the young man experienced no sudden relief
from unholy atmospheres. He had forgotten all about them, and had been
breathing naturally, and with no sensation of discomfort or distress.

He was thinking of these things as he walked along the street, when he
was suddenly startled by feeling the assassin's hand, trembling with
excitement, clutching his arm, and when the assassin spoke, his voice
went into quavers from a supreme agitation.

"I'll be hully, bloomin' blowed if there wasn't a feller with a
nightshirt on up there in that joint."

The youth was bewildered for a moment, but presently he turned to smile
indulgently at the assassin's humor.

"Oh, you're a d--d liar," he merely said.

Whereupon the assassin began to gesture extravagantly, and take oath by
strange gods. He frantically placed himself at the mercy of remarkable
fates if his tale were not true.

"Yes, he did! I cross m' heart thousan' times!" he protested, and at the
moment his eyes were large with amazement, his mouth wrinkled in
unnatural glee.

"Yessir! A nightshirt! A hully white nightshirt!"

"You lie!"

"No, sir! I hope ter die b'fore I kin git anudder ball if there wasn't a
jay wid a hully, bloomin' white nightshirt!"

His face was filled with the infinite wonder of it. "A hully white
nightshirt," he continually repeated.

The young man saw the dark entrance to a basement restaurant. There was
a sign which read "No mystery about our hash"! and there were other age-
stained and world-battered legends which told him that the place was
within his means. He stopped before it and spoke to the assassin. "I
guess I'll git somethin' t' eat."

At this the assassin, for some reason, appeared to be quite embarrassed.
He gazed at the seductive front of the eating place for a moment. Then
he started slowly up the street. "Well, good-bye, Willie," he said
bravely.

For an instant the youth studied the departing figure. Then he called
out, "Hol' on a minnet." As they came together he spoke in a certain
fierce way, as if he feared that the other would think him to be
charitable. "Look-a-here, if yeh wanta git some breakfas' I'll lend yeh
three cents t' do it with. But say, look-a-here, you've gota git out an'
hustle. I ain't goin' t' support yeh, or I'll go broke b'fore night. I
ain't no millionaire."

"I take me oath, Willie," said the assassin earnestly, "th' on'y thing I
really needs is a ball. Me t'roat feels like a fryin'-pan. But as I
can't get a ball, why, th' next bes' thing is breakfast, an' if yeh do
that for me, b'Gawd, I say yeh was th' whitest lad I ever see."

They spent a few moments in dexterous exchanges of phrases, in which
they each protested that the other was, as the assassin had originally
said, "a respecter'ble gentlem'n." And they concluded with mutual
assurances that they were the souls of intelligence and virtue. Then
they went into the restaurant.

There was a long counter, dimly lighted from hidden sources. Two or
three men in soiled white aprons rushed here and there.

The youth bought a bowl of coffee for two cents and a roll for one cent.
The assassin purchased the same. The bowls were webbed with brown seams,
and the tin spoons wore an air of having emerged from the first pyramid.
Upon them were black mosslike encrustations of age, and they were bent
and scarred from the attacks of long-forgotten teeth. But over their
repast the wanderers waxed warm and mellow. The assassin grew affable as
the hot mixture went soothingly down his parched throat, and the young
man felt courage flow in his veins.

Memories began to throng in on the assassin, and he brought forth long
tales, intricate, incoherent, delivered with a chattering swiftness as
from an old woman. "--great job out'n Orange. Boss keep yeh hustlin'
though all time. I was there three days, and then I went an' ask 'im t'
lend me a dollar. 'G-g-go ter the devil,' he ses, an' I lose me job."

"South no good. Damn niggers work for twenty-five an' thirty cents a
day. Run white man out. Good grub, though. Easy livin'."

"Yas; useter work little in Toledo, raftin' logs. Make two or three
dollars er day in the spring. Lived high. Cold as ice, though, in the
winter."

"I was raised in northern N'York. O-a-ah, yeh jest oughto live there. No
beer ner whisky, though, way off in the woods. But all th' good hot grub
yeh can eat. B'Gawd, I hung around there long as I could till th' ol'
man fired me. 'Git t' hell outa here, yeh wuthless skunk, git t' hell
outa here, an' go die,' he ses. 'You're a hell of a father,' I ses, 'you
are,' an' I quit 'im."

As they were passing from the dim eating place, they encountered an old
man who was trying to steal forth with a tiny package of food, but a
tall man with an indomitable moustache stood dragon fashion, barring the
way of escape. They heard the old man raise a plaintive protest. "Ah,
you always want to know what I take out, and you never see that I
usually bring a package in here from my place of business."

As the wanderers trudged slowly along Park Row, the assassin began to
expand and grow blithe. "B'Gawd, we've been livin' like kings," he said,
smacking appreciative lips.

"Look out, or we'll have t' pay fer it t'night," said the youth with
gloomy warning.

But the assassin refused to turn his gaze toward the future. He went
with a limping step, into which he injected a suggestion of lamblike
gambols. His mouth was wreathed in a red grin.

In the City Hall Park the two wanderers sat down in the little circle of
benches sanctified by traditions of their class. They huddled in their
old garments, slumbrously conscious of the march of the hours which for
them had no meaning.

The people of the street hurrying hither and thither made a blend of
black figures changing yet frieze-like. They walked in their good
clothes as upon important missions, giving no gaze to the two wanderers
seated upon the benches. They expressed to the young man his infinite
distance from all that he valued. Social position, comfort, the
pleasures of living, were unconquerable kingdoms. He felt a sudden awe.

And in the background a multitude of buildings, of pitiless hues and
sternly high, were to him emblematic of a nation forcing its regal head
into the clouds, throwing no downward glances; in the sublimity of its
aspirations ignoring the wretches who may flounder at its feet. The roar
of the city in his ear was to him the confusion of strange tongues,
babbling heedlessly; it was the clink of coin, the voice if the city's
hopes which were to him no hopes.

He confessed himself an outcast, and his eyes from under the lowered rim
of his hat began to glance guiltily, wearing the criminal expression
that comes with certain convictions.




THE DUEL THAT WAS NOT FOUGHT


Patsy Tulligan was not as wise as seven owls, but his courage could
throw a shadow as long as the steeple of a cathedral. There were men on
Cherry Street who had whipped him five times, but they all knew that
Patsy would be as ready for the sixth time as if nothing had happened.

Once he and two friends had been away up on Eighth Avenue, far out of
their country, and upon their return journey that evening they stopped
frequently in saloons until they were as independent of their
surroundings as eagles, and cared much less about thirty days on
Blackwell's.

On Lower Sixth Avenue they paused in a saloon where there was a good
deal of lamp-glare and polished wood to be seen from the outside, and
within, the mellow light shone on much furbished brass and more polished
wood. It was a better saloon than they were in the habit of seeing, but
they did not mind it. They sat down at one of the little tables that
were in a row parallel to the bar and ordered beer. They blinked
stolidly at the decorations, the bartender, and the other customers.
When anything transpired they discussed it with dazzling frankness, and
what they said of it was as free as air to the other people in the
place.

At midnight there were few people in the saloon. Patsy and his friends
still sat drinking. Two well-dressed men were at another table, smoking
cigars slowly and swinging back in their chairs. They occupied
themselves with themselves in the usual manner, never betraying by a
wink of an eyelid that they knew that other folk existed. At another
table directly behind Patsy and his companions was a slim little Cuban,
with miraculously small feet and hands, and with a youthful touch of
down upon his lip. As he lifted his cigarette from time to time his
little finger was bended in dainty fashion, and there was a green flash
when a huge emerald ring caught the light. The bartender came often with
his little brass tray. Occasionally Patsy and his two friends
quarrelled.

Once this little Cuban happened to make some slight noise and Patsy
turned his head to observe him. Then Patsy made a careless and rather
loud comment to his two friends. He used a word which is no more than
passing the time of day down in Cherry Street, but to the Cuban it was a
dagger-point. There was a harsh scraping sound as a chair was pushed
swiftly back.

The little Cuban was upon his feet. His eyes were shining with a rage
that flashed there like sparks as he glared at Patsy. His olive face had
turned a shade of grey from his anger. Withal his chest was thrust out
in portentous dignity, and his hand, still grasping his wine-glass, was
cool and steady, the little finger still bended, the great emerald
gleaming upon it. The others, motionless, stared at him.

"Sir," he began ceremoniously. He spoke gravely and in a slow way, his
tone coming in a marvel of self-possessed cadences from between those
lips which quivered with wrath. "You have insult me. You are a dog, a
hound, a cur. I spit upon you. I must have some of your blood."

Patsy looked at him over his shoulder.

"What's th' matter wi' che?" he demanded. He did not quite understand
the words of this little man who glared at him steadily, but he knew
that it was something about fighting. He snarled with the readiness of
his class and heaved his shoulders contemptuously. "Ah, what's eatin'
yeh? Take a walk! You hain't got nothin' t' do with me, have yeh? Well,
den, go sit on yerself."

And his companions leaned back valorously in their chairs, and
scrutinized this slim young fellow who was addressing Patsy.

"What's de little Dago chewin' about?"

"He wants t' scrap!"

"What!"

The Cuban listened with apparent composure. It was only when they
laughed that his body cringed as if he was receiving lashes. Presently
he put down his glass and walked over to their table. He proceeded
always with the most impressive deliberation.

"Sir," he began again. "You have insult me. I must have s-s-satisfac-
shone. I must have your body upon the point of my sword. In my country
you would already be dead. I must have s-s-satisfac-shone."

Patsy had looked at the Cuban with a trifle of bewilderment. But at last
his face began to grow dark with belligerency, his mouth curved in that
wide sneer with which he would confront an angel of darkness. He arose
suddenly in his seat and came towards the little Cuban. He was going to
be impressive too.

"Say, young feller, if yeh go shootin' off yer face at me, I'll wipe d'
joint wid yeh. What'cher gaffin' about, hey? Are yeh givin' me er jolly?
Say, if yeh pick me up fer a cinch, I'll fool yeh. Dat's what! Don't
take me fer no dead easy mug." And as he glowered at the little Cuban,
he ended his oration with one eloquent word, "Nit!"

The bartender nervously polished his bar with a towel, and kept his eyes
fastened upon the men. Occasionally he became transfixed with interest,
leaning forward with one hand upon the edge of the bar and the other
holding the towel grabbed in a lump, as if he had been turned into
bronze when in the very act of polishing.

The Cuban did not move when Patsy came toward him and delivered his
oration. At its conclusion he turned his livid face toward where, above
him, Patsy was swaggering and heaving his shoulders in a consummate
display of bravery and readiness. The Cuban, in his clear, tense tones,
spoke one word. It was the bitter insult. It seemed fairly to spin from
his lips and crackle in the air like breaking glass.

Every man save the little Cuban made an electric movement. Patsy roared
a black oath and thrust himself forward until he towered almost directly
above the other man. His fists were doubled into knots of bone and hard
flesh. The Cuban had raised a steady finger.

"If you touch me wis your hand, I will keel you."

The two well-dressed men had come swiftly, uttering protesting cries.
They suddenly intervened in this second of time in which Patsy had
sprung forward and the Cuban had uttered his threat. The four men were
now a tossing, arguing; violent group, one well-dressed man lecturing
the Cuban, and the other holding off Patsy, who was now wild with rage,
loudly repeating the Cuban's threat, and maneuvering and struggling to
get at him for revenge's sake.

The bartender, feverishly scouring away with his towel, and at times
pacing to and fro with nervous and excited tread, shouted out--

"Say, for heaven's sake, don't fight in here. If yeh wanta fight, go out
in the street and fight all yeh please. But don't fight in here."

Patsy knew one only thing, and this he kept repeating:

"Well, he wants t' scrap! I didn't begin dis! He wants t' scrap."

The well-dressed man confronting him continually replied--

"Oh, well, now, look here, he's only a lad. He don't know what he's
doing. He's crazy mad. You wouldn't slug a kid like that."

Patsy and his aroused companions, who cursed and growled, were
persistent with their argument. "Well, he wants t' scrap!" The whole
affair was as plain as daylight when one saw this great fact. The
interference and intolerable discussion brought the three of them
forward, battleful and fierce.

"What's eatin' you, anyhow?" they demanded. "Dis ain't your business, is
it? What business you got shootin' off your face?"

The other peacemaker was trying to restrain the little Cuban, who had
grown shrill and violent.

"If he touch me wis his hand I will keel him. We must fight like
gentlemen or else I keel him when he touch me wis his hand."

The man who was fending off Patsy comprehended these sentences that were
screamed behind his back, and he explained to Patsy.

"But he wants to fight you with swords. With swords, you know."

The Cuban, dodging around the peacemakers, yelled in Patsy's face--

"Ah, if I could get you before me wis my sword! Ah! Ah! A-a-ah!" Patsy
made a furious blow with a swift fist, but the peacemakers bucked
against his body suddenly like football players.

Patsy was greatly puzzled. He continued doggedly to try to get near
enough to the Cuban to punch him. To these attempts the Cuban replied
savagely--

"If you touch me wis your hand, I will cut your heart in two piece."

At last Patsy said--"Well, if he's so dead stuck on fightin' wid swords,
I'll fight 'im. Soitenly! I'll fight 'im." All this palaver had
evidently tired him, and he now puffed out his lips with the air of a
man who is willing to submit to any conditions if he can only bring on
the row soon enough. He swaggered, "I'll fight 'im wid swords. Let 'im
bring on his swords, an' I'll fight 'im 'til he's ready t' quit."

The two well-dressed men grinned. "Why, look here," they said to Patsy,
"he'd punch you full of holes. Why he's a fencer. You can't fight him
with swords. He'd kill you in 'bout a minute."

"Well, I'll giv' 'im a go at it, anyhow," said Patsy, stouthearted and
resolute. "I'll giv' 'im a go at it, anyhow, an' I'll stay wid 'im as
long as I kin."

As for the Cuban, his lithe body was quivering in an ecstasy of the
muscles. His face radiant with a savage joy, he fastened his glance upon
Patsy, his eyes gleaming with a gloating, murderous light. A most
unspeakable, animal-like rage was in his expression.

"Ah! ah! He will fight me! Ah!" He bended unconsciously in the posture
of a fencer. He had all the quick, springy movements of a skilful
swordsman. "Ah, the b-r-r-rute! The b-r-r-rute! I will stick him like a
pig!"

The two peacemakers, still grinning broadly, were having a great time
with Patsy.

"Why, you infernal idiot, this man would slice you all up. You better
jump off the bridge if you want to commit suicide. You wouldn't stand a
ghost of a chance to live ten seconds."

Patsy was as unshaken as granite. "Well, if he wants t' fight wid
swords, he'll get it. I'll giv' 'im a go at it, anyhow."

One man said--"Well, have you got a sword? Do you know what a sword is?
Have you got a sword?"

"No, I ain't got none," said Patsy honestly, "but I kin git one." Then
he added valiantly--"An' quick, too."

The two men laughed. "Why, can't you understand it would be sure death
to fight a sword duel with this fellow?"

"Dat's all right! See? I know me own business. If he wants t' fight one
of dees d--n duels, I'm in it, understan'"

"Have you ever fought one, you fool?"

"No, I ain't. But I will fight one, dough! I ain't no muff. If he wants
t' fight a duel, by Gawd, I'm wid 'im! D'yeh understan' dat!" Patsy
cocked his hat and swaggered. He was getting very serious.

The little Cuban burst out--"Ah, come on, sirs: come on! We can take
cab. Ah, you big cow, I will stick you, I will stick you. Ah, you will
look very beautiful, very beautiful. Ah, come on, sirs. We will stop at
hotel--my hotel. I there have weapons."

"Yeh will, will yeh? Yeh bloomin' little black Dago!" cried Patsy in
hoarse and maddened reply to the personal part of the Cuban's speech. He
stepped forward. "Git yer d--n swords," he commanded. "Git yer swords.
Git 'em quick! I'll fight wi' che! I'll fight wid anyt'ing, too! See?
I'll fight yeh wid a knife an' fork if yeh say so! I'll fight yer
standin' up er sittin' down!" Patsy delivered this intense oration with
sweeping, intensely emphatic gestures, his hands stretched out
eloquently, his jaw thrust forward, his eyes glaring.

"Ah!" cried the little Cuban joyously. "Ah, you are in very pretty
temper. Ah, how I will cut your heart in two piece, my dear, d-e-a-r
friend." His eyes, too, shone like carbuncles, with a swift, changing
glitter, always fastened upon Patsy's face.

The two peacemakers were perspiring and in despair. One of them blurted
out--

"Well, I'll be blamed if this ain't the most ridiculous thing I ever
saw."

The other said--"For ten dollars I'd be tempted to let these two
infernal blockheads have their duel."

Patsy was strutting to and fro, and conferring grandly with his friends.

"He took me for a muff. He t'ought he was goin' t' bluff me out, talkin'
'bout swords. He'll get fooled." He addressed the Cuban--"You're a fine
little dirty picter of a scrapper, ain't che? I'll chew yez up, dat's
what I will!"

There began then some rapid action. The patience of well-dressed men is
not an eternal thing. It began to look as if it would at last be a fight
with six corners to it. The faces of the men were shining red with
anger. They jostled each other defiantly, and almost every one blazed
out at three or four of the others. The bartender had given up
protesting. He swore for a time and banged his glasses. Then he jumped
the bar and ran out of the saloon, cursing sullenly.

When he came back with a policeman, Patsy and the Cuban were preparing
to depart together. Patsy was delivering his last oration--

"I'll fight yer wid swords! Sure I will! Come ahead, Dago! I'll fight
yeh anywheres wid anyt'ing! We'll have a large, juicy scrap, an' don't
yeh forgit dat! I'm right wid yez. I ain't no muff! I scrap with a man
jest as soon as he ses scrap, an' if yeh wanta scrap, I'm yer kitten.
Understan' dat?"

The policeman said sharply--"Come, now; what's all this?" He had a
distinctly business air.

The little Cuban stepped forward calmly. "It is none of your business."

The policeman flushed to his ears. "What?"

One well-dressed man touched the other on the sleeve. "Here's the time
to skip," he whispered. They halted a block away from the saloon and
watched the policeman pull the Cuban through the door. There was a
minute of scuffle on the sidewalk, and into this deserted street at
midnight fifty people appeared at once as if from the sky to watch it.

At last the three Cherry Hill men came from the saloon, and swaggered
with all their old valor toward the peacemakers.

"Ah," said Patsy to them, "he was so hot talkin' about this duel
business, but I would a-given 'im a great scrap, an' don't yeh forgit
it."

For Patsy was not as wise as seven owls, but his courage could throw a
shadow as long as the steeple of a cathedral.




A DESERTION


The yellow gaslight that came with an effect of difficulty through the
dust-stained windows on either side of the door gave strange hues to the
faces and forms of the three women who stood gabbling in the hallway of
the tenement. They made rapid gestures, and in the background their
enormous shadows mingled in terrific conflict.

"Aye, she ain't so good as he thinks she is, I'll bet. He can watch over
'er an' take care of 'er all he pleases, but when she wants t' fool 'im,
she'll fool 'im. An' how does he know she ain't foolin' im' now?"

"Oh, he thinks he's keepin' 'er from goin' t' th' bad, he does. Oh, yes.
He ses she's too purty t' let run round alone. Too purty! Huh! My
Sadie--"

"Well, he keeps a clost watch on 'er, you bet. On'y las' week, she met
my boy Tim on th' stairs, an' Tim hadn't said two words to 'er b'fore
th' ol' man begin to holler. 'Dorter, dorter, come here, come here!'"

At this moment a young girl entered from the street, and it was evident
from the injured expression suddenly assumed by the three gossipers that
she had been the object of their discussion. She passed them with a
slight nod, and they swung about into a row to stare after her.

On her way up the long flights the girl unfastened her veil. One could
then clearly see the beauty of her eyes, but there was in them a certain
furtiveness that came near to marring the effects. It was a peculiar
fixture of gaze, brought from the street, as of one who there saw a
succession of passing dangers with menaces aligned at every corner.

On the top floor, she pushed open a door and then paused on the
threshold, confronting an interior that appeared black and flat like a
curtain. Perhaps some girlish idea of hobgoblins assailed her then, for
she called in a little breathless voice, "Daddie!"

There was no reply. The fire in the cooking-stove in the room crackled
at spasmodic intervals. One lid was misplaced, and the girl could now
see that this fact created a little flushed crescent upon the ceiling.
Also, a series of tiny windows in the stove caused patches of red upon
the floor. Otherwise, the room was heavily draped with shadows.

The girl called again, "Daddie!"

Yet there was no reply.

"Oh, Daddie!"

Presently she laughed as one familiar with the humors of an old man.
"Oh, I guess yer cussin' mad about yer supper, Dad," she said, and she
almost entered the room, but suddenly faltered, overcome by a feminine
instinct to fly from this black interior, peopled with imagined dangers.

Again she called, "Daddie!" Her voice had an accent of appeal. It was as
if she knew she was foolish but yet felt obliged to insist upon being
reassured. "Oh, Daddie!"

Of a sudden a cry of relief, a feminine announcement that the stars
still hung, burst from her. For, according to some mystic process, the
smoldering coals of the fire went aflame with sudden, fierce brilliance,
splashing parts of the walls, the floor, the crude furniture, with a hue
of blood-red. And in the light of this dramatic outburst of light, the
girl saw her father seated at a table with his back turned toward her.

She entered the room, then, with an aggrieved air, her logic evidently
concluding that somebody was to blame for her nervous fright. "Oh, yer
on'y sulkin' 'bout yer supper. I thought mebbe ye'd gone somewheres."

Her father made no reply. She went over to a shelf in the corner, and,
taking a little lamp, she lit it and put it where it would give her
light as she took off her hat and jacket in front of the tiny mirror.
Presently she began to bustle among the cooking utensils that were
crowded into the sink, and as she worked she rattled talk at her father,
apparently disdaining his mood.

"I'd 'a' come home earlier t'night, Dad, on'y that fly foreman, he kep'
me in th' shop 'til half-past six. What a fool! He came t' me, yeh know,
an' he ses, 'Nell, I wanta give yeh some brotherly advice.' Oh, I know
him an' his brotherly advice. 'I wanta give yeh some brotherly advice.
Yer too purty, Nell,' he ses, 't' be workin' in this shop an' paradin'
through the streets alone, without somebody t' give yeh good brotherly
advice, an' I wanta warn yeh, Nell. I'm a bad man, but I ain't as bad as
some, an' I wanta warn yeh.' 'Oh, g'long 'bout yer business,' I ses. I
know 'im. He's like all of 'em, on'y he's a little slyer. I know 'im.
'You g'long 'bout yer business,' I ses. Well, he ses after a while that
he guessed some evenin' he'd come up an' see me. 'Oh, yeh will,' I ses,
'yeh will? Well, you jest let my ol' man ketch yeh comin' foolin' 'round
our place. Yeh'll wish yeh went t' some other girl t' give brotherly
advice.' 'What th' 'ell do I care fer yer father?' he ses. 'What's he t'
me?' 'If he throws yeh downstairs, yeh'll care for 'im,' I ses. 'Well,'
he ses, 'I'll come when 'e ain't in, b' Gawd, I'll come when 'e ain't
in.' 'Oh, he's allus in when it means takin' care 'o me,' I ses. 'Don't
yeh fergit it, either. When it comes t' takin' care o' his dorter, he's
right on deck every single possible time.'"

After a time, she turned and addressed cheery words to the old man.
"Hurry up th' fire, Daddie! We'll have supper pretty soon."

But still her father was silent, and his form in its sullen posture was
motionless.

At this, the girl seemed to see the need of the inauguration of a
feminine war against a man out of temper. She approached him breathing
soft, coaxing syllables.

"Daddie! Oh, Daddie! O--o--oh, Daddie!"

It was apparent from a subtle quality of valor in her tones that this
manner of onslaught upon his moods had u