 can be
captured.

As a matter of comparison the first ten moves of a game are
described above in both notations.]

! signifies a good move.

? signifies a bad move.

          (1) P-d4          P-d5
          (2) P-c4          P-e6
          (3) Kt-c3         P-c5
          (4) Kt-f3         Kt-c6
          (5) Pxd5          Pxd5
          (6) B-f4          Kt-f6
          (7) P-e3          B-e6
          (8) B-d3          B-e7
          (9) o-o           o-o
         (10) R-c1          Kt-h5

          (1) P-Q4          P-Q4
          (2) P-QB4         P-K3
          (3) Kt-QB3        P-QB4
          (4) Kt-B3         Kt-QB3
          (5) PxQP          KPxP
          (6) B-KB4         Kt-B3
          (7) P-K3          B-K3
          (8) B-Q3          B-K7
          (9) Castles       Castles
         (10) R-B           Kt-KR4



CHESS LAWS



If a player having the move touches one of his men he is
compelled to move him; if he touches a hostile man he must
capture him. This law is void, however, if the man so touched
cannot be legally moved or captured.

A man may be moved to any square accessible to him as long as the
hand of the player has not left him. If an illegal move has been
made it must be retracted and if possible another move must be
made with the same man. If a player has castled illegally, King
and Rook must be moved back and the King must make another move,
if there is a legal one.

If a player touches a man with the sole object of adjusting his
position, he must indicate his intention by saying "j'adoube"
(French for: I adjust) beforehand. In castling, the King must be
moved first as otherwise a doubt might arise whether castling or
a Rook's move only was intended.

A game is void if a mistake has been made in setting up board or
men or if in the course of the game the position or number of men
have been altered in a manner not in accordance with the rules of
play and the position cannot be reconstructed from the point
where the error was made.

If a player resigns his game before he is actually mated he
acknowledges that in the end mate is unavoidable, and the game is
counted as a loss to him.

If neither player has sufficient material left to enforce a mate
(compare following chapter) the game is considered a draw. A draw
may also be claimed by either player if the moves are repeated so
that the same position occurs three times with the same player on
the move, or if fifty moves have been made without the capture of
a man or the move of a Pawn.



II


ELEMENTARY TACTICS



The beginner who thinks he ought to be able to play a good game
of Chess after learning the moves of the men is like the soldier
who is confident that he could lead an army after he has learned
how to march.

He may have great strategical gifts but he will not be able to
use them to any advantage unless he is thoroughly conversant with
the tactical possibilities afforded by the cooperation of the
different units of which his army is composed and by the
topography of the ground on which the battle takes place.

The different conditions of the battle ground in war which make
some positions more easily accessible to infantry than to
artillery and vice versa have their equivalent on the Chess board
in the different ways in which the men move and which make
certain squares accessible to some of them which others cannot
reach.

The first thing, then, for the beginner to do is to acquaint
himself thoroughly with the characteristic features of each man
so that he may know exactly how much work to expect from him. The
best way to accomplish this is the study of the elementary
problems which are in end games, that is, in positions where only
a few men are left on each side.



FUNDAMENTAL ENDINGS



Considering that the object of the game is the capture of the
opposing King, it seems most important to find out whether there
are positions in which this capture can be accomplished in the
face of the best possible defense. Naturally a player must have a
certain material superiority to be able to force a mate, and the
first question which offers itself is what MINIMUM force is
required to compel the surrender of a King whose men have all
been captured during the game.

It is clear that in order to checkmate the lone King it is
necessary to attack the square on which he stands as well as all
adjacent squares to which he could escape. The most unfavorable
position for the King is, of course, a corner of the board as
there he has only three squares to go to while in the middle of
the board eight squares are accessible to him. Consequently, in
an ending in which one player has only his King left the other
player will try to drive the King into a corner where he needs
control over only three additional squares.

It can easily be seen that this can be done without difficulty
with King and Queen or with King and Rook. Supposing, for
instance, White has his King on c3 and his Queen on h3 while
Black's King stands on d6 as shown in the following diagram.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #K |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^K |    |    |    |    | ^Q |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 9.

How will White proceed in order to drive the King into a corner
and checkmate him there?

A direct onslaught with the Queen on e6 or d7 is clearly not
advisable as the Queen would not be protected on these squares,
so that the King could simply capture her. A long range attack
from h2, g3, d3 or h6 is not effective either as it would not
restrict the mobility of the King who could go to either d5 or e6
or e5, that is away from the corner to which he is to be driven.

The correct way of maneuvering for White will be to confine
Black's King to a smaller and smaller territory until he finally
has to back up against the side or the corner of the board. This
consideration indicates the following line of play:

(1)Q-f5, K-c6; (2)Q-e5, K-d7; (3) K-c4, K-c6; (4) Q-e7, K-b6; (5)
Q-d7, K-a6. White must now be very careful to avoid a stalemate
which would result if he deprived the King of all mobility
without attacking him at the same time. This would be the case if
he now moved Q-c7. For then Black could not move the King to b5,
as this square is controlled by White's King, and he could not go
to any of the other four squares in his range on account of
White's Queen attacking all of them. The correct move is (6) K-
c5. This leaves only the square a5 for Black's King, and White
checkmates by (7) Q-a7 or (7) Q-b5.

If, in Diagram 9, White had a Rook on h3 instead of the Queen,
the mating process would take a few more moves, but there would
be no escape for Black either.

It will again be White's aim to confine Black's King to a smaller
and smaller number of squares. The best way to start will
therefore be (1) R-e3. No matter what Black replies, he cannot
prevent White from driving him to the edge of the board in a
similar way to the one shown in the following example:

(1) ..., K-d5; (2) R-e1. This is a WAITING MOVE. Black must leave
d5, thus enabling either White's King to advance or the Rook to
occupy e5. (2) ..., K-c5; (3) R-e5; K-d6; (4) K-d4, K-c6; (5) R-
d5, K-b6; (6) R-c5, K-b7; (7) K-d5, K-b6; (8) K-d6, K-b7; (9) R-
b5, K-a6; (10) K-c6, K-a7; (11) K-c7, K-a6; (12) R-h5, K-a7; (13)
R-a5 mate.

The two examples discussed show that it is not necessary to drive
the King into the corner but that he can be mated on any square
of the edge by Queen or Rook. It will be observed that in the
mating position three of the six squares at Black's disposal are
controlled by White's King and the other three by the Rook (or
the Queen). If White had only a Bishop or a Knight in addition to
the King he could never mate Black, for neither Bishop nor Knight
can attack the King and at the same time control a square
adjacent to the King. This, however, is at least necessary to
force the mate, even in the most unfavorable position of the
King, that is, in the corner.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    | ^K |    | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 10.

There are possibilities of a player mating his opponent with only
King and Knight or King and Bishop, but then there must be a man
of the opponent blocking the escape of the King. Diagram 10 is an
example of such a case. White plays (1) Kt-c5, K-h1; (2) Kt-e4.
Now Black cannot continue with P-h2, as White would checkmate
with Kt-g3. Therefore, he must play (2) ..., K-h2. White then
gets the Knight in such a position as to deprive Black's King of
the escape to h2 and to keep the square g3 accessible to the
Knight: (3) Kt-d2 (not Kt-g3, which would stalemate Black's
King), K-h1; (4) Kt-f1. The only move left to Black is now P-h2,
and White mates by (5) Kt-g3.

If it were Black's move in the position of the Diagram the game
would be a draw, for after (1) ..., K-h1; (2) Kt-c5, P-h2 Black
is stalemate unless White moves his King so as to make the square
g1 accessible to Black. However, he will not do that as it would
enable Black to queen the Pawn and to win the game.

In the case of King and Bishop against King and another man a
mate can only occur through a blunder. Supposing for instance
White has the King on f3 and a Bishop on d5 and Black has the
King on h1 and a Bishop or a Pawn on h2, then White on the move
would mate by K-f2. But it is evident that Black must have made a
blunder, for on the move preceding the position of the Diagram he
must have either played his King into the corner or moved the
Bishop or Pawn to h2, both moves which were in no way forced.

To checkmate with King and two Bishops against King or with
Bishop and Knight against King offers no difficulty.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #K |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^K | ^B | ^B |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 11.

The only thing the player must keep in mind is that he needs his
King for the drive. The two pieces are not sufficient to confine
the opposing King to the corner. In Diagram 11 for instance, it
will be the best policy for White to advance right away with his
King in order to prevent Black's King from escaping into the
middle of the board. The following play might then ensue:

(1) K-b2, K-b7; (2) K-c3, K-c6; (3) K-d4, K-d6; (4) B-f5, K-c6;
(5) B-f4, K-b5; (6) B-e4, K-b4; (7) B-d3, K-b3; (8) B-d2, K-b2;
(9) K-c4, K-a3; (10) K-c3, K-a4; 11) K-c2 (not K-b2 which would
stalemate Black's King), K-a3; (12) B-b5, K-a2; (13) B-c1, K-a1;
(14) B-b2, K-a2; (15) B-c4 mate.

In the fight of King, Bishop and Knight against the King the mate
can be enforced only in a corner controlled by the Bishop, if the
lone King always makes the best move. Diagram 12 may serve as an
example of this ending. White has a black Bishop and so he will
have to drive Black's King to either h8 or a1 as it is not
possible to mate him in the white corner a8, unless he makes a
blunder.

After (1) B-e5 for instance, Black must of course not go into the
corner as Kt-b6 would mate him. He will play K-c8 and White will
have to prevent the flight of the black King into the middle of
the board. It is easy to see, by the way, that the Kt cannot be
placed so as to control the square c8, thereby forcing the King
into the corner, and to threaten the mate on b6 at the same time.
For he can control c8 only from a black square while he would
have to stand on a white square to be able to reach b6 in one
move.

After (1) B-e5, K-c8; (2) K-b6, K-d7; (3) Kt-f4 Black's King is
confined to the seventh and eighth ranks and it is only a
question of time when he will be forced to h8.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    | #K |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | ^K |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^B |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 12.

White's Bishop being only capable of commanding black squares the
Knight will have to be used to drive the King from white squares.
For instance: K-c8; (4) K-c6, K-d8; (5) Kt-g6, K-c8; (6) Kt-e7,
K-d8; (7) K-d6, K-e8; (8) K-e6, K-d8; (9) B-h2. A waiting move.
White wants to place the Bishop on c7 so as to make d8
inaccessible to Black. (9) K-e8; (10) B-c7, K-f8; (11) Kt-f5, K-
e8; (12) Kt-g7, K-f8; (13) K-f6, K-g8; (14) K-g6, K-f8; (15) B-
d6, K-g8; (16) Kt-f5, K-h8; (17)

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    | #K |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | ^K |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 13.

B-a3. Again a waiting move. White cannot play Kt-h6 right away as
Black would be stalemate. (17) ..., K-g8; (18) Kt-h6, K-h8; (19)
B-b2 mate.

It is not possible to force a mate with King and two Knights, for
even if a position similar to Diagram 13 is arrived at, in which
the King can be driven into the corner, the Knight who prevents
the King from escaping is never ready to give the checkmate, and
in order to prevent a stalemate the other Knight would have to
let the King out of the corner again. If Black had a spare move,
for instance if he had a Pawn left, then White would win. (1) Kt-
a6, K-a8; (2) Kt-e8, Pawn moves; (3) Kt-c7 mate.



RELATIVE VALUE OF THE MEN



From the foregoing examples it is possible to form a vague idea
of the strength of the different pieces. The Queen is apparently
the strongest piece. On account of her superior mobility she can
confine the hostile King with a few moves and force him into a
mating net. Of the other pieces the Rook is no doubt the
strongest for he is sufficient to force a mate in conjunction
with his own King, while Bishop or Knight cannot do so. Two
Bishops apparently are stronger than two Knights, while it is not
possible yet to say anything about the relative value of one
Bishop and one Knight.

The above valuation, however, holds good only on the
comparatively vacant board, where the pieces can make full use of
their mobility. It is the mobility alone which decides the value
of a man, and positions often occur in which a Knight is more
valuable than a Rook or in which a Pawn might be preferable to a
Bishop and so on. The reason is that sometimes the weaker man
occupies a commanding square while the stronger man is obstructed
somehow or other so that he cannot be made to work. Examples for
positions of this kind will be discussed in the Chapter on
combination.

Although it is impossible to indicate exactly the relative value
of the men in each position, experience enables a fair estimation
of their average strength. The Queen is about as strong as two
Rooks or as three minor pieces (Bishops or Knights). A minor
piece is about equivalent to three Pawns, and a Rook is
consequently equal to a minor piece and one to two Pawns.

The value of a Pawn is the hardest thing to grasp for the
beginner. A Pawn appears to be of so little use on account of his
limited mobility, that it seems hardly worth while to waste time
on saving a Pawn that is attacked, as so much greater things are
apparently at issue. What he overlooks is the latent value of the
Pawn which lies in the possibility of queening him later in the
game.

To realize the importance of the Pawn it is necessary to know
exactly under what conditions he CAN be queened. This knowledge
is all the more indispensable to the Chess player as the vast
majority of all games finally resolve themselves into Pawn
endings in which the advantage of one or more Pawns decides the
issue.

In most of these cases some pieces are on the board in addition
to the Pawns and sometimes it is only by their exchange that the
game can be won. The most elementary example is that shown in the
following Diagram.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | #Q |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | #K |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    | ^Q |    |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 14.

White is a Pawn ahead and it will be his object to Queen it. The
beginner, in his haste to advance the Pawn, will probably play P-
e5 at once and lose the Pawn, as Black can answer Q-d4 check with
simultaneous attack on the Pawn. The correct way to play for
White is (1) Q-d1+, K-a3 or b4; (2) Qxa4, Kxa4. Now that the
Queens are exchanged White need not any longer worry about any
interference with his plans to queen the Pawn except maneuvers of
the black King, which might still lead to the capture or the
blockade of the Pawn.

A rash advance of the Pawn would again be the wrong thing. The
right way of playing is indicated by a simple calculation. The
Pawn needs four moves to reach the queening square. But the black
King arrives there in the same number of moves, so that he can
capture the Pawn the moment he queens. Consequently White will
only be able to enforce the safe queening of his Pawn if he can
gain control of the queening square with his own King, thus
protecting the Pawn at the time of queening.

Now, White needs three moves to bring his King up to his Pawn on
f4. In the meantime Black will have reached the square d6 and
after White's (4) K-f5 Black will block the further advance of
White's King by K-e7. However, White can force Black to give the
way free. The maneuver by which he does this is one which occurs
in a similar form in nearly all Pawn endings and its thorough
grasp is therefore essential. Diagram 15 shows the critical
position.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    | #K |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    | ^K |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 15.

White can win the game only by playing (5) K-e5. The technical
term for this move is "going into OPPOSITION." The Kings oppose
each other in one line on squares of the same color and the one
who has to move out of opposition--in this case Black's King--is
compelled to allow the advance of the opposing King to the next
line. If Black plays K-d7, White answers (6) K-f6, and if Black
plays K-f7, (6) K-d6 would follow. Then, after Black's K-e8,
White repeats the maneuver by taking the opposition with (7) K-
e6, and again Black must back out with either K-d8 or K-f8, so
that White can advance to either f7 or d7. This clears the way
for the Pawn who now advances unimpeded to the queening square.

The important role which the opposition of the Kings play in Pawn
endings is still more strikingly illustrated by the situations
which would result if in the position of Diagram 15 White played
(5) P-e5 instead of K-e5. Black would then draw the game by
maintaining the opposition himself. He would play K-f7 and
although after (6) P-e6, K-e7; (7) K-e5 White has regained the
opposition he cannot keep it if Black continues correctly. The
move which saves the game for Black is K-e8. K-d8 or K-f8 lose,
as then White could go into opposition by K-d6 or K-f6. The play
in these three cases would be this: A: (7) ..., K-e8, (8) K-f6,
K-f8; (9) P-e7+, K-e8; (10) K-e6 and Black is stalemate, the game
is drawn. B: (7) ..., K-d8; (8) K-d6, K-e8; (9) P-e7 and Black
must move K-f7 enabling White to obtain control of the queening
square by (10) K-d7. C: (7) ..., K-f8, (8) K-f6, K-e8, etc.,
similar to the play in B.

To sum up the investigation of this Pawn ending: The deciding
factor is the opposition of the Kings on the 6th and 8th ranks.
If the weaker party succeeds in obtaining that opposition with
the Pawn on the 6th rank he draws the game.

If the Pawn is not yet advanced to the 6th rank the opposition of
the Kings is of no avail to the weaker party as the Pawn
advancing would force the opposing King out of opposition again.
Suppose, for instance, White has the King on e6 and the Pawn on
e5 while Black's King stands on e8 with White on the move. White
must get out of opposition by playing K-f6 or K-d6 and Black
keeps the opposition by K-f8 or K-d8. But then White has a move
to spare which forces Black out of opposition and thereby wins
the game. He plays P-e6 and the game ends in the way discussed
above.

The ending King and Pawn against King is one of the most
important for every Chess player to know, not only because a
great number of positions can be reduced to this ending by the
exchange of all the other men left on the board, but also because
it gives the first insight into the peculiar maneuvers of the
King which have to be carried out in connection with gaining or
giving up the opposition, and which, as will be seen later on,
constitute the essence of the most frequent pawn endings.

For the beginner, of course, the opposition maneuvers are rather
difficult to grasp and it is fortunate for him that the vast
majority of pawn endings are of a much simpler form. The winning
maneuver in these endings into which most Chess games resolve
themselves, is easily explained and after understanding it the
beginner can readily see the fundamental principle underlying
every game.

Diagram 16 shows a typical position on which the winning method
should be studied. White is a pawn ahead, but as demonstrated on
the position of Diagram 15 he cannot queen his passed Pawn
because his King is not in front of it. On the other hand, there
cannot possibly be any advantage in advancing the Pawns on the
other side of the board as there Black has the same number of
Pawns as White and consequently there is no reason why one of the
white Pawns should succeed in breaking through. It is all the
same very easy for White to win and the strategy to be employed
will be evident from the following consideration: Black's King is
considerably confined in his movements as he has to be constantly
watching White's passed Pawn.

        +---------------------------------------+
      8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |#P  |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      5 |    |    | #K |    |    | #P |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      3 |    | ^P |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      2 |    |    | ^K |    |    |    | ^P |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        +---------------------------------------+
          a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                   DIAGRAM 16.

White's King, however, is free to go wherever he likes without
any immediate danger. There is consequently nothing to hinder him
attacking and capturing the black Pawns, for if Black's King
tries to stop White's advance, White's passed Pawn marches on and
compels the opposing King to catch him, thereby giving the way
free to his own King. According to this scheme play could proceed
like this: (1) K-d3, K-d5; (2) K-e3, K-e5; (3) P-b4, P-g5; (4) P-
b5, K-d5; (5) P-b6, K-c6; (6) K-d4, Kxb6; (7) K-e5, P-f4; (8) K-
f5, K-c6; (9) Kxg5, K-d6; (10) Kxf4, K-e6; (11) K-g5, K-f7. Now
White would win even without the Pawn g2 by playing (12) K-f5 and
so on as explained on Diagram 15.

From the foregoing it will be clear to the beginner that if a
player succeeds in winning a Pawn he can win the game if he is
able to exchange all pieces so that only the Pawns are left.
However, he will not yet see the way in which this exchange of
pieces can be forced. It is evident that the player who has lost
the Pawn will try to avoid the exchange, hoping that he may be
able to regain the Pawn with his pieces. Therefore, he will
permit his opponent an exchange only if, in avoiding it, he would
sustain an additional loss. The position of Diagram 17 offers a
simple example. White on the move will play R-e5, offering the
exchange of Rooks. If Black tried to avoid the exchange by
playing R-b6, White would capture the Pawn f5 with the Rook and
after Black's King moves out of check he would take the Pawn g4
too. Therefore Black has to make the offered exchange of Rooks,
and White then wins by advancing the c-Pawn which forces Black's
King over to the Queen's wing and leaves the Pawns of the King's
wing unprotected.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #R |    |    |    | #P |    | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | ^P |    |    |    | ^K | #P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P |    |    |    | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    | ^R |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 17.

The beginner might think that inasmuch as the loss of a Pawn in
most cases means the loss of the game on account of the final
promotion of the Pawn to the Queen, it may be advisable to
sacrifice a piece if thereby the loss of a Pawn can be avoided.
However, this idea, which is frequently met, is altogether wrong
as the additional piece will easily enable the opponent to gain
as many Pawns as he likes within the further course of the game.
The position of Diagram 18 may serve as an example.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    | #P | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | #B |    |    |    |    | ^K | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^B |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 18.

In the following line of play it is assumed that Black makes the
best moves, but the method employed is the same for any defensive
maneuvers which Black might try, with the only difference that
White would win still more quickly. (1) Kt-c5, B-c6; (2) B-f3,
Bxf3; (3) Kxf3, P-b6; (4) Kt-e6, P-c5; (5) P-a4. This move
retains the black Pawns so that the Knight can attack them with
better effect. (5) ..., P-c4; (6) Kt-c7, K-g7; (7) Kt-b5, P-a6;
(8) Kt-d6, K-f6; (9) Ktxc4, P-b5; (10) Pxb5, Pxb5; (n) Kt-a3, P-
b4; (12) Kt-c2, P-b3; (13) Kt-d4, etc.

Often it happens that a player can give up his additional piece
to advantage for one or two Pawns thereby enforcing an ending
which is won on account of the Pawn position. Diagram 19 is an
example.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    | #B |    |    | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | ^Kt|    |    |    | ^K | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 | ^Kt| #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 19.

Black is a piece down but his two connected passed Pawns
constitute a dangerous threat. White, therefore, does best to
sacrifice a Knight for the two Pawns, as he then remains with two
Pawns against one. Black must finally give up his Bishop for
White's a-Pawn who threatens to queen, and then White wins by
capturing Black's g-Pawn and queening his own. Play might proceed
as follows: (1) Ktxc2, Pxc2; (2) Ktxc2, B-d5; (3) Kt-b4, B-a8;
(4) P-a6, K-g6; (5) P-a7, K-f6; (6) Kt-a6, K-e7; (7) Kt-c7, B-h1;
(8) P-a8 (Queen), Bxa8; (9) Ktxa8, K-f6; (10) Kt-c7, K-g6; (11)
Kt-d5, K-h6; (12) K-f5, K-h7; (13) K-g5, K-h8; (14) K-g6, K-g8;
(15) Kt-e7+, K-h8; (16) Kt-f5, K-g8; (17) Ktxg7, K-h8; (18) K-f7,
K-h7; (19) P-g5, K-h8; (20) Kt-f5, White could not play P-g6, as
Black would have been stalemate. (20) ..., K-h7; (21) P-g6+, K-
h8; (22) P-g7+, K-h7; (23) P-g8 (Queen) mate.

The game endings discussed up to now have illustrated the method
of winning with a superior force and it is now possible for the
beginner to understand that the leading rule for all maneuvers is
to AVOID THE LOSS OF MATERIAL--no matter how small--as it will
ultimately lead to the loss of the game by one pawn or the other
queening.

The next step will be to find out under what conditions it is
possible to gain a man and when it will be possible to avoid
loss. To understand the attacking and defensive maneuvers
involved it is necessary first to become acquainted with the
different ways in which the various pieces can be made to do some
useful work, where their strength lies and where their weakness,
and how they are able to cooperate. Not before all this is clear
to the beginner--in the outlines at least--will he be in a
position to play a sensible game or even to understand the most
elementary strategic principles.

The reader is therefore urged to study carefully the next chapter
in which the characteristic features of the different men are
discussed. In this way he will much more quickly arrive at a fair
playing strength than by relying on the experience which he may
gain in playing a great number of games, trying to find out
everything for himself instead of profiting by the knowledge
which has been gathered by others in centuries of study.



HOW THE DIFFERENT MEN COOPERATE



There are two kinds of elementary attack. One when a single man
attacks two or more hostile men at the same time; the other when
more men are brought up to attack an opposing man than can be
mustered for defense. The beginner, as a rule, makes attacks with
the sole aim of driving away a hostile piece; it is clear that
these attempts will in most cases be futile as they generally
allow the attacked piece to move to another square just as or
perhaps more favorable. The advantage of attacking two men at
once is evident in that probably only one of them can be saved.
The advantage of bringing up more men for attack than can be
gathered for defense is not less obvious, but will be found more
difficult to carry out. Using both methods of attack in
conjunction is the secret of the successful cooperation of the
men.

In the following diagrams simple illustrations are shown of
elementary cases of such attacks. These positions often occur in
games of beginners on account of their placing the men on
unfavorable squares. In studying them the eye of the beginner
will become accustomed to dangerous formations of the pieces and
he will be able to foresee similar threats in his games.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    |    | #K |    | #Kt| #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #B | #P |    | #B | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P | #Kt| #P |    | #Q |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^P | ^B | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 20.

This is especially true of the mating positions which are
discussed below in connection with attacks instituted by the
Queen in the middle of the game. It is these attacks to which the
beginner at an early stage of the game falls victim in ninety out
of a hundred cases when playing against an experienced opponent.

In the position of Diagram 20 White on the move wins the exchange
and thereby practically the game by playing (1) Kt-d5. With this
move he attacks the Queen and at the same time the Pawn c7.
Black, in order not to lose the Queen, must move her, but he
cannot move her so that she will protect the Pawn c7.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R | #Kt| #B |    | #K | #B |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    | #Q |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q | ^K | ^B | ^Kt| ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 21.

On the next move White will, therefore, take the Pawn calling
Check and at the same time attacking the Rook a8. The King must
move and the Knight takes the Rook.

Quite frequently a similar attack with the Knight is likely to
win the Queen if the opponent is not familiar with situations of
that kind. If in the position of Diagram 21 White plays (1) Kt-
d5, Black must protect the Pawn c7 by Q-d8 or Q-d6, but not by Q-
c6; for in the latter case White would continue with (2) B-b5,
Qxb5; (3) Ktxc7+ and (4) Ktxb5.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R | #Kt| #B |    | #K | #B |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    | #P | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | #Q |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^B |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q | ^K |    | ^Kt| ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 22.

Sometimes two pieces are involved in the double attack, the line
of one of the pieces being discovered by the other. Thus, in the
position of Diagram 22, which could be brought about by the moves
(1) P-e4, P-d5; (2) Pxd5, Qxd5; (3) Kt-c3, Q-a5; (4) P-d4, Kt-f6;
(5) B-c4, P-e6; (6) B-d2, white threatens to play (7) Kt-d5,
uncovering the Bishop d2 on Black's Queen and at the same time
attacking the Pawn c7, which Black cannot keep protected.

Threats of this kind more frequently occur in connection with a
discovered Check. As an example the following opening will serve:
(1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-f6; (3) Ktxe5, Ktxe4; (4) Q-e2, Kt-
f6. Black's last move exposes his King to a discovered Check, and
White wins the Queen by playing (5) Kt-c6+.

Next to the Knight the Queen is most frequently in a position to
carry out a double attack. Two typical examples are shown in the
following diagrams.

After the opening moves (1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) P-f4, B-C5; (3)
Pxe5?? the position of Diagram 23 is reached, in which Black wins
a Rook by Q-h4+. White cannot reply (4) K-e2 on account of Qxe4
mate. His only move is (4) P-g3 and then follows Qxe4 attacking
King and Rook simultaneously.

This opening offers another opportunity to demonstrate the
dangerous mobility of the Queen. Instead of (3) Pxe5 White should
have played (3) Kt-f3. The game could then have continued as
follows: P-d6; (4) B-c4, Kt-f6; (5) Pxe5, Pxe5: Again White
cannot win the Pawn e5 for (6) Ktxe5 would be answered by Q-d4,
attacking Knight and Bishop and threatening mate on f2.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R | #Kt| #B | #Q | #K |    | #Kt| #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q | ^K | ^B | ^Kt| ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 23.

Diagram 24 shows a typical case of a double threat with the Queen
in conjunction with other pieces. White on the move plays B-d3,
and now Black cannot castle as White would continue with Q-e4
threatening mate through Qxh7 and at the same time attacking the
Bishop e7 for the second time who is only once protected. Black
would have to defend the mate by either P-g6 or P-f5 or Q-h5 and
White would capture the Bishop.

When castling on the King side a player must always beware of an
attack by the Queen and another piece on the King's Rook's Pawn.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B |    | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P | #B | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | ^B | #Q |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P |    |    | ^Q |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B |    | ^R |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 24.

In the case illustrated above it was the Bishop who assisted the
Queen. A Knight could aid in an attack on h7 from either g5 or
f6. More frequently he does so from g5 as usually the square f6
is not accessible to him on account of the Pawn g7 protecting it.
In the majority of cases the Knight goes to g5 from f3, and the
Queen attacks h7 from h5, coming from her original square d1.
Then, if Black cannot protect h7 by a Knight from f6 or by the
Bishop, from f5 for instance, or from g6, the only protection as
a rule is to advance the Pawn to h6. The position of Diagram 25
may serve as an example.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R | #Kt| #B | #Q | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P | #Kt| #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B | #P | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |^Kt | ^B | ^Q | ^K |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 25

Black's last move was Kt-e7, while Kt-f6, which protects the Pawn
h7 against future attacks, is generally preferable in any
opening. White can now play Kt-g5, attacking the Pawn f7 for the
second time, as it is already attacked by the Bishop c4. The
student will, at this stage of his development, not yet know why
Black should be so anxious to defend the Pawn f7, considering
that he is a Pawn ahead so that the loss of a Pawn would only
equalize the forces but would not give White a material
advantage. However, later on, when discussing the strategy of the
opening, it will become evident that in the position of the
diagram Black must, under all circumstances, defend the Pawn f7
as otherwise his game would soon become hopeless on account of
the exposed position of his King.

There are only two ways for Black to defend f7. One is to advance
the Queen's Pawn to d5, interrupting the diagonal of White's
Bishop; the other is to castle, so that the Rook procures the
second protection for the Pawn f7 which is needed. It would then
not be good for White to capture the Pawn because he would have
to give up Knight and Bishop for Rook and one Pawn, which is not
a sufficient equivalent.

Of the two ways indicated only the first one is feasible. For if
Black castles he gives White an opportunity to institute an
attack on the weak Pawn h7 with Knight and Queen against which
Black has no satisfactory defense. Play would develop as follows:

          (1) Kt-g5          o-o
          (2) Q-h5           P-h6

This is the only defense against the threat Qxh7 mate. But
White's Queen's move involved a double threat. It brought up a
third attack on the Pawn f7, and the latter now falls, forcing
Black to give up some more material.

          (3) Ktxf7          Rxf7

Black has to sacrifice the exchange. If he moved the Queen, which
is attacked by the Knight, he would expose his King to a deadly
double check, viz.: (4) Ktxh6++, K-h8 or h7; (5) Kt-f7+
(discovered), K-g8; (6) Q-h8 mate. After giving up his Rook for
the Knight on the third move Black has a lost game, for as
explained in the previous chapter White can simply exchange all
pieces and force the win in the ending with his superior
material.

Another square which after castling on the King side is often the
mark of attack for the Queen in connection with either Knight or
Bishop, is the one immediately in front of the King in the
Knight's file. Diagram 26 illustrates several possibilities of
this kind. White, on the move, can play (1) Q-g5, attacking for
the second time the Pawn g7 which is only once protected. The
threat, however, is not only to win a Pawn, but to win the game,
for in taking the Pawn with the Queen White would checkmate
Black's King.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    |    |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #B |    | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #Q |    | #P | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #Kt|    |    | ^P |    |    | ^B |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P | ^P | ^Q |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 26

The only defense at Black's disposal is P-g6, but this move helps
only temporarily. White can force the mate within a few moves in
different ways. One would be the following:

          (2) Kt-h6+          K-g7

If the King goes to h8 White mates by Q-f6.

          (3) Q-f6+          Kxh6
          (4) B-g5+          K-h5
          (5) P-h3

and the mate through P-g4 cannot be protected.
Another way would be:

          (2) Q-h6          Pxf5
          (3) B-f6

and the mate through Q-g7 cannot be protected.

The position of Diagram 26 enables another mating attack for
White, demonstrating the possibility of mating with Bishop and
Knight in the middle of a game, which occurs oftener than one
would be inclined to think. White can play (1) B-f6 instead of Q-
g5 as suggested above. Black cannot take the Bishop as White
would continue Q-h6 with Q-g7 mate. Neither can Black play P-g6
as then White would mate right away with Kt-h6. The latter mate
with Knight and Bishop White can force, even if Black does not
move the Pawn g7 but makes some other indifferent move, as for
instance Qxc2. White would then make the surprising move Q-h6,
allowing Black to take the Queen. In doing so, however, Black
again enables the mate Kt-h6.

The only move which Black could try in answer to (1) B-f6 is P-
h6, preventing the Queen from occupying g5. Now Qxh6 would not be
feasible as after Pxh6 White does not mate with Ktxh6, but leaves
the square h7 open to Black's King.


       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R |    | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P | ^Kt| #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #Kt|    |    | ^R |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^P |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B | ^Q |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 27.

However, White wins easily through (2) Ktxh6+. If Black takes the
Knight, White mates with Qxh6 and Q-g7. If Black does not take
but plays K-h7, White goes back with the Knight to f5, again
threatening Q-g5 and Qxg7. (3) ..., R-g8 is of no avail, as (4)
Q-g5 threatens mate of h5 which can only be prevented by either
P-g6 or a move with the Rook, after which White mates by either
Q-h6 or Qxg7.

It remains to show some examples of the cooperation of Rooks with
other pieces. Diagram 27 shows one of the positions in which the
beginner is frequently caught.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    | #R |    |    |    | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | ^R |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #B |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^K |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 28.

White plays (1) Q-h5, and if Black makes an indifferent move he
mates through (2) Qxh7+, Kxh7; (3) R-h5.

Black could try to defend himself with (1) ..., P-g6. White can
then continue with (2) Q-h6 and again Black cannot make an
indifferent move such as P-d6 for instance, as White would have
another mate in two moves, namely (3) R-h5 (threatening Qxh7),
Pxh5; (4) Q-f6.

More frequent than the mate with Rook and Knight shown above is
one which usually occurs in the end game and which is illustrated
in Diagram 28.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    | #R |    | #R |    | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P |    |    | #P |    | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | #Q |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #Kt|    |    |    | ^P |    | ^B |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^R |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    |    |    | ^Q |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    | ^R |    |    |    | ^K |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 29.

White plays Kt-f6+ and Black cannot go with the King into the
corner as the Rook would mate him on h7. After K-f8 White draws
the game through perpetual check; for after (2) Kt-h7+, K-e8; (3)
Kt-f6+ the King must go back to f8 as on d8 he would be mated by
R-d7. Consequently White can check the King indefinitely on h7
and f6.

An example for the cooperation of Rook and Bishop is shown in
Diagram 29. White plays B-f6, and there is no way for Black to
prevent the mate threatened through R-h3 followed by R-h8.

It is evident that the force of the Rooks will increase as the
board gets emptier through the exchange of men, for they will
then find more open lines to act in. One of the most important
lines for Rooks to occupy is--especially in the ending --the one
in which most of the attackable Pawns of the opponent are
standing, that is in the majority of cases the second or the
seventh rank respectively. If both Rooks cooperate with each
other in this rank they usually decide the victory within a short
time.

Following is an example which is taken from a master game. As far
as the material is concerned the players are about even, as the
Queen is worth as much as the two Rooks while Knight and Bishop
are an approximate equivalent of the Black Rook and the Pawn
which Black is ahead. The Pawn a4 is rather dangerous for White,
as he needs only three more moves to reach the first rank where
he can be promoted into any piece. On the other hand the Rooks
doubled in the seventh rank give White so strong an attack on the
Black King that he forces the mate before Black succeeds in
realizing the advantage of his advanced passed Pawn.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    | #R | #K |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P | ^R | ^R |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | #P |    |    |    | ^P | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^P | ^B |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | #Q |    |    |    |    | ^P |    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                     DIAGRAM 30.

It is White's move. If Black's Queen did not protect the Pawn f7
White would be able to give a mate in five moves, thus: (I)
Rxf7+, K-g8; (2) Rxg7+, K-h8 (not K-f8 on account of Rc7-f7
mate); (3) Rxh7+, K-g8; (4) R-g7+ and Kt-g6 mate.

Therefore, White will try to interrupt the diagonal in which the
Queen defends the threat, and he can do so by (1) Kt-d5. Black
being unable to keep f7 protected, must defend g7 or h7, or he
will be mated. In the game in question Black played Q-a1+ ; (2)
K-g2, P-a3. After (3) Rxf7+, K-g8 it would not be good for White
to take g7, giving up the two Rooks for the Queen, as he would
then have no more attack while Black still has the dangerous Pawn
in the a-line. If possible he will rather interrupt again the
diagonal of Black's Queen. This suggests the move (4) Kt-f6+.
After Pxf6 White's Rooks are at last free to act unmolested in
the seventh rank, and they do it with deadly effect. White forces
the mate through (5) R-g7+, K-h8; (6) Rxh7+, K-g8; (7) Rh7-g7+,
K-h8; (8) B-f5! Now R-g4 is threatened followed by R-h7 mate, and
Black has no defense.

In the opening and in the middle game the main threat of a Rook
is the "pinning" of a hostile piece. What is meant by this is
illustrated in Diagram 31. Supposing Black, to save his Knight f6
which White has just attacked by P-e5, plays Kt-g4 and after (2)
P-h3 takes the Pawn e5 with the Knight g4, then White wins a
piece by (3) Ktxe5, Ktxe5; (4) R-e1. This move "pins" Black's
Knight to his place as the King would be exposed to White's Rook
if the Knight moved. (4) ..., P-d6 or Q-e7 is not a sufficient
defense, for White continues with (5) P-f4.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt|    |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                     DIAGRAM 31.

Pieces that can be used for pinning a hostile man are, apart from
the Rooks, the Queen and the Bishops; in fact pinning is the main
activity of a Bishop throughout the game. Right after the first
few moves one of the Bishops, as a rule, finds an opportunity to
pin a hostile Knight. For instance: (1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) Kt-f3,
Kt-c6; (3) B-b5 and as soon as the Pawn d7 moves in order to give
an outlet to the Bishop c8, the Knight c6 is pinned. Or: (1) P-
d4, P-d5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-f6; (3) P-c4, P-e6; (4) B-g5 and the
Knight f6 is pinned, as the Queen would be lost if the Knight
moved.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    |    |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #B | #Q | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #B | #Kt|    |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | #P |    | ^B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^B | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^Kt|    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^Q |    | ^P | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    | ^R |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                       DIAGRAM 32.

The disadvantage arising from having a piece pinned is often that
the opponent might be able to concentrate more men to attack the
piece which is pinned than can be gathered for defense. The
position of Diagram 32 will serve as an illustration.

Two of Black's men are pinned, namely, the Knight f6 and the Pawn
e5, and of both pins White can take advantage.

The Pawn e5 is attacked twice and defended twice. White cannot
take Pawn, as he would lose Knight and Rook but would get for it
only Knight and Pawn. However, he can win the Pawn by playing (1)
P-d4. This attacks the Pawn for the third time and although Black
can defend him for the third time with R-e8, the defense is not
serviceable as Black would lose Pawn, Knight and Queen for Pawn,
Knight and Rook.

P-e4 in answer to P-d4 would not help either; for on e4 the Pawn
is twice attacked and only once protected as the Knight f6 cannot
be counted as protection on account of his being pinned by the
Bishop g5. All White needs to do is to take the Knight f6 first
and then to capture the Pawn e4.

It remains to examine whether in answer to (1) P-d4 Black can
take the Pawn with either Bishop or Knight. Apparently this is
possible as the Pawn d4 is protected only by the Knight f3 and
the Queen. Indeed, the combination would be correct if the Bishop
d7 were sufficiently protected. As it is White wins a piece in
the following way:

          (1) P-d4          Bxd4
          (2) Ktxd4         Ktxd4
          (3) Qxd4          Pxd4
          (4) Rxe7          Pxc3

Up to this move an even exchange of pieces has taken place, but
now Black loses the Bishop which is attacked by White's Rook,
because White can remove the Knight which protects the Bishop.

          (5) Bxf6          Pxf6
          (6) Rxd7, etc.

Instead of playing (1) P-d4 and taking advantage of the fact that
the Pawn e5 is pinned, White can direct his attack against the
other Black man which is pinned, namely the Knight f6. He can
play (1) Kt-d5 and thereby attack the Queen and at the same time
the Knight f6 for the second time. It will not be evident to the
beginner that White can derive any advantage from this double
attack, as Black can answer either Q-d6 or Q-d8 keeping his
Knight twice protected. Indeed, White does not gain anything on
f6, the square itself upon which the pin is effected, but he uses
the pin to force an opening into the chain of Pawns which
protects Black's King by exchanging on f6, compelling Black to
retake with the Pawn g7. The advantage resulting from this break
in Black's Pawn position will be explained later on when
discussing the strategy of the middle-game.



SACRIFICING



A player is said to SACRIFICE if he allows a certain amount of
his forces to be captured without recapturing himself an
equivalent amount of his opponent's forces. He will not, of
course, knowingly do so unless he expects to obtain some other
advantage which will at least compensate for his loss of
material. Such compensation can only be afforded by a superiority
of the position. In as much as a position can only be considered
superior if it enables the mating of the opposing King or the
obtaining of an advantage in material which will secure a win in
the ending, it is evident that in sacrificing a player really
never intends to give up more than he gets, but that on the
contrary he expects to gain more than he loses. In other words, a
sacrifice, if correct, is a sacrifice only TEMPORARILY, and very
soon yields either the same, if not more material, or an attack
on the King to which the latter falls victim.

The less evident the way is in which a player recovers the
material sacrificed or realizes an equivalent advantage the more
beautiful the sacrifice is considered. If the effect of a
sacrifice is a direct mating attack on the King, it is as a rule
not difficult to foresee as long as the typical mating positions
are known to the player, most of which have been discussed in the
previous chapter. The following diagrams illustrate examples of
such sacrifices which occur fairly often in actual games.

In Diagram 33, White on the move can play for a similar mate as
the one explained in the discussion of Diagram 29 by placing his
Rook on g3. The best protection against Rxg7 which Black has at
his disposal is P-f6. But if he does not know the mating position
illustrated in Diagram 29 he is liable to play P-g6, and then
White forces the mate by sacrificing his Queen on h7.

          (1) R-g3          P-g6
          (2) Qxh7+         Kxh7
          (3) R-h3+         K-g8
          (4) R-h8+

Black could have prolonged the agony one move by interposing his
Queen on h4 on the third move.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    | #R |    |    |    | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #R |    | #Q | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt|    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    | ^Q |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^R |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^B | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 33

In the position of Diagram 34 White institutes a mating attack by
(1) P-f6. The only move to protect the mate on g7 is P-g6. It
will then be White's desire to enter with his Queen on h6 again
threatening the checkmate on g7. He will, therefore, play either
Q-f4 or Q-g5. Black has no other way to defend himself against
White's threat than by K-h8 followed by R-g8. But after K-h8; Q-
h6, R-g8 White plays R-f3 and Black is unable to prevent White
from sacrificing his Queen on h7 and mating by R-h3.

If Black's Queen were standing on c5 instead of b5 he could avert
the mate by moving the Rook f8 and playing the Queen to f8
thereby protecting g7.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    |    |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt|    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #Q |    | #P | ^P | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^Q |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    | ^B |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    | ^R |    | ^K |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 34.

The mate with Rook and Knight demonstrated by the position of
Diagram 28 is liable to occur in several variations of the play
which might result from the following situation:

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | #R |    | #Kt|    | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #B | #Q |    | #R | #P | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P |    |    | #P |    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #P |    | ^P |    |    | ^Q |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B | ^P | ^Kt|    | ^R |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P | ^R |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 35.

White starts his mating attack with (1) Kt-f6. This threatens the
sacrifice of the Queen on h6 followed by R-g8 mate. White's
Knight move can hardly be called a sacrifice as it is quite
evident that Black cannot take the Knight on account of Qxh6+,
Kt-h7; Q-g7 mate. The only way to parry White's threat is (1)
..., Kt-g6. However, this helps only momentarily as White
continues (2) R-h3 threatening Q-g5, Rxh6+ and Qxh6 mate, a
threat against which Black has no defense. White can very nearly
force the mate by sacrificing his Queen on h6 instead of the
Rook. But after (3) Qxh6, Pxh6; (4) Rxh6+, K-g7; (5) R-h7+, K-f8;
(6) R-h8+ Black does not take the Rook as White would like him to
do to enable the mate R-g8, but he goes back to g7 with the King
and White could not do any better than draw by perpetual check on
h7 and h8.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #B |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P | #Kt| #Kt|    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P | #P | #P | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^P |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P | ^B |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 36.

In the position of Diagram 36 White can make an attack which will
recall somewhat the play shown in connection with Diagram 25. (1)
Kt-g5 would not lead to anything, as Black could defend himself
by P-g6 or P-h6. White has a much more direct way to attack the
black King. This is by the sacrifice (1) Bxh7+. After Kxh7; (2)
Kt-g5+, K-g8; (3) Q-h5 Black can protect the mate only by
sacrificing his Queen for White's Knight. For (3) ..., R-e8 with
the view to escape with the King to e7 via f8 if attacked by Q-h7
and Q-h8 would be rendered futile by White through (4) Qxf7+, K-
h8; (5) Q-h5+, K-g8; (6) Q-h7+, K-f8; (7) Q-h8+, K-e7; (8) Qxg7
mate. Before making the sacrifice of the Bishop White will, of
course, have to make sure that Black cannot save himself by
evading altogether the attack which is threatened through Q-h5.
Black could, indeed, avoid this variation by going with the King
to g6 on the second move instead of g8. But in this case too
White has a winning continuation. He would play (3) Q-g4
threatening to win Black's Queen by the discovered check Ktxe6.
If Black moves the Queen, then White gives the discovered check
in any case forcing the King to h7 and leading over to the
variation which was originally intended. If, on the other hand,
Black tried (3) ..., P-f5, attacking White's Queen and thereby
rendering the discovered check ineffective, White would first
take the Pawn en passant and after (4) Pxf6, Kxf6 the Queen mates
on e6.

Frequently a sacrifice is brought to maintain a pin which is
bound to yield a piece in return sooner or later. The position of
Diagram 37 is typical for cases of this kind.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt| #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | #P |    | ^B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #B | ^B |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 37.

Supposing Black plays (1) ..., P-h6; (2) B-h4, P-g5 to free
himself of the pinning Bishop. Then White can sacrifice the
Knight f3 for the two black Pawns and thereby maintain the pin
with the threat to regain the Knight immediately through Kt-d5.
The ensuing play could be the following: (3) Ktxg5, Pxg5; (4)
Bxg5, Bxc3; (5) Pxc3. Now White threatens to play P-f4 and Pxe5
opening the line of his Rook and thereby attacking the pinned
Knight for the second time. This threat cannot be effectively
countered. Black could try to unpin the Knight by (5) .... K-g7;
(6) P-f4, Q-e8. Indeed, Black saves his Knight in this way, but
the exposed position of his King leads to a speedy disaster. For
instance: (7) Pxe5, Kt-h7; (8) B-f6+, Ktxf6; (9) Pxf6+, K-h7;
(10) Q-h5+, K-g8; (11) Q-g6+, K-h8; (12) Q-g7+/-. Black could not
take White's Queen on the 11th move because the Pawn f7 was
pinned by the Bishop c4.

If Black had moved his King to g8 or g6 on the 8th move instead
of taking the Bishop f6, White would have forced the mate by
sacrificing his Rook on f5, thereby cutting off the Bishop c8 and
giving his Queen access to the square g4.

Sacrifices with the view to utilizing a pin occur in various
other versions which are essentially different from the one
illustrated above. Following are typical examples of the three
most frequent cases.

In the position of Diagram 38 Black must not take the Pawn e4
although he can protect the Knight with B-f5 in case White pins
him with R-e1.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B |    | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    |    |    |    | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #P |    |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^R |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 38.

The way in which White would obtain the advantage is this:

          (1) R-e1          B-f5
          (2) Rxe4          Bxe4
          (3) R-e1

Through sacrificing one Rook for the Knight White has freed the
square e1 for the other Rook who now pins the Black Bishop
without Black being able to protect it.

The position of Diagram 39 is somewhat related to that of Diagram
38, as far as the possibility of a sacrifice for the sake of a
pin is concerned. If White plays B-b5+ Black must not interpose
his Bishop, for White will give up his Rook for the Bishop in
order to force the Rook d8 into a pinned position and then he
will win the Rook by R-d1.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | #R | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    | #B |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    | ^K | ^R |    | ^B |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 39.

In the position of Diagram 40 there is also a possibility of a
sacrifice with the view to pin a piece that defends a certain
threat as long as it is mobile. White plays (1) Q-d5, and Black
dares not take White's Knight with his Queen for White would
continue (2) Qxf7+, Rxf7; (3) R-e8+/-.

What Black could try is (1) Kt-h6.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    | #P |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    | #Kt| ^Kt|    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B |    | ^R |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 40.

The Pawn f7 would then be three times attacked and three times
protected so that White cannot take him as now the pin of the
Rook resulting from Ktxf7, Ktxf7; Qxf7, Rxf7 does not lead to
anything, the square e8 being protected by the Queen. However,
White can force the win by (2) Ra1- e1, threatening again the
sacrifice of f7, as he now controls the square e8 twice. If Black
replies (2) ..., Q-f6, protecting f7 for the fourth time and
thereby making impossible White's sacrifice on that point, White
continues with (3) R-e8. This threatens Rxf8+, Kxf8; Ktxh7+
winning the Queen. Black cannot defend himself with Q-g6 on
account of (4) B-d3 followed by Bxh7+ and Rxf8, etc., nor can he
play (3) ..., Q-f4 on account of P-g3 followed by Qxd6, attacking
the defenseless Rook f8.

A sacrifice with the view to enabling a mating attack through the
cooperation of Rooks and Bishop somewhat similar to the examples
discussed in the previous chapter is possible in the position of
Diagram 41 which occurred in a Tournament game in London in which
the author conducted the black men.

Black's combination starts with the sacrifice of the Queen on f3.
After (1) ..., Qxf3; (2) Pxf3, B-h3+; (3) K-g1 White's King is
held in an immobile position by the Black Bishop and a check with
one of Black's Rooks in the g-file would be deadly.

However, White can, for a while, protect himself against all
mating attempts of Black. If Black continued (3 ) ..., R-e6,
White would take the Pawn d3 with the Queen thereby defending
the mate R-g6. After giving up his Queen for one of Black's Rooks
White would still have an advantage in material.

The correct way to carry on the attack is (3) ..., Ra8-e8, as
then White cannot take the Pawn d3 on account of R-e1+; Q-f1,
Rxf1+; Rxf1, R-e6 and R-g6 mate.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B |    |    |    | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    | #Q |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | ^P | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | #P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P |    |    | #R | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^K |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 41.

The main threat of Black's third move is R-e6-g6 mate. Another
threat is P-d2 followed by R-e1+. The only way for White to
defend himself is (4) P-f4. If now P-d2, then (5) P-f3, R-e1+;
(6) K-f2 affords a sufficient protection. And if (4) ..., Re8-e6,
then (5) P-f5 prevents the Rook from going to g6.

However, by repeating the mating threat with (5) ..., Re6-e4,
which forces White to protect, g4 by (6) P-f3 Black opens the
second rank for a combined assault of the Rooks similar to the
one illustrated by Diagram 30. What makes matters worse for White
is that with (6) ..., R-g2+ he is forced into the line of the
Bishop h3 so that he is exposed to a discovered check. After (7)
K-f1, Rxb2 discovered check; (8) K-g1, Re4-e2 White must give up
his Queen for the Rook immediately, as otherwise Black would mate
in four moves by R-g2+, K-f1, Rxh2+, K-g1, Rb2-g2+; K-f1, Rxh1+/-.

Although White is still ahead in material after (9) Qxe2, Rxe2 he
cannot avoid the loss of the game on account of the continued
threat which Black exerts by the cooperation of his Rook and his
Bishop. The only move which would save the Rook a1 from getting
lost through R-g2+, followed by a discovered check with
simultaneous attack of the Rook by Black's Rook would be (10) R-
d1 with the idea of protecting the Rook with the King thus (10)
..., R-g2+; (11) K-f1, R-d2; (12) K-e1; but this plan fails as
Black checkmates with (12)  ..., R-e2.

A mating position which has not been discussed up to now but
which occurs frequently enough in the actual game to warrant its
special mention is one in which the King is deprived of all
mobility by his own men who surround him and in which a hostile
Knight can check the King. Diagram 42 offers an example.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    | #Q |    | #R |    |    | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    |    |    |    | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    | #B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    | ^R |    |    | ^Kt|    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^Q |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    |    |    |    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                    DIAGRAM 42.

White on the move can force the mate by (1) R-d8, a very
surprising sacrifice indeed, for not only can Black take the Rook
with either Queen or Rook but he can also take White's Queen. In
the latter case, however, he would be mated in two moves by (2)
Rxe8+, Q-g8; (3) Kt-f7. This is one example of the "throttled
mate" by the Knight. Another one, which is really the typical
one, occurs if Black takes the Rook instead of the Queen. The
mating process then is: (2) Kt-f7+, K-g8; (3) Kt-h6 double check,
K-h8; (4) Q-g8+, Rxg8; (5) Kt-f7+/-. White could not have played Q-
g8+ right on the second move because then Black would have taken
the Queen with the King, while he could not do so with White's
Knight on h6.

Sacrifices made with the view of a direct mating attack are, as a
rule, the easiest to figure out, as there is no guesswork
connected with them. In those cases the player does not face the
question as to whether the position attained after the sacrifice
will be strong enough to insure a gain of material at least
equivalent to the amount of material sacrificed, a question which
to answer correctly sometimes requires a good deal of instinct
trained by experience; all that is necessary if to ascertain
whether the opponent can be mated in a definite number of moves
or not. If the mate cannot be clearly foreseen, the sacrifice
must not be made. The possibility of a sacrifice with consequent
forced mate is always indicated if a greatly superior force is
available for attack at the part of the board where the opposing
King is located. An example is offered by the position reproduced
on the book cover.

  [E-text editor note: The position on the book cover is:

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R | #Kt|    |    |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #B | #P | #P | #Q |    | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P |    |    | #P | #B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    | ^Q |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^P | ^Kt|    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | ^B |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    | ^K |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h       ]

This position occurred in a game between Sir G. A. Thomas of
London and the author. Black has just played Q-e7 in order to
protect the mate which was threatened by Ktxf6+ followed by Qxh7.
If in the position of the diagram White played Kt-f6+, Black
would retake with the Pawn, thereby protecting the Pawn h7 with
his Queen. However, White can force the mate with a neat Queen's
sacrifice which drives Black's King right into the arms of the
remaining White pieces. Play continued as follows:

          (1) Qxh7+         Kxh7
          (2) Ktxf6++       K-h6

The King cannot go to h8 on account of Kt-g6 mate. White now
continually checks Black's King in such a manner that he has only
one square to go to until he is finally driven to the first rank,
all White pieces participating in the chase.

         (3) Kte5-g4+

In answer to Ktf6-g4+ Black would play K-h5; (4) B-g6+, K-h4; (5)
P-g3+, K-h3 and there is no mate.

          (3) ...      K-g5
          (4) P-h4+    K-f4
          (5) P-g3+    K-f3
          (6) B-e2+    K-g2
          (7) R-h2+    K-g1
          (8) K-d2 mate.

White could have forced the mate in seven instead of eight moves
by playing (6) K-f1, or (6) o-o, for there was no protection
against (7) Kt-h2.



III

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CHESS STRATEGY



In reading the chapter on "Elementary Tactics" the beginner will
have obtained a fair idea of the value of the different pieces
and he will have gained an insight into the possibilities of
their cooperation. However, the fundamental principle of Chess
strategy, the method of developing the inherent powers of the men
so that they may be able to do all the work possible for them,
will still be a secret to him.

At the beginning of the game the Knights are the only pieces
which are able to move, and consequently the other pieces are
worthless until openings have been created for them by Pawn
moves. Now, the first thing the beginner should try to keep in
mind is that only such Pawn moves can be good as open lines for
their fellow pieces or obstruct lines of opposing men. The reason
is this:

In any hand to hand fight evidently that player will get the
better of it who has more pieces ready for action on the
battlefield. When examining the typical positions discussed in
the previous chapter the fact will strike the observant reader
that the winning player always has a decided superiority of
forces at his disposal where the actual fight is going on, so
that in some cases he can even sacrifice a great amount of them
and still have enough left for the final onslaught against the
King. The same holds good in combinations where lesser objects
than the King are fought for; the player who has more pieces
ready to take part in the struggle will emerge victorious; the
player who attacks with less pieces than the opponent has on the
spot for defense, cannot hope to succeed.

The important point, therefore, is to place the pieces so that
they will be in readiness for concentration on whatever part of
the board they are needed.

Moreover, it will be important to place the pieces on such
favorable squares in the shortest possible time--meaning with the
smallest number of moves--as wasting moves on maneuvers which do
not further the mobilization of the troops will give the opponent
an opportunity to gather a superior force somewhere on the board
and make an attack with the best chance in the world to succeed
before reinforcements can be brought up.

With this aim in mind the beginner will readily see that it is by
no means immaterial which Pawn moves are made in the opening. The
fact that a Pawn move opens an outlet for a piece is not
sufficient. If possible Pawn moves will have to be found which
enable the development of more than one piece for they will lead
to an advantage in the mobilization unless the opponent, too,
hastens the development of his pieces by equally good Pawn moves.

The only Pawn moves which fit this description are moves with the
King's or Queen's Pawns as they open lines for Queen and Bishop--
apart from an additional square for the Knight--while the other
Pawns cannot free the way for more than one piece. Whether the
move with the King's Pawn or the Queen's Pawn is better when
beginning the game is impossible to say. In neither case can it
be proved that White can obtain an advantage which is sufficient
to win the game. With correct play on both sides it can be only
White who gains an advantage, for he has the first move and so he
is one move ahead of Black in the development as long as he does
not waste any time on maneuvers which do not increase the
mobility of his pieces.

By the mobility of a piece is meant the number of squares
accessible to it. A Bishop or a Rook which stands in an
unobstructed file is obviously worth more than one whose sphere
of action is limited on account of his way being blocked. This
does not mean, however, that a Bishop or a Knight to whom, at a
certain moment, three or four squares are accessible, is more
valuable than a Rook who at the same moment can go only to one or
two squares; for a few moves later the Rook might be in
possession of his full freedom while the action of the Bishop or
the Knight might be hampered. It is, therefore, best to value the
pieces according to their latent strength, that is, the strength
which is likely to show in the ending after all temporary
obstructions have been removed. The comparative values given for
the different men on page 42 will serve as good guide in most
cases. It is not advisable though to give up a minor piece for
three Pawns or two minor pieces for a Rook and one Pawn as long
as Queens and minor pieces are on the board, as with a piece
ahead the opponent mostly succeeds in winning through a direct
attack against the King before the superiority of Pawns becomes
dangerous.

In trying to place the pieces on squares where they have as much
mobility as possible individual thought is required with each new
game as it depends altogether upon the moves of the opponent
which lines can be opened for Bishops, Rooks and Queen and where
a good field of action can be secured for the Knights. However,
it is possible to give a few rules which common sense tells us
must hold good in the majority of games if both players play
well. Of course, if a player makes bad moves in the opening, that
is, moves which do not aim at a speedy mobilization of all
pieces, then the opponent may soon have a chance to win the game
with moves which are not in accordance with those common sense
rules either but which force an immediate issue in a maneuver of
a kind that ordinarily does not occur in an opening but is
characteristic of the middle game. This is a point which the
majority of Chess players overlook. They argue that--granted the
value of general principles of strategy, which will greatly help
to build up a safe position--cases occur in which a move may win
which is not according to principles, and that, therefore,
following the trend of a certain combination which seems
profitable, is advisable even if the general principles are
violated.

Even a Chess master once said, that generalities are of no use in
Chess and that it is necessary to figure out every move in all
variations to which it may lead to make sure that the move is
good. As an example he offered the following opening: (1) P-f3,
P-e5; (2) P-g4. Now, he asks, should Black omit to give the
checkmate with Q-h4 because it is against the general principles
to bring out the Queen at an early stage of the game?

The shallowness of this argument is obvious. The reason for the
general rule that the Queen should not come out too soon is that
she is liable to be attacked by the minor pieces of the opponent
so that she has to move again and again and time is lost which
could be used for the development of other pieces. Of course, if
the opponent does not develop his pieces, the Queen may often
come out without danger and she may do a lot of harm before she
can be driven away.

In formulating general strategical principles it is, then,
assumed that both players will follow them, and it is taken for
granted that if one player deviates from these principles and
thereby weakens himself at some point, the other player is
expected to exact the full penalty for this deviation with any
means at his disposal. It will always be found that these means
are also indicated by the general principles if only their
meaning is intelligently applied to the position in question.

As was stated before, the point of greatest importance in the
opening is to develop the pieces without loss of time, that is,
to place them on squares where they have as much mobility as
possible without making any move which retards this development.
There are different ways in which the development may be
retarded, and which consequently must be avoided. For instance,
no Pawn move should be made which is not absolutely necessary to
open a line for a piece; or, no piece should move twice as long
as there are pieces which have not yet moved at all; or, no piece
should be developed to a square from which the opponent can drive
it away at the same time furthering his own development; or, the
right of castling should not be foregone by moving the King or by
any other way, as castling develops a Rook and places the King in
safety with one move while more moves are required to the same
end if castling is not possible, and so on.

The beginner who makes this great principle of development quite
clear to himself has made the most difficult step on the way to
mastership. The grasp of the far reaching influence of the
mobility of the pieces in the opening upon the further
development of the whole game is really what distinguishes the
master from the average player.

Of course, it would be too difficult for the beginner to find out
for himself what squares are the most favorable for the different
pieces; at any rate, it would take him a long time to gain that
knowledge by experience. Fortunately, the experience of the
masters of several generations is accessible to us and so it is
possible to expedite considerably the process by which the mind
of the student is adapted to the tactics required in every game
of Chess to carry out the principle of speedy development. To a
great extent these tactics, too, can be simply explained from the
point of view of giving the pieces their utmost mobility so that
they will be readily understood by the reader who has followed
the arguments given in the foregoing pages.

There is a considerable difference in the constellation of the
pieces depending on whether the game is opened with (1) P-e4, P-
e5 or (1) P-d4, P-d5. These two openings shall therefore be
treated separately. All other openings are related to one of the
above main branches and need little additional discussion.



KING'S PAWN OPENINGS



After (1) P-e4, P-e5 the only Pawn which both players have to
move to enable the development of all pieces is the Queen's Pawn,
which obstructs the Queen's Bishop. Of course, it would also be
possible to secure an outlet for the Queen's Bishop by advancing
the Queen's Knight's Pawn one step; but in the long diagonal the
Bishop is ordinarily not so well posted as the development of the
Queen's Knight to his most natural square, that is c3 or c6
respectively, would block the way of the Bishop. The Queen's
Knight is best placed in the c-file because on the edge of the
board, in the a-file, he has less mobility; less squares are
accessible to him. In order to place him in the d-file it would
be necessary to move the d-Pawn, and as this would also give an
opening to the Queen's Bishop the move of the Queen's Knight's
Pawn is superfluous.

Before moving the Queen's Pawn the players will have to make sure
that in advancing him they will not block the way of any piece.
Consequently, White will not play P-d3 on his second move. He
will first develop the King's Bishop. Of course, he will not
place him on d3, obstructing the Queen's Pawn and thereby the
Queen's Bishop. Neither will he play B-b5, as Black could drive
him away from there immediately with P-c6, opening another
diagonal for the Queen. The choice between the remaining squares,
e2 and c4, is not difficult. On e2 the Bishop would be in the way
of the Queen and his way would soon be blocked by the King's
Knight, who for similar reasons to those given for the move of
the Queen's Knight will go to f3 in preference to other squares.
Therefore, the only move to be considered in case the King's
Bishop is played at this early stage of the game, is B-c4.

White is not forced to develop this Bishop on the second move by
any means. He could either play (2) Kt-f3 or (2) Kt-c3 or (2) P-
d4. The objection to the latter move, however, is that after (2)
...., Pxd4; (3) Qxd4 the white Queen is exposed to the attack of
the Knight b8, which means loss of time. Kt-f3 or Kt-c3 are
probably preferable to B-c4 on the second move, because it is
certain that the Knights will not find any better squares on
their initial move. The Bishop, however, may have an occasion to
be used on b5 instead of on c4, and it is a good thing, generally
speaking, to keep the option of moving a piece to different
squares as long as it is compatible with the other requirements
of the position.

That the Bishop may be used to advantage on b5 will be seen from
the following variation. Supposing White plays (2) Kt-f3. Then
the Pawn e5 is attacked. The only sensible protection is (2) ...,
Kt-c6; for P-f6 does not come into consideration, as it is a Pawn
move which does not add anything to the development of the
pieces; P-d6 blocks the Bishop f8; B-d6 obstructs the Queen's
Pawn and Q-f6 or Q-e7 hinders the development of the Knight or
the Bishop respectively. Now, it can readily be seen that after
(2) ..., Kt-c6 White may want to place his King's Bishop on b5,
for with this move he repeats indirectly his attack on the King's
Pawn through the threat to remove the protecting Knight. It is
true, that this threat needs no attention as long as White's
King's Pawn is not protected (for instance: (3) ..., Kt-f6; (4)
Bxc6, Pd7xc6; (5) Ktxe5, Q-d4 attacking Knight and Pawn at the
same time and thereby regaining the Pawn) but as soon as White
has defended the Pawn--with P-d3 may be--the Bishop b5 is at work
and Black must seek additional protection for the Pawn e5.

If White, on his second move, plays B-c4, he attacks the Pawn f7.
This Pawn is protected by Black's King and so he need not be
defended any further; but Black must be on the alert against a
concentration of some more white men on f7. White could try (3)
Q-f3 or Q-h5. However, Black would then have time to defend
himself with Kt-f6 or Q-e7 respectively.

Therefore, on the second move, Black may make any developing
move; he could, of course, play (2) ..., Kt-f6, preventing
White's Queen from going to h5, but this is unnecessary, as Q-h5
would be a very bad move, placing the Queen on a square from
which she is bound to be chased away very soon. For instance: (2)
...., B-c5; (3) Q-h5, Q-e7 (not P-g6 on account of Qxe5 attacking
the King and the Rook at the same time). Now, whatever White
plays, he will have to retire again with his Queen as soon as
Black attacks her with Kt-f6, and so he loses his birth-right of
attack; for it will be Black who is a move ahead in the
development instead of White, as it ought to be.

If both players refrain from premature attack the game might
develop as follows: (2) B-c4, B-c5; (3) Kt-f3, Kt-c6; (4) P-d3,
Kt-f6; (5) Kt-c3, P-d6; (6) o-o, o-o; (7) B-g5. This move is the
first one with which White trespasses the "frontier" which may be
said to run in the openings of all games between the fourth and
fifth ranks of the board. The Bishops are the only pieces for
whom there is a field of action in the opponent's camp early in
the game. They pin a hostile Knight and thereby exert a certain
pressure on the opponent who naturally does not like to see any
of his pieces deprived of its mobility. The fact that Black can
drive White's Bishop away with P-h6 does not lead to any loss of
time for White, for the Bishop can retire to h4, still
maintaining the pin, while Black has not furthered his
development by his Pawn move; in fact, he has somewhat
compromised his position and as explained by the discussion of
the position of Diagram 37 the advance of the Pawn g7 to g5
cannot follow without the risk that White will uphold the pin
even at the cost of a piece and obtain an overwhelming attack.

That the move P-h6 creates a weakness even if it is not followed
up by P-g5 will be demonstrated later on in the discussion of the
middle game. The correct answer to White's seventh move is easily
found with the help of the principle of development. If White did
not threaten anything Black would certainly think of nothing else
than the development of his Queen's Bishop, the only minor piece
which has not yet moved. Therefore, the first thing Black should
consider in countering the threat involved in White's last move
is a protection with a move of the Queen's Bishop. White's threat
is (8) Kt-d5, attacking the Knight f6 for the second time.
Although the Knight is twice protected, Black will naturally
endeavor to prevent an accumulation of hostile pieces on the
point f6, and he can do that indeed very easily by playing (7)
...., B-e6 with a view toward capturing the Knight if he should
move to d5.

The exchange (8) Kt-d5, Bxd5; (9) Bxd5 is manifestly not
desirable for White, as it does not improve in any way the
mobility of his men. On the contrary, White loses a move, as the
result of the maneuver is only a change of location of the King's
Bishop who was already developed while the principle of speedy
development demands that no piece should be moved twice in the
opening until ALL pieces are developed.

Unless Black's move involves a threat which needs immediate
attention White should consider only such moves as will secure a
possibility of development for his Rooks, that is maneuvers which
are liable to produce an open file somewhere on the board.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt| #P | #B | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B |    | #P |    | ^B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 43.

This can only be done by the exchange of a Pawn and as the only
Pawn within easy reach is the Pawn e5 the files which are liable
to be opened first are the d-file and the f-file. In the position
of the Diagram it is not easy to find a way of opening either
file mentioned without elaborate preparation. P-d4 cannot be
played before the square d4 is three times controlled by White
and if White tries to accomplish this by (8) Kt-e2, Black spoils
White's plan by Bxc4 without being bothered by the threat Kt-d5
which existed as long as the Knight was posted on c3. If, on the
other hand, White exchanges the Bishop first on e6 he helps
Black's development by opening the f-file for his Rook. To avoid
these alternatives White could withdraw the Bishop c4 to b3 and
then play Kt-e2 followed by P-c3 and P-d4. But this maneuver
involves two moves with pieces which are already developed and it
is therefore preferable to place the Rook a1, who has to be
developed, right away in the Queen's file and then to proceed as
suggested above. In other words, White does probably best to play
(8) Q-d2 and (9) Ra1-d1.

Black, in the meantime, will of course, also aim at the
development of his Rooks. In the position of the Diagram it is
even less troublesome for him than for White to prepare the
opening of the d-file, as there is no objection to his playing
immediately Kt-e7 with P-c6 and P-d5. The only reason which might
deter Black from playing Kt-e7 is the fear that White might
answer Bxf6 forcing Black to retake with the Pawn g7 and thereby
tearing a hole in the protecting chain of Pawns around the King.
However, as will be explained in the discussion of the middle
game, this maneuver need not be feared.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 44.

The advance of the d-Pawn, besides the possibility of opening the
d-file for the Rooks, has another very important purpose. It
invites, and often compels the opponent to take the Pawn with his
e-Pawn thereby losing control of "the center." What is meant by
center in King's Pawn openings will be understood from the
analysis of the Diagram 44 in which only the Pawn skeleton of a
King's Pawn game is given and in which it is assumed that Black
has exchanged the Pawn e5 for the Pawn d4. This Pawn formation
offers an advantage to White because the Pawn e4, White's center-
Pawn, controls the two squares d5 and f5 while the two
corresponding squares in White's camp, that is d4 and f4, are not
in the hands of Black and could be occupied by White men. It is
evident that it must be advantageous to have pieces placed in the
center of the board as there they have naturally more mobility
than towards the edge of the board where part of their radius of
action is cut off. A Knight, for instance, placed on d4 will
possibly have an opportunity later on to go to f5 from where he
helps an attack on g7. The square f4 may be useful for the Queen
in an attempt to reach the King's wing speedily, thus
accumulating on that part of the board superior forces. These and
other advantages connected with the control of the center will be
more readily understood after the discussion of the middle game
maneuvers of which the center squares form the basis. It is
necessary, however, to touch upon this matter at this time, as in
many openings the player is confronted after the very first moves
with questions in which the maintenance of the center-Pawn is the
point at issue.

Following are a few examples:

Supposing White, after (1) P-e4, P-e5, plays (2) P-d4. Then Black
is immediately threatened with the loss of his center-Pawn, which
he cannot defend with P-d6 as after (3) Pxe5, Pxe5 White would
exchange Queens and thereby deprive Black of the possibility of
bringing his Rooks quickly into cooperation through castling.

(2) ..., Kt-c6 is out of question too; not on account of (3) P-
d5, which merely helps Black in getting his Knight over to the
King's wing via e7 and allows him to maintain his center-Pawn,
but on account of (3) Pxe5, Ktxe5; (4) Pf4, which secures the
control of the center for White and does not leave Black a chance
to advance his Queen's Pawn to d5 with the view of depriving
White of his center-Pawn too.

For these reasons Black has no choice but has to play (2) ...,
Pxd4. True enough, Black gives up his center-Pawn with this
exchange, but White cannot prevent P-d5 in the long run, so that
he also loses his center-Pawn and has no advantage over Black in
that respect. The following variations are typical for the line
of play in cases of this kind. White tries to hold back Black's
Queen's Pawn as long as he can, but finally Black enforces the
advance.

       I. (3) Qxd4          Kt-c6
          (4) Q-e3

Now P-d5 is not possible because of Pxd5 check.

          (4) ...           Kt-f6
          (5) Kt-c3         B-e7
          (6) B-d2          P-d5

Threatening to win a piece by P-d4.

          (7) Pxd5          Ktxd5

Now White has no center-Pawn either; Black has
a perfectly good game.

      II. (3) Kt-f3         Kt-c6

Most players would be tempted to play P-c5 instead.  But this
must be bad as it is a Pawn move which is not necessary. Black
does not need to defend the Pawn d4 as he is a Pawn ahead; and
the development of the pieces is much more valuable than the
advantage of a Pawn. White would obtain a far superior position
with (4) P-c3, Pxc3; (5) Ktxc3, after which Black cannot
hope ever to free his game by P-d5.

          (4) Ktxd4          Kt-f6

It would be bad to exchange Knights on d4 because White's Queen
would be brought up into a dominating position from which she
could not easily be driven away.

          (5) Kt-c3          B-b4

This attacks again the Pawn e4. Relieving the pin by (6) B-d2
would be no protection as Black could exchange on c3 and then
take the Pawn. Therefore, White must defend the Pawn with another
piece. The Bishop f1, which has to be developed in any case,
offers himself naturally for this purpose, but B-d3 is not
possible as long as the Knight d4 has to be kept protected by the
Queen. Hence, it is necessary first to exchange the Knight.

          (6) Ktxc6          Pb7xc6
          (7) B-d3           P-d5!

Again Black has succeeded in advancing his Queen's Pawn against
the opposing center-Pawn, and White cannot avoid the exchange. To
advance to e5 would be against the principle that no Pawn-move
should be made in the opening which is not absolutely necessary.
How easily (8) P-e5 could get White into trouble can be seen from
the following variation: (8) ..., Kt-g4; (9) o-o, o-o; (10) Pf4
??, B-c5+; (11) K-h1, Q-h4; (12) P-h3, Q-g3; (13) Pxg4, Q-h4
mate.

     III. (3) P-c3

With this move White invites Black to lose time in winning a Pawn
or two while the White pieces are rapidly developed. If Black
accepts the Gambit [Footnote: A Gambit is an opening in which the
sacrifice of a Pawn is offered for the sake of a speedy
development of the pieces.] the continuation might be.

          (3) ...          Pxc3
          (4) B-c4         Pxb2
          (5) Bxb2

                  or

          (4) ...          Kt-c6
          (5) Kt-f3        P-d6
          (6) Ktxc3 or Q-b3 or o-o

In all of these cases White has by far the freer game and he
remains in the possession of his center-Pawn. For this reason it
is much more advisable for Black to decline the Gambit offered
and to hasten his development by immediately advancing his
Queen's Pawn, thus:

          (3) P-c3          P-d5!
          (4) Pxd5

The advance of the King's Pawn would be quite out of place, as it
would not add anything to White's development so that Black need
not mind the loss of the move either which he sustains from the
developing point of view in gaining a Pawn by Pxc3. The future
development of Black is not any longer endangered as he has a
Pawn in the center and an outlet for his Queen's Bishop.

          (4) ...          Qxd5
          (5) Pxd4         Kt-c6
          (6) Kt-f3        B-g4
          (7) Kt-c3        Q-h5

and Black has, no doubt, the initiative.

If White, instead of playing (2) P-d4 as assumed in the above
examples, advances his f-Pawn against Black's center, Black has
ample time to make all preparations necessary to maintain his
center-Pawn, for White does not threaten Pxe5 as long as he is
not protected against Q-h4+, followed by Qxe4. Black's best move
is apparently B-c5, so that he may be able to reply P-d6 to (3)
Kt-f3 without blocking the way of the Bishop. On c5 Black's
Bishop is very disagreeable for White as he prevents his
castling. The natural development of this opening would be about
this:

          (2) P-f4          B-c5
          (3) Kt-f3         P-d6
          (4) B-c4          Kt-f6

Although this move blocks the diagonal for Black's Queen, making
impossible a check on h4, it does not enable White to win a Pawn
on e5, because (5) Pxe5, Pxe5; (6) Ktxe5 would be answered by Q-
d4.

          (5) P-d3          Kt-c6
          (6) Kt-c3         B-g4

Black has one more piece developed than White on account of the
Pawn move P-f4 which is a wasted move from the point of view of
development, especially as White cannot very well castle on the
King's side and make use of the open f-file for his Rooks.

The two principles mentioned--namely the development of the
pieces without unnecessary Pawn moves or other loss of time and
the maintenance of a Pawn in the center--are a perfectly
sufficient guidance in all King's Pawn openings, as no particular
difficulty exists for any piece to be developed to a favorable
square. Even if Black tries to avoid the well-known openings
which result from the reply (1) ..., P-e5 by playing (1) ..., P-
e6 for instance, or (1) ..., P-c5;, or, in fact, any other of the
twenty possible first moves, White will find the right way to
mobilize his men if he strictly adheres to those two principles
and resists the temptation to institute an early attack. A few
examples will show how simple the application of the principle
is.

       I. (1) P-e4          P-d5

This attacks White's Pawn and White has to decide whether to
protect, advance or exchange him. The advance P-e5 and the
protection P-f3 are out of question because these moves are Pawn
moves which do not contribute to the development and are,
therefore, to be classed as mere loss of time. The protection (2)
P-d3 is not sufficient either as Black, after exchanging on e4,
would hamper White's development by exchanging Queens so that
White would lose the right of castling. The protection (2) Kt-c3
cannot be recommended as Black could deprive White of his center-
Pawn and obtain one for himself by Pxe4, (3) Ktxe4; P-e5. For all
these reasons White cannot do better than exchanges on d5.

At first sight this might seem a violation of the principles, as
Pxd5 is a Pawn move which does not further the development of the
pieces while Black, in retaking the Pawn, develops his Queen.
However, as was already pointed out on several other occasions,
the early development of the Queen is not desirable as she is
sure to be exposed to the attack of minor pieces. Indeed, White
obtains the better game through (3) Kt-c3, Q-a5; (4) P-d4 or (4)
Kt-f3, followed by P-d4. Black cannot get his King's Pawn up to
the center [(4) P-d4, P-e5; (5) Q-h5] and in addition he is bound
to lose some more moves with his Queen as soon as White has
developed his Bishop to d2 threatening a discovered attack
through a move with the Knight c3.

      II. (1) P-e4          P-e6

With this move Black switches the center from the e-file to the
d-file.

          (2) P-d4          P-d5

Now White need not hesitate to protect his King's Pawn with Kt-
c3, for Black cannot, as shown in example 1, gain control of the
center by exchanging on e4 and playing P-e5.

The advance (3) P-e5 cannot be recommended for the reason
explained in example I. Of course, White, being a move ahead
anyhow, can afford to make a Pawn move which does not exactly
advance his own development, if that Pawn move hampers the
development of the opponent to some extent. This would be the
case after (3) P-e5, as Black could not develop his King's Knight
to the most natural square, namely, f6. However, the Pawns d4 and
e5, though forming a strong center, as long as they are both in
place, are liable to become subject to disagreeable attacks which
Black can institute with P-c5 and P-f6, and if White cannot
maintain his center, then the advance to e5 is mere waste of
time.

          (3) Kt-c3          Kt-f6

Again White's King's Pawn is attacked. The first continuation for
White to think of would be (4) B-d3, developing another piece.
However, Black can then simply exchange twice on e4 and play P-
c5, so that White loses his Pawn center. P-e5 does not seem very
good either. It does not lose any time, as Black too has to lose
a move retreating with his Knight. But the latter is well posted
on d7 from where he assists the contemplated advance P-c5 against
White's center. The best continuation is apparently (4) B-g5,
which develops a piece and protects the Pawn e4 through pinning
the Knight f6. After

          (4) B-g5          B-e7

White finally has to either advance the King's Pawn or exchange
him. The latter seems preferable. The drawbacks to the advance
have been discussed before. After the exchange White can develop
his King's Bishop to d3 where he is considerably better posted
than the corresponding Black Bishop.



QUEEN'S PAWN OPENINGS



The same two leading principles apply to Queen's Pawn openings
which were discussed in connection with the King's Pawn openings;
but there is one great difference between the two kinds of
openings which is not obvious to the beginner. This is the fact
that in Queen's Pawn openings, in most cases, neither player has
a chance to open a file in the center of the board through the
exchange of one of the center-Pawns, and that, therefore, an
additional Pawn move is necessary in the opening stage to provide
for an open file in which the Rooks later on may have an
opportunity of entering the battle.

In addition, it is in most variations not easy to find a good
place for the Queen's Bishop without further Pawn moves, and it
is here where the beginner is bound to err in the plan of his
mobilization unless he has adequate instruction.

In trying to open a file for the Rooks it will be advisable--just
as in the King's Pawn openings--to aim at the same time at the
clearing away of the opponent's center-Pawn, and this can only be
done by the advance of the c-Pawn. Therefore, it would mean loss
of time if the Queen's Knight were developed into the c-file
before the c-Pawn has moved; the Knight would have to be moved
away again in order to enable the opening of the c-file. This
consideration furnishes the key for the understanding of the most
popular Queen's Pawn opening, which is

          (1) P-d4          P-d5
          (2) Kt-f3         Kt-f6
          (3) P-c4

White offers a Pawn to induce Black to give up his center-Pawn,
hence the name "Queen's Gambit." If Black could actually hold the
Pawn he would be justified in accepting the Gambit unless it can
be demonstrated that White's advantage in development yields a
winning attack. However, White can easily regain the Gambit-Pawn,
and so there is absolutely no reason why Black should give up his
Pawn-center.

The way in which White regains his Pawn in the accepted Gambit is
this: (3) ..., Pxc4; (4) P-e3, P-b5; (5) P-a4, P-c6 (if Black
takes the Pawn a4, White captures the Pawn c4 and then regains
the a-Pawn. (5) ..., P-a6, cannot be played on account of Pxb5,
opening the a-file for White's Rook so that Black cannot retake
the Pawn). (6) P-b3, Pxb3; (7) Pxb5, Pxb5; (8) Bxb5+ and Qxb3.

Now White is far ahead in the development and in addition he has
an open file for his Queen's Rook in which the black Pawn is
bound to be lost in the long run. Moreover, Black has no
compensation for White's strong Pawn-center.

For this reason the Queen's Gambit is hardly ever accepted and
the following defense played instead:

          (1) P-d4          P-d5
          (2) Kt-f3         Kt-f6
          (3) P-c4          P-e6
          (4) Kt-c3

Black has now the choice between either advancing his c-Pawn
right away or first developing the pieces of his Queen's wing. In
the latter case he cannot place the Queen's Knight on c6 as this
would block the way of the c-Pawn. He must develop him to d7.
This appears to be a bad move as it blocks the way of the Queen's
Bishop, but this Bishop will have to be developed in a different
diagonal anyway as the Pawn e6 cannot advance opening the
diagonal c8-h3.

       I. (4) ...          Ktb8-d7
          (5) B-g5

The fact that White can develop his Queen's Bishop without
difficulty while Black cannot do so has made the Queen's Gambit
one of the most popular openings.

          (5) ...          B-e7
          (6) P-e3         o-o
          (7) B-d3         P-b6
          (8) o-o          B-b7
          (9) Pxd5         Pxd5
          (10) R-c1

White is two moves ahead in the development, as Black has still
to move his c-Pawn before he can get his Queen's Rook into play.
In the meantime White can mobilize his King's Rook with Q-e2 and
Rf1-d1, with a view to opening the Queen's file by Pd4xc5.

      II. (4) ... P-c5

If White now Plays P-e3, holding his Pawn-center, a symmetrical
development follows on both sides. If, however, White takes his
opportunity to develop the Queen's Bishop, a game of entirely
different character ensues. The following variations show typical
examples of the way these two variations are liable to develop:

       A. (5) P-e3          Kt-c6
          (6) P-a3

If White played (6) P-b3 before castling he would get into
trouble because Black could pin his Queen's Knight with Pxd4 and
B-b4. For this reason the maneuver P-a3, Pxc5, P-b4 and B-b2 is
usually adopted to develop the Queen's Bishop. It is true that
this maneuver involves two Pawn moves, which mean a loss of time,
instead of only one, as for instance when playing (6) B-d3, (7)
o-o, (8) P-b3, (9) B-b2. But Black can hardly avoid a similar
loss of time. For if he plays (6) ..., B-d6, he loses two moves
with his Bishop through recapturing on c5 (after (7) Pxc5) and
going back to d6; and if he first exchanges on d4 and then
develops the Bishop to d6, White has an open diagonal for his
Queen's Bishop and need not make any more Pawn moves to develop
him while Black still must move his Queen's Knight's Pawn to get
his Queen's Bishop into play.

          (6) ...           P-a6
          (7) Pxc5          Bxc5
          (8) P-b4          B-d6
          (9) B-b2          Pxc4
         (10) Bxc4          P-b5
         (11) B-d3          B-b7

       B. (5) Pxd5          Pxd5

The idea of this exchange is to create a weak Pawn on d5 against
which later on an attack can be instituted. However, it is very
doubtful whether the Pawn on d5 is really weak. Experience has
shown that Black wins just as many games as White in this
opening; the reason is probably that White, in order to open the
Queen's file for attack on d5, has to give away his center-Pawn
so that Black has more freedom for his pieces in the center.

          (6) P-g3          Kt-c6
          (7) B-g2          B-e6
          (8) B-g5          B-e7
          (9) o-o           o-o
         (10) Pxc5          Bxc5
         (11) R-c1          B-e7
         (12) Kt-d4 or Q-a4 followed by
                R-f1-d1.

Instead of developing the King's Bishop to g2 White can just as
well play (6) B-g5 or f4, (7) P-e3 and (8) B-d3. In either case
the success depends rather on clever maneuvering in the middle-
game than on an advantage inherent to the opening.

What has been said of irregular replies which Black may try in
King's Pawn openings holds good in Queen's Pawn openings too.
There is no series of opening moves which needs to be memorized.
The principles of speedy development and of the maintenance of a
Pawn center lead the right way in all novel openings which a
player might try to avoid the well-known paths which have been
studied out by the masters of many generations.

Following are again a few examples which show the application of
the principles:

       I. (1) P-d4          P-c5
          (2) P-e3

With Pxc5 White would give away his center-Pawn, and Black would
regain the Gambit-Pawn easily after (2) ..., P-e6. White could
play (2) P-d5, thereby depriving Black's Queen's Knight of his
best developing square. But in doing so he would lose time with a
Pawn move which does not improve the mobility of his own pieces,
and consequently (2) P-e3 is preferable.

      II. (1) P-d4          Kt-f6
          (2) Kt-f3

The advance P-c4, which, as explained, is customary in Queen's
Pawn openings, serves its original purpose only if Black has a
Pawn on d5 so that White can open the c-file. Therefore, it is
better for White to wait until Black shows what intentions he has
with his Queen's Pawn.

          (2) ...           P-d6
          (3) Kt-c3

Black's last move clearly indicates that he intends playing P-e5
and not P-d5, and so White has no reason to expect that he will
be able to open the c-file for his Rooks. Consequently there is
no objection to his developing the Queen's Knight to c3, blocking
the c-Pawn.

          (3) ...           Ktb8-d7
          (4) B-f4

This prevents P-e5 for the time being, and Black has to make
rather complicated preparations, such as P-c6 and Q-c7 before he
can advance the King's Pawn two squares. In other words, White
completes his development more quickly than Black and he has
consequently the better winning chances, provided, of course, he
knows how to maintain his advantage in the middle game and in the
end game.



THE MIDDLE GAME



It is not possible to draw a distinct dividing line between the
two stages of the game which are called the OPENING and the
MIDDLE GAME. Strictly speaking the opening comprises only such
moves as are NECESSARY for the development of the pieces, and any
move which a player--without being compelled--makes with a piece
that is already developed, ought to be regarded as a Middle-game
move. To give an example: If after (1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-
c6; (3) Kt-c3, Kt-f6; (4) B-b5 Black plays Kt-d4, he deviates
from the Opening and embarks on a Middle-game maneuver; for the
Queen's Knight was already developed.

This does not mean that it is bad under all circumstances to make
a Middle-game move during the opening stage of a game. But only
such moves should be considered in cases of this kind as a player
is fairly sure to make at any rate within the further course of
the game with a view to increasing the mobility of the piece in
question.

This is the main point. A second move made with a piece must
improve its position, otherwise, common sense tells us, it is
surely bad. For instance: After (1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-c6;
(3) B-b5, Kt-f6; (4) o-o, B-e7 there is no objection to White's
playing (5) R-e1 as the Rook will very likely want to get into
action in the e-file in any case, as soon as the development has
progressed with P-d4, Kt-c3, B-g5, etc.

But if in an opening like (1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-c6; (3)
B-c4, Kt-f6 White plays (4) Kt-g5 for instance, or (4) B-d5, it
is evident that he merely wastes time, for in the first case he
places the Knight on a square from which he is sure to be driven
away again as soon as the direct attack involved in his move has
been warded off, and in the second case he moves the Bishop to a
square which does not afford him any more mobility than the one
on which he stood before.

As a rule only Rooks or Knights are in a position, during the
opening, to add to their mobility by a second move; the Rooks by
occupying a file which is liable to be opened by an exchange of
Pawns, and the Knights by occupying a square in the center of the
board.

The Knights are really more often under the necessity of making
several moves in succession than any other piece, because they
can never pass over more than one line at a time, and they may be
required to hasten from one wing of the board to the other just
as often as the other pieces. This is the reason why the most
favorable spot for a Knight is a square in the center of the
board; there he is always ready for an excursion to either wing.

The establishment of a Knight in the center can more readily be
effected in Queen's Pawn openings than in King's Pawn openings.
This will be evident from the following consideration:

In Queen's Pawn openings the squares e5 and e4 are the ones which
are aimed at by the respective Knights. If the opponent exchanges
the Knight with either his Queen's Knight or his King's Bishop,
the Pawn which takes the place of the Knight in recapturing,
gains control of two squares in the heart of the hostile camp. To
illustrate this by a case which often occurs: If after (1) P-d4,
P-d5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-f6; (3) P-e3, P-c5; (4) B-d3, Kt-c6; (5) o-o,
P-e6; (6) P-b3, B-d6; (7) B-b2, o-o; (8) Ktb1-d2, P-b6; (9) Kt-e5
Black plays Bxe5, White in retaking drives Black's King's Knight
away depriving the King's wing of an important protection and
also creating a weakness on d6, where White might be able at some
later stage of the game to establish his Knight.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P |    |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P | #Kt| #B | #P | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #P | #P | ^Kt|    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    | ^B | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^B | ^P | ^Kt|    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 45.

Another advantage of the position for White is that he can get
his King's Rook into play by P-f4 and R-f3-h3, while Black's Rook
cannot get to f6 as long as White has his Pawn on e5.

In King's Pawn openings the situation is different. Here the
squares d5 and d4 respectively are the aim of the Knights which
normally are posted on c3 and c6. However, as long as the
opposing King's Knight can exchange himself for the advancing
Queen's Knight there is no advantage in occupying the center. The
position of Diagram 46 is a typical example. If White plays Kt-d5
he loses practically a move, as after Ktxd5, Pxd5 he has in no
way improved the mobility of his men while it is Black's turn to
move. In addition, White, by transferring his Pawn to d5, gives
up his Pawn-center and blocks a diagonal which his Bishop could
use, while Black, in retreating with his Knight to e7, gains a
move towards the efficient use of the Knight on the King's wing.

All the same, the advance of the Queen's Knight in the center is
one of the most important maneuvers in King's Pawn openings when
it is properly prepared, and its consequences need thorough
discussion.

The proper preparation consists in first fixing the object at
which the Knight aims. This--from White's, the attacker's point
of view--is the Knight f6. The developing move B-g5 serves this
purpose in the most natural way, and a position arises similar to
the one shown in Diagram 43 where Black prevented any further
accumulation of white forces on f6 by B-e6. In the present case
this move is of doubtful value as White, by P-d4, can force Black
to give up his center-Pawn.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt| #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | ^B |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #B |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 46.

If Black is ready to admit that Kt-d5 is a disagreeable threat he
will either exchange the Knight for his Bishop b4 or he will play
Kt-e7 in order to take White's Knight should he go to d5.
Ordinarily Black plays first Bxc3 and then Kt-e7. The reason is
that this maneuver enables Black to get his Queen's Knight over
to the King's wing while White's Bishop b5 is rather out of
action, so that Black has a good chance to enter the battle on
the King's wing with one piece more than White. Of course, White
can get his Bishop into play again by placing him on c4. But he
has to spend a move in doing so, which does not add to the
completion of the development.

In the position of Diagram 46 Black would not take any steps to
prevent Kt-d5 unless a threat is involved in this move which
cannot be counteracted by the most natural continuation, which is
the development of the Bishop c8. Indeed, there seems to be no
reason why Black should not answer (1) B-g5 with B-g4 and (2) Kt-
d5 with Kt-d4; for the Knight f6, who after Kt-d5 is attacked
twice, is defended twice, and there is no possibility for White
to attack the Knight again. On the other hand, the attack on the
Bishop b4 is balanced by the attack on the Bishop b5, and if
White were to withdraw his Bishop to c4 Black could withdraw his
to c5.

However, in the position resulting after these moves (Diagram 47)
White gets the upper hand because he is one move ahead in the
attack on the opposing King's Knight. The danger of the
concentration of two pieces on this Knight lies in the fact that
Black is obliged to retake with the g-Pawn in case White
exchanges on f6 and that thereby the squares f6 and h6 lose their
natural protection.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B | ^Kt| #P |    | ^B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B | #Kt| ^P |    | #B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 47.

Thus weak points are created of which White may find an
opportunity to make use in a manner similar to the one
illustrated by the discussion of Diagrams 26 and 29. On the other
hand, Black gains an open file for his Rooks as soon as the g-
Pawn is out of the way, and the exchange on f6 should therefore
not be made until preparations for the occupation of the
resulting weak spots are completed. The following variations will
throw some light on this rather complex problem.

Supposing White wants to try the immediate exchange on f6, hoping
that somehow or other he will be able to take advantage of the
weakness resulting on f6 and h6. In exchanging he can give up
either his Knight d5 or his Bishop g5. In both cases there are
promising possibilities for attack, but Black, with correct play,
can sufficiently defend himself and even get the better.

If White plays (1) Ktxf6 he has to lose a move before he can
bring up other pieces to help in the attack, for after Pxf6 he
must first move the Bishop g5. The only good square for the
Bishop is h4 from where he maintains the pin on f6 which would
become very dangerous for Black if he could not prevent White's
Queen from entering on h6 or render the double threat on f6
ineffective in some other way. The logical continuation for Black
is to answer (2) B-h4 with K-h8 in order to occupy the g-file
with his Rook as soon as possible. Indeed, this is at the same
time the best defense against White's threat, for if White now
plays (3) Q-d2; Black replies Ktxf3+; (4) Pxf3, Bxf3; and he is
the first to take advantage of the open g-file as his King has
already made room for the Rook.

It would be dangerous for Black to play (3) ..., Bxf3 instead of
Ktxf3. For White would continue (4) Q-h6 and the only way for
Black to prevent the disaster threatened on f6 is to give back
the piece he just won: (4) ..., Kt-e2+; (5) K-h1, Bxg2+; (6)
Kxg2, R4-g8+; (7) K-h1, R-g6; or (6) ..., Kt-f4+; (7) K- h1, Kt-
g6. In either case Black's defense is very difficult.

The play outlined in the last variation suggests a better method
for White to institute the attack in the position of Diagram 47.
This is the preparatory move (1) Q-d2. (1) Bxf6 is obviously not
as good, as Black can soon drive away the Knight d5 by P-c6,
relieving f6 of all pressure.

In answer to (1) Q-d2, which threatens (2) Bxf6, (3) Q-h6, (4)
Ktxf6 and (5) Qxh7 mate, Black has three replies, namely: Bxf3 or
Ktxf3 or P-c6.

That (1) ..., Bxf3 is not sufficient can easily be seen. White
continues (2) Bxf6, Q-d7; (3) Kt-e7+/-, and Black must give up the
Queen for the Knight as (3) ..., K-h8 would be followed by (4)
Bxg7+, (5) Q-g5+  and (6) Q-f6 mate. It is interesting to note
that it is just the one move which White is ahead in the
development that gives him the win. If he tried to checkmate
Black by (3) Q-g5, P-g6; (4) Q-h6 he would be checkmated himself
by (4) ..., Kt-e2+  followed by Bxg2+ and Q-g4+, etc.

(2) ..., Pxf6 would not be of avail either. The consequence would
be: (3) Q-h6, Kt-e2+; (4) K-h1, Bxg2+; (5) Kxg2, Kt-f4+; (6)
Ktxf4, Pxf4; (7) K-h1, K-h8; (8) R-g1, R-g8; (9) Rxg8+, Qxg8;
(10) R-g1 and the mate can only be averted by the sacrifice of
the Queen for the Rook.

The second defense which Black could try is (1) ..., Ktxf3+; (2)
Pxf3, Bxf3. Now (3) Bxf6, Pxf6; (4) Q-h6 would be fatal for White
as Black plays K-h8 and there is no protection against the threat
R-g8+. But White can again make a preparatory move which secures
for him the victory. This is (3) P-h3, with the view to make room
for the Rook by K-h2. The only way to counter White's threat is
now P-c6. However, after (4) Ktxf6+, Pxf6; (5) B-h4, K-h8; (6) K-
h2, R-g8; (7) R-g1, Q-e7; (8) R-g3 Black is unable to stave off
defeat any longer. Whatever he plays, White succeeds in attacking
f6 for the second time while Black has no second protection at
his disposal. For instance, (8) ..., B-h5; (9) Q-h6, B-g6; (10)
R-f3--or (8) ..., Rxg3; (9) Pxg3 and (10) Rf1.

The most interesting line of defense is the third one mentioned,
that is (1) ..., P-c6. After (2) Ktxf6+, Pxf6; (3) B-h4 a
situation arises similar to the one discussed in the line of play
commencing with (1) Ktxf6+, but with the big difference that
White is now one move ahead in the attack. This is the move Q-d2
in answer to which Black was forced to make the move P-c6 which
does not improve the constellation of the Black pieces in any
way.

This one move is sufficient to secure for White an easy victory.
After (3) ..., Bxf3; (4) Q-h6, Kt-e2+; (5) K-h1, Bxg2+; (6) Kxg2,
Kt-f4+; (7) K-h1, Kt-g6 the position of Diagram 48 is reached in
which White can force the mate, or win Black's Queen in a most
ingenious manner. If White tried to win by (8) R-g1, threatening
mate in four moves through Rxg6, Qxg6, Q-h6 and R-g1 Black could
sufficiently defend himself with (8) ..., P-d5, unpinning the
Pawn f7 and enabling B-e7, which would supply the much needed
protection for the square f6. However, White can frustrate
Black's intention by playing (8) P-d4!! If Black takes with the
Pawn, (9) P-e5 follows forcing Pd6xe5 after which Black cannot
any more intercept the diagonal of the Bishop c4 so that there
remains no defense against (10) R-g1.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    |    |    | #P |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #P | #P |    | #P | #Kt| ^Q |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B |    | ^P |    |    | ^B |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P |    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    | ^R |    | ^K |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 48.

If, on the other hand, Black takes the Pawn d4 with his Bishop,
White continues with (9) P-c3, B-c5; (10) Ra1- d1, again
preventing the interception of the Bishop c4 and threatening R-
g1. The consequence could then be: (10) ..., K-h8; (11) R-g1, Q-
e7; (12) R-d3, R-g8; (13) R-h3, Ktxh4; (14) Qxh7+ and (15) Rxh4
mate, or: (13) ..., R-g7; (14) R-f3, Ra8-g8; (15) Bxf6, Q-d7;
(16) R-h3 and the mate on h7 can only be avoided by the sacrifice
of the Queen for the Rook.

The foregoing variations show conclusively that the position of
Diagram 47 is lost for Black. The attack which White obtains
after creating a weakness on f6 by the removal of the Pawn g7
cannot be effectively countered. The question arises, whether
Black was at fault when disregarding White's threat to place his
Knight on d5 and developing his Queen's Bishop or whether he had
a chance to improve on one of the two following moves which led
to the position of Diagram 47. Indeed, it lies near to try the
same attack which White threatens to initiate by Q-d2 one move
earlier by playing Q-d7 instead of B-c5. The fact, however, that
this Bishop is not cooperating with the pieces on the King's wing
makes a big difference and the most Black can obtain is
apparently a draw. The continuation could be: (1) Ktxf6+, Pxf6;
(2) Bxf6, P-h6; (3) P-c3, Ktxf3+, (4) Pxf3, B-h5; (5) K-h1, K-h7;
(6) R-g1, R-g8; (7) R-g3. If Black's Bishop were on c5 instead of
b4, White could not play R-g3 on account of Bxf2. He would have
to make the preparatory move Q-e2 and he would be lost after R-
g6, just in the same manner which was demonstrated in one of the
above variations with attack and defense reversed. As it is Black
cannot enter on h3 with his Queen without exchanging Rooks and so
he is unable to take advantage of the weakness on f3. After (7)
..., R-g6, (8) B-h4, B-a5 or c5, (9) P-d4 and Q-d3 the game
probably ends in a draw as it is unlikely that White can realize
an advantage from the doubled Pawn which he is ahead.

To the beginner the lines of play discussed in connection with
Diagrams 47 and 48 will have appeared rather complicated. This
they are, indeed, even for the experienced player; but it is by
no means necessary to memorize any of the variations. The
important thing to realize is the fact that in a position where
both players have castled on the King's side, a dangerous
weakness is created if the g-Pawn is forced to move, and if
pressure can be brought to bear upon the two squares which
through the move of the g-Pawn have lost their protection;
moreover, that a method to create such a weakness is the pinning
of the hostile King's Knight and the advance of the Queen's
Knight in the center.

Another important point that the variations discussed will bring
out to the observant reader is the order in which the different
pieces take their turn in the battle. First come the minor
pieces, then the Queen and then the Rooks. This, of course, is
not a rule that has to be adhered to under all circumstances, but
in most games it is a good rule to follow. The reason is obvious.
The Rooks have no opportunity of making themselves useful until a
file has been opened, while the Queen often finds an occasion to
enter the battlefield on a diagonal. Only in such games can the
Rooks be made to work at a comparatively early stage of the game,
in which the players have not castled on the same sides of the
board. For then the advance of the Pawns in front of the Rooks
does not create weakness which endangers their own King.

The following middle game from a match of two masters furnishes
an example. After White's seventh move the position of Diagram 49
was reached, in which Black continued with P-b5 with the view to
playing B-g4 and Kt-d4. White replied (8) B-b3, B-g4; (9) Kt-e2.
Better would surely have been B-e3, which develops a new piece.
To allow the exchange of f3 which forces the g-Pawn out is
dangerous because Black may castle on the Queen's side and storm
with the Pawns of his King's wing.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt| #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | ^B |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 49.

From Black's next move, Q-d7, it is indeed apparent that he has
decided on a maneuver of this kind. The game continued: (10) P-
c3, Bxf3; (11) Pxf3, Q-h3; (12) Kt-g3, P-h5; (13) B-e3. He cannot
play R-e1 on account of Bxf2+ followed by Qxh2+ and Qxg3. (13)
..., P-h4; (14) Kt-h1, R-h6 and wins, for if White takes the
Rook, Pxh6 opens the g-file and the other Rook occupies it with
deadly effect.

In the last example it was easy for the Rooks to take an active
part in the battle because a file was open which enabled them to
bear down on the opposing King.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    | #P | #Kt| #P | #B | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt|    | #P |    | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #P |    |    |    | ^B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^Q |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    | ^K | ^R |    |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 50.

In the majority of cases no open file is available on the wing
and the attack with the Rooks is then much more difficult. There
is little use in advancing the Pawns on the wing on which the
hostile King has castled unless one of them can be exchanged so
that a line is opened which the Rooks can occupy. As a rule such
an exchange is only possible in case one of the Pawns in front of
the King has moved. In the position of Diagram 50 for instance,
White is able to open the h-file by advancing the h-Pawn and
exchanging it against Black's g-Pawn, while Black, who would like
to use his Rooks in an attack on the Queen's wing, has little
hope to open a file on that side of the board. If Black's g-Pawn
were still on his original square, the advance of White's h-Pawn
would be of no avail. Black would simply wait until the Pawn has
advanced to h6 and then he would play P-g6 so that White's own
Pawn would block the h-file for the Rook. In the above position,
which occurred in one of six simultaneous games played by the
author in a blindfold-exhibition, the attack developed as
follows:

          (1) P-h4          P-b5
          (2) B-b3          Kt-a5
          (3) P-h5          Ktxb3
          (4) Pa2xb3        Q-a5

Black has succeeded in opening a line also, but he cannot get his
Rooks working in it. His last move threatens mate in two moves by
Q-a1; Kt-b1, Bxb2; but White simply defends himself first against
this threat and then proceeds with his attack on the King's wing
which is irresistible.

          (5) K-b1          Kt-c6
          (6) Pxg6          Pf7xg6
          (7) B-h6          R-f7
          (8) Bxg7          Rxg7

With this exchange White has weakened the defense around Black's
King who has now only the Rook and himself to rely on for
protection.

          (9) Kt-g5          P-d5

Black opens the seventh rank in the hope that it will enable his
Queen's Rook or his Queen to come to assistance. But so great is
the advantage afforded White by the open h-file that he can
sacrifice his Knight to break through Black's chain of defense
and force the mate before Black has a chance to touch his Queen
or his Rook.

          (10) Ktxh7          Rxh7

If Q-c7 or Ra8-a7, White continues (11) Q-h6! Rxh7?; (12) Qxg6+,
K-h8; (13) Q-e8+, K-g7; (14) Rxh7+, Kxh7; (15) R-h1+, etc.

          (11) Rxh7          Kxh7
          (12) R-h1+         K-g7
          (13) Q-h6+         K-f7
          (14) Q-h7+         K-f6
          (15) Q-h8+         K-e7
          (16) R-h7+         K-d6
          (17) Q-f8+         K-e5
          (18) P-f4+         K-d4
          (19) Q-f6+         K-e3
          (20) R-h3+         K-d2
          (21) Q-h4

and Black resigns as there is no defense against Q-f2.

Diagram 51 shows a similar example, the only difference being
that it is not the advance of the Black Knight's Pawn but that of
the Rook's Pawn which gives White an opportunity of opening a
file for his Rooks. He will accomplish this by advancing his
Knight's Pawn to g5 and exchanging him against Black's Rook's
Pawn. If he does not want to play P-g4 on the first move, because
Black could take the Pawn with his Knight, he can prepare the
advance by R-g1. But he need not really fear the loss of the
Pawn, because in taking him Black would himself open the g-file
for White's Rook and White is sure to obtain an overwhelming
attack. It would, of course, be futile for Black to try and stop
the advance of White's g-Pawn by P-g5, as White would then simply
open the Rook's file by P-h4 and Pxg5, quite apart from the fact
that he could sacrifice his Bishop e3 for two Pawns, thereby
depriving Black's King of all protection.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    | #Kt| #B | #P | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #P |    |    | #Kt|    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^B | ^B | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^Q |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    | ^K | ^R |    |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 51.

The play might proceed like this: (1) P-g4, P-g5; (2) Bxg5, Pxg5;
(3) Qxg5+, K-h8; (4) Q-h6+, K-g8; (5) P-g5, Kt-e4; (6) Ktxe4,
Pxe4; (7) P-g6, Pxg6; (8) Qxg6+, K-h8; (9) R-g1, etc.

Ordinarily both players castle on the same side of the board so
that neither of them can advance his Pawns in an attack against
the opposing King without weakening his own King's position. Only
if a player holds more territory and has a greater number of
pieces on the King's wing than the opponent he can embark on an
attack which involves an advance of the Pawns in front of his
King. Diagram 52 offers a typical example.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    |    |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    | #Q | #B | #B | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    | #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | #Kt|    | #P | ^P | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #P |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P |    | ^B |^Kt |    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^B |    |    | ^P | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q | ^R | ^Kt| ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 52.

Black has a preponderance on the Queen's side, while White has
more mobility for his pieces on the King's side. Considering that
Black cannot easily throw his men over to the King's wing, White
can risk to loosen his Pawns on this wing without fearing that
Black will be able to obtain a foothold on the weak points which
are necessarily created by the advance of the Pawns in White's
camp.

White will start the attack with (1) P-g4 and (2) Kt-g3. Then he
threatens to occupy the dominating square f5 with his Knight, and
Black has hardly any other move than P-g6; for if he permits Kt-
f5 with the view to exchanging the Knight with his Bishop, he
opens the g-file for White's Rooks. P-g6 on the other hand
enables White to open the h-file by advancing the h-Pawn after
the necessary preparations such as K-g2, R-h1, P-g5, etc.

In the vast majority of games files for the Rooks are not opened
on the side but in the center of the board, as was explained in
the discussion of the openings. The many advantages arising from
the control of a center-file by the Rooks will be more fully
analyzed in the illustrative games. Generally speaking it is
easier to get the two Rooks into cooperation in the center than
on the side of the board. This cooperation--usually effected by
doubling in one file--is naturally very important and it is the
main reason why it is desirable to castle as early as possible.
Between the Rooks of a player who is prevented from castling
there are, so to speak, no natural lines of communication and it
takes so long to create artificial ones that in most cases the
opponent can, in the meantime, force a victory through the
combined efforts of his Rooks. Diagram 53 gives an example.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    | #Q |    |    | #K | #B |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    | #B |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #R |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^Q |    |    | ^B | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 53.

It is White's move, and he will naturally think of a Rook's move
as all the other pieces are already developed. The best move is
probably (1) Rf1-d1. Ra1-d1 comes also into consideration but
this Rook might be needed later on the c-file while the King's
Rook certainly will have no chance to be developed in any but the
d-file as long as the White e- and f-Pawns are still on the
board. Black, in the game from which the above position is taken,
replied B-c5, and White continued with (2) Q-c3, attacking the
Bishop c5 and the Pawn g7 at the same time.

Black has only the choice between returning with the Bishop to f8
or capturing on e3. Naturally, he chooses the latter move as he
cannot improve his position by a retrogressive play which still
further retards his development. After Bxe3,(3) Qxg7, Bxf2+;(4)
Kxf2, R-c2+; (5) K-g1, R-f8; there is not much hope for Black to
bring his King's Rook in contact with the other pieces, while
White may be able to double his Rooks in the Queen's file, which
would decide the victory as Black has no possibility to counter
the threat R-d8+ in the long run. White played (6) Kt-e5 with the
intention to sacrifice the Knight on f7 in case Black should move
his Bishop. Rxf7 would then be followed by Q-g8+ and Qxb8 or Qxe6
mate. Therefore, Black had to withdraw his Rook with (6) ..., R-
c7 and White simply played (7) R-d2 threatening to double. Black
prevented this by B-a4, at the same time threatening P-f6, but
after(8) Kt-g4, R-c2; (9) R-d4, Q-c8; (10) Kt-f6+, K-e7; (11) Q-
g5 he resigned as now the square c1 is sufficiently protected
while the threat Kt-g8++ cannot be parried.

The foregoing examples show that generally several moves are
necessary in the middle game for Knights and Rooks to reach
positions favorable for an active part in the attack. With the
Bishops it is different. They can usually be developed on their
first move to the square on which they are needed in the middle
game for either attack or defense.

In King's Pawn openings as well as in Queen's Pawn openings
White's Queen's Bishop is, in the majority of cases, used for
pinning Black's King's Knight on g5 and Black's King's Bishop is
placed on e7 to relieve the pin. The pinning of the King's
Knight, however, is not advisable in positions in which the
opponent has the option of castling to the Queen's side. After
(1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-c6; (3) B-c4, Kt-f6; (4) Kt-c3, B-
c5; (5) P-d3, P-d6; for instance White should wait with B-g5
until Black has castled on the King's side. If he plays (6) B-g5,
Black will answer B-e6; (7) o-o, Q-d7; and now White would only
hurt his own game by exchanging on f6 as the open g-file is bound
to aid Black, who will castle on the Queen's side, in an attack
on the King's side.

In Queen's Pawn openings the move B-g5 is always good as Black
cannot very well castle on the Queen's side on account of the
open c-file in which White would soon obtain an overwhelming
attack. Another good square for the Queen's Bishop is in Queen's
Pawn openings b2 from where the Bishop supports the advance of
the King's Knight to e5. In this case the Queen's Knight should
be developed to d2 instead of c3 so as not to obstruct the line
of the Bishop. The same holds good for the development of Black's
Queen's Bishop.

In King's Pawn openings it is dangerous for the Queen's Bishop to
leave the long diagonal in which he is originally posted as the
opponent might threaten to gain a foothold in the f-line with a
Knight, provoking a weakening move with the g-Pawn. The position
of Diagram 54, which occurred in a game between Teichmann and
Rubinstein in the Karlsbad Tournament, 1911, furnishes an
instructive example. White played (1) P-a4, trying to make use of
the advanced position of Black's b-Pawn for opening the a-file
for his Rook, and Black replied B-b7. This crosses White's plan,
as after (2) Pxb5, Pxb5; it would not be White but Black who
would gain control of the a-line.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    | #B | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt| #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P | #P |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P | ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^B | ^Kt|    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B | ^Q | ^R |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                  DIAGRAM 54.

However, Black should not have withdrawn the Bishop from the
King's wing, for White can now play his Queen's Knight via f1 and
g3 or e3 to f5 unless Black weakens his Pawn position by P-g6.
The proper way to answer White's first move would have been
either B-e6 or P-b4. The latter is a Pawn move, but in the
present case it cannot be considered a loss of time as White,
too, has made a Pawn move which does not further his development.

The game went on as follows: (2) Kt-f1, Q-c7; (3) Kt-g3, P-g6;
White's aim is accomplished. He has provoked a weakness which
furnishes a mark for his attack. The way to conduct the attack--
after completing the development by B-g5, will be to open the f-
file for the Rook by advancing the f-Pawn. This advance can be
prepared by P-h3 and Kt-h2. Of course, White would prefer to do
without the move of the h-Pawn; but h2 is the only favorable
square for the Knight f3, as neither from d2 nor from h4 he has
an opportunity to help the attack while from h2 he may go to g4,
bearing on both of the weak squares f6 and h6.

Black has little chance for counterattack. The only thing he can
do is occupy the Queen's file with his Rooks and opening it by P-
d5 and Pxe4. His Queen's Bishop, however, is badly placed in any
case as he has no open diagonal to work in, and he will have to
get back into play via his original square c8.

White's King's Bishop is not well placed either and is
practically condemned to play the role of a Pawn by protecting
the square d3 without, at the same time, attacking anything.
There is, of course, a chance for him to be useful in the
diagonal a2-g8. It may be said that in King's Pawn openings
White's King's Bishop comparatively seldom has an opportunity to
take an active part in the battle. He is mostly exchanged at an
early stage of the game for Black's Queen's Knight or Queen's
Bishop. In Queen's Pawn openings, however, he finds a great field
of action in the unobstructed diagonal b1-h7. In this diagonal he
can also be used in all openings starting with P-e4 in which
Black does not advance his King's pawn to e5, as White can open
the diagonal at any time by playing P-e5.

Generally speaking, Bishops should not be placed in diagonals
which are obstructed by Pawns of their own army, and Pawns moves
should be avoided which close a diagonal formerly open to a
kindred Bishop. A striking illustration of the importance of this
rule will be found in the play which developed in the position of
Diagram 55 in a game between Teichmann and Dus Chotimirski in the
Prague Tournament 1908. Black, on the move, played (1)..., Kt-e5,
disturbing the symmetry of the position to his advantage by
opening the diagonal of his Queen's Bishop without allowing White
to make a similar maneuver. After (2) Ktxe5, Bxe5; (3) Q-e2, o-o;
(4) Ra1-d1, Q-e7; White yielded the temptation to drive away the
disagreeable Bishop e5 by (5) P-f4, a move which had to be
followed up with the advance of the e-Pawn who otherwise would
have remained very weak, not being protected by another Pawn.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #B |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt| #B | #P | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 | ^P |    | ^Kt| ^B | ^P | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^B |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 55.

The game went on as follows: (5) ..., B-c7; (6) P-e4, B-b6+; (7)
K-h1, Rf8-d8; (8) B-b1, Ra8-c8; (9) Rxd8+, Qxd8; (10) R-d1, Q-e7;
(11) P-e5. This opens again the diagonal of the King's Bishop,
but it closes that of the Queen's Bishop, and it is the advantage
of the work done by his Queen's Bishop in the unobstructed
diagonal which secures Black the victory, (11) ..., Kt-d5; (12)
Ktxd5, Bxd5; (13) Q-g4, Q-b7; (14) P-f5, R-c4; (15) Q-g3, R-f4!.
White cannot capture the Rook on account of Bxg2 mate. (16) P-f6,
P-g6. There is now no defense against R-f2 which attacks g2 and
b2 at the same time. (17) B-a2, R-f2; (18) Bxd5, Qxd5! and White
resigns as he loses his Bishop on account of the mating threat.

It remains to examine typical middle-game maneuvers with the
Queen and with the Pawns. Little is to be said about the Queen.
On account of her tremendous mobility she is liable at any time
to initiate a dangerous attack in conjunction with one or more of
the other pieces, and most of the examples given for the typical
Rook's, Bishop's and Knight's maneuvers have also shown the
methods by which the cooperation with the Queen can be effected.
The main field of action for the Queen is the side on which the
opponent has castled. In games, in which both players have
castled on the same side of the board, and which, as stated
previously, constitute the vast majority of cases it is dangerous
to make excursions with the Queen to distant regions away from
the King, as her retreat might be cut off, making impossible an
adequate defense against an attack which the opponent might be
able to initiate on the King's side with the help of his own
Queen.

        +---------------------------------------+
      8 |    | #R |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      7 |    |    | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
        |---------------------------------------|
      6 | #P |    |    | #B | #B |    |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      5 |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      3 |    |    |    | ^Q |    |    |    |    |
        |---------------------------------------|
      2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
        |---------------------------------------|
      1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B |    | ^R |    | ^K |    |
        +---------------------------------------+
          a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                 DIAGRAM 56.

In the position of Diagram 56 for instance, it would be very
risky for White to take the Pawn a6. Black would play P-c4,
cutting off the retreat of White's Queen, and then start a
violent attack with his Queen in conjunction with the two
Bishops. Another example is the position of Diagram 57 which
occurred in a game between Capablanca and Bernstein in the San
Sebastian Tournament 1911. White played (1) Kt-e2 and Black, in
view of the threatening accumulation of white pieces on the
King's wing, should not have risked to capture the Pawn a2,
getting his Queen quite out of play.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    | #R | #R |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P |    | #P | #B |    | #P | #P | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #P | #P | #Kt|    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | #Q |    |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    |    | ^Q | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    | ^P |    |    |    |    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    | ^R | ^R |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 57

He underestimated the danger and lost the game very quickly. The
attack developed as follows: (1) ..., Qxa2; (2) Kte2-g3, Qxc2. In
taking the second Pawn Black loses another move. He might have
tried Q-a5, threatening to exchange Queens with Q-b6. But it is
doubtful whether he would have been able to save the game. White
would, of course, have avoided the exchange by playing his King
into the corner. (3) R-c1, Q-b2; (4) Kt-h5; this prevents the
Queen from getting back into play via f6. The threat is now R-c3,
cutting Black's Queen off from g7, and then Kth5xg7 and Qxh6.
Black defends himself against this threat by (4) ..., R-h8 with
the intention to answer R-c3 with K-g8; but White's position
involves so many threats that Black cannot provide a satisfactory
protection. (5) R-e2, Q-e5; (6) P-f4, Q-b5; (7) Ktf5xg7 ! and
wins, as Ktxg7 is followed by (8) Kt-f6+, (9) Ktxd7 and (10) P-f5
or P-e5 with overwhelming attack.

The most difficult problem in the conduct of the middle-game is
the timely maneuvering with the Pawns. Although it is impossible
to give a general rule which will apply to all cases it is a good
principle to avoid Pawn moves in the middle- game just as
carefully as in the opening, at least in the early stages of the
middle-game. In the opening the argument against Pawn moves was
the time loss connected with them from the point of view of
development. In the middle-game it is mainly the weakness created
by the Pawn move on the squares which were protected by the Pawn
before he advanced. A square may be termed "weak" if it can be
safely occupied by men which help the opponent in his attack, and
this is generally possible if the square in question cannot any
longer be defended by a Pawn. The great danger involved in the
occupation by hostile pieces of such weak squares is evident if
they are situated near the King, and examples of how the attack
develops in cases of this kind have been discussed in connection
with Diagrams 48, 49, 50 and 52. It is less apparent why a Pawn
move should create a weakness if a center-Pawn or a Pawn on the
Queen's wing is concerned. In the latter case, the possibility of
deriving an advantage during the middle-game is rare, indeed; but
the weakness produced by the Pawn moves invariably shows itself
in the ending. In the position of Diagram 58 for instance, White
wins on account of the weakness of the squares a6, c6, d5 and b5
from which his King can attack the Black Pawns as soon as the
Queen and the Rook are exchanged. The following play may ensue:
(1) R-e8, Rxe8; (2) Qxe8, Q-f8; (3) Qxf8 , Kxf8; (4) K-d3, K-e7;
(5) K-c4, K-d7; (6) K-b5, K-c7; (7) K-a6, K-b8; (8) P-a4, K-a8;
(9) P-a5, Pxa5; (10) Kxa5 and wins the c-Pawn. Or: (5) ..., P-a6;
(6) K-d5, K-d7.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | #R |    |    | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P |    |    |    |    | #P | #Q | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P |    |    |    |    | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #P |    | ^R |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 | ^P |    |    |    | ^Q |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P | ^P |    | ^K | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM  58.

For the time being Black has the opposition so that White's King
cannot advance any further; but White has so many more Pawn moves
at his disposal than Black that the latter is soon forced to move
his King allowing White to break in with his King at one or the
other side. For instance: (7) P-a4, P-a5; (8) P-f4, P-f6; (9) P-
g4, P-h6; (10) P-h3, P-g5; (11) P-f5; King moves, and White wins
either the f-Pawn or the b-Pawn.

This example brings out another reason why it is advantageous to
keep the Pawns of the wings back. In the ending positions
frequently arise in which it is important to have some moves to
spare in order to be able to maintain the opposition of Kings;
and the player whose Pawns are farther back naturally has more
spare moves.

A disadvantage which is liable to make itself felt in the middle
game as well as in Rooks' endings as a consequence of Pawn moves
on the wing is the opening of an adjoining file for a hostile
Rook, as illustrated by the play in the positions of Diagrams 50,
51 and 54. In the middle-game this is also true of certain Pawns,
as for instance in the following position which arises after the
opening moves (1) P-e4, P-e5; (2) Kt-f3, Kt-c6; (3) P-d4, Pxd4;
(4) B-c4, Kt-f6; (5) o-o, B-e7. The proper continuation is (6) R-
e1, protecting the center-Pawn. The advance of this Pawn is
entirely uncalled for. Not only does it enable Black to open the
f-file for his Rook by advancing his f-Pawn, but it gives up the
greatest advantage connected with the possession of a center-
Pawn, that is the control of two center-squares. As long as White
has his Pawn on e4, the two squares f5 and d5 are inaccessible to
black pieces; as soon as the Pawn advances, however, he does not
do Black any further harm, as the two squares which he controls
after the advance are firmly in Black's hands on account of the
two Pawns f7 and d7.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P | #B | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt|    |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B | #P | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM  59.

A game played with this opening proceeded as follows: (6) P-e5,
Kt-e4; (7) B-d5, Kt-c5; (8) Ktxd4, Ktxd4; (9) Qxd4, o-o; (10) Kt-
c3, P-d6; (11) B-e3, P-c6; (12) B-b3, P-d5; (13) Ra1-d1, K-h8;
(14) Q-f4, P-f6. This decides the middle-game in Black's favor.
Not only will he have superior mobility with his Rooks, but his
two Bishops are much stronger than White's two minor pieces,
especially as White's Bishop is shut in.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K | #B | #Kt| #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^Q | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B |    | ^K | ^B |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM  60.

Moreover, Black has the better chances even in the ending, as he
has a majority of Pawns on the Queen's wing. After all pieces
have been exchanged, these Pawns would finally result in a passed
Pawn, which White would have to stop with his King while Black
can leisurely attack the Pawns of the King's side.

A disadvantage due to Pawn moves which up to now has not yet been
discussed is the weakness of so-called "backward Pawns." A
backward Pawn is one whose adjoining kindred Pawns have advanced
while he is unable himself to advance far enough to obtain their
protection from a frontal or diagonal attack. In the position of
Diagram 60, for instance, Black would make his Queen's Pawn
backward if he played P-c5; for if White handles the game right
Black will never be able to advance the Queen's Pawn beyond d6,
making him an easy mark for an attack in the d-file or in the
diagonal h2-b8, and also hampering the mobility of Black's pieces
in the center. The correct way for White to arrange his men would
be to play P-c4 and after the development of the minor pieces to
double the Rooks in the d-file. White's Queen's Bishop will be
placed best on f4 from where he helps pressing on d6.

Diagram 61 shows a position which occurred in one of the match
games played between Emanuel Lasker and S. Tarrasch for the
World's Championship in 1908, and which furnishes a good
illustration of the difficulties arising from a backward Pawn.
The game proceeded as follows: (1) Ktxd6, Pxd6; (2) Ra1-d1, Q-f6;
(3) P-c4, Rf8-e8; (4) Q-g4 (threatening Q-d7) B-c6; (5) R-e2; R-
e4; (6) Q-g3, Q-e6 (threatening R-g4); (7) P-h3, R-d8. Black
cannot protect the Pawn d6 as many times as White can attack him.
It looks as if he could have taken the Pawn c4 with his Queen,
but he was probably afraid of the weakness White would have
provoked with B-h6, (8) Re2-d2, Re4-e5; (9) B-h6 ! Black cannot
take the Bishop on account of Qxe5. (9) ..., Q-g6; (10) B-f4 and
wins, as the Pawn d6 as well as the Pawn c5 are doomed.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #B | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #B |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    | ^B |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    | ^Q | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    | ^R |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM  61.

In a position like that of Diagram 45 on White could play P-f4
without making his King's Pawn backward, as neither a frontal nor
a diagonal attack on e3 is possible. Of course, he would have to
see that the possibility of such an attack does not arise later
on. For instance, he would not be in a position to take the Pawn
c5 with the Pawn d4, as this would enable Black to use the
diagonal a7-g1 for operations against e3.

The player who endeavors to adhere in all positions to the
principles of Chess Strategy outlined in this chapter will
rapidly improve his strength and acquire within a short time a
much more intimate grasp of the game than others who have had
years of practice without making clear to themselves the general
laws which govern the outcome of every combination on the
Chessboard.

The illustrative games analyzed in the following chapter do not
teach anything new. They are merely examples of the application
of the general principles to the continuous series of
combinations which constitute a game of Chess. The author has
chosen games from his own tournament practice as this naturally
enabled a more thorough annotation than would have been possible
to offer for games of other players.



IV ILLUSTRATIVE GAMES



GAME NO. 1


Played in the Championship Tournament of the Western States,
1917, at Lexington, Ky.

           White            Black
     Jackson Showalter.  Edward Lasker

          (1) P-e4          P-e5
          (2) Kt-f3         Kt-c6
          (3) B-b5          P-a6

As explained previously this move cannot be regarded as loss of
time as White has to either retreat with the Bishop, adding
nothing to his development, or exchange on c6, helping Black's
development by opening a line for the Bishop c8.

          (4) B-a4          Kt-f6

The move B-c5 which Black might consider instead of Kt-f6 is not
to be recommended as White would reply P-c3 and then force the
exchange of Black's center-Pawn by P-d4. The complete control of
the center which White would gain in the further course of the
game would soon give him an overwhelming attack. For instance:
(4) ..., B-c5; (5) P-c3, Kt-f6; (6) o-o, o-o;

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K | #B |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P | #P | #P |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt|    |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | ^B |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^P |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q | ^K |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 62.

(7) P-d4, Pxd4; (8) Pxd4, B-b6; (9) P-e5, Kt-e8; (10) P-d5, Kt-
e7; (11) P-d6, Pxd6; (12) Pxd6, Kt-g6; (13) B-g5, etc.

           (5) P-d3

It is customary for White to castle at this point. P-d3 is
certainly a good move as it enables the development of the
Queen's Bishop, but o-o is very likely better as it reserves the
option of advancing the Queen's Pawn either one or two squares.
When advancing the Pawn two squares White has to avoid the
following trap: (5) o-o, B-e7; (6) P-d4, P-b5; (7) B-b3, Pxd4
(not Ktxd4 on account of (8) Bxf7  and (9) Ktxe5 +); (8) Ktxd4
??, Ktxd4; (9) Qxd4, P-c5 followed by P-c4 winning the Bishop.
What White can try in this variation is the Pawn sacrifice (8) P-
c3, Pxc3, through which he obtains a considerable advantage in
the development of the pieces.

After (5) o-o White threatens to win the Pawn e5 by (6) Bxc6 and
(7) Ktxe5, as now Q-d4; (8) Kt-f3, Qxe4 is not possible on
account of (9) R-e1. Black has various ways to counter this
threat. He can either defend the Pawn by P-d6 or play B-e7 with
the view to capture the Pawn e4 in case White should take the
Pawn e5, or, finally, he can capture the Pawn e4 at once.

All of these three variations are playable for Black although it
appears that White obtains a slight advantage however Black
continues. This opening is consequently a great favorite in
modern Tournament play.



[Footnote: Following are the two main variations which have been
adopted in the practice of the Masters:

A. (5) o-o, B-e7; (6) R-e1 (protecting the Pawn e4 so that
Black has to defend himself against Bxc6 and Ktxe5), P-b5; (7) B-
b3, P-d6; (8) P-c3 (preserving the Bishop against the exchange
threatened with Kt-a5), Kt-a5; (9) B-c2, P-c5; (10) P-d4, Q-c7.
Now the Pawn e5 is sufficiently protected and Black threatens to
exert pressure on d4 by playing B-g4 and Kt-c6. It might seem
that White can ignore this threat and as soon as d4 attacked
either exchange the Pawn on e5 or advance him to d5. However, the
former maneuver would open the d-file for Black's Rooks and the
latter would not be very good either before Black has castled;
for the advance of the d-pawn closes the center-files permanently
for the Rooks so that Black's King is safe in the center while
White may have to face an attack on the King's wing which Black
might initiate by storming with the h and g Pawns.

For all these reasons White is justified in making the waiting
move (11) P-h3, which safeguards the square d4 against the
indirect attack B-g4 and at the same time prepares an attack
along the lines of the one discussed in connection with Diagram
52. After (11) ..., Kt-c6; (12) B-e3, o-o; White can safely
advance the Queen's Pawn and then launch the attack referred to
above.

B. The second variation arising from the position of Diagram 62
is (5) o-o, Ktxe4. It seems rather dangerous for Black to take
the Pawn as long as his King is in the e-file which White can
occupy with his Rook; but after (6) R-e1, Kt-c5; (7) Ktxe5,
Ktxe5; (8) Rxe5 +, Kt-e6, White has not much attack and for this
reason the opening is generally treated in a different way. As
the strongest move is considered (6) P-d4. Black can hardly take
this Pawn as R-e1 and Ktxd4 would follow threatening to win a
piece; but he may try to maintain his Knight on the dominating
square e4 by (6) ..., P-b5; (7) B-b3, P-d5. After (8) Pxe5, B-e6;
(9) P-c3 (again providing a retreat for the Bishop), B-e7; (10)
Ktb1-d2, Black's best continuation is probably Ktxd2; (11) Qxd2
(not Bxd2 on account of B-g4); Kt-a5 or o-o. The maneuver (10)
..., Kt-c5; (11) B-c2, P-d4, which was tried in several recent
tournaments, is of doubtful value as Black loses control of the
important center-square e4. White can use this square for an
attack on the weak point c6 as follows: (12) Kt-e4, Pxc3; (13)
Ktxc5, Bxc5; (14) B-e4, Q-d7; (15) Q-c2, B-d5 (in order to answer
R-d1 with Bxe4); (16) B-g5, and Black does not seem to have a
satisfactory defense. For instance (16) ..., B-b6; (17) Ra1-d1,
Bxe4; (18) Qxe4, Q-e6; (19) R-d6 or (16) ..., Bxe4; (17) Qxe4,
Pxb2; (18) Ra1-d1, P-b1 (Q); (19) Rxb1 followed by R-c1.]



           (5) ...      P-b5

The simplest and probably best way to defend the Pawn e5 against
the threat Bxc6 and Ktxe5 is P-d6 without P-b5.

           (6) B-b3     P-d6

The alternative was B-c5. White could then not have captured the
Pawn e5 by (7) B-d5, o-o; (8) Bxc6, Pxc6; (9) Ktxe5 on account of
Q-d4, threatening mate on f2 and attacking the Knight.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K | #B |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt| #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^B |    | ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q | ^K |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 63.

          (7) Kt-g5

This attack with two pieces in the early stage of the opening is
contrary to the general principles of strategy. White wins a Pawn
but this cannot be considered an adequate equivalent for the time
he loses in doing so. He neglects his development and he is bound
to suffer for that sooner than he can make the weight of his
extra-Pawn felt.

          (7) ...           P-d5
          (8) Pxd5

Black cannot recapture the Pawn as this would give White an
occasion to initiate a violent attack starting with the sacrifice
of the Knight on f7, thus: (8) ..., Ktxd5; (9) Ktxf7, Kxf7; (10)
Q-f3+, K-e6 (the Knight d5 has to be protected); (11) Kt-c3,
Ktc6-e7; (12) o-o, followed by R-e1, P-d4, etc. The exposed
position of Black's King is well worth the piece which White has
sacrificed.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K | #B |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt|    |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    | ^P | #P |    | ^Kt|    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^B |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q | ^K |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 64.

          (8) ...           Kt-d4

With this move Black crosses White's plans by exchanging the
Bishop who was to play the main part in the attack, and, as a
consequence, the Knight g5 does not have a chance to do any
useful work either.

         (9) P-d6

Opening again the diagonal of the Bishop and getting rid of the
advanced Pawn by exchange before Black has an occasion to capture
him.

          (9) ...           Ktxb3
          (10) Pxc7         Qxc7


       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B |    | #K | #B |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    | #Q |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    |    |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    |    | #P |    | ^Kt|    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | #Kt|    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q | ^K |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 65.

Black could regain his Pawn by Q-d5; (11) Pa2xb3, Qxg2; (12) Q-
f3, Qxf3; (13) Ktxf3, B-b7; (14) K-e2, B-d6 and Bxc7; but in
doing so he would give up his advantage in development, which, as
the further course of the game proves, is much more valuable.

          (11) Pa2xb3        B-b7
          (12) o-o           P-h6!

If Black proceeded to develop his pieces indiscriminately, his
advantage would soon vanish. White needs only two moves--R-e1 and
Kt-e4--to paralyze the effect of Black's powerful Queen's Bishop
and to regain control of the center where at present Black has
the upper hand on account of his center-Pawn.

          (13) Kt-f3          B-d6
          (14) R-e1           o-o
          (15) Ktb1-d2        Ra8-d8
          (16) P-c3

White does not risk Kt-e4 as Black, after Ktxe4; (17) Pxe4, can
uncover the Rook by B-b4 attacking White's Queen and Rook at the
same time. White's only defense would be (18) B-d2 or Kt-d2, but
he would pin himself badly in either case and Black would obtain
an overwhelming attack by P-f5, which enables his King's Rook to
join the fray.

With P-c3 White protects himself against B-b4 and now actually
threatens to interrupt the diagonal of Black's Queen's Bishop.
Black will naturally try to prevent this and the first move which
presents itself for the purpose is P-e4, opening a line for the
Bishop d6 and the Queen at the same time. At first sight the move
does not seem playable as on e4 the Pawn is three times attacked
and only twice defended; but White cannot withdraw both the
Knight d2 and the Pawn d3 from the Queen's file on account of the
threat Bxh2+ winning the Queen for Rook and Bishop. Black can,
therefore, safely advance the Pawn.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | #R |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #B | #Q |    |    | #P | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    | #B |    | #Kt|    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P |    | ^Kt|    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B | ^Q | ^R |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 66.

          (16) ...           P-e4
          (17) Pxe4          Ktxe4
          (18) Q-c2

Now that the Queen has left the d-file, unpinning the Knight,
something must be done for the Knight e4 who is twice attacked
and only once protected. Two moves come into consideration. One
is P-f5 which maintains the Knight in the dominating center-
position, as White cannot take him without opening the f-file for
Black's Rook and losing the Pawn h2 who needs the protection of
the Knight f3. The other is Ktxd2, winning the Pawn h2 right away
no matter whether White retakes with the Bishop or with the
Knight. Which of the two moves is the better is difficult to say
and is more or less a matter of temperament. A player who prefers
a slow and sure advance will choose P-f5. A player who likes a
faster pace will start the hand-to-hand fight without delay by
Ktxd2. It is the latter move on which Black decides.

           (18) ... Ktxd2

White now faces the dilemma whether to recapture with the Bishop
or with the Knight. If he takes with the Bishop Black exchanges
on f3, breaking up White's chain of Pawns, and he regains his
Pawn by Bxh2. If he takes with the Knight, Black also wins the
Pawn h2, but the other Pawns in front of the King remain intact.
The drawback to the latter continuation is, however, that White's
development is delayed for another two moves, as the Queen's
Bishop is shut in. For this reason White decides on Bxd2,
probably also hoping that he will be compensated for the broken
Pawn position by an attack in the g- or h-file which Black's
maneuver opens.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | #R |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #B | #Q |    |    | #P | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    | #B |    |    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P | ^Q | #Kt|    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B |    | ^R |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 67.


          (19) Bxd2          Bxf3

The fact that Black has to exchange his well placed Queen's
Bishop in order to win the Pawn h2 was very likely another reason
which induced White to retake with the Bishop.

          (20) Pxf3          Bxh2+
          (21) K-g2

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | #R |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    | #Q |    |    | #P | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P | ^Q | ^B |    | ^P | ^K | ^B |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    | ^R |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 68.

A general survey of the position shows clearly that Black has the
advantage. His Rook d8 is ready to take part in the battle while
White has to make several preparatory moves with his Rooks before
he can make use of them on the King's wing, the only part of the
board where they have a chance to be effective. In the e-line
which White's Rook controls at present, there is no tangible
object for an attack.

Moreover, White's King is rather exposed while Black's King is
safely entrenched behind his Pawns.

A good continuation for Black, which presents itself at first
thought, is R-d6, enabling the doubling of the Rooks in the d-
line or the participation of the Rook d6 in a fight on the King's
wing.

          (21) ...           R-d6
          (22) R-e4

White cannot take the Bishop h2 as Rxd2 would win the Queen. (22)
P-f4 would not be good either as Black would reply Q-d7,
threatening Rxd2 as well as Q-g4+; Kxh2, R-g6 and mate in two
moves.

With R-e4 White attempts to protect his King by R-g4 against
attacks in the g-file, and Black naturally tries to foil this
attempt.

          (22) ...           P-f5
          (23) R-h4

Black has now to decide whether he should withdraw his Bishop to
e5 or counterattack White's Bishop by Q-d7 or Q-d8 or Rf8-d8. The
counterattack looks better as it threatens to force an entrance
for the Rooks in the second rank, displacing White's Queen and
attacking the King from the flank. The withdrawal of the Bishop
would give White time to play his Queen's Rook over to the King's
wing.

The most forcible of the three moves available for the
counterattack is Q-d8, which attacks the Rook h4 too, thereby
depriving White of the possibility to save his Bishop by flight.

          (23) ...           Q-d8
          (24) Rxh2          Rxd2
          (25) Q-c1

White's Queen has now hardly any mobility and in addition she
shuts off the Queen's Rook from the King's wing. Black, on the
other hand, can easily get his Rooks to cooperate by doubling
them either in the d-file or in the second rank. He decides on
the former alternative because the control of the Queen's file
keeps White's troops separated in two parts which have little or
no communication with each other, while Black's pieces are ready
for concentration on the King's wing at any moment.

          (25) ...           Q-g5+
          (26) K-h1          Rf8-d8
          (27) Q-e1

With the intention to play Q-e6+, thereby gaining time to swing
over the Queen's Rook to the King's wing.

          (27) ...           K-h7
          (28) Q-c1

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | #R |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    | #P | #K |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    |    |    | #P | #Q |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P |    | #R |    | ^P |    | ^R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^Q |    |    |    |    | ^K |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 69.

The Queen cannot leave the first rank on account of the threat R-
d1+. It lies near for Black to try to force her out by attacking
the square d1 once more with the Queen, thereby threatening to
win the Queen for a Rook by the check on d1. He can accomplish
this by playing the  Queen into the  d-file  behind the Rooks.

          (28) ...           R-d6
          (29) P-c4

Apparently White does not recognize Black's intention, or he
would have played (29) Q-f1 in order to answer Q-d8 with (30) R-
e1, R-dl; (31) K-g2. But Black would then also have had an easy
win by playing (29) ..., Rxb2 and doubling the Rooks in the
second rank.

          (29) ...           Q-d8
          (30) Q-c3

The only alternative to save the Queen was K-g2, but then R-d1
would have won a clear Rook.

Black now enforces a mate in ten moves: R-d1+; (31) Rxd1, Rxd1+;
(32) K-g2, Q-g5+; (33) K-h3, R-g1; (34) Q-d4, Q-h5+; (35) Q-h4,
Qxf3+; (36) Q-g3, Rxg3+; (37) Pxg3, P-f4; (38) K-h4, Qxg3+; (39)
K-h5, Q-g5 mate. This instructive game was not lost through a
faulty combination but on account of loss of time in the opening
which could not be regained.


GAME  NO. 2


Played in the New York Masters' Tournament 1915

          White             Black
          Edward Lasker     Jose Raoul Capablanca

          (1) P-d4          P-d5
          (2) Kt-f3         Kt-f6
          (3) P-c4          P-e6
          (4) Kt-c3         Ktb8-d7
          (5) B-g5          B-b4

Ordinarily the Bishop is developed to e7 as on b4 he is out of
place as soon as White has castled.

          (6) P-e3          P-c5

With this move Black threatens Q-a5, attacking the Knight c3 for
the second time and unpinning the Knight f6 who is then free to
cooperate with the Bishop b4 and the Queen by advancing to e4. In
trying to counter Black's threat White will seek to do as much as
he can for the development of his pieces so as to combine the
attack with defense. The King's Bishop is not yet developed, and
his most natural developing move happens to cover the square at
which Black is aiming with his Knight.

          (7) B-d3           Q-a5
          (8) Q-b3

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B |    | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    | #Kt|    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    | #P | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | #Q |    | #P | #P |    |    | ^B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #B | ^P | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^Q | ^Kt| ^B | ^P | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    | ^K |    |    | ^R |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 70.

White has to be very careful on account of the various exchanges
possible in the center. Black threatens for instance to exchange
first on d4 and then to play Kt-e4 so that the Bishop g5 is
attacked by the Queen in case White takes the Knight with his
Bishop, allowing the Pawn d5 to clear the fifth rank. Or he might
play Kt-e4 first and then exchange on d4. Considering that all
these threats are based on the fact that the Knight c3 is pinned
as long as White has not yet castled it lies near for White to
try (8) o-o. It is true that Black can then win a Pawn by taking
twice on c3; however, in doing so he would retard his development
and White is bound to obtain a strong attack by getting all of
his pieces quickly into action, while Black's Queen is separated
from the rest of her troops.

White's eighth move, Q-b3, has several drawbacks. First of all
Black could play P-b5! winning a piece for three Pawns as White
cannot do better than play (9) Pxb5 or Pxd5 allowing P-C4.
Secondly, Black can make the combination indicated above which
tends to open the fifth rank so that the Queen attacks g5. The
same combination would be possible if White played (8) Q-C2.

          (8) ...            Kt-e4
          (9) o-o

Offering the Pawn sacrifice Ktxc3; (10) Pxc3, Bxc3 with the view
to attacking by (11) R-c1, etc., as previously indicated. Black
prefers to direct his attack against g5.

          (9) ...             Ktxg5
          (10) Ktxg5          Pxd4
          (11) Kt-b5

(11) Pxd4 would lose a piece on account of Pxc4, attacking the
Bishop on d3 and the Knight on g5. Black could now win a Pawn by
taking on d3, but this would be very dangerous as it would open
the f-file for White's Rook.

          (11) ...            Kt-c5

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B |    | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | #Q | ^Kt| #Kt| #P |    |    | ^Kt|    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #B | ^P | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^Q |    | ^B | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 71.

The position is getting very complicated indeed. The first
possibility which White will consider is (12) Kt-d6+; but after
K-e7 there seems to be no satisfactory continuation. For
instance: (13) Q-C2, Ktxd3; (14) Ktd6xf7, R-f8 winning two
Knights for the Rook. Or: (14) Ktxc8+ ?, Ra8xc8; (15) Qxd3, Pxc4
winning a piece. Therefore, White has no alternative but to
retire the Queen.

          (12) Q-c2           Ktxd3
          (13) Qxd3           P-a6

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #R |    | #B |    | #K |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | #Q | ^Kt|    | #P |    |    | ^Kt|    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #B | ^P | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | ^Q | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    | ^R | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 72.

It is not easy for Black to retain tide Pawn which he has won. If
he plays (13) ..., B-e7; (14) Kt-f3, Pxe3; White can continue
(15) Pxd5 with good attacking chances on account of the open
files in the center of the board, of which Black cannot yet make
any use as he has not yet castled.

By P-a6 Black opens again the fifth rank in order to operate
against the Knight g5.

          (14) Ktxd4           Pxc4
          (15) Qxc4            B-d7
          (16) Kt-b3

A very bad move, as it violates the general principles of
strategy. In withdrawing the Knight from the dominating center
square White decreases his mobility instead of increasing it.
The logical continuation would have been Rf1-d1 or Ra1-c1,
developing one of the Rooks.

          (16) ...          Qxg5
          (17) Qxb4         B-c6

Black would not have been able to occupy this favorable square
with his Bishop, had not White withdrawn his Knight from d4.

          (18) P-e4          P-a5

This forces the Queen out of the diagonal a3-f8 as the Pawn e4
has to be kept protected.

          (19) Q-d2          Qxd2

Black demonstrates in a very simple manner that the exchange of
Queens is disadvantageous for White, a fact that White should
have foreseen as the unprotected Knight on d2 enables Black to
gain control of the d-file by castling on the Queen's side.

          (20) Ktxd2          o-o-o
          (21) Kt-c4

White cannot play R-d1 on account of R-d4, threatening Rh8-d8.

          (21) ...            Bxe4
          (22) Rf1-c1

This merely drives the Black King to a safe place. Ktxa5 was
indicated. R-d2 could then have been answered by (23) R-c1+ and
(24) R-C4.

          (22) ...            K-b8
          (23) P-f3

Again a move which helps the opponent as it drives the Bishop
where he wants to go.

          (23)...            B-d5
          (24) Ktxa5         R-c8
          (25) P-b3

This situation furnishes an instructive example of the importance
of the rules governing Pawn formations as previously discussed.
By attacking the Knight with the King Black can force the
exchange of the Bishop for the Knight on c4.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    | #K | #R |    |    |    |    | #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | ^Kt|    |    | #B |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    |    |    |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^R |    |    |    | ^K |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 73.

This leaves White with a Pawn on c4 who is weak on account of his
advanced position. Black can attack him with the King and White's
King is consequently compelled to stay on the Queen's wing
guarding the Pawn, while Black is at leisure to secure a passed
Pawn on the King's wing. These maneuvers are, of course, possible
only with the Rooks off the board. That is why Black tries to
force their exchange and why White should endeavor to prevent it.

          (25) ...            Rxc1+
          (26) Rxc1           R-c8
          (27) Rxc8+

In view of the hopeless Pawn ending it would have been best to
give up a Pawn by (27) R-d1, P-b6; (28) Kt-c4, Bxc4; (29) Pxc4,
Rxc4; (30) R-d2 in order to keep a Rook on the board, thus
obtaining a drawing chance.

          (27) ...            Kxc8
          (28) K-f2           K-c7
          (29) K-e3           K-b6
          (30) Kt-c4+         Bxc4
          (31) Pxc4           K-c5
          (32) K-d3           P-e5

Black's strategy in this ending is clearly indicated. He will
play P-f5 and advance the e-Pawn as soon as White plays K-c3.
Instead of the latter move White could play P-a3 which would also
keep Black's King from b4; but he would soon run out of spare
moves with his Pawns necessitating a King's move. For instance,
(32) P-a3, P-f5; (33) P-g4, P-g6; (34) P-h3, P-h6; (35) P-h4, P-
h5; (36) P-g5, P-b6!; (37) K-c3, P-e4; (38) P-f4, P-e3; (39) K-
d3, P-e2; (40) Kxe2, Kxc4; (41) K-e3, P-b5.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #K |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | ^K |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    |    |    |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 74.

Black needs now only six moves to queen the Pawn b5 while White
in the meantime cannot do more than capture the g- and h-Pawns,
and Black's Queen can naturally stop the White passed Pawns
without difficulty. The game proceeded as follows:

          (33) P-g4           P-f6
          (34) P-h4           P-g6
          (35) K-e4           K-d6

Black could just as well have captured the Pawn c4 and permitted
(36) P-g5, Pxg5; (37) Pxg5.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #K |    | #P | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^P |    | ^K |    | ^P |^P  |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 75.

He would then have had a Queen in another eight moves while White
could not get farther with his Pawn than to g7, so that Black
easily wins.

To march  against the  Pawn b7  instead of the Pawns on the
King's side would not help White either, as he does not get back
to the King's wing in time to protect his f- and g-Pawn.

          (36) P-f4           Pxf4
          (37) Kxf4           K-c5
          (38) P-h5           Kxc4
          (39) K-e4           P-b5
          (40) P-a3           K-c5
          (41) Resigns.



V

PROBLEMS



To offer an exhaustive treatise on the manifold varieties of
Chess problems is not within the scope of this book. The
intention of the author is merely to make it quite clear to the
reader that the Chess problem, apart from the moves of the men,
has no relation to the game and to illustrate the vast difference
between PROBLEM combinations and positions and GAME combinations
and positions by a few typical examples from the works of master
composers.

The mating methods and mating positions in the actual game very
rarely embody an element of surprise. They are all known from
previous experience and the question is merely whether the player
concerned is familiar with them. With the problem it is
altogether different. Here the mate must be accomplished in a
certain number of moves from a given position in some ingenious
way which is not known from game practice, or, if the mating
METHOD is not extraordinary, the mating POSITION must be
surprising and unlooked for.

Moreover, a number of laws must be obeyed in problem composition,
which by the general consent of problemists, or rather by natural
evolution of a more refined taste, have become the standards by
which the merits of a problem are judged.

There is first of all the law of economy in material which
demands that the idea of the problem should be expressed with the
least possible number of men, and that no pieces should be added
for the mere sake of increasing the number of variations. Then,
of course, a problem should have only one solution. A position
which has more than one key move is not considered a problem,
because the main point at issue in a problem is not the NUMBER of
moves in which the mate is accomplished but the METHOD in which
it is accomplished, and of two possible solutions one will always
be prettier so that the existence of the other must necessarily
appear a blemish.

A very important law is that the first move of White (who by
general consent has always the attack) must not deprive the black
King of a flight square, as this would be too brutal, too obvious
a procedure. The more possibilities of defense are left to Black
the more surprising is the solution and the finer is the problem.

Many problem solvers are under the false impression that the
first move in a problem must not be a check. This argument is
valid only when by the check the number of defensive moves is
limited, but this is not necessarily the case, as can be seen for
instance in problem No. 2, in which Black has to move his King
anyway, there being no other black piece on the board.

The position of Diagram 76 is an example of how a problem should
NOT be constructed. There is a tremendous number of pieces on the
board which have nothing to do with the idea of the problem. The
latter is one of the most primitive ideas used in problem
composition and has been expressed by many composers in charming
forms, so that there was no need for the above monstrous addition
to the problem literature. The key move is Q-h7 so as to pin the
Rook f5 in case Black plays K-d3 and to enable the mate (2) Rxf3.
However, if Black replies (1) ..., P-d3 or Bxe1, neither the
Queen nor the Rook f4 are necessary, but the mate is accomplished
by some of the other white pieces which are lavishly distributed
over the board.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^Q |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | ^Kt|    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | ^P |    | ^P | #R |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | ^B |    | #P | #P |    | ^R |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 | #P |    | #K |    |    | #P | ^Kt|    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    |    | #B |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^K | #Kt|    | ^R | ^B |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 76.--Mate in Two Moves

A striking contrast will be found in the following problem which
is based on the same idea but in which all unnecessary material
is dispensed with.

The key move is B-c1, in order to mate with the Queen on b3 in
case Black takes the Rook a3. If Black moves the Rook, White
mates by Qxb6, and if the Pawn b6 advances (2) Qxe7 is mate.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    | ^K |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    | #P | ^B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P |    |    | #Q |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #K |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 | ^R |    |    |    | ^B |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | #R |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 77.--Problem No. 1.

                    Mate In Two Moves.

In problem No. 2 the mating maneuver does not involve a special
trick; the idea of the composer was merely to arrive at an
extraordinary mating position, and he added considerably to the
value of the problem by producing the same mating position in
several variations. The key move is B-b3+. Black has three moves
in reply. If K-e4, White mates by (2) Q-f2, K-d3; (3) Q-f3. If K-
c6, the mate is accomplished by (2) B-b4, K-b5; (3) Q-b7; and if
K-d6, White answers (2) B-c4, K-c6; (3) Q-c7 mate.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    | ^K |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | ^Q |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    | #K |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^B |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    | ^B |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 78.--Problem No. 2.

                 Mate In Three Moves.

A favorite trick with composers is to provide a stalemate which
they relieve by obstructing the way of one of the pieces involved
in the stalemate. The move which is thereby allowed Black's King
exposes him to a discovered mate. The key move of problem No.3 is
P-g8 (becomes Knight). After P-b5 Black is stalemate, but White
relieves the stalemate by (2) Kt-e7, allowing Black to take the
Knight on b4, and then mates by Kt-c6.

In trying to solve a problem it is a good method to examine
Black's moves first. Often it will be found that whatever Black
moves White can mate in reply so that all that is necessary is to
find a first move for White, which leaves the position unchanged
as far as the different mating threats are concerned. If Black
has one or more moves at his disposal in reply to which there is
no mate, the way is indicated in which to provide for these
defenses.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    | ^B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 | #K | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    | ^K |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 79.--Problem No. 3.

                   Mate In Three Moves.

In problem No. 4 for instance, it is evident that Black has to
keep the two squares b8 and b4 guarded on which the Knight a6
threatens mate. Of course, Black can take the Bishop f5,
relieving the mating threat but White can move the Bishop to some
other square in the diagonal h3-c8. Still, Black would have the
defense Q-f8. This suggests as White's first move B-c8,
interrupting the line from f8 to b8.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | ^K | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | ^Kt| ^P | #K |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    | #P |    | ^B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #P |    |    |    | #Q |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 80.--Problem No. 4.

                    Mate In Two Moves

The only square for Black's Queen from which to guard both b4 and
b8 is then d6; but there the Queen blocks a flight square of the
King, freeing the Knight b7 and enabling the mate Kt-a5.

The most difficult problems, of course, are those in which no
mate is threatened in the initial position and in which Black can
apparently foil all attempts to build a mating net. An example is
the following position which illustrates the so-called "Roman
idea."

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | ^Kt|    |    | #B |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | ^B |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | ^K |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | #K |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    | ^Q |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

                DIAGRAM 81.--Problem No. 5.

                   Mate In Four Moves.

Black's King is stalemate so that any check with the Knight would
settle him. However, Black's Bishop guards the squares c5 and d6
from which the Knight could threaten a mate, and if White makes a
waiting move with the Queen in the second rank to force Black's
Bishop from his defensive position, Black replies B-g5 and takes
the Pawn e3 on the following move, relieving the stalemate. The
same maneuver would foil White's attempt to checkmate by (1) Q-
e2, (2) B-d3 and (3) Q-c2, and the position really does not
betray any other mating possibility.

The key of this exceptionally fine and difficult problem is (1)
Kt-d6, forcing Bxd6. The idea of this sacrifice is to change the
line of defense of the black Bishop from the diagonal h4-d8 to
the diagonal h2-b8, so that he is compelled to defend the threat
Q-e2, etc., indicated above by moving to f4, that is to a square
on which he can be taken. After (2) Q-e2, B-f4; (3) Pxf4 the
stalemate is relieved and Black can take the Pawn d4. But a most
surprising mate is now possible, which could not possibly have
been foreseen in the original position, namely: (4) Q-e5.

Problems in which no definite number of moves are stipulated for
the mate are usually called STUDIES or ENDINGS. They are nothing
but game positions in which a maneuver forces the win that is so
well hidden that it would probably not be found by a player in an
actual game. The following two positions are examples of this
class of compositions.

The first move is evident. White must play (1) P-c7, as otherwise
Black retreats with the Rook in the d-file and occupies the c-
file so that he can be sacrificed at any time for White's
dangerous Pawn.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | ^K | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    | #R |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | #K |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

           DIAGRAM 82.--WHITE TO PLAY AND WIN.

After (1) ..., R-d6+ White can neither go to b7 on account of R-
d7 nor can he play K-c6 or c5 on account of R-d1 followed by R-c1
whereby Black would draw. The only way to win is: (2) K-b5, R-
d5+; (3) K-b4, R-d4+; (4) K-b3, R-d3+; (5) K-c2. At last White
has succeeded in guarding his rear, and it seems as if Black
could not any longer prevent the Pawn from Queening. However,
Black plays (5) ..., R-d4 and if White queens the Pawn he gives
check on C4 forcing Qxc4 which would stalemate the King.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #B | ^B |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    | ^Kt|    |    | #P |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    | #K |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

          DIAGRAM 83.--White to Move and Draw.

This is the point where the problem-trick enters the game. White
does not promote the Pawn to a Queen but to a Rook, avoiding the
stalemate and threatening mate on a8. Black's only defense is R-
a4 and now White wins by (7) K-b3 attacking the Rook and
threatening mate on c1 at the same time.

In the position of Diagram 83 Black threatens to queen either of
his Pawns. White can play (1) Kt-e3+ K-e2; (2) Bxh2, but after
Kxe3 there seems to be no way of stopping the Pawn f2.

       +---------------------------------------+
     8 | #K | #B |    | ^Q |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P | ^P |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    | #K |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
         a    b    c    d    e    f    g    h

           DIAGRAM 84.--Sui-Mate in Six Moves

Again an ingenious trick is available which leads to an
unexpected finish. White plays (3) K-h8 threatening to Queen his
Pawn and forcing B-d5. Then he gives up his Pawn by (4) P-g8
(Queen) and after Bxg8 he saves the game by (5) B-g1 !! If Black
takes the Bishop promoting the Pawn to a Queen or a Rook White is
stalemate. Otherwise the draw is forced by either Kxg8 or Bxf2.

It remains to explain the meaning of the so- called sui-mates. A
sui-mate is a problem in which White has to play so as to force
Black to checkmate him (White) in a certain number of moves. One
of the most beautiful examples in the literature is the above six
mover, the solution of which runs as follows: (1) Kt-b5, Pxb5;
(2) Kt-a6, Pxa6. One should not think that White can force Black
to checkmate in four more moves; but: (3) K-d4, K-b7; (4) Q-d5+,
K-c8; (5) P-b7+, K-c7; (6) K-c5 and Black has no other move
except B-a7, checkmating White.



PART II



THE GAME OF CHECKERS



I

THE RULES OF THE GAME



The game of Checkers (English: Draughts) is played on the 32
black or white squares of the Chess board by two opponents, each
of whom has twelve men of the same kind. The object of the game
is to capture all opposing men or to block them so that they
cannot move.

The original position of board and men is shown in Diagram 85. It
will be seen that the board is placed in such a way that the
players have a vacant square at their lower right hand corner.
This corner is called the DOUBLE CORNER because two men are
located in its immediate neighborhood while the left hand corner,
the SINGLE CORNER, is occupied by only one man.

The squares of the Checker board are usually described by numbers
as shown in Diagram 86. This is a rather crude method when
compared with the simple notation by means of a system of
coordinates as used in Chess, but as it is universally employed
in Checker books and Checker columns in daily papers it will be
adhered to in the following explanation of the game.

The black men are placed on the squares 1 to 12, the white men on
the squares 21 to 32. The first move must invariably be made by
the player of the black men.

             32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |  * | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                        DIAGRAM 85.

The move of the Checker men is a diagonal step forward, one
square at a time. If a hostile man is in his way and if the
square beyond the hostile man is vacant, he must capture him by
jumping over him on to the vacant square, and he must continue
capturing from the square on which he lands as long as this is
possible according to the above rule. Captured men are removed
from the board.

                        WHITE

       +---------------------------------------+
       |    | 32 |    | 31 |    | 30 |    | 29 |
       |---------------------------------------|
       | 28 |    | 27 |    | 26 |    | 25 |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | 24 |    | 23 |    | 22 |    | 21 |
       |---------------------------------------|
       | 20 |    | 19 |    | 18 |    | 17 |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | 16 |    | 15 |    | 14 |    | 13 |
       |---------------------------------------|
       | 12 |    | 11 |    | 10 |    |  9 |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | 8  |    | 7  |    | 6  |    | 5  |
       |---------------------------------------|
       | 4  |    | 3  |    |  2 |    | 1  |    |
       +---------------------------------------+

                        BLACK

                     DIAGRAM 86.

If a man reaches the opposite edge of the board he automatically
becomes a King and must be "crowned" by the opponent, who must
place another man on top of him. A King may move and capture
backward as well as forward. A man, who reaches the "King row" in
capturing, cannot, however, continue capturing on the same move
with the newly made King.

The position of Diagram 87 may serve to illustrate the above
rules. White, on the move, plays 14-9. Black must capture this
man with the man on 5 who jumps on to 14.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    | o  |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 | *  |    |    |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  o |    |  o |    | *  | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | *  |    | o  |    | o  | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    | *  |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | *  |    | *  |    |    |    | *  | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+

                    3         2        1

                     DIAGRAM 87.

White then sacrifices another man by 23-18 forcing Black to reply
14-23. Now White captures the three men on 23, 15 and 7 with his
man on 26, and Black, before making his next move, must crown
White's man who has just reached the King's row. He will
naturally move his man 8, as otherwise White would capture him
with the King on 3.

If a player overlooks the possibility of a capture his opponent
has the right to remove the man who should have made the capture,
from the board. This procedure is called "huffing" and does not
constitute a play. Instead of huffing a player may ask the
opponent to retract his move and to make the capture.

When neither player can force a win the game is considered a
draw. When one side appears to be stronger and refuses to accept
a draw offered the player of the weaker side can require the win
to be demonstrated within 40 moves; otherwise the game is drawn.



II

ELEMENTARY TACTICS



The first thing a Checker player has to know is what superiority
in material or position is required to FORCE a win in the ending.
The most elementary case is the one shown in Diagram 88, in which
White wins by playing 32-27. With this move White takes the
opposition or as most Checker players call it, White has the
"move." Whatever Black replies he is forced to the edge of the
board and finally he is obliged to let White capture his King.
Supposing Black plays (2) 26-22, in order to reach the double
corner, where he would be safe as he could indefinitely move from
5 to 1 and from 1 to 5, then White continues with (2) ...,27-23,
preventing (3) 22-18 which would gain the road to the double
corner. After (3) 22-17, 23-l8; Black has to retreat to the edge
by 17-13 or 17-21, and White, by playing 18-14, or 18-22 pins the
black King so that he cannot move without being captured. If it
had been Black's move in the position of the diagram, he would
have gained the opposition by 26-31 and White would have been
compelled to retire to the double corner and to draw by 32-28,
28-32, etc.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |    |29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    | ** |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 88.

With one King entrenched in the double corner it takes two Kings
to force the win. In the position of Diagram 89 for instance
White would win as follows:

          Black          White

          (1) ...        19-24
          (2) 32-28      23-19
          (3) 28-32      24-28
          (4) 32-27      28-32
          (5) 27-31      19-15
          (6) 31-26      15-18
          (7) 26-31      18-22

In the ending THREE KINGS AGAINST TWO KINGS the most favorable
spots for the weaker player are the two double corners; but the
three Kings will always win when handled right.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 89.

The method which has to be employed will be evident from the play
in Diagram 90. In order to win Black must exchange one King; the
position is then reduced to that of Diagram 89.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | ** |    |    |    |    |13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    | ** |    | oo |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 90.

If it were White's move, Black would easily win; for after (1)
..., 27-32; (2) 19-24, 9-5; (3) 10-6, White cannot avoid the
exchange. For instance: (3) ..., 5-1; (4) 24-19. The problem
reduces itself therefore to changing the move from Black to
White. This is accomplished by:

          Black              White

          (1) 15-18          27-32
          (2) 19-24           9-5
          (3) 10-14

Threatening 24-27. White can only reply

          (3) ...           32-28
          (4) 24-27          5-1
          (5) 14-9, etc., as above.

If the weaker side does not control both double corners the
exchange can be forced much more easily, as an experiment will
quickly show.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |    |29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 | ** |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 | ** |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |    |13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 91.

Sometimes the stronger side has an occasion to give up two Kings
for one thereby forcing a position similar to that of Diagram 88.
Diagram 91 offers an example:

Black on the move wins in 5 moves, thus:

          (1) 16-19          27-31
          (2) 20-24          32-27
          (3) 28-32          27x20
          (4) 19-24          20x27
          (5) 32x23

and White is pinned.

With three Kings against four a player can sometimes offer
prolonged resistance. But finally the stronger player will always
be able to force an exchange which secures the victory. In the
position of Diagram 92 for instance Black will proceed as
follows:

          (1) 18-15          19-24

It would not help to play 27-24, as Black would reply 14-17 and
exchange on the next move by 10-14.

          (2) 11-16

limiting White's mobility.

          (2) ...            23-26

In answer to 24-20 Black would play 15-19.

          (3) 16-19          24-28
          (4) 14-18          26-30
          (5) 19-23          28-32
          (6) 15-19          27-31


              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    | oo |    | ** |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    | ** |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    | ** |    | ** |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+

                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 92.

Not 30-25 on account of 18-22.

          (7) 10-14          31-26
          (8) 14-17          26-31
          (9) 17-22          31-27
         (10) 19-16          27-24
         (11) 16-19 and wins.

If, on the 10th move, White played 27-31 instead of 27-24, the
game might proceed as follows:

          (11) 18-15          32-28
          (12) 15-19          28-32
          (13) 22-26          31x22
          (14) 23-27          32x23
          (15) 19x17

These possibilities of exchanging "two for two" should always be
looked for as they often occur, enabling a win within a few
moves.



III

THE FIVE FUNDAMENTAL POSITIONS



While in the examples of elementary endings given in the previous
chapter, the correct method of play was comparatively easy to
find, positions with few men often occur which look very simple
but which require considerable thought to be handled in the right
way. The knowledge of these positions, of which there are five
distinctly different types, is essential for any one who desires
to become a fair player and they are, therefore, thoroughly
explained in the following five characteristic examples.


THE FIRST POSITION


It does not make any difference in the method of play whether the
Black man is located as shown in Diagram 93 or on 3, 4, 7, 8, 10,
11 16, 20 or 24. The essential point is that he must not be able
to march to the King row without being intercepted by White.

The winning maneuver is this: White turns the Black King out of
the double corner in the manner shown in the play from the
position of Diagram 89 and thereby compels the Black man to
advance, finally forcing an exchange which secures the
opposition.

          32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 | ** |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 | ** |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

           DIAGRAM 93.--White to Move and Win.

This maneuver, as will be evident from a careful study of the
position, is possible only in case White has the move. If Black
has the move the ending is a draw.

          Black              White

          (1) ...            23-27
          (2) 28-32          19-23
          (3) 32-28

Black cannot play 12-16, as 27-24 would win a piece.

          (3) ...            27-32
          (4) 28-24

Again 12-16 is not possible on account of 32-27 winning a piece
in three moves.

          (4) ...            23-18

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    | oo |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 94.

White played 32-28 Black would exchange by five 24-19 and draw
the game.

In the position of the Diagram Black has the choice between 24-
20, 12-16, 24-19 or 24-28, but he loses, no matter what move he
makes as demonstrated below.

(A)       (5) 24-20          32-27
          (6) 20-16          18-15
          (7) 16-20          15-18
          (8) 12-16          18-15

(B)       (5) 12-16          18-15

Now Black cannot play (6) 16-19 because of the exchange 32-27;
(6) 16-20 would also lose quickly through 15-18, (7) 24-19, 32-
28, (8) 19-16, 18-23. The best try is (6) 24-28.

Against 15-18 Black would now draw by (7) 16-19, 32-27; (8) 19-
23.

The only way to win is

          (6) ...            15-11

after which Black can do no better than

          (7) 16-19          32-27
          (8) 28-32          27-31
          (9) 32-28          11-16
         (10) 19-24          16-19, etc.

(C)       (5) 24-19          32-28
          (6) 12-16          28-32
          (7) 19-24          18-15

and White continues as shown before.

(D)       (5) 24-28          18-15
          (6) 28-24          32-28
          (7) 24-27          15-18
          (8) 12-16          28-32
          (9) 27-24          18-15

and wins as before by 15-18 in reply to (10) 16-20 or 15-11 in
reply to 24-28.


THE SECOND POSITION (See Diagram 95)


White's advantage is that he can crown his two men while Black
remains with only one King and two men. The reason why Black
cannot use his two men to advantage is that they are pinned on
the side of the board while White's men are located in the center
where they have much more mobility. All the same White must have
the move in order to win, just as in first position.

          Black              White

          (1)   ...          30-26
          (2)  9-14          26-23
          (3) 14-10          23-18


              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    | o  |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    | o  |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    | oo |    | *  | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 | *  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    | ** |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

            DIAGRAM 95.--White to Move and Win.

          (4) 10-6           18-14
          (5)  6-1           14-9
          (6)  1-5            9-6
          (7)  5-9            6-2
          (8)  9-5            2-6
          (9)  5-1            6-9
          (10) 1-5            9-14
          (11) 5-1           14-18
          (12) 1-6           18-15
          (13) 6-9           15-19
          (14) 9-14          27-23
          (15) 14-10          23-18
          (16) 10-6           18-14
          (17)  6-1           14-9
          (18)  1-5            9-6
          (19)  5-9            6-2
          (20)  9-5            2-6
          (21)  5-1            6-9
          (22)  1-5            9-14
          (23)  5-1           14-18
          (24)  1-6           18-23
          (25)  6-10          23-27
          (26) 10-14          19-23
          (27) 14-10          23-18
          (28) 10-6           18-14
          (29)  6-1           14-9
          (30)  1-5           22-17

At last White has a position in which he can reduce the ending to
one of the fundamental cases by exchange.

          (31)  5-14          17-10
          (32)  21-25

It will be noticed that through the exchange Black gained to
move. White regains it by a second exchange.

          (32) ...            10-15
          (33) 25-30          15-19
          (34) 30-26          27-32
          (35) 26-22          19-24
          (36) 20-27          32-23

           and wins.

Second position as a rule results from a "Bridge position" like
the following: Black men on 20, 21, 23, Black King on 26. White
men on 30 and 32, White Kings on 15 and 19. Black to move:

          (1) 26-31          19-26
          (2) 31-22          32-27

and White wins by "second position."


THE CHANGE OF THE MOVE


By the exchanges of men in the foregoing example the move was
altered in each case. However, exchanges of pieces often occur
which do NOT change the move, and as win or loss in a great
number of endings depends upon which player has the move, it is
necessary for the beginner to obtain a clear insight into the
questions involved. An exchange always alters the move if the
capturing piece is recaptured in turn. If a different piece is
recaptured, it depends upon the relative position of the captured
pieces, whether the move has remained with the same player or
gone over to his opponent. For the purpose of calculating the
move and its changes it is useful to imagine the Checker board as
being composed of two "systems of squares"--the Black system
containing the ranks starting with the squares 1, 9, 17 and 25,
and the White system containing the other four ranks. If each of
the two systems contains an EVEN number of men, the player whose
turn to play it is, loses the opposition, that is: his opponent
has the move. If the number of men in each system is ODD, the
player whose turn to play it is, gains the opposition, that is,
he has the move. As the calculation of the move enters only into
such positions in which both players have the same number of
pieces, it is sufficient to correct the number of men in one of
the systems to obtain the desired information. Diagram 96
furnishes an example.

Counting the men of a system, the Black one, for instance, shows
their number to be odd. Therefore, the player whose turn it is to
play, has the move, which in the present instance

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    | o  |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | o  |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    | o  |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  * |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |  * |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+

                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 96.

secures the win for White and a draw for Black, thus

          (A) Black to move

          Black              White

          (1)  8-11

This is apparently Black's best move; if he plays 2-7, White
replies 19-15, obtaining a very strong position.

          (1)  ...            31-26
          (2)  2-6            26-22
          (3)  6-10           22-18
          (4)  11-16           18-15
                       Draw.

         (B) White to move

          Black               White

          (1)  ...            31-26
          (2)  2-6            26-22
          (3)  8-11           24-20
          (4)  6-10           22-19
          Block.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    | o  |    |    |    |    |    |  o | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 | * |     |  o |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | *  | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 | *  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 97.

From the above explanation it is evident that in the case of an
exchange the move remains unaltered if the captured pieces were
located in the same system, and that the move changes if the
captured pieces belonged to different systems.

Exceptions to the rule sometimes occur due to a piece having no
mobility, as for instance in the position of Diagram 97 where
Black, on the move, loses because his man on 28 is blocked.


THE THIRD POSITION


              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 | oo |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 | oo |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+

                    3         2        1

           DIAGRAM 98.--White to Move and Win.

White being a man ahead appears to have an easy win; but owing to
the difficulty of getting the man crowned he has a hard task
before him.

If the Kings on 11 and 12 were removed White would not be able to
win at all, as the Black King would go back and forth between 19
and 23. It is, therefore, clear that in forcing a win from the
position of the diagram the King on 12 must cooperate.

Another point to be borne in mind is that the following position
would be a draw with White to move.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |  o |    | oo |    | oo |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ** |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 99.

White is unable to make any headway because he cannot threaten an
exchange. The method in which White threatens the exchange of the
King on 19 in the example of third position given in Diagram 98
is the following:

          Black               White
          (1)  ...            20-24
          (2) 11-15           24-27

12-8 would be of no use as 19-23 would force 8-12 again.

          (3) 15-11

If 15-18 White wins by 27-31

          (3)  ...            27-32

27-31 would admit of a draw by (4) 19-23, 28-24; (5) 23-27, 24-
20; (6) 27-23, 12-16; (7) 11-15, etc.

          (4) 11-15           12-8
          (5) 15-18           32-27
          (6) 18-15           27-31
          (7) 15-18            8-11
          (8) 18-23           11-7
          (9) 19-15

This is better than allowing the Kings to get together.

           (9)  ...            28-24
           (10) 23-27          24-20
           (11) 27-23           7-2
           (12) 15-11           2-6
           (13) 23-19           6-10

If he moved the other King, Black would draw by 19-16.

           (14) 19-23          10-14
           (15) 23-19

Black would lose easily if he allowed the man to advance

           (15) ...            14-18

Threatening to exchange

           (16) 19-24

The only move to avoid the exchange.

           (16) ...            18-23
           (17) 24-28          23-19
           (18) 28-32          31-26
           (19) 32-28          26-23
           (20) 28-32          23-18
           (21) 32-28          19-15
           (22) 11-8           20-16

and White cannot be prevented from getting another King.

An earlier setting of third position is shown in Diagram 100.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |  o |    |    |    |  o |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 100.

White wins by

          (1)  ...            19-24
          (2) 27-31           32-28
          (3) 23-27           30-23
          (4) 27-32           23-18
          (5) 32-27           24-20
          (6) 27-23           19-15, etc.


THE FOURTH POSITION


Although White is a piece ahead he has great difficulties in
winning on account of the weak position of the man on 12. Black's
man on 3 holds

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    | oo |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  o |    | oo |    | oo |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |  * |    | ** |    | ** |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

          DIAGRAM 101.--White to Move and Win.

him in check without being impaired in his effectiveness towards
the center of the board. If Black had the move, White could not
win at all, as he would be unable to dislodge Black's Kings. As
it is, he wins by means of a sacrifice which often occurs in
endings with 4 Kings against 3.

          Black               White

          (1)  ...            14-9
          (2)  1-5             9-13
          (3)  5-1            11-15
          (4)  2-6            10-14
          (5)  1-5            15-18
          (6)  5-1

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    | oo |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    | oo |    | oo | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  o |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    | ** |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |  * |    |    |    | ** |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 102.

It would not help Black to play 6-2 on account of 13-9; (7) 5-1,
9-5; (8) 2-6, 14-17; (9) 6-2, 17-13; (10) 2-6, 18-15; (11) 6-2,
15-10, etc.

          (6)  ...           14-9
          (7)  6-2            9-5
          (8)  2-6          18-15
          (9)  6-2          15-10

This is the important move, which forces the win.

         (10)  2-6

If 2-7, White exchanges by 13-9

         (10)  ...         10-7

Only with this pretty sacrifice can White win the game. After
(11) 3-10 White plays 5-9 and should Black answer (12) 6-2, White
would get "two for one" by 9-6. Therefore, Black can do no better
than play (12) 10-15, 9-2; (13) 15-19, etc., and get a King in
each double corner. White then wins as explained in the chapter
on elementary endings.

Fourth position results in a draw only when the man is held on 12
or 21, according to whether the weaker side is Black or White. In
third position it is useless to hold the man on the above
squares, but sometimes a draw is obtained by holding him on 20 or
13.

In defending a game with two Kings against two Kings and a man,
the weaker side must have the move in the system in which the man
is pinned. The following position for instance is drawn with
White on the move.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    | oo |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    | oo |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    | ** |    |  * | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ** |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 103.

Black, on the move, would win by (1) 13-17, 22-13; (2) 14-9.

In Diagram 104 the drawing move is 27-31. The game ought to run
like this:

          (2) 20-24          23-27
          (3) 24-28          27-32
          (4) 30-26          31-27
          (5) 22-18          27-24

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    | ** |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | oo |    | ** |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |  * |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 104.--WHITE TO MOVE.

          (6) 26-23          24-20

and White moves back and forth between 24 and 20. In the position
of Diagram 105 White draws by:

          (1) ...            23-19
          (2) 28-32          19-24
          (3)  7-2           24-19
          (4)  2-6           19-24
          (5)  6-9           24-19
          (6)  9-14          19-24
          (7) 14-17          15-19

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 | ** |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | oo |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | ** |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 105.--WHITE TO MOVE.

Changing the guard

           (8) 17-22          19-23

and Black can make no progress.


THE FIFTH POSITION


White is on the move, and it is evident that he loses if he moves
the man on 27 permitting black to reply 11-15. The only way to
save the game is to sacrifice the man on 20 by 20-16. The
following play would ensue.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |  o |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |  o |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |  o |    |  o |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |  * |    |  * | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                DIAGRAM 106.

          (2) 11-2O          27-23
          (3) 20-24          22-18
          (4) 24-27          18-9
          (5) 10-14

Preventing 23-18

          (5)  ...            9-6
          (6) 27-31           6-2K
          (7) 31-27           2-6

White cannot save the piece and so he runs his opponent.

          (8) 27-18           6-9
          (9) 13-17           19-15
         (10) 18-11           9-18
         (11) 17-22           18-25
         (12) 11-15           25-22

Drawn. White would lose by 21-17, as after (13) 15-18, 17-13;
(14) 18-14, 25-22; (15) 12-16 he cannot gain the double corner.

The following has been suggested as a suitable problem to be
called SIXTH POSITION.

             32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | oo |    |    |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | o  |    | ** |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  o |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | ** |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |  * |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

       DIAGRAM 107.--BLACK TO MOVE AND WHITE TO DRAW.

Black plays

         (1) 7-2

threatening (2) 3-7 and (3) 15-11.   White can prevent this only
by

         (1) ...          24-20

Now 3-7 would only draw on account of 16-11.

         (2) 2-6          20-24
         (3) 6-10         24-20

Again 3-7 had to be prevented.

         (4) 10-14        20-24
         (5) 14-17        24-27

This time 24-20 would have lost, as Black would have replied (6)
17-13, 20-24; (7) 3-7, 12-8; (8) 15-11.

         (6) 17-13        27-32

Avoiding 27-24 which would lose by (7) 3-7

         (7) 13-9         32-27
         (8) 9-14         27-24
         (9) 14-18        24-27

Drawn. White has to watch 3-7 and to take care to play 24-20 at
the right time so as to exchange 16-11 if 3-7 is played. At the
same time he must beware of playing 24-20 when the Black Kings
are on squares 15 and 5 or 15 and 13, as otherwise Black would
reply 5-9, 20-24; 3-7, 12-8; 15-11.



IV

GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND ILLUSTRATIVE GAMES



It is possible to apply general strategic principles to the game
of Checkers, just as well as the game of Chess, even though there
is not the scope in Checkers for strategic maneuvers on the grand
scale on which they can be carried out in Chess.

Again it is naturally the principle of greatest mobility which
should govern the plan of mobilization in any opening, and it is
consequently more desirable to have the men work in the center of
the board, than on the edge, where part of their range is cut
off.

The advantage of center squares over side squares is not so
marked in Checkers as it is in Chess. There is no doubt that a
piece has more mobility in the center, where there are two or
four moves to choose from, than on the side where only one or two
moves are possible; but a man on the side has an advantage in so
far as he is backed up by the edge of the board so that he is
safe from being captured until he moves. However, a player who
keeps his men in massed formation in the center will in almost
all cases be able to make them protect each other and to win the
upper hand against an opponent whose army is divided into two
parts, one on the left and the other on the right side of the
board.

When playing with the white men, it is advisable to occupy such
squares as 14, 18, 19, 30, 31 and 32, and it is not advisable to
occupy 5 and 12 whenever the opponent has a man on 1 or 3
respectively, as in that case the men have a tendency to act as
supports for the enemy instead of helping their own side. In the
position: Black 1, 7 and 9; White 5, 14, 18 and 22; for instance,
White's man on 5 supports Black's man on 9 and White, on the
move, has to surrender a piece by 22-17, to which Black replies
9-13.

It is naturally a good thing not to touch the men of the back row
mentioned above, as they will prevent the opponent from getting
Kings. White's man 29 and Black's man 4, however, are better off
in the middle of the board, as the squares 25 and 8 are
adequately guarded by 30 and 3 respectively. Moreover, there is
danger of the first position arising from openings in which a
player keeps his man in the single corner.

A formation which very often occurs in the middle game is the so-
called "elbow." It consists of three men arranged like the white
pieces in Diagram 108.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    | o  |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | o  |    |    |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 | *  |    |  o |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  * |    |    |    |    |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 | *  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 108.

When adequately supported an elbow forms a solid position which
cannot easily be attacked. An example of a strong elbow will be
found in the following game:

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |  o |    |    |    |  o |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |  o |    |    |    |  o |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |  * |    |  o | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | *  |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 109.

          Black               White

          (1) 10-15           23-19
          (2) 6-10            22-17
          (3) 1-6             25-22
          (4) 11-16           17-13
          (5) 16-23           26-19
          (6) 7-11            29-25
          (7) 11-16           22-17
          (8) 16-23           27-11
          (9) 8-15            24-19
         (10) 15-24           28-19
         (11) 4-8             25-22
         (12) 8-11            31-26
         (13) 3-7             22-18
         (14) 9-14            18-9
         (15) 5-14

The men on 6, 10, 13, 14, 17 and 21 form the elbow, the strength
of which becomes apparent on the 19th move.

         (15) ...             26-23
         (16) 11-15           32-28
         (17) 15-24           28-19
         (18) 7-11            30-26
         (19) 2-7             19-16
         (20) 12-19           23-16
         (21) 11-20           26-23
         (22) 7-11 and wins.

The danger involved in an elbow, which is not sufficiently backed
up, is shown in the following game.

          Black               White

          (1) 10-15           23-19
          (2) 7-10            22-17
          (3) 3-7             25-22
          (4) 9-14            29-25
          (5) 5-9             17-13
          (6) 1-5             22-17
          (7) 11-16           26-22
          (8) 16-23           27-11
          (9) 7-l6            31-26
         (10) 8-11            24-19
         (11) 16-23           26-19
         (12) 11-15           30-26

and White wins through the threat to get two for one by 19-15
after the exchange. Black cannot help the loss of a man.

The reader, who has thoroughly acquainted himself with the
fundamental endings, will have no difficulty in playing a good
game of checkers, if he follows at every move the general
principles discussed in this chapter. When playing over the
countless variations, which are offered in the majority of
checker books, he would find that they are merely illustrations
of the application of those principles to the various openings.

Following are two examples from master play, the careful study of
which will do more good to the student than the perusal of a
great number of games that lack adequate annotation.

          Black               White

         (1)  9-14

The best opening move is probably 11-15, as this enables a speedy
development of the man on 4, who, as previously explained, should
not be kept in the back row. The variations resulting from 11-15
have been so thoroughly analyzed that it is practically
impossible to defeat a player who chooses this opening and knows
the possible variations by heart. It has, therefore, been found
necessary to restrict the players in matches and tournaments by
balloting the first move of Black and White, in order to avoid
too many draws. This is a serious drawback, as it curtails the
freedom of decision, to which a player should be entitled in any
game.

          (1) ...             22-17
          (2) 11-15

It is hard to tell whether this move of 11-16 or 5-9 is the best.
6-9 and 10-15 are considered weak.

          (2) ...             25-22

More aggressive than 23-19, which can safely be played.

          (3) 15-19

8-11 or 17-13 or 23-19 are also good moves.

          Black               White

         (3) ...              24-15
         (4) 10-19            23-16
         (5) 12-19            17-1O
         (6) 6-15             21-17
         (7) 5-9              29-25
         (8) 8-12             25-21
         (9) 7-10             17-13
        (10) 1-6


              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |  o |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |  * |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |    |    |  o | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 110.

At first sight, it might seem unwise to break up the King row,
when 9-14 could be played; but the advantage of holding the man
on 13, instead of allowing him to complicate matters by 13-9,
more than counterbalances the disadvantage of moving a back man.
Black could also play (10) 2-6, but this admits of the following
strong attack: (10) 2-6, 27-23; (11) 4-8, 23-16; (12) 12-19, 32-
27; (13) 9-14, 27-24; (14) 3-7 (8-12 would lose), 22-17; (15) 14-
18 (again 8-12 would lose), 17-14; (16) 10-17, 21-14; (17) 1-5,
31-27; (18) 6-10, 24-20; (19) 10-17, 26-22; (20) 18-25, 30-14;
(21) 7-11 (Probably the only move to draw--8-12 would lose on
account of 20-16).

          Black               White

          (10) ...            27-24
          (11) 4-8            32-27

22-18 could also be played.

          (12) 9-14           27-23

or 22-17 or 24-20.

          (13) 3-7            23-16
          (14) 12-19          22-17
          (15) 7-11           26-23

31-27 would lose through (16) 8-12, 26-22; (17) 11-16, 24-20;
(18) 19-24, 20-11; (19) 24-31, 11-8; (20) 14-18.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |  o |    |  o |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  o |    |  o |    |    |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |  * |    |    |    |  o |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |  o | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  * |    |    |    |  * |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |  * |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 111.

          (16) 19-26          30-23
          (17)  8-12          24-20
          (18) 15-18          23-19

20-16 cannot be played on account of (19) 20-27, 16-7; (20) 2-11,
31-24; (21) 12-16.

           (19) 11-15          20-16

White can, of course, draw here by 31-26; but 20-16 also draws in
spite of Black's seemingly invincible elbow.

           Black              White

          (20) 15-24          28-19
          (21) 2-7            31-26
          (22) 18-23

If 18-22, White draws by 19-15; (23) 12-19, 13-9.

          (22) ...            26-22


              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |  o |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |  o |    |    |    |  o |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  o |    |    |    |  * |    |  o | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |    |    |  * |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 112.

Playing for a brilliant finish. He could also draw by 16-11; (23)
7-16, 26-22; (24) 14-18, 22-15; (25) 23-26, 17-14.

          Black               White

          (23) 23-27          16-11
          (24) 7-23           22-18

Drawing, although two men down.

The following game illustrates first position:

          Black               White

          (1) 11-15           22-18

This move is not considered as strong as 23-19.

          (2) 15-22           25-18
          (3) 8-11

12-16 can also be played.

          (3) ...             29-25
          (4) 4-8             25-22

24-20 is another good move.

          (5) 12-16

If 10-15, White obtains a strong game by 23-19.

          (5) ...             24-20

Considered best. 24-19 or 22-17 are also playable.

          (6) 8-12

He could lay a trap by (6) 10-15. If White replies 27-24 or 28-
24, Black wins by (7) 15-19. 24-15; (8) 16-19, 23-16; (9) 9-14.

          Black               White

          (6) ...             27-24
          (7) 10-14           24-19

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |  o |    |  o |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    |    |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  o |    |  o |    |    |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  * |    |    |    |  * |    |  * | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 113.

In answer to 31-27, Black would win by (8) 7-10, 24-19; (9) 9-13,
18-9; (10) 5-14, 28-24; (11) 13-17, 22-13; (12) 3-7 or (10) ...,
27-24; (11) 1-5, 22-18; (12) 3-7.

         (8) 7-10             28-24

32-27 or 19-15 are considered stronger.

         (9) 3-7              32-28

This loses. The only drawing move is 30-25.

         Black               White

         (10) 9-13           18-9
         (11) 5-14           22-18


              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |  o |    |  o |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |  o |    |  o |    |    |    |  * |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  * |    |    |    |    |    |  * | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |  * |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 114.

Four variations are possible here. If 31-27 or 30-25, Black wins
by (12) 13-17, 22-13; (13) 14-18, etc. (11) ..., 22-17 loses on
account of (12) 13-22, 26-17; (13) 14-18. The sacrifice (11) ...,
21-17; (12) 14-21, 22-18 is met by (13) 10-14, 18-9; (14) 1-5,
26-22; (15) 5-14, 31-26; (16) 13-17.

          Black               White

          (12) 13-17          18-9
          (13)  6-13          21-14
          (14) 10-17          26-22

In answer to 30-25 Black wins by (15) 7-10, 25-22; (16) 2-6; but
with 31-27 White can offer prolonged resistance, thus:

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    |    |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  o |    |  o |    |  o | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |  o |    |  o |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |  * |    |    |    |  * |    |    | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  * |    |  * |    |    |    |  * |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |  * | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |  * |    |  * |    |  * |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2         1

                    DIAGRAM 115.

(14) ..., 31-27; (15) 17-22, 26-17; (16) 13-22, 19-15; (17) 11-
18, 23-14; (18) 1-6, 20-11; (19) 7-16, 27-23; (20) 16-19, 23-16;
(21) 12-19, 24-15; (22) 6-10, 15-6; (23) 2-18, 28-24; (24) 18-23,
24-19; (25) 23-27, 19-15; (26) 27-32. 15-10; (27) 32-27, 10-6;
(28) 27-23, 6-1; (29) 22-26, 1-6; (30) 26-31, 6-9; (31) 30-26, 9-
13; (32) 26-22, 13-9; (33) 23-18. Black has now received first
position and wins.

          Black               White

          (15) 17-26          31-22
          (16) 7-10           30-25
          (17) 2-6            25-21
          (18) 6-9            22-18
          (19) 1-5            18-15

White must give up a piece to get through, and Black can then
exchange at his leisure and win without difficulty.

          (20) 11-27, etc.



V

PROBLEMS



Checker problems, unlike the Chess problems, are intimately
related to the game itself and do not enable combinations
different in kind from those which occur in the actual fight over
the board.

         PROBLEM No. 1. WHITE TO MOVE AND DRAW.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    | o  |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | o  |    |    |    |    |    | o  | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | *  |    |    |    |    |    |  * | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 116.

They usually represent an end game and are distinguished from
ordinary endings only by an unexpected initial move, mostly
embodying a sacrifice of several men. Diagrams 116, 117 and 118
furnish some examples:

         PROBLEM No. 2. WHITE TO MOVE AND WIN.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | ** | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | oo |    |  o |    | o  |    |    | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 |    |    |    |    |    |    | o  |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | *  | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |    |    |    |    |    |    | *  |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | *  | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 117.

If, in Diagram 116, White tried to reach the King row with his
man 27, Black would win by first position thus: (1) . . ., 27-23,
(2) 16-20, 24-19; (3) 20-24, 19-15; (4) 24-27, 23-19; (5) 27-24,
19-16; (6) 24-19, etc. The only way to draw is to sacrifice first
the man on 21 by 21-17; and then to continue as above. This
enables White to play 23-18, instead of 19-15, exchanging the
King for a man.

The first move in Diagram 117 is 24-28, to which Black must reply
(2) 29-25. White then sacrifices his three men by 17-14 and after
(3) 25-27 (or 9-27) plays 28-32. Black must take the third man,
and White recaptures two men by 32-14, pinning both of the
remaining black men.

         PROBLEM No. 3. BLACK TO PLAY AND WIN.

              32        31        30
       +---------------------------------------+
       |    | o  |    |    |    | o  |    |  o | 29
       |---------------------------------------|
    28 |  o |    | o  |    |  o |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    |    |    | o  |    | o  |    | *  | 21
       |---------------------------------------|
    20 | *  |    |    |    | o  |    | *  |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | *  |    | o  |    |    |    | o  | 13
       |---------------------------------------|
    12 |  o |    | *  |    |    |    | *  |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
       |    | *  |    |    |    | *  |    | *  | 5
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |  * |    |  * |    | *  |    |
       +---------------------------------------+
                    3         2        1

                    DIAGRAM 118.

This is the longest stroke known to have occurred in actual play.
The game from which the above position arose went as follows:

              Black         White

          (1) 12-16         21-17
          (2) 16-20         17-13
          (3) 10-14         23-19
          (4) 14-17         19-16
          (5) 17-21         16-12
          (6) 11-16         22-18
          (7) 8-11          25-22
          (8) 7-10          26-23
          (9) 10-14         24-19
         (10) 14-17         31-26
         (11) 4-8           19-15

Now the position of the diagram is reached, in which Black wins
by

         (12) 21-25         30-14
         (13) 16-19         23-7
         (14) 3-19          12-3
         (15) 19-24         28-19
         (16) 2-7           3-10
         (17) 6-31          13-6
         (18) 1-17          22-13
         (19) 31-15

Completing a stroke, which removes 18 pieces from the board.

         (19)  ...          32-27
         (20) 15-10         29-25
         (21) 5-9

To get the move

         (21)  ...          13-6
         (22) 10-1          25-22
         (23) 1-6           22-18
         (24) 6-10          27-23
         (25) 20-24         23-19
         (26) 24-27         18-15
         (27) 10-7          19-16
         (28) 27-31         15-11
         (29) 7-3           16-2
         (30) 31-27         11-8
         (31) 27-24         8-4
         (32) 24-19         4-8
         (33) 19-15         8-4
         (34) 15-11 and wins.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chess and Checkers: The Way to
Mastership, by Edward Lasker





Produced by Robert Nield, Tom Allen, David Moynihan, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





ABRAHAM LINCOLN: A HISTORY
BY JOHN G. NICOLAY AND JOHN HAY

VOLUME ONE




TO THE HONORABLE ROBERT TODD LINCOLN

  THIS WORK IS DEDICATED
    IN TOKEN OF
  A LIFE-LONG FRIENDSHIP
    AND ESTEEM




AUTHORS' PREFACE


A generation born since Abraham Lincoln died has already reached
manhood and womanhood. Yet there are millions still living who
sympathized with him in his noble aspirations, who labored with him in
his toilsome life, and whose hearts were saddened by his tragic death.
It is the almost unbroken testimony of his contemporaries that by
virtue of certain high traits of character, in certain momentous lines
of purpose and achievement, he was incomparably the greatest man of
his time. The deliberate judgment of those who knew him has hardened
into tradition; for although but twenty-five years have passed since
he fell by the bullet of the assassin, the tradition is already
complete. The voice of hostile faction is silent, or unheeded; even
criticism is gentle and timid. If history had said its last word, if
no more were to be known of him than is already written, his fame,
however lacking in definite outline, however distorted by fable, would
survive undiminished to the latest generations. The blessings of an
enfranchised race would forever hail him as their liberator; the
nation would acknowledge him as the mighty counselor whose patient
courage and wisdom saved the life of the republic in its darkest hour;
and illuminating his proud eminence as orator, statesman, and ruler,
there would forever shine around his memory the halo of that tender
humanity and Christian charity in which he walked among his fellow-
countrymen as their familiar companion and friend.

It is not, therefore, with any thought of adding materially to his
already accomplished renown that we have written the work which we now
offer to our fellow-citizens. But each age owes to its successors the
truth in regard to its own annals. The young men who have been born
since Sumter was fired on have a right to all their elders know of the
important events they came too late to share in. The life and fame of
Lincoln will not have their legitimate effect of instruction and
example unless the circumstances among which he lived and found his
opportunities are placed in their true light before the men who never
saw him.

To write the life of this great American in such a way as to show his
relations to the times in which he moved, the stupendous issues he
controlled, the remarkable men by whom he was surrounded, has been the
purpose which the authors have diligently pursued for many years. We
can say nothing of the result of our labor; only those who have been
similarly employed can appreciate the sense of inadequate performance
with which we regard what we have accomplished. We claim for our work
that we have devoted to it twenty years of almost unremitting
assiduity; that we have neglected no means in our power to ascertain
the truth; that we have rejected no authentic facts essential to a
candid story; that we have had no theory to establish, no personal
grudge to gratify, no unavowed objects to subserve. We have aimed to
write a sufficiently full and absolutely honest history of a great man
and a great time; and although we take it for granted that we have
made mistakes, that we have fallen into such errors and inaccuracies
as are unavoidable in so large a work, we claim there is not a line in
all these volumes dictated by malice or unfairness.

Our desire to have this work placed under the eyes of the greatest
possible number of readers induced us to accept the generous offer of
"The Century Magazine" to print it first in that periodical. In this
way it received, as we expected, the intelligent criticism of a very
large number of readers, thoroughly informed in regard to the events
narrated, and we have derived the greatest advantage from the
suggestions and corrections which have been elicited during the serial
publication, which began in November, 1886, and closed early in 1890.
We beg, here, to make our sincere acknowledgments to the hundreds of
friendly critics who have furnished us with valuable information.

As "The Century" had already given, during several years, a
considerable portion of its pages to the elucidation and discussion of
the battles and campaigns of the civil war, it was the opinion of its
editor, in which we coincided, that it was not advisable to print in
the magazine the full narrative sketch of the war which we had
prepared. We omitted also a large number of chapters which, although
essential to a history of the time, and directly connected with the
life of Mr. Lincoln, were still episodical in their nature, and were
perhaps not indispensable to a comprehension of the principal events
of his administration. These are all included in the present volumes;
they comprise additional chapters almost equal in extent and fully
equal in interest to those which have already been printed in "The
Century." Interspersed throughout the work in their proper connection
and sequence, and containing some of the most important of Mr.
Lincoln's letters, they lend breadth and unity to the historical
drama.

We trust it will not be regarded as presumptuous if we say a word in
relation to the facilities we have enjoyed and the methods we have
used in the preparation of this work. We knew Mr. Lincoln intimately
before his election to the Presidency. We came from Illinois to
Washington with him, and remained at his side and in his service--
separately or together--until the day of his death. We were the daily
and nightly witnesses of the incidents, the anxieties, the fears, and
the hopes which pervaded the Executive Mansion and the National
Capital. The President's correspondence, both official and private,
passed through our hands; he gave us his full confidence. We had
personal acquaintance and daily official intercourse with Cabinet
Officers, Members of Congress, Governors, and Military and Naval
Officers of all grades, whose affairs brought them to the White House.
It was during these years of the war that we formed the design of
writing this history and began to prepare for it. President Lincoln
gave it his sanction and promised his cordial cooperation. After
several years' residence in Europe, we returned to this country and
began the execution of our long-cherished plan. Mr. Robert T. Lincoln
gave into our keeping all the official and private papers and
manuscripts in his possession, to which we have added all the material
we could acquire by industry or by purchase. It is with the advantage,
therefore, of a wide personal acquaintance with all the leading
participants of the war, and of perfect familiarity with the
manuscript material, and also with the assistance of the vast bulk of
printed records and treatises which have accumulated since 1865, that
we have prosecuted this work to its close.

If we gained nothing else by our long association with Mr. Lincoln we
hope at least that we acquired from him the habit of judging men and
events with candor and impartiality. The material placed in our hands
was unexampled in value and fullness; we have felt the obligation of
using it with perfect fairness. We have striven to be equally just to
friends and to adversaries; where the facts favor our enemies we have
recorded them ungrudgingly; where they bear severely upon statesmen
and generals whom we have loved and honored we have not scrupled to
set them forth, at the risk of being accused of coldness and
ingratitude to those with whom we have lived on terms of intimate
friendship. The recollection of these friendships will always be to us
a source of pride and joy; but in this book we have known no
allegiance but to the truth. We have in no case relied upon our own
memory of the events narrated, though they may have passed under our
own eyes; we have seen too often the danger of such a reliance in the
reminiscences of others. We have trusted only our diaries and
memoranda of the moment; and in the documents and reports we have
cited we have used incessant care to secure authenticity. So far as
possible, every story has been traced to its source, and every
document read in the official record or the original manuscript.

We are aware of the prejudice which exists against a book written by
two persons, but we feel that in our case the disadvantages of
collaboration are reduced to the minimum. Our experiences, our
observations, our material, have been for twenty years not merely
homogeneous--they have been identical. Our plans were made with
thorough concert; our studies of the subject were carried on together;
we were able to work simultaneously without danger of repetition or
conflict. The apportionment of our separate tasks has been dictated
purely by convenience; the division of topics between us has been
sometimes for long periods, sometimes almost for alternate chapters.
Each has written an equal portion of the work; while consultation and
joint revision have been continuous, the text of each remains
substantially unaltered. It is in the fullest sense, and in every
part, a joint work. We each assume responsibility, not only for the
whole, but for all the details, and whatever credit or blame the
public may award our labors is equally due to both.

We commend the result of so many years of research and diligence to
all our countrymen, North and South, in the hope that it may do
something to secure a truthful history of the great struggle which
displayed on both sides the highest qualities of American manhood, and
may contribute in some measure to the growth and maintenance
throughout all our borders of that spirit of freedom and nationality
for which Abraham Lincoln lived and died.

John G. Nicolay
John Hay
[signatures]




ILLUSTRATIONS

VOL. I


ABRAHAM LINCOLN From a photograph taken about 1860 by Hesler, of
Chicago; from the original negative owned by George B. Ayres,
Philadelphia.

LAND WARRANT, ISSUED TO ABRAHAM LINKHORN (LINCOLN)

FAC-SIMILE FROM THE FIELD-BOOK OF DANIEL BOONE

SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE FOR ABRAHAM LINKHORN (LINCOLN)

HOUSE IN WHICH THOMAS LINCOLN AND NANCY HANKS WERE MARRIED

FAC-SIMILE OF THE MARRIAGE BOND OF THOMAS LINCOLN

CERTIFICATE, OR MARRIAGE LIST, CONTAINING THE NAMES OF THOMAS LINCOLN
AND NANCY HANKS

SARAH BUSH LINCOLN AT THE AGE OF 76 From a photograph in possession of
William H. Herndon.

CABIN ON GOOSE-NEST PRAIRIE, ILL., IN WHICH THOMAS LINCOLN LIVED AND
DIED

MODEL OF LINCOLN'S INVENTION FOR BUOYING VESSELS

FAC-SIMILE OF DRAWINGS IN THE PATENT OFFICE

LEAF FROM ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S EXERCISE BOOK

SOLDIER'S DISCHARGE FROM THE BLACK HAWK WAR, SIGNED BY A. LINCOLN,
CAPTAIN

BLACK HAWK. From a portrait by Charles B. King, from McKenny & Hall's
"Indian Tribes of North America."

STEPHEN T. LOGAN From the portrait in possession of his daughter, Mrs.
L. H. Coleman.

ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S SURVEYING INSTRUMENTS, SADDLE BAG, ETC

PLAN OF ROADS SURVEYED BY A. LINCOLN AND OTHERS

FAC-SIMILE OF LINCOLN'S REPORT OF THE ROAD SURVEY

O. H. BROWNING From a photograph by Waide.

MARTIN VAN BUREN From a photograph by Brady.

COL. E. D. BAKER From a photograph by Brady, about 1861.

LINCOLN AND STUART'S LAW-OFFICE, SPRINGFIELD

LINCOLN'S BOOKCASE AND INKSTAND From the Keyes Lincoln Memorial
Collection, Chicago.

GLOBE TAVERN, SPRINGFIELD Where Lincoln lived after his marriage.

WILLIAM HENRY HARRISON From a painting, in 1841, by Henry Inman, owned
by Benjamin Harrison.

FAC-SIMILE OF MARRIAGE CERTIFICATE OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN

JOSHUA SPEED AND WIFE From a painting by Healy, about 1864.

HOUSE IN WHICH ABRAHAM LINCOLN WAS MARRIED

GEN. JAMES SHIELDS From a photograph owned by David Delany.

HENRY CLAY After a photograph by Rockwood, from the daguerreotype
owned by Alfred Hassack.

ZACHARY TAYLOR From the painting by Vanderlyn in the Corcoran Gallery.

JOSHUA R. GIDDINGS From a photograph by Brady.

DAVID DAVIS From a photograph by Brady.

JAMES K. POLK From a photograph by Brady.

FRANKLIN PIERCE From a photograph by Brady.

LYMAN TRUMBULL Prom a photograph by Brady.

OWEN LOVEJOY From a photograph.

DAVID E. ATCHISON From a daguerreotype.

ANDREW H. REEDER From a photograph by R. Knecht.

JAMES H. LANE By permission of the Strowbridge Lithographing Co. MAPS

MAP SHOWING LOCALITIES CONNECTED WITH EARLY EVENTS IN THE LINCOLN
FAMILY

MAP OF NEW SALEM, ILL., AND VICINITY

MAP OF THE BOUNDARIES OF TEXAS

HISTORICAL MAP OF THE UNITED STATES IN 1854




TABLE OF CONTENTS

VOL. I


CHAPTER I. LINEAGE The Lincolns in America. Intimacy with the Boones.
Kentucky in 1780. Death of Abraham Lincoln the Pioneer. Marriage of
Thomas Lincoln. Birth and Childhood of Abraham

CHAPTER II. INDIANA Thomas Lincoln leaves Kentucky. Settles at
Gentryville. Death of Nancy Hanks Lincoln. Sarah Bush Johnston.
Pioneer Life in Indiana. Sports and Superstitions of the Early
Settlers. The Youth of Abraham. His Great Physical Strength. His
Voyage to New Orleans. Removal to Illinois

CHAPTER III. ILLINOIS IN 1830 The Winter of the Deep Snow. The Sudden
Change. Pioneer Life. Religion and Society. French and Indians.
Formation of the Political System. The Courts. Lawyers and
Politicians. Early Superannuation

CHAPTER IV. NEW SALEM Denton Offutt. Lincoln's Second Trip to New
Orleans. His Care of His Family. Death of Thomas Lincoln. Offutt's
Store in New Salem. Lincoln's Initiation by the "Clary's Grove Boys."
The Voyage of the _Talisman_

CHAPTER V. LINCOLN IN THE BLACK HAWK WAR Black Hawk. The Call for
Volunteers. Lincoln Elected Captain. Stillman's Run. Lincoln
Reenlists. The Spy Battalion. Black Hawk's Defeat. Disbandment of the
Volunteers

CHAPTER VI. SURVEYOR AND REPRESENTATIVE Lincoln's Candidacy for the
Legislature. Runs as a Whig. Defeated. Berry and Lincoln Merchants.
Lincoln Begins the Study of Law. Postmaster. Surveyor. His Popularity.
Elected to the Legislature, 1834

CHAPTER VII. LEGISLATIVE EXPERIENCE Lincoln's First Session in the
Legislature. Douglas and Peek. Lincoln Reelected. Bedlam Legislation.
Schemes of Railroad Building. Removal of the Capital to Springfield

CHAPTER VIII. THE LINCOLN-STONE PROTEST The Pro-Slavery Sentiment in
Illinois. Attempt to Open the State to Slavery. Victory of the Free-
State Party. Reaction. Death of Lovejoy. Pro-Slavery Resolutions. The
Protest

CHAPTER IX. COLLAPSE OF "THE SYSTEM" Lincoln in Springfield. The
Failure of the Railroad System. Fall of the Banks. First Collision
with Douglas. Tampering with the Judiciary

CHAPTER X. EARLY LAW PRACTICE Early Legal Customs. Lincoln's
Popularity in Law and Politics. A Speech in 1840. The Harrison
Campaign. Correspondence with Stuart. Harrison Elected. Melancholia

CHAPTER XI. MARRIAGE Courtship and Engagement, The Pioneer
Temperament. Lincoln's Love Affairs. Joshua F. Speed. Lincoln's Visit
to Kentucky. Correspondence with Speed. Marriage

CHAPTER XII. THE SHIELDS DUEL A Political Satire. James Shields.
Lincoln Challenged. A Fight Arranged and Prevented. Subsequent
Wranglings. The Whole Matter Forgotten. An Admonition

CHAPTER XIII. THE CAMPAIGN OF 1844 Partnership with Stephen T. Logan.
Lincoln Becomes a Lawyer. Temperance Movement. Baker and Lincoln
Candidates for the Whig Nomination to Congress. Baker Successful. Clay
Nominated for President. The Texas Question. Clay Defeated

CHAPTER XIV. LINCOLN'S CAMPAIGN FOR CONGRESS Schemes of Annexation.
Opposition at the North. Outbreak of War. Lincoln Nominated for
Congress. His Opponent Peter Cartwright. Lincoln Elected. The Whigs in
the War. E. D. Baker in Washington and Mexico

CHAPTER XV. THE THIRTIETH CONGRESS Robert C. Winthrop Chosen Speaker.
Debates on the War. Advantage of the Whigs. Acquisition of Territory.
The Wilmot Proviso. Lincoln's Resolutions. Nomination of Taylor for
President. Cass the Democratic Candidate. Lincoln's Speech, July 27,
1848. Taylor Elected

CHAPTER XVI. A FORTUNATE ESCAPE Independent Action of Northern
Democrats. Lincoln's Plan for Emancipation in the District of
Columbia. His Bill Fails to Receive Consideration. A Similar Bill
Signed by Him Fifteen Years Later. Logan Nominated for Congress and
Defeated. Lincoln an Applicant for Office. The Fascination of
Washington

CHAPTER XVII. THE CIRCUIT LAWYER The Growth and Change of Legal
Habits. Lincoln on the Circuit. His Power and Value as a Lawyer.
Opinion of David Davis. Of Judge Drummond. Incidents of the Courts.
Lincoln's Wit and Eloquence. His Life at Home

CHAPTER XVIII. THE BALANCE OF POWER Origin of the Slavery Struggle.
The Ordinance of 1787. The Compromises of the Constitution. The
Missouri Compromise. Cotton and the Cotton-Gin. The Race between Free
and Slave States. The Admission of Texas. The Wilmot Proviso. New
Mexico and California. The Compromise Measures of 1850. Finality

CHAPTER XIX. REPEAL OF THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE Stephen A. Douglas. Old
Fogies and Young America. The Nomination of Pierce. The California
Gold Discovery. The National Platforms on the Slavery Issue.
Organization of Western Territories. The Three Nebraska Bills. The
Caucus Agreement of the Senate Committee. Dixon's Repealing Amendment.
Douglas Adopts Dixon's Proposition. Passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act

CHAPTER XX. THE DRIFT OF POLITICS The Storm of Agitation. The Free
Soil Party. The American Party. The Anti-Nebraska Party. Dissolution
of the Whig Party. The Congressional Elections. Democratic Defeat.
Banks Elected Speaker

CHAPTER XXI. LINCOLN AND TRUMBULL The Nebraska Question in Illinois.
Douglas's Chicago Speech. Lincoln Reappears in Politics. Political
Speeches at the State Fair. A Debate between Lincoln and Douglas.
Lincoln's Peoria Speech. An Anti-Nebraska Legislature Elected.
Lincoln's Candidacy for the Senate. Shields and Matteson. Trumbull
Elected Senator. Lincoln's Letter to Robertson

CHAPTER XXII. THE BORDER RUFFIANS The Opening of Kansas Territory.
Andrew H, Reeder Appointed Governor. Atchison's Propaganda. The
Missouri Blue Lodges. The Emigrant Aid Company. The Town of Lawrence
Founded. Governor Reeder's Independent Action. The First Border
Ruffian Invasion. The Election of Whitfield

CHAPTER XXIII. THE BOGUS LAWS Governor Reeder's Census. The Second
Border Ruffian Invasion. Missouri Voters Elect the Kansas Legislature.
Westport and Shawnee Mission. The Governor Convenes the Legislature at
Pawnee. The Legislature Returns to Shawnee Mission. Governor Reeder's
Vetoes. The Governor's Removal. Enactment of the Bogus Laws. Despotic
Statutes. Lecompton Founded

CHAPTER XXIV. THE TOPEKA CONSTITUTION The Bogus Legislature Defines
Kansas Politics. The Big Springs Convention. Ex-Governor Reeder's
Resolutions. Formation of the Free-State Party. A Constitutional
Convention at Topeka. The Topeka Constitution. President Pierce
Proclaims the Topeka Movement Revolutionary. Refusal to Recognize the
Bogus Laws. Chief-Justice Lecompte's Doctrine of Constructive Treason,
Arrests and Indictment of the Free-State Leaders. Colonel Sumner
Disperses the Topeka Legislature

CHAPTER XXV. CIVIL WAR IN KANSAS Wilson Shannon Appointed Governor.
The Law and Order Party Formed at Leavenworth. Sheriff Jones. The
Branson Rescue. The Wakarusa War. Sharps Rifles. Governor Shannon's
Treaty. Guerrilla Leaders and Civil War. The Investigating Committee
of Congress. The Flight of Ex-Governor Reeder. The Border Ruffians
March on Lawrence. Burning of the Free-State Hotel




ABRAHAM LINCOLN




CHAPTER I

LINEAGE


[Sidenote: 1780.]

In the year 1780, Abraham Lincoln, a member of a respectable and well-
to-do family in Rockingham County, Virginia, started westward to
establish himself in the newly-explored country of Kentucky. He
entered several large tracts of fertile land, and returning to
Virginia disposed of his property there, and with his wife and five
children went back to Kentucky and settled in Jefferson County. Little
is known of this pioneer Lincoln or of his father. Most of the records
belonging to that branch of the family were destroyed in the civil
war. Their early orphanage, the wild and illiterate life they led on
the frontier, severed their connection with their kindred in the East.
This, often happened; there are hundreds of families in the West
bearing historic names and probably descended from well-known houses
in the older States or in England, which, by passing through one or
two generations of ancestors who could not read or write, have lost
their continuity with the past as effectually as if a deluge had
intervened between the last century and this. Even the patronymic has
been frequently distorted beyond recognition by slovenly pronunciation
during the years when letters were a lost art, and by the phonetic
spelling of the first boy in the family who learned the use of the
pen. There are Lincolns in Kentucky and Tennessee belonging to the
same stock with the President, whose names are spelled "Linkhorn" and
"Linkhern." All that was known of the emigrant, Abraham Lincoln, by
his immediate descendants was that his progenitors, who were Quakers,
came from Berks County, Pennsylvania, into Virginia, and there throve
and prospered. [Footnote: We desire to express our obligations to
Edwin Salter, Samuel L. Smedley, Samuel Shackford, Samuel W.
Pennypacker, Howard M. Jenkins, and John T. Harris, Jr., for
information and suggestions which have been of use to us in this
chapter.] But we now know, with sufficient clearness, through the
wide-spread and searching luster which surrounds the name, the history
of the migrations of the family since its arrival on this continent,
and the circumstances under which the Virginia pioneer started for
Kentucky.

The first ancestor of the line of whom we have knowledge was Samuel
Lincoln, of Norwich, England, who came to Hingham, Massachusetts, in
1638, and died there. He left a son, Mordecai, whose son, of the same
name,--and it is a name which persists in every branch of the family,
[Footnote: The Lincolns, in naming their children, followed so strict
a tradition that great confusion has arisen in the attempt to trace
their genealogy. For instance, Abraham Lincoln, of Chester County, son
of one Mordecai and brother of another, the President's ancestors,
left a fair estate, by will, to his children, whose names were John,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Mordecai, Rebecca, and Sarah--precisely the
same names we find in three collateral families.]--removed to
Monmouth, New Jersey, and thence to Amity township, now a part of now
a part of Berks County, Pennsylvania, where he died in 1735, fifty
years old. From a copy of his will, recorded in the office of the
Register in Philadelphia, we gather that he was a man of considerable
property. In the inventory of his effects, made after his death, he is
styled by the appraisers, "Mordecai Lincoln, Gentleman." His son John
received by his father's will "a certain piece of land lying in the
Jerseys, containing three hundred acres," the other sons and daughters
having been liberally provided for from the Pennsylvania property.
This John Lincoln left New Jersey some years later, and about 1750
established himself in Rockingham County, Virginia. He had five sons,
to whom he gave the names which were traditional in the family:--
Abraham, the pioneer first mentioned,--Isaac, Jacob, Thomas, and John.
Jacob and John remained in Virginia; the former was a soldier in the
War of the Revolution, and took part as lieutenant in a Virginia
regiment at the siege of Yorktown. Isaac went to a place on the
Holston River in Tennessee; Thomas followed his brother to Kentucky,
lived and died there, and his children then emigrated to Tennessee
[Footnote: It is an interesting coincidence for the knowledge of which
we are indebted to Colonel John B. Brownlow, that a minister named
Mordecai Lincoln a relative of the President, performed, on the 17th
of May, 1837, the marriage ceremony of Andrew Johnson, Mr. Lincoln's
succesor, in the Presidency.] With the one memorable exception the
family seem to have been modest, thrifty, unambitious people. Even the
great fame and conspicuousness of the President did not tempt them out
of their retirement. Robert Lincoln, of Hancock County, Illinois, a
cousin--German, became a captain and commissary of volunteers; none of
the others, so far as we know, ever made their existence known to
their powerful kinsman during the years of his glory. [Transcriber's
Note: Lengthy footnote relocated to chapter end.]

It was many years after the death of the President that his son
learned the probable circumstances under which the pioneer Lincoln
removed to the West, and the intimate relations which subsisted
between his family and the most celebrated man in early Western
annals. There is little doubt that it was on account of his
association with the, famous Daniel Boone that Abraham Lincoln went to
Kentucky. The families had for a century been closely allied. There
were frequent intermarriages [Footnote: A letter from David J.
Lincoln, of Birdsboro, Berks County, Pennsylvania, to the writers,
says, "My grandfather, Abraham Lincoln, was married to Anna Boone, a
first cousin of Daniel Boone, July 10, 1760." He was half-brother of
John Lincoln, and afterwards became a man of some prominence in
Pennsylvania, serving in the Constitutional Convention in 1789-90.]
among them--both being of Quaker lineage. By the will of Mordecai
Lincoln, to which reference has been made, his "loving friend and
neighbor" George Boone was made a trustee to assist his widow in the
care of the property. Squire Boone, the father of Daniel, was one of
the appraisers who made the inventory of Mordecai Lincoln's estate.
The intercourse between the families was kept up after the Boones had
removed to North Carolina and John Lincoln had gone to Virginia.
Abraham Lincoln, son of John, and grandfather of the President, was
married to Miss Mary Shipley [Transcriber's Note: Lengthy footnote
relocated to chapter end.] in North Carolina. The inducement which led
him to leave Virginia, where his standing and his fortune were
assured, was, in all probability, his intimate family relations with
the great explorer, the hero of the new country of Kentucky, the land
of fabulous richness and unlimited adventure. At a time when the
Eastern States were ringing with the fame of the mighty hunter who was
then in the prime of his manhood, and in the midst of those
achievements which will forever render him one of the most picturesque
heroes in all our annals, it is not to be wondered at that his own
circle of friends should have caught the general enthusiasm and felt
the desire to emulate his career.

Boone's exploration of Kentucky had begun some ten years before
Lincoln set out to follow his trail. In 1769 he made his memorable
journey to that virgin wilderness of whose beauty he always loved to
speak even to his latest breath. During all that year he hunted,
finding everywhere abundance of game. "The buffalo," Boone says, "were
more frequent than I have seen cattle in the settlements, browsing on
the leaves of the cane, or cropping the herbage on these extensive
plains, fearless because ignorant of the violence of man. Sometimes we
saw hundreds in a drove, and the numbers about the salt springs were
amazing." In the course of the winter, however, he was captured by the
Indians while hunting with a comrade, and when they had contrived to
escape they never found again any trace of the rest of their party.
But a few days later they saw two men approaching and hailed them with
the hunter's caution, "Hullo, strangers; who are you?" They replied,
"White men and friends." They proved to be Squire Boone and another
adventurer from North Carolina. The younger Boone had made that long
pilgrimage through the trackless woods, led by an instinct of doglike
affection, to find his elder brother and share his sylvan pleasures
and dangers. Their two companions were soon waylaid and killed, and
the Boones spent their long winter in that mighty solitude
undisturbed. In the spring their ammunition, which was to them the
only necessary of life, ran low, and one of them must return to the
settlements to replenish the stock. It need not be said which assumed
this duty; the cadet went uncomplaining on his way, and Daniel spent
three months in absolute loneliness, as he himself expressed it, "by
myself, without bread, salt, or sugar, without company of my fellow-
creatures, or even a horse or dog." He was not insensible to the
dangers of his situation. He never approached his camp without the
utmost precaution, and always slept in the cane-brakes if the signs
were unfavorable. But he makes in his memoirs this curious reflection,
which would seem like affectation in one less perfectly and simply
heroic: "How unhappy such a situation for a man tormented with fear,
which is vain if no danger comes, and if it does, only augments the
pain. It was my happiness to be destitute of this afflicting passion,
with which I had the greatest reason to be afflicted." After his
brother's return, for a year longer they hunted in those lovely wilds,
and then returned to the Yadkin to bring their families to the new
domain. They made the long journey back, five hundred miles, in peace
and safety.

For some time after this Boone took no conspicuous part in the
settlement of Kentucky. The expedition with which he left the Yadkin
in 1773 met with a terrible disaster near Cumberland Gap, in which his
eldest son and five more young men were killed by Indians, and the
whole party, discouraged by the blow, retired to the safer region of
Clinch River. In the mean time the dauntless speculator Richard
Henderson had begun his occupation with all the pomp of viceroyalty.
Harrodsburg had been founded, and corn planted, and a flourishing
colony established at the Falls of the Ohio. In 1774 Boone was called
upon by the Governor of Virginia to escort a party of surveyors
through Kentucky, and on his return was given the command of three
garrisons; and for several years thereafter the history of the State
is the record of his feats of arms. No one ever equaled him in his
knowledge of Indian character, and his influence with the savages was
a mystery to him and to themselves. Three times he fell into their
hands and they did not harm him. Twice they adopted him into their
tribes while they were still on the war-path. Once they took him to
Detroit, [Footnote: Silas Farmer, historiographer of Detroit, informs
us that Daniel Boone was brought there on the 10th of March, 1778, and
that he remained there a month.] to show the Long-Knife chieftains of
King Greorge that they also could exhibit trophies of memorable
prowess, but they refused to give him up even to their British allies.
In no quality of wise woodcraft was he wanting. He could outrun a dog
or a deer; he could thread the woods without food day and night; he
could find his way as easily as the panther could. Although a great
athlete and a tireless warrior, he hated fighting and only fought for
peace. In council and in war he was equally valuable. His advice was
never rejected without disaster, nor followed but with advantage; and
when the fighting once began there was not a rifle in Kentucky which
could rival his. At the nine days' siege of Boonesboro' he took
deliberate aim and killed a negro renegade who was harassing the
garrison from a tree five hundred and twenty-five feet away, and whose
head only was visible from the fort. The mildest and the quietest of
men, he had killed dozens of enemies with his own hand, and all this
without malice and, strangest of all, without incurring the hatred of
his adversaries. He had self-respect enough, but not a spark of
vanity. After the fatal battle of the Blue Licks,--where the only
point of light in the day's terrible work was the wisdom and valor
with which he had partly retrieved a disaster he foresaw but was
powerless to prevent,--when it became his duty, as senior surviving
officer of the forces, to report the affair to Governor Harrison, his
dry and naked narrative gives not a single hint of what he had done
himself, nor mentions the gallant son lying dead on the field, nor the
wounded brother whose gallantry might justly have claimed some notice.
He was thinking solely of the public good, saying, "I have encouraged
the people in this country all that I could, but I can no longer
justify them or myself to risk our lives here under such extraordinary
hazards." He therefore begged his Excellency to take immediate
measures for relief. During the short existence of Henderson's
legislature he was a member of it, and not the least useful one. Among
his measures was one for the protection of game.

[Illustration:   LAND WARRANT ISSUED TO ABRAHAM LINKHORN (LINCOLN). The
original, of which this is a reduced fac-simile, is in the possession
of Colonel R. T, Durrett, Louisville, Ky.]

[Sidenote: Jefferson County Records.]

Everything we know of the emigrant Abraham Lincoln goes to show that
it was under the auspices of this most famous of our pioneers that he
set out from Rockingham County to make a home for himself and his
young family in that wild region which Boone was wresting from its
savage holders. He was not without means of his own. He took with him
funds enough to enter an amount of land which would have made his
family rich if they had retained it. The county records show him to
have been the possessor of a domain of some seventeen hundred acres.
There is still in existence [Transcriber's Note: Lengthy footnote
relocated to chapter end.] the original warrant, dated March 4, 1780,
for four hundred acres of land, for which the pioneer had paid "into
the publick Treasury one hundred and sixty pounds current money," and
a copy of the surveyor's certificate, giving the metes and bounds of
the property on Floyd's Fork, which remained for many years in the
hands of Mordecai Lincoln, the pioneer's eldest son and heir. The name
was misspelled "Linkhorn" by a blunder of the clerk in the
land-office, and the error was perpetuated in the subsequent record.

Kentucky had been for many years the country of romance and fable for
Virginians. Twenty years before Governor Spotswood had crossed the
Alleghanies and returned to establish in a Williamsburg tavern that
fantastic order of nobility which he called the Knights of The Golden
Horseshoe, [Footnote: Their motto was _Sic jurat transcendere
montes_.] and, with a worldly wisdom which was scarcely consistent
with these medieval affectations, to press upon the attention of the
British Government the building of a line of frontier forts to guard
the Ohio River from the French. Many years after him the greatest of
all Virginians crossed the mountains again, and became heavily
interested in those schemes of emigration which filled the minds of
many of the leading men in America until they were driven out by
graver cares and more imperative duties. Washington had acquired
claims and patents to the amount of thirty or forty thousand acres of
land in the West; Benjamin Franklin and the Lees were also large
owners of these speculative titles. They formed, it is true, rather an
airy and unsubstantial sort of possession, the same ground being often
claimed by a dozen different persons or companies under various grants
from the crown or from legislatures, or through purchase by
adventurers from Indian councils. But about the time of which we are
speaking the spirit of emigration had reached the lower strata of
colonial society, and a steady stream of pioneers began pouring over
the passes of the mountains into the green and fertile valleys of
Kentucky and Tennessee. They selected their homes in the most eligible
spots to which chance or the report of earlier explorers directed
them, with little knowledge or care as to the rightful ownership of
the land, and too often cleared their corner of the wilderness for the
benefit of others. Even Boone, to whose courage, forest lore, and
singular intuitions of savage character the State of Kentucky owed
more than to any other man, was deprived in his old age of his hard-
earned homestead through his ignorance of legal forms, and removed to
Missouri to repeat in that new territory his labors and his
misfortunes.

[Illustration:   FAC-SIMILE FROM THE FIELD BOOK OF DANIEL BOONE. This
record of the Lincoln Claim on Licking River is from the original in
posession of Lyman C. Draper, Madison, Wis.]

[Sidenote: 1780.]

The period at which Lincoln came West was one of note in the history
of Kentucky. The labors of Henderson and the Transylvania Company had
begun to bear fruit in extensive plantations and a connected system of
forts. The land laws of Kentucky had reduced to something like order
the chaos of conflicting claims arising from the various grants and
the different preemption customs under which settlers occupied their
property. The victory of Boone at Boonesboro' against the Shawnees,
and the capture of Kaskaskia and Vincennes by the brilliant audacity
of George Rogers Clark, had brought the region prominently to the
attention of the Atlantic States, and had turned in that direction the
restless and roving spirits which are always found in communities at
periods when great emigrations are a need of civilization. Up to this
time few persons had crossed the mountains except hunters, trappers,
and explorers--men who came merely to kill game, and possibly Indians,
or to spy out the fertility of the land for the purpose of
speculation. But in 1780 and 1781 a large number of families took up
their line of march, and in the latter year a considerable contingent
of women joined the little army of pioneers, impelled by an instinct
which they themselves probably but half comprehended. The country was
to be peopled, and there was no other way of peopling it but by the
sacrifice of many lives and fortunes; and the history of every country
shows that these are never lacking when they are wanted. The number of
those who came at about the same time with the pioneer Lincoln was
sufficient to lay the basis of a sort of social order. Early in the
year 1780 three hundred "large family boats" arrived at the Falls of
the Ohio, where the land had been surveyed by Captain Bullitt seven
years before, and in May the Legislature of Virginia passed a law for
the incorporation of the town of Louisville, then containing some six
hundred inhabitants. At the same session a law was passed confiscating
the property of certain British subjects for the endowment of an
institution of learning in Kentucky, "it being the interest of this
commonwealth," to quote the language of the philosophic Legislature,
"always to encourage and promote every design which may tend to the
improvement of the mind and the diffusion of useful knowledge even
among its remote citizens, whose situation in a barbarous neighborhood
and a savage intercourse might otherwise render them unfriendly to
science." This was the origin of the Transylvania University of
Lexington, which rose and flourished for many years on the utmost
verge of civilization.

[Illustration:   SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE (SLIGHTLY REDUCED), TAKEN FROM
RECORD BOOK "B," PAGE 60, IN THE OFFICE OF JEFFERSON COUNTY,
KENTUCKY.]

The "barbarous neighborhood" and the "savage intercourse" undoubtedly
had their effect upon the manners and morals of the settlers; but we
should fall into error if we took it for granted that the pioneers
were all of one piece. The ruling motive which led most of them to the
wilds was that Anglo-Saxon lust of land which seems inseparable from
the race. The prospect of possessing a four-hundred-acre farm by
merely occupying it, and the privilege of exchanging a basketful of
almost worthless continental currency for an unlimited estate at the
nominal value of forty cents per acre, were irresistible to thousands
of land-loving Virginians and Carolinians whose ambition of
proprietorship was larger than their means. Accompanying this flood of
emigrants of good faith was the usual froth and scum of shiftless
idlers and adventurers, who were either drifting with a current they
were too worthless to withstand, or in pursuit of dishonest gains in
fresher and simpler regions. The vices and virtues of the pioneers
were such as proceeded from their environment. They were careless of
human life because life was worth comparatively little in that hard
struggle for existence; but they had a remarkably clear idea of the
value of property, and visited theft not only with condign punishment,
but also with the severest social proscription. Stealing a horse was
punished more swiftly and with more feeling than homicide. A man might
be replaced more easily than the other animal. Sloth was the worst of
weaknesses. An habitual drunkard was more welcome at "raisings" and
"logrollings" than a known faineant. The man who did not do a man's
share where work was to be done was christened "Lazy Lawrence," and
that was the end of him socially. Cowardice was punished by inexorable
disgrace. The point of honor was as strictly observed as it ever has
been in the idlest and most artificial society. If a man accused
another of falsehood, the ordeal by fisticuffs was instantly resorted
to. Weapons were rarely employed in these chivalrous encounters, being
kept for more serious use with Indians and wild beasts; nevertheless
fists, teeth, and the gouging thumb were often employed with fatal
effect. Yet among this rude and uncouth people there was a genuine and
remarkable respect for law. They seemed to recognize it as an absolute
necessity of their existence. In the territory of Kentucky, and
afterwards in that of Illinois, it occurred at several periods in the
transition from counties to territories and states, that the country
was without any organized authority. But the people were a law unto
themselves. Their improvised courts and councils administered law and
equity; contracts were enforced, debts were collected, and a sort of
order was maintained. It may be said, generally, that the character of
this people was far above their circumstances. In all the accessories
of life, by which we are accustomed to rate communities and races in
the scale of civilization, they were little removed from primitive
barbarism. They dressed in the skins of wild beasts killed by
themselves, and in linen stuffs woven by themselves. They hardly knew
the use of iron except in their firearms and knives. Their food
consisted almost exclusively of game, fish, and roughly ground corn-
meal. Their exchanges were made by barter; many a child grew up
without ever seeing a piece of money. Their habitations were hardly
superior to those of the savages with whom they waged constant war.
Large families lived in log huts, put together without iron, and far
more open to the inclemencies of the skies than the pig-styes of the
careful farmer of to-day. An early schoolmaster says that the first
place where he went to board was the house of one Lucas, consisting of
a single room, sixteen feet square, and tenanted by Mr. and Mrs.
Lucas, ten children, three dogs, two cats, and himself. There were
many who lived in hovels so cold that they had to sleep on their shoes
to keep them from freezing too stiff to be put on. The children grew
inured to misery like this, and played barefoot in the snow. It is an
error to suppose that all this could be undergone with impunity. They
suffered terribly from malarial and rheumatic complaints, and the
instances of vigorous and painless age were rare among them. The lack
of moral and mental sustenance was still more marked. They were
inclined to be a religious people, but a sermon was an unusual luxury,
only to be enjoyed at long intervals and by great expense of time.
There were few books or none, and there was little opportunity for the
exchange of opinion. Any variation in the dreary course of events was
welcome. A murder was not without its advantages as a stimulus to
conversation; a criminal trial was a kind of holiday to a county. It
was this poverty of life, this famine of social gratification, from
which sprang their fondness for the grosser forms of excitement, and
their tendency to rough and brutal practical joking. In a life like
theirs a laugh seemed worth having at any expense.

[Illustration:   HOUSE NEAR BEECHLAND, KENTUCKY, IN WHICH THOMAS LINCOLN
AND NANCY HANKS WERE MARRIED.]

But near as they were to barbarism in all the circumstances of their
daily existence, they were far from it politically. They were the
children of a race which had been trained in government for centuries
in the best school the world has ever seen, and wherever they went
they formed the town, the county, the court, and the legislative power
with the ease and certainty of nature evolving its results. And this
they accomplished in the face of a savage foe surrounding their feeble
settlements, always alert and hostile, invisible and dreadful as the
visionary powers of the air. Until the treaty of Greenville, in 1795,
closed the long and sanguinary history of the old Indian wars, there
was no day in which the pioneer could leave his cabin with the
certainty of not finding it in ashes when he returned, and his little
flock murdered on his threshold, or carried into a captivity worse
than death. Whenever nightfall came with the man of the house away
from home, the anxiety and care of the women and children were none
the less bitter because so common.

[Illustration:   MAP SHOWING VARIOUS LOCALITIES CONNECTED WITH EARLY
EVENTS IN THE LINCOLN FAMILY.]

The life of the pioneer Abraham Lincoln soon came to a disastrous
close. He had settled in Jefferson County, on the land he had bought
from the Government, and cleared a small farm in the forest.
[Footnote: Lyman C. Draper, of the Wisconsin Historical Society, has
kindly furnished us with a MS account of a Kentucky tradition
according to which the pioneer Abraham Lincoln was captured by the
Indians, near Crow's Station, in August, 1782, carried into captivity,
and forced to run the gauntlet. The story rests on the statement of a
single person, Mrs. Sarah Graham.] One morning in the year 1784, he
started with his three sons, Mordecai, Josiah, and Thomas, to the edge
of the clearing, and began the day's work. A shot from the brush
killed the father; Mordecai, the eldest son, ran instinctively to the
house, Josiah to the neighboring fort, for assistance, and Thomas, the
youngest, a child of six, was left with the corpse of his father.
Mordecai, reaching the cabin, seized the rifle, and saw through the
loophole an Indian in his war-paint stooping to raise the child from
the ground. He took deliberate aim at a white ornament on the breast
of the savage and brought him down. The little boy, thus released, ran
to the cabin, and Mordecai, from the loft, renewed his fire upon the
savages, who began to show themselves from the thicket, until Josiah
returned with assistance from the stockade, and the assailants fled.
This tragedy made an indelible impression on the mind of Mordecai.
Either a spirit of revenge for his murdered father, or a sportsmanlike
pleasure in his successful shot, made him a determined Indian-stalker,
and he rarely stopped to inquire whether the red man who came within
range of his rifle was friendly or hostile. [Footnote: Late in life
Mordecai Lincoln removed to Hancock County, Illinois, where his
descendants still live.]

[Illustration:   FAC-SIMILE OF THE MARRIAGE BOND OF THOMAS LINCOLN.]

The head of the family being gone, the widow Lincoln soon removed to a
more thickly settled neighborhood in Washington County. There her
children grew up. Mordecai and Josiah became reputable citizens; the
two daughters married two men named Crume and Brumfield. Thomas, to
whom were reserved the honors of an illustrious paternity, learned the
trade of a carpenter. He was an easy-going man, entirely without
ambition, but not without self-respect. Though the friendliest and
most jovial of gossips, he was not insensible to affronts; and when
his slow anger was roused he was a formidable adversary. Several
border bullies, at different times, crowded him indiscreetly, and were
promptly and thoroughly whipped. He was strong, well-knit, and sinewy;
but little over the medium height, though in other respects he seems
to have resembled his son in appearance.

On the 12th of June, 1806, [Footnote: All previous accounts give the
date of this marriage as September 23d. This error arose from a
clerical blunder in the county record of marriages. The minister, the
Rev. Jesse Head, in making his report, wrote the date before the
names; the clerk, copying it, lost the proper sequence of the entries,
and gave to the Lincolns the date belonging to the next couple on the
list.] while learning his trade in the carpenter shop of Joseph Hanks,
in Elizabethtown, he married Nancy Hanks, a niece of his employer,
near Beechland, in Washington County. [Transcriber's Note: Lengthy
footnote (1) relocated to chapter end.] She was one of a large family
who had emigrated from Virginia with the Lincolns and with another
family called Sparrow. They had endured together the trials of pioneer
life; their close relations continued for many years after, and were
cemented by frequent intermarriage.

Mrs. Lincoln's mother was named Lucy Hanks; her sisters were Betty,
Polly, and Nancy who married Thomas Sparrow, Jesse Friend, and Levi
Hall. The childhood of Nancy was passed with the Sparrows, and she was
oftener called by their name than by her own. The whole family
connection was composed of people so little given to letters that it
is hard to determine the proper names and relationships of the younger
members amid the tangle of traditional cousinships. [Footnote: The
Hanks family seem to have gone from Pennsylvania and thence to
Kentucky about the same time with the Lincolns. They also belonged to
the Communion of Friends.--"Historical Collections of Gwynnedd," by H.
M. Jenkins.] Those who went to Indiana with Thomas Lincoln, and grew
up with his children, are the only ones that need demand our
attention.

There was no hint of future glory in the wedding or the bringing home
of Nancy Lincoln. All accounts represent her as a handsome young woman
of twenty-three, of appearance and intellect superior to her lowly
fortunes. She could read and write,--a remarkable accomplishment in
her circle,--and even taught her husband to form the letters of his
name. He had no such valuable wedding gift to bestow upon her; he
brought her to a little house in Elizabethtown, where he and she and
want dwelt together in fourteen feet square. The next year a daughter
was born to them; and the next the young carpenter, not finding his
work remunerative enough for his growing needs, removed to a little
farm which he had bought on the easy terms then prevalent in Kentucky.
It was on the Big South Fork of Nolin Creek, in what was then Hardin
and is now La Rue County, three miles from Hodgensville. The ground
had nothing attractive about it but its cheapness. It was hardly more
grateful than the rocky hill slopes of New England. It required full
as earnest and intelligent industry to persuade a living out of those
barren hillocks and weedy hollows, covered with stunted and scrubby
underbrush, as it would amid the rocks and sands of the northern
coast.

Thomas Lincoln settled down in this dismal solitude to a deeper
poverty than any of his name had ever known; and there, in the midst
of the most unpromising circumstances that ever witnessed the advent
of a hero into this world, Abraham Lincoln was born on the 12th day of
February, 1809.

Four years later, Thomas Lincoln purchased a fine farm of 238 acres on
Knob Creek, near where it flows into the Rolling Fork, and succeeded
in getting a portion of it into cultivation. The title, however,
remained in him only a little while, and after his property had passed
out of his control he looked about for another place to establish
himself.

[Illustration:   This Certificate, or Marriage List (here shown in
reduced fac-simile), written by the Rev. Jesse Head, was lost sight of
for many years, and about 1886 was discovered through the efforts of
W. F. Booker, Clerk of Washington County, Kentucky.]

Of all these years of Abraham Lincoln's early childhood we know almost
nothing. He lived a solitary life in the woods, returning from his
lonesome little games to his cheerless home. He never talked of these
days to his most intimate friends. [Transcriber's Note: Lengthy
footnote (2) relocated to chapter end.] Once, when asked what he
remembered about the war with Great Britain, he replied: "Nothing but
this. I had been fishing one day and caught a little fish which I was
taking home. I met a soldier in the road, and, having been always told
at home that we must be good to the soldiers, I gave him my fish."
This is only a faint glimpse, but what it shows is rather
pleasant--the generous child and the patriotic household. But there is
no question that these first years of his life had their lasting
effect upon the temperament of this great mirthful and melancholy man.
He had little schooling. He accompanied his sister Sarah [Footnote:
This daughter of Thomas Lincoln is sometimes called Nancy and
sometimes Sarah. She seems to have borne the former name during her
mother's life-time, and to have taken her stepmother's name after Mr.
Lincoln's second marriage.] to the only schools that existed in their
neighborhood, one kept by Zachariah Riney, another by Caleb Hazel,
where he learned his alphabet and a little more. But of all those
advantages for the cultivation of a young mind and spirit which every
home now offers to its children, the books, toys, ingenious games, and
daily devotion of parental love, he knew absolutely nothing.

[Relocated Footnote: Soon after Mr. Lincoln arrived in Washington in
1861, he received the following letter from one of his Virginia
kinsmen, the last communication which ever came from them. It was
written on paper adorned with a portrait of Jefferson Davis, and was
inclosed in an envelope emblazoned with the Confederate flag:

"To ABRAHAM LINCOLN, Esq., _President of the Northern Confederacy_.

"SIR: Having just returned from a trip through Virginia, North
Carolina, and Tennessee, permit me to inform you that you will get
whipped out of your boots. To-day I met a gentleman from Anna,
Illinois, and although he voted for you he says that the moment your
troops leave Cairo they will get the spots knocked out of them. My
dear sir, these are facts which time will prove to be correct.

"I am, sir, with every consideration, yours respectfully,

"MINOR LINCOLN,

"Of the Staunton stock of Lincolns."

There was a young Abraham Lincoln on the Confederate side in the
Shenandoah distinguished for his courage and ferocity. He lay in wait
and shot a Drunkard preacher, whom he suspected of furnishing
information to the Union army. (Letter from Samuel W. Pennypacker.)]

[Relocated Footnote: In giving to the wife of the pioneer Lincoln the
name of Mary Shipley we follow the tradition in his family. The Hon.
J. L. Nall, of Missouri, grandson of Nancy (Lincoln) Brumfield,
Abraham Lincoln's youngest child, has given us so clear a statement of
the case that we cannot hesitate to accept it, although it conflicts
with equally positive statements from other sources. The late Gideon
Welles, Secretary of the Navy, who gave much intelligent effort to
genealogical researches, was convinced that the Abraham Lincoln who
married Miss Hannah Winters, a daughter of Ann Boone, sister of the
famous Daniel, was the President's grandfather. Waddell's "Annals of
Augusta County" says he married Elizabeth Winter, a cousin of Daniel
Boone. The Boone and Lincoln families were large and there were
frequent intermarriages among them, and the patriarchal name of
Abraham was a favorite one. There was still another Lincoln, Hannaniah
by name, who was also intimately associated with the Boones. His
signature appears on the surveyor's certificate for Abraham Lincoln's
land in Jefferson County, and he joined Daniel Boone in 1798 in the
purchase of the tract of land on the Missouri River where Boone died.
(Letter from Richard V. B. Lincoln, printed in the "Williamsport
[Pa.] Banner," Feb. 25, 1881.)]

[Relocated Footnote: In the possession of Colonel Reuben T. Durrett,
of Louisville, a gentleman who has made the early history of his State
a subject of careful study, and to whom we are greatly indebted for
information in regard to the settlement of the Lincolns in Kentucky.
He gives the following list of lands in that State owned by Abraham
Lincoln:

1. Four hundred acres on Long Run, a branch of Floyd's Fork, in
Jefferson County, entered May 29, 1780, and surveyed May 7, 1785. We
have in our possession the original patent issued by Governor Garrard,
of Kentucky, to Abraham Lincoln for this property. It was found by
Col. A. C. Matthews, of the 99th Illinois, in 1863, at an abandoned
residence near Indianola, Texas.

2. Eight hundred acres on Green River, near Green River Lick, entered
June 7, 1780, and surveyed October 12, 1784.

3. Five hundred acres in Campbell County, date of entry not known, but
surveyed September 27, 1798, and patented June 30, 1799--the survey
and patent evidently following his entry after his death. It is
possible that this was the five-hundred-acre tract found in Boone's
field-book, in the possession of Lyman C. Draper, Esq., Secretary of
the Wisconsin Historical Society, and erroneously supposed by some to
have been in Mercer County. Boone was a deputy of Colonel Thomas
Marshall, Surveyor of Fayette County.]

[Relocated Footnote (1): The following is a copy of the marriage bond:

"Know all men by these presents, that we, Thomas Lincoln and Richard
Berry, are held and firmly bound unto his Excellency, the Governor of
Kentucky, in the just and full sum of fifty pounds current money to the
payment of which well and truly to be made to the said Governor and his
successors, we bind ourselves, our heirs, etc., jointly and severally,
firmly by these presents, sealed with our seals and dated this 10th day
of June, 1806. The condition of the above obligation is such that
whereas there is a marriage shortly intended between the above bound
Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks, for which a license has issued, now if
there be no lawful cause to obstruct the said marriage, then this
obligation to be void, else to remain in full force and virtue in law.

  "THOMAS LINCOLN [Seal].
  "RICHARD BERRY [Seal].
  "_Witness_, JOHN H. PARROTT, Guardian."

Richard Berry was a connection of Lincoln; his wife was a Shipley.]

[Relocated Footnote (2): There is still living (1886) near Knob Creek
in Kentucky, at the age of eighty, a man who claims to have known
Abraham Lincoln in his childhood--Austin Gollaher. He says he used to
play with Abe Lincoln in the shavings of his father's carpenter shop.
He tells a story which, if accurate, entitles him to the civic crown
which the Romans used to give to one who saved the life of a citizen.
When Gollaher was eleven and Lincoln eight the two boys were in the
woods in pursuit of partridges; in trying to "coon" across Knob Creek
on a log, Lincoln fell in and Gollaher fished him out with a sycamore
branch--a service to the Republic, the value of which it would be
difficult to compute.]




CHAPTER II

INDIANA


[Sidenote: 1818.]

By the time the boy Abraham had attained his seventh year, the social
condition of Kentucky had changed considerably from the early pioneer
days. Life had assumed a more settled and orderly course. The old
barbarous equality of the earlier time was gone; a difference of
classes began to be seen. Those who held slaves assumed a distinct
social superiority over those who did not. Thomas Lincoln, concluding
that Kentucky was no country for a poor man, determined to seek his
fortune in Indiana. He had heard of rich and unoccupied lands in Perry
County in that State, and thither he determined to go. He built a rude
raft, loaded it with his kit of tools and four hundred gallons of
whisky, and trusted his fortunes to the winding water-courses. He met
with only one accident on his way: his raft capsized in the Ohio
River, but he fished up his kit of tools and most of the ardent
spirits, and arrived safely at the place of a settler named Posey,
with whom he left his odd invoice of household goods for the
wilderness, while he started on foot to look for a home in the dense
forest. He selected a spot which pleased him in his first day's
journey. He then walked back to Knob Creek and brought his family on
to their new home. No humbler cavalcade ever invaded the Indiana
timber. Besides his wife and two children, his earthly possessions
were of the slightest, for the backs of two borrowed horses sufficed
for the load. Insufficient bedding and clothing, a few pans and
kettles, were their sole movable wealth. They relied on Lincoln's kit
of tools for their furniture, and on his rifle for their food. At
Posey's they hired a wagon and literally hewed a path through the
wilderness to their new habitation near Little Pigeon Creek, a mile
and a half east of Gentryville, in a rich and fertile forest country.

Thomas Lincoln, with the assistance of his wife and children, built a
temporary shelter of the sort called in the frontier language "a half-
faced camp"; merely a shed of poles, which defended the inmates on
three sides from foul weather, but left them open to its inclemency in
front. For a whole year his family lived in this wretched fold, while
he was clearing a little patch of ground for planting corn, and
building a rough cabin for a permanent residence. They moved into the
latter before it was half completed; for by this time the Sparrows had
followed the Lincolns from Kentucky, and the half-faced camp was given
up to them. But the rude cabin seemed so spacious and comfortable
after the squalor of "the camp," that Thomas Lincoln did no further
work on it for a long time. He left it for a year or two without
doors, or windows, or floor. The battle for existence allowed him no
time for such superfluities. He raised enough corn to support life;
the dense forest around him abounded in every form of feathered game;
a little way from his cabin an open glade was full of deer-licks, and
an hour or two of idle waiting was generally rewarded by a shot at a
fine deer, which would furnish meat for a week, and material for
breeches and shoes. His cabin was like that of other pioneers. A few
three-legged stools; a bedstead made of poles stuck between the logs
in the angle of the cabin, the outside corner supported by a crotched
stick driven into the ground; the table, a huge hewed log standing on
four legs; a pot, kettle, and skillet, and a few tin and pewter dishes
were all the furniture. The boy Abraham climbed at night to his bed of
leaves in the loft, by a ladder of wooden pins driven into the logs.

This life has been vaunted by poets and romancers as a happy and
healthful one. Even Dennis Hanks, speaking of his youthful days when
his only home was the half-faced camp, says, "I tell you, Billy, I
enjoyed myself better then than I ever have since." But we may
distrust the reminiscences of old settlers, who see their youth in the
flattering light of distance. The life was neither enjoyable nor
wholesome. The rank woods were full of malaria, and singular epidemics
from time to time ravaged the settlements. In the autumn of 1818 the
little community of Pigeon Creek was almost exterminated by a
frightful pestilence called the milk-sickness, or, in the dialect of
the country, "the milk-sick." It is a mysterious disease which has
been the theme of endless wrangling among Western physicians, and the
difficulty of ascertaining anything about it has been greatly
increased by the local sensitiveness which forbids any one to admit
that any well-defined case has ever been seen in his neighborhood,
"although just over the creek (or in the next county) they have had it
bad." It seems to have been a malignant form of fever--attributed
variously to malaria and to the eating of poisonous herbs by the
cattle--attacking cattle as well as human beings, attended with
violent retching and a burning sensation in the stomach, often
terminating fatally on the third day. In many cases those who
apparently recovered lingered for years with health seriously
impaired. Among the Pioneers of Pigeon Creek, so ill-fed, ill-housed,
and uncared for, there was little prospect of recovery from such a
grave disorder. The Sparrows, husband and wife, died early in October,
and Nancy Hanks Lincoln followed them after an interval of a few days.
Thomas Lincoln made the coffins for his dead "out of green lumber cut
with a whipsaw," and they were all buried, with scant ceremony, in a
little clearing of the forest. It is related of young Abraham, that he
sorrowed most of all that his mother should have been laid away with
such maimed rites, and that he contrived several months later to have
a wandering preacher named David Elkin brought to the settlement, to
deliver a funeral sermon over her grave, already white with the early
winter snows. [Footnote: A stone has been placed over the site of the
grave "by P. E. Studebaker, of South Bend, Indiana." The stone bears
the following inscription: "Nancy Hanks Lincoln, mother of President
Lincoln, died October 5th, A. D. 1818, aged 35 years. Erected by a
friend of her martyred son, 1879."]

This was the dreariest winter of his life, for before the next
December came his father had brought from Kentucky a new wife, who was
to change the lot of all the desolate little family very much for the
better. Sarah Bush had been an acquaintance of Thomas Lincoln before
his first marriage; she had, it is said, rejected him to marry one
Johnston, the jailer at Elizabethtown, who had died, leaving her with
three children, a boy and two girls. When Lincoln's widowhood had
lasted a year, he went down to Elizabethtown to begin again the wooing
broken off so many years before. He wasted no time in preliminaries,
but promptly made his wishes known, and the next morning they were
married. It was growing late in the autumn, and the pioneer probably
dreaded another lonely winter on Pigeon Creek. Mrs. Johnston was not
altogether portionless. She had a store of household goods which
filled a four-horse wagon borrowed of Ralph Grume, Thomas Lincoln's
brother-in-law, to transport the bride to Indiana. It took little time
for this energetic and honest Christian woman to make her influence
felt, even in those discouraging surroundings, and Thomas Lincoln and
the children were the better for her coming all the rest of their
lives. The lack of doors and floors was at once corrected. Her honest
pride inspired her husband to greater thrift and industry. The goods
she brought with her compelled some effort at harmony in the other
fittings of the house. She dressed the children in warmer clothing and
put them to sleep in comfortable beds. With this slight addition to
their resources the family were much improved in appearance, behavior,
and self-respect.

[Illustration:   SARAH BUSH LINCOLN AT THE AGE OF SEVENTY-SIX.]

Thomas Lincoln joined the Baptist church at Little Pigeon in 1823; his
oldest child, Sarah, followed his example three years later. They were
known as active and consistent members of that communion. Lincoln was
himself a good carpenter when he chose to work at his trade; a walnut
table made by him is still preserved as part of the furniture of the
church to which he belonged.

[Sidenote: MS. letter from the Rev. T.V. Robertson, pastor of the
Little Pigeon Baptist church.]

Such a woman as Sarah Bush could not be careless of so important a
matter as the education of her children, and they made the best use of
the scanty opportunities the neighborhood afforded. "It was a wild
region," writes Mr. Lincoln, in one of those rare bits of
autobiography which he left behind him, "with many bears and other
wild animals still in the woods. There were some schools so-called,
but no qualification was ever required of a teacher beyond 'readin',
writin', and cipherin' to the Rule of Three.' If a straggler supposed
to understand Latin happened to sojourn in the neighborhood, he was
looked upon as a wizard. There was absolutely nothing to excite
ambition for education." But in the case of this ungainly boy there
was no necessity of any external incentive. A thirst for knowledge as
a means of rising in the world was innate in him. It had nothing to do
with that love of science for its own sake which has been so often
seen in lowly savants, who have sacrificed their lives to the pure
desire of knowing the works of God. All the little learning he ever
acquired he seized as a tool to better his condition. He learned his
letters that he might read books and see how men in the great world
outside of his woods had borne themselves in the fight for which he
longed. He learned to write, first, that he might have an
accomplishment his playmates had not; then that he might help his
elders by writing their letters, and enjoy the feeling of usefulness
which this gave him; and finally that he might copy what struck him in
his reading and thus make it his own for future use. He learned to
cipher certainly from no love of mathematics, but because it might
come in play in some more congenial business than the farm-work which
bounded the horizon of his contemporaries. Had it not been for that
interior spur which kept his clear spirit at its task, his schools
could have done little for him; for, counting his attendance under
Riney and Hazel in Kentucky, and under Dorsey, Crawford, and Swaney in
Indiana, it amounted to less than a year in all. The schools were much
alike. They were held in deserted cabins of round logs, with earthen
floors, and small holes for windows, sometimes illuminated by as much
light as could penetrate through panes of paper greased with lard. The
teachers were usually in keeping with their primitive surroundings.
The profession offered no rewards sufficient to attract men of
education or capacity. After a few months of desultory instruction
young Abraham knew all that these vagrant literati could teach him.
His last school-days were passed with one Swaney in 1826, who taught
at a distance of four and a half miles from the Lincoln cabin. The
nine miles of walking doubtless seemed to Thomas Lincoln a waste of
time, and the lad was put at steady work and saw no more of school.

But it is questionable whether he lost anything by being deprived of
the ministrations of the backwoods dominies. When his tasks ended, his
studies became the chief pleasure of his life. In all the intervals of
his work--in which he never took delight, knowing well enough that he
was born for something better than that--he read, wrote, and ciphered
incessantly. His reading was naturally limited by his opportunities,
for books were among the rarest of luxuries in that region and time.
But he read everything he could lay his hands upon, and he was
certainly fortunate in the few books of which he became the possessor.
It would hardly be possible to select a better handful of classics for
a youth in his circumstances than the few volumes he turned with a
nightly and daily hand--the Bible, "Aesop's Fables," "Robinson Crusoe,"
"The Pilgrim's Progress," a history of the United States, and Weem's
"Life of Washington." These were the best, and these he read over and
over till he knew them almost by heart. But his voracity for anything
printed was insatiable. He would sit in the twilight and read a
dictionary as long as he could see. He used to go to David Turnham's,
the town constable, and devour the "Revised Statutes of Indiana," as
boys in our day do the "Three Guardsmen." Of the books he did not own
he took voluminous notes, filling his copy-book with choice extracts,
and poring over them until they were fixed in his memory. He could not
afford to waste paper upon his original compositions. He would sit by
the fire at night and cover the wooden shovel with essays and
arithmetical exercises, which he would shave off and then begin again.
It is touching to think of this great-spirited child, battling year
after year against his evil star, wasting his ingenuity upon devices
and makeshifts, his high intelligence starving for want of the simple
appliances of education that are now offered gratis to the poorest and
most indifferent. He did a man's work from the time he left school;
his strength and stature were already far beyond those of ordinary
men. He wrought his appointed tasks ungrudgingly, though without
enthusiasm; but when his employer's day was over, his own began. John
Hanks says: "When Abe and I returned to the house from work he would
go to the cupboard, snatch a piece of corn-bread, take down a book,
sit down, cock his legs up as high as his head, and read." The picture
may be lacking in grace, but its truthfulness is beyond question. The
habit remained with him always. Some of his greatest work in later
years was done in this grotesque Western fashion,--"sitting on his
shoulder-blades."

[Sidenote: W. H. Lamou "Life of Lincoln," p. 37.]

[Sidenote: Damon, p. 80.]

Otherwise his life at this time differed little from that of ordinary
farm-hands. His great strength and intelligence made him a valuable
laborer, and his unfailing good temper and flow of rude rustic wit
rendered him the most agreeable of comrades. He was always ready with
some kindly act or word for others. Once he saved the life of the town
drunkard, whom he found freezing by the roadside, by carrying him in
his strong arms to the tavern, and working over him until he revived.
It is a curious fact that this act of common humanity was regarded as
something remarkable in the neighborhood; the grateful sot himself
always said "it was mighty clever of Abe to tote me so far that cold
night." It was also considered an eccentricity that he hated and
preached against cruelty to animals. Some of his comrades remember
still his bursts of righteous wrath, when a boy, against the wanton
murder of turtles and other creatures. He was evidently of better and
finer clay than his fellows, even in those wild and ignorant days. At
home he was the life of the singularly assorted household, which
consisted, besides his parents and himself, of his own sister, Mrs.
Lincoln's two girls and boy, Dennis Hanks, the legacy of the dying
Sparrow family, and John Hanks (son of the carpenter Joseph with whom
Thomas Lincoln learned his trade), who came from Kentucky several
years after the others. It was probably as much the inexhaustible good
nature and kindly helpfulness of young Abraham which kept the peace
among all these heterogeneous elements, effervescing with youth and
confined in a one-roomed cabin, as it was the Christian sweetness and
firmness of the woman of the house. It was a happy and united
household: brothers and sisters and cousins living peacefully under
the gentle rule of the good stepmother, but all acknowledging from a
very early period the supremacy in goodness and cleverness of their
big brother Abraham. Mrs. Lincoln, not long before her death, gave
striking testimony of his winning and loyal character. She said to Mr.
Herndon: "I can say, what scarcely one mother in a thousand can say,
Abe never gave me a cross word or look, and never refused in fact or
appearance to do anything I asked him. His mind and mine--what little
I had--seemed to run together.... I had a son John, who was raised
with Abe. Both were good boys, but I must say, both now being dead,
that Abe was the best boy I ever saw or expect to see." Such were the
beginnings of this remarkable career, sacred as we see from childhood,
to duty and to human kindliness.

"We are making no claim of early saintship for him. He was merely a
good boy, with sufficient wickedness to prove his humanity. One of his
employers, undazzled by recent history, faithfully remembers that
young Abe liked his dinner and his pay better than his work: there is
surely nothing alien to ordinary mortality in this. It is also
reported that he sometimes impeded the celerity of harvest operations
by making burlesque speeches, or worse than that, comic sermons, from
the top of some tempting stump, to the delight of the hired hands and
the exasperation of the farmer. His budding talents as a writer were
not always used discreetly. He was too much given to scribbling coarse
satires and chronicles, in prose, and in something which had to him
and his friends the air of verse. From this arose occasional heart-
burnings and feuds, in which Abraham bore his part according to the
custom of the country. Despite his Quaker ancestry and his natural
love of peace, he was no non-resistant, and when he once entered upon
a quarrel the opponent usually had the worst of it. But he was
generous and placable, and some of his best friends were those with
whom he had had differences, and had settled them in the way then
prevalent,--in a ring of serious spectators, calmly and judicially
ruminant, under the shade of some spreading oak, at the edge of the
timber. Before we close our sketch of this period of Lincoln's life,
it may not be amiss to glance for a moment at the state of society
among the people with whom his lot was cast in these important years.

In most respects there had been little moral or material improvement
since the early settlement of the country. Their houses were usually
of one room, built of round logs with the bark on. We have known a man
to gain the sobriquet of "Split-log Mitchell" by indulging in the
luxury of building a cabin of square-hewn timbers. Their dress was
still mostly of tanned deer-hide, a material to the last degree
uncomfortable when the wearer was caught in a shower. Their shoes were
of the same, and a good Western authority calls a wet moccasin "a
decent way of going barefoot." About the time, however, when Lincoln
grew to manhood, garments of wool and of tow began to be worn, dyed
with the juice of the butternut or white walnut, and the hides of
neat-cattle began to be tanned. But for a good while it was only the
women who indulged in these novelties. There was little public
worship. Occasionally an itinerant preacher visited a county, and the
settlers for miles around would go nearly in mass to the meeting. If a
man was possessed of a wagon, the family rode luxuriously; but as a
rule the men walked and the women went on horseback with the little
children in their arms. It was considered no violation of the
sanctities of the occasion to carry a rifle and take advantage of any
game which might be stirring during the long walk. Arriving at the
place of meeting, which was some log cabin if the weather was foul, or
the shade of a tree if it was fair, the assembled worshipers threw
their provisions into a common store and picnicked in neighborly
companionship. The preacher would then take off his coat, and go at
his work with an energy unknown to our days.

There were few other social meetings. Men came together for
"raisings," where a house was built in a day; for "log-rollings,"
where tons of excellent timber were piled together and wastefully
burned; for wolf-hunts, where a tall pole was erected in the midst of
a prairie or clearing, and a great circle of hunters formed around it,
sometimes of miles in diameter, which, gradually contracting with
shouts and yells, drove all the game in the woods together at the pole
for slaughter; and for horse-races, which bore little resemblance to
those magnificent exhibitions which are the boast of Kentucky at this
time. In these affairs the women naturally took no part; but weddings,
which were entertainments scarcely less rude and boisterous, were
their own peculiar province. These festivities lasted rarely less than
twenty-four hours. The guests assembled in the morning. There was a
race for the whisky bottle; a midday dinner; an afternoon of rough
games and outrageous practical jokes; a supper and dance at night,
interrupted by the successive withdrawals of the bride and of the
groom, attended with ceremonies and jests of more than Rabelaisian
crudeness; and a noisy dispersal next day.

[Sidenote: O. H. Smith, "Early Indiana Trials," p. 285.]

The one point at which they instinctively clung to civilization was
their regard for law and reverence for courts of justice. Yet these
were of the simplest character and totally devoid of any adventitious
accessories. An early jurist of the country writes: "I was Circuit
Prosecuting Attorney at the time of the trials at the falls of Fall
Creek, where Pendleton now stands. Four of the prisoners were
convicted of murder, and three of them hung, for killing Indians. The
court was held in a double log cabin, the grand jury sat upon a log in
the woods, and the foreman signed the bills of indictment, which I had
prepared, upon his knee; there was not a petit juror that had shoes
on; all wore moccasins, and were belted around the waist, and carried
side-knives used by the hunters." Yet amidst all this apparent
savagery we see justice was done, and the law vindicated even against
the bitterest prejudices of these pioneer jurymen.

[Sidenote: Lamon, p. 44.]

They were full of strange superstitions. The belief in witchcraft had
long ago passed away with the smoke of the fagots from old and New
England, but it survived far into this century in Kentucky and the
lower halves of Indiana and Illinois--touched with a peculiar tinge of
African magic. The pioneers believed in it for good and evil. Their
veterinary practice was mostly by charms and incantations; and when a
person believed himself bewitched, a shot at the image of the witch
with a bullet melted out of a half-dollar was the favorite curative
agency. Luck was an active divinity in their apprehension, powerful
for blessing or bane, announced by homely signs, to be placated by
quaint ceremonies. A dog crossing the hunter's path spoiled his day,
unless he instantly hooked his little fingers together, and pulled
till the animal disappeared. They were familiar with the ever-
recurring mystification of the witch-hazel, or divining-rod; and the
"cure by faith" was as well known to them as it has since become in a
more sophisticated state of society. The commonest occurrences were
heralds of death and doom. A bird lighting in a window, a dog baying
at certain hours, the cough of a horse in the direction of a child,
the sight, or worse still, the touch of a dead snake, heralded
domestic woe. A wagon driving past the house with a load of baskets
was a warning of atmospheric disturbance. A vague and ignorant
astronomy governed their plantings and sowings, the breeding of their
cattle, and all farm-work. They must fell trees for fence-rails before
noon, and in the waxing of the moon. Fences built when there was no
moon would give way; but that was the proper season for planting
potatoes and other vegetables whose fruit grows underground; those
which bore their product in the air must be planted when the moon
shone. The magical power of the moon was wide in its influence; it
extended to the most minute details of life.

[Sidenote: Lamon, p. 52.]

Among these people, and in all essential respects one of them, Abraham
Lincoln passed his childhood and youth. He was not remarkably
precocious. His mind was slow in acquisition, and his powers of
reasoning and rhetoric improved constantly to the end of his life, at
a rate of progress marvelously regular and sustained. But there was
that about him, even at the age of nineteen years, which might well
justify his admiring friends in presaging for him an unusual career.
He had read every book he could find, and could "spell down" the whole
county at their orthographical contests. By dint of constant practice
he had acquired an admirably clear and serviceable handwriting. He
occasionally astounded his companions by such glimpses of occult
science as that the world is round and that the sun is relatively
stationary. He wrote, for his own amusement and edification, essays on
politics, of which gentlemen of standing who had been favored with a
perusal said with authority, at the cross-roads grocery, "The world
can't beat it." One or two of these compositions got into print and
vastly increased the author's local fame. He was also a magnanimous
boy, with a larger and kindlier spirit than common. His generosity,
courage, and capability of discerning two sides to a dispute, were
remarkable even then, and won him the admiration of those to whom such
qualities were unknown. But perhaps, after all, the thing which gained
and fixed his mastery over his fellows was to a great degree his
gigantic stature and strength. He attained his full growth, six feet
and four inches, two years before he came of age. He rarely met with a
man he could not easily handle. His strength is still a tradition in
Spencer County. One aged man says that he has seen him pick up and
carry away a chicken-house weighing six hundred pounds. At another
time, seeing some men preparing a contrivance for lifting some large
posts, Abe quickly shouldered the posts and took them where they were
needed. One of his employers says, "He could sink an axe deeper into
wood than any man I ever saw." With strength like this and a brain to
direct it, a man was a born leader in that country and at that time.
There are, of course, foolish stories extant that Abraham used to
boast, and that others used to predict, that he would be President
some day. The same thing is daily said of thousands of boys who will
never be constables. But there is evidence that he felt too large for
the life of a farmhand on Pigeon Creek, and his thoughts naturally
turned, after the manner of restless boys in the West, to the river,
as the avenue of escape from the narrow life of the woods. He once
asked an old friend to give him a recommendation to some steamboat on
the Ohio, but desisted from his purpose on being reminded that his
father had the right to dispose of his time for a year or so more. But
in 1828 an opportunity offered for a little glimpse of the world
outside, and the boy gladly embraced it. He was hired by Mr. Gentry,
the proprietor of the neighboring village of Gentryville, to accompany
his son with a flat-boat of produce to New Orleans and intermediate
landings. The voyage was made successfully, and Abraham gained great
credit for his management and sale of the cargo. The only important
incident of the trip occurred at the plantation of Madame Duchesne, a
few miles below Baton Rouge. The young merchants had tied up for the
night and were asleep in the cabin, when they were aroused by
shuffling footsteps, which proved to be a gang of marauding negroes,
coming to rob the boat. Abraham instantly attacked them with a club,
knocked several overboard and put the rest to flight; flushed with
battle, he and Allen Gentry carried the war into the enemy's country,
and pursued the retreating Africans some distance in the darkness.
They then returned to the boat, bleeding but victorious, and hastily
swung into the stream and floated down the river till daylight.
Lincoln's exertion in later years for the welfare of the African race
showed that this nocturnal battle had not led him to any hasty and
hostile generalizations.

The next autumn, John Hanks, the steadiest and most trustworthy of his
family, went to Illinois. Though an illiterate and rather dull man, he
had a good deal of solidity of character and consequently some
influence and consideration in the household. He settled in Macon
County, and was so well pleased with the country, and especially with
its admirable distribution into prairie and timber, that he sent
repeated messages to his friends in Indiana to come out and join him.
Thomas Lincoln was always ready to move. He had probably by this time
despaired of ever owning any unencumbered real estate in Indiana, and
the younger members of the family had little to bind them to the place
where they saw nothing in the future but hard work and poor living.
Thomas Lincoln handed over his farm to Mr. Gentry, sold his crop of
corn and hogs, packed his household goods and those of his children
and sons-in-law into a single wagon, drawn by two yoke of oxen, the
combined wealth of himself and Dennis Hanks, and started for the new
State. His daughter Sarah or Nancy, for she was called by both names,
who married Aaron Grigsby a few years before, had died in childbirth.
The emigrating family consisted of the Lincolns, John Johnston, Mrs.
Lincoln's son, and her daughters, Mrs. Hall and Mrs. Hanks, with their
husbands.

Two weeks of weary tramping over forest roads and muddy prairie, and
the dangerous fording of streams swollen by the February thaws,
brought the party to John Hanks's place near Decatur. He met them with
a frank and energetic welcome. He had already selected a piece of
ground for them a few miles from his own, and had the logs ready for
their house. They numbered men enough to build without calling in
their neighbors, and immediately put up a cabin on the north fork of
the Sangamon River. The family thus housed and sheltered, one more bit
of filial work remained for Abraham before assuming his virile
independence. With the assistance of John Hanks he plowed fifteen
acres, and split, from the tall walnut-trees of the primeval forest,
enough rails to surround them with a fence. Little did either dream,
while engaged in this work, that the day would come when the
appearance of John Hanks in a public meeting, with two of these rails
on his shoulder, would electrify a State convention, and kindle
throughout the country a contagious and passionate enthusiasm, whose
results would reach to endless generations.




CHAPTER III

ILLINOIS IN 1830


[Sidenote: Roy. J. M. Sturtevant, "Address to Old Settlers of Morgan
County."]

[Sidenote: Thomas Buckles, of McLean County.]

[Sidenote: J.C. Power, "Early Settlers of Sangamon County," p. 62.]

[Sidenote: "Old Times in McLean County," p. 414.]

[Illustration:   GOOSE-NEST PRAIRIE, NEAR FARMINGTON ILLINOIS, WHERE
THOMAS LINCOLN LIVED AND DIED.]

The Lincolns arrived in Illinois just in time to entitle themselves to
be called pioneers. When, in after years, associations of "Old
Settlers" began to be formed in Central Illinois, the qualification
for membership agreed upon by common consent was a residence in the
country before "the winter of the deep snow." This was in 1830-31, a
season of such extraordinary severity that it has formed for half a
century a recognized date in the middle counties of Illinois, among
those to whom in those days diaries and journals were unknown. The
snowfall began in the Christmas holidays and continued until the snow
was three feet deep on level ground. Then came a cold rain, freezing
as it fell, until a thick crust of ice gathered over the snow. The
weather became intensely cold, the mercury sinking to twelve degrees
below zero, Fahrenheit, and remaining there for two weeks. The storm
came on with such suddenness that all who were abroad had great
trouble in reaching their homes, and many perished. One man relates
that he and a friend or two were out in a hunting party with an ox-
team. They had collected a wagon-load of game and were on their way
home when the storm struck them. After they had gone four miles they
were compelled to abandon their wagon; the snow fell in heavy masses
"as if thrown from a scoop-shovel"; arriving within two miles of their
habitation, they were forced to trust to the instinct of their
animals, and reached home hanging to the tails of their steers. Not
all were so fortunate. Some were found weeks afterwards in the snow-
drifts, their flesh gnawed by famished wolves; and the fate of others
was unknown until the late spring sunshine revealed their resting-
places. To those who escaped, the winter was tedious and terrible. It
is hard for us to understand the isolation to which such weather
condemned the pioneer. For weeks they remained in their cabins hoping
for some mitigation of the frost. When at last they were driven out by
the fear of famine, the labor of establishing communications was
enormous. They finally made roads by "wallowing through the snow," as
an Illinois historian expresses it, and going patiently over the same
track until the snow was trampled hard and rounded like a turnpike.
These roads lasted far into the spring, when the snow had melted from
the plains, and wound for miles like threads of silver over the rich
black loam of the prairies. After that winter game was never again so
plentiful in the State. Much still remained, of course, but it never
recovered entirely from the rigors of that season and the stupid
enterprise of the pioneer hunters, who, when they came out of their
snow-beleaguered cabins, began chasing and killing the starved deer by
herds. It was easy work; the crust of the snow was strong enough to
bear the weight of men and dogs, but the slender hoofs of the deer
would after a few bounds pierce the treacherous surface. This
destructive slaughter went on until the game grew too lean to be worth
the killing. All sorts of wild animals grew scarce from that winter.
Old settlers say that the slow cowardly breed of prairie wolves, which
used to be caught and killed as readily as sheep, disappeared about
that time and none but the fleeter and stronger survived.

Only once since then has nature shown such extravagant severity in
Illinois, and that was on a day in the winter of 1836, known to
Illinoisans as "the sudden change." At noon on the 20th of December,
after a warm and rainy morning, the ground being covered with mud and
slush, the temperature fell instantly forty degrees. A man riding into
Springfield for a marriage license says a roaring and crackling wind
came upon him and the rain-drops dripping from his bridle-reins and
beard changed in a second into jingling icicles. He rode hastily into
the town and arrived in a few minutes at his destination; but his
clothes were frozen like sheet iron, and man and saddle had to be
taken into the house together to be thawed apart. Geese and chickens
were caught by the feet and wings and frozen to the wet ground. A
drove of a thousand hogs, which were being driven to St. Louis, rushed
together for warmth, and became piled in a great heap. Those inside
smothered and those outside froze, and the ghastly pyramid remained
there on the prairie for weeks: the drovers barely escaped with their
lives. Men killed their horses, disemboweled them, and crept into the
cavity of their bodies to escape the murderous wind. [Footnote:
Although the old settlers of Sangamon County are acquainted with these
facts, and we have often heard them and many others like them from the
lips of eye-witnesses, we have preferred to cite only these incidents
of the sudden change which are given in the careful and conscientious
compilation entitled "The Early Settlers of Sangamon County," by John
Carroll Power.]

The pioneer period of Illinois was ending as Thomas Lincoln and his
tall boy drove their ox-team over the Indiana line. The population of
the State had grown to 157,447. It still clung to the wooded borders
of the water-courses; scattered settlements were to be found all along
the Mississippi and its affluents, from where Cairo struggled for life
in the swamps of the Ohio to the bustling and busy mining camps which
the recent discovery of lead had brought to Galena. A line of villages
from Alton to Peoria dotted the woodland which the Illinois River had
stretched, like a green baldric, diagonally across the bosom of the
State. Then there were long reaches of wilderness before you came to
Fort Dearborn, where there was nothing as yet to give promise of that
miraculous growth which was soon to make Chicago a proverb to the
world. There were a few settlements in the fertile region called the
Military Tract; the southern part of the State was getting itself
settled here and there. People were coming in freely to the Sangamon
country. But a grassy solitude stretched from Galena to Chicago, and
the upper half of the State was generally a wilderness. The earlier
emigrants, principally of the poorer class of Southern farmers,
shunned the prairies with something of a superstitious dread. They
preferred to pass the first years of their occupation in the wasteful
and laborious work of clearing a patch of timber for corn, rather than
enter upon those rich savannas which were ready to break into
fertility at the slightest provocation of culture. Even so late as
1835, writes J. F. Speed, "no one dreamed the prairies would ever be
occupied." It was thought they would be used perpetually as grazing-
fields for stock. For years the long processions of "movers" wound,
over those fertile and neglected plains, taking no hint of the wealth
suggested by the rank luxuriance of vegetable growth around them, the
carpet of brilliant flowers spread over the verdant knolls, the
strong, succulent grass that waved in the breeze, full of warm and
vital odor, as high as the waist of a man. In after years, when the
emigration from the Northern and Eastern States began to pour in, the
prairies were rapidly taken up, and the relative growth and importance
of the two sections of the State were immediately reversed. Governor
Ford, writing about 1847, attributes this result to the fact that the
best class of Southern people were slow to emigrate to a State where
they could not take their slaves; while the settlers from the North,
not being debarred by the State Constitution from bringing their
property with them, were of a different class. "The northern part of
the State was settled in the first instance by wealthy farmers,
enterprising merchants, millers, and manufacturers. They made farms,
built mills, churches, school-houses, towns, and cities, and
constructed roads and bridges as if by magic; so that although the
settlements in the southern part of the State are from twenty to fifty
years in advance on the score of age, yet are they ten years behind in
point of wealth and all the appliances of a higher civilization."

[Sidenote: Thomas Ford, "History of Illinois," p. 280.]

At the time which we are specially considering, however, the few
inhabitants of the south and the center were principally from what
came afterwards to be called the border slave States. They were mostly
a simple, neighborly, unambitious people, contented with their
condition, living upon plain fare, and knowing not much of anything
better. Luxury was, of course, unknown; even wealth, if it existed,
could procure few of the comforts of refined life. There was little or
no money in circulation. Exchanges were effected by the most primitive
forms of barter, and each family had to rely chiefly upon itself for
the means of living. The neighbors would lend a hand in building a
cabin for a new-comer; after that he must in most cases shift for
himself. Many a man arriving from an old community, and imperfectly
appreciating the necessities of pioneer life, has found suddenly, on
the approach of winter, that he must learn to make shoes or go
barefoot. The furniture of their houses was made with an axe from the
trees of the forest. Their clothing was all made at home. The buckskin
days were over to a great extent, though an occasional hunting-shirt
and pair of moccasins were still seen. But flax and hemp had begun to
be cultivated, and as the wolves were killed off the sheep-folds
increased, and garments resembling those of civilization were spun and
woven, and cut and sewed, by the women of the family. When a man had a
suit of jeans colored with butternut-dye, and his wife a dress of
linsey, they could appear with the best at a wedding or a quilting
frolic. The superfluous could not have been said to exist in a
community where men made their own buttons, where women dug roots in
the woods to make their tea with, where many children never saw a
stick of candy until after they were grown. The only sweetmeats known
were those a skillful cook could compose from the honey plundered from
the hollow oaks where the wild bees had stored it. Yet there was
withal a kind of rude plenty; the woods swarmed with game, and after
swine began to be raised, there was the bacon and hoe-cake which any
south-western farmer will say is good enough for a king. The greatest
privation was the lack of steel implements. His axe was as precious to
the pioneer as his sword to the knight errant. Governor John Reynolds
speaks of the panic felt in his father's family when the axe was
dropped into a stream. A battered piece of tin was carefully saved and
smoothed, and made into a grater for green corn.

[Sidenote: William H. Herndon's speech at Old Settlers' Meeting,
Menard County.]

[Sidenote: "Old Times in McLean County," p. 194.]

They had their own amusements, of course; no form of society is
without them, from the anthropoid apes to the Jockey Club. As to the
grosser and ruder shapes taken by the diversions of the pioneers, we
will let Mr. Herndon speak--their contemporary annalist and ardent
panegyrist: "These men could shave a horse's mane and tail, paint,
disfigure, and offer it for sale to the owner. They could hoop up in a
hogshead a drunken man, they themselves being drunk, put in and nail
fast the head, and roll the man down hill a hundred feet or more. They
could run down a lean and hungry wild pig, catch it, heat a ten-plate
stove furnace hot, and putting in the pig, could cook it, they dancing
the while a merry jig." Wild oats of this kind seem hardly compatible
with a harvest of civilization, but it is contended that such of these
roysterers as survived their stormy beginnings became decent and
serious citizens. Indeed, Mr. Herndon insists than even in their hot
youth they showed the promise of goodness and piety. "They attended
church, heard the sermon, wept and prayed, shouted, got up and fought
an hour, and then went back to prayer, just as the spirit moved them."
The camp-meeting may be said, with no irreverent intention, to have
been their principal means of intellectual excitement. The circuit
preachers were for a long time the only circulating medium of thought
and emotion that kept the isolated settlements from utter spiritual
stagnation. They were men of great physical and moral endurance,
absolutely devoted to their work, which they pursued in the face of
every hardship and discouragement. Their circuits were frequently so
great in extent that they were forced to be constantly on the route;
what reading they did was done in the saddle. They received perhaps
fifty dollars from the missionary fund and half as much more from
their congregations, paid for the most part in necessaries of life.
Their oratory was suited to their longitude, and was principally
addressed to the emotions of their hearers. It was often very
effective, producing shouts and groans and genuflections among the
audience at large, and terrible convulsions among the more nervous and
excitable. We hear sometimes of a whole congregation prostrated as by
a hurricane, flinging their limbs about in furious contortions, with
wild outcries. To this day some of the survivors of that period insist
that it was the spirit of the Almighty, and nothing less, that thus
manifested itself. The minister, however, did not always share in the
delirium of his hearers. Governor Reynolds tells us of a preacher in
Sangamon County, who, before his sermon, had set a wolf-trap in view
from his pulpit. In the midst of his exhortations his keen eyes saw
the distant trap collapse, and he continued in the same intonation
with which he had been preaching, "Mind the text, brethren, till I go
kill that wolf!" With all the failings and eccentricities of this
singular class of men, they did a great deal of good, and are entitled
to especial credit among those who conquered the wilderness. The
emotions they excited did not all die away in the shouts and
contortions of the meeting. Not a few of the cabins in the clearings
were the abode of a fervent religion and an austere morality. Many a
traveler, approaching a rude hut in the woods in the gathering
twilight, distrusting the gaunt and silent family who gave him an
unsmiling welcome, the bare interior, the rifles and knives
conspicuously displayed, has felt his fears vanish when he sat down to
supper, and the master of the house, in a few fervent words, invoked
the blessing of heaven on the meal.

There was very little social intercourse; a visit was a serious
matter, involving the expenditure of days of travel. It was the custom
among families, when the longing for the sight of kindred faces was
too strong to withstand, to move in a body to the distant settlement
where their relatives lived and remain with them for months at a time.
The claims of consanguinity were more regarded than now. Almost the
only festivities were those that accompanied weddings, and these were,
of course, of a primitive kind. The perils and adventures through
which the young pioneers went to obtain their brides furnish forth
thousands of tales by Western firesides. Instead of taking the rosy
daughter of a neighbor, the enterprising bachelor would often go back
to Kentucky, and pass through as many adventures in bringing his wife
home as a returning crusader would meet between Beirut and Vienna. If
she was a young woman who respected herself, the household gear she
would insist on bringing would entail an Iliad of embarrassments. An
old farmer of Sangamon County still talks of a featherbed weighing
fifty-four pounds with which his wife made him swim six rivers under
penalty of desertion.

It was not always easy to find a competent authority to perform the
ceremony. A justice in McLean County lived by the bank of a river, and
his services were sometimes required by impatient lovers on the other
bank when the waters were too torrential to cross. In such cases,
being a conscientious man, he always insisted that they should ride
into the stream far enough for him to discern their features, holding
torches to their faces by night and by storm. The wooing of those days
was prompt and practical. There was no time for the gradual approaches
of an idler and more conventional age. It is related of one Stout, one
of the legendary Nimrods of Illinois, who was well and frequently
married, that he had one unfailing formula of courtship. He always
promised the ladies whose hearts he was besieging that "they should
live in the timber where they could pick up their own firewood."

Theft was almost unknown; property, being so hard to get, was
jealously guarded, as we have already noticed in speaking of the
settlement of Kentucky. The pioneers of Illinois brought with them the
same rigid notions of honesty which their environment maintained. A
man in Macoupin County left his wagon, loaded with corn, stuck in the
prairie mud for two weeks near a frequented road. When he returned he
found some of his corn gone, but there was money enough tied in the
sacks to pay for what was taken. Men carrying bags of silver from the
towns of Illinois to St. Louis rather made a display of it, as it
enhanced their own importance, and there was no fear of robbery. There
were of course no locks on the cabin doors, and the early merchants
sometimes left their stores unprotected for days together when they
went to the nearest city to replenish their stock. Of course there
were rare exceptions to this rule, but a single theft alarmed and
excited a whole neighborhood. When a crime was traced home, the family
of the criminal were generally obliged to remove.

[Sidenote: N.W. Edwards, "Life and Times of Ninian Edwards," p. 163.]

There were still, even so late as the time to which we are referring,
two alien elements in the population of the State--the French and the
Indians. The French settlements about Kaskaskia retained much of their
national character, and the pioneers from the South who visited them
or settled among them never ceased to wonder at their gayety, their
peaceable industry and enterprise, and their domestic affection, which
they did not care to dissemble and conceal like their shy and reticent
neighbors. It was a daily spectacle, which never lost its strangeness
for the Tennesseeans and Kentuckians, to see the Frenchman returning
from his work greeted by his wife and children with embraces of
welcome "at the gate of his door-yard, and in view of all the
villagers." The natural and kindly fraternization of the Frenchmen
with the Indians was also a cause of wonder to the Americans. The
friendly intercourse between them, and their occasional
intermarriages, seemed little short of monstrous to the ferocious
exclusiveness of the Anglo-Saxon. [Footnote: Michelet notices this
exclusiveness of the English, and inveighs against it in his most
lyric style. "Crime contre la nature! Crime contre l'humanite! Il sera
expie par la sterilite de l'esprit."] The Indians in the central part
of Illinois cut very little figure in the reminiscences of the
pioneers; they occupied much the same relation to them as the tramp to
the housewife of to-day. The Winnebago war in 1827 and the Black Hawk
war in 1831 disturbed only the northern portion of the State. A few
scattered and vagrant lodges of Pottawatomies and Kickapoos were all
the pioneers of Sangamon and the neighboring counties ever met. They
were spared the heroic struggle of the advance-guard of civilization
in other States. A woman was sometimes alarmed by a visit from a
drunken savage; poultry and pigs occasionally disappeared when they
were in the neighborhood; but life was not darkened by the constant
menace of massacre. A few years earlier, indeed, the relations of the
two races had been more strained, as may be inferred from an act
passed by the territorial Legislature in 1814, offering a reward of
fifty dollars to any citizen or ranger who should kill or take any
depredating Indian. As only two dollars was paid for killing a wolf,
it is easy to see how the pioneers regarded the forest folk in point
of relative noxiousness. But ten years later a handful only of the
Kickapoos remained in Sangamon County, the specter of the vanished
people. A chief named Machina came one day to a family who were
clearing a piece of timber, and issued an order of eviction in these
words: "Too much come white man. T'other side Sangamon." He threw a
handful of dried leaves in the air to show how he would scatter the
pale faces, but he never fulfilled his threats further than to come in
occasionally and ask for a drink of whisky. That such trivial details
are still related, only shows how barren of incident was the life of
these obscure founders of a great empire. Any subject of conversation,
any cause of sensation, was a godsend. When Vannoy murdered his wife
in Springfield, whole families put on their best clothes and drove
fifty miles through bottomless mud and swollen rivers to see him
hanged.

[Sidenote: Power, "Early Settlers of Sangamon County," p. 88.]

It is curious to see how naturally in such a state of things the
fabric of political society developed itself from its germ. The county
of Sangamon was called by an act of the Legislature in 1821 out of a
verdant solitude of more than a million acres, inhabited by a few
families. An election for county commissioners was ordered; three men
were chosen; they came together at the cabin of John Kelly, at Spring
Creek. He was a roving bachelor from North Carolina, devoted to the
chase, who had built this hut three years before on the margin of a
green-bordered rivulet, where the deer passed by in hundreds, going in
the morning from the shady banks of the Sangamon to feed on the rich
green grass of the prairie, and returning in the twilight. He was so
delighted with this hunters' paradise that he sent for his brothers to
join him. They came and brought their friends, so it happened that in
this immense county, several thousand square miles in extent, the
settlement of John Kelly at Spring Creek was the only place where
there was shelter for the commissioners; thus it became the temporary
county-seat, duly described in the official report of the
commissioners as "a certain point in the prairie near John Kelly's
field, on the waters of Spring Creek, at a stake marked Z and D (the
initials of the commissioners), to be the temporary seat of justice
for said county; and we do further agree that the said county-seat be
called and known by the name of Springfield." In this manner the
future capital received that hackneyed title, when the distinctive and
musical name of Sangamon was ready to their hands. The same day they
agreed with John Kelly to build them a court-house, for which they
paid him forty-two dollars and fifty cents. In twenty-four days the
house was built--one room of rough logs, the jury retiring to any
sequestered glade they fancied for their deliberation. They next
ordered the building of a jail, which cost just twice as much money as
the court-house. Constables and overseers of the poor were appointed,
and all the machinery of government prepared for the population which
was hourly expected. It was taken for granted that malefactors would
come and the constables have employment; and the poor they would have
always with them, when once they began to arrive. This was only a
temporary arrangement, but when, a year or two later, the time came to
fix upon a permanent seat of justice for the county, the resources of
the Spring Creek men were equal to the emergency. When the
commissioners came to decide on the relative merits of Springfield and
another site a few miles away, they led them through brake, through
brier, by mud knee-deep and by water-courses so exasperating that the
wearied and baffled officials declared they would seek no further, and
Springfield became the county-seat for all time; and greater destinies
were in store for it through means not wholly dissimilar. Nature had
made it merely a pleasant hunting-ground; the craft and the industry
of its first settlers made it a capital.

[Sidenote: "History Of Sangamon County," p. 83.]

[Sidenote: "Old Times in McLean County," p. 235.]

[Sidenote: Ford, "History of Illinois," p. 53.]

The courts which were held in these log huts were as rude as might be
expected; yet there is evidence that although there was no superfluity
of law or of learning, justice was substantially administered. The
lawyers came mostly from Kentucky, though an occasional New Englander
confronted and lived down the general prejudice against his region and
obtained preferment. The profits of the profession were inconceivably
small. One early State's Attorney describes his first circuit as a
tour of shifts and privations not unlike the wanderings of a mendicant
friar. In his first county he received a fee of five dollars for
prosecuting the parties to a sanguinary affray. In the next he was
equally successful, but barely escaped drowning in Spoon River. In the
third there were but two families at the county-seat, and no cases on
the docket. Thence he journeyed across a trackless prairie sixty
miles, and at Quincy had one case and gained five dollars. In Pike
County our much-enduring jurist took no cash, but found a generous
sheriff who entertained him without charge. "He was one of nature's
noblemen, from Massachusetts," writes the grateful prosecutor. The
lawyers in what was called good practice earned less than a street-
sweeper to-day. It is related that the famous Stephen A. Douglas once
traveled from Springfield to Bloomington and made an extravagant
speech, and having gained his case received a fee of five dollars. In
such a state of things it was not to be wondered at that the
technicalities of law were held in somewhat less veneration than what
the pioneer regarded as the essential claims of justice. The
infirmities of the jury system gave them less annoyance than they give
us. Governor Ford mentions a case where a gang of horse-thieves
succeeded in placing one of their confederates upon a jury which was
to try them; but he was soon brought to reason by his eleven
colleagues making preparations to hang him to the rafters of the jury
room. The judges were less hampered by the limitations of their legal
lore than by their fears of a loss of popularity as a result of too
definite charges in civil suits, or too great severity in criminal
cases. They grew very dexterous in avoiding any commitment as to the
legal or moral bearings of the questions brought before them. They
generally refused to sum up, or to comment upon evidence; when asked
by the counsel to give instructions they would say, "Why, gentlemen,
the jury understand this case as well as you or I. They will do
justice between the parties." One famous judge, who was afterwards
governor, when sentencing a murderer, impressed it upon his mind, and
wished him to inform his friends, that it was the jury and not the
judge who had found him guilty, and then asked him on what day he
would like to be hanged. It is needless to say that the bench and bar
were not all of this class. There were even at that early day lawyers,
and not a few, who had already won reputation in the older States, and
whose names are still honored in the profession. Cook, McLean,
Edwards, Kane, Thomas, Reynolds, and others, the earliest lawyers of
the State, have hardly been since surpassed for learning and ability.

[Sidenote: Ford, "History of Illinois," p. 31.]

[Sidenote: Ford, p. 81.]

In a community where the principal men were lawyers, where there was
as yet little commerce, and industrial enterprise was unknown, it was
natural that one of the chief interests of life should be the pursuit
of politics. The young State swarmed with politicians; they could be
found chewing and whittling at every cross-roads inn; they were busy
at every horse-race, arranging their plans and extending their
acquaintance; around the burgoo-pot of the hunting party they
discussed measures and candidates; they even invaded the camp-meeting
and did not disdain the pulpit as a tribune. Of course there was no
such thing as organization in the pioneer days. Men were voted for to
a great extent independently of partisan questions affecting the
nation at large, and in this way the higher offices of the State were
filled for many years by men whose personal character compelled the
respect and esteem of the citizens. The year 1826 is generally taken
as the date which witnessed the change from personal to partisan
politics, though several years more elapsed before the rule of
conventions came in, which put an end to individual candidacy. In that
year, Daniel Pope Cook, who had long represented the State in Congress
with singular ability and purity, was defeated by Governor Joseph
Duncan, the candidate of the Jackson men, on account of the vote given
by Cook which elected John Quincy Adams to the Presidency. The bitter
intolerance of the Jackson party naturally caused their opponents to
organize against them, and there were two parties in the State from
that time forward. The change in political methods was inevitable, and
it is idle to deplore it; but the former system gave the better men in
the new State a power and prominence which they have never since
enjoyed. Such men as Governor Ninian Edwards, who came with the
prestige of a distinguished family connection, a large fortune, a good
education, and a distinction of manners and of dress--ruffles, gold
buttons, and fair-topped boots--which would hardly have been pardoned
a few years later; and Governor Edward Coles, who had been private
secretary to Madison, and was familiar with the courts of Europe, a
man as notable for his gentleness of manners as for his nobility of
nature, could never have come so readily and easily to the head of the
government after the machine of the caucus had been perfected. Real
ability then imposed itself with more authority upon the ignorant and
unpretending politicians from the back timber; so that it is remarked
by those who study the early statutes of Illinois that they are far
better drawn up, and better edited, than those of a later period, when
illiterate tricksters, conscious of the party strength behind them,
insisted on shaping legislation according to their own fancy. The men
of cultivation wielded an influence in the Legislature entirely out of
proportion to their numbers, as the ruder sort of pioneers were
naturally in a large majority. The type of a not uncommon class in
Illinois tradition was a member from the South who could neither read
nor write, and whose apparently ironical patronymic was Grammar. When
first elected he had never worn anything except leather; but regarding
his tattered buckskin as unfit for the garb of a lawgiver, he and his
sons gathered hazelnuts enough to barter at the nearest store for a
few yards of blue strouding such as the Indians used for breech-
clouts. When he came home with his purchase and had called together
the women of the settlement to make his clothes, it was found that
there was only material enough for a very short coat and a long pair
of leggins, and thus attired he went to Kaskaskia, the territorial
capital. Uncouth as was his appearance, he had in him the raw material
of a politician. He invented a system--which was afterwards adopted by
many whose breeches were more fashionably cut--of voting against every
measure which was proposed. If it failed, the responsibility was
broadly shared; if it passed and was popular, no one would care who
voted against it; if it passed and did not meet the favor of the
people, John Grammar could vaunt his foresight. Between the men like
Coles and the men like Grammar there was a wide interval, and the
average was about what the people of the State deserved and could
appreciate. A legislator was as likely to suffer for doing right as
for doing wrong. Governor Ford, in his admirable sketch of the early
history of the State, mentions two acts of the Legislature, both of
them proper and beneficial, as unequaled in their destructive
influence upon the great folks of the State. One was a bill for a loan
to meet the honest obligations of the commonwealth, commonly called
"the Wiggins loan"; and the other was a law to prevent bulls of
inferior size and breed from running at large. This latter set loose
all the winds of popular fury: it was cruel, it was aristocratic; it
was in the interest of rich men and pampered foreign bulls; and it
ended the career of many an aspiring politician in a blast of
democratic indignation and scorn. The politician who relied upon
immediate and constant contact with the people certainly earned all
the emoluments of office he received. His successes were hardly
purchased by laborious affability. "A friend of mine," says Ford,
"once informed me that he intended to be a candidate for the
Legislature, but would not declare himself until just before the
election, and assigned as a reason that it was so very hard to be
clever for a long time at once." Before the caucus had eliminated the
individual initiative, there was much more of personal feeling in
elections. A vote against a man had something of offense in it, and
sometimes stirred up a defeated candidate to heroic vengeance. In 1827
the Legislature elected a State treasurer after an exciting contest,
and before the members had left the house the unsuccessful aspirant
came in and soundly thrashed, one after the other, four of the
representatives who had voted against him. Such energy was sure to
meet its reward, and he was soon after made clerk of the Circuit
Court. It is related by old citizens of Menard County, as a
circumstance greatly to the credit of Abraham Lincoln, that when he
was a candidate for the Legislature a man who wanted his vote for
another place walked to the polls with him and ostentatiously voted
for him, hoping to receive his vote in return. Lincoln voted against
him, and the act was much admired by those who saw it.

One noticeable fact is observed in relation to the politicians of the
day--their careers were generally brief. Superannuation came early. In
the latter part of the last century and the first half of this, men
were called old whom we should regard as in the prime of life. When
the friends of Washington were first pressing the Presidency upon him
in 1788, he urged his "advanced age" as an imperative reason for
declining it: he was fifty-six years old. When Ninian Edwards was a
candidate for Governor of Illinois in 1826, he was only fifty-one, and
yet he considered it necessary in his published addresses to refer to
the charge that he was too old for the place, and, while admitting the
fact that he was no longer young, to urge in extenuation that there
are some old things,--like old whisky, old bacon, and old friends,--
which are not without their merits. Even so late as 1848, we find a
remarkable letter from Mr. Lincoln, who was then in Congress, bearing
upon the same point. His partner, William H. Herndon, had written him
a letter, complaining that the old men in Sangamon County were
unwilling to let the young ones have any opportunity to distinguish
themselves. To this Lincoln answered in his usual tone of grave
kindness: "The subject of your letter is exceedingly painful to me;
and I cannot but think there is some mistake in your impression of the
motives of the old men. I suppose I am now one of the old men, and I
declare on my veracity, which I think is good with you, that nothing
could afford me more satisfaction than to learn that you and others of
my young friends at home were doing battle in the contest and
endearing themselves to the people and taking a stand far above any I
have ever been able to reach in their admiration. I cannot conceive
that other old men feel differently. Of course, I cannot demonstrate
what I say; but I was young once, and I am sure I was never
ungenerously thrust back." The man who thus counseled petulant youth
with the experienced calmness of age was thirty-nine years old. A
state of society where one could at that age call himself or be called
by others an old man, is proved by that fact alone to be one of
wearing hardships and early decay of the vital powers. The survivors
of the pioneers stoutly insist upon the contrary view. "It was a
glorious life," says one old patriarch; "men would fight for the love
of it, and then shake hands and be friends; there is nothing like it
now." Another says, "I never enjoy my breakfast now as I used to, when
I got up and ran down a deer before I could have anything to eat." But
they see the past through a rosy mist of memory, transfigured by the
eternal magic of youth. The sober fact is that the life was a hard
one, with few rational pleasures, few wholesome appliances. The strong
ones lived, and some even attained great length of years; but to the
many age came early and was full of infirmity and pain. If we could go
back to what our fore-fathers endured in clearing the Western
wilderness, we could then better appreciate our obligations to them.
It is detracting from the honor which is their due to say that their
lives had much of happiness or comfort, or were in any respect
preferable to our own.




CHAPTER IV

NEW SALEM


During the latter part of "the winter of the deep snow," Lincoln
became acquainted with one Denton Offutt, an adventurous and
discursive sort of merchant, with more irons in the fire than he could
well manage. He wanted to take a flat-boat and cargo to New Orleans,
and having heard that Hanks and Lincoln had some experience of the
river, he insisted on their joining him. John Johnston was afterwards
added to the party, probably at the request of his foster-brother, to
share in the golden profits of the enterprise; for fifty cents a day,
and a contingent dividend of twenty dollars apiece, seemed like a
promise of immediate opulence to the boys. In the spring, when the
rivers broke up and the melting snows began to pour in torrents down
every ravine and gully, the three young men paddled down the Sangamon
in a canoe to the point where Jamestown now stands; whence they walked
five miles to Springfield, where Offutt had given them rendezvous.
They met him at Elliott's tavern and far from happy. Amid the
multiplicity of his engagements he had failed to procure a flat-boat,
and the first work his new hands must do was to build one. They cut
the timber, with frontier innocence, from "Congress land," and soon
had a serviceable craft afloat, with which they descended the current
of the Sangamon to New Salem, a little village which seems to have
been born for the occasion, as it came into existence just before the
arrival of Lincoln, nourished for seven years while he remained one of
its citizens, and died soon after he went away. His introduction to
his fellow-citizens was effected in a peculiar and somewhat striking
manner. Offutt's boat had come to serious embarrassment on Rutledge's
mill-dam, and the unwonted incident brought the entire population to
the water's edge. They spent a good part of the day watching the
hapless flat-boat, resting midships on the dam, the forward end in the
air and the stern taking in the turbid Sangamon water. Nobody knew
what to do with the disaster except "the bow-oar," who is described as
a gigantic youth "with his trousers rolled up some five feet," who was
wading about the boat and rigging up some undescribed contrivance by
which the cargo was unloaded, the boat tilted and the water let out by
boring a hole through the bottom, and everything brought safely to
moorings below the dam. This exploit gained for young Lincoln the
enthusiastic admiration of his employer, and turned his own mind in
the direction of an invention which he afterwards patented "for
lifting vessels over shoals." The model on which he obtained this
patent--a little boat whittled by his own hand in 1849, after he had
become prominent as a lawyer and politician--is still shown to
visitors at the Department of the Interior. We have never learned that
it has served any other purpose.

[Illustration:   MODEL OF LINCOLN'S INVENTION, IN THE PATENT OFFICE,
WASHINGTON.]

[Illustration:   REDUCED FAC-SIMILE OF DRAWINGS IN THE PATENT OFFICE.]

[Sidenote: Lamon, p. 83.]

They made a quick trip down the Sangamon, the Illinois, and the
Mississippi rivers. Although it was but a repetition in great part of
the trip young Lincoln had made with Gentry, it evidently created a
far deeper impression on his mind than the former one. The simple and
honest words of John Hanks leave no doubt of this. At New Orleans, he
said, they saw for the first time "negroes chained, maltreated,
whipped, and scourged. Lincoln saw it; his heart bled; said nothing
much, was silent, looked bad. I can say, knowing it, that it was on
this trip that he formed his opinion of slavery. It run its iron in
him then and there, May, 1831. I have heard him say so often." The
sight of men in chains was intolerable to him. Ten years after this he
made another journey by water with his friend Joshua Speed, of
Kentucky. Writing to Speed about it after the lapse of fourteen years,
he says: "In 1841 you and I had together a tedious low-water trip on a
steamboat from Louisville to St. Louis. You may remember, as I well
do, that from Louisville to the mouth of the Ohio there were on board
ten or a dozen slaves shackled together with irons. That sight was a
continual torment to me, and I see something like it every time I
touch the Ohio or any other slave border. It is not fair for you to
assume that I have no interest in a thing which has, and continually
exercises, the power of making me miserable."

There have been several ingenious attempts to show the origin and
occasion of Mr. Lincoln's antislavery convictions. They seem to us an
idle waste of labor. These sentiments came with the first awakening of
his mind and conscience, and were roused into active life and energy
by the sight of fellow-creatures in chains on an Ohio River steamboat,
and on the wharf at New Orleans.

The party went up the river in the early summer and separated in St.
Louis. Abraham walked in company with John Johnston from St. Louis to
Coles County, and spent a few weeks there with his father, who had
made another migration the year before. His final move was to Goose
Nest Prairie, where he died in 1851, [Footnote: His grave, a mile and
a half west of the town of Farmington, Illinois, is surmounted by an
appropriate monument erected by his grandson, the Hon. Robert T.
Lincoln.] at the age of seventy-three years, after a life which,
though not successful in any material or worldly point of view, was
probably far happier than that of his illustrious son, being unvexed
by enterprise or ambition. Abraham never lost sight of his parents. He
continued to aid and befriend them in every way, even when he could
ill afford it, and when his benefactions were imprudently used. He not
only comforted their declining years with every aid his affection
could suggest, but he did everything in his power to assist his
stepbrother Johnston--a hopeless task enough. The following rigidly
truthful and yet kindly letters will show how mentor-like and
masterful, as well as generous, were the relations that Mr. Lincoln
held to these friends and companions of his childhood:

DEAR JOHNSTON: Your request for eighty dollars I do not think it best
to comply with now. At the various times when I have helped you a
little, you have said to me, "We can get along very well now," but in
a very short time I find you in the same difficulty again. Now this
can only happen by some defect in your conduct.

What that defect is I think I know. You are not _lazy_, and still
you are an _idler_. I doubt whether, since I saw you, you have
done a good whole day's work in any one day. You do not very much
dislike to work, and still you do not work much, merely because it
does not seem to you that you could get much for it. This habit of
uselessly wasting time is the whole difficulty, and it is vastly
important to you, and still more so to your children, that you should
break the habit. It is more important to them because they have longer
to live, and can keep out of an idle habit before they are in it
easier than they can get out after they are in.

You are now in need of some money; and what I propose is that you
shall go to work "tooth and nail" for somebody who will give you money
for it. Let father and your boys take charge of things at home,
prepare for a crop, and make the crop; and you go to work for the best
money wages, or in discharge of any debt you owe, that you can get;
and to secure you a fair reward for your labor, I now promise you that
for every dollar you will, between this and the first of next May, get
for your own labor, either in money or as discharging your own
indebtedness, I will then give you one other dollar. By this, if you
hire yourself at ten dollars a month, from me you will get ten more,
making twenty dollars a month for your work. In this I do not mean you
should go off to St. Louis, or the lead mines, or the gold mines in
California; but I mean for you to go at it for the best wages you can
get close to home, in Coles County. Now, if you will do this you will
soon be out of debt, and, what is better, you will have a habit that
will keep you from getting in debt again. But if I should now clear
you out of debt, next year you would be just as deep in as ever. You
say you would almost give your place in heaven for seventy or eighty
dollars. Then you value your place in heaven very cheap, for I am sure
you can with the offer I make get the seventy or eighty dollars for
four or five months' work. You say if I will furnish you the money you
will deed me the land, and if you don't pay the money back you will
deliver possession. Nonsense. If you can't now live with the land, how
will you then live without it? You have always been kind to me, and I
do not mean to be unkind to you. On the contrary, if you will but
follow my advice, you will find it worth more than eighty times eighty
dollars to you.

Here is a later epistle, still more graphic and terse in statement,
which has the unusual merit of painting both confessor and penitent to
the life:

  SHELBYVILLE, Nov. 4, 1851.

DEAR BROTHER: When I came into Charleston, day before yesterday, I
learned that you were anxious to sell the land where you live and move
to Missouri. I have been thinking of this ever since, and cannot but
think such a notion is utterly foolish. What can you do in Missouri
better than here? Is the land any richer? Can you there, any more than
here, raise corn and wheat and oats without work? Will anybody there,
any more than here, do your work for you? If you intend to go to work,
there is no better place than right where you are; if you do not
intend to go to work, you cannot get along anywhere. Squirming and
crawling about from place to place can do no good. You have raised no
crop this year, and what you really want is to sell the land, get the
money, and spend it. Part with the land you have, and, my life upon
it, you will never after own a spot big enough to bury you in. Half
you will get for the land you will spend in moving to Missouri, and
the other half you will eat and drink and wear out, and no foot of
land will be bought. Now, I feel it is my duty to have no hand in such
a piece of foolery. I feel that it is so even on your own account, and
particularly on mother's account. The eastern forty acres I intend to
keep for mother while she lives; if you will not cultivate it, it will
rent for enough to support her; at least, it will rent for something.
Her dower in the other two forties she can let you have, and no thanks
to me. Now do not misunderstand this letter. I do not write it in any
unkindness. I write it in order, if possible, to get you to face the
truth, which truth is, you are destitute because you have idled away
all your time. Your thousand pretenses deceive nobody but yourself. Go
to work is the only cure for your case.

A volume of disquisition could not put more clearly before the reader
the difference between Abraham Lincoln and the common run of Southern
and Western rural laborers. He had the same disadvantages that they
had. He grew up in the midst of poverty and ignorance; he was poisoned
with the enervating malaria of the Western woods, as all his fellows
were, and the consequences of it were seen in his character and
conduct to the close of his life. But he had, what very few of them
possessed any glimmering notion of, a fixed and inflexible will to
succeed. He did not love work, probably, any better than John
Johnston; but he had an innate self-respect, and a consciousness that
his self was worthy of respect, that kept him from idleness as it kept
him from all other vices, and made him a better man every year that he
lived.

We have anticipated a score of years in speaking of Mr. Lincoln's
relations to his family. It was in August of the year 1831 that he
finally left his father's roof, and swung out for himself into the
current of the world to make his fortune in his own way. He went down
to New Salem again to assist Offutt in the business that lively
speculator thought of establishing there. He was more punctual than
either his employer or the merchandise, and met with the usual reward
of punctuality in being forced to waste his time in waiting for the
tardy ones. He seemed to the New Salem people to be "loafing"; several
of them have given that description of him. He did one day's work
acting as clerk of a local election, a lettered loafer being pretty
sure of employment on such an occasion. [Footnote: Mrs. Lizzie H. Bell
writes of this incident: "My father, Menton Graham, was on that day,
as usual, appointed to be a clerk, and Mr. McNamee, who was to be the
other, was sick and failed to come. They were looking around for a man
to fill his place when my father noticed Mr. Lincoln and asked if he
could write. He answered that 'he could make a few rabbit tracks.'"]
He also piloted a boat down the Sangamon for one Dr. Nelson, who had
had enough of New Salem and wanted to go to Texas. This was probably a
task not requiring much pilot-craft, as the river was much swollen,
and navigators had in most places two or three miles of channel to
count upon. But Offutt and his goods arrived at last, and Lincoln and
he got them immediately into position, and opened their doors to what
commerce could be found in New Salem. There was clearly not enough to
satisfy the volatile mind of Mr. Offutt, for he soon bought Cameron's
mill at the historic dam, and made Abraham superintendent also of that
branch of the business.

It is to be surmised that Offutt never inspired his neighbors and
customers with any deep regard for his solidity of character. One of
them says of him with injurious pleonasm, that he "talked too much
with his mouth." A natural consequence of his excessive fluency was
soon to be made disagreeably evident to his clerk. He admired Abraham
beyond measure, and praised him beyond prudence. He said that Abe knew
more than any man in the United States; and he was certainly not
warranted in making such an assertion, as his own knowledge of the
actual state of science in America could not have been exhaustive. He
also said that Abe could beat any man in the county running, jumping,
or "wrastling." This proposition, being less abstract in its nature,
was more readily grasped by the local mind, and was not likely to pass
unchallenged.

[Illustration:   MAP OF NEW SALEM AND VICINITY]

Public opinion at New Salem was formed by a crowd of ruffianly young
fellows who were called the "Clary's Grove Boys." Once or twice a week
they descended upon the village and passed the day in drinking,
fighting, and brutal horse-play. If a stranger appeared in the place,
he was likely to suffer a rude initiation into the social life of New
Salem at the hands of these jovial savages. Sometimes he was nailed up
in a hogshead and rolled down hill; sometimes he was insulted into a
fight and then mauled black and blue; for despite their pretensions to
chivalry they had no scruples about fair play or any such
superstitions of civilization. At first they did not seem inclined to
molest young Lincoln. His appearance did not invite insolence; his
reputation for strength and activity was a greater protection to him
than his inoffensive good-nature. But the loud admiration of Offutt
gave them umbrage. It led to dispute, contradictions, and finally to a
formal banter to a wrestling-match. Lincoln was greatly averse to all
this "wooling and pulling," as he called it. But Offutt's indiscretion
had made it necessary for him to show his mettle. Jack Armstrong, the
leading bully of the gang, was selected to throw him, and expected an
easy victory. But he soon found himself in different hands from any he
had heretofore engaged with. Seeing he could not manage the tall
stranger, his friends swarmed in, and by kicking and tripping nearly
succeeded in getting Lincoln down. At this, as has been said of
another hero, "the spirit of Odin entered into him," and putting forth
his whole strength, he held the pride of Clary's Grove in his arms
like a child, and almost choked the exuberant life out of him. For a
moment a general fight seemed inevitable; but Lincoln, standing
undismayed with his back to the wall, looked so formidable in his
defiance that an, honest admiration took the place of momentary fury,
and his initiation was over. As to Armstrong, he was Lincoln's friend
and sworn brother as soon as he recovered the use of his larynx, and
the bond thus strangely created lasted through life. Lincoln had no
further occasion to fight his own battles while Armstrong was there to
act as his champion. The two friends, although so widely different,
were helpful to each other afterwards in many ways, and Lincoln made
ample amends for the liberty his hands had taken with Jack's throat,
by saving, in a memorable trial, his son's neck from the halter.

This incident, trivial and vulgar as it may seem, was of great
importance in Lincoln's life. His behavior in this ignoble scuffle did
the work of years for him, in giving him the position he required in
the community where his lot was cast. He became from that moment, in a
certain sense, a personage, with a name and standing of his own. The
verdict of Clary's Grove was unanimous that he was "the cleverest
fellow that had ever broke into the settlement." He did not have to be
constantly scuffling to guard his self-respect, and at the same time
he gained the good-will of the better sort by his evident
peaceableness and integrity.

[Illustration:   LEAF FROM ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S EXERCISE BOOK. The page
here shown in reduced fac-simile is from the Exercise Book presented
by William H. Herndon to the Keyes-Lincoln Memorial Collection. When
the book was written Lincoln was about seventeen.]

He made on the whole a satisfactory clerk for Mr. Offutt, though his
downright honesty must have seemed occasionally as eccentric in that
position as afterwards it did to his associates at the bar. Dr.
Holland has preserved one or two incidents of this kind, which have
their value. Once, after he had sold a woman a little bill of goods
and received the money, he found on looking over the account again
that she had given him six and a quarter cents too much. The money
burned in his hands until he locked the shop and started on a walk of
several miles in the night to make restitution before he slept. On
another occasion, after weighing and delivering a pound of tea, he
found a small weight on the scales. He immediately weighed out the
quantity of tea of which he had innocently defrauded his customer and
went in search of her, his sensitive conscience not permitting any
delay. To show that the young merchant was not too good for this
world, the same writer gives an incident of his shop-keeping
experience of a different character. A rural bully having made himself
especially offensive one day, when women were present, by loud
profanity, Lincoln requested him to be silent. This was of course a
cause of war, and the young clerk was forced to follow the incensed
ruffian into the street, where the combat was of short duration.
Lincoln threw him at once to the ground, and gathering a handful of
the dog fennel with which the roadside was plentifully bordered, he
rubbed the ruffian's face and eyes with it until he howled for mercy.
He did not howl in vain, for the placable giant, when his discipline
was finished, brought water to bathe the culprit's smarting face, and
doubtless improved the occasion with quaint admonition.

A few passages at arms of this sort gave Abraham a redoubtable
reputation in the neighborhood. But the principal use he made of his
strength and his prestige was in the capacity of peacemaker, an office
which soon devolved upon him by general consent. Whenever old feuds
blossomed into fights by Offutt's door, or the chivalry of Clary's
Grove attempted in its energetic way to take the conceit out of some
stranger, or a canine duel spread contagion of battle among the
masters of the beasts, Lincoln usually appeared upon the scene, and
with a judicious mixture of force and reason and invincible good-
nature restored peace.

While working with Offutt his mind was turned in the direction of
English grammar. From what he had heard of it he thought it a matter
within his grasp, if he could once fall in with the requisite
machinery. Consulting with Menton [Footnote: This name has always been
written in Illinois "Minter," but a letter from Mr. Graham's daughter,
Mrs. Bell, says that her father's name is as given in the text.]
Graham, the schoolmaster, in regard to it, and learning the
whereabouts of a vagrant "Kirkham's Grammar," he set off at once and
soon returned from a walk of a dozen miles with the coveted prize. He
devoted himself to the new study with that peculiar intensity of
application which always remained his most valuable faculty, and soon
knew all that can be known about it from rules. He seemed surprised,
as others have been, at the meager dimensions of the science he had
acquired and the ease with which it yielded all there was of it to the
student. But it seemed no slight achievement to the New Salemites, and
contributed not a little to the prevalent impression of his learning.

His name is prominently connected with an event which just at this
time caused an excitement and interest in Salem and the neighboring
towns entirely out of proportion to its importance. It was one of the
articles of faith of most of the settlers on the banks of the Sangamon
River that it was a navigable stream, and the local politicians found
that they could in no way more easily hit the fancy of their hearers
than by discussing this assumed fact, and the logical corollary
derived from it, that it was the duty of the State or the nation to
clear out the snags and give free course to the commerce which was
waiting for an opportunity to pour along this natural highway. At last
one Captain Vincent Bogue, of Springfield, determined to show that the
thing could be done by doing it. The first promise of the great
enterprise appears in the "Sangsmo Journal" of January 26, 1832, in a
letter from the Captain, at Cincinnati, saying he would ascend the
Sangamon by steam on the breaking up of the ice. He asked that he
might be met at the mouth of the river by ten or twelve men, having
axes with long handles, to cut away the overhanging branches of the
trees on the banks. From this moment there was great excitement,--
public meetings, appointment of committees, appeals for subscriptions,
and a scattering fire of advertisements of goods and freight to be
bargained for,--which sustained the prevailing interest. It was a day
of hope and promise when the advertisement reached Springfield from
Cincinnati that "the splendid upper-cabin steamer Talisman" would
positively start for the Sangamon on a given day. As the paper
containing this joyous intelligence also complained that no mail had
reached Springfield from the east for three weeks, it is easy to
understand the desire for more rapid and regular communications. From
week to week the progress of the _Talisman_, impeded by bad weather
and floating ice, was faithfully recorded, until at last the party
with long-handled axes went down to Beardstown to welcome her. It is
needless to state that Lincoln was one of the party. His standing as a
scientific citizen of New Salem would have been enough to insure his
selection even if he had not been known as a bold navigator. He
piloted the _Talisman_ safely through the windings of the Sangamon,
and Springfield gave itself up to extravagant gayety on the event that
proved she "could no longer be considered an inland town." Captain
Bogue announced "fresh and seasonable goods just received per
steamboat _Talisman_," and the local poets illuminated the columns of
the "Journal" with odes on her advent. The joy was short-lived. The
_Talisman_ met the natural fate of steamboats a few months later,
being burned at the St. Louis wharf. Neither State nor nation has ever
removed the snags from the Sangamon, and no subsequent navigator of
its waters has been found to eclipse the fame of the earliest one.




CHAPTER V

LINCOLN IN THE BLACK HAWK WAR


[Sidenote: 1832.]

A new period in the life of Lincoln begins with the summer of 1832. He
then obtained his first public recognition, and entered upon the
course of life which was to lead him to a position of prominence and
great usefulness.

The business of Offutt had gone to pieces, and his clerk was out of
employment, when Governor Reynolds issued his call for volunteers to
move the tribe of Black Hawk across the Mississippi. For several years
the raids of the old Sac chieftain upon that portion of his patrimony
which he had ceded to the United States had kept the settlers in the
neighborhood of Rock Island in terror, and menaced the peace of the
frontier. In the spring of 1831 he came over to the east side of the
river with a considerable band of warriors, having been encouraged by
secret promises of cooperation from several other tribes. These failed
him, however, when the time of trial arrived, and an improvised force
of State volunteers, assisted by General E. P. Gaines and his
detachment, had little difficulty in compelling the Indians to re-
cross the Mississippi, and to enter into a solemn treaty on the 30th
of June by which the former treaties were ratified and Black Hawk
and his leading warriors bound themselves never again to set foot on
the east side of the river, without express permission from the
President or the Governor of Illinois.

[Sidenote: Reynolds, "Life and Times," p. 325.]

[Sidenote: Ford, "History of Illinois," p. 110.]

But Black Hawk was too old a savage to learn respect for treaties or
resignation under fancied wrongs. He was already approaching the
allotted term of life. He had been a chief of his nation for more than
forty years. He had scalped his first enemy when scarcely more than a
child, having painted on his blanket the blood-red hand which marked
his nobility at fifteen years of age. Peace under any circumstances
would doubtless have been irksome to him, but a peace which forbade
him free access to his own hunting-grounds and to the graves of his
fathers was more than he could now school himself to endure. He had
come to believe that he had been foully wronged by the treaty which
was his own act; he had even convinced himself that "land cannot be
sold," a proposition in political economy which our modern socialists
would be puzzled to accept or confute. Besides this, the tenderest
feelings of his heart were outraged by this exclusion from his former
domain. He had never passed a year since the death of his daughter
without making a pilgrimage to her grave at Oquawka and spending hours
in mystic ceremonies and contemplation. He was himself prophet as well
as warrior, and had doubtless his share of mania, which is the
strength of prophets. The promptings of his own broken heart readily
seemed to him the whisperings of attendant spirits; and day by day
these unseen incitements increased around him, until they could not be
resisted even if death stood in the way.

He made his combinations during the winter, and had it not been for
the loyal attitude of Keokuk, he could have brought the entire nation
of the Sacs and Foxes to the war-path. As it was, the flower of the
young men came with him when, with the opening spring, he crossed the
river once more. He came this time, he said, "to plant corn," but as a
preliminary to this peaceful occupation of the land he marched up the
Rock River, expecting to be joined by the Winnebagoes and
Pottawatomies. But the time was passed for honorable alliances among
the Indians. His oath-bound confederates gave him little assistance,
and soon cast in their lot with the stronger party.

This movement excited general alarm in the State. General Henry
Atkinson, commanding the United States troops, sent a formal summons
to Black Hawk to return; but the old chief was already well on his way
to the lodge of his friend, the prophet Wabokishick, at Prophetstown,
and treated the summons with contemptuous defiance. The Governor
immediately called for volunteers, and was himself astonished at the
alacrity with which the call was answered. Among those who enlisted at
the first tap of the drum was Abraham Lincoln, and equally to his
surprise and delight he was elected captain of his company. The
volunteer organizations of those days were conducted on purely
democratic principles. The company assembled on the green, an election
was suggested, and three-fourths of the men walked over to where
Lincoln was standing; most of the small remainder joined themselves to
one Kirkpatrick, a man of some substance and standing from Spring
Creek. We have the word of Mr. Lincoln for it, that no subsequent
success ever gave him such unmixed pleasure as this earliest
distinction. It was a sincere, unsought tribute of his equals to those
physical and moral qualities which made him the best man of his
hundred, and as such was accepted and prized.

[Sidenote: Reynolds, "Life and Times," p. 363.]

At the Beardstown rendezvous, Captain Lincoln's company was attached
to Colonel Samuel Thompson's regiment, the Fourth Illinois, which was
organized at Richland, Sangamon County, on the 21st of April, and
moved on the 27th, with the rest of the command under General Samuel
Whitesides, for Yellow Banks, where the boats with provisions had been
ordered to meet them. It was arduous marching. There were no roads and
no bridges, and the day's task included a great deal of labor. The
third day out they came to the Henderson River, a stream some fifty
yards wide, swift and swollen with the spring thaws, with high and
steep banks. To most armies this would have seemed a serious obstacle,
but these backwoodsmen swarmed to the work like beavers, and in less
than three hours the river was crossed with the loss of only one or
two horses and wagons. When they came to Yellow Banks, on the
Mississippi, the provision-boats had not arrived, and for three days
they waited there literally without food; very uncomfortable days for
Governor Reynolds, who accompanied the expedition, and was forced to
hear the outspoken comments of two thousand hungry men on his supposed
inefficiency. But on the 6th of May the _William Wallace_ arrived, and
"this sight," says the Governor with characteristic sincerity, "was, I
presume, the most interesting I ever beheld." From there they marched
to the mouth of Rock River, and thence General Whitesides proceeded
with his volunteers up the river some ninety miles to Dixon, where
they halted to await the arrival of General Atkinson with the regular
troops and provisions. There they found two battalions of fresh
horsemen under Majors Stillman and Bailey, who had as yet seen no
service and were eager for the fray. Whitesides's men were tired with
their forced march, and besides, in their ardor to get forward, they
had thrown away a good part of their provisions and left their baggage
behind. It pleased the Governor, therefore, to listen to the prayers
of Stillman's braves, and he gave them orders to proceed to the head
of Old Man's Creek, where it was supposed there were some hostile
Indians, and coerce them into submission. "I thought," says the
Governor in his memoirs, "they might discover the enemy."

[Illustration:   A SOLDIER'S DISCHARGE FROM THE BLACK HAWK WAR, SIGNED
BY A. LINCOLN, CAPTAIN. IN THE POSSESSION OF O. H. OLDROTD,
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS.]

The supposition was certainly well founded. They rode merrily away,
came to Old Man's Creek, thereafter to be called Stillman's Run, and
encamped for the night. By the failing light a small party of Indians
was discovered on the summit of a hill a mile away, and a few
courageous gentlemen hurriedly saddled their horses, and, without
orders, rode after them. The Indians retreated, but were soon
overtaken, and two or three of them killed. The volunteers were now
strung along a half mile of hill and valley, with no more order or
care than if they had been chasing rabbits. Black Hawk, who had been
at supper when the running fight began, hastily gathered a handful of
warriors and attacked the scattered whites. The onset of the savages
acted like an icy bath on the red-hot valor of the volunteers; they
turned and ran for their lives, stampeding the camp as they fled.
There was very little resistance--so little that Black Hawk, fearing a
ruse, tried to recall his warriors from the pursuit, but in the
darkness and confusion could not enforce his orders. The Indians
killed all they caught up with; but the volunteers had the fleeter
horses, and only eleven were overtaken. The rest reached Dixon by twos
and threes, rested all night, and took courage. General Whitesides
marched out to the scene of the disaster the next morning, but the
Indians were gone. They had broken up into small parties, and for
several days they reaped the bloody fruit of their victory in the
massacre of peaceful settlements in the adjacent districts.

The time of enlistment of the volunteers had now come to an end, and
the men, seeing no prospect of glory or profit, and weary of the work
and the hunger which were the only certain incidents of the campaign,
refused in great part to continue in service. But it is hardly
necessary to say that Captain Lincoln was not one of these homesick
soldiers. Not even the trammels of rank, which are usually so strong
among the trailers of the saber, could restrain him from what he
considered his simple duty. As soon as he was mustered out of his
captaincy, he re-enlisted on the same day, May 27, as a private
soldier. Several other officers did the same, among them General
Whitesides and Major John T. Stuart. Lincoln became a member of
Captain Elijah Iles's company of mounted volunteers, sometimes called
the "Independent Spy Battalion," an organization unique of its kind,
if we may judge from the account given by one of its troopers. It was
not, says Mr. George M. Harrison, "under the control of any regiment
or brigade, but received orders directly from the Commander-in-Chief,
and always, when with the army, camped within the lines, and had many
other privileges, such as having no camp duties to perform and drawing
rations as much and as often as we pleased," which would seem to liken
this battalion as nearly as possible to the fabled "regiment of
brigadiers." With this _elite_ corps Lincoln served through his
second enlistment, though it was not his fortune to take part in
either of the two engagements in which General James D. Henry, at the
Wisconsin Bluffs and the Bad Axe, broke and destroyed forever the
power of Black Hawk and the British band of Sacs and Foxes.

After Lincoln was relieved of the weight of dignity involved in his
captaincy, the war became a sort of holiday, and the tall private from
New Salem enjoyed it as much as any one. He entered with great zest
into the athletic sports with which soldiers love to beguile the
tedium of camp. He was admitted to be the strongest man in the army,
and, with one exception, the best wrestler. Indeed, his friends never
admitted the exception, and severely blamed Lincoln for confessing
himself defeated on the occasion when he met the redoubtable Thompson,
and the two fell together on the turf. His popularity increased from
the beginning to the end of the campaign, and those of his comrades
who still survive always speak with hearty and affectionate praise of
his character and conduct in those rough yet pleasantly remembered
days.

[Sidenote: MS. Letters from Thomas, Gregg and others.]

The Spy Battalion formed no part of General Henry's forces when, by a
disobedience of orders as prudent as it was audacious, he started with
his slender force on the fresh trail which he was sure would lead him
to Black Hawk's camp. He found and struck the enemy at bay on the
bluffs of the Wisconsin River on the 21st of July, and inflicted upon
them a signal defeat. The broken remnant of Black Hawk's power then
fled for the Mississippi River, the whole army following in close
pursuit--General Atkinson in front and General Henry bringing up the
rear. Fortune favored the latter once more, for while Black Hawk with
a handful of men was engaging and drawing away the force under
Atkinson, General Henry struck the main trail, and brought on the
battle of the Bad Axe, if that could be called a battle which was an
easy slaughter of the weary and discouraged savages, fighting without
heart or hope, an army in front and the great river behind. Black Hawk
escaped the fate of his followers, to be captured a few days later
through the treachery of his allies. He was carried in triumph to
Washington and presented to President Jackson, to whom he made this
stern and defiant speech, showing how little age or disaster could do
to tame his indomitable spirit: "I am a man and you are another. I did
not expect to conquer the white people. I took up the hatchet to
avenge injuries which could no longer be borne. [Footnote: It is a
noteworthy coincidence that President Lincoln's proclamation at the
opening of the war calls for troops "to redress wrongs already long
enough endured."] Had I borne them longer my people would have said:
'Black Hawk is a squaw; he is too old to be a chief; he is no Sac.'
This caused me to raise the war-whoop. I say no more of it; all is
known to you." He returned to Iowa, and died on the 3d of October,
1838, at his camp on the river Des Moines. He was buried in gala
dress, with cocked hat and sword, and the medals presented him by two
governments. He was not allowed to rest even in his grave. His bones
were exhumed by some greedy wretch and sold from hand to hand till
they came at last to the Burlington Museum, where they were destroyed
by fire.

[Illustration:   BLACK HAWK]

It was on the 16th of June, a month before the slaughter of the Bad
Axe, that the battalion to which Lincoln belonged was at last mustered
out, at Whitewater, Wisconsin. His final release from the service was
signed by a young lieutenant of artillery, Robert Anderson, who,
twenty-nine years later, in one of the most awful crises in our
annals, was to sustain to Lincoln relations of prodigious importance,
on a scene illuminated by the flash of the opening guns of the civil
war. [Transcriber's Note: Lengthy footnote relocated to chapter end.]
The men started home the next day in high spirits, school-boys for
their holidays. Lincoln had need, like Horatio, of his good spirits,
for they were his only outfit for the long journey to New Salem, he
and his mess-mate Harrison [Footnote: George M. Harrison, who gives an
account of his personal experiences in Lamon, p. 116.] having had
their horses stolen the day before by some patriot over-anxious to
reach home. But, as Harrison says, "I laughed at our fate, and he
joked at it, and we all started off merrily. The generous men of our
company walked and rode by turns with us, and we fared about equal
with the rest. But for this generosity our legs would have had to do
the better work; for in that day this dreary route furnished no horses
to buy or to steal; and, whether on horse or afoot, we always had
company, for many of the horses' backs were too sore for riding." It
is not hard to imagine with what quips and quirks of native fancy
Lincoln and his friends beguiled the way through forest and prairie.
With youth, good health, and a clear conscience, and even then the
dawn of a young and undefiled ambition in his heart, nothing was
wanting to give zest and spice to this long, sociable walk of a
hundred leagues. One joke is preserved, and this one is at the expense
of Lincoln. One chilly morning he complained of being cold. "No
wonder," said some facetious cavalier, "there is so much of you on the
ground." [Footnote: Dr. Holland gives this homely joke (Life of
Lincoln, p. 71), but transfers it to a time four years later, when
Lincoln had permanently assumed shoes and had a horse of his own.] We
hope Lincoln's contributions to the fun were better than this, but of
course the prosperity of these jests lay rather in the liberal ears
that heard them than in the good-natured tongues that uttered them.

Lincoln and Harrison could not have been altogether penniless, for at
Peoria they bought a canoe and paddled down to Pekin. Here the
ingenious Lincoln employed his hereditary talent for carpentry by
making an oar for the frail vessel while Harrison was providing the
commissary stores. The latter goes on to say: "The river, being very
low, was without current, so that we had to pull hard to make half the
speed of legs on land; in fact, we let her float all night, and on the
next morning always found the objects still visible that were beside
us the previous evening. The water was remarkably clear for this river
of plants, and the fish appeared to be sporting with us as we moved
over or near them. On the next day after we left Pekin we overhauled a
raft of saw-logs, with two men afloat on it to urge it on with poles
and to guide it in the channel. We immediately pulled up to them and
went on the raft, where we were made welcome by various
demonstrations, especially by an invitation to a feast on fish, corn-
bread, eggs, butter, and coffee, just prepared for our benefit. Of
these good things we ate almost immoderately, for it was the only warm
meal we had made for several days. While preparing it, and after
dinner, Lincoln entertained them, and they entertained us for a couple
of hours very amusingly." Kindly human companionship was a luxury in
that green wilderness, and was readily appreciated and paid for.

The returning warriors dropped down the river to the village of
Havana--from Pekin to Havana in a canoe! The country is full of these
geographical nightmares, the necessary result of freedom of
nomenclature bestowed by circumstances upon minds equally destitute of
taste or education. There they sold their boat,--no difficult task,
for a canoe was a staple article in any river-town,--and again set out
"the old way, over the sand-ridges, for Petersburg. As we drew near
home, the impulse became stronger and urged us on amazingly. The long
strides of Lincoln, often slipping back in the loose sand six inches
every step, were just right for me; and he was greatly diverted when
he noticed me behind him stepping along in his tracks to keep from
slipping." Thus the two comrades came back from their soldierings to
their humble homes, from which Lincoln was soon to start on the way
marked out for him by Providence, with strides which no comrade, with
whatever goodwill, might hope to follow.

He never took his campaigning seriously. The politician's habit of
glorifying the petty incidents of a candidate's life always seemed
absurd to him, and in his speech, made in 1848, ridiculing the effort
on the part of General Cass's friends to draw some political advantage
from that gentleman's respectable but obscure services on the frontier
in the war with Great Britain, he stopped any future eulogist from
painting his own military achievements in too lively colors. "Did you
know, Mr. Speaker," he said, "I am a military hero! In the days of the
Black Hawk war I fought, bled, and came away. I was not at Stillman's
defeat, but I was about as near it as General Cass was to Hull's
surrender; and, like him, I saw the place very soon afterwards. It is
quite certain I did not break my sword, for I had none to break, but I
bent my musket pretty badly on one occasion. If General Cass went in
advance of me picking whortleberries, I guess I surpassed him in
charges on the wild onions. If he saw any live fighting Indians, it
was more than I did, but I had a good many bloody struggles with the
mosquitoes; and although I never fainted from loss of blood, I can
truly say I was often very hungry. If ever I should conclude to doff
whatever our Democratic friends may suppose there is of black-cockade
Federalism about me, and thereupon they shall take me up as their
candidate for the Presidency, I protest that they shall not make fun
of me, as they have of General Cass, by attempting to write me into a
military hero."

[Relocated Footnote: A story to the effect that Lincoln was mustered
into service by Jefferson Davis has for a long time been current, but
the strictest search in the records fails to confirm it. We are
indebted to General R. C. Drum, Adjutant-General of the Army, for an
interesting letter giving all the known facts in relation to this
story. General Drum says: "The company of the Fourth Regiment Illinois
Mounted Volunteers, commanded by Mr. Lincoln, was, with others, called
out by Governor Reynolds, and was organized at Richland, Sangamon
County, Illinois, April 21, 1832. The muster-in roll is not on file,
but the records show that the company was mustered out at the mouth of
Fox River, May 27, 1832, by Nathaniel Buckmaster, Brigade-Major to
General Samuel Whitesides's Illinois Volunteers. On the muster-roll of
Captain Elijah Iles's company, Illinois Mounted Volunteers, A. Lincoln
(Sangamon County) appears as a private from May 27, 1832, to June 16,
1832, when the company was mustered out of service by Lieutenant
Robert Anderson, Third United States Artillery and Colonel (Assistant
Inspector-General) Illinois Volunteers. Brigadier-General Henry
Atkinson, in his report of May 30, 1832, stated that the Illinois
Volunteers were called out by the Governor of that State, but in haste
and for no definite period of service. On their arrival at Ottawa they
became clamorous for their discharge, which the Governor granted,
retaining--of those who were discharged and volunteered for a further
period of twenty days--a sufficient number of men to form six
companies, which General Atkinson found at Ottawa on his arrival there
from Rock River. General Atkinson further reports that these companies
and some three hundred regular troops, remaining in position at Rock
River, were all the force left him to keep the enemy in check until
the assemblage of the three thousand additional Illinois militia
called out by the Governor upon his (General A.'s) requisition, to
rendezvous at Ottawa, June 12-15, 1832,

"There can be no doubt that Captain Iles's company, mentioned above,
was one of the six which served until June 16, 1832, while the fact is
fully established that the company of which Mr. Lincoln was a member
was mustered out by Lieutenant Robert Anderson, who, in April, 1861,
was in command of Fort Sumter. There is no evidence to show that it
was mustered in by Lieutenant Jefferson Davis. Mr. Davis's company (B,
First United States Infantry) was stationed at Fort Crawford,
Wisconsin, during the months of January and February, 1832, and he is
borne on the rolls as 'absent on detached service at the Dubuque mines
by order of Colonel Morgan.' From March 26 to August 18, 1832, the
muster-rolls of his company report him as absent on furlough."]




CHAPTER VI

SURVEYOR AND REPRESENTATIVE


[Sidenote: 1832.]

The discharged volunteer arrived in New Salem only ten days before the
August election, in which he had a deep personal interest. Before
starting for the wars he had announced himself, according to the
custom of the time, by a handbill circular, as a candidate for the
Legislature from Sangamon County. [Footnote: We are aware that all
former biographers have stated that Lincoln's candidacy for the
Legislature was subsequent to his return from the war, and a
consequence of his service. But his circular is dated March 9, 1832,
and the "Sangamo Journal" mentions his name among the July, and
apologizes candidates in for having accidentally omitted it in May.]
He had done this in accordance with his own natural bent for public
life and desire for usefulness and distinction, and not without strong
encouragement from friends whose opinion he valued. He had even then
considerable experience in speaking and thinking on his feet. He had
begun his practice in that direction before leaving Indiana, and
continued it everywhere he had gone. Mr. William Butler tells us that
on one occasion, when Lincoln was a farmhand at Island Grove, the
famous circuit-rider, Peter Cartwright, came by, electioneering for
the Legislature, and Lincoln at once engaged in a discussion with him
in the cornfield, in which the great Methodist was equally astonished
at the close reasoning and the uncouth figure of Mr. Brown's
extraordinary hired man. At another time, after one Posey, a
politician in search of office, had made a speech in Macon, John
Hanks, whose admiration of his cousin's oratory was unbounded, said
that "Abe could beat it." He turned a keg on end, and the tall boy
mounted it and made his speech. "The subject was the navigation of the
Sangamon, and Abe beat him to death," says the loyal Hanks. So it was
not with the tremor of a complete novice that the young man took the
stump during the few days left him between his return and the
election.

[Sidenote: Reynolds, "My Own Times," p. 291.]

He ran as a Whig. As this has been denied on authority which is
generally trustworthy, it is well enough to insist upon the fact. We
have a memorandum in Mr. Lincoln's own handwriting in which he says he
ran as "an avowed Clay man." In one of the few speeches of his, which,
made at this time, have been remembered and reported, he said: "I am
in favor of a national bank; I am in favor of the internal improvement
system, and of a high protective tariff. These are my sentiments and
political principles." Nothing could be more unqualified or outspoken
than this announcement of his adhesion to what was then and for years
afterwards called "the American System" of Henry Clay. Other testimony
is not wanting to the same effect. Both Major Stuart and Judge Logan
[Footnote: The Democrats of New Salem worked for Lincoln out of their
personal regard for him. That was the general understanding of the
matter here at the time. In this he made no concession of principle
whatever. He was as stiff as a man could be in his Whig doctrines.
They did this for him simply because he was popular--because he was
Lincoln. STEPHEN T. LOGAN. July 6, 1875.] say that Lincoln ran in 1832
as a Whig, and that his speeches were unevasively in defense of the
principles of that party. Without discussing the merits of the party
or its purposes, we may insist that his adopting them thus openly at
the outset of his career was an extremely characteristic act, and
marks thus early the scrupulous conscientiousness which shaped every
action of his life. The State of Illinois was by a large majority
Democratic, hopelessly attached to the person and policy of Jackson.
Nowhere had that despotic leader more violent and unscrupulous
partisans than there. They were proud of their very servility, and
preferred the name of "whole-hog Jackson men" to that of Democrats.
The Whigs embraced in their scanty ranks the leading men of the State,
those who have since been most distinguished in its history, such as
S. T. Logan, Stuart, Browning, Dubois, Hardin, Breese, and many
others. But they were utterly unable to do anything except by dividing
the Jackson men, whose very numbers made their party unwieldy, and by
throwing their votes with the more decent and conservative portion of
them. In this way, in the late election, they had secured the success
of Governor Reynolds--the Old Ranger--against Governor Kinney, who
represented the vehement and proscriptive spirit which Jackson had
just breathed into the party. He had visited the General in
Washington, and had come back giving out threatenings and slaughter
against the Whigs in the true Tennessee style, declaring that "all
Whigs should be whipped out of office like dogs out of a meat-house";
the force of south-western simile could no further go. But the great
popularity of Reynolds and the adroit management of the Whigs carried
him through successfully. A single fact will show on which side the
people who could read were enlisted. The "whole-hog" party had one
newspaper, the opposition five. Of course it would have been
impossible for Reynolds to poll a respectable vote if his loyalty to
Jackson had been seriously doubted. As it was, he lost many votes
through a report that he had been guilty of saying that "he was as
strong for Jackson as any reasonable man should be." The Governor
himself, in his naive account of the canvass, acknowledges the
damaging nature of this accusation, and comforts himself with quoting
an indiscretion of Kinney's, who opposed a projected canal on the
ground that "it would flood the country with Yankees."

It showed some moral courage, and certainly an absence of the
shuffling politician's fair-weather policy, that Lincoln, in his
obscure and penniless youth, at the very beginning of his career, when
he was not embarrassed by antecedents or family connections, and when,
in fact, what little social influence he knew would have led him the
other way, chose to oppose a furiously intolerant majority, and to
take his stand with the party which was doomed to long-continued
defeat in Illinois. The motives which led him to take this decisive
course are not difficult to imagine. The better sort of people in
Sangamon County were Whigs, though the majority were Democrats, and he
preferred through life the better sort to the majority. The papers he
read were the Louisville "Journal" and the "Sangamo Journal," both
Whig. Reading the speeches and debates of the day, he sided with
Webster against Calhoun, and with Clay against anybody. Though his
notions of politics, like those of any ill-educated young man of
twenty-two, must have been rather crude, and not at all sufficient to
live and to die by, he had adopted them honestly and sincerely, with
no selfish regard to his own interests; and though he ardently desired
success, he never abated one jot or tittle of his convictions for any
possible personal gain, then or thereafter.

In the circular in which he announced his candidacy he made no
reference to national politics, but confined himself mainly to a
discussion of the practicability of improving the navigation of the
Sangamon, the favorite hobby of the place and time. He had no monopoly
of this "issue." It formed the burden of nearly every candidate's
appeal to the people in that year. The excitement occasioned by the
trip of the _Talisman_ had not yet died away, although the little
steamer was now dust and ashes, and her bold commander had left the
State to avoid an awkward meeting with the sheriff. The hope of seeing
Springfield an emporium of commerce was still lively among the
citizens of Sangamon County, and in no one of the handbills of the
political aspirants of the season was that hope more judiciously
encouraged than in the one signed by Abraham Lincoln. It was a well-
written circular, remarkable for its soberness and, reserve when we
consider the age and the limited advantages of the writer. It
concluded in these words: "Upon the subjects of which I have treated,
I have spoken as I have thought. I may be wrong in regard to any or
all of them; but holding it a sound maxim that it is better only
sometimes to be right than at all times wrong, so soon as I discover
my opinions to be erroneous I shall be ready to renounce them....
Every man is said to have his peculiar ambition. Whether it be true or
not, I can say for one, that I have no other so great as that of being
truly esteemed of my fellow-men, by rendering myself worthy of their
esteem. How far I shall succeed in gratifying this ambition is yet to
be developed. I am young, and unknown to many of you. I was born and
have ever remained in the most humble walks of life. I have no wealthy
or powerful relations or friends to recommend me. My case is thrown
exclusively upon the independent voters of the county; and, if
elected, they will have conferred a favor upon me, for which I shall
be unremitting in my labors to compensate. But if the good people in
their wisdom shall see fit to keep me in the background, I have been
too familiar with disappointments to be very much chagrined."

This is almost precisely the style of his later years. The errors of
grammar and construction which spring invariably from an effort to
avoid redundancy of expression remained with him through life. He
seemed to grudge the space required for necessary parts of speech. But
his language was at twenty-two, as it was thirty years later, the
simple and manly attire of his thought, with little attempt at
ornament and none at disguise. There was an intermediate time when he
sinned in the direction of fine writing; but this ebullition soon
passed away, and left that marvelously strong and transparent style in
which his two inaugurals were written.

Of course, in the ten days left him after his return from the field, a
canvass of the county, which was then--before its division--several
thousand square miles in extent, was out of the question. He made a
few speeches in the neighborhood of New Salem, and at least one in
Springfield. He was wholly unknown there except by his few comrades in
arms. We find him mentioned in the county paper only once during the
summer, in an editorial note adding the name of Captain Lincoln to
those candidates for the Legislature who were periling their lives on
the frontier and had left their reputations in charge of their
generous fellow-citizens at home. On the occasion of his speaking at
Springfield, most of the candidates had come together to address a
meeting there to give their electors some idea of their quality. These
were severe ordeals for the rash aspirants for popular favor. Besides
those citizens who came to listen and judge, there were many whose
only object was the free whisky provided for the occasion, and who,
after potations pottle-deep, became not only highly unparliamentary
but even dangerous to life and limb. This wild chivalry of Lick Creek
was, however, less redoubtable to Lincoln than it might be to an urban
statesman unacquainted with the frolic brutality of Clary's Grove.
Their gambols never caused him to lose his self-possession. It is
related that once, while he was speaking, he saw a ruffian attack a
friend of his in the crowd, and the rencontre not resulting according
to the orator's sympathies, he descended from the stand, seized the
objectionable fighting man by the neck, "threw him some ten feet,"
then calmly mounted to his place and finished his speech, the course
of his logic undisturbed by this athletic parenthesis. Judge Logan saw
Lincoln for the first time on the day when he came up to Springfield
on his canvass this summer. He thus speaks of his future partner: "He
was a very tall, gawky, and rough-looking fellow then; his pantaloons
didn't meet his shoes by six inches. But after he began speaking I
became very much interested in him. He made a very sensible speech.
His manner was very much the same as in after life; that is, the same
peculiar characteristics were apparent then, though of course in after
years he evinced more knowledge and experience. But he had then the
same novelty and the same peculiarity in presenting his ideas. He had
the same individuality that he kept through all his life."

There were two or three men at the meeting whose good opinion was
worth more than all the votes of Lick Creek to one beginning life:
Stephen T. Logan, a young lawyer who had recently come from Kentucky
with the best equipment for a _nisi prius_ practitioner ever
brought into the State; Major Stuart, whom we have met in the Black
Hawk war, once commanding a battalion and then marching as a private;
and William Butler, afterwards prominent in State politics, at that
time a young man of the purest Western breed in body and character,
clear-headed and courageous, and ready for any emergency where a
friend was to be defended or an enemy punished. We do not know whether
Lincoln gained any votes that day, but he gained what was far more
valuable, the active friendship of these able and honorable men, all
Whigs and all Kentuckians like himself.

The acquaintances he made in his canvass, the practice he gained in
speaking, and the added confidence which this experience of measuring
his abilities with those of others gave, were all the advantages which
Lincoln derived from this attempt. He was defeated, for the only time
in his life, in a contest before the people. The fortunate candidates
were E. D. Taylor, J. T. Stuart, Achilles Morris, and Peter
Cartwright, the first of whom received 1127 votes and the last 815.
Lincoln's position among the eight defeated candidates was a very
respectable one. He had 657 votes, and there were five who fared
worse, among them his old adversary Kirkpatrick. What must have been
especially gratifying to him was the fact that he received the almost
unanimous vote of his own neighborhood, the precinct of New Salem, 277
votes against 3, a result which showed more strongly than any words
could do the extent of the attachment and the confidence which his
genial and upright character had inspired among those who knew him
best.

Having been, even in so slight a degree, a soldier and a politician,
he was unfitted for a day laborer; but being entirely without means of
subsistence, he was forced to look about for some suitable occupation.
We know he thought seriously at this time of learning the trade of a
blacksmith, and using in that honest way the sinew and brawn which
nature had given him. But an opening for another kind of business
occurred, which prevented his entering upon any merely mechanical
occupation. Two of his most intimate friends were the brothers
Herndon, called, according to the fashion of the time, which held it
unfriendly to give a man his proper name, and arrogant for him to
claim it, "Row" and "Jim." They kept one of those grocery stores in
which everything salable on the frontier was sold, and which seem to
have changed their occupants as rapidly as sentry-boxes. "Jim" sold
his share to an idle and dissolute man named Berry, and "Row" soon
transferred his interest to Lincoln. It was easy enough to buy, as
nothing was ever given in payment but a promissory note. A short time
afterwards, one Reuben Radford, who kept another shop of the same
kind, happened one evening to attract the dangerous attention of the
Clary's Grove boys, who, with their usual prompt and practical
facetiousness, without a touch of malice in it, broke his windows and
wrecked his store. The next morning, while Radford was ruefully
contemplating the ruin, and doubtless concluding that he had had
enough of a country where the local idea of neighborly humor found
such eccentric expression, he hailed a passer-by named Greene, and
challenged him to buy his establishment for four hundred dollars. This
sort of trade was always irresistible to these Western speculators,
and Greene at once gave his note for the amount. It next occurred to
him to try to find out what the property was worth, and doubting his
own skill, he engaged Lincoln to make an invoice of it. The young
merchant, whose appetite for speculation had just been whetted by his
own investment, undertook the task, and, finding the stock of goods
rather tempting, offered Greene $250 for his bargain, which was at
once accepted. Not a cent of money changed hands in all these
transactions. By virtue of half a dozen signatures, Berry and Lincoln
became proprietors of the only mercantile establishment in the
village, and the apparent wealth of the community was increased by a
liberal distribution of their notes among the Herndons, Radford,
Greene, and a Mr. Rutledge, whose business they had also bought.

Fortunately for Lincoln and for the world, the enterprise was not
successful. It was entered into without sufficient reflection, and
from the very nature of things was destined to fail. To Berry the
business was merely the refuge of idleness. He spent his time in
gossip and drank up his share of the profits, and it is probable that
Lincoln was far more interested in politics and general reading than
in the petty traffic of his shop. In the spring of the next year,
finding that their merchandise was gaining them little or nothing,
they concluded to keep a tavern in addition to their other business,
and the records of the County Court of Sangamon County show that Berry
took out a license for that purpose on the 6th of March, 1833.
[Transcriber's Note: Lengthy footnote (1) relocated to chapter end.]
But it was even then too late for any expedients to save the moribund
partnership. The tavern was never opened, for about this time Lincoln
and Berry were challenged to sell out to a pair of vagrant brothers
named Trent, who, as they had no idea of paying, were willing to give
their notes to any amount. They soon ran away, and Berry expired,
extinguished in rum. Lincoln was thus left loaded with debts, and with
no assets except worthless notes of Berry and the Trents. It is
greatly to his credit that he never thought of doing by others as
others had done by him. The morality of the frontier was deplorably
loose in such matters, and most of these people would have concluded
that the failure of the business expunged its liabilities. But Lincoln
made no effort even to compromise the claims against him. He promised
to pay when he could, and it took the labor of years to do it; but he
paid at last every farthing of the debt, which seemed to him and his
friends so large that it was called among them "the national debt."

[Illustration:   JUDGE STEPHEN T. LOGAN.]

He had already begun to read elementary books of law, borrowed from
Major Stuart and other kindly acquaintances. Indeed, it is quite
possible that Berry and Lincoln might have succeeded better in
business if the junior member of the firm had not spent so much of his
time reading Blackstone and Chitty in the shade of a great oak just
outside the door, while the senior quietly fuddled himself within.
Eye-witnesses still speak of the grotesque youth, habited in homespun
tow, lying on his back with his feet on the trunk of the tree, and
poring over his book by the hour, "grinding around with the shade," as
it shifted from north to east. After his store, to use his own
expression, had "winked out," he applied himself with more continuous
energy to his reading, doing merely what odd jobs came to his hand to
pay his current expenses, which were of course very slight. He
sometimes helped his friend Ellis in his store; sometimes went into
the field and renewed his exploits as a farm-hand, which had gained
him a traditional fame in Indiana; sometimes employed his clerkly hand
in straightening up a neglected ledger. It is probable that he worked
for his board oftener than for any other compensation, and his hearty
friendliness and vivacity, as well as his industry in the field, made
him a welcome guest in any farmhouse in the county. His strong arm was
always at the disposal of the poor and needy; it is said of him, with
a graphic variation of a well-known text, "that he visited the
fatherless and the widow and chopped their wood."

In the spring of this year, 1833, he was appointed Postmaster of New
Salem, and held the office for three years. Its emoluments were
slender and its duties light, but there was in all probability no
citizen of the village who could have made so much of it as he. The
mails were so scanty that he was said to carry them in his hat, and he
is also reported to have read every newspaper that arrived; it is
altogether likely that this formed the leading inducement to his
taking the office. His incumbency lasted until New Salem ceased to be
populous enough for a post-station and the mail went by to Petersburg.
Dr. J. G. Holland relates a sequel to this official experience which
illustrates the quaint honesty of the man. Several years later, when
he was a practicing lawyer, an agent of the Post-office Department
called upon him, and asked for a balance due from the New Salem
office, some seventeen dollars. Lincoln rose, and opening a little
trunk which lay in a corner of the room, took from it a cotton rag in
which was tied up the exact sum required. "I never use any man's money
but my own," he quietly remarked. When we consider the pinching
poverty in which these years had been passed, we may appreciate the
self-denial denial which had kept him from making even a temporary use
of this little sum of government money.

[Illustration:   A. LINCOLN'S SURVEYING INSTRUMENTS AND SADDLE-BAG. IN
THE POSSESSION OF THE LINCOLN MONUMENT COLLECTION.]

John Calhoun, the Surveyor of Sangamon County, was at this time
overburdened with work. The principal local industry was speculation
in land. Every settler of course wanted his farm surveyed and marked
out for him, and every community had its syndicate of leading citizens
who cherished a scheme of laying out a city somewhere. In many cases
the city was plotted, the sites of the principal buildings, including
a courthouse and a university, were determined, and a sonorous name
was selected out of Plutarch, before its location was even considered.
For this latter office the intervention of an official surveyor was
necessary, and therefore Mr. Calhoun had more business than he could
attend to without assistance. Looking about for a young man of good
character, intelligent enough to learn surveying at short notice, his
attention was soon attracted to Lincoln. He offered young Abraham a
book containing the elements of the art, and told him when he had
mastered it he should have employment. The offer was a flattering one,
and Lincoln, with that steady self-reliance of his, accepted it, and
armed with his book went out to the schoolmaster's (Menton Graham's),
and in six weeks' close application made himself a surveyor.
[Transcriber's Note: Lengthy footnote (2) relocated to chapter end.]

[Illustration:   AUTOGRAPH PLAN OF ROAD SURVEYED BY A. LINCOLN AND
OTHERS. The lower half is the right-hand side of the plan which, in
the original, is in one piece.]

[Illustration:   Fac-simile of Lincoln's Report of the road survey.]

It will be remembered that Washington in his youth adopted the same
profession, but there were few points of similarity in the lives of
the two great Presidents, in youth or later manhood. The Virginian had
every social advantage in his favor, and was by nature a man of more
thrift and greater sagacity in money matters. He used the knowledge
gained in the practice of his profession so wisely that he became
rather early in life a large land-holder, and continually increased
his possessions until his death. Lincoln, with almost unbounded
opportunities for the selection and purchase of valuable tracts, made
no use whatever of them. He employed his skill and knowledge merely as
a bread-winner, and made so little provision for the future that when
Mr. Van Bergen, who had purchased the Radford note, sued and got
judgment on it, his horse and his surveying instruments were taken to
pay the debt, and only by the generous intervention of a friend was he
able to redeem these invaluable means of living. He was, nevertheless,
an excellent surveyor. His portion of the public work executed under
the directions of Mr. Calhoun and his successor, T. M. Neale, was well
performed, and he soon found his time pretty well employed with
private business which came to him from Sangamon and the adjoining
counties. Early in the year 1834 we find him appointed one of three
"viewers" to locate a road from Salt Creek to the county line in the
direction of Jacksonville. The board seems to have consisted mainly of
its chairman, as Lincoln made the deposit of money required by law,
surveyed the route, plotted the road, and wrote the report.
[Transcriber's Note: (3) Lengthy footnote relocated to chapter end.]

Though it is evident that the post-office and the surveyor's compass
were not making a rich man of him, they were sufficient to enable him
to live decently, and during the year he greatly increased his
acquaintance and his influence in the county. The one followed the
other naturally; every acquaintance he made became his friend, and
even before the end of his unsuccessful canvass in 1832 it had become
evident to the observant politicians of the district that he was a man
whom it would not do to leave out of their calculations. There seemed
to be no limit to his popularity nor to his aptitudes, in the opinion
of his admirers. He was continually called on to serve in the most
incongruous capacities. Old residents say he was the best judge at a
horse-race the county afforded; he was occasionally second in a duel
of fisticuffs, though he usually contrived to reconcile the
adversaries on the turf before any damage was done; he was the arbiter
on all controverted points of literature, science, or woodcraft among
the disputatious denizens of Clary's Grove, and his decisions were
never appealed from. His native tact and humor were invaluable in his
work as a peacemaker, and his enormous physical strength, which he
always used with a magnanimity rare among giants, placed his off-hand
decrees beyond the reach of contemptuous question. He composed
differences among friends and equals with good-natured raillery, but
he was as rough as need be when his wrath was roused by meanness and
cruelty. We hardly know whether to credit some of the stories,
apparently well-attested by living witnesses, of his prodigious
muscular powers. He is said to have lifted, at Rutledge's mill, a box
of stones weighing over half a ton! It is also related that he could
raise a barrel of whisky from the ground and drink from the bung--but
the narrator adds that he never swallowed the whisky. Whether these
traditions are strictly true or not, they are evidently founded on the
current reputation he enjoyed among his fellows for extraordinary
strength, and this was an important element in his influence. He was
known to be capable of handling almost any man he met, yet he never
sought a quarrel. He was everybody's friend and yet used no liquor or
tobacco. He was poor and had scarcely ever been at school, yet he was
the best-informed young man in the village. He had grown up on the
frontier, the utmost fringe of civilization, yet he was gentle and
clean of speech, innocent of blasphemy or scandal. His good qualities
might have excited resentment if displayed by a well-dressed stranger
from an Eastern State, but the most uncouth ruffians of New Salem took
a sort of proprietary interest and pride in the decency and the
cleverness and the learning of their friend and comrade, Abe Lincoln.

It was regarded, therefore, almost as a matter of course that Lincoln
should be a candidate for the Legislature at the next election, which
took place in August, 1834. He was sure of the united support of the
Whigs, and so many of the Democrats also wanted to vote for him that
some of the leading members of that party came to him and proposed
they should give him an organized support. He was too loyal a partisan
to accept their overtures without taking counsel from the Whig
candidates. He laid the matter before Major Stuart, who at once
advised him to make the canvass. It was a generous and chivalrous
action, for by thus encouraging the candidacy of Lincoln he was
endangering his own election. But his success two years before, in the
face of a vindictive opposition led by the strongest Jackson men in
the district, had made him somewhat confident, and he perhaps thought
he was risking little by giving a helping hand to his comrade in the
Spy Battalion. Before the election Lincoln's popularity developed
itself in rather a portentous manner, and it required some exertion to
save the seat of his generous friend. At the close of the poll, the
four successful candidates held the following relative positions:
Lincoln, 1376; Dawson, 1370; Carpenter, 1170; and Stuart, at that time
probably the most prominent young man in the district, and the one
marked out by the public voice for an early election to Congress,
1164.

[Relocated Footnote (1): The following is an extract from the court
record: "March 6, 1833. Ordered that William F. Berry, in the name of
Berry and Lincoln, have license to keep a tavern in New Salem, to
continue twelve months from this date, and that they pay one dollar in
addition to six dollars heretofore prepaid as per Treasurer's receipt,
and that they be allowed the following rates, viz.: French brandy, per
pint, 25; Peach, 183/4; Apple, 12; Holland Gin, 183/4; Domestic,
121/2; Wine, 25; Rum, 183/4; Whisky, 121/2; Breakfast, dinner, or
supper, 25; Lodging for night, 121/2; Horse for night, 25; Single
feed, 121/2; Breakfast, dinner, or supper, for stage passengers,
371/2. Who gave bond as required by law."]

[Relocated Footnote (2): There has been some discussion as to whether
Lincoln served as deputy under Calhoun or Neale. The truth is that he
served under both of them. Calhoun was surveyor in 1833, when Lincoln
first learned the business. Neale was elected in 1835, and immediately
appointed Lincoln and Calhoun as his deputies. The "Sangamo Journal"
of Sept, 12, 1835, contains the following official advertisement:

"SURVEYOR'S NOTICE.--I have appointed John B. Watson, Abram Lincoln,
and John Calhoun deputy surveyors for Sangamon County. In my absence
from town, any persons wishing their land surveyed will do well to
call at the Recorder's office and enter his or their names in a book
left for that purpose, stating township and range in which they
respectively live, and their business shall be promptly attended to.

"T. M. NEALE."

An article by Colonel G. A. Pierce, printed April 21, 1881, in the
Chicago "Inter-Ocean," describes an interview held in that month with
W.G. Green, of Menard County, in which this matter is referred to. But
Mr. Green relies more on the document in his possession than on his
recollection of what took place in 1833. "'Where did Lincoln learn
his surveying?' I asked. 'Took it up himself,' replied Mr. Green, 'as
he did a hundred things, and mastered it too. When he acted as
surveyor here he was deputy of T. M. Neale, and not of Calhoun, as has
often been said. There was a dispute about this, and many sketches of
his life gave Calhoun (Candle-box Calhoun, as he was afterwards known
during the Kansas troubles and election frauds) as the surveyor, but
it was Neale.' Mr. Green turned to his desk and drew out an old
certificate, in the handwriting of Lincoln, giving the boundaries of
certain lands, and signed, 'T. M. Neale, Surveyor, by A. Lincoln,
Deputy,' thus settling the question. Mr. Green was a Democrat, and has
leaned towards that party all his life, but what he thought and thinks
of Lincoln can be seen by an endorsement on the back of the
certificate named, which is as follows:"

(Preserve this, as it is the noblest of God's creation--A. Lincoln,
the 2d preserver of his country. May 3, 1865.--Penned by W. G. Green,
who taught Lincoln the English grammar in 1831.)]

[Relocated Footnote (3): As this is probably the earliest public document
extant written and signed by Lincoln, we give it in full:

"March 3, 1834. Reuben Harrison presented the following petition: We,
the undersigned, respectfully request your honorable body to appoint
viewers to view and locate a road from Musick's ferry on Salt Creek,
via New Salem, to the county line in the direction of Jacksonville.

"And Abram Lincoln deposited with the clerk $10, as the law directs.
Ordered, that Michael Killion, Hugh Armstrong, and Abram Lincoln be
appointed to view said road, and said Lincoln to act as surveyor.

"To the County Commissioners' Court for the county of Sangamon, at its
June term, 1834. We, the undersigned, being appointed to view and
locate a "Whole length of road, 26 road, beginning at Musick's ferry
on Salt Creek, via New Salem, to the county line in the direction to
Jacksonville, respectfully report that we have performed the duties of
said view and location, as required by law, and that we have made the
location on good ground, and believe the establishment of the same to
be necessary and proper.

"The inclosed map gives the courses and distances as required by law.
Michael Killion, Hugh Armstrong, A. Lincoln."

(Indorsement in pencil, also in Lincoln's handwriting:)

"A. Lincoln, 5 days at $3.00, $15.00. John A. Kelsoe, chain-bearer, for
5 days at 75 cents, $3.75. Robert Lloyd, at 75 cents, $3.75. Hugh
Armstrong, for services as axeman, 5 days at 75 cents, $3.75. A.
Lincoln, for making plot and report, $2.50."

(On Map.)  "Whole length of road, 26 miles and 70 chains. Scale, 2
inches to the mile."]




CHAPTER VII

LEGISLATIVE EXPERIENCE


The election of Mr. Lincoln to the Legislature may be said to have
closed the pioneer portion of his life. He was done with the wild
carelessness of the woods, with the jolly ruffianism of Clary's Grove,
with the petty chaffering of grocery stores, with odd jobs for daily
bread, with all the uncouth squalor of the frontier poverty. It was
not that his pecuniary circumstances were materially improved. He was
still, and for years continued to be, a very poor man, harassed by
debts which he was always working to pay, and sometimes in distress
for the means of decent subsistence. But from this time forward his
associations were with a better class of men than he had ever known
before, and a new feeling of self-respect must naturally have grown up
in his mind from his constant intercourse with them--a feeling which
extended to the minor morals of civilized life. A sophisticated reader
may smile at the mention of anything like social ethics in Vandalia in
1834; but, compared with Gentryville and New Salem, the society which
assembled in the winter at that little capital was polished and
elegant. The State then contained nearly 250,000 inhabitants, and the
members of the Legislature, elected purely on personal grounds,
nominated by themselves or their neighbors without the intervention of
party machinery, were necessarily the leading men, in one way or
another, in their several districts. Among the colleagues of Lincoln
at Vandalia were young men with destinies only less brilliant than his
own. They were to become governors, senators, and judges; they were to
organize the Whig party of Illinois, and afterwards the Republican;
they were to lead brigades and divisions in two great wars. Among the
first persons he met there--not in the Legislature proper, but in the
lobby, where he was trying to appropriate an office then filled by
Colonel John J. Hardin--was his future antagonist, Stephen A. Douglas.
Neither seemed to have any presentiment of the future greatness of the
other. Douglas thought little of the raw youth from the Sangamon
timber, and Lincoln said the dwarfish Vermonter was "the least man he
had ever seen." To all appearance, Vandalia was full of better men
than either of them--clever lawyers, men of wit and standing, some of
them the sons of provident early settlers, but more who had come from
older States to seek their fortunes in these fresh fields.

During his first session Lincoln occupied no especially conspicuous
position. He held his own respectably among the best. One of his
colleagues tells us he was not distinguished by any external
eccentricity; that he wore, according to the custom of the time, a
decent suit of blue jeans; that he was known simply as a rather quiet
young man, good-natured and sensible. Before the session ended he had
made the acquaintance of most of the members, and had evidently come
to be looked upon as possessing more than ordinary capacity. His
unusual common-sense began to be recognized. His name does not often
appear in the records of the year. He introduced a resolution in favor
of securing to the State a part of the proceeds of the sales of public
lands within its limits; he took part in the organization of the
ephemeral "White" party, which was designed to unite all the anti-
Jackson elements under the leadership of Hugh L. White, of Tennessee;
he voted with the minority in favor of Young against Robinson for
senator, and with the majority that passed the Bank and Canal bills,
which were received with great enthusiasm throughout Illinois, and
which were only the precursors of those gigantic and ill-advised
schemes that came to maturity two years later, and inflicted
incalculable injury upon the State.

Lincoln returned to New Salem, after this winter's experience of men
and things at the little capital, much firmer on his feet than ever
before. He had had the opportunity of measuring himself with the
leading men of the community, and had found no difficulty whatever in
keeping pace with them. He continued his studies of the law and
surveying together, and became quite indispensable in the latter
capacity--so much so that General Neale, announcing in September,
1835, the names of the deputy surveyors of Sangarnon County, placed
the name of Lincoln before that of his old master in the science, John
Calhoun. He returned to the Legislature in the winter of 1835-6, and
one of the first important incidents of the session was the election
of a senator to fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of Elias Kent
Kane. There was no lack of candidates. A journal of the time says:
"This intelligence reached Vandalia on the evening of the 26th of
December, and in the morning nine candidates appeared in that place,
and it was anticipated that a number more would soon be in, among them
'the lion of the North,' who, it is thought, will claim the office by
preemption." [Footnote: "Sangamo Journal," January 2.] It is not
known who was the roaring celebrity here referred to, but the
successful candidate was General William L. D. Ewing, who was elected
by a majority of one vote. Lincoln and the other Whigs voted for him,
not because he was a "White" man, as they frankly stated, but because
"he had been proscribed by the Van Buren party." Mr. Semple, the
candidate for the regular Democratic caucus, was beaten simply on
account of his political orthodoxy.

A minority is always strongly in favor of independent action and
bitterly opposed to caucuses, and therefore we need not be surprised
at finding Mr. Lincoln, a few days later in the session, joining in
hearty denunciation of the convention system, which had already become
popular in the East, and which General Jackson was then urging upon
his faithful followers. The missionaries of this new system in
Illinois were Stephen A. Douglas, recently from Vermont, the shifty
young lawyer from Morgan County, who had just succeeded in having
himself made circuit attorney in place of Colonel Hardin, and a man
who was then regarded in Vandalia as a far more important and
dangerous person than Douglas, Ebenezer Peck, of Chicago. Peck was
looked upon with distrust and suspicion for several reasons, all of
which seemed valid to the rural legislators assembled there. He came
from Canada, where he had been a member of the provincial parliament;
it was therefore imagined that he was permeated with secret hostility
to republican institutions; his garb, his furs, were of the fashion of
Quebec; and he passed his time indoctrinating the Jackson men with the
theory and practice of party organization, teachings which they
eagerly absorbed, and which seemed sinister and ominous to the Whigs.
He was showing them, in fact, the way in which elections were to be
won; and though the Whigs denounced his system as subversive of
individual freedom and private judgment, it was not long before they
were also forced to adopt it, or be left alone with their virtue. The
organization of political parties in Illinois really takes its rise
from this time, and in great measure from the work of Mr. Peck with
the Vandalia Legislature. There was no man more dreaded and disliked
than he was by the stalwart young Whigs against whom he was organizing
that solid and disciplined opposition. But a quarter of a century
brings wonderful changes. Twenty-five years later Mr. Peck stood
shoulder to shoulder with these very men who then reviled him as a
Canadian emissary of tyranny and corruption,--with S. T. Logan, 0. H.
Browning, and J. K. Dubois,--organizing a new party for victory under
the name of Abraham Lincoln.

[Illustration:   O. H. Browning.]

The Legislature adjourned on the 18th of January, having made a
beginning, it is true, in the work of improving the State by statute,
though its modest work, incorporating canal and bridge companies and
providing for public roads, bore no relation to the ambitious essays
of its successor. Among the bills passed at this session was an
Apportionment act, by which Sangamon County became entitled to seven
representatives and two senators, and early in the spring eight
"White" statesmen of the county were ready for the field--the ninth,
Mr. Herndon, holding over as State Senator. It seems singular to us of
a later day that just eight prominent men, on a side, should have
offered themselves for these places, without the intervention of any
primary meetings. Such a thing, if we mistake not, was never known
again in Illinois. The convention system was afterwards seen to be an
absolute necessity to prevent the disorganization of parties through
the restless vanity of obscure and insubordinate aspirants. But the
eight who "took the stump" in Sangamon in the summer of 1836 were
supported as loyally and as energetically as if they had been
nominated with all the solemnity of modern days. They became famous in
the history of the State, partly for their stature and partly for
their influence in legislation. They were called, with Herndon, the
"Long Nine;" their average height was over six feet, and their
aggregate altitude was said to be fifty-five feet. Their names were
Abraham Lincoln, John Dawson, Dan Stone, Ninian W. Edwards, William F.
Elkin, R. L. Wilson, and Andrew McCormick, candidates for the House of
Representatives, and Job Fletcher for the Senate, of Illinois.

Mr. Lincoln began his canvass with the following circular:


     NEW SALEM/June 13, 1836.
   To the Editor of the "Journal."

In your paper of last Saturday I see a communication over the
signature "Many Voters" in which the candidates who are announced in
the "Journal" are called upon to "show their hands." Agreed. Here's
mine.

I go for all sharing the privileges of the Government who assist in
bearing its burdens. Consequently I go for admitting all whites to the
right of suffrage who pay taxes or bear arms (by no means excluding
females).

If elected, I shall consider the whole people of Sangamon my
constituents, as well those that oppose as those that support me.

While acting as their representative I shall be governed by their will
on all subjects upon which I have the means of knowing what their will
is, and upon all others I shall do what my own judgment teaches me
will best advance their interests. Whether elected or not, I go for
distributing the proceeds of the sales of the public lands to the
several States, to enable our State, in common with others, to dig
canals and construct railroads without borrowing money and paying
interest on it.

If alive on the first Monday in November, I shall vote for Hugh L.
White for President. [Footnote: This phrase seems to have been adopted
as a formula by the anti-Jackson party. The "cards" of several
candidates contain it.]

   Very respectfully,
     A. LINCOLN.


It would be hard to imagine a more audacious and unqualified
declaration of principles and intentions. But it was the fashion of
the hour to promise exact obedience to the will of the people, and the
two practical questions touched by this circular were the only ones
then much talked about. The question of suffrage for aliens was a
living problem in the State, and Mr. Lincoln naturally took liberal
ground on it; and he was also in favor of getting from the sale of
public lands a portion of the money he was ready to vote for internal
improvements. This was good Whig doctrine at that time, and the young
politician did not fancy he could go wrong in following in such a
matter the lead of his idol, Henry Clay.

He made an active canvass, and spoke frequently during the summer. He
must have made some part of the campaign on foot, for we find in the
county paper an advertisement of a horse which had strayed or been
stolen from him while on a visit to Springfield. It was not an
imposing animal, to judge from the description; it was "plainly marked
with harness," and was "believed to have lost some of his shoes"; but
it was a large horse, as suited a cavalier of such stature, and
"trotted and paced" in a serviceable manner. In July a rather
remarkable discussion took place at the county-seat, in which many of
the leading men on both sides took part. Ninian Edwards, son of the
late Governor, is said to have opened the debate with much effect. Mr.
Early, who followed him, was so roused by his energetic attack that he
felt his only resource was a flat contradiction, which in those days
meant mischief. In the midst of great and increasing excitement Dan
Stone and John Calhoun made speeches which did not tend to pour oil on
the waters of contention, and then came Mr. Lincoln's turn. An article
in the "Journal" states that he seemed embarrassed in his opening, for
this was the most important contest in which he had ever been engaged.
But he soon felt the easy mastery of his powers come back to him, and
he finally made what was universally regarded as the strongest speech
of the day. One of his colleagues says that on this occasion he used
in his excitement for the first time that singularly effective clear
tenor tone of voice which afterwards became so widely known in the
political battles of the West. The canvass was an energetic one
throughout, and excited more interest, in the district than even the
presidential election, which occurred some months later. Mr. Lincoln
was elected at the head of the poll by a majority greatly in excess of
the average majority of his friends, which shows conclusively how his
influence and popularity had increased. The Whigs in this election
effected a revolution in the politics of the county. By force of their
ability and standing they had before managed to divide the suffrages
of the people, even while they were unquestionably in the minority;
but this year they completely defeated their opponents and gained that
control of the county which they never lost as long as the party
endured.

If Mr. Lincoln had no other claims to be remembered than his services
in the Legislature of 1836-7, there would be little to say in his
favor. Its history is one of disaster to the State. Its legislation
was almost wholly unwise and hurtful. The most we can say for Mr.
Lincoln is that he obeyed the will of his constituents, as he promised
to do, and labored with singular skill and ability to accomplish the
objects desired by the people who gave him their votes. The especial
work intrusted to him was the subdivision of the county, and the
project for the removal of the capital of the State to Springfield.
[Footnote: "Lincoln was at the head of the project to remove the seat
of government to Springfield; it was entirely intrusted to him to
manage. The members were all elected on one ticket, but they all
looked to Lincoln as the head" STEPHEN T, LOGAN.] In both of these he
was successful. In the account of errors and follies committed by the
Legislature to the lasting injury of the State, he is entitled to no
praise or blame beyond the rest. He shared in that sanguine epidemic
of financial and industrial quackery which devastated the entire
community, and voted with the best men of the country in favor of
schemes which appeared then like a promise of an immediate millennium,
and seem now like midsummer madness.

[Sidenote: Ford, p. 102.]

[Footnote: Reynolds, "Life and Times."]

He entered political life in one of those eras of delusive prosperity
which so often precede great financial convulsions. The population of
the State was increasing at the enormous rate of two hundred percent
in ten years. It had extended northward along the lines of the wooded
valleys of creeks and rivers in the center to Peoria; on the west by
the banks of the Mississippi to Galena; on the east with wide
intervals of wilderness to Chicago. The edge of the timber was
everywhere pretty well occupied, though the immigrants from the forest
States of Kentucky and Tennessee had as yet avoided the prairies. The
rich soil and equable climate were now attracting an excellent class
of settlers from the older States, and the long-neglected northern
counties were receiving the attention they deserved. The war of Black
Hawk had brought the country into notice; the utter defeat of his
nation had given the guarantee of a permanent peace; the last lodges
of the Pottawatomies had disappeared from the country in 1833. The
money spent by the general Government during the war, and paid to the
volunteers at its close, added to the common prosperity. There was a
brisk trade in real estate, and there was even a beginning in Chicago
of that passion for speculation in town lots which afterwards became a
frenzy.

It was too much to expect of the Illinois Legislature that it should
understand that the best thing it could do to forward this prosperous
tendency of things was to do nothing; for this is a lesson which has
not yet been learned by any legislature in the world. For several
years they had been tinkering, at first modestly and tentatively, at a
scheme of internal improvements which should not cost too much money.
In 1835 they began to grant charters for railroads, which remained in
embryo, as the stock was never taken. Surveys for other railroads were
also proposed, to cross the State in different directions; and the
project of uniting Lake Michigan with the Illinois River by a canal
was of too evident utility to be overlooked. In fact, the route had
been surveyed, and estimates of cost made, companies incorporated, and
all preliminaries completed many years before, though nothing further
had been done, as no funds had been offered from any source. But at
the special session of 1835 a law was passed authorizing a loan of
half a million dollars for this purpose; the loan was effected by
Governor Duncan the following year, and in June, aboard of canal
commissioners having been appointed, a beginning was actually made
with pick and shovel.

[Sidenote: Ford, p. 181.]

A restless feeling of hazardous speculation seemed to be taking
possession of the State. "It commenced," says Governor Ford, in his
admirable chronicle, "at Chicago, and was the means of building up
that place in a year or two from a village of a few houses to be a
city of several thousand inhabitants. The story of the sudden fortunes
made there excited at first wonder and amazement; next, a gambling
spirit of adventure; and lastly, an all-absorbing desire for sudden
and splendid wealth. Chicago had been for some time only one great
town-market. The plots of towns for a hundred miles around were
carried there to be disposed of at auction. The Eastern people had
caught the mania. Every vessel coming west was loaded with them, their
money and means, bound for Chicago, the great fairy-land of fortunes.
But as enough did not come to satisfy the insatiable greediness of the
Chicago sharpers and speculators, they frequently consigned their
wares to Eastern markets. In fact, lands and town lots were the staple
of the country, and were the only article of export." The contagion
spread so rapidly, towns and cities were laid out so profusely, that
it was a standing joke that before long there would be no land left in
the State for farming purposes.

The future of the State for many years to come was thus discounted by
the fervid imaginations of its inhabitants. "We have every requisite
of a great empire," they said, "except enterprise and inhabitants,"
and they thought that a little enterprise would bring the inhabitants.
Through the spring and summer of 1836 the talk of internal
improvements grew more general and more clamorous. The candidates for
office spoke about little else, and the only point of emulation among
the parties was which should be the more reckless and grandiose in its
promises. When the time arrived for the assembling of the Legislature,
the members were not left to their own zeal and the recollection of
their campaign pledges, but meetings and conventions were everywhere
held to spur them up to the fulfillment of their mandate. The
resolutions passed by the principal body of delegates who came
together in December directed the Legislature to vote a system of
internal improvements "commensurate with the wants of the people," a
phrase which is never lacking in the mouth of the charlatan or the
demagogue.

[Sidenote: "Ford's History," p. 184.]

These demands were pressed upon a not reluctant Legislature. They
addressed themselves at once to the work required of them, and soon
devised, with reckless and unreasoning haste, a scheme of railroads
covering the vast uninhabited prairies as with a gridiron. There was
to be a rail-road from Galena to the mouth of the Ohio River; from
Alton to Shawneetown; from Alton to Mount Carmel; from Alton to the
eastern State boundary--by virtue of which lines Alton was to take the
life of St. Louis without further notice; from Quincy to the Wabash
River; from Bloomington to Pekin; from Peoria to Warsaw;--in all, 1350
miles of railway. Some of these terminal cities were not in existence
except upon neatly designed surveyor's maps. The scheme provided also
for the improvement of every stream in the State on which a child's
shingle-boat could sail; and to the end that all objections should be
stifled on the part of those neighborhoods which had neither railroads
nor rivers, a gift of two hundred thousand dollars was voted to them,
and with this sop they were fain to be content and not trouble the
general joy. To accomplish this stupendous scheme, the Legislature
voted eight million dollars, to be raised by loan. Four millions were
also voted to complete the canal. These sums, monstrous as they were,
were still ridiculously inadequate to the purpose in view. But while
the frenzy lasted there was no consideration of cost or of
possibilities. These vast works were voted without estimates, without
surveys, without any rational consideration of their necessity. The
voice of reason seemed to be silent in the Assembly; only the
utterances of fervid prophecy found listeners. Governor Ford speaks of
one orator who insisted, amid enthusiastic plaudits, that the State
could well afford to borrow one hundred millions for internal
improvements. The process of reasoning, or rather predicting, was easy
and natural. The roads would raise the price of land; the State could
enter large tracts and sell them at a profit; foreign capital would be
invested in land, and could be heavily taxed to pay bonded interest;
and the roads, as fast as they were built, could be operated at a
great profit to pay for their own construction. The climax of the
whole folly was reached by the provision of law directing that work
should be begun at once at the termini of all the roads and the
crossings of all rivers.

It is futile and disingenuous to attempt, as some have done, to fasten
upon one or the other of the political parties of the State the
responsibility of this bedlam legislation. The Governor and a majority
of the Legislature were elected as Jackson Democrats, but the Whigs
were as earnest in passing these measures as their opponents; and
after they were adopted, the superior wealth, education, and business
capacity of the Whigs had their legitimate influence, and they filled
the principal positions upon the boards and commissions which came
into existence under the acts. The bills were passed,--not without
opposition, it is true, but by sufficient majorities,--and the news
was received by the people of the State with the most extravagant
demonstrations of delight. The villages were illuminated; bells were
rung in the rare steeples of the churches; "fire-balls,"--bundles of
candle-wick soaked in turpentine,--were thrown by night all over the
country. The day of payment was far away, and those who trusted the
assurances of the sanguine politicians thought that in some mysterious
way the scheme would pay for itself.

Mr. Lincoln is continually found voting with his friends in favor of
this legislation, and there is nothing to show that he saw any danger
in it. He was a Whig, and as such in favor of internal improvements in
general and a liberal construction of constitutional law in such
matters. As a boy, he had interested himself in the details of local
improvements of rivers and roads, and he doubtless went with the
current in Vandalia in favor of this enormous system. He took,
however, no prominent part in the work by which these railroad bills
were passed. He considered himself as specially commissioned to
procure the removal of the State capital from Vandalia to Springfield,
and he applied all his energies to the accomplishment of this work.
The enterprise was hedged round with difficulties; for although it was
everywhere agreed, except at Vandalia, that the capital ought to be
moved, every city in the State, and several which existed only on
paper, demanded to be made the seat of government. The question had
been submitted to a popular vote in 1834, and the result showed about
as many cities desirous of opening their gates to the Legislature as
claimed the honor of being the birthplace of Homer. Of these
Springfield was only third in popular estimation, and it was evident
that Mr. Lincoln had need of all his wits if he were to fulfill the
trust confided to him. It is said by Governor Ford that the "Long
Nine" were not averse to using the hopes and fears of other members in
relation to their special railroads to gain their adherence to the
Springfield programme, but this is by no means clear. We are rather
inclined to trust the direct testimony of Jesse K. Dubois, that the
success of the Sangamon County delegation in obtaining the capital was
due to the adroit management of Mr. Lincoln--first in inducing all the
rival claimants to unite in a vote to move the capital from Vandalia,
and then in carrying a direct vote for Springfield through the joint
convention by the assistance of the southern counties. His personal
authority accomplished this in great part. Mr. Dubois says: "He made
Webb and me vote for the removal, though we belonged to the southern
end of the State. We defended our vote before our constituents by
saying that necessity would ultimately force the seat of government to
a central position. But in reality we gave the vote to Lincoln because
we liked him, because we wanted to oblige our friend, and because we
recognized him as our leader." To do this, they were obliged to
quarrel with their most intimate associates, who had bought a piece of
waste land at the exact geographical center of the State and were
striving to have the capital established there in the interest of
their own pockets and territorial symmetry.

The bill was passed only a short time before the Legislature
adjourned, and the "Long Nine" came back to their constituents wearing
their well-won laurels. They were complimented in the newspapers, at
public meetings, and even at subscription dinners. We read of one at
Springfield, at the "Rural Hotel," to which sixty guests sat down,
where there were speeches by Browning, Lincoln, Douglas (who had
resigned his seat in the Legislature to become Register of the Land
Office at the new capital), S. T. Logan, Baker, and others, whose wit
and wisdom were lost to history through the absence of reporters.
Another dinner was given them at Athens a few weeks later. Among the
toasts on these occasions were two which we may transcribe: "Abraham
Lincoln: He has fulfilled the expectations of his friends, and
disappointed the hopes of his enemies"; and "A. Lincoln: One of
Nature's noblemen."




CHAPTER VIII

THE LINCOLN-STONE PROTEST


[Sidenote: 1837.]

On the 3rd of March, the day before the Legislature adjourned, Mr.
Lincoln caused to be entered upon its records a paper which excited
but little interest at the time, but which will probably be remembered
long after the good and evil actions of the Vandalia Assembly have
faded away from the minds of men. It was the authentic record of the
beginning of a great and momentous career. The following protest was
presented to the House, which was read and ordered to be spread on the
journals, to wit:


   Resolutions upon the subject of domestic slavery having
   passed both branches of the General Assembly at its
   present session, the undersigned hereby protest against the
   passage of the same.

   They believe that the institution of slavery is founded
   on both injustice and bad policy, but that the promulgation
   of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than
   abate its evils.

   They believe that the Congress of the United States
   has no power under the Constitution to interfere with the
   institution of slavery in the different States.

   They believe that the Congress of the United States
   has the power, under the Constitution, to abolish slavery
   in the District of Columbia, but that the power ought not
   to be exercised, unless at the request of the people of the
   District.

   The difference between these opinions and those contained
   in the above resolutions is their reason for entering
   this protest.

  (Signed)
     DAN STONE,
     A. LINCOLN,
     Representatives from the county of Sangamon.


It may seem strange to those who shall read these pages that a protest
so mild and cautious as this should ever have been considered either
necessary or remarkable. We have gone so far away from the habits of
thought and feeling prevalent at that time that it is difficult to
appreciate such acts at their true value. But if we look a little
carefully into the state of politics and public opinion in Illinois in
the first half of this century, we shall see how much of inflexible
conscience and reason there was in this simple protest.

[Sidenote: Edwards, "History of Illinois," p. 179.]

[Sidenote: Edwards, p. 180.]

The whole of the North-west territory had, it is true, been dedicated
to freedom by the ordinance of 1787, but in spite of that famous
prohibition, slavery existed in a modified form throughout that vast
territory wherever there was any considerable population. An act
legalizing a sort of slavery by indenture was passed by the Indiana
territorial Legislature in 1807, and this remained in force in the
Illinois country after its separation. Another act providing for the
hiring of slaves from Southern States was passed in 1814, for the
ostensible reason that "mills could not be successfully operated in
the territory for want of laborers, and that the manufacture of salt
could not be successfully carried on by white laborers." Yet, as an
unconscious satire upon such pretenses, from time to time the most
savage acts were passed to prohibit the immigration of free negroes
into the territory which was represented as pining for black labor.
Those who held slaves under the French domination, and their heirs,
continued to hold them and their descendants in servitude, after
Illinois had become nominally a free territory and a free State, on
the ground that their vested rights of property could not have been
abrogated by the ordinance, and that under the rule of the civil law
_partus sequitur ventrem_.

But this quasi-toleration of the institution was not enough for the
advocates of slavery. Soon after the adoption of the State
Constitution, which prohibited slavery "hereafter," it was evident
that there was a strong under-current of desire for its introduction
into the State. Some of the leading politicians, exaggerating the
extent of this desire, imagined they saw in it a means of personal
advancement, and began to agitate the question of a convention to
amend the Constitution. At that time there was a considerable
emigration setting through the State from Kentucky and Tennessee to
Missouri. Day by day the teams of the movers passed through the
Illinois settlements, and wherever they halted for rest and
refreshment they would affect to deplore the short-sighted policy
which, by prohibiting slavery, had prevented their settling in that
beautiful country. When young bachelors came from Kentucky on trips of
business or pleasure, they dazzled the eyes of the women and excited
the envy of their male rivals with their black retainers. The early
Illinoisans were perplexed with a secret and singular sense of
inferiority to even so new and raw a community as Missouri, because of
its possession of slavery. Governor Edwards, complaining so late as
1829 of the superior mail facilities afforded to Missouri, says: "I
can conceive of no reason for this preference, unless it be supposed
that because the people of Missouri have negroes to work for them they
are to be considered as gentlefolks entitled to higher consideration
than us plain 'free-State' folks who have to work for ourselves."

The attempt was at last seriously made to open the State to slavery by
the Legislature of 1822-3. The Governor, Edward Coles, of Virginia, a
strong antislavery man, had been elected by a division of the pro-
slavery party, but came in with a Legislature largely against him. The
Senate had the requisite pro-slavery majority of two-thirds for a
convention. In the House of Representatives there was a contest for a
seat upon the result of which the two-thirds majority depended. The
seat was claimed by John Shaw and Nicholas Hansen, of Pike County. The
way in which the contest was decided affords a curious illustration of
the moral sense of the advocates of slavery. They wanted at this
session to elect a senator and provide for the convention. Hansen
would vote for their senator and not for the convention. Shaw would
vote for the convention, but not for Thomas, their candidate for
senator. In such a dilemma they determined not to choose, but
impartially to use both. They gave the seat to Hansen, and with his
vote elected Thomas; they then turned him out, gave the place to Shaw,
and with his vote carried the act for submitting the convention
question to a popular vote. They were not more magnanimous in their
victory than scrupulous in the means by which they had gained it. The
night after the vote was taken they formed in a wild and drunken
procession, and visited the residences of the Governor and the other
free-State leaders, with loud and indecent demonstrations of triumph.

They considered their success already assured; but they left out of
view the value of the moral forces called into being by their insolent
challenge. The better class of people in the State, those heretofore
unknown in politics, the schoolmasters, the ministers, immediately
prepared for the contest, which became one of the severest the State
has ever known. They established three newspapers, and sustained them
with money and contributions. The Governor gave his entire salary for
four years to the expenses of this contest, in which he had no
personal interest whatever. The antislavery members of the Legislature
made up a purse of a thousand dollars. They spent their money mostly
in printer's ink and in the payment of active and zealous colporteurs.
The result was a decisive defeat for the slave party. The convention
was beaten by 1800 majority, in a total vote of 11612, and the State
saved forever from slavery.

[Illustration:   MARTIN VAN BUREN.]

But these supreme efforts of the advocates of public morals,
uninfluenced by considerations of personal advantage, are of rare
occurrence, and necessarily do not survive the exigencies that call
them forth. The apologists of slavery, beaten in the canvass, were
more successful in the field of social opinion. In the reaction which
succeeded the triumph of the antislavery party, it seemed as if there
had never been any antislavery sentiment in the State. They had voted,
it is true, against the importation of slaves from the South, but they
were content to live under a code of Draconian ferocity, inspired by
the very spirit of slavery, visiting the immigration of free negroes
with penalties of the most savage description. Even Governor Coles,
the public-spirited and popular politician, was indicted and severely
fined for having brought his own freedmen into the State and having
assisted them in establishing themselves around him upon farms of
their own. The Legislature remitted the fine, but the Circuit Court
declared it had no constitutional power to do so, though the Supreme
Court afterwards overruled this decision. Any mention of the subject
of slavery was thought in the worst possible taste, and no one could
avow himself opposed to it without the risk of social ostracism. Every
town had its one or two abolitionists, who were regarded as harmless
or dangerous lunatics, according to the energy with which they made
their views known.

From this arose a singular prejudice against New England people. It
was attributable partly to the natural feeling of distrust of
strangers which is common to ignorance and provincialism, but still
more to a general suspicion that all Eastern men were abolitionists.
Mr. Cook, who so long represented the State in Congress, used to
relate with much amusement how he once spent the night in a farmer's
cabin, and listened to the honest man's denunciations of "that----
Yankee Cook." Cook was a Kentuckian, but his enemies could think of no
more dreadful stigma to apply to him than that of calling him a
Yankee. Senator James A. McDougall once told us that although he made
no pretense of concealing his Eastern nativity, he never could keep
his ardent friends in Pike County from denying the fact and fighting
any one who asserted it. The great preacher, Peter Cartwright, used to
denounce Eastern men roundly in his sermons, calling them "imps who
lived on oysters" instead of honest corn-bread and bacon. The taint of
slavery, the contagion of a plague they had not quite escaped, was on
the people of Illinois. They were strong enough to rise once in their
might and say they would not have slavery among them. But in the petty
details of every day, in their ordinary talk, and in their routine
legislation, their sympathies were still with the slave-holders. They
would not enlist with them, but they would fight their battles in
their own way.

Their readiness to do what came to be called later, in a famous
speech, the "dirty work" of the South was seen in the tragic death of
Rev. Elijah P. Lovejoy, in this very year of 1837. He had for some
years been publishing a religious newspaper in St. Louis, but finding
the atmosphere of that city becoming dangerous to him on account of
the freedom of his comments upon Southern institutions, he moved to
Alton, in Illinois, twenty-five miles further up the river. His
arrival excited an immediate tumult in that place; a mob gathered
there on the day he came--it was Sunday, and the good people were at
leisure--and threw his press into the Mississippi. Having thus
expressed their determination to vindicate the law, they held a
meeting, and cited him before it to declare his intentions. He said
they were altogether peaceful and legal; that he intended to publish a
religious newspaper and not to meddle with politics. This seemed
satisfactory to the people, and he was allowed to fish out his press,
buy new types, and set up his paper. But Mr. Lovejoy was a predestined
martyr. He felt there was a "woe" upon him if he held his peace
against the wickedness across the river. He wrote and published what
was in his heart to say, and Alton was again vehemently moved. A
committee appointed itself to wait upon him; for this sort of outrage
is usually accomplished with a curious formality which makes it seem
to the participants legal and orderly. The preacher met them with an
undaunted front and told them he must do his duty as it appeared to
him; that he was amenable to law, but nothing else; he even spoke in
condemnation of mobs. Such language "from a minister of the gospel"
shocked and infuriated the committee and those whom they represented.
"The people assembled," says Governor Ford, "and quietly took the
press and types and threw them into the river." We venture to say that
the word "quietly" never before found itself in such company. It is
not worth while to give the details of the bloody drama that now
rapidly ran to its close. There was a fruitless effort at compromise,
which to Lovejoy meant merely surrender, and which he firmly rejected.
The threats of the mob were answered by defiance; from the little band
that surrounded the abolitionist. A new press was ordered, and
arrived, and was stored in a warehouse, where Lovejoy and his friends
shut themselves up, determined to defend it with their lives. They
were there besieged by the infuriated crowd, and after a short
interchange of shots Lovejoy was killed, his friends dispersed, and
the press once more--and this time finally--thrown into the turbid
flood.

These events took place in the autumn of 1837, but they indicate
sufficiently the temper of the people of the State in the earlier part
of the year.

[Sidenote: Law approved Dec. 26, 1831.]

The vehemence with which the early antislavery apostles were
conducting their agitation in the East naturally roused a
corresponding violence of expression in every other part of the
country. William Lloyd Garrison, the boldest and most aggressive non-
resistant that ever lived, had, since 1831, been pouring forth once a
week in the "Liberator" his earnest and eloquent denunciations of
slavery, taking no account of the expedient or the possible, but
demanding with all the fervor of an ancient prophet the immediate
removal of the cause of offense. Oliver Johnson attacked the national
sin and wrong, in the "Standard," with zeal and energy equally hot and
untiring. Their words stung the slave-holding States to something like
frenzy. The Georgia Legislature offered a reward of five thousand
dollars to any one who should kidnap Garrison, or who should bring to
conviction any one circulating the "Liberator" in the State. Yet so
little known in their own neighborhoods were these early workers in
this great reform that when the Mayor of Boston received remonstrances
from certain Southern States against such an incendiary publication as
the "Liberator," he was able to say that no member of the city
government and no person of his acquaintance had ever heard of the
paper or its editor; that on search being made it was found that "his
office was an obscure hole, his only visible auxiliary a negro boy,
and his supporters a very few insignificant persons of all colors."
But the leaven worked continually, and by the time of which we are
writing the antislavery societies of the North-east had attained a
considerable vitality, and the echoes of their work came back from the
South in furious resolutions of legislatures and other bodies, which,
in their exasperation, could not refrain from this injudicious
advertising of their enemies. Petitions to Congress, which were met by
gag-laws, constantly increasing in severity, brought the dreaded
discussion more and more before the public. But there was as yet
little or no antislavery agitation in Illinois.

[Sidenote: Jan 25, 1837.]

There was no sympathy with nor even toleration for any public
expression of hostility to slavery. The zeal of the followers of
Jackson, although he had ceased to be President, had been whetted by
his public denunciations of the antislavery propaganda; little more
than a year before he had called upon Congress to take measures to
"prohibit under severe penalties" the further progress of such
incendiary proceedings as were "calculated to stimulate the slaves to
insurrection and to produce all the horrors of civil war." But in
spite of all this, people with uneasy consciences continued to write
and talk and petition Congress against slavery, and most of the State
legislatures began to pass resolutions denouncing them. In the last
days of 1836 Governor Duncan sent to the Illinois Legislature the
reports and resolutions of several States in relation to this subject.
They were referred to a committee, who in due time reported a set of
resolves "highly disapproving abolition societies"; holding that "the
right of property in slaves is secured to the slave-holding States by
the Federal Constitution"; that the general Government cannot abolish
slavery in the District of Columbia against the consent of the
citizens of said District, without a manifest breach of good faith;
and requesting the Governor to transmit to the States which had sent
their resolutions to him a copy of those tranquilizing expressions. A
long and dragging debate ensued of which no record has been preserved;
the resolutions, after numberless amendments had been voted upon, were
finally passed, in the Senate, unanimously, in the House with none but
Lincoln and five others in the negative. [Footnote: We are under
obligations to John M. Adair for transcripts of the State records
bearing on this matter.] No report remains of the many speeches which
prolonged the debate; they have gone the way of all buncombe; the
sound and fury of them have passed away into silence; but they woke an
echo in one sincere heart which history will be glad to perpetuate.

There was no reason that Abraham Lincoln should take especial notice
of these resolutions, more than another. He had done his work at this
session in effecting the removal of the capital. He had only to shrug
his shoulders at the violence and untruthfulness of the majority, vote
against them, and go back to his admiring constituents, to his dinners
and his toasts. But his conscience and his reason forbade him to be
silent; he felt a word must be said on the other side to redress the
distorted balance. He wrote his protest, saying not one word he was
not ready to stand by then and thereafter, wasting not a syllable in
rhetoric or feeling, keeping close to law and truth and justice. When
he had finished it he showed it to some of his colleagues for their
adhesion; but one and all refused, except Dan Stone, who was not a
candidate for reelection, having retired from politics to a seat on
the bench. The risk was too great for the rest to run. Lincoln was
twenty-eight years old; after a youth, of singular privations and
struggles he had arrived at an enviable position in the politics and
the society of the State. His intimate friends, those whom he loved
and honored, were Browning, Butler, Logan, and Stuart--Kentuckians
all, and strongly averse to any discussion of the question of slavery.
The public opinion of his county, which was then little less than the
breath of his life, was all the same way. But all these considerations
could not withhold him from performing a simple duty--a duty which no
one could have blamed him for leaving undone. The crowning grace of
the whole act is in the closing sentence: "The difference between
these opinions and those contained in the said resolutions is their
reason for entering this protest." Reason enough for the Lincolns and
Luthers.

He had many years of growth and development before him. There was a
long distance to be traversed between the guarded utterances of this
protest and the heroic audacity which launched the proclamation of
emancipation. But the young man who dared declare, in the prosperous
beginning of his political life, in the midst of a community imbued
with slave-State superstitions, that "he believed the institution of
slavery was founded both on injustice and bad policy,"--attacking thus
its moral and material supports, while at the same time recognizing
all the constitutional guarantees which protected it,--had in him the
making of a statesman and, if need be, a martyr. His whole career was
to run in the lines marked out by these words, written in the hurry of
a closing session, and he was to accomplish few acts, in that great
history which God reserved for him, wiser and nobler than this.




CHAPTER IX

COLLAPSE OF THE SYSTEM


Mr. Lincoln had made thus far very little money--nothing more, in
fact, than a subsistence of the most modest character. But he had made
some warm friends, and this meant much among the early Illinoisans. He
had become intimately acquainted, at Vandalia, with William Butler,
who was greatly interested in the removal of the capital to
Springfield, and who urged the young legislator to take up his
residence at the new seat of government. Lincoln readily fell in with
this suggestion, and accompanied his friend home when the Legislature
adjourned, sharing the lodging of Joshua F. Speed, a young Kentucky
merchant, and taking his meals at the house of Mr. Butler for several
years.

[Sidenote: "Sangamon Journal," November 7, 1835.]

[Sidenote: Reynolds, "Life and Times" p. 237.]

In this way began Mr. Lincoln's residence in Springfield, where he was
to remain until called to one of the highest of destinies intrusted to
men, and where his ashes were to rest forever in monumental marble. It
would have seemed a dreary village to any one accustomed to the world,
but in a letter written about this time, Lincoln speaks of it as a
place where there was a "good deal of flourishing about in carriages"
--a town of some pretentious to elegance. It had a population of 1500.
The county contained nearly 18,000 souls, of whom 78 were free
negroes, 20 registered indentured servants, and six slaves. Scarcely a
perceptible trace of color, one would say, yet we find in the
Springfield paper a leading article beginning with the startling
announcement, "Our State is threatened to be overrun with free
negroes." The county was one of the richest in Illinois, possessed of
a soil of inexhaustible fertility, and divided to the best advantage
between prairie and forest. It was settled early in the history of the
State, and the country was held in high esteem by the aborigines. The
name of Sangamon is said to mean in the Pottawatomie language "land of
plenty." Its citizens were of an excellent class of people, a large
majority of them from Kentucky, though representatives were not
wanting from the Eastern States, men of education and character.

There had been very little of what might be called pioneer life in
Springfield. Civilization came in with a reasonably full equipment at
the beginning. The Edwardses, in fair-top boots and ruffled shirts;
the Ridgelys brought their banking business from Maryland; the Logans
and Conklings were good lawyers before they arrived; another family
came from Kentucky, with a cotton manufactory which proved its
aristocratic character by never doing any work. With a population like
this, the town had, from the beginning, a more settled and orderly
type than was usual in the South and West. A glance at the advertising
columns of the newspaper will show how much attention to dress was
paid in the new capital. "Cloths, cassinetts, cassimeres, velvet,
silk, satin, and Marseilles vestings, fine calf boots, seal and
morocco pumps, for gentlemen," and for the sex which in barbarism
dresses less and in civilization dresses more than the male, "silks,
bareges, crepe lisse, lace veils, thread lace, Thibet shawls, lace
handkerchiefs, fine prunella shoes, etc." It is evident that the young
politician was confronting a social world more formidably correct than
anything he had as yet seen.

[Sidenote: Ford's "History," p. 94.]

Governor Ford began some years before this to remark with pleasure the
change in the dress of the people of Illinois: the gradual
disappearance of leather and, linsey-woolsey, the hunting-knife and
tomahawk, from the garb of men; the deerskin moccasin supplanted by
the leather boot and shoe; the leather breeches tied around the ankle
replaced by the modern pantaloons; and the still greater improvement
in the adornment of women, the former bare feet decently shod, and
homespun frocks giving way to gowns of calico and silk, and the heads
tied up in red cotton turbans disappearing in favor of those
surmounted by pretty bonnets of silk or straw. We admit that these
changes were not unattended with the grumbling ill-will of the pioneer
patriarchs; they predicted nothing but ruin to a country that thus
forsook the old ways "which were good enough for their fathers." But
with the change in dress came other alterations which were all for the
better--a growing self-respect among the young; an industry and thrift
by which they could buy good clothes; a habit of attending religious
service, where they could show them; a progress in sociability,
civility, trade, and morals.

The taste for civilization had sometimes a whimsical manifestation.
Mr. Stuart said the members of the Legislature bitterly complained of
the amount of game--venison and grouse of the most delicious quality--
which was served them at the taverns in Vandalia; they clamored for
bacon--they were starving, they said, "for something civilized." There
was plenty of civilized nourishment in Springfield. Wheat was fifty
cents a bushel, rye thirty-three; corn and oats were twenty-five,
potatoes twenty-five; butter was eight cents a pound, and eggs were
eight cents a dozen; pork was two and a half cents a pound.

The town was built on the edge of the woods, the north side touching
the timber, the south encroaching on the prairie. The richness of the
soil was seen in the mud of the streets, black as ink, and of an
unfathomable depth in time of thaw. There were, of course, no
pavements or sidewalks; an attempt at crossings was made by laying
down large chunks of wood. The houses were almost all wooden, and were
disposed in rectangular blocks. A large square had been left in the
middle of the town, in anticipation of future greatness, and there,
when Lincoln began his residence, the work of clearing the ground for
the new State-house was already going forward. In one of the largest
houses looking on the square, at the north-west corner, the county
court had its offices, and other rooms in the building were let to
lawyers. One of these was occupied by Stuart and Lincoln, for the
friendship formed in the Black Hawk war and strengthened at Vandalia
induced "Major" Stuart to offer a partnership to "Captain" Lincoln.
[Footnote: It is not unworthy of notice that in a country where
military titles were conferred with ludicrous profusion, and borne
with absurd complacency, Abraham Lincoln, who had actually been
commissioned, and had served as captain, never used the designation
after he laid down his command.]

Lincoln did not gain any immediate eminence at the bar. His
preliminary studies had been cursory and slight, and Stuart was then
too much engrossed in politics to pay the unremitting attention to the
law which that jealous mistress requires. He had been a candidate for
Congress the year before, and had been defeated by W. L. May. He was a
candidate again in 1838, and was elected over so agile an adversary as
Stephen Arnold Douglas. His paramount interest in these canvasses
necessarily prevented him from setting to his junior partner the
example which Lincoln so greatly needed, of close and steady devotion
to their profession. It was several years later that Lincoln found
with Judge Logan the companionship and inspiration which he required,
and began to be really a lawyer. During the first year or two he is
principally remembered in Springfield as an excellent talker, the life
and soul of the little gatherings about the county offices, a story-
teller of the first rank, a good-natured, friendly fellow whom
everybody liked and trusted. He relied more upon his influence with a
jury than upon his knowledge of law in the few cases he conducted in
court, his acquaintance with human nature being far more extensive
than his legal lore.

Lincoln was not yet done with Vandalia, its dinners of game, and its
political intrigue. The archives of the State were not removed to
Springfield until 1839, and Lincoln remained a member of the
Legislature by successive reelections from 1834 to 1842. His campaigns
were carried on almost entirely without expense. Joshua Speed told the
writers that on one occasion some of the Whigs contributed a purse of
two hundred dollars which Speed handed to Lincoln to pay his personal
expenses in the canvass. After the election was over, the successful
candidate handed Speed $199.25, with the request that he return it to
the subscribers. "I did not need the money," he said. "I made the
canvass on my own horse; my entertainment, being at the houses of
friends, cost me nothing; and my only outlay was seventy-five cents
for a barrel of cider, which some farm-hands insisted I should treat
them to." He was called down to Vandalia in the summer of 1837, by a
special session of the Legislature. The magnificent schemes of the
foregoing winter required some repairing. The banks throughout the
United States had suspended specie payments in the spring, and as the
State banks in Illinois were the fiscal agents of the railroads and
canals, the Governor called upon the law-makers to revise their own
work, to legalize the suspension, and bring their improvement system
within possible bounds. They acted as might have been expected:
complied with the former suggestion, but flatly refused to touch their
masterpiece. They had been glorifying their work too energetically to
destroy it in its infancy. It was said you could recognize a
legislator that year in any crowd by his automatic repetition of the
phrase, "Thirteen hundred--fellow-citiztens!--and fifty miles of
railroad!" There was nothing to be done but to go on with the
stupendous folly. Loans were effected with surprising and fatal
facility, and, "before the end of the year, work had begun at many
points on the railroads. The whole State was excited to the highest
pitch of frenzy and expectation. Money was as plenty as dirt.
Industry, instead of being stimulated, actually languished. We
exported nothing," says Governor Ford, "and everything from abroad was
paid for by the borrowed money expended among us." Not only upon the
railroads, but on the canal as well, the work was begun on a
magnificent scale. Nine millions of dollars were thought to be a mere
trifle in view of the colossal sum expected to be realized from the
sale of canal lands, three hundred thousand acres of which had been
given by the general Government. There were rumors of coming trouble,
and of an unhealthy condition of the banks; but it was considered
disloyal to look too curiously into such matters. One frank patriot,
who had been sent as one of a committee to examine the bank at
Shawneetown, when asked what he found there, replied with winning
candor, "Plenty of good whisky and sugar to sweeten it."

[Sidenote: Ford, "History," p. 197.]

But a year of baleful experience destroyed a great many illusions, and
in the election of 1838 the subject of internal improvements was
treated with much more reserve by candidates. The debt of the State,
issued at a continually increasing discount, had already attained
enormous proportions; the delirium of the last few years was ending,
and sensible people began to be greatly disquieted. Nevertheless, Mr.
Cyrus Edwards boldly made his canvass for Governor as a supporter of
the system of internal improvements, and his opponent, Thomas Carlin,
was careful not to commit himself strongly on the other side. Carlin
was elected, and finding that a majority of the Legislature was still
opposed to any steps backward, he made no demonstration against the
system at the first session. Lincoln was a member of this body, and,
being by that time the unquestioned leader of the Whig minority, was
nominated for Speaker, and came within one vote of an election. The
Legislature was still stiff-necked and perverse in regard to the
system. It refused to modify it in the least, and voted, as if in
bravado, another eight hundred thousand dollars to extend it.

But this was the last paroxysm of a fever that was burnt out. The
market was glutted with Illinois bonds; one banker and one broker
after another, to whose hands they had been recklessly confided in New
York and London, failed, or made away with the proceeds of sales. The
system had utterly failed; there was nothing to do but repeal it, stop
work upon the visionary roads, and endeavor to invent some means of
paying the enormous debt. This work taxed the energies of the
Legislature in 1839, and for some years after. It was a dismal and
disheartening task. Blue Monday had come after these years of
intoxication, and a crushing debt rested upon a people who had been
deceiving themselves with the fallacy that it would somehow pay itself
by acts of the Legislature.

[Illustration:   "COLONEL E. D. BAKER."]

Many were the schemes devised for meeting these oppressive obligations
without unduly taxing the voters; one of them, not especially wiser
than the rest, was contributed by Mr. Lincoln. It provided for the
issue of bonds for the payment of the interest due by the State, and
for the appropriation of a special portion of State taxes to meet the
obligations thus incurred. He supported his bill in a perfectly
characteristic speech, making no effort to evade his share of the
responsibility for the crisis, and submitting his views with
diffidence to the approval of the Assembly. His plan was not adopted;
it was too simple and straightforward, even if it had any other
merits, to meet the approval of an assembly intent only upon getting
out of immediate embarrassment by means which might save them future
trouble on the stump. There was even an undercurrent of sentiment in
favor of repudiation. But the payment of the interest for that year
was provided for by an ingenious expedient which shifted upon the Fund
Commissioners the responsibility of deciding what portion of the debt
was legal, and how much interest was therefore to be paid. Bonds were
sold for this purpose at a heavy loss.

This session of the Legislature was enlivened by a singular contest
between the Whigs and Democrats in relation to the State banks. Their
suspension of specie payments had been legalized up to "the
adjournment of the next session of the Legislature." They were not now
able to resume, and it was held by the Democrats that if the special
session adjourned _sine die_ the charter of the banks would be
forfeited, a purpose the party was eager to accomplish. The Whigs, who
were defending the banks, wished to prevent the adjournment of the
special session until the regular session should begin, during the
course of which they expected to renew the lease of life now held
under sufferance by the banks--in which, it may be here said, they
were finally successful. But on one occasion, being in the minority,
and having exhausted every other parliamentary means of opposition and
delay, and seeing the vote they dreaded imminent, they tried to defeat
it by leaving the house in a body, and, the doors being locked, a
number of them, among whom Mr. Lincoln's tall figure was prominent,
jumped from the windows of the church where the Legislature was then
holding its sessions. "I think," says Mr. Joseph Gillespie, who was
one of those who performed this feat of acrobatic politics, "Mr.
Lincoln always regretted it, as he deprecated everything that savored
of the revolutionary."

Two years later the persecuted banks, harried by the demagogues and
swindled by the State, fell with a great ruin, and the financial
misery of the State was complete. Nothing was left of the brilliant
schemes of the historic Legislature of 1836 but a load of debt which
crippled for many years the energies of the people, a few miles of
embankments which the grass hastened to cover, and a few abutments
which stood for years by the sides of leafy rivers, waiting for their
long delaying bridges and trains.

During the winter of 1840-1 occurred the first clash of opinion and
principle between Mr. Lincoln and his life-long adversary, Mr.
Douglas. There are those who can see only envy and jealousy in that
strong dislike and disapproval with which Mr. Lincoln always regarded
his famous rival. But we think that few men have ever lived who were
more free from those degrading passions than Abraham Lincoln, and the
personal reprobation with which he always visited the public acts of
Douglas arose from his sincere conviction that, able as Douglas was,
and in many respects admirable in character, he was essentially
without fixed political morals. They had met for the first time in
1834 at Vandalia, where Douglas was busy in getting the circuit
attorneyship away from John J. Hardin. He held it only long enough to
secure a nomination to the Legislature in 1836. He went there to
endeavor to have the capital moved to Jacksonville, where he lived,
but he gave up the fight for the purpose of having himself appointed
Register of the Land Office at Springfield. He held this place as a
means of being nominated for Congress the next year; he was nominated
and defeated. In 1840 he was engaged in another scheme to which we
will give a moment's attention, as it resulted in giving him a seat on
the Supreme Bench of the State, which he used merely as a perch from
which to get into Congress.

There had been a difference of opinion in Illinois for some years as
to whether the Constitution, which made voters of all white male
inhabitants of six months' residence, meant to include aliens in that
category. As the aliens were nearly all Democrats, that party insisted
on their voting, and the Whigs objected. The best lawyers in the State
were Whigs, and so it happened that most of the judges were of that
complexion. A case was made up for decision and decided adversely to
the aliens, who appealed it to the Supreme Court. This case was to
come on at the June term in 1840, and the Democratic counsel, chief
among whom was Mr. Douglas, were in some anxiety, as an unfavorable
decision would lose them about ten thousand alien votes in the
Presidential election in November. In this conjuncture one Judge
Smith, of the Supreme Court, an ardent Democrat, willing to enhance
his value in his party, communicated to Mr. Douglas two important
facts: first, that a majority of the court would certainly decide
against the aliens; and, secondly that there was a slight imperfection
in the record by which counsel might throw the case over to the
December term, and save the alien vote for Van Buren and the
Democratic ticket. This was done, and when the Legislature came
together with its large Democratic majority, Mr. Douglas handed in a
bill "reforming" the Judiciary--for they had learned that serviceable
word already. The circuit judges were turned out of office, and five
new judges were added to the Supreme Court, who were to perform
circuit duty also. It is needless to say that Judge Douglas was one of
these, and he had contrived also in the course of the discussion to
disgrace his friend Smith so thoroughly by quoting his treacherous
communication of matters which took place within the court, that Smith
was no longer a possible rival for political honors.

It was useless for the Whigs to try to prevent this degradation of the
bench. There was no resource but a protest, and here again Lincoln
uttered the voice of the conscience of the party. He was joined on
this occasion by Edward D. Baker [Footnote: Afterwards senator from
Oregon, and as colonel of the 71st Pennsylvania (called the 1st
California) killed at Ball's Bluff.] and some others, who protested
against the act because

1st. It violates the principles of free government by subjecting the
Judiciary to the Legislature.

2d. It is a fatal blow at the independence of the judges and the
constitutional term of their offices.

3d. It is a measure not asked for or wished for by the people.

4th. It will greatly increase the expense of our courts or else
greatly diminish their utility.

5th. It will give our courts a political and partisan character,
thereby impairing public confidence in their decisions.

6th. It will impair our standing with other States and the world.

7th. It is a party measure for party purposes from which no practical
good to the people can possibly arise, but which may be the source of
immeasurable evils.

The undersigned are well aware that this protest will be altogether
unavailing with the majority of this body. The blow has already fallen;
and we are compelled to stand by, the mournful spectators of the
ruin it will cause.

[Sidenote: Ford's "History," p. 221.]

It will be easy to ridicule this indignant protest as the angry outcry
of beaten partisans; but fortunately we have evidence which cannot be
gainsaid of the justice of its sentiments and the wisdom of its
predictions. Governor Ford, himself a Democratic leader as able as he
was honest, writing seven years after these proceedings, condemns them
as wrong and impolitic, and adds, "Ever since this reforming measure
the Judiciary has been unpopular with the Democratic majorities. Many
and most of the judges have had great personal popularity--so much so
as to create complaint of so many of them being elected or appointed
to other offices. But the Bench itself has been the subject of bitter
attacks by every Legislature since." It had been soiled by unclean
contact and could not be respected as before.




CHAPTER X

EARLY LAW PRACTICE


During all the years of his service in the Legislature, Lincoln was
practicing law in Springfield in the dingy little office at the corner
of the square. A youth named Milton Hay, who afterwards became one of
the foremost lawyers of the State, had made the acquaintance of
Lincoln at the County Clerk's office and proposed to study law with
him. He was at once accepted as a pupil, and his days being otherwise
employed he gave his nights to reading, and as his vigils were apt to
be prolonged he furnished a bedroom adjoining the office, where
Lincoln often passed the night with him. Mr. Hay gives this account of
the practice of the law in those days:

"In forming our ideas of Lincoln's growth and development as a lawyer,
we must remember that in those early days litigation was very simple
as compared with that of modern times. Population was sparse and
society scarcely organized, land was plentiful and employment
abundant. There was an utter absence of the abstruse questions and
complications which now beset the law. There was no need of that close
and searching study into principles and precedents which keeps the
modern law-student buried in his office. On the contrary, the very
character of this simple litigation drew the lawyer into the street
and neighborhood, and into close and active intercourse with all
classes of his fellow-men. The suits consisted of actions of tort and
assumpsit. If a man had a debt not collectible, the current phrase
was, 'I'll take it out of his hide.'

[Illustration:   LINCOLN AND STUART'S LAW-OFFICE, SPRINGFIELD.]

"This would bring on an action for assault and battery. The free
comments of the neighbors on the fracas or the character of the
parties would be productive of slander suits. A man would for his
convenience lay down an irascible neighbor's fence, and indolently
forget to put it up again, and an action of trespass would grow out of
it. The suit would lead to a free fight, and sometimes furnish the
bloody incidents for a murder trial. Occupied with this class of
business, the half-legal, half-political lawyers were never found
plodding in their offices. In that case they would have waited long
for the recognition of their talents or a demand for their services.
Out of this characteristic of the times also grew the street
discussions I have adverted to. There was scarcely a day or hour when
a knot of men might not have been seen near the door of some prominent
store, or about the steps of the court-house eagerly discussing a
current political topic--not as a question of news, for news was not
then received quickly or frequently, as it is now, but rather for the
sake of debate; and the men from the country, the pioneers and
farmers, always gathered eagerly about these groups and listened with
open-mouthed interest, and frequently manifested their approval or
dissent in strong words, and carried away to their neighborhoods a
report of the debaters' wit and skill. It was in these street talks
that the rising and aspiring young lawyer found his daily and hourly
forum. Often by good luck or prudence he had the field entirely to
himself, and so escaped the dangers and discouragements of a decisive
conflict with a trained antagonist."

[Illustration:   LINCOLN'S BOOKCASE AND INKSTAND. ]

Mr. Stuart was either in Congress or actively engaged in canvassing
his district a great part of the time that his partnership with
Lincoln continued, so that the young lawyer was thrown a good deal on
his own resources for occupation. There was not enough business to
fill up all his hours, and he was not at that time a close student, so
that he soon became as famous for his racy talk and good-fellowship at
all the usual lounging-places in Springfield as he had ever been in
New Salem. Mr. Hay says, speaking of the youths who made the County
Clerk's office their place of rendezvous, "It was always a great treat
when Lincoln got amongst us. We were sure to have some of those
stories for which he already had a reputation, and there was this
peculiarity about them, that they were not only entertaining in
themselves, but always singularly illustrative of some point he wanted
to make." After Mr. Hay entered his office, and was busily engaged
with his briefs and declarations, the course of their labors was often
broken by the older man's wise and witty digressions. Once an
interruption occurred which affords an odd illustration of the
character of discussion then prevalent. We will give it in Mr. Hay's
words: "The custom of public political debate, while it was sharp and
acrimonious, also engendered a spirit of equality and fairness. Every
political meeting was a free fight open to every one who had talent
and spirit, no matter to which party the speaker belonged. These
discussions used often to be held in the court-room, just under our
office, and through a trap-door, made there when the building was used
for a store-house, we could hear everything that was said in the hall
below. One night there was a discussion in which E. D. Baker took
part. He was a fiery fellow, and when his impulsiveness was let loose
among the rough element that composed his audience there was a fair
prospect of trouble at any moment. Lincoln was lying on the bed,
apparently paying no attention to what was going on. Lamborn was
talking, and we suddenly heard Baker interrupting him with a sharp
remark, then a rustling and uproar. Lincoln jumped from the bed and
down the trap, lighting on the platform between Baker and the
audience, and quieted the tumult as much by the surprise of his sudden
apparition as by his good-natured and reasonable words."

[Lamon p. 396.]

He was often unfaithful to his Quaker traditions in those days of his
youth. Those who witnessed his wonderful forbearance and self-
restraint in later manhood would find it difficult to believe how
promptly and with what pleasure he used to resort to measures of
repression against a bully or brawler. On the day of election in 1840,
word came to him that one Radford, a Democratic contractor, had taken
possession of one of the polling-places with his workmen, and was
preventing the Whigs from voting. Lincoln started off at a gait which
showed his interest in the matter in hand. He went up to Radford and
persuaded him to leave the polls without a moment's delay. One of his
candid remarks is remembered and recorded: "Radford! you'll spoil and
blow, if you live much longer." Radford's prudence prevented an actual
collision, which, it must be confessed, Lincoln regretted. He told his
friend Speed he wanted Radford to show fight so that he might "knock
him down and leave him kicking."

Early in the year 1840 it seemed possible that the Whigs might elect
General Harrison to the Presidency, and this hope lent added energy to
the party even in the States where the majority was so strongly
against them as in Illinois. Lincoln was nominated for Presidential
Elector and threw himself with ardor into the canvass, traversing a
great part of the State and speaking with remarkable effect. Only one
of the speeches he made during the year has been preserved entire:
this was an address delivered in Springfield as one of a series--a
sort of oratorical tournament participated in by Douglas, Calhoun,
Lamborn, and Thomas on the part of the Democrats, and Logan, Baker,
Browning, and Lincoln on the part of the Whigs. The discussion began
with great enthusiasm and with crowded houses, but by the time it came
to Lincoln's duty to close the debate the fickle public had tired of
the intellectual jousts, and he spoke to a comparatively thin house.
But his speech was considered the best of the series, and there was
such a demand for it that he wrote it out, and it was printed and
circulated in the spring as a campaign document.

[Illustration:   GLOBE TAVERN, SPRINGFIELD, WHERE LINCOLN LIVED AFTER
HIS MARRIAGE.]

It was a remarkable speech in many respects--and in none more than in
this, that it represented the highest expression of what might be
called his "first manner." It was the most important and the last
speech of its class which he ever delivered--not destitute of sound
and close reasoning, yet filled with boisterous fun and florid
rhetoric. It was, in short, a rattling stump speech of the kind then
universally popular in the West, and which is still considered a very
high grade of eloquence in the South. But it is of no kindred with his
inaugural addresses, and resembles the Gettysburg speech no more than
"The Comedy of Errors" resembles "Hamlet." One or two extracts will
give some idea of its humorous satire and its lurid fervor. Attacking
the corruptions and defalcations of the Administration party he said:
"Mr. Lamborn insists that the difference between the Van Buren party
and the Whigs is that, although the former sometimes err in practice
they are always correct in principle, whereas the latter are wrong in
principle; and the better to impress this proposition he uses a
figurative expression in these words, 'The Democrats are vulnerable in
the heel, but they are sound in the heart and head.' The first branch
of the figure--that is, the Democrats are vulnerable in the heel--I
admit is not merely figuratively but literally true. Who that looks
but for a moment at their Swartwouts, their Prices, their Harringtons,
and their hundreds of others scampering away with the public money to
Texas, to Europe, and to every spot of the earth where a villain may
hope to find refuge from justice, can at all doubt that they are most
distressingly affected in their heels with a species of running itch?
It seems that this malady of their heels operates on the sound-headed
and honest-hearted creatures, very much as the cork leg in the comic
song did on its owner, which, when he once got started on it, the more
he tried to stop it the more it would run away. At the hazard of
wearing this point threadbare, I will relate an anecdote which seems
to be too strikingly in point to be omitted. A witty Irish soldier who
was always boasting of his bravery when no danger was near, but who
invariably retreated without orders at the first charge of the
engagement, being asked by his captain why he did so, replied,
'Captain, I have as brave a heart as Julius Caesar ever had, but
somehow or other whenever danger approaches, my cowardly legs will run
away with it.' So with Mr. Lamborn's party--they take the public money
into their hands for the most laudable purpose that wise heads and
honest hearts can dictate; but before they can possibly get it out
again, their rascally vulnerable heels will run away with them."

[Illustration:   WILLIAM HENRY HARRISON.]

The speech concludes with these swelling words: "Mr. Lamborn refers to
the late elections in the States, and from their results confidently
predicts every State in the Union will vote for Mr. Van Buren at the
next Presidential election. Address that argument to cowards and
slaves: with the free and the brave it will affect nothing. It may be
true; if it must, let it. Many free countries have lost their liberty,
and ours may lose hers; but if she shall, be it my proudest plume, not
that I was the last to desert, but that I never deserted her. I know
that the great volcano at Washington, aroused and directed by the evil
spirit that reigns there, is belching forth the lava of political
corruption in a current broad and deep, which is sweeping with
frightful velocity over the whole length and breadth of the land,
bidding fair to leave unscathed no green spot or living thing; while
on its bosom are riding, like demons on the wave of Hell, the imps of
the Evil Spirit, and fiendishly taunting all those who dare to resist
its destroying course with the hopelessness of their efforts; and
knowing this, I cannot deny that all may be swept away. Broken by it
I, too, may be; bow to it, I never will. The probability that we may
fall in the struggle ought not to deter us from the support of a cause
we believe to be just. It shall not deter me. If ever I feel the soul
within me elevate and expand to those dimensions not wholly unworthy
of its almighty architect, it is when I contemplate the cause of my
country, deserted by all the world beside, and I standing up boldly
alone, hurling defiance at her victorious oppressors. Here, without
contemplating consequences, before Heaven, and in face of the world, I
swear eternal fealty to the just cause, as I deem it, of the land of
my life, my liberty, and my love. And who that thinks with me will not
fearlessly adopt that oath that I take? Let none falter who thinks he
is right, and we may succeed. But if after all we should fail, be it
so. We still shall have the proud consolation of saying to our
consciences, and to the departed shade of our country's freedom, that
the cause approved of our judgment, and adored of our hearts, in
disaster, in chains, in torture, in death, we never faltered in
defending."

These perfervid and musical metaphors of devotion and defiance have
often been quoted as Mr. Lincoln's heroic challenge to the slave
power, and Bishop Simpson gave them that lofty significance in his
funeral oration. But they were simply the utterances of a young and
ardent Whig, earnestly advocating the election of "old Tippecanoe" and
not unwilling, while doing this, to show the people of the capital a
specimen of his eloquence. The whole campaign was carried on in a tone
somewhat shrill. The Whigs were recovering from the numbness into
which they had fallen during the time of Jackson's imperious
predominance, and in the new prospect of success they felt all the
excitement of prosperous rebels. The taunts of the party in power,
when Harrison's nomination was first mentioned, their sneers at "hard
cider" and "log-cabins," had been dexterously adopted as the slogan of
the opposition, and gave rise to the distinguishing features of that
extraordinary campaign. Log-cabins were built in every Western county,
tuns of hard cider were filled and emptied at all the Whig mass
meetings; and as the canvass gained momentum and vehemence a curious
kind of music added its inspiration to the cause; and after the Maine
election was over, with its augury of triumph, every Whig who was able
to sing, or even to make a joyful noise, was roaring the inquiry, "Oh,
have you heard how old Maine went?" and the profane but powerfully
accented response, "She went, hell-bent, for Governor Kent, and
Tippecanoe, and Tyler too."

It was one of the busiest and most enjoyable seasons of Lincoln's
life. He had grown by this time thoroughly at home in political
controversy, and he had the pleasure of frequently meeting Mr. Douglas
in rough-and-tumble debate in various towns of the State as they
followed Judge Treat on his circuit. If we may trust the willing
testimony of his old associates, Lincoln had no difficulty in holding
his own against his adroit antagonist, and it was even thought that
the recollection of his ill success in these encounters was not
without its influence in inducing Douglas and his followers, defeated
in the nation, though victorious in the State, to wreak their
vengeance on the Illinois Supreme Court.

[Sidenote: Copied from the MS. in Major Stuart's possession.]

[Sidenote: Noah W. Matheny, County Clerk.]

In Lincoln's letters to Major Stuart, then in Washington, we see how
strongly the subject of politics overshadows all others in his mind.
Under date of November 14, 1839, he wrote: "I have been to the
Secretary's office within the last hour, and find things precisely as
you left them; no new arrivals of returns on either side. Douglas has
not been here since you left. A report is in circulation here now that
he has abandoned, the idea of going to Washington; but the report does
not come in very authentic form so far as I can learn. Though,
speaking of authenticity, you know that if we had heard Douglas say
that he had abandoned the contest, it would not be very authentic.
There is no news here. Noah, I still think, will be elected very
easily. I am afraid of our race for representative. Dr. Knapp has
become a candidate; and I fear the few votes he will get will be taken
from us. Also some one has been tampering with old squire Wyckoff, and
induced him to send in his name to be announced as a candidate.
Francis refused to announce him without seeing him, and now I suppose
there is to be a fuss about it. I have been so busy that I have not
seen Mrs. Stuart since you left, though I understand she wrote you by
to-day's mail, which will inform you more about her than I could. The
very moment a speaker is elected, write me who he is. Your friend, as
ever."

Again he wrote, on New Year's Day, 1840, a letter curiously destitute
of any festal suggestions: "There is a considerable disposition on the
part of both parties in the Legislature to reinstate the law bringing
on the Congressional elections next summer. What motive for this the
Locos have, I cannot tell. The Whigs say that the canal and other
public works will stop, and consequently we shall then be clear of the
foreign votes, whereas by another year they may be brought in again.
The Whigs of our district say that everything is in favor of holding
the election next summer, except the fact of your absence; and several
of them have requested me to ask your opinion on the matter. Write me
immediately what you think of it.

"On the other side of this sheet I send you a copy of my Land
Resolutions, which passed both branches of our Legislature last
winter. Will you show them to Mr. Calhoun, informing him of the fact
of their passage through our Legislature! Mr. Calhoun suggested a
similar proposition last winter; and perhaps if he finds himself
backed by one of the States he may be induced to take it up again."

After the session opened, January 20, he wrote to Mr. Stuart,
accurately outlining the work of the winter: "The following is my
guess as to what will be done. The Internal Improvement System will be
put down in a lump without benefit of clergy. The Bank will be
resuscitated with some trifling modifications."

State affairs have evidently lost their interest, however, and his
soul is in arms for the wider fray. "Be sure to send me as many copies
of the Life of Harrison as you can spare. Be very sure to send me the
Senate Journal of New York for September, 1814,"--he had seen in a
newspaper a charge of disloyalty made against Mr. Van Buren during the
war with Great Britain, but, as usual, wanted to be sure of his
facts,--"and in general," he adds, "send me everything you think will
be a good war-club, The nomination of Harrison takes first-rate. You
know I am never sanguine; but I believe we will carry the State. The
chance for doing so appears to me twenty-five per cent, better than it
did for you to beat Douglas. A great many of the grocery sort of Van
Buren men are out for Harrison. Our Irish blacksmith Gregory is for
Harrison.... You have heard that the Whigs and Locos had a political
discussion shortly after the meeting of the Legislature. Well, I made
a big speech which is in progress of printing in pamphlet form. To
enlighten you and the rest of the world, I shall send you a copy when
it is finished." The "big speech" was the one from which we have just
quoted.

The sanguine mood continued in his next letter, March 1: "I have never
seen the prospects of our party so bright in these parts as they are
now. We shall carry this county by a larger majority than we did in
1836 when you ran against May. I do not think my prospects
individually are very flattering, for I think it probable I shall not
be permitted to be a candidate; but the party ticket will succeed
triumphantly. Subscriptions to the 'Old Soldier' pour in without
abatement. This morning I took from the post-office a letter from
Dubois, inclosing the names of sixty subscribers, and on carrying it
to Francis [Simeon Francis, editor of the 'Sangamo Journal'] I found
he had received one hundred and forty more from other quarters by the
same day's mail.... Yesterday Douglas, having chosen to consider
himself insulted by something in the 'Journal,' undertook to cane
Francis in the street. Francis caught him by the hair and jammed him
back against a market-cart, where the matter ended by Francis being
pulled away from him. The whole affair was so ludicrous that Francis
and everybody else, Douglas excepted, have been laughing about it ever
since."

Douglas seems to have had a great propensity to such rencontres, of
which the issue was ordinarily his complete discomfiture, as he had
the untoward habit of attacking much bigger and stronger men than
himself. He weighed at that time little, if anything, over a hundred
pounds, yet his heart was so valiant that he made nothing of
assaulting men of ponderous flesh like Francis, or of great height and
strength like Stuart. He sought a quarrel with the latter, during
their canvass in 1838, in a grocery, with the usual result. A
bystander who remembers the incident says that Stuart "jest mopped the
floor with him." In the same letter Mr. Lincoln gives a long list of
names to which he wants documents to be sent. It shows a remarkable
personal acquaintance with the minutest needs of the canvass: this one
is a doubtful Whig; that one is an inquiring Democrat; that other a
zealous young fellow who would be pleased by the attention; three
brothers are mentioned who "fell out with us about Early and are
doubtful now"; and finally he tells Stuart that Joe Smith is an
admirer of his, and that a few documents had better be mailed to the
Mormons; and he must be sure, the next time he writes, to send Evan
Butler his compliments.

It would be strange, indeed, if such a politician as this were
slighted by his constituents, and in his next letter we find how
groundless were his forebodings in that direction. The convention had
been held; the rural delegates took all the nominations away from
Springfield except two, Baker for the Senate, and Lincoln for the
House of Representatives. "Ninian," he says, meaning Ninian W.
Edwards, "was very much hurt at not being nominated, but he has become
tolerably well reconciled. I was much, very much, wounded myself, at
his being left out. The fact is, the country delegates made the
nominations as they pleased, and they _pleased_ to make them all
from the country, except Baker and me, whom they supposed necessary to
make stump speeches. Old Colonel Elkin is nominated for Sheriff--
that's right."

Harrison was elected in November, and the great preoccupation of most
of the Whigs was, of course, the distribution of the offices which
they felt belonged to them as the spoils of battle. This demoralizing
doctrine had been promulgated by Jackson, and acted upon for so many
years that it was too much to expect of human nature that the Whigs
should not adopt it, partially at least, when their turn came, But we
are left in no doubt as to the way in which Lincoln regarded the
unseemly scramble. It is probable that he was asked to express his
preference among applicants, and he wrote under date of December 17:
"This affair of appointments to office is very annoying--more so to
you than to me doubtless. I am, as you know, opposed to removals to
make places for our friends. Bearing this in mind, I express my
preference in a few cases, as follows: for Marshal, first, John
Dawson, second, B. F. Edwards; for postmaster here, Dr. Henry; at
Carlinville, Joseph C. Howell."

The mention of this last post-office rouses his righteous indignation,
and he calls for justice upon a wrong-doer. "There is no question of
the propriety of removing the postmaster at Carlinville, I have been
told by so many different persons as to preclude all doubt of its
truth, that he boldly refused to deliver from his office during the
canvass all documents franked by Whig members of Congress."

Once more, on the 23d of January, 1841, he addresses a letter to Mr.
Stuart, which closes the correspondence, and which affords a glimpse
of that strange condition of melancholia into whose dark shadow he was
then entering, and which lasted, with only occasional intervals of
healthy cheerfulness, to the time of his marriage. We give this
remarkable letter entire, from the manuscript submitted to us by the
late John T. Stuart:

DEAR STUART: Yours of the 3d instant is received, and I proceed to
answer it as well as I can, though from the deplorable state of my
mind at this time I fear I shall give you but little satisfaction.
About the matter of the Congressional election, I can only tell you
that there is a bill now before the Senate adopting the general ticket
system; but whether the party have fully determined on its adoption is
yet uncertain. There is no sign of opposition to you among our
friends, and none that I can learn among our enemies; though of course
there will be if the general ticket be adopted. The Chicago
"American," Peoria "Register," and Sangamo "Journal" have already
hoisted your flag upon their own responsibility; and the other Whig
papers of the district are expected to follow immediately. On last
evening there was a meeting of our friends at Butler's, and I
submitted the question to them and found them unanimously in favor of
having you announced as a candidate. A few of us this morning,
however, concluded that as you were already being announced in the
papers we would delay announcing you, as by your authority, for a week
or two. We thought that to appear too keen about it might spur our
opponents on about their general ticket project. Upon the whole I
think I may say with certainty that your reelection is sure, if it be
in the power of the Whigs to make it so.

For not giving you a general summary of news, you _must_ pardon
me; it is not in my power to do so. I am now the most miserable man
living. If what I feel were equally distributed to the whole human
family, there would not be one cheerful face on earth. Whether I shall
ever be better I cannot tell; I awfully forebode I shall not. To
remain as I am is impossible; I must die or be better, it appears to
me. The matter you speak of on my account you may attend to as you
say, unless you shall hear of my condition forbidding it. I say this
because I fear I shall be unable to attend to any business here, and a
change of scene might help me. If I could be myself, I would rather
remain at home with Judge Logan. I can write no more. Your friend as
ever.

A. LINCOLN.




CHAPTER XI

MARRIAGE


The foregoing letter brings us to the consideration of a remarkable
passage in Lincoln's life. It has been the cause of much profane and
idle discussion among those who were constitutionally incapacitated
from appreciating ideal sufferings, and we would be tempted to refrain
from adding a word to what has already been said if it were possible
to omit all reference to an experience so important in the development
of his character.

In the year 1840 he became engaged to be married to Miss Mary Todd, of
Lexington, Kentucky, a young lady of good education and excellent
connections, who was visiting her sister, Mrs. Ninian W. Edwards, at
Springfield. [Transcriber's Note: Lengthy footnote relocated to
chapter end.] The engagement was not in all respects a happy one, as
both parties doubted their compatibility, and a heart so affectionate
and a conscience so sensitive as Lincoln's found material for
exquisite self-torment in these conditions. His affection for his
betrothed, which he thought was not strong enough to make happiness
with her secure; his doubts, which yet were not convincing enough to
induce him to break off all relations with her; his sense of honor,
which was wounded in his own eyes by his own act; his sense of duty,
which condemned him in one course and did not sustain him in the
opposite one--all combined to make him profoundly and passionately
miserable. To his friends and acquaintances, who were unused to such
finely wrought and even fantastic sorrows, his trouble seemed so
exaggerated that they could only account for it on the ground of
insanity. But there is no necessity of accepting this crude
hypothesis; the coolest and most judicious of his friends deny that
his depression ever went to such an extremity. Orville H. Browning,
who was constantly in his company, says that his worst attack lasted
only about a week; that during this time he was incoherent and
distraught; but that in the course of a few days it all passed off,
leaving no trace whatever. "I think," says Mr. Browning, "it was only
an intensification of his constitutional melancholy; his trials and
embarrassments pressed him down to a lower point than usual."

[Illustration:   FAC-SIMILE OF THE MARRIAGE CERTIFICATE OF ABRAHAM
LINCOLN. From the original in the Keyes Lincoln Memorial Collection,
Chicago.]

[Sidenote: "Western Characters," p. 134.]

This taint of constitutional sadness was not peculiar to Lincoln; it
may be said to have been endemic among the early settlers of the West.
It had its origin partly in the circumstances of their lives, the
severe and dismal loneliness in which their struggle for existence for
the most part went on. Their summers were passed in the solitude of
the woods; in the winter they were often snowed up for months in the
more desolate isolation of their own poor cabins. Their subjects of
conversation were limited, their range of thoughts and ideas narrow
and barren. There was as little cheerfulness in their manners as there
was incentive to it in their lives. They occasionally burst out into
wild frolic, which easily assumed the form of comic outrage, but of
the sustained cheerfulness of social civilized life they knew very
little. One of the few pioneers who have written their observations of
their own people, John L. McConnell, says, "They are at the best not a
cheerful race; though they sometimes join in festivities, it is but
seldom, and the wildness of their dissipation is too often in
proportion to its infrequency. There is none of that serene
contentment which distinguishes the tillers of the ground in other
lands.... Acquainted with the character [of the pioneer], you do not
expect him to smile much, but now and then he laughs."

Besides this generic tendency to melancholy, very many of the pioneers
were subject in early life to malarial influences, the effect of which
remained with them all their days. Hewing out their plantations in the
primeval woods amid the undisturbed shadow of centuries, breaking a
soil thick with ages of vegetable decomposition, sleeping in half-
faced camps, where the heavy air of the rank woods was in their lungs
all night, or in the fouler atmosphere of overcrowded cabins, they
were especially subject to miasmatic fevers. Many died, and of those
who survived, a great number, after they had outgrown the more
immediate manifestations of disease, retained in nervous disorders of
all kinds the distressing traces of the maladies which afflicted their
childhood. In the early life of Lincoln these unwholesome physical
conditions were especially prevalent. The country about Pigeon Creek
was literally devastated by the terrible malady called "milk-
sickness," which carried away his mother and half her family. His
father left his home in Macon County, also, on account of the
frequency and severity of the attacks of fever and ague which were
suffered there; and, in general, Abraham was exposed through all the
earlier part of his life to those malarial influences which made,
during the first half of this century, the various preparations of
Peruvian bark a part of the daily food of the people of Indiana and
Illinois. In many instances this miasmatic poison did not destroy the
strength or materially shorten the lives of those who absorbed it in
their youth; but the effects remained in periodical attacks of gloom
and depression of spirits which would seem incomprehensible to
thoroughly healthy organizations, and which gradually lessened in
middle life, often to disappear entirely in old age.

[Sidenote: "Western Characters" p. 126.]

Upon a temperament thus predisposed to look at things in their darker
aspect, it might naturally be expected that a love-affair which was
not perfectly happy would be productive of great misery. But Lincoln
seemed especially chosen to the keenest suffering in such a
conjuncture. The pioneer, as a rule, was comparatively free from any
troubles of the imagination. To quote Mr. McConnell again: "There was
no romance in his [the pioneer's] composition. He had no dreaminess;
meditation was no part of his mental habit; a poetical fancy would, in
him, have been an indication of insanity. If he reclined at the foot
of a tree, on a still summer day, it was to sleep; if he gazed out
over the waving prairie, it was to search for the column of smoke
which told of his enemies' approach; if he turned his eyes towards the
blue heaven, it was to prognosticate tomorrow's rain or sunshine. If
he bent his gaze towards the green earth, it was to look for 'Indian
sign' or buffalo trail. His wife was only a helpmate; he never thought
of making a divinity of her." But Lincoln could never have claimed
this happy immunity from ideal trials. His published speeches show how
much the poet in him was constantly kept in check; and at this time of
his life his imagination was sufficiently alert to inflict upon him
the sharpest anguish. His reverence for women was so deep and tender
that he thought an injury to one of them was a sin too heinous to be
expiated. No Hamlet, dreaming amid the turrets of Elsinore, no Sidney
creating a chivalrous Arcadia, was fuller of mystic and shadowy
fancies of the worth and dignity of woman than this backwoods
politician. Few men ever lived more sensitively and delicately tender
towards the sex.

Besides his step-mother, who was a plain, God-fearing woman, he had
not known many others until he came to live in New Salem. There he had
made the acquaintance of the best people the settlement contained, and
among them had become much attached to a young girl named Ann
Rutledge, the daughter of one of the proprietors of the place. She
died in her girlhood, and though there does not seem to have been any
engagement between them, he was profoundly affected by her death. But
the next year a young woman from Kentucky appeared in the village, to
whom he paid such attentions as in his opinion fully committed him as
a suitor for her hand. He admired her, and she seems to have merited
the admiration of all the manhood there was in New Salem. She was
handsome and intelligent and of an admirable temper and disposition.
While they were together he was constant in his attentions, and when
he was at Vandalia or at Springfield he continued his assiduities in
some of the most singular love-letters ever written. They are filled
mostly with remarks about current politics, and with arguments going
to show that she had better not marry him! At the same time he clearly
intimates that he is at her disposition if she is so inclined. At
last, feeling that his honor and duty were involved, he made a direct
proposal to her, and received an equally direct, kind, and courteous
refusal. Not knowing but that this indicated merely a magnanimous
desire to give him a chance for escape, he persisted in his offer, and
she in her refusal. When the matter had ended in this perfectly
satisfactory manner to both of them, he sat down and wrote, by way of
epilogue to the play, a grotesquely comic account of the whole affair
to Mrs. O. H. Browning, one of his intimate Vandalia acquaintances.

[Illustration:   JOSHUA SPEED AND WIFE.]

This letter has been published and severely criticised as showing a
lack of gentlemanlike feeling. But those who take this view forget
that he was writing to an intimate friend of a matter which had
greatly occupied his own mind for a year; that he mentioned no names,
and that he threw such an air of humorous unreality about the whole
story that the person who received it never dreamed that it recorded
an actual occurrence until twenty-five years afterwards, when, having
been asked to furnish it to a biographer, she was warned against doing
so by the President himself, who said there was too much truth in it
for print. The only significance the episode possesses is in showing
this almost abnormal development of conscience in the young man who
was perfectly ready to enter into a marriage which he dreaded simply
because he thought he had given a young woman reason to think that he
had such intentions. While we admit that this would have been an
irremediable error, we cannot but wonder at the nobleness of the
character to which it was possible.

In this vastly more serious matter, which was, we may say at once, the
crucial ordeal of his life, the same invincible truthfulness, the same
innate goodness, the same horror of doing a wrong, are combined with
an exquisite sensibility and a capacity for suffering which mark him
as a man "picked out among ten thousand." His habit of relentless
self-searching reveals to him a state of feeling which strikes him
with dismay; his simple and inflexible veracity communicates his
trouble and his misery to the woman whom he loves; his freedom, when
he has gained it, yields him nothing but an agony of remorse and
humiliation. He could not shake off his pain, like men of cooler heads
and shallower hearts. It took fast hold of him and dragged him into
awful depths of darkness and torture. The letter to Stuart, which we
have given, shows him emerging from the blackest period of that time
of gloom. Immediately after this, he accompanied his close friend and
confidant, Joshua F. Speed, to Kentucky, where, in a way so singular
that no writer of fiction would dare to employ the incident, he became
almost cured of his melancholy, and came back to Illinois and his work
again.

Mr. Speed was a Kentuckian, carrying on a general mercantile business
in Springfield--a brother of the distinguished lawyer, James Speed, of
Louisville, who afterwards became Attorney-General of the United
States. He was one of those men who seem to have to a greater extent
than others the genius of friendship, the Pythias, the Pylades, the
Horatios of the world. It is hardly too much to say that he was the
only--as he was certainly the last--intimate friend that Lincoln ever
had. He was his closest companion in Springfield, and in the evil days
when the letter to Stuart was written he took him with brotherly love
and authority under his special care. He closed up his affairs in
Springfield, and went with Lincoln to Kentucky, and, introducing him
to his own cordial and hospitable family circle, strove to soothe his
perturbed spirit by every means which unaffected friendliness could
suggest. That Lincoln found much comfort and edification in that
genial companionship is shown by the fact that after he became
President he sent to Mr. Speed's mother a photograph of himself,
inscribed, "For Mrs. Lucy G. Speed, from whose pious hand I accepted
the present of an Oxford Bible twenty years ago."

But the principal means by which the current of his thoughts was
changed was never dreamed of by himself or by his friend when they
left Illinois. During this visit Speed himself fell in love, and
became engaged to be married; and either by a singular chance or
because the maladies of the soul may be propagated by constant
association, the feeling of despairing melancholy, which he had found
so morbid and so distressing an affliction in another, took possession
of himself, and threw him into the same slough of despondency from
which he had been laboring to rescue Lincoln. Between friends so
intimate there were no concealments, and from the moment Lincoln found
his services as nurse and consoler needed, the violence of his own
trouble seemed to diminish. The two young men were in Springfield
together in the autumn, and Lincoln seems by that time to have laid
aside his own peculiar besetments, in order to minister to his friend.
They knew the inmost thoughts of each other's hearts and each relied
upon the honesty and loyalty of the other to an extent rare among men.
When Speed returned to Kentucky, to a happiness which awaited him
there, so bright that it dazzled and blinded his moral vision, Lincoln
continued his counsels and encouragements in letters which are
remarkable for their tenderness and delicacy of thought and
expression. Like another poet, he looked into his own heart and wrote.
His own deeper nature had suffered from these same fantastic sorrows
and terrors; of his own grief he made a medicine for his comrade.

While Speed was still with him, he wrote a long letter, which he put
into his hands at parting, full of wise and affectionate reasonings,
to be read when he should feel the need of it. He predicts for him a
period of nervous depression--first, because he will be "exposed to
bad weather on his journey, and, secondly, because of the absence of
all business and conversation of friends which might divert his mind
and give it occasional rest from the intensity of thought which will
sometimes wear the sweetest idea threadbare, and turn it to the
bitterness of death." The third cause, he says, "is the rapid and near
approach of that crisis on which all your thoughts and feelings
concentrate." If in spite of all these circumstances he should escape
without a "twinge of the soul," his friend will be most happily
deceived; but, he continues, "if you shall, as I expect you will at
some time, be agonized and distressed, let me, who have some reason to
speak with judgment on the subject, beseech you to ascribe it to the
causes I have mentioned, and not to some false and ruinous suggestion
of the devil." This forms the prelude to an ingenious and affectionate
argument in which he labors to convince Speed of the loveliness of his
betrothed and of the integrity of his own heart; a strange task, one
would say, to undertake in behalf of a young and ardent lover. But the
two men understood each other, and the service thus rendered was
gratefully received and remembered by Speed all his life.

Lincoln wrote again on the 3d of February, 1842, congratulating Speed
upon a recent severe illness of his destined bride, for the reason
that "your present distress and anxiety about her health must forever
banish those horrid doubts which you feel as to the truth of your
affection for her." As the period of Speed's marriage drew near,
Lincoln's letters betray the most intense anxiety. He cannot wait to
hear the news from his friend, but writes to him about the time of the
wedding, admitting that he is writing in the dark, that words from a
bachelor may be worthless to a Benedick, but still unable to keep
silence. He hopes he is happy with his wife, "but should I be mistaken
in this, should excessive pleasure still be accompanied with a painful
counterpart at times, still let me urge you, as I have ever done, to
remember in the depth and even agony of despondency, that very shortly
you are to feel well again." Further on he says: "If you went through
the ceremony calmly, or even with sufficient composure not to excite
alarm in any present, you are safe beyond question," seeking by every
device of subtle affection to lift up the heart of his friend.

With a solicitude apparently greater than that of the nervous
bridegroom, he awaited the announcement of the marriage, and when it
came he wrote (February 25): "I opened the letter with intense anxiety
and trepidation; so much that, although it turned out better than I
expected, I have hardly yet, at the distance of ten hours, become calm.
I tell you, Speed, our forebodings, for which you and I are peculiar,
are all the worst sort of nonsense. I fancied from the time I received
your letter of Saturday that the one of "Wednesday was never to come,"
and yet it did come, and, what is more, it is perfectly clear, both
from its tone and handwriting, that ... you had obviously improved at
the very time I had so much fancied you would have grown worse. You say
that something indescribably horrible and alarming still haunts you.
You will not say that three months from now, I will venture." The
letter goes on in the same train of sympathetic cheer, but there is one
phrase which strikes the keynote of all lives whose ideals are too high
for fulfillment: "It is the peculiar misfortune of both you and me to
dream dreams of Elysium far exceeding all that anything earthly can
realize."

But before long a letter came from Speed, who had settled with his
black-eyed Kentucky wife upon a well-stocked plantation, disclaiming
any further fellowship of misery and announcing the beginnings of that
life of uneventful happiness which he led ever after. His peace of
mind has become a matter of course; he dismisses the subject in a
line, but dilates, with a new planter's rapture, upon the beauties and
attractions of his farm. Lincoln frankly answers that he cares nothing
about his farm. "I can only say that I am glad _you_ are satisfied
and pleased with it. But on that other subject, to me of the most
intense interest whether in joy or sorrow, I never had the power to
withhold my sympathy from you. It cannot be told how it now thrills me
with joy to hear you say you are 'far happier than you ever expected to
be.'.. I am not going beyond the truth when I tell you that the short
space it took me to read your last letter gave me more pleasure than
the total sum of all I have enjoyed since the fatal 1st of January,
1841. Since then it seems to me I should have been entirely happy, but
for the never-absent idea that there is _one_ still unhappy whom I
have contributed to make so. That still kills my soul. I cannot but
reproach myself for even wishing myself to be happy while she is
otherwise."

During the summer of 1842 the letters of the friends still discuss,
with waning intensity, however, their respective affairs of the heart.
Speed, in the ease and happiness of his home, thanks Lincoln for his
important part in his welfare, and gives him sage counsel for himself.
Lincoln replies (July 4, 1842): "I could not have done less than I
did. I always was superstitious; I believe God made me one of the
instruments of bringing your Fanny and you together, which union I
have no doubt he foreordained. Whatever he designs, he will do for me
yet." A better name than "superstition" might properly be applied to
this frame of mind. He acknowledges Speed's kindly advice, but says:
"Before I resolve to do the one thing or the other, I must gain my
confidence in my own ability to keep my resolves when they are made.
In that ability you know I once prided myself, as the only or chief
gem of my character; that gem I lost, how and where you know too well.
I have not yet regained it; and until I do I cannot trust myself in
any matter of much importance. I believe now, that had you understood
my case at the time as well as I understood yours afterwards, by the
aid you would have given me I should have sailed through clear; but
that does not afford me confidence to begin that, or the like of that,
again." Still, he was nearing the end of his doubts and self-torturing
sophistry. A last glimpse of his imperious curiosity, kept alive by
saucy hopes and fears, is seen in his letter to Speed of the 5th of
October. He ventures, with a genuine timidity, to ask a question which
we may believe has not often been asked by one civilized man of
another, with the hope of a candid answer, since marriages were
celebrated with ring and book. "I want to ask you a close question--
Are you now, in _feeling_ as well as _judgment,_ glad you are
married as you are? From anybody but me this would be an impudent
question, not to be tolerated; but I know you will pardon it in me.
Please answer it quickly, as I am impatient to know." It is probable
that Mr. Speed replied promptly in the way in which such questions
must almost of necessity be answered. On the 4th of November, 1842, a
marriage license was issued to Lincoln, and on the same day he was
married to Miss Mary Todd, the ceremony being performed by the Rev.
Charles Dresser. Four sons were the issue of this marriage: Robert
Todd, born August 1, 1843; Edward Baker, March 10, 1846; William
Wallace, December 21, 1850; Thomas, April 4, 1853. Of these only the
eldest lived to maturity.

In this way Abraham Lincoln met and passed through one of the most
important crises of his life. There was so much of idiosyncrasy in it
that it has been, and will continue to be for years to come, the
occasion of endless gossip in Sangamon County and elsewhere. Because
it was not precisely like the experience of other people, who are
married and given in marriage every day without any ado, a dozen
conflicting stories have grown up, more or less false and injurious to
both contracting parties. But it may not be fanciful to suppose that
characters like that of Lincoln, elected for great conflicts and
trials, are fashioned by different processes from those of ordinary
men, and pass their stated ordeals in a different way. By
circumstances which seem commonplace enough to commonplace people, he
was thrown for more than a year into a sea of perplexities and
sufferings beyond the reach of the common run of souls.

It is as useless as it would be indelicate to seek to penetrate in
detail the incidents and special causes which produced in his mind
this darkness as of the valley of the shadow of death. There was
probably nothing worth recording in them; we are only concerned with
their effect upon a character which was to be hereafter for all time
one of the possessions of the nation. It is enough for us to know that
a great trouble came upon him, and that he bore it nobly after his
kind. That the manner in which he confronted this crisis was strangely
different from that of most men in similar circumstances need surely
occasion no surprise. Neither in this nor in other matters was he
shaped in the average mold of his contemporaries. In many respects he
was doomed to a certain loneliness of excellence. There are few men
that have had his stern and tyrannous sense of duty, his womanly
tenderness of heart, his wakeful and inflexible conscience, which was
so easy towards others and so merciless towards himself. Therefore
when the time came for all of these qualities at once to be put to the
most strenuous proof, the whole course of his development and the
tendency of his nature made it inevitable that his suffering should be
of the keenest and his final triumph over himself should be of the
most complete and signal character. In that struggle his youth of
reveries and day-dreams passed away. Such furnace-blasts of proof,
such pangs of transformation, seem necessary for exceptional natures.
The bread eaten in tears, of which Goethe speaks, the sleepless nights
of sorrow, are required for a clear vision of the celestial powers.
Fortunately the same qualities that occasion the conflict insure the
victory also. From days of gloom and depression, such as we have been
considering, no doubt came precious results in the way of sympathy,
self-restraint, and that sober reliance on the final triumph of good
over evil peculiar to those who have been greatly tried but not
destroyed. The late but splendid maturity of Lincoln's mind and
character dates from this time, and, although he grew in strength and
knowledge to the end, from this year we observe a steadiness and
sobriety of thought and purpose, as discernible in his life as in his
style. He was like a blade forged in fire and tempered in the ice-
brook, ready for battle whenever the battle might come.

[Relocated Footnote: Mrs. Lincoln was the daughter of the Hon. Robert
S. Todd of Kentucky. Her great-uncle John Todd, and her grandfather
Levi Todd, accompanied General George Rogers Clark to Illinois, and
were present at the capture of Kaskaskia and Vincennes. In December,
1778, John Todd was appointed by Patrick Henry, Governor of Virginia,
to be lieutenant of the county of Illinois, then a part of Virginia.
He was killed at the battle of the Blue Licks, in 1782. His brother
Levi was also at that battle and was one of the few survivors of it.

Colonel John Todd was one of the original proprietors of the town of
Lexington, Ky. While encamped on the site of the present city, he
heard of the opening battle of the Revolution and named his infant
settlement in its honor.--Arnold's "Life of Lincoln," p. 68.]




CHAPTER XII

THE SHIELDS DUEL


An incident which occurred during the summer preceding Mr. Lincoln's
marriage, and which in the opinion of many had its influence in
hastening that event, deserves some attention, if only from its
incongruity with the rest of his history. This was the farce--which
aspired at one time to be a tragedy--of his first and last duel. Among
the officers of the State Government was a young Irishman named James
Shields, who owed his post as Auditor, in great measure, to that alien
vote to gain which the Democrats had overturned the Supreme Court. The
finances of the State were in a deplorable condition: the treasury was
empty; auditor's warrants were selling at half their nominal value; no
more money was to be borrowed, and taxation was dreaded by both
political parties more than disgrace. The currency of the State banks
was well-nigh worthless, but it constituted nearly the only
circulating medium in the State.

In the middle of August the Governor, Auditor, and Treasurer issued a
circular forbidding the payment of State taxes in this depreciated
paper. This order was naturally taken by the Whigs as indicating on
the part of these officers a keener interest in the integrity of their
salaries than in the public welfare, and it was therefore severely
attacked in all the opposition newspapers of the State.

The sharpest assault it had to endure, however, was in a
communication, dated August 27, and printed in the "Sangamo Journal"
of September 2, not only dissecting the administration circular with
the most savage satire, but covering the Auditor with merciless
personal ridicule. It was written in the dialect of the country, dated
from the "Lost Townships," and signed "Rebecca," and purported to come
from a farmer widow of the county, who expressed in this fashion her
discontent with the evil course of affairs.

Shields was a man of inordinate vanity and a corresponding
irascibility. He was for that reason an irresistible mark for satire.
Through a long life of somewhat conspicuous public service, he never
lost a certain tone of absurdity which can only be accounted for by
the qualities we have mentioned. Even his honorable wounds in battle,
while they were productive of great public applause and political
success, gained him scarcely less ridicule than praise. He never could
refrain from talking of them himself, having none of Coriolanus's
repugnance in that respect, and for that reason was a constant target
for newspaper wits.

After Shields returned from the Mexican war, with his laurels still
green, and at the close of the canvass which had made him Senator, he
wrote an incredible letter to Judge Breese, his principal competitor,
in which he committed the gratuitous folly of informing him that "he
had sworn in his heart [if Breese had been elected] that he should
never have profited by his success; and depend upon it," he added, in
the amazing impudence of triumph, "I would have kept that vow,
regardless of consequences. That, however, is now past, and the vow is
canceled by your defeat." He then went on, with threats equally
indecent, to make certain demands which were altogether inadmissible,
and which Judge Breese only noticed by sending this preposterous
letter to the press.

[Sidenote: "National Intelligencer," Feb. 28, 1849.]

It may easily be imagined that a man who, after being elected a
Senator of the United States, was capable of the insane insolence of
signing his name to a letter informing his defeated competitor that he
would have killed him if the result had been different, would not have
been likely, when seven years younger, to bear newspaper ridicule with
equanimity. His fury against the unknown author of the satire was the
subject of much merriment in Springfield, and the next week another
letter appeared, from a different hand, but adopting the machinery of
the first, in which the widow offered to make up the quarrel by
marrying the Auditor, and this, in time, was followed by an
epithalamium, in which this happy compromise was celebrated in very
bad verses. In the change of hands all the humor of the thing had
evaporated, and nothing was left but feminine mischief on one side and
the exasperation of wounded vanity on the other.

Shields, however, had talked so much about the matter that he now felt
imperatively called upon to act, and he therefore sent General
Whitesides to demand from the "Journal" the name of its contributor.
Mr. Francis, the editor, was in a quandary. Lincoln had written the
first letter, and the antic fury of Shields had induced two young
ladies who took a lively interest in Illinois politics--and with good
reason, for one was to be the wife of a Senator and the other of a
President--to follow up the game with attacks in prose and verse
which, however deficient in wit and meter, were not wanting in
pungency. In his dilemma he applied to Lincoln, who, as he was
starting to attend court at Tremont, told him to give his name and
withhold the names of the ladies. As soon as Whitesides received this
information, he and his fiery principal set out for Tremont, and as
Shields did nothing in silence, the news came to Lincoln's friends,
two of whom, William Butler and Dr. Merryman, one of those combative
medical men who have almost disappeared from American society, went
off in a buggy in pursuit. They soon came in sight of the others, but
loitered in the rear until evening, and then drove rapidly to Tremont,
arriving there some time in advance of Shields; so that in the ensuing
negotiations Abraham Lincoln had the assistance of friends whose
fidelity and whose nerve were equally beyond question.

It would be useless to recount all the tedious preliminaries of the
affair. Shields opened the correspondence, as might have been
expected, with blustering and with threats; his nature had no other
way of expressing itself. His first letter was taken as a bar to any
explanation or understanding, and he afterwards wrote a second, a
little less offensive in tone, but without withdrawing the first. At
every interview of the seconds General Whitesides deplored the
bloodthirsty disposition of his principal, and urged that Mr. Lincoln
should make the concessions which alone would prevent lamentable
results. These representations seemed to avail nothing, however, and
the parties, after endless talk, went to Alton and crossed the river
to the Missouri shore. It seemed for a moment that the fight must take
place. The terms had been left by the code, as then understood in the
West, to Lincoln, and he certainly made no grudging use of his
privilege. The weapons chosen were "cavalry broadswords of the largest
size"; and the combatants were to stand on either side of a board
placed on the ground, each to fight in a limit of six feet on his own
side of the board. It was evident that Lincoln did not desire the
death of his adversary, and did not intend to be materially injured
himself. The advantage morally was altogether against him. He felt
intensely the stupidity of the whole affair, but thought he could not
avoid the fight without degradation; while to Shields such a fracas
was a delight. The duel came to its natural end by the intervention of
the usual "gods out of a machine," the gods being John J. Hardin and
one Dr. English, and the machine a canoe in which they had hastily
paddled across the Mississippi. Shields suffered himself to be
persuaded to withdraw his offensive challenge. Lincoln then made the
explanation he had been ready to make from the beginning; avowing the
one letter he had written, and saying that it had been printed solely
for political effect, and without any intention of injuring Shields
personally.

One would think that, after a week passed in such unprofitable
trifling, the parties, principal and secondary, would have been
willing to drop the matter forever. We are sure that Lincoln would
have been glad to banish it, even from his memory; but to men like
Shields and Whitesides, the peculiar relish and enjoyment of such an
affair is its publicity. On the 3d of October, therefore, eleven days
after the meeting, as public attention seemed to be flagging,
Whitesides wrote an account of it to the "Sangamo Journal," for which
he did not forget to say, "I hold myself responsible!" Of course he
seized the occasion to paint a heroic portrait of himself and his
principal. It was an excellent story until the next week, when Dr.
Merryman, who seems to have wielded a pen like a scalpel, gave a much
fuller history of the matter, which he substantiated by printing all
the documents, and, not content with that, gave little details of the
negotiations which show, either that Whitesides was one of the most
grotesque braggarts of the time, or that Merryman was an admirable
writer of comic fiction. Among the most amusing facts he brought
forward was that Whitesides, being a Fund Commissioner of the State,
ran the risk of losing his office by engaging in a duel; and his
anxiety to appear reckless and dangerous, and yet keep within the
statute and save his salary, was depicted by Merryman with a droll
fidelity. He concluded by charging Whitesides plainly with
"inefficiency and want of knowledge of those laws which govern
gentlemen in matters of this kind," and with "trying to wipe out his
fault by doing an act of injustice to Mr. Lincoln."

[Illustration:   HOUSE IN WHICH ABRAHAM LINCOLN WAS MARRIED, THEN OWNED
BY NINIAN W. EDWARDS, NOW OCCUPIED AS ST. AGATHA'S SCHOOL.]

The town was greatly diverted by these pungent echoes of the bloodless
fight, and Shields and Whitesides felt that their honor was still out
of repair. A rapid series of challenges succeeded among the parties,
principals and seconds changing places as deftly as dancers in a
quadrille. The Auditor challenged Mr. Butler, who had been very
outspoken in his contemptuous comments on the affair. Butler at once
accepted, and with a grim sincerity announced his conditions--"to
fight next morning at sunrising in Bob Allen's meadow, one hundred
yards' distance, with rifles." This was instantly declined, with a
sort of horror, by Shields and Whitesides, as such a proceeding would
have proved fatal to their official positions and their means of
livelihood. They probably cared less for the chances of harm from
Butler's Kentucky rifle than for the certainty of the Illinois law
which cut off all duelists from holding office in the State.

But, on the other hand,--so unreasonable is human nature as displayed
among politicians,--General Whitesides felt that if he bore patiently
the winged words of Merryman, his availability as a candidate was
greatly damaged; and he therefore sent to the witty doctor what Mr.
Lincoln called "a quasi-challenge," hurling at him a modified
defiance, which should be enough to lure him to the field of honor,
and yet not sufficiently explicit to lose Whitesides the dignity and
perquisites of Fund Commissioner. Merryman, not being an office-holder
and having no salary to risk, responded with brutal directness, which
was highly unsatisfactory to Whitesides, who was determined not to
fight unless he could do so lawfully; and Lincoln, who now acted as
second to the doctor in his turn, records the cessation of the
correspondence amid the agonized explanations of Whitesides and the
scornful hootings of Merryman, "while the town was in a ferment and a
street fight somewhat anticipated." In respect to the last diversion
the town was disappointed.

Shields lost nothing by the hilarity which this burlesque incident
created. He was reserved for a career of singular luck and glory
mingled with signal misfortunes. On account of his political
availability he continued throughout a long lifetime to be selected at
intervals for high positions. After he ceased to be Auditor he was
elected a judge of the Supreme Court of Illinois; while still holding
that position he applied for the place of Commissioner of the General
Land Office, and his application was successful. When the Mexican war
broke out he asked for a commission as brigadier-general, although he
still held his civil appointment, and, to the amazement of the whole
army, he was given that important command before he had ever seen a
day's service. At the battle of Cerro Glordo he was shot through the
lungs, and this wound made him a United States Senator as soon as he
returned from the war. After he had served one term in the Senate, he
removed from Illinois, and was soon sent back to the same body from
Minnesota. In the war of the rebellion he was again appointed a
brigadier-general by his old adversary, and was again wounded in a
battle in which his troops defeated the redoubtable Stonewall Jackson;
and many years after Lincoln was laid to sleep beneath a mountain of
marble at Springfield, Shields was made the shuttlecock of contending
demagogues in Congress, each striving to make a point by voting him
money--until in the impulse of that transient controversy, the State
of Missouri, finding the gray-headed soldier in her borders, for the
third time sent him to the Senate of the United States for a few
weeks--a history unparalleled even in America.

We have reason to think that the affair of the duel was excessively
distasteful to Lincoln. He did not even enjoy the ludicrousness of it,
as might have been expected. He never--so far as we can learn--alluded
to it afterwards, and the recollection of it died away so completely
from the minds of people in the State, that during the heated canvass
of 1860 there was no mention of this disagreeable episode in the
opposition papers of Illinois. It had been absolutely forgotten.

This was Mr. Lincoln's last personal quarrel. [Transcriber's Note:
Lengthy footnote relocated to chapter end.] Although the rest of his
life was passed in hot and earnest debate, he never again descended to
the level of his adversaries, who would gladly enough have resorted to
unseemly wrangling. In later years it became his duty to give an
official reprimand to a young officer who had been court-martialed for
a quarrel with one of his associates. The reprimand is probably the
gentlest recorded in the annals of penal discourses, and it shows in
few words the principles which ruled the conduct of this great and
peaceable man. It has never before been published, and it deserves to
be written in letters of gold on the walls of every gymnasium and
college:

The advice of a father to his son, "Beware of entrance to a quarrel,
but being in, bear it that the opposed may beware of thee!" is good,
but not the best. Quarrel not at all. No man resolved to make the most
of himself can spare time for personal contention. Still less can he
afford to take all the consequences, including the vitiating of his
temper and the loss of self-control. Yield larger things to which you
can show no more than equal right; and yield lesser ones though
clearly your own. Better give your path to a dog than be bitten by him
in contesting for the right. Even killing the dog would not cure the
bite.

[Relocated Footnote: Lincoln's life was unusually free from personal
disputes. We know of only one other hostile letter addressed to him.
This was from W. G. Anderson, who being worsted in a verbal encounter
with Lincoln at Lawrenceville, the county-seat of Lawrence County,
Ill., wrote him a note demanding an explanation of his words and of
his "present feelings." Lincoln's reply shows that his habitual
peaceableness involved no lack of dignity; he said. "Your note of
yesterday is received. In the difficulty between us of which you
speak, you say you think I was the aggressor. I do not think I was.
You say my words 'imported insult.' I meant them as a fair set-off to
your own statements, and not otherwise; and in that light alone I now
wish you to understand them. You ask for my 'present feelings on the
subject.' I entertain no unkind feeling to you, and none of any sort
upon the subject, except a sincere regret that I permitted myself to
get into any such altercation." This seems to have ended the
matter--although the apology was made rather to himself than to Mr.
Anderson. (See the letter of William C. Wilkinson in "The Century
Magazine" for January, 1889.)]




CHAPTER XIII

THE CAMPAIGN OF 1844


In the letter to Stuart which we have quoted, Lincoln announced his
intention to form a partnership with Judge Logan, which was soon
carried out. His connection with Stuart was formally dissolved in
April, 1841, and one with Logan formed which continued for four years.
It may almost be said that Lincoln's practice as a lawyer begins from
this time. Stuart, though even then giving promise of the distinction
at which he arrived in his profession later in life, was at that
period so entirely devoted to politics that the business of the office
was altogether a secondary matter to him; and Lincoln, although no
longer in his first youth, being then thirty-two years of age, had not
yet formed those habits of close application which are indispensable
to permanent success at the bar. He was not behind the greater part of
his contemporaries in this respect. Among all the lawyers of the
circuit who were then, or who afterwards became, eminent
practitioners, [Footnote: They were Dan Stone, Jesse B. Thomas, Cyrus
Walker, Schuyler Strong, Albert T. Bledsoe, George Forquer, Samuel H.
Treat, Ninian W. Edwards, Josiah Lamborn, John J. Hardin, Edward D.
Baker, and others.] there were few indeed who in those days applied
themselves with any degree of persistency to the close study of legal
principles. One of these few was Stephen T. Logan. He was more or less
a politician, as were all his compeers at the bar, but he was always
more a lawyer than anything else. He had that love for his profession
which it jealously exacts as a condition of succeeding. He possessed
few books, and it used to be said of him long afterwards that he
carried his library in his hat. But the books which he had he never
ceased to read and ponder, and we heard him say when he was sixty
years old, that once every year since he came of age he had read
"Blackstone's Commentaries" through. He had that old-fashioned,
lawyer-like morality which was keenly intolerant of any laxity or
slovenliness of mind or character. His former partner had been Edward
D. Baker, but this brilliant and mercurial spirit was not congenial to
Logan; Baker's carelessness in money matters was Intolerable to him,
and he was glad to escape from an associate so gifted and so
exasperating. [Footnote: Logan's office was, in fact, a nursery of
statesmen. Three of his partners, William L. May, Baker, and Lincoln,
left him in rapid succession to go to Congress, and finally the
contagion gained the head of the firm, and the judge was himself the
candidate of his party, when it was no longer able to elect one. After
he had retired from practice, the office, under his son-in-law and
successor, Milton Hay, retained its prestige for cradling public men.
John M. Palmer and Shelby M. Cullom left it to be Governors of the
State, and the latter to be a Congressman and Senator.]

Needing some one, however, to assist him in his practice, which was
then considerable, he invited Lincoln into partnership. He had, as we
have seen, formed a favorable opinion of the young Kentuckian the
first time they had met. In his subsequent acquaintance with him he
had come to recognize and respect his abilities, his unpretending
common sense, and his innate integrity. The partnership continued
about four years, but the benefit Lincoln derived from it lasted all
his life. The example of Judge Logan's thrift, order, and severity of
morals; his straightforward devotion to his profession; his close and
careful study of his cases, together with the larger and more
important range of practice to which Lincoln was introduced by this
new association, confirmed all those salutary tendencies by which he
had been led into the profession, and corrected those less desirable
ones which he shared with most of the lawyers about him. He began for
the first time to study his cases with energy and patience; to resist
the tendency, almost universal at that day, to supply with florid
rhetoric the attorney's deficiency in law; in short, to educate,
discipline, and train the enormous faculty, hitherto latent in him,
for close and severe intellectual labor. Logan, who had expected that
Lincoln's chief value to him would be as a talking advocate before
juries, was surprised and pleased to find his new partner rapidly
becoming a lawyer. "He would study out his case and make about as much
of it as anybody," said Logan, many years afterwards. "His ambition as
a lawyer increased; he grew constantly. By close study of each case,
as it came up, he got to be quite a formidable lawyer." The character
of the man is in these words. He had vast concerns intrusted to him in
the course of his life, and disposed of them one at a time as they
were presented. At the end of four years the partnership was
dissolved. Judge Logan took his son David--afterwards a well-known
politician and lawyer of Oregon--into his office, and Lincoln opened
one of his own, into which he soon invited a young, bright, and
enthusiastic man named William Henry Herndon, who remained his partner
as long as Lincoln lived.

The old partners continued close and intimate friends. They practiced
at the same bar for twenty years, often as associates, and often as
adversaries, but always with relations of mutual confidence and
regard. They had the unusual honor, while they were still
comparatively young men, of seeing their names indissolubly associated
in the map of their State as a memorial to future ages of their
friendship and their fame, in the county of Logan, of which the city
of Lincoln is the county-seat.

They both prospered, each in his way. Logan rapidly gained a great
reputation and accumulated an ample fortune. Lincoln, while he did not
become rich, always earned a respectable livelihood, and never knew
the care of poverty or debt from that time forward, His wife and he
suited their style of living to their means, and were equally removed
from luxury and privation. They went to live, immediately after their
marriage, at a boarding-house [Footnote: This house is still standing,
opposite St, Paul's church.] called "The Globe," which was "very well
kept by a widow lady of the name of Beck," and there their first child
was born, who was one day to be Secretary of War and Minister to
England, and for whom was reserved the strange experience of standing
by the death-bed of two assassinated Presidents. Lincoln afterwards
built a comfortable house of wood on the corner of Eighth and Jackson
streets, where he lived until he removed to the White House.

Neither his marriage nor his new professional interests, however, put
an end to his participation in politics. Even that period of gloom and
depression of which we have spoken, and which has been so much
exaggerated by the chroniclers and the gossip of Springfield, could
not have interrupted for any length of time his activity as a member
of the Legislature. Only for a few days was he absent from his place
in the House. On the 19th of January, 1841, John J. Hardin apologized
for the delay in some committee business, alleging Mr. Lincoln's
indisposition as an excuse. On the 23d the letter to Stuart was
written; but on the 26th Lincoln had so far recovered his self-
possession as to resume his place in the House and the leadership of
his party. The journals of the next month show his constant activity
and prominence in the routine business of the Legislature until it
adjourned. In August, Stuart was reflected to Congress. Lincoln made
his visit to Kentucky with speed, and returned to find himself
generally talked of for Governor of the State. This idea did not
commend itself to the judgment of himself or his friends, and
accordingly we find in the "Sangamo Journal" one of those semi-
official announcements so much in vogue in early Western politics,
which, while disclaiming any direct inspiration from Mr. Lincoln,
expressed the gratitude of his friends for the movement in his favor,
but declined the nomination. "His talents and services endear him to
the Whig party; but we do not believe he desires the nomination. He
has already made great sacrifices in maintaining his party principles,
and before his political friends ask him to make additional
sacrifices, the subject should be well considered. The office of
Governor, which would of necessity interfere with the practice of his
profession, would poorly compensate him for the loss of four of the
best years of his life."

He served this year as a member of the Whig Central Committee, and
bore a prominent part in the movement set on foot at that time to
check intemperance in the use of spirits. It was a movement in the
name and memory of "Washington," and the orators of the cause made
effective rhetorical use of its august associations. A passage from
the close of a speech made by Lincoln on February 22, 1842, shows the
fervor and feeling of the hour: "Washington is the mightiest name of
earth--long since mightiest in the cause of civil liberty; still
mightiest in moral reformation. On that name no eulogy is expected. It
cannot be. To add brightness to the sun or glory to the name of
Washington is alike impossible. Let none attempt it. In solemn awe
pronounce the name, and in its naked, deathless splendor leave it
shining on."

A mass meeting of the Whigs of the district was held at Springfield on
the 1st of March, 1843, for the purpose of organizing the party for
the elections of the year. On this occasion Lincoln was the most
prominent figure. He called the meeting to order, stated its object,
and drew up the platform of principles, which embraced the orthodox
Whig tenets of a protective tariff, national bank, the distribution of
the proceeds of the public lands, and, finally, the tardy conversion
of the party to the convention system, which had been forced upon them
by the example of the Democrats, who had shown them that victory could
not be organized without it. Lincoln was also chairman of the
committee which was charged with the address to the people, and a
paragraph from this document is worth quoting, as showing the use
which he made at that early day of a pregnant text which was hereafter
to figure in a far more momentous connection, and exercise a powerful
influence upon his career. Exhorting the Whigs to harmony, he says:
"That union is strength is a truth that has been known, illustrated,
and declared in various ways and forms in all ages of the world. That
great fabulist and philosopher, Aesop, illustrated it by his fable of
the bundle of sticks; and He whose wisdom surpasses that of all
philosophers has declared that 'a house divided against itself cannot
stand.'" He calls to mind the victory of 1840, the overwhelming
majority gained by the Whigs that year, their ill success since, and
the necessity of unity and concord that the party may make its entire
strength felt.

Lincoln was at this time a candidate for the Whig nomination to
Congress; but he was confronted by formidable competition. The
adjoining county of Morgan was warmly devoted to one of its own
citizens, John J. Hardin, a man of an unusually gallant and chivalrous
strain of character; and several other counties, for reasons not worth
considering, were pledged to support any one whom Morgan County
presented. If Lincoln had carried Sangamon County, his strength was so
great in Menard and Mason, where he was personally known, that he
could have been easily nominated. But Edward D. Baker had long coveted
a seat in Congress, and went into the contest against Lincoln with
many points in his favor. He was of about the same age, but had
resided longer in the district, had a larger personal acquaintance,
and was a much readier and more pleasing speaker. In fact, there are
few men who have ever lived in this country with more of the peculiar
temperament of the orator than Edward Dickinson Baker, It is related
of him that on one occasion when the circumstances called for a policy
of reserve, he was urged by his friends to go out upon a balcony and
address an impromptu audience, which was calling for him. "No," he
replied, mistrusting his own fluency; "if I go out there, I will make
a better speech than I want to." He was hardly capable of the severe
study and care by which great parliamentary speakers are trained; but
before a popular audience, and on all occasions where brilliant and
effective improvisation was called for, he was almost unequaled. His
funeral oration over the dead body of Senator Broderick in California,
his thrilling and inspiriting appeal in Union Square, New York, at the
great meeting of April, 1861, and his reply to Breckinridge in the
Senate delivered upon the impulse of the moment, conceived as he
listened to the Kentuckian's peroration, leaning against the doorway
of the Chamber in full uniform, booted and spurred, as he had ridden
into Washington from the camp, are among the most remarkable specimens
of absolutely unstudied and thrilling eloquence which our annals
contain. He was also a man of extremely prepossessing appearance. Born
in England of poor yet educated parents, and brought as a child to
this country, his good looks and brightness had early attracted the
attention of prominent gentlemen in Illinois, especially of Governor
Edwards, who had made much of him and assisted him to a good
education. He had met with considerable success as a lawyer, though he
always relied rather upon his eloquence than his law, and there were
few juries which could resist the force and fury of his speech, and
not many lawyers could keep their equanimity in the face of his witty
persiflage and savage sarcasm. When to all this is added a genuine
love of every species of combat, physical and moral, we may understand
the name Charles Sumner--paraphrasing a well-known epigram--applied to
him in the Senate, after his heroic death at Ball's Bluff, "the Prince
Rupert of battle and debate."

If Baker had relied upon his own unquestionable merits he would have
been reasonably sure of succeeding in a community so well acquainted
with him as Sangamon County. But to make assurance doubly sure his
friends resorted to tactics which Lincoln, the most magnanimous and
placable of men, thought rather unfair. Baker and his wife belonged to
that numerous and powerful sect which has several times played an
important part in Western politics--the Disciples. They all supported
him energetically, and used as arguments against Lincoln that his wife
was a Presbyterian, that most of her family were Episcopalians, that
Lincoln himself belonged to no church, and that he had been suspected
of deism, and, finally, that he was the candidate of the aristocracy.
This last charge so amazed Lincoln that he was unable to frame any
satisfactory answer to it. The memory of his flat-boating days, of his
illiterate youth, even of his deer-skin breeches shrunken by rain and
exposure, appeared to have no power against this unexpected and
baleful charge. When the county convention met, the delegates to the
district convention were instructed to cast the vote of Sangamon for
Baker. It showed the confidence of the convention in the imperturbable
good-nature of the defeated candidate that they elected him a delegate
to the Congressional convention charged with the cause of his
successful rival. In a letter to Speed, he humorously refers to his
situation as that of a rejected suitor who is asked to act as
groomsman at the wedding of his sweetheart.

It soon became evident that Baker could not get strength enough
outside of the county to nominate him. Lincoln in a letter to Speed,
written in May, said: "In relation to our Congress matter here, you
were right in supposing I would support the nominee. Neither Baker nor
I, however, is the man, but Hardin, so far as I can judge from present
appearances. We shall have no split or trouble about the matter; all
will be harmony." A few days later this prediction was realized. The
convention met at Pekin, and nominated Hardin with all the customary
symptoms of spontaneous enthusiasm. He was elected in August,
[Footnote: The opposing candidate was James A. McDougall, who was
afterwards, as Senator from California, one of the most remarkable and
eccentric figures in Washington life.] after a short but active
canvass, in which Lincoln bore his part as usual. Hardin took his seat
in December. The next year the time of holding elections was changed,
and always afterwards the candidates were elected the year before
vacancies were to occur. In May, 1844, therefore, Baker attained the
desire of his heart by being nominated, and in August he was elected,
defeating John Calhoun, while Lincoln had the laborious and honorable
post of Presidential Elector.

[Illustration:   BRIG.-GEN. JAMES SHIELDS.]

It was not the first nor the last time that he acted in this capacity.
The place had become his by a sort of prescription. His persuasive and
convincing oratory was thought so useful to his party that every four
years he was sent, in the character of electoral canvasser, to the
remotest regions of the State to talk to the people in their own
dialect, with their own habits of thought and feeling, in favor of the
Whig candidate. The office had its especial charm for him; if beaten,
as generally happened, the defeat had no personal significance; if
elected, the functions of the place were discharged in one day, and
the office passed from existence. But there was something more than
the orator and the partisan concerned in this campaign of 1844. The
whole heart of the man was enlisted in it--for the candidate was the
beloved and idolized leader of the Whigs, Henry Clay. It is probable
that we shall never see again in this country another such instance of
the personal devotion of a party to its chieftain as that which was
shown by the long and wonderful career of Mr. Clay. He became
prominent in the politics of Kentucky near the close of the last
century at twenty-three years of age. He was elected first to the
Senate at twenty-nine. He died a Senator at seventy-five, and for the
greater part of that long interval he was the most considerable
personal influence in American politics. As Senator, Representative,
Speaker of the House, and diplomatist, he filled the public eye for
half a century, and although he twice peremptorily retired from
office, and although he was the mark of the most furious partisan
hatred all his days, neither his own weariness nor the malice of his
enemies could ever keep him for any length of time from that
commanding position for which his temperament and his nature designed
him. He was beloved, respected, and served by his adherents with a
single-hearted allegiance which seems impossible to the more complex
life of a later generation. In 1844, it is true, he was no longer
young, and his power may be said to have been on the decline. But
there were circumstances connected with this his last candidacy which
excited his faithful followers to a peculiar intensity of devotion. He
had been, as many thought, unjustly passed over in 1840, and General
Harrison, a man of greatly inferior capacity, had been preferred to
him on the grounds of prudence and expediency, after three days of
balloting had shown that the eloquent Kentuckian had more friends and
more enemies than any other man in the republic. He had seemed to
regain all his popularity by the prompt and frank support which he
gave to the candidacy of Harrison; and after the President's death and
the treachery of Tyler had turned the victory of the Whigs into dust
and ashes, the entire party came back to Clay with passionate
affection and confidence, to lead them in the desperate battle which
perhaps no man could have won. The Whigs, however, were far from
appreciating this. There is evident in all their utterances of the
spring and early summer of 1844, an ardent and almost furious
conviction, not only of the necessity but the certainty of success.
Mr. Clay was nominated long before the convention met in Baltimore.
The convention of the 1st of May only ratified the popular will; no
other name was mentioned. Mr. Watkins Leigh had the honor of
presenting his name, "a word," he said "that expressed more
enthusiasm, that had in it more eloquence, than the names of Chatham,
Burke, Patrick Henry, and," he continued, rising to the requirements
of the occasion, "to us more than any other and all other names
together." Nothing was left to be said, and Clay was nominated without
a ballot; Mr. Lumpkin, of Georgia, then nominated Theodore
Frelinghuysen for Vice-President, not hesitating to avow, in the
warmth and expansion of the hour, that he believed that the baptismal
name of the New Jersey gentleman had a mystical appropriateness to the
occasion.

In the Democratic convention Mr. Van Buren had a majority of delegates
pledged to support him; but it had already been resolved in the inner
councils of the party that he should be defeated. The Southern leaders
had determined upon the immediate and unconditional annexation of
Texas, and Mr. Van Buren's views upon this vital question were too
moderate and conservative to suit the adventurous spirits who most
closely surrounded President Tyler. During the whole of the preceding
year a steady and earnest propaganda of annexation had been on foot,
starting from the immediate _entourage_ of the President and embracing
a large number of Southern Congressmen. A letter had been elicited
from General Jackson, declaring with his usual vehemence in favor of
the project, and urging it upon the ground that Texas was absolutely
necessary to us, as the most easily defensible frontier against Great
Britain. Using the favorite argument of the Southerners of his school,
he said: "Great Britain has already made treaties with Texas; and we
know that far-seeing nation never omits a circumstance in her
extensive intercourse with the world which can be turned to account in
increasing her military resources. May she not enter into an alliance
with Texas? And, reserving, as she doubtless will, the North-western
boundary question as the cause of war with us whenever she chooses to
declare it--let us suppose that, as an ally with Texas, we are to
fight her. Preparatory to such a movement she sends her 20,000 or
30,000 men to Texas; organizes them on the Sabine, where supplies and
arms can be concentrated before we have even notice of her intentions;
makes a lodgment on the Mississippi; excites the negroes to
insurrection; the lower country falls, with it New Orleans; and a
servile war rages through the whole South and West." [Footnote: This
letter was dated at the Hermitage, near Nashville, Tennessee, Feb. 13,
1843, and was printed a year later in the "National Intelligencer,"
with the date altered to 1844. ]

[Sidenote: T. H. Benton, "Thirty Years View."]

These fanciful prophecies of evil were privately circulated for a year
among those whom they would be most likely to influence, and the
entire letter was printed in 1844, with a result never intended by the
writer. It contributed greatly, in the opinion of many, to defeat Van
Buren, whom Jackson held in great esteem and regard, and served the
purposes of the Tyler faction, whom he detested. The argument based on
imaginary British intrigues was the one most relied upon by Mr.
Tyler's successive secretaries of state. John C. Calhoun, in his
dispatch of the 12th of August, 1844, instructed our minister in Paris
to impress upon the Government of France the nefarious character of
the English diplomacy, which was seeking, by defeating the annexation
of Texas, to accomplish the abolition of slavery first in that region,
and afterwards throughout the United States, "a blow calamitous to
this continent beyond description." No denials on the part of the
British Government had any effect; it was a fixed idea of Calhoun and
his followers that the designs of Great Britain against American
slavery could only be baffled by the annexation of Texas. Van Buren
was not in principle opposed to the admission of Texas into the Union
at the proper time and with the proper conditions, but the more ardent
Democrats of the South were unwilling to listen to any conditions or
any suggestion of delay. They succeeded in inducing the convention to
adopt the two-thirds rule, after a whole day of stormy debate, and the
defeat of Van Buren was secured. The nomination of Mr. Polk was
received without enthusiasm, and the exultant hopes of the Whigs were
correspondingly increased.

Contemporary observers differ as to the causes which gradually, as the
summer advanced, changed the course of public opinion to such an
extent as to bring defeat in November upon a party which was so sure
of victory in June. It has been the habit of the antislavery Whigs who
have written upon the subject to ascribe the disaster to an
indiscretion of the candidate himself. At the outset of the campaign
Mr. Clay's avowed opinion as to the annexation of Texas was that of
the vast majority of his party, especially in the North. While not
opposing an increase of territory under all circumstances, he said,--
in a letter written from Raleigh, N.C., two weeks before his
nomination,--"I consider the annexation of Texas, at this time,
without the consent of Mexico, as a measure compromising the national
character, involving us certainly in war with Mexico, probably with
other foreign powers, dangerous to the integrity of the Union,
inexpedient in the present financial condition of the country, and not
called for by any expression of public opinion." He supported these
views with temperate and judicious reasons which were received with
much gratification throughout the country.

Of course they were not satisfactory to every one, and Mr. Clay became
so disquieted by letters of inquiry and of criticism from the South,
that he was at last moved, in an unfortunate hour, to write another
letter to a friend in Alabama, which was regarded as seriously
modifying the views he had expressed in the letter from Raleigh. He
now said: "I have no hesitation in saying that, far from having any
personal objections to the annexation of Texas, I should be glad to
see it--without dishonor, without war, with the common consent of the
Union, and upon just and fair terms ... I do not think the subject of
slavery ought to affect the question one way or the other, whether
Texas be independent or incorporated in the United States. I do not
believe it will prolong or shorten the duration of that institution.
It is destined to become extinct, at some distant day, in my opinion,
by the operation of the inevitable laws of population. It would be
unwise to refuse a permanent acquisition, which will exist as long as
the globe remains, on account of a temporary institution." Mr. Clay
does not in this letter disclaim or disavow any sentiments previously
expressed. He says, as any one might say, that provided certain
impossible conditions were complied with, he would be glad to see
Texas in the Union, and that he was so sure of the ultimate extinction
of slavery that he would not let any consideration of that transitory
system interfere with a great national advantage. It might naturally
have been expected that such an expression would have given less
offense to the opponents than to the friends of slavery. But the
contrary effect resulted, and it soon became evident that a grave
error of judgment had been committed in writing the letter.

[Sidenote: "American Conflict," p. 167.]

The principal opposition to annexation in the North had been made
expressly upon the ground that it would increase the area of slavery,
and the comparative indifferences with which Mr. Clay treated that
view of the subject cost him heavily in the canvass. Horace Greeley,
who should be regarded as an impartial witness in such a case, says,
"The 'Liberty Party,' so-called, pushed this view of the matter beyond
all justice and reason, insisting that Mr. Clay's antagonism to
annexation, not being founded in antislavery conviction, was of no
account whatever, and that his election should, on that ground, be
opposed." It availed nothing that Mr. Clay, alarmed at the defection
in the North, wrote a third and final letter, reiterating his
unaltered objections to any such annexation as was at that time
possible. The damage was irretrievable. It is not probable that his
letters gained or saved him a vote in the South among the advocates of
annexation. They cared for nothing short of their own unconditional
scheme of immediate action. They forgot the services rendered by Mr.
Clay in bringing about the recognition of Texan independence a few
years before.

They saw that Mr. Polk was ready to risk everything--war,
international complications, even the dishonor of broken obligations--
to accomplish their purpose, and nothing the Whig candidate could say
would weigh anything in the balance against this blind and reckless
readiness. On the other hand, Mr. Clay's cautious and moderate
position did him irreparable harm among the ardent opponents of
slavery. They were not willing to listen to counsels of caution and
moderation. More than a year before, thirteen of the Whig antislavery
Congressmen, headed by the illustrious John Quincy Adams, had issued a
fervid address to the people of the free States, declaiming in
language of passionate force against the scheme of annexation as fatal
to the country, calling it, in fact, "identical with dissolution," and
saying that "it would be a violation of our national compact, its
objects, designs, and the great elementary principles which entered
into its formation of a character so deep and fundamental, and would
be an attempt to eternize an institution and a power of nature so
unjust in themselves, so injurious to the interests and abhorrent to
the feelings of the people of the free States, as in our opinion, not
only inevitably to result in a dissolution of the Union, but fully to
justify it; and we not only assert that the people of the free States
ought not to submit to it, but we say with confidence they would not
submit to it." To men in a temper like that indicated by these words,
no arguments drawn from consideration of political expediency could be
expected to have any weight, and it was of no use to say to them that
in voting for a third candidate they were voting to elect Mr. Polk,
the avowed and eager advocate of annexation. If all the votes cast for
James G. Birney, the "Liberty" candidate, had been cast for Clay, he
would have been elected, and even as it was the contest was close and
doubtful to the last. Birney received 62,263 votes, and the popular
majority of Polk over Clay was only 38,792.

There are certain temptations that no government yet instituted has
been able to resist. When an object is ardently desired by the
majority, when it is practicable, when it is expedient for the
material welfare of the country, and when the cost of it will fall
upon other people, it may be taken for granted that--in the present
condition of international ethics--the partisans of the project will
never lack means of defending its morality. The annexation of Texas
was one of these cases. Moralists called it an inexcusable national
crime, conceived by Southern statesmen for the benefit of slavery,
[Footnote: This purpose was avowed by John C. Calhoun in the Senate,
May 23, 1836; see also his speech of February 24, 1847.] carried on
during a term of years with unexampled energy, truculence and
treachery; in both houses of Congress, in the cabinets of two
Presidents, in diplomatic dealings with foreign powers, every step of
its progress marked by false professions, by broken pledges, by a
steady degradation of moral fiber among all those engaged in the
scheme. The opposition to it--as usually happens--consisted partly in
the natural effort of partisans to baffle their opponents, and partly
in an honorable protest of heart and conscience against a great wrong
committed in the interest of a national sin. But looking back upon the
whole transaction--even over so short a distance as now separates us
from it--one cannot but perceive that the attitude of the two parties
was in some sort inevitable and that the result was also sure,
whatever the subordinate events or incidents which may have led to it.
It was impossible to defeat or greatly to delay the annexation of
Texas, and although those who opposed it but obeyed the dictates of
common morality, they were fighting a battle beyond ordinary human
powers.

Here was a great empire offering itself to us--a State which had
gained its independence, and built itself into a certain measure of
order and thrift through American valor and enterprise. She offered us
a magnificent estate of 376,000 square miles of territory, all of it
valuable, and much of it of unsurpassed richness and fertility. Even
those portions of it once condemned as desert now contribute to the
markets of the world vast stores of wool and cotton, herds of cattle
and flocks of sheep. Not only were these material advantages of great
attractiveness to the public mind, but many powerful sentimental
considerations reinforced the claim of Texas. The Texans were not an
alien people. The few inhabitants of that vast realm were mostly
Americans, who had occupied and subdued a vacant wilderness. The
heroic defense of the Alamo had been made by Travis, Bowie, and David
Crockett, whose exploits and death form one of the most brilliant
pages of our border history. Fannin and his men, four hundred strong,
when they laid down their lives at Goliad [Transcriber's Note: Lengthy
footnote relocated to chapter end.] had carried mourning into every
South-western State; and when, a few days later, Samuel Houston and
his eight hundred raw levies defeated and destroyed the Mexican army
at San Jacinto, captured Santa Anna, the Mexican president, and with
American thrift, instead of giving him the death he merited for his
cruel murder of unarmed prisoners, saved him to make a treaty with,
the whole people recognized something of kinship in the unaffected
valor with which these borderers died and the humorous shrewdness with
which they bargained, and felt as if the victory over the Mexicans
were their own.

The schemes of the Southern statesmen who were working for the
extension of slavery were not defensible, and we have no disposition
to defend them; but it may be doubted whether there is a government on
the face of the earth which, under similar circumstances, would not
have yielded to the same temptation.

Under these conditions, the annexation, sooner or later, was
inevitable. No man and no party could oppose it except at serious
cost. It is not true that schemes of annexation are always popular.
Several administrations have lost heavily by proposing them. Grant
failed with Santo Domingo; Seward with St. Thomas; and it required all
his skill and influence to accomplish the ratification of the Alaska
purchase. There is no general desire among Americans for acquiring
outlying territory, however intrinsically valuable it may be; their
land-hunger is confined within the limits of that of a Western farmer
once quoted by Mr. Lincoln, who used to say, "I am not greedy about
land; I only want what jines mine." Whenever a region contiguous to
the United States becomes filled with Americans, it is absolutely
certain to come under the American flag. Texas was as sure to be
incorporated into the Union as are two drops of water touching each
other to become one; and this consummation would not have been
prevented for any length of time if Clay or Van Buren had been elected
in 1844. The honorable scruples of the Whigs, the sensitive
consciences of the "Liberty" men, could never have prevailed
permanently against a tendency so natural and so irresistible.
Everything that year seemed to work against the Whigs. At a most
unfortunate time for them, there was an outbreak of that "native"
fanaticism which reappears from time to time in our politics with the
periodicity of malarial fevers, and always to the profit of the party
against which its efforts are aimed. It led to great disturbances in
several cities, and to riot and bloodshed in Philadelphia. The Clay
party were, of course, free from any complicity with these outrages,
but the foreigners, in their alarm, huddled together almost as one man
on the side where the majority of them always voted, and this
occasioned a heavy loss to the Whigs in several States. The first
appearance of Lincoln in the canvass was in a judicious attempt to
check this unreasonable panic. At a meeting held in Springfield, June
12, he introduced and supported resolutions, declaring that "the
guarantee of the rights of conscience as found in our Constitution is
most sacred and inviolable, and one that belongs no less to the
Catholic than the Protestant, and that all attempts to abridge or
interfere with these rights either of Catholic or Protestant, directly
or indirectly, have our decided disapprobation, and shall have our
most effective opposition." Several times afterwards in his life
Lincoln was forced to confront this same proscriptive spirit among the
men with whom he was more or less affiliated politically, and he never
failed to denounce it as it deserved, whatever might be the risk of
loss involved.

Beginning with this manly protest against intolerance and disorder, he
went into the work of the campaign and continued in it with unabated
ardor to the end. The defeat of Clay affected him, as it did thousands
of others, as a great public calamity and a keen personal sorrow. It
is impossible to mistake the accent of sincere mourning which we find
in the journals of the time. The addresses which were sent to Mr. Clay
from every part of the country indicate a depth of affectionate
devotion which rarely falls to the lot of a political chieftain. An
extract from the one sent by the Clay Clubs of New York will show the
earnest attachment and pride with which the young men of that day
still declared their loyalty to their beloved leader, even in the
midst of irreparable disaster. "We will remember you, Henry Clay,
while the memory of the glorious or the sense of the good remains in
us, with a grateful and admiring affection which shall strengthen with
our strength and shall not decay with our decline. We will remember
you in all our future trials and reverses as him whose name honored
defeat and gave it a glory which victory could not have brought. We
will remember you when patriotic hope rallies again to successful
contest with the agencies of corruption and ruin; for we will never
know a triumph which you do not share in life, whose glory does not
accrue to you in death."

[Relocated Footnote: This massacre inspired one of the most remarkable
poems of Walt Whitman, "Now I tell you what I knew of Texas in my
early youth," in which occurs his description of the rangers:

   "They were the glory of the race of rangers,
   Matchless with horse, rifle, song, supper, courtship,
   Large, turbulent, generous, handsome, proud, and affectionate,
   Bearded, sunburnt, drest in the free costume of hunters,
   Not a single one over thirty years of age."]




CHAPTER XIV

CAMPAIGN FOR CONGRESS


In the months that remained of his term, after the election of his
successor, President Tyler pursued with much vigor his purpose of
accomplishing the annexation of Texas, regarding it as the measure
which was specially to illustrate his administration and to preserve
it from oblivion. The state of affairs, when Congress came together in
December, 1844, was propitious to the project. Dr. Anson Jones had
been elected as President of Texas; the republic was in a more
thriving condition than ever before. Its population was rapidly
increasing under the stimulus of its probable change of flag; its
budget presented a less unwholesome balance; its relations with
Mexico, while they were no more friendly, had ceased to excite alarm.
The Tyler government, having been baffled in the spring by the
rejection of the treaty for annexation which they had submitted to the
Senate, chose to proceed this winter in a different way. Early in the
session a joint resolution providing for annexation was introduced in
the House of Representatives, which, after considerable discussion and
attempted amendment by the anti-slavery members, passed the House by a
majority of twenty-two votes.

In the Senate it encountered more opposition, as might have been
expected in a chamber which had overwhelmingly rejected the same
scheme only a few months before. It was at last amended by inserting a
section called the Walker amendment, providing that the President, if
it were in his judgment advisable, should proceed by way of
negotiation, instead of submitting the resolutions as an overture on
the part of the United States to Texas. This amendment eased the
conscience of a few shy supporters of the Administration who had
committed themselves very strongly against the scheme, and saved them
from the shame of open tergiversation. The President, however, treated
this subterfuge with the contempt which it deserved, by utterly
disregarding the Walker amendment, and by dispatching a messenger to
Texas to bring about annexation on the basis of the resolutions, the
moment he had signed them, when only a few hours of his official
existence remained. The measures initiated by Tyler were, of course,
carried out by Polk. The work was pushed forward with equal zeal at
Washington and at Austin. A convention of Texans was called for the
4th of July to consider the American propositions; they were promptly
accepted and ratified, and in the last days of 1845 Texas was formally
admitted into the Union as a State.

Besides the general objections which the anti-slavery men of the North
had to the project itself, there was something especially offensive to
them in the pretense of fairness and compromise held out by the
resolutions committing the Government to annexation. The third section
provided that four new States might hereafter be formed out of the
Territory of Texas; that such States as were formed out of the portion
lying south of 36 degrees 30', the Missouri Compromise line, might be
admitted with or without slavery, as the people might desire; and that
slavery should be prohibited in such States as might be formed out of
the portion lying north of that line. The opponents of slavery
regarded this provision, with good reason, as derisive. Slavery
already existed in the entire territory by the act of the early
settlers from the South who had brought their slaves with them, and
the State of Texas had no valid claim to an inch of ground north of
the line of 36 degrees 30' nor anywhere near it; so that this clause, if it
had any force whatever, would have authorized the establishment of
slavery in a portion of New Mexico, where it did not exist, and where
it had been expressly prohibited by the Mexican law. Another serious
objection was that the resolutions were taken as committing the United
States to the adoption and maintenance of the Rio Grande del Norte as
the western boundary of Texas. All mention of this was avoided in the
instrument, and it was expressly stated that the State was to be
formed "subject to the adjustment by this Government of all questions
of boundary that may arise with other governments," but the moment the
resolutions were passed the Government assumed, as a matter beyond
dispute, that all of the territory east of the Rio Grande was the
rightful property of Texas, to be defended by the military power of
the United States.

Even if Mexico had been inclined to submit to the annexation of Texas,
it was nevertheless certain that the occupation of the left bank of
the Rio Grande, without an attempt at an understanding, would bring
about a collision. The country lying between the Nueces and the Rio
Grande was then entirely uninhabited, and was thought uninhabitable,
though subsequent years have shown the fallacy of that belief. The
occupation of the country extended no farther than the Nueces, and the
Mexican farmers cultivated their corn and cotton in peace in the
fertile fields opposite Matamoras.

It is true that Texas claimed the eastern bank of the Rio Grande from
its source to its mouth; and while the Texans held Santa Anna
prisoner, under duress of arms and the stronger pressure of his own
conscience, which assured him that he deserved death as a murderer,
"he solemnly sanctioned, acknowledged, and ratified" their
independence with whatever boundaries they chose to claim; but the
Bustamente administration lost no time in repudiating this treaty, and
at once renewed the war, which had been carried on in a fitful way
ever since.

[Illustration:   HENRY CLAY.]

[Sidenote: August 23, 1843.]

But leaving out of view this special subject of admitted dispute, the
Mexican Government had warned our own in sufficiently formal terms
that annexation could not be peacefully effected. When A. P. Upshur
first began his negotiations with Texas, the Mexican Minister of
Foreign Affairs, at his earliest rumors of what was afoot, addressed a
note to Waddy Thompson, our Minister in Mexico, referring to the
reported intention of Texas to seek admission, to the Union, and
formally protesting against it as "an aggression unprecedented in the
annals of the world," and adding "if it be indispensable for the
Mexican nation to seek security for its rights at the expense of the
disasters of war, it will call upon God, and rely on its own efforts
for the defense of its just cause." A little while later General
Almonte renewed this notification at Washington, saying in so many
words that the annexation of Texas would terminate his mission, and
that Mexico would declare war as soon as it received intimation of
such an act. In June, 1845, Mr. Donelson, in charge of the American
Legation in Mexico, assured the Secretary of State that war was
inevitable, though he adopted the fiction of Mr. Calhoun, that it was
the result of the abolitionist intrigues of Great Britain, which he
credited with the intention "of depriving both Texas and the United
States of all claim to the country between the Nueces and the Rio
Grande."

No one, therefore, doubted that war would follow, and it soon came.
General Zachary Taylor had been sent during the summer to Corpus
Christi, where a considerable portion of the small army of the United
States was placed under his command. It was generally understood to be
the desire of the Administration that hostilities should begin without
orders, by a species of spontaneous combustion; but the coolness and
prudence of General Taylor made futile any such hopes, if they were
entertained, and it required a positive order to induce him, in March,
1846, to advance towards the Rio Grande and to cross the disputed
territory. He arrived at a point opposite Matamoras on the 28th of
March, and immediately fortified himself, disregarding the summons of
the Mexican commander, who warned him that such action would be
considered as a declaration of war. In May, General Arista crossed the
river and attacked General Taylor on the field of Palo Alto, where
Taylor won the first of that remarkable series of victories, embracing
Resaca de la Palma, Monterey, and Buena Vista, all gained over
superior forces of the enemy, which made the American commander for
the brief day that was left him the idol alike of soldiers and voters.

After Baker's election in 1844, it was generally taken as a matter of
course in the district that Lincoln was to be the next candidate of
the Whig party for Congress. It was charged at the time, and some
recent writers have repeated the charge, that there was a bargain made
in 1840 between Hardin, Baker, Lincoln, and Logan to succeed each
other in the order named. This sort of fiction is the commonest known
to American politics. Something like it is told, and more or less
believed, in half the districts in the country at every election. It
arises naturally from the fact that there are always more candidates
than places, that any one who is a candidate twice is felt to be
defrauding his neighbors, and that all candidates are too ready to
assure their constituents that they only want one term, and too ready
to forget these assurances when their terms are ending. There is not
only no evidence of any such bargain among the men we have mentioned,
but there is the clearest proof of the contrary. Two or more of them
were candidates for the nomination at every election from the time
when Stuart retired until the Whigs lost the district.

At the same time it is not to be denied that there was a tacit
understanding among the Whigs of the district that whoever should, at
each election, gain the honor of representing the one Whig
constituency of the State, should hold himself satisfied with the
privilege, and not be a candidate for reelection. The retiring member
was not always convinced of the propriety of this arrangement. In the
early part of January, 1846, Hardin was the only one whose name was
mentioned in opposition to Lincoln. He was reasonably sure of his own
county, and he tried to induce Lincoln to consent to an arrangement
that all candidates should confine themselves to their own counties in
the canvass; but Lincoln, who was very strong in the outlying counties
of the district, declined the proposition, alleging, as a reason for
refusing, that Hardin was so much better known than he, by reason of
his service in Congress, that such a stipulation would give him a
great advantage. There was fully as much courtesy as candor in this
plea, and Lincoln's entire letter was extremely politic and civil. "I
have always been in the habit," he