n the part of our Mother
Nature was well worth obtaining through such cares as these.  That
feeling can be enjoyed in perfection only by the natives of summer
islands, where the bread-fruit, the cocoa, the palm, and the orange
grow spontaneously and hold forth the ever-ready meal; but likewise
almost as well by a man long habituated to city life, who plunges into
such a solitude as that of the Old Manse, where he plucks the fruit of
trees that he did not plant, and which therefore, to my heterodox
taste, bear the closest resemblance to those that grew in Eden.  It
has been an apothegm these five thousand years, that toil sweetens the
bread it earns. For my part (speaking from hard experience, acquired
while belaboring the rugged furrows of Brook Farm), I relish best the
free gifts of Providence.

Not that it can be disputed that the light toil requisite to cultivate
a moderately sized garden imparts such zest to kitchen vegetables as
is never found in those of the market-gardener. Childless men, if they
would know something of the bliss of paternity, should plant a seed,--
be it squash, bean, Indian corn, or perhaps a mere flower or worthless
weed,--should plant it with their own hands, and nurse it from infancy
to maturity altogether by their own care.  If there be not too many of
them, each individual plant becomes an object of separate interest.
My garden, that skirted the avenue of the Manse, was of precisely the
right extent.  An hour or two of morning labor was all that it
required.  But I used to visit and revisit it a dozen times a day, and
stand in deep contemplation over my vegetable progeny with a love that
nobody could share or conceive of who had never taken part in the
process of creation.  It was one of the most bewitching sights in the
world to observe a hill of beans thrusting aside the soil, or a row of
early peas just peeping forth sufficiently to trace a line of delicate
green. Later in the season the humming-birds were attracted by the
blossoms of a peculiar variety of bean; and they were a joy to me,
those little spiritual visitants, for deigning to sip airy food out of
my nectar-cups.  Multitudes of bees used to bury themselves in the
yellow blossoms of the summer-squashes.  This, too, was a deep
satisfaction; although, when they had laden themselves with sweets,
they flew away to some unknown hive, which would give back nothing in
requital of what my garden had contributed.  But I was glad thus to
fling a benefaction upon the passing breeze with the certainty that
somebody must profit by it and that there would be a little more honey
in the world to allay the sourness and bitterness which mankind is
always complaining of.  Yes, indeed; my life was the sweeter for that
honey.

Speaking of summer-squashes, I must say a word of their beautiful and
varied forms.  They presented an endless diversity of urns and vases,
shallow or deep, scalloped or plain, moulded in patterns which a
sculptor would do well to copy, since Art has never invented anything
more graceful.  A hundred squashes in the garden were worth, in my
eyes at least, of being rendered indestructible in marble.  If ever
Providence (but I know it never will) should assign me a superfluity
of gold, part of it shall be expended for a service of plate, or most
delicate porcelain, to be wrought into the shapes of summer-squashes
gathered from vines which I will plant with my own hands.  As dishes
for containing vegetables, they would be peculiarly appropriate.

But not merely the squeamish love of the beautiful was gratified by my
toil in the kitchen-garden.  There was a hearty enjoyment, likewise,
in observing the growth of the crook-necked winter-squashes from the
first little bulb, with the withered blossom adhering to it, until
they lay strewn upon the soil, big, round fellows, hiding their heads
beneath the leaves, but turning up their great yellow rotundities to
the noontide sun.  Gazing at them, I felt that by my agency something
worth living for had been done.  A new substance was born into the
world.  They were real and tangible existences, which the mind could
seize hold of and rejoice in.  A cabbage, too,--especially the early
Dutch cabbage, which swells to a monstrous circumference, until its
ambitious heart often bursts asunder,--is a matter to be proud of when
we can claim a share with the earth and sky in producing it. But,
after all, the hugest pleasure is reserved until these vegetable
children of ours are smoking on the table, and we, like Saturn, make a
meal of them.

What with the river, the battle-field, the orchard, and the garden,
the reader begins to despair of finding his way back into the Old
Manse. But, in agreeable weather, it is the truest hospitality to keep
him out of doors.  I never grew quite acquainted with my habitation
till a long spell of sulky rain had confined me beneath its roof.
There could not be a more sombre aspect of external nature than as
then seen from the windows of my study.  The great willow-tree had
caught and retained among its leaves a whole cataract of water, to be
shaken down at intervals by the frequent gusts of wind.  All day long,
and for a week together, the rain was drip-drip-dripping and splash-
splash-splashing from the eaves and bubbling and foaming into the tubs
beneath the spouts.  The old, unpainted shingles of the house and
outbuildings were black with moisture; and the mosses of ancient
growth upon the walls looked green and fresh, as if they were the
newest things and afterthought of Time.  The usually mirrored surface
of the river was blurred by an infinity of raindrops; the whole
landscape had a completely water-soaked appearance, conveying the
impression that the earth was wet through like a sponge; while the
summit of a wooded hill, about a mile distant, was enveloped in a
dense mist, where the demon of the tempest seemed to have his abiding-
place and to be plotting still direr inclemencies.

Nature has no kindness, no hospitality, during a rain.  In the
fiercest beat of sunny days she retains a secret mercy, and welcomes
the wayfarer to shady nooks of the woods whither the sun cannot
penetrate; but she provides no shelter against her storms. It makes us
shiver to think of those deep, umbrageous recesses, those
overshadowing banks, where we found such enjoyment during the sultry
afternoons.  Not a twig of foliage there but would dash a little
shower into our faces.  Looking reproachfully towards the impenetrable
sky,--if sky there be above that dismal uniformity of cloud,--we are
apt to murmur against the whole system of the universe, since it
involves the extinction of so many summer days in so short a life by
the hissing and spluttering rain.  In such spells of weather,--and it
is to be supposed such weather came,--Eve's bower in paradise must
have been but a cheerless and aguish kind of shelter, nowise
comparable to the old parsonage, which had resources of its own to
beguile the week's imprisonment.  The idea of sleeping on a couch of
wet roses!

Happy the man who in a rainy day can betake himself to a huge garret,
stored, like that of the Manse, with lumber that each generation has
left behind it from a period before the Revolution.  Our garret was an
arched hall, dimly illuminated through small and dusty windows; it was
but a twilight at the best; and there were nooks, or rather caverns,
of deep obscurity, the secrets of which I never learned, being too
reverent of their dust and cobwebs.  The beams and rafters, roughly
hewn and with strips of bark still on them, and the rude masonry of
the chimneys, made the garret look wild and uncivilized, an aspect
unlike what was seen elsewhere in the quiet and decorous old house.
But on one side there was a little whitewashed apartment, which bore
the traditionary title of the Saint's Chamber, because holy men in
their youth had slept, and studied, and prayed there. With its
elevated retirement, its one window, its small fireplace, and its
closet convenient for an oratory, it was the very spot where a young
man might inspire himself with solemn enthusiasm and cherish saintly
dreams.  The occupants, at various epochs, had left brief records and
ejaculations inscribed upon the walls.  There, too, hung a tattered
and shrivelled roll of canvas, which on inspection proved to be the
forcibly wrought picture of a clergyman, in wig, band, and gown,
holding a Bible in his hand.  As I turned his face towards the light,
he eyed me with an air of authority such as men of his profession
seldom assume in our days.  The original had been pastor of the parish
more than a century ago, a friend of Whitefield, and almost his equal
in fervid eloquence.  I bowed before the effigy of the dignified
divine, and felt as if I had now met face to face with the ghost by
whom, as there was reason to apprehend, the Manse was haunted.

Houses of any antiquity in New England are so invariably possessed
with spirits that the matter seems hardly worth alluding to.  Our
ghost used to heave deep sighs in a particular corner of the parlor,
and sometimes rustled paper, as if he were turning over a sermon in
the long upper entry,--where nevertheless he was invisible, in spite
of the bright moonshine that fell through the eastern window.  Not
improbably he wished me to edit and publish a selection from a chest
full of manuscript discourses that stood in the garret.  Once, while
Hillard and other friends sat talking with us in the twilight, there
came a rustling noise as of a minister's silk gown, sweeping through
the very midst of the company, so closely as almost to brush against
the chairs.  Still there was nothing visible.  A yet stranger business
was that of a ghostly servant-maid, who used to be heard in the
kitchen at deepest midnight, grinding coffee, cooking, ironing,--
performing, in short, all kinds of domestic labor,--although no traces
of anything accomplished could be detected the next morning.  Some
neglected duty of her servitude, some ill-starched ministerial band,
disturbed the poor damsel in her grave and kept her at work without
any wages.

But to return from this digression.  A part of my predecessor's
library was stored in the garret,--no unfit receptacle indeed for such
dreary trash as comprised the greater number of volumes. The old books
would have been worth nothing at an auction.  In this venerable
garret, however, they possessed an interest, quite apart from their
literary value, as heirlooms, many of which had been transmitted down
through a series of consecrated hands from the days of the mighty
Puritan divines. Autographs of famous names were to be seen in faded
ink on some of their fly-leaves; and there were marginal observations
or interpolated pages closely covered with manuscript in illegible
shorthand, perhaps concealing matter of profound truth and wisdom.
The world will never be the better for it.  A few of the books were
Latin folios, written by Catholic authors; others demolished Papistry,
as with a sledge-hammer, in plain English.  A dissertation on the Book
of Job--which only Job himself could have had patience to read--filled
at least a score of small, thick-set quartos, at the rate of two or
three volumes to a chapter.  Then there was a vast folio body of
divinity,--too corpulent a body, it might be feared, to comprehend the
spiritual element of religion.  Volumes of this form dated back two
hundred years or more, and were generally bound in black leather,
exhibiting precisely such an appearance as we should attribute to
books of enchantment.  Others equally antique were of a size proper to
be carried in the large waistcoat pockets of old times,--diminutive,
but as black as their bulkier brethren, and abundantly interfused with
Greek and Latin quotations.  These little old volumes impressed me as
if they had been intended for very large ones, but had been
unfortunately blighted at an early stage of their growth.

The rain pattered upon the roof and the sky gloomed through the dusty
garret-windows while I burrowed among these venerable books in search
of any living thought which should burn like a coal of fire or glow
like an inextinguishable gem beneath the dead trumpery that had long
hidden it. But I found no such treasure; all was dead alike; and I
could not but muse deeply and wonderingly upon the humiliating fact
that the works of man's intellect decay like those of his hands.
Thought grows mouldy. What was good and nourishing food for the
spirits of one generation affords no sustenance for the next.  Books
of religion, however, cannot be considered a fair test of the enduring
and vivacious properties of human thought, because such books so
seldom really touch upon their ostensible subject, and have,
therefore, so little business to be written at all.  So long as an
unlettered soul can attain to saving grace there would seem to be no
deadly error in holding theological libraries to be accumulations of,
for the most part, stupendous impertinence.

Many of the books had accrued in the latter years of the last
clergyman's lifetime.  These threatened to be of even less interest
than the elder works a century hence to any curious inquirer who
should then rummage then as I was doing now. Volumes of the Liberal
Preacher and Christian Examiner, occasional sermons, controversial
pamphlets, tracts, and other productions of a like fugitive nature,
took the place of the thick and heavy volumes of past time.  In a
physical point of view, there was much the same difference as between
a feather and a lump of lead; but, intellectually regarded, the
specific gravity of old and new was about upon a par.  Both also were
alike frigid.  The elder books nevertheless seemed to have been
earnestly written, and might be conceived to have possessed warmth at
some former period; although, with the lapse of time, the heated
masses had cooled down even to the freezing-point. The frigidity of
the modern productions, on the other hand, was characteristic and
inherent, and evidently had little to do with the writer's qualities
of mind and heart.  In fine, of this whole dusty heap of literature I
tossed aside all the sacred part, and felt myself none the less a
Christian for eschewing it.  There appeared no hope of either mounting
to the better world on a Gothic staircase of ancient folios or of
flying thither on the wings of a modern tract.

Nothing, strange to say, retained any sap except what had been written
for the passing day and year, without the remotest pretension or idea
of permanence.  There were a few old newspapers, and still older
almanacs, which reproduced to my mental eye the epochs when they had
issued from the press with a distinctness that was altogether
unaccountable.  It was as if I had found bits of magic looking-glass
among the books with the images of a vanished century in them.  I
turned my eyes towards the tattered picture above mentioned, and asked
of the austere divine wherefore it was that he and his brethren, after
the most painful rummaging and groping into their minds, had been able
to produce nothing half so real as these newspaper scribblers and
almanac-makers had thrown off in the effervescence of a moment. The
portrait responded not; so I sought an answer for myself.  It is the
age itself that writes newspapers and almanacs, which therefore have a
distinct purpose and meaning at the time, and a kind of intelligible
truth for all times; whereas most other works--being written by men
who, in the very act, set themselves apart from their age--are likely
to possess little significance when new, and none at all when old.
Genius, indeed, melts many ages into one, and thus effects something
permanent, yet still with a similarity of office to that of the more
ephemeral writer. A work of genius is but the newspaper of a century,
or perchance of a hundred centuries.

Lightly as I have spoken of these old books, there yet lingers with me
a superstitious reverence for literature of all kinds.  A bound volume
has a charm in my eyes similar to what scraps of manuscript possess
for the good Mussulman.  He imagines that those wind-wafted records
are perhaps hallowed by some sacred verse; and I, that every new book
or antique one may contain the "open sesame,"--the spell to disclose
treasures hidden in some unsuspected cave of Truth.  Thus it was not
without sadness that I turned away from the library of the Old Manse.

Blessed was the sunshine when it came again at the close of another
stormy day, beaming from the edge of the western horizon; while the
massive firmament of clouds threw down all the gloom it could, but
served only to kindle the golden light into a more brilliant glow by
the strongly contrasted shadows.  Heaven smiled at the earth, so long
unseen, from beneath its heavy eyelid.  To-morrow for the hill-tops
and the woodpaths.

Or it might be that Ellery Charming came up the avenue to join me in a
fishing excursion on the river.  Strange and happy times were those
when we cast aside all irksome forms and strait-laced habitudes and
delivered ourselves up to the free air, to live like the Indians or
any less conventional race during one bright semicircle of the sun.
Rowing our boat against the current, between wide meadows, we turned
aside into the Assabeth.  A more lovely stream than this, for a mile
above its junction with the Concord, has never flowed on earth,
nowhere, indeed, except to lave the interior regions of a poet's
imagination.  It is sheltered from the breeze by woods and a hillside;
so that elsewhere there might be a hurricane, and here scarcely a
ripple across the shaded water.  The current lingers along so gently
that the mere force of the boatman's will seems sufficient to propel
his craft against it.  It comes flowing softly through the midmost
privacy and deepest heart of a wood which whispers it to be quiet;
while the stream whispers back again from its sedgy borders, as if
river and wood were hushing one another to sleep. Yes; the river
sleeps along its course and dreams of the sky and of the clustering
foliage, amid which fall showers of broken sunlight, imparting specks
of vivid cheerfulness, in contrast with the quiet depth of the
prevailing tint.  Of all this scene, the slumbering river has a dream-
picture in its bosom.  Which, after all, was the most real,--the
picture, or the original?--the objects palpable to our grosser senses,
or their apotheosis in the stream beneath?  Surely the disembodied
images stand in closer relation to the soul.  But both the original
and the reflection had here an ideal charm; and, had it been a thought
more wild, I could have fancied that this river had strayed forth out
of the rich scenery of my companion's inner world; only the vegetation
along its banks should then have had an Oriental character.

Gentle and unobtrusive as the river is, yet the tranquil woods seem
hardly satisfied to allow it passage.  The trees are rooted on the
very verge of the water, and dip their pendent branches into it.  At
one spot there is a lofty bank, on the slope of which grow some
hemlocks, declining across the stream with outstretched arms, as if
resolute to take the plunge.  In other places the banks are almost on
a level with the water; so that the quiet congregation of trees set
their feet in the flood, and are Fringed with foliage down to the
surface.  Cardinal-flowers kindle their spiral flames and illuminate
the dark nooks among the shrubbery.  The pond-lily grows abundantly
along the margin,--that delicious flower which, as Thoreau tells me,
opens its virgin bosom to the first sunlight and perfects its being
through the magic of that genial kiss.  He has beheld beds of them
unfolding in due succession as the sunrise stole gradually from flower
to flower,--a sight not to be hoped for unless when a poet adjusts his
inward eye to a proper focus with the outward organ. Grapevines here
and there twine themselves around shrub and tree and hang their
clusters over the water within reach of the boatman's hand.
Oftentimes they unite two trees of alien race in an inextricable
twine, marrying the hemlock and the maple against their will and
enriching them with a purple offspring of which neither is the parent.
One of these ambitious parasites has climbed into the upper branches
of a tall white-pine, and is still ascending from bough to bough,
unsatisfied till it shall crown the tree's airy summit with a wreath
of its broad foliage and a cluster of its grapes.

The winding course of the stream continually shut out the scene behind
us and revealed as calm and lovely a one before.  We glided from depth
to depth, and breathed new seclusion at every turn.  The shy
kingfisher flew from the withered branch close at hand to another at a
distance, uttering a shrill cry of anger or alarm.  Ducks that had
been floating there since the preceding eve were startled at our
approach and skimmed along the glassy river, breaking its dark surface
with a bright streak. The pickerel leaped from among the lilypads.
The turtle, sunning itself upon a rock or at the root of a tree, slid
suddenly into the water with a plunge.  The painted Indian who paddled
his canoe along the Assabeth three hundred years ago could hardly have
seen a wilder gentleness displayed upon its banks and reflected in its
bosom than we did.  Nor could the same Indian have prepared his
noontide meal with more simplicity.  We drew up our skiff at some
point where the overarching shade formed a natural bower, and there
kindled a fire with the pine cones and decayed branches that lay
strewn plentifully around.  Soon the smoke ascended among the trees,
impregnated with a savory incense, not heavy, dull, and surfeiting,
like the steam of cookery within doors, but sprightly and piquant.
The smell of our feast was akin to the woodland odors with which it
mingled: there was no sacrilege committed by our intrusion there: the
sacred solitude was hospitable, and granted us free leave to cook and
eat in the recess that was at once our kitchen and banqueting-hall.
It is strange what humble offices may be performed in a beautiful
scene without destroying its poetry. Our fire, red gleaming among the
trees, and we beside it, busied with culinary rites and spreading out
our meal on a mossgrown log, all seemed in unison with the river
gliding by and the foliage rustling over us.  And, what was strangest,
neither did our mirth seem to disturb the propriety of the solemn
woods; although the hobgoblins of the old wilderness and the will-of-
the-wisps that glimmered in the marshy places might have come trooping
to share our table-talk and have added their shrill laughter to our
merriment.  It was the very spot in which to utter the extremest
nonsense or the profoundest wisdom, or that ethereal product of the
mind which partakes of both, and may become one or the other, in
correspondence with the faith and insight of the auditor.

So, amid sunshine and shadow, rustling leaves and sighing waters, up
gushed our talk like the babble of a fountain.  The evanescent spray
was Ellery's; and his, too, the lumps of golden thought that lay
glimmering in the fountain's bed and brightened both our faces by the
reflection. Could he have drawn out that virgin gold, and stamped it
with the mint-mark that alone gives currency, the world might have had
the profit, and he the fame. My mind was the richer merely by the
knowledge that it was there. But the chief profit of those wild days,
to him and me, lay not in any definite idea, not in any angular or
rounded truth, which we dug out of the shapeless mass of problematical
stuff, but in the freedom which we thereby won from all custom and
conventionalism and fettering influences of man on man.  We were so
free to-day that it was impossible to be slaves again to-morrow.  When
we crossed the threshold of the house or trod the thronged pavements
of a city, still the leaves of the trees that overhang the Assabeth
were whispering to us, "Be free! be free!" Therefore along that shady
river-bank there are spots, marked with a heap of ashes and half-
consumed brands, only less sacred in my remembrance than the hearth of
a household fire.

And yet how sweet, as we floated homeward adown the golden river at
sunset,--how sweet was it to return within the system of human
society, not as to a dungeon and a chain, but as to a stately edifice,
whence we could go forth at will into state--her simplicity!  How
gently, too, did the sight of the Old Manse, best seen from the river,
overshadowed with its willow and all environed about with the foliage
of its orchard and avenue,--how gently did its gray, homely aspect
rebuke the speculative extravagances of the day!  It had grown sacred
in connection with the artificial life against which we inveighed; it
had been a home for many years, in spite of all; it was my home too;
and, with these thoughts, it seemed to me that all the artifice and
conventionalism of life was but an impalpable thinness upon its
surface, and that the depth below was none the worse for it. Once, as
we turned our boat to the bank, there was a cloud, in the shape of an
immensely gigantic figure of a hound, couched above the house, as if
keeping guard over it.  Gazing at this symbol, I prayed that the upper
influences might long protect the institutions that had grown out of
the heart of mankind.

If ever my readers should decide to give up civilized life, cities,
houses, and whatever moral or material enormities in addition to these
the perverted ingenuity of our race has contrived, let it be in the
early autumn.  Then Nature will love him better than at any other
season, and will take him to her bosom with a more motherly
tenderness. I could scarcely endure the roof of the old house above me
in those first autumnal days. How early in the summer, too, the
prophecy of autumn comes! Earlier in some years than in others;
sometimes even in the first weeks of July.  There is no other feeling
like what is caused by this faint, doubtful, yet real perception--if
it be not rather a foreboding--of the year's decay, so blessedly sweet
and sad in the same breath.

Did I say that there was no feeling like it?  Ah, but there is a half-
acknowledged melancholy like to this when we stand in the perfected
vigor of our life and feel that Time has now given us all his flowers,
and that the next work of his never-idle fingers must be to steal them
one by one away.

I have forgotten whether the song of the cricket be not as early a
token of autumn's approach as any other,--that song which may be
called an audible stillness; for though very loud and heard afar, yet
the mind does not take note of it as a sound, so completely is its
individual existence merged among the accompanying characteristics of
the season. Alas for the pleasant summertime!  In August the grass is
still verdant on the hills and in the valleys; the foliage of the
trees is as dense as ever and as green; the flowers gleam forth in
richer abundance along the margin of the river and by the stone walls
and deep among the woods; the days, too, are as fervid now as they
were a month ago; and yet in every breath of wind and in every beam of
sunshine we hear the whispered farewell and behold the parting smile
of a dear friend.  There is a coolness amid all the heat, a mildness
in the blazing noon.  Not a breeze can stir but it thrills us with the
breath of autumn.  A pensive glory is seen in the far, golden gleams,
among the shadows of the trees. The flowers--even the brightest of
them, and they are the most gorgeous of the year--have this gentle
sadness wedded to their pomp, and typify the character of the
delicious time each within itself.  The brilliant cardinal-flower has
never seemed gay to me.

Still later in the season Nature's tenderness waxes stronger.  It is
impossible not to be fond of our mother now; for she is so fond of us!
At other periods she does not make this impression on me, or only at
rare intervals; but in those genial days of autumn, when she has
perfected her harvests and accomplished every needful thing that was
given her to do, then she overflows with a blessed superfluity of
love. She has leisure to caress her children now.  It is good to be
alive and at such times. Thank Heaven for breath--yes, for mere
breath--when it is made up of a heavenly breeze like this!  It comes
with a real kiss upon our cheeks; it would linger fondly around us if
it might; but, since it must be gone, it embraces us with its whole
kindly heart and passes onward to embrace likewise the next thing that
it meets.  A blessing is flung abroad and scattered far and wide over
the earth, to be gathered up by all who choose.  I recline upon the
still unwithered grass and whisper to myself, "O perfect day!  O
beautiful world!  O beneficent God!"  And it is the promise of a
blessed eternity; for our Creator would never have made such lovely
days and have given us the deep hearts to enjoy them, above and beyond
all thought, unless we were meant to be immortal.  This sunshine is
the golden pledge thereof.  It beams through the gates of paradise and
shows us glimpses far inward.

By and by, in a little time, the outward world puts on a drear
austerity.  On some October morning there is a heavy hoarfrost on the
grass and along the tops of the fences; and at sunrise the leaves fall
from the trees of our avenue, without a breath of wind, quietly
descending by their own weight.  All summer long they have murmured
like the noise of waters; they have roared loudly while the branches
were wrestling with the thunder-gust; they have made music both glad
and solemn; they have attuned my thoughts by their quiet sound as I
paced to and fro beneath the arch of intermingling boughs.  Now they
can only rustle under my feet.  Henceforth the gray parsonage begins
to assume a larger importance, and draws to its fireside,--for the
abomination of the air-tight stove is reserved till wintry weather,--
draws closer and closer to its fireside the vagrant impulses that had
gone wandering about through the summer.

When summer was dead and buried the Old Manse became as lonely as a
hermitage.  Not that ever--in my time at least--it had been thronged
with company; but, at no rare intervals, we welcomed some friend out
of the dusty glare and tumult of the world, and rejoiced to share with
him the transparent obscurity that was floating over us.  In one
respect our precincts were like the Enchanted Ground through which the
pilgrim travelled on his way to the Celestial City.  The guests, each
and all, felt a slumberous influence upon them; they fell asleep in
chairs, or took a more deliberate siesta on the sofa, or were seen
stretched among the shadows of the orchard, looking up dreamily
through the boughs. They could not have paid a more acceptable
compliment to my abode nor to my own qualities as a host.  I held it
as a proof that they left their cares behind them as they passed
between the stone gate-posts at the entrance of our avenue, and that
the so powerful opiate was the abundance of peace and quiet within and
all around us.  Others could give them pleasure and amusement or
instruction,--these could be picked up anywhere; but it was for me to
give them rest,--rest in a life of trouble.  What better could be
done for those weary and world-worn spirits?--for him whose career of
perpetual action was impeded and harassed by the rarest of his powers
and the richest of his acquirements?--for another who had thrown his
ardent heart from earliest youth into the strife of politics, and now,
perchance, began to suspect that one lifetime is too brief for the
accomplishment of any lofty aim?--for her oil whose feminine nature
had been imposed the heavy gift of intellectual power, such as a
strong man might have staggered under, and with it the necessity to
act upon the world?--in a word, not to multiply instances, what
better could be done for anybody who came within our magic circle than
to throw the spell of a tranquil spirit over him?  And when it had
wrought its full effect, then we dismissed him, with but misty
reminiscences, as if he had been dreaming of us.

Were I to adopt a pet idea as so many people do, and fondle it in my
embraces to the exclusion of all others, it would be, that the great
want which mankind labors under at this present period is sleep.  The
world should recline its vast head on the first convenient pillow and
take an age-long nap.  It has gone distracted through a morbid
activity, and, while preternaturally wide awake, is nevertheless
tormented by visions that seem real to it now, but would assume their
true aspect and character were all things once set right by an
interval of sound repose. This is the only method of getting rid of
old delusions and avoiding new ones; of regenerating our race, so that
it might in due time awake as an infant out of dewy slumber; of
restoring to us the simple perception of what is right and the single-
hearted desire to achieve it, both of which have long been lost in
consequence of this weary activity of brain and torpor or passion of
the heart that now afflict the universe. Stimulants, the only mode of
treatment hitherto attempted, cannot quell the disease; they do but
heighten the delirium.

Let not the above paragraph ever be quoted against the author; for,
though tinctured with its modicum of truth, it is the result and
expression of what he knew, while he was writing, to be but a
distorted survey of the state and prospects of mankind.  There were
circumstances around me which made it difficult to view the world
precisely as it exists; for, severe and sober as was the Old Manse, it
was necessary to go but a little way beyond its threshold before
meeting with stranger moral shapes of men than might have been
encountered elsewhere in a circuit of a thousand miles.

These hobgoblins of flesh and blood were attracted thither by the
widespreading influence of a great original thinker, who had his
earthly abode at the opposite extremity of our village.  His mind
acted upon other minds of a certain constitution with wonderful
magnetism, and drew many men upon long pilgrimages to speak with him
face to face.  Young visionaries--to whom just so much of insight had
been imparted as to make life all a labyrinth around them--came to
seek the clew that should guide them out of their self-involved
bewilderment.  Gray-headed theorists--whose systems, at first air, had
finally imprisoned them in an iron framework--travelled painfully to
his door, not to ask deliverance, but to invite the free spirit into
their own thraldom. People that had lighted on a new thought or a
thought that they fancied new, came to Emerson, as the finder of a
glittering gem hastens to a lapidary, to ascertain its quality and
value.  Uncertain, troubled, earnest wanderers through the midnight of
the moral world beheld his intellectual fire as a beacon burning on a
hill-top, and, climbing the difficult ascent, looked forth into the
surrounding obscurity more hopefully than hitherto.  The light
revealed objects unseen before,--mountains, gleaming lakes, glimpses
of a creation among the chaos; but also, as was unavoidable, it
attracted bats and owls and the whole host of night birds, which
flapped their dusky wings against the gazer's eyes, and sometimes were
mistaken for fowls of angelic feather.  Such delusions always hover
nigh whenever a beacon-fire of truth is kindled.

For myself, there bad been epochs of my life when I, too, might have
asked of this prophet the master word that should solve me the riddle
of the universe; but now, being happy, I felt as if there were no
question to be put, and therefore admired Emerson as a poet, of deep
beauty and austere tenderness, but sought nothing from him as a
philosopher.  It was good, nevertheless, to meet him in the woodpaths,
or sometimes in our avenue, with that pure, intellectual gleam
diffused about his presence like the garment of a shining one; and be,
so quiet, so simple, so without pretension, encountering each man
alive as if expecting to receive more than he could impart.  And, in
truth, the heart of many an ordinary man had, perchance, inscriptions
which he could not read.  But it was impossible to dwell in his
vicinity without inhaling more or less the mountain atmosphere of his
lofty thought, which, in the brains of some people, wrought a singular
giddiness,--new truth being as heady as new wine.  Never was a poor
little country village infested with such a variety of queer,
strangely dressed, oddly behaved mortals, most of whom took upon
themselves to be important agents of the world's destiny, yet were
simply bores of a very intense water.  Such, I imagine, is the
invariable character of persons who crowd so closely about an original
thinker as to draw in his unuttered breath and thus become imbued with
a false originality.  This triteness of novelty is enough to make any
man of common-sense blaspheme at all ideas of less than a century's
standing, and pray that the world may be petrified and rendered
immovable in precisely the worst moral and physical state that it ever
yet arrived at, rather than be benefited by such schemes of such
philosophers.

And now I begin to feel--and perhaps should have sooner felt--that we
have talked enough of the Old Manse.  Mine honored reader, it may be,
will vilify the poor author as an egotist for babbling through so many
pages about a mossgrown country parsonage, and his life within its
walls, and on the river, and in the woods, and the influences that
wrought upon him from all these sources.  My conscience, however, does
not reproach me with betraying anything too sacredly individual to be
revealed by a human spirit to its brother or sister spirit.  How
narrow-how shallow and scanty too--is the stream of thought that has
been flowing from my pen, compared with the broad tide of dim
emotions, ideas, and associations which swell around me from that
portion of my existence!  How little have I told!  and of that little,
how almost nothing is even tinctured with any quality that makes it
exclusively my own!  Has the reader gone wandering, hand in hand with
me, through the inner passages of my being? and have we groped
together into all its chambers and examined their treasures or their
rubbish?  Not so.  We have been standing on the greensward, but just
within the cavern's mouth, where the common sunshine is free to
penetrate, and where every footstep is therefore free to come.  I have
appealed to no sentiment or sensibilities save such as are diffused
among us all.  So far as I am a man of really individual attributes I
veil my face; nor am I, nor have I ever been, one of those supremely
hospitable people who serve up their own hearts, delicately fried,
with brain sauce, as a tidbit for their beloved public.

Glancing back over what I have written, it seems but the scattered
reminiscences of a single summer.  In fairyland there is no
measurement of time; and, in a spot so sheltered from the turmoil of
life's ocean, three years hastened away with a noiseless flight, as
the breezy sunshine chases the cloud-shadows across the depths of a
still valley. Now came hints, growing more and more distinct, that the
owner of the old house was pining for his native air.  Carpenters
next, appeared, making a tremendous racket among the outbuildings,
strewing the green grass with pine shavings and chips of chestnut
joists, and vexing the whole antiquity of the place with their
discordant renovations.  Soon, moreover, they divested our abode of
the veil of woodbine which had crept over a large portion of its
southern face.  All the aged mosses were cleared unsparingly away; and
there were horrible whispers about brushing up the external walls with
a coat of paint,--a purpose as little to my taste as might be that of
rouging the venerable cheeks of one's grandmother. But the hand that
renovates is always more sacrilegious than that which destroys.  In
fine, we gathered up our household goods, drank a farewell cup of tea
in our pleasant little breakfast-room,--delicately fragrant tea, an
unpurchasable luxury, one of the many angel gifts that had fallen like
dew upon us,--and passed forth between the tall stone gate-posts as
uncertain as the wandering Arabs where our tent might next be pitched.
Providence took me by the hand, and--an oddity of dispensation which,
I trust, there is no irreverence in smiling at--has led me, as the
newspapers announce while I am writing, from the Old Manse into a
custom-house.  As a story-teller, I have often contrived strange
vicissitudes for my imaginary personages, but none like this.

The treasure of intellectual gold which I hoped to find in our
secluded dwelling had never come to light.  No profound treatise of
ethics, no philosophic history, no novel even, that could stand
unsupported on its edges.  All that I had to show, as a man of
letters, were these, few tales and essays, which had blossomed out
like flowers in the calm summer of my heart and mind.  Save editing
(an easy task) the journal of my friend of many years, the African
Cruiser, I had done nothing else. With these idle weeds and withering
blossoms I have intermixed some that were produced long ago,--old,
faded things, reminding me of flowers pressed between the leaves of a
book,--and now offer the bouquet, such as it is, to any whom it may
please.  These fitful sketches, with so little of external life about
them, yet claiming no profundity of purpose,--so reserved, even while
they sometimes seem so frank,--often but half in earnest, and never,
even when most so, expressing satisfactorily the thoughts which they
profess to image,--such trifles, I truly feel, afford no solid basis
for a literary reputation. Nevertheless, the public--if my limited
number of readers, whom I venture to regard rather as a circle of
friends, may be termed a public--will receive them the more kindly,
as the last offering, the last collection of this nature which it is
my purpose ever to put forth. Unless I could do better, I have done
enough in this kind.  For myself the book will always retain one
charm,--as reminding me of the river, with its delightful solitudes,
and of the avenue, the garden, and the orchard, and especially the
dear Old Manse, with the little study on its western side, and the
sunshine glimmering through the willow branches while I wrote.

Let the reader, if he will do me so much honor, imagine himself my
guest, and that, having seen whatever may be worthy of notice within
and about the Old Manse, he has finally been ushered into my study.
There, after seating him in an antique elbow-chair, an heirloom of the
house, I take forth a roll of manuscript and entreat his attention to
the following tales,--an act of personal inhospitality, however, which
I never was guilty of, nor ever will be, even to my worst enemy.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                         A SELECT PARTY  



The man of fancy made an entertainment at one of his castles in the
air, and invited a select number of distinguished personages to
favor him with their presence.  The mansion, though less splendid
than many that have been situated in the same region, was
nevertheless of a magnificence such as is seldom witnessed by those
acquainted only with terrestrial architecture.  Its strong
foundations and massive walls were quarried out of a ledge of heavy
and sombre clouds which had hung brooding over the earth, apparently
as dense and ponderous as its own granite, throughout a whole
autumnal day.  Perceiving that the general effect was gloomy,--so
that the airy castle looked like a feudal fortress, or a monastery
of the Middle Ages, or a state prison of our own times, rather than
the home of pleasure and repose which he intended it to be,--the
owner, regardless of expense, resolved to gild the exterior from top
to bottom.  Fortunately, there was just then a flood of evening
sunshine in the air.  This being gathered up and poured abundantly
upon the roof and walls, imbued them with a kind of solemn
cheerfulness; while the cupolas and pinnacles were made to glitter
with the purest gold, and all the hundred windows gleamed with a
glad light, as if the edifice itself were rejoicing in its heart.

And now, if the people of the lower world chanced to be looking
upward out of the turmoil of their petty perplexities, they probably
mistook the castle in the air for a heap of sunset clouds, to which
the magic of light and shade had imparted the aspect of a
fantastically constructed mansion.  To such beholders it was unreal,
because they lacked the imaginative faith.  Had they been worthy to
pass within its portal, they would have recognized the truth, that
the dominions which the spirit conquers for itself among unrealities
become a thousand times more real than the earth whereon they stamp
their feet, saying, "This is solid and substantial; this may be
called a fact."

At the appointed hour, the host stood in his great saloon to receive
the company.  It was a vast and noble room, the vaulted ceiling of
which was supported by double rows of gigantic pillars that had been
hewn entire out of masses of variegated clouds.  So brilliantly were
they polished, and so exquisitely wrought by the sculptor's skill,
as to resemble the finest specimens of emerald, porphyry, opal, and
chrysolite, thus producing a delicate richness of effect which their
immense size rendered not incompatible with grandeur.  To each of
these pillars a meteor was suspended.  Thousands of these ethereal
lustres are continually wandering about the firmament, burning out
to waste, yet capable of imparting a useful radiance to any person
who has the art of converting them to domestic purposes.  As managed
in the saloon, they are far more economical than ordinary lamplight.
Such, however, was the intensity of their blaze that it had been
found expedient to cover each meteor with a globe of evening mist,
thereby muffling the too potent glow and soothing it into a mild and
comfortable splendor.  It was like the brilliancy of a powerful yet
chastened imagination,--a light which seemed to hide whatever was
unworthy to be noticed and give effect to every beautiful and noble
attribute.  The guests, therefore, as they advanced up the centre of
the saloon, appeared to better advantage than ever before in their
lives.

The first that entered, with old-fashioned punctuality, was a
venerable figure in the costume of bygone days, with his white hair
flowing down over his shoulders and a reverend beard upon his
breast.  He leaned upon a staff, the tremulous stroke of which, as
he set it carefully upon the floor, re-echoed through the saloon at
every footstep.  Recognizing at once this celebrated personage, whom
it had cost him a vast deal of trouble and research to discover, the
host advanced nearly three fourths of the distance down between the
pillars to meet and welcome him.

"Venerable sir," said the Man of Fancy, bending to the floor, "the
honor of this visit would never be forgotten were my term of
existence to be as happily prolonged as your own."

The old gentleman received the compliment with gracious
condescension.  He then thrust up his spectacles over his forehead
and appeared to take a critical survey of the saloon.

"Never within my recollection," observed he, "have I entered a more
spacious and noble hall.  But are you sure that it is built of solid
materials and that the structure will be permanent?"

"O, never fear, my venerable friend," replied the host.  "In
reference to a lifetime like your own, it is true my castle may well
be called a temporary edifice.  But it will endure long enough to
answer all the purposes for which it was erected."

But we forget that the reader has not yet been made acquainted with
the guest.  It was no other than that universally accredited
character so constantly referred to in all seasons of intense cold
or heat; he that, remembers the hot Sunday and the cold Friday; the
witness of a past age whose negative reminiscences find their way
into every newspaper, yet whose antiquated and dusky abode is so
overshadowed by accumulated years and crowded back by modern
edifices that none but the Man of Fancy could have discovered it;
it was, in short, that twin brother of Time, and great-grandsire of
mankind, and hand-and-glove associate of all forgotten men and
things,--the Oldest Inhabitant.  The host would willingly have drawn
him into conversation, but succeeded only in eliciting a few remarks
as to the oppressive atmosphere of this present summer evening
compared with one which the guest had experienced about fourscore
years ago.  The old gentleman, in fact, was a good deal overcome by
his journey among the clouds, which, to a frame so earth-incrusted
by long continuance in a lower region, was unavoidably more
fatiguing than to younger spirits.  He was therefore conducted to an
easy-chair, well cushioned and stuffed with vaporous softness, and
left to take a little repose.

The Man of Fancy now discerned another guest, who stood so quietly
in the shadow of one of the pillars that he might easily have been
overlooked.

"My dear sir," exclaimed the host, grasping him warmly by the hand,
"allow me to greet you as the hero of the evening.  Pray do not take
it as an empty compliment; for, if there were not another guest in
my castle, it would be entirely pervaded with your presence."

"I thank you," answered the unpretending stranger; "but, though you
happened to overlook me, I have not just arrived.  I came very
early; and, with your permission, shall remain after the rest of the
company have retired."

And who does the reader imagine was this unobtrusive guest?  It was
the famous performer of acknowledged impossibilities,--a character
of superhuman capacity and virtue, and, if his enemies are to be
credited, of no less remarkable weaknesses and defects. With a
generosity with which he alone sets us an example, we will glance
merely at his nobler attributes.  He it is, then, who prefers the
interests of others to his own and a humble station to an exalted
one.  Careless of fashion, custom, the opinions of men, and the
influence of the press, he assimilates his life to the standard of
ideal rectitude, and thus proves himself the one independent citizen
of our free country.  In point of ability, many people declare him
to be the only mathematician capable of squaring the circle; the
only mechanic acquainted with the principle of perpetual motion; the
only scientific philosopher who can compel water to run up hill; the
only writer of the age whose genius is equal to the production of an
epic poem; and, finally, so various are his accomplishments, the
only professor of gymnastics who has succeeded in jumping down his
own throat. With all these talents, however, he is so far from being
considered a member of good society, that it is the severest censure
of any fashionable assemblage to affirm that this remarkable
individual was present.  Public orators, lecturers, and theatrical
performers particularly eschew his company.  For especial reasons,
we are not at liberty to disclose his name, and shall mention only
one other trait,--a most singular phenomenon in natural philosophy,
--that, when he happens to cast his eyes upon a looking-glass, he
beholds Nobody reflected there!

Several other guests now made their appearance; and among them,
chattering with immense volubility, a brisk little gentleman of
universal vogue in private society, and not unknown in the public
journals under the title of Monsieur On-Dit.  The name would seem to
indicate a Frenchman; but, whatever be his country, he is thoroughly
versed in all the languages of the day, and can express himself
quite as much to the purpose in English as in any other tongue.  No
sooner were the ceremonies of salutation over than this talkative
little person put his mouth to the host's ear and whispered three
secrets of state, an important piece of commercial intelligence, and
a rich item of fashionable scandal. He then assured the Man of Fancy
that he would not fail to circulate in the society of the lower
world a minute description of this magnificent castle in the air and
of the festivities at which he had the honor to be a guest.  So
saying, Monsieur On-Dit made his bow and hurried from one to another
of the company, with all of whom he seemed to be acquainted and to
possess some topic of interest or amusement for every individual.
Coming at last to the Oldest Inhabitant, who was slumbering
comfortably in the easy-chair, he applied his mouth to that
venerable ear.

"What do you say?" cried the old gentleman, starting from his nap
and putting up his hand to serve the purpose of an ear-trumpet.

Monsieur On-Dit bent forward again and repeated his communication.

"Never within my memory," exclaimed the Oldest Inhabitant, lifting
his hands in astonishment, "has so remarkable an incident been heard
of."

Now came in the Clerk of the Weather, who had been invited out of
deference to his official station, although the host was well aware
that his conversation was likely to contribute but little to the
general enjoyment.  He soon, indeed, got into a corner with his
acquaintance of long ago, the Oldest Inhabitant, and began to
compare notes with him in reference to the great storms, gales of
wind, and other atmospherical facts that had occurred during a
century past.  It rejoiced the Man of Fancy that his venerable and
much-respected guest had met with so congenial an associate.
Entreating them both to make themselves perfectly at home, he now
turned to receive the Wandering Jew.  This personage, however, had
latterly grown so common, by mingling in all sorts of society and
appearing at the beck of every entertainer, that he could hardly be
deemed a proper guest in a very exclusive circle.  Besides, being
covered with dust from his continual wanderings along the highways
of the world, he really looked out of place in a dress party; so
that the host felt relieved of an incommodity when the restless
individual in question, after a brief stay, took his departure on a
ramble towards Oregon.

The portal was now thronged by a crowd of shadowy people with whom
the Man of Fancy had been acquainted in his visionary youth. He had
invited them hither for the sake of observing how they would
compare, whether advantageously or otherwise, with the real
characters to whom his maturer life had introduced him.  They were
beings of crude imagination, such as glide before a young man's eye
and pretend to be actual inhabitants of the earth; the wise and
witty with whom he would hereafter hold intercourse; the generous
and heroic friends whose devotion would be requited with his own;
the beautiful dream-woman who would become the helpmate of his human
toils and sorrows and at once the source and partaker of his
happiness.  Alas! it is not good for the full-grown man to look too
closely at these old acquaintances, but rather to reverence them at
a distance through the medium of years that have gathered duskily
between.  There was something laughably untrue in their pompous
stride and exaggerated sentiment; they were neither human nor
tolerable likenesses of humanity, but fantastic maskers, rendering
heroism and nature alike ridiculous by the grave absurdity of their
pretensions to such attributes; and as for the peerless dream-lady,
behold! there advanced up the saloon, with a movement like a jointed
doll, a sort of wax-figure of an angel, a creature as cold as
moonshine, an artifice in petticoats, with an intellect of pretty
phrases and only the semblance of a heart, yet in all these
particulars the true type of a young man's imaginary mistress.
Hardly could the host's punctilious courtesy restrain a smile as he
paid his respects to this unreality and met the sentimental glance
with which the Dream sought to remind him of their former love
passages.

"No, no, fair lady," murmured he betwixt sighing and smiling; "my
taste is changed; I have learned to love what Nature makes better
than my own creations in the guise of womanhood."

"Ah, false one," shrieked the dream-lady, pretending to faint, but
dissolving into thin air, out of which came the deplorable murmur of
her voice, "your inconstancy has annihilated me."

"So be it," said the cruel Man of Fancy to himself; "and a good
riddance too."

Together with these shadows, and from the same region, there came an
uninvited multitude of shapes which at any time during his life had
tormented the Man of Fancy in his moods of morbid melancholy or had
haunted him in the delirium of fever.  The walls of his castle in
the air were not dense enough to keep them out, nor would the
strongest of earthly architecture have availed to their exclusion.
Here were those forms of dim terror which had beset him at the
entrance of life, waging warfare with his hopes; here were strange
uglinesses of earlier date, such as haunt children in the night-
time.  He was particularly startled by the vision of a deformed old
black woman whom he imagined as lurking in the garret of his native
home, and who, when he was an infant, had once come to his bedside
and grinned at him in the crisis of a scarlet fever.  This same
black shadow, with others almost as hideous, now glided among the
pillars of the magnificent saloon, grinning recognition, until the
man shuddered anew at the forgotten terrors of his childhood.  It
amused him, however, to observe the black woman, with the
mischievous caprice peculiar to such beings, steal up to the chair
of the Oldest Inhabitant and peep into his half-dreamy mind.

"Never within my memory," muttered that venerable personage, aghast,
"did I see such a face."

Almost immediately after the unrealities just described, arrived a
number of guests whom incredulous readers may be inclined to rank
equally among creatures of imagination.  The most noteworthy were an
incorruptible Patriot; a Scholar without pedantry; a Priest without
worldly ambition; and a Beautiful Woman without pride or coquetry; a
Married Pair whose life had never been disturbed by incongruity of
feeling; a Reformer untrammelled by his theory; and a Poet who felt
no jealousy towards other votaries of the lyre.  In truth, however,
the host was not one of the cynics who consider these patterns of
excellence, without the fatal flaw, such rarities in the world; and
he had invited them to his select party chiefly out of humble
deference to the judgment of society, which pronounces them almost
impossible to be met with.

"In my younger days," observed the Oldest Inhabitant, "such
characters might be seen at the corner of every street."

Be that as it might, these specimens of perfection proved to be not
half so entertaining companions as people with the ordinary
allowance of faults.

But now appeared a stranger, whom the host had no sooner recognized
than, with an abundance of courtesy unlavished on any other, he
hastened down the whole length of the saloon in order to pay him
emphatic honor.  Yet he was a young man in poor attire, with no
insignia of rank or acknowledged eminence, nor anything to
distinguish him among the crowd except a high, white forehead,
beneath which a pair of deep-set eyes were glowing with warm light.
It was such a light as never illuminates the earth save when a great
heart burns as the household fire of a grand intellect.  And who was
he?--who but the Master Genius for whom our country is looking
anxiously into the mist of Time, as destined to fulfil the great
mission of creating an American literature, hewing it, as it were,
out of the unwrought granite of our intellectual quarries?  From
him, whether moulded in the form of an epic poem or assuming a guise
altogether new as the spirit itself may determine, we are to receive
our first great original work, which shall do all that remains to be
achieved for our glory among the nations.  How this child of a
mighty destiny had been discovered by the Man of Fancy it is of
little consequence to mention.  Suffice it that he dwells as yet
unhonored among men, unrecognized by those who have known him from
his cradle; the noble countenance which should be distinguished by a
halo diffused around it passes daily amid the throng of people
toiling and troubling themselves about the trifles of a moment, and
none pay reverence to the worker of immortality.  Nor does it matter
much to him, in his triumph over all the ages, though a generation
or two of his own times shall do themselves the wrong to disregard
him.

By this time Monsieur On-Dit had caught up the stranger's name and
destiny and was busily whispering the intelligence among the other
guests.

"Pshaw!" said one.  "There can never be an American genius."

"Pish!" cried another.  "We have already as good poets as any in the
world.  For my part, I desire to see no better."

And the Oldest Inhabitant, when it was proposed to introduce him to
the Master Genius, begged to be excused, observing that a man who
had been honored with the acquaintance of Dwight, and Freneau, and
Joel Barlow, might be allowed a little austerity of taste.

The saloon was now fast filling up by the arrival of other
remarkable characters, among whom were noticed Davy Jones, the
distinguished nautical personage, and a rude, carelessly dressed,
harum-scarum sort of elderly fellow, known by the nickname of Old
Harry.  The latter, however, after being shown to a dressing-room,
reappeared with his gray hair nicely combed, his clothes brushed, a
clean dicky on his neck, and altogether so changed in aspect as to
merit the more respectful appellation of Venerable Henry.  Joel Doe
and Richard Roe came arm in arm, accompanied by a Man of Straw, a
fictitious indorser, and several persons who had no existence except
as voters in closely contested elections. The celebrated Seatsfield,
who now entered, was at first supposed to belong to the same
brotherhood, until he made it apparent that he was a real man of
flesh and blood and had his earthly domicile in Germany.  Among the
latest comers, as might reasonably be expected, arrived a guest from
the far future.

"Do you know him? do you know him?" whispered Monsieur On-Dit, who
seemed to be acquainted with everybody.  "He is the representative
of Posterity,--the man of an age to come."

"And how came he here?" asked a figure who was evidently the
prototype of the fashion-plate in a magazine, and might be taken to
represent the vanities of the passing moment.  "The fellow infringes
upon our rights by coming before his time."

"But you forget where we are," answered the Man of Fancy, who
overheard the remark.  "The lower earth, it is true, will be
forbidden ground to him for many long years hence; but a castle in
the air is a sort of no-man's-land, where Posterity may make
acquaintance with us on equal terms."

No sooner was his identity known than a throng of guests gathered
about Posterity, all expressing the most generous interest in his
welfare, and many boasting of the sacrifices which they had made, or
were willing to make, in his behalf.  Some, with as much secrecy as
possible, desired his judgment upon certain copies of verses or
great manuscript rolls of prose; others accosted him with the
familiarity of old friends, taking it for granted that he was
perfectly cognizant of their names and characters.  At length,
finding himself thus beset, Posterity was put quite beside his
patience.

"Gentlemen, my good friends," cried he, breaking loose from a misty
poet who strove to hold him by the button, "I pray you to attend to
your own business, and leave me to take care of mine! I expect to
owe you nothing, unless it be certain national debts, and other
encumbrances and impediments, physical and moral, which I shall find
it troublesome enough to remove from my path.  As to your verses,
pray read them to your contemporaries.  Your names are as strange to
me as your faces; and even were it otherwise,--let me whisper you a
secret,--the cold, icy memory which one generation may retain of
another is but a poor recompense to barter life for.  Yet, if your
heart is set on being known to me, the surest, the only method is,
to live truly and wisely for your own age, whereby, if the native
force be in you, you may likewise live for posterity."

"It is nonsense," murmured the Oldest Inhabitant, who, as a man of
the past, felt jealous that all notice should be withdrawn from
himself to be lavished on the future, "sheer nonsense, to waste so
much thought on what only is to be."

To divert the minds of his guests, who were considerably abashed by
this little incident, the Man of Fancy led them through several
apartments of the castle, receiving their compliments upon the taste
and varied magnificence that were displayed in each.  One of these
rooms was filled with moonlight, which did not enter through the
window, but was the aggregate of all the moonshine that is scattered
around the earth on a summer night while no eyes are awake to enjoy
its beauty.  Airy spirits had gathered it up, wherever they found it
gleaming on the broad bosom of a lake, or silvering the meanders of
a stream, or glimmering among the windstirred boughs of a wood, and
had garnered it in this one spacious hall.  Along the walls,
illuminated by the mild intensity of the moonshine, stood a
multitude of ideal statues, the original conceptions of the great
works of ancient or modern art, which the sculptors did but
imperfectly succeed in putting into marble; for it is not to be
supposed that the pure idea of an immortal creation ceases to exist;
it is only necessary to know where they are deposited in order to
obtain possession of them.--In the alcoves of another vast apartment
was arranged a splendid library, the volumes of which were
inestimable, because they consisted, not of actual performances, but
of the works which the authors only planned, without ever finding
the happy season to achieve them.  To take familiar instances, here
were the untold tales of Chaucer's Canterbury Pilgrims; the
unwritten cantos of the Fairy Queen; the conclusion of Coleridge's
Christabel; and the whole of Dryden's projected epic on the subject
of King Arthur.  The shelves were crowded; for it would not be too
much to affirm that every author has imagined and shaped out in his
thought more and far better works than those which actually
proceeded from his pen.  And here, likewise, where the unrealized
conceptions of youthful poets who died of the very strength of their
own genius before the world had caught one inspired murmur from
their lips.

When the peculiarities of the library and statue-gallery were
explained to the Oldest Inhabitant, he appeared infinitely
perplexed, and exclaimed, with more energy than usual, that he had
never heard of such a thing within his memory, and, moreover, did
not at all understand how it could be.

"But my brain, I think," said the good old gentleman, "is getting
not so clear as it used to be.  You young folks, I suppose, can see
your way through these strange matters.  For my part, I give it up."

"And so do I," muttered the Old Harry.  "It is enough to puzzle the
--Ahem!"

Making as little reply as possible to these observations, the Man of
Fancy preceded the company to another noble saloon, the pillars of
which were solid golden sunbeams taken out of the sky in the first
hour in the morning.  Thus, as they retained all their living
lustre, the room was filled with the most cheerful radiance
imaginable, yet not too dazzling to be borne with comfort and
delight.  The windows were beautifully adorned with curtains made of
the many-colored clouds of sunrise, all imbued with virgin light,
and hanging in magnificent festoons from the ceiling to the floor.
Moreover, there were fragments of rainbows scattered through the
room; so that the guests, astonished at one another, reciprocally
saw their heads made glorious by the seven primary hues; or, if they
chose,--as who would not?--they could grasp a rainbow in the air and
convert it to their own apparel and adornment.  But the morning
light and scattered rainbows were only a type and symbol of the real
wonders of the apartment.  By an influence akin to magic, yet
perfectly natural, whatever means and opportunities of joy are
neglected in the lower world had been carefully gathered up and
deposited in the saloon of morning sunshine.  As may well be
conceived, therefore, there was material enough to supply, not
merely a joyous evening, but also a happy lifetime, to more than as
many people as that spacious apartment could contain.  The company
seemed to renew their youth; while that pattern and proverbial
standard of innocence, the Child Unborn, frolicked to and fro among
them, communicating his own unwrinkled gayety to all who had the
good fortune to witness his gambols.

"My honored friends," said the Man of Fancy, after they had enjoyed
themselves awhile, "I am now to request your presence in the
banqueting-hall, where a slight collation is awaiting you."

"Ah, well said!" ejaculated a cadaverous figure, who had been
invited for no other reason than that he was pretty constantly in
the habit of dining with Duke Humphrey.  "I was beginning to wonder
whether a castle in the air were provided with a kitchen."

It was curious, in truth, to see how instantaneously the guests were
diverted from the high moral enjoyments which they had been tasting
with so much apparent zest by a suggestion of the more solid as well
as liquid delights of the festive board.  They thronged eagerly in
the rear of the host, who now ushered them into a lofty and
extensive hall, from end to end of which was arranged a table,
glittering all over with innumerable dishes and drinking-vessels of
gold.  It is an uncertain point whether these rich articles of plate
were made for the occasion out of molten sunbeams, or recovered from
the wrecks of Spanish galleons that had lain for ages at the bottom
of the sea.  The upper end of the table was overshadowed by a
canopy, beneath which was placed a chair of elaborate magnificence,
which the host himself declined to occupy, and besought his guests
to assign it to the worthiest among them.  As a suitable homage to
his incalculable antiquity and eminent distinction, the post of
honor was at first tendered to the Oldest Inhabitant.  He, however,
eschewed it, and requested the favor of a bowl of gruel at a side
table, where he could refresh himself with a quiet nap.  There was
some little hesitation as to the next candidate, until Posterity
took the Master Genius of our country by the hand and led him to the
chair of state beneath the princely canopy.  When once they beheld
him in his true place, the company acknowledged the justice of the
selection by a long thunder-roll of vehement applause.

Then was served up a banquet, combining, if not all the delicacies
of the season, yet all the rarities which careful purveyors had met
with in the flesh, fish, and vegetable markets of the land of
Nowhere.  The bill of fare being unfortunately lost, we can only
mention a phoenix, roasted in its own flames, cold potted birds of
paradise, ice-creams from the Milky-Way, and whip syllabubs and
flummery from the Paradise of Fools, whereof there was a very great
consumption.  As for drinkables, the temperance people contented
themselves with water as usual; but it was the water of the Fountain
of Youth; the ladies sipped Nepenthe; the lovelorn, the careworn,
and the sorrow-stricken were supplied with brimming goblets of Lethe;
and it was shrewdly conjectured that a certain golden vase, from
which only the more distinguished guests were invited to partake,
contained nectar that had been mellowing ever since the days of
classical mythology.  The cloth being removed, the company, as
usual, grew eloquent over their liquor and delivered themselves of a
succession of brilliant speeches,--the task of reporting which we
resign to the more adequate ability of Counsellor Gill, whose
indispensable co-operation the Man of Fancy had taken the precaution
to secure.

When the festivity of the banquet was at its most ethereal point,
the Clerk of the Weather was observed to steal from the table and
thrust his head between the purple and golden curtains of one of the
windows.

"My fellow-guests," he remarked aloud, after carefully noting the
signs of the night, "I advise such of you as live at a distance to
be going as soon as possible; for a thunder-storm is certainly at
hand."

"Mercy on me!" cried Mother Carey, who had left her brood of
chickens and come hither in gossamer drapery, with pink silk
stockings.  "How shall I ever get home?"

All now was confusion and hasty departure, with but little
superfluous leave-taking.  The Oldest Inhabitant, however, true to
the rule of those long past days in which his courtesy had been
studied, paused on the threshold of the meteor-lighted hall to
express his vast satisfaction at the entertainment.

"Never, within my memory," observed the gracious old gentleman, "has
it been my good fortune to spend a pleasanter evening or in more
select society."

The wind here took his breath away, whirled his three-cornered hat
into infinite space, and drowned what further compliments it had
been his purpose to bestow.  Many of the company had bespoken will-
o'-the-wisps to convoy them home; and the host, in his general
beneficence, had engaged the Man in the Moon, with an immense horn-
lantern, to be the guide of such desolate spinsters as could do no
better for themselves.  But a blast of the rising tempest blew out
all their lights in the twinkling of an eye. How, in the darkness
that ensued, the guests contrived to get back to earth, or whether
the greater part of them contrived to get back at all, or are still
wandering among clouds, mists, and puffs of tempestuous wind,
bruised by the beams and rafters of the overthrown castle in the
air, and deluded by all sorts of unrealities, are points that
concern themselves much more than the writer or the public.  People
should think of these matters before they trust themselves on a
pleasure-party into the realm of Nowhere.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                          FIRE WORSHIP



It is a great revolution in social and domestic life, and no less so
in the life of a secluded student, this almost universal exchange of
the open fireplace for the cheerless and ungenial stove.  On such a
morning as now lowers around our old gray parsonage, I miss the
bright face of my ancient friend, who was wont to dance upon the
hearth and play the part of more familiar sunshine.  It is sad to
turn from the cloudy sky and sombre landscape; from yonder hill,
with its crown of rusty, black pines, the foliage of which is so
dismal in the absence of the sun; that bleak pasture-land, and the
broken surface of the potato-field, with the brown clods partly
concealed by the snowfall of last night; the swollen and sluggish
river, with ice-incrusted borders, dragging its bluish-gray stream
along the verge of our orchard like a snake half torpid with the
cold,--it is sad to turn from an outward scene of so little comfort
and find the same sullen influences brooding within the precincts of
my study.  Where is that brilliant guest, that quick and subtle
spirit, whom Prometheus lured from heaven to civilize mankind and
cheer them in their wintry desolation; that comfortable inmate,
whose smile, during eight months of the year, was our sufficient
consolation for summer's lingering advance and early flight? Alas!
blindly inhospitable, grudging the food that kept him cheery and
mercurial, we have thrust him into an iron prison, and compel him to
smoulder away his life on a daily pittance which once would have
been too scanty for his breakfast.  Without a metaphor, we now make
our fire in an air-tight stove, and supply it with some half a dozen
sticks of wood between dawn and nightfall.

I never shall be reconciled to this enormity.  Truly may it be said
that the world looks darker for it.  In one way or another, here and
there and all around us, the inventions of mankind are fast blotting
the picturesque, the poetic, and the beautiful out of human life.
The domestic fire was a type of all these attributes, and seemed to
bring might and majesty, and wild nature and a spiritual essence,
into our in most home, and yet to dwell with us in such friendliness
that its mysteries and marvels excited no dismay.  The same mild
companion that smiled so placidly in our faces was he that comes
roaring out of AEtna and rushes madly up the sky like a fiend
breaking loose from torment and fighting for a place among the upper
angels.  He it is, too, that leaps from cloud to cloud amid the
crashing thunder-storm. It was he whom the Gheber worshipped with no
unnatural idolatry; and it was he who devoured London and Moscow and
many another famous city, and who loves to riot through our own dark
forests and sweep across our prairies, and to whose ravenous maw, it
is said, the universe shall one day be given as a final feast.
Meanwhile he is the great artisan and laborer by whose aid men are
enabled to build a world within a world, or, at least, to smooth
down the rough creation which Nature flung to its.  He forges the
mighty anchor and every lesser instrument; he drives the steamboat
and drags the rail-car; and it was he--this creature of terrible
might, and so many-sided utility and all-comprehensive
destructiveness--that used to be the cheerful, homely friend of our
wintry days, and whom we have made the prisoner of this iron cage.

How kindly he was! and, though the tremendous agent of change, yet
bearing himself with such gentleness, so rendering himself a part of
all life-long and age-coeval associations, that it seemed as if he
were the great conservative of nature.  While a man was true to the
fireside, so long would he be true to country and law, to the God
whom his fathers worshipped, to the wife of his youth, and to all
things else which instinct or religion has taught us to consider
sacred.  With how sweet humility did this elemental spirit perform
all needful offices for the household in which he was domesticated!
He was equal to the concoction of a grand dinner, yet scorned not to
roast a potato or toast a bit of cheese.  How humanely did he
cherish the school-boy's icy fingers, and thaw the old man's joints
with a genial warmth which almost equalled the glow of youth!  And
how carefully did he dry the cowhide boots that had trudged through
mud and snow, and the shaggy outside garment stiff with frozen
sleet! taking heed, likewise, to the comfort of the faithful dog who
had followed his master through the storm.  When did he refuse a
coal to light a pipe, or even a part of his own substance to kindle
a neighbor's fire?  And then, at twilight, when laborer, or scholar,
or mortal of whatever age, sex, or degree, drew a chair beside him
and looked into his glowing face, how acute, how profound, how
comprehensive was his sympathy with the mood of each and all!  He
pictured forth their very thoughts.  To the youthful he showed the
scenes of the adventurous life before them; to the aged the shadows
of departed love and hope; and, if all earthly things had grown
distasteful, he could gladden the fireside muser with golden
glimpses of a better world.  And, amid this varied communion with
the human soul, how busily would the sympathizer, the deep moralist,
the painter of magic pictures, be causing the teakettle to boil!

Nor did it lessen the charm of his soft, familiar courtesy and
helpfulness that the mighty spirit, were opportunity offered him,
would run riot through the peaceful house, wrap its inmates in his
terrible embrace, and leave nothing of them save their whitened
bones.  This possibility of mad destruction only made his domestic
kindness the more beautiful and touching.  It was so sweet of him,
being endowed with such power, to dwell day after day, and one long
lonesome night after another, on the dusky hearth, only now and then
betraying his wild nature by thrusting his red tongue out of the
chimney-top!  True, he had done much mischief in the world, and was
pretty certain to do more; but his warm heart atoned for all.  He
was kindly to the race of man; and they pardoned his characteristic
imperfections.

The good old clergyman, my predecessor in this mansion, was well
acquainted with the comforts of the fireside.  His yearly allowance
of wood, according to the terms of his settlement, was no less than
sixty cords.  Almost an annual forest was converted from sound
oaklogs into ashes, in the kitchen, the parlor, and this little
study, where now an unworthy successor, not in the pastoral office,
but merely in his earthly abode, sits scribbling beside an air-tight
stove.  I love to fancy one of those fireside days while the good
man, a contemporary of the Revolution, was in his early prime, some
five-and-sixty years ago.  Before sunrise, doubtless, the blaze
hovered upon the gray skirts of night and dissolved the frostwork
that had gathered like a curtain over the small window-panes.  There
is something peculiar in the aspect of the morning fireside; a
fresher, brisker glare; the absence of that mellowness which can be
produced only by half-consumed logs, and shapeless brands with the
white ashes on them, and mighty coals, the remnant of tree-trunks
that the hungry, elements have gnawed for hours.  The morning
hearth, too, is newly swept, and the brazen andirons well
brightened, so that the cheerful fire may see its face in them.
Surely it was happiness, when the pastor, fortified with a
substantial breakfast, sat down in his arm-chair and slippers and
opened the Whole Body of Divinity, or the Commentary on Job, or
whichever of his old folios or quartos might fall within the range
of his weekly sermons.  It must have been his own fault if the
warmth and glow of this abundant hearth did not permeate the
discourse and keep his audience comfortable in spite of the
bitterest northern blast that ever wrestled with the church-steeple.
He reads while the heat warps the stiff covers of the volume; he
writes without numbness either in his heart or fingers; and, with
unstinted hand, he throws fresh sticks of wood upon the fire.

A parishioner comes in.  With what warmth of benevolence--how should
he be otherwise than warm in any of his attributes?--does the
minister bid him welcome, and set a chair for him in so close
proximity to the hearth, that soon the guest finds it needful to rub
his scorched shins with his great red hands!  The melted snow drips
from his steaming boots and bubbles upon the hearth.  His puckered
forehead unravels its entanglement of crisscross wrinkles.  We lose
much of the enjoyment of fireside heat without such an opportunity
of marking its genial effect upon those who have been looking the
inclement weather in the face.  In the course of the day our
clergyman himself strides forth, perchance to pay a round of
pastoral visits; or, it may he, to visit his mountain of a wood-pile
and cleave the monstrous logs into billets suitable for the fire.
He returns with fresher life to his beloved hearth.  During the
short afternoon the western sunshine comes into the study and
strives to stare the ruddy blaze out of countenance but with only a
brief triumph, soon to be succeeded by brighter glories of its
rival.  Beautiful it is to see the strengthening gleam, the
deepening light that gradually casts distinct shadows of the human
figure, the table, and the high-backed chairs upon the opposite
wall, and at length, as twilight comes on, replenishes the room with
living radiance and makes life all rose-color.  Afar the wayfarer
discerns the flickering flame as it dances upon the windows, and
hails it as a beacon-light of humanity, reminding him, in his cold
and lonely path, that the world is not all snow, and solitude, and
desolation.  At eventide, probably, the study was peopled with the
clergyman's wife and family, and children tumbled themselves upon
the hearth-rug, and grave puss sat with her back to the fire, or
gazed, with a semblance of human meditation, into its fervid depths.
Seasonably the plenteous ashes of the day were raked over the
mouldering brands, and from the heap came jets of flame, and an
incense of night-long smoke creeping quietly up the chimney.

Heaven forgive the old clergyman!  In his later life, when for
almost ninety winters he had been gladdened by the firelight,--when
it had gleamed upon him from infancy to extreme age, and never
without brightening his spirits as well as his visage, and perhaps
keeping him alive so long,--he had the heart to brick up his
chimney-place and bid farewell to the face of his old friend
forever, why did he not take an eternal leave of the sunshine too?
His sixty cords of wood had probably dwindled to a far less ample
supply in modern times; and it is certain that the parsonage had
grown crazy with time and tempest and pervious to the cold; but
still it was one of the saddest tokens of the decline and fall of
open fireplaces that, the gray patriarch should have deigned to warm
himself at an air-tight stove.

And I, likewise,--who have found a home in this ancient owl's-nest
since its former occupant took his heavenward flight,--I, to my
shame, have put up stoves in kitchen and parlor and chamber. Wander
where you will about the house, not a glimpse of the earth-born,
heaven-aspiring fiend of Etna,--him that sports in the thunder-
storm, the idol of the Ghebers, the devourer of cities, the forest-
rioter and prairie-sweeper, the future destroyer of our earth, the
old chimney-corner companion who mingled himself so sociably with
household joys and sorrows,--not a glimpse of this mighty and kindly
one will greet your eyes.  He is now an invisible presence.  There
is his iron cage.  Touch it, and he scorches your fingers.  He
delights to singe a garment or perpetrate any other little unworthy
mischief; for his temper is ruined by the ingratitude of mankind,
for whom he cherished such warmth of feeling, and to whom he taught
all their arts, even that of making his own prison-house.  In his
fits of rage he puffs volumes of smoke and noisome gas through the
crevices of the door, and shakes the iron walls of his dungeon so as
to overthrow the ornamental urn upon its summit.  We tremble lest he
should break forth amongst us.  Much of his time is spent in sighs,
burdened with unutterable grief, and long drawn through the funnel.
He amuses himself, too, with repeating all the whispers, the moans,
and the louder utterances or tempestuous howls of the wind; so that
the stove becomes a microcosm of the aerial world.  Occasionally
there are strange combinations of sounds,--voices talking almost
articulately within the hollow chest of iron,--insomuch that fancy
beguiles me with the idea that my firewood must have grown in that
infernal forest of lamentable trees which breathed their complaints
to Dante.  When the listener is half asleep he may readily take
these voices for the conversation of spirits and assign them an
intelligible meaning.  Anon there is a pattering noise,--drip,
drip, drip,--as if a summer shower were falling within the narrow
circumference of the stove.

These barren and tedious eccentricities are all that the air-tight
stove can bestow in exchange for the invaluable moral influences
which we have lost by our desertion of the open fireplace.  Alas! is
this world so very bright that we can afford to choke up such a
domestic fountain of gladsomeness, and sit down by its darkened
source without being conscious of a gloom?

It is my belief that social intercourse cannot long continue what it
has been, now that we have subtracted from it so important and
vivifying an element as firelight.  The effects will be more
perceptible on our children and the generations that shall succeed
them than on ourselves, the mechanism of whose life may remain
unchanged, though its spirit be far other than it was. The sacred
trust of the household fire has been transmitted in unbroken
succession from the earliest ages, and faithfully cherished in spite
of every discouragement such as the curfew law of the Norman
conquerors, until in these evil days physical science has nearly
succeeded in extinguishing it.  But we at least have our youthful
recollections tinged with the glow of the hearth, and our life-long
habits and associations arranged on the principle of a mutual bond
in the domestic fire.  Therefore, though the sociable friend be
forever departed, yet in a degree he will be spiritually present
with us; and still more will the empty forms which were once full of
his rejoicing presence continue to rule our manners.  We shall draw
our chairs together as we and our forefathers have been wont for
thousands of years back, and sit around some blank and empty corner
of the room, babbling with unreal cheerfulness of topics suitable to
the homely fireside.  A warmth from the past--from the ashes of
bygone years and the raked-up embers of long ago--will sometimes
thaw the ice about our hearts; but it must be otherwise with our
successors.  On the most favorable supposition, they will be
acquainted with the fireside in no better shape than that of the
sullen stove; and more probably they will have grown up amid furnace
heat in houses which might be fancied to have their foundation over
the infernal pit, whence sulphurous steams and unbreathable
exhalations ascend through the apertures of the floor.  There will
be nothing to attract these poor children to one centre.  They will
never behold one another through that peculiar medium of vision the
ruddy gleam of blazing wood or bituminous coal---which gives the
human spirit so deep an insight into its fellows and melts all
humanity into one cordial heart of hearts.  Domestic life, if it may
still be termed domestic, will seek its separate corners, and never
gather itself into groups. The easy gossip; the merry yet
unambitious Jest; the life-like, practical discussion of real
matters in a casual way; the soul of truth which is so often
incarnated in a simple fireside word,--will disappear from earth.
Conversation will contract the air of debate, and all mortal
intercourse be chilled with a fatal frost.

In classic times, the exhortation to fight "pro axis et focis," for
the altars and the hearths, was considered the strongest appeal that
could be made to patriotism.  And it seemed an immortal utterance;
for all subsequent ages and people have acknowledged its force and
responded to it with the full portion of manhood that nature had
assigned to each.  Wisely were the altar and the hearth conjoined in
one mighty sentence; for the hearth, too, had its kindred sanctity.
Religion sat down beside it, not in the priestly robes which
decorated and perhaps disguised her at the altar, but arrayed in a
simple matron's garb, and uttering her lessons with the tenderness
of a mother's voice and heart.  The holy hearth!  If any earthly and
material thing, or rather a divine idea embodied in brick and
mortar, might be supposed to possess the permanence of moral truth,
it was this.  All revered it.  The man who did not put off his shoes
upon this holy ground would have deemed it pastime to trample upon
the altar.  It has been our task to uproot the hearth.  What further
reform is left for our children to achieve, unless they overthrow
the altar too?  And by what appeal hereafter, when the breath of
hostile armies may mingle with the pure, cold breezes of our
country, shall we attempt to rouse up native valor?  Fight for your
hearths?  There will be none throughout the land.

FIGHT FOR YOUR STOVES!  Not I, in faith.  If in such a cause I
strike a blow, it shall be on the invader's part; and Heaven grant
that it may shatter the abomination all to pieces!









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                       BUDS AND BIRD VOICES



Balmy Spring--weeks later than we expected and months later than we
longed for her--comes at last to revive the moss on the roof and
walls of our old mansion.  She peeps brightly into my study-window,
inviting me to throw it open and create a summer atmosphere by the
intermixture of her genial breath with the black and cheerless
comfort of the stove.  As the casement ascends, forth into infinite
space fly the innumerable forms of thought or fancy that have kept me
company in the retirement of this little chamber during the sluggish
lapse of wintry weather; visions, gay, grotesque, and sad; pictures
of real life, tinted with nature's homely gray and russet; scenes in
dreamland, bedizened with rainbow hues which faded before they were
well laid on,--all these may vanish now, and leave me to mould a
fresh existence out of sunshine, Brooding Meditation may flap her
dusky wings and take her owl-like Right, blinking amid the
cheerfulness of noontide.  Such companions befit the season of
frosted window-panes and crackling fires, when the blast howls
through the black-ash trees of our avenue and the drifting snow-
storm chokes up the wood-paths and fills the highway from stone wall
to stone wall.  In the spring and summer time all sombre thoughts
should follow the winter northward with the sombre and thoughtful
crows. The old paradisiacal economy of life is again in force; we
live, not to think or to labor, but for the simple end of being
happy. Nothing for the present hour is worthy of man's infinite
capacity save to imbibe the warm smile of heaven and sympathize with
the reviving earth.

The present Spring comes onward with fleeter footsteps, because
Winter lingered so unconscionably long that with her best diligence
she can hardly retrieve half the allotted period of her reign.  It
is but a fortnight since I stood on the brink of our swollen river
and beheld the accumulated ice of four frozen months go down the
stream.  Except in streaks here and there upon the hillsides, the
whole visible universe was then covered with deep snow, the
nethermost layer of which had been deposited by an early December
storm.  It was a sight to make the beholder torpid, in the
impossibility of imagining how this vast white napkin was to be
removed from the face of the corpse-like world in less time than had
been required to spread it there.  But who can estimate the power of
gentle influences, whether amid material desolation or the moral
winter of man's heart?  There have been no tempestuous rains, even
no sultry days, but a constant breath of southern winds, with now a
day of kindly sunshine, and now a no less kindly mist or a soft
descent of showers, in which a smile and a blessing seemed to have
been steeped.  The snow has vanished as if by magic; whatever heaps
may be hidden in the woods and deep gorges of the hills, only two
solitary specks remain in the landscape; and those I shall almost
regret to miss when to-morrow I look for them in vain.  Never
before, methinks, has spring pressed so closely on the footsteps of
retreating winter.  Along the roadside the green blades of grass
have sprouted on the very edge of the snow-drifts.  The pastures and
mowing-fields have not vet assumed a general aspect of verdure; but
neither have they the cheerless-brown tint which they wear in latter
autumn when vegetation has entirely ceased; there is now a faint
shadow of life, gradually brightening into the warm reality.  Some
tracts in a happy exposure,--as, for instance, yonder southwestern
slope of an orchard, in front of that old red farm-house beyond the
river,--such patches of land already wear a beautiful and tender
green, to which no future luxuriance can add a charm.  It looks
unreal; a prophecy, a hope, a transitory effect of sonic peculiar
light, which will vanish with the slightest motion of the eye.  But
beauty is never a delusion; not these verdant tracts, but the dark
and barren landscape all around them, is a shadow and a dream.  Each
moment wins seine portion of the earth from death to life; a sudden
gleam of verdure brightens along the sunny slope of a bank which an
instant ago was brown and bare.  You look again, and behold an
apparition of green grass!

The trees in our orchard and elsewhere are as yet naked, but already
appear full of life and vegetable blood.  It seems as if by one
magic touch they might instantaneously burst into full foliage, and
that the wind which now sighs through their naked branches might
make sudden music amid innumerable leaves.  The mossgrown willow-
tree which for forty years past has overshadowed these western
windows will be among the first to put on its green attire.  There
are some objections to the willow; it is not a dry and cleanly tree,
and impresses the beholder with an association of sliminess.  No
trees, I think, are perfectly agreeable as companions unless they
have glossy leaves, dry bark, and a firm and hard texture of trunk
and branches.  But the willow is almost the earliest to gladden us
with the promise and reality of beauty in its graceful and delicate
foliage, and the last to scatter its yellow yet scarcely withered
leaves upon the ground.  All through the winter, too, its yellow
twigs give it a sunny aspect, which is not without a cheering
influence even in the grayest and gloomiest day.  Beneath a clouded
sky it faithfully remembers the sunshine.  Our old house would lose
a charm were the willow to be cut down, with its golden crown over
the snow-covered roof and its heap of summer verdure.

The lilac-shrubs under my study-windows are likewise almost in leaf:
in two or three days more I may put forth my hand and pluck the
topmost bough in its freshest green.  These lilacs are very aged,
and have lost the luxuriant foliage of their prime.  The heart, or
the judgment, or the moral sense, or the taste is dissatisfied with
their present aspect.  Old age is not venerable when it embodies
itself in lilacs, rose-bushes, or any other ornamental shrub; it
seems as if such plants, as they grow only for beauty, ought to
flourish always in immortal youth, or, at least, to die before their
sad decrepitude.  Trees of beauty are trees of paradise, and
therefore not subject to decay by their original nature, though they
have lost that precious birthright by being transplanted to an
earthly soil.  There is a kind of ludicrous unfitness in the idea of
a time-stricken and grandfatherly lilac-bush.  The analogy holds
good in human life. Persons who can only be graceful and ornamental
--who can give the world nothing but flowers--should die young, and
never be seen with gray hair and wrinkles, any more than the flower-
shrubs with mossy bark and blighted foliage, like the lilacs under
my window. Not that beauty is worthy of less than immortality; no,
the beautiful should live forever,--and thence, perhaps, the sense
of impropriety when we see it triumphed over by time.  Apple-trees,
on the other hand, grow old without reproach.  Let them live as long
as they may, and contort themselves into whatever perversity of
shape they please, and deck their withered limbs with a springtime
gaudiness of pink blossoms; still they are respectable, even if they
afford us only an apple or two in a season.  Those few apples--or,
at all events, the remembrance of apples in bygone years--are the
atonement which utilitarianism inexorably demands for the privilege
of lengthened life.  Human flower-shrubs, if they will grow old on
earth, should, besides their lovely blossoms, bear some kind of
fruit that will satisfy earthly appetites, else neither man nor the
decorum of nature will deem it fit that the moss should gather on
them.

One of the first things that strikes the attention when the white
sheet of winter is withdrawn is the neglect and disarray that lay
hidden beneath it.  Nature is not cleanly according to our
prejudices.  The beauty of preceding years, now transformed to brown
and blighted deformity, obstructs the brightening loveliness of the
present hour.  Our avenue is strewn with the whole crop of autumn's
withered leaves.  There are quantities of decayed branches which one
tempest after another has flung down, black and rotten, and one or
two with the ruin of a bird's-nest clinging to them.  In the garden
are the dried bean-vines, the brown stalks of the asparagus-bed, and
melancholy old cabbages which were frozen into the soil before their
unthrifty cultivator could find time to gather them.  How
invariably, throughout all the forms of life, do we find these
intermingled memorials of death!  On the soil of thought and in the
garden of the heart, as well as in the sensual world, he withered
leaves,--the ideas and feelings that we have done with.  There is no
wind strong enough to sweep them away; infinite space will not
garner then from our sight.  What mean they?  Why may we not be
permitted to live and enjoy, as if this were the first life and our
own the primal enjoyment, instead of treading always on these dry
hones and mouldering relics, from the aged accumulation of which
springs all that now appears so young and new?  Sweet must have been
the springtime of Eden, when no earlier year had strewn its decay
upon the virgin turf and no former experience had ripened into
summer and faded into autumn in the hearts of its inhabitants! That
was a world worth living in.  O then murmurer, it is out of the very
wantonness of such a life that then feignest these idle
lamentations.  There is no decay.  Each human soul is the first-
created inhabitant of its own Eden.  We dwell in an old moss-covered
mansion, and tread in the worn footprints of the past, and have a
gray clergyman's ghost for our daily and nightly inmate; yet all
these outward circumstances are made less than visionary by the
renewing power of the spirit.  Should the spirit ever lose this
power,--should the withered leaves, and the rotten branches, and the
moss-covered house, and the ghost of the gray past ever become its
realities, and the verdure and the freshness merely its faint
dream,--then let it pray to be released from earth.  It will need
the air of heaven to revive its pristine energies.

What an unlooked-for flight was this from our shadowy avenue of
black-ash and balm of Gilead trees into the infinite!  Now we have
our feet again upon the turf.  Nowhere does the grass spring up so
industriously as in this homely yard, along the base of the stone
wall, and in the sheltered nooks of the buildings, and especially
around the southern doorstep,--a locality which seems particularly
favorable to its growth, for it is already tall enough to bend over
and wave in the wind.  I observe that several weeds--and most
frequently a plant that stains the fingers with its yellow juice--
have survived and retained their freshness and sap throughout the
winter.  One knows not how they have deserved such an exception from
the common lot of their race.  They are now the patriarchs of the
departed year, and may preach mortality to the present generation of
flowers and weeds.

Among the delights of spring, how is it possible to forget the
birds?  Even the crows were welcome as the sable harbingers of a
brighter and livelier race.  They visited us before the snow was
off, but seem mostly to have betaken themselves to remote depths of
the woods, which they haunt all summer long.  Many a time shall I
disturb them there, and feel as if I had intruded among a company of
silent worshippers, as they sit in Sabbath stillness among the tree-
tops.  Their voices, when they speak, are in admirable accordance
with the tranquil solitude of a summer afternoon; and resounding so
far above the head, their loud clamor increases the religious quiet
of the scene instead of breaking it.  A crow, however, has no real
pretensions to religion, in spite of his gravity of mien and black
attire; he is certainly a thief, and probably an infidel.  The gulls
are far more respectable, in a moral point of view.  These denizens
of seabeaten rocks and haunters of the lonely beach come up our
inland river at this season, and soar high overhead, flapping their
broad wings in the upper sunshine.  They are among the most
picturesque of birds, because they so float and rest upon the air as
to become almost stationary parts of the landscape.  The imagination
has time to grow acquainted with them; they have not flitted away in
a moment.  You go up among the clouds and greet these lofty-flighted
gulls, and repose confidently with them upon the sustaining
atmosphere.  Duck's have their haunts along the solitary places of
the river, and alight in flocks upon the broad bosom of the
overflowed meadows.  Their flight is too rapid and determined for
the eye to catch enjoyment from it, although it never fails to stir
up the heart with the sportsman's ineradicable instinct.  They have
now gone farther northward, but will visit us again in autumn.

The smaller birds,--the little songsters of the woods, and those
that haunt man's dwellings and claim human friendship by building
their nests under the sheltering eaves or among the orchard trees,--
these require a touch more delicate and a gentler heart than mine to
do them justice.  Their outburst of melody is like a brook let loose
from wintry chains.  We need not deem it a too high and solemn word
to call it a hymn of praise to the Creator; since Nature, who
pictures the reviving year in so many sights of beauty, has
expressed the sentiment of renewed life in no other sound save the
notes of these blessed birds.  Their music, however, just now, seems
to be incidental, and not the result of a set purpose.  They are
discussing the economy of life and love and the site and
architecture of their summer residences, and have no time to sit on
a twig and pour forth solemn hymns, or overtures, operas,
symphonies, and waltzes.  Anxious questions are asked; grave
subjects are settled in quick and animated debate; and only by
occasional accident, as from pure ecstasy, does a rich warble roll
its tiny waves of golden sound through the atmosphere.  Their little
bodies are as busy as their voices; they are all a constant flutter
and restlessness.  Even when two or three retreat to a tree-top to
hold council, they wag their tails and heads all the time with the
irrepressible activity of their nature, which perhaps renders their
brief span of life in reality as long as the patriarchal age of
sluggish man.  The blackbirds, three species of which consort
together, are the noisiest of all our feathered citizens.  Great
companies of them--more than the famous "four-and-twenty" whom
Mother Goose has immortalized--congregate in contiguous treetops and
vociferate with all the clamor and confusion of a turbulent
political meeting.  Politics, certainly, must be the occasion of
such tumultuous debates; but still, unlike all other politicians,
they instil melody into their individual utterances and produce
harmony as a general effect.  Of all bird voices, none are more
sweet and cheerful to my ear than those of swallows, in the dim,
sunstreaked interior of a lofty barn; they address the heart with
even a closer sympathy than robin-redbreast.  But, indeed, all these
winged people, that dwell in the vicinity of homesteads, seem to
partake of human nature, and possess the germ, if not the
development, of immortal souls.  We hear them saying their melodious
prayers at morning's blush and eventide.  A little while ago, in the
deep of night, there came the lively thrill of a bird's note from a
neighboring tree,--a real song, such as greets the purple dawn or
mingles with the yellow sunshine.  What could the little bird mean
by pouring it forth at midnight? Probably the music gushed out of
the midst of a dream in which he fancied himself in paradise with
his mate, but suddenly awoke on a cold leafless bough, with a New
England mist penetrating through his feathers.  That was a sad
exchange of imagination for reality.

Insects are among the earliest births of sprung.  Multitudes of I
know not what species appeared long ago on the surface of the snow.
Clouds of them, almost too minute for sight, hover in a beam of
sunshine, and vanish, as if annihilated, when they pass into the
shade.  A mosquito has already been heard to sound the small horror
of his bugle-horn.  Wasps infest the sunny windows of the house.  A
bee entered one of the chambers with a prophecy of flowers.  Rare
butterflies came before the snow was off, flaunting in the chill
breeze, and looking forlorn and all astray, in spite of the
magnificence of their dark velvet cloaks, with golden borders.

The fields and wood-paths have as yet few charms to entice the
wanderer.  In a walk, the other day, I found no violets, nor
anemones, nor anything in the likeness of a flower.  It was worth
while, however, to ascend our opposite hill for the sake of gaining
a general idea of the advance of spring, which I had hitherto been
studying in its minute developments.  The river lay around me in a
semicircle, overflowing all the meadows which give it its Indian
name, and offering a noble breadth to sparkle in the sunbeams.
Along the hither shore a row of trees stood up to their knees in
water; and afar off, on the surface of the stream, tufts of bushes
thrust up their heads, as it were, to breathe. The most striking
objects were great solitary trees here and there, with a mile-wide
waste of water all around them.  The curtailment of the trunk, by
its immersion in the river, quite destroys the fair proportions of
the tree, and thus makes us sensible of a regularity and propriety
in the usual forms of nature.  The flood of the present season--
though it never amounts to a freshet on our quiet stream--has
encroached farther upon the land than any previous one for at least
a score of years.  It has overflowed stone fences, and even rendered
a portion of the highway navigable for boats.

The waters, however, are now gradually subsiding; islands become
annexed to the mainland; and other islands emerge, like new
creations, from the watery waste.  The scene supplies an admirable
image of the receding of the Nile, except that there is no deposit
of black slime; or of Noah's flood, only that there is a freshness
and novelty in these recovered portions of the continent which give
the impression of a world just made rather than of one so polluted
that a deluge had been requisite to purify it.  These upspringing
islands are the greenest spots in the landscape; the first gleam of
sunlight suffices to cover them with verdure.

Thank Providence for spring!  The earth--and man himself, by
sympathy with his birthplace would be far other than we find them if
life toiled wearily onward without this periodical infusion of the
primal spirit.  Will the world ever be so decayed that spring may
not renew its greenness?  Can man be so dismally age stricken that
no faintest sunshine of his youth may revisit him once a year?  It
is impossible.  The moss on our time-worn mansion brightens into
beauty; the good old pastor who once dwelt here renewed his prime,
regained his boyhood, in the genial breezes of his ninetieth spring.
Alas for the worn and heavy soul if, whether in youth or age, it
have outlived its privilege of springtime sprightliness!  From such
a soul the world must hope no reformation of its evil, no sympathy
with the lofty faith and gallant struggles of those who contend in
its behalf.  Summer works in the present, and thinks not of the
future; autumn is a rich conservative; winter has utterly lost its
faith, and clings tremulously to the remembrance of what has been;
but spring, with its outgushing life, is the true type of the
movement.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                        MONSIEUR DU MIROIR



Than the gentleman above named, there is nobody, in the whole circle
of my acquaintance, whom I have more attentively studied, yet of
whom I have less real knowledge, beneath the surface which it
pleases him to present.  Being anxious to discover who and what he
really is, and how connected with me, and what are to be the results
to him and to myself of the joint interest which, without any choice
on my part, seems to be permanently established between us, and
incited, furthermore, by the propensities of a student of human
nature, though doubtful whether Monsieur du Miroir have aught of
humanity but the figure,--I have determined to place a few of his
remarkable points before the public, hoping to be favored with some
clew to the explanation of his character.  Nor let the reader
condemn any part of the narrative as frivolous, since a subject of
such grave reflection diffuses its importance through the minutest
particulars; and there is no judging beforehand what odd little
circumstance may do the office of a blind man's dog among the
perplexities of this dark investigation; and however extraordinary,
marvellous, preternatural, and utterly incredible some of the
meditated disclosures may appear, I pledge my honor to maintain as
sacred a regard to fact as if my testimony were given on oath and
involved the dearest interests of the personage in question.  Not
that there is matter for a criminal accusation against Monsieur du
Miroir, nor am I the man to bring it forward if there were.  The
chief that I complain of is his impenetrable mystery, which is no
better than nonsense if it conceal anything good, and much worse in
the contrary case.

But, if undue partialities could be supposed to influence me,
Monsieur du Miroir might hope to profit rather than to suffer by
them, for in the whole of our long intercourse we have seldom had
the slightest disagreement; and, moreover, there are reasons for
supposing him a near relative of mine, and consequently entitled to
the best word that I can give him.  He bears indisputably a strong
personal resemblance to myself, and generally puts on mourning at
the funerals of the family.  On the other hand, his name would
indicate a French descent; in which case, infinitely preferring that
my blood should flow from a bold British and pure Puritan source, I
beg leave to disclaim all kindred with Monsieur du Miroir.  Some
genealogists trace his origin to Spain, and dub him a knight of the
order of the CABALLEROS DE LOS ESPEJOZ, one of whom was overthrown
by Don Quixote.  But what says Monsieur du Miroir himself of his
paternity and his fatherland?  Not a word did he ever say about the
matter; and herein, perhaps, lies one of his most especial reasons
for maintaining such a vexatious mystery, that he lacks the faculty
of speech to expound it.  His lips are sometimes seen to move; his
eyes and countenance are alive with shifting expression, as if
corresponding by visible hieroglyphics to his modulated breath; and
anon he will seem to pause with as satisfied an air as if he had
been talking excellent sense.  Good sense or bad, Monsieur du Miroir
is the sole judge of his own conversational powers, never having
whispered so much as a syllable that reached the ears of any other
auditor.  Is he really dumb? or is all the world deaf? or is it
merely a piece of my friend's waggery, meant for nothing but to make
fools of us?  If so, he has the joke all to himself.

This dumb devil which possesses Monsieur do Miroir is, I am
persuaded, the sole reason that he does not make me the most
flattering protestations of friendship.  In many particulars--
indeed, as to all his cognizable and not preternatural points,
except that, once in a great while, I speak a word or two--there
exists the greatest apparent sympathy between us.  Such is his
confidence in my taste that he goes astray from the general fashion
and copies all his dresses after mine.  I never try on a new garment
without expecting to meet, Monsieur du Miroir in one of the same
pattern.  He has duplicates of all my waistcoats and cravats, shirt-
bosoms of precisely a similar plait, and an old coat for private
wear, manufactured, I suspect, by a Chinese tailor, in exact
imitation of a beloved old coat of mine, with a facsimile, stitch by
stitch, of a patch upon the elbow.  In truth, the singular and
minute coincidences that occur, both in the accidents of the passing
day and the serious events of our lives, remind me of those doubtful
legends of lovers, or twin children, twins of fate, who have lived,
enjoyed, suffered, and died in unison, each faithfully repeating the
last tremor of the other's breath, though separated by vast tracts
of sea and land. Strange to say, my incommodities belong equally to
my companion, though the burden is nowise alleviated by his
participation.  The other morning, after a night of torment from the
toothache, I met Monsieur du Miroir with such a swollen anguish in
his cheek that my own pangs were redoubled, as were also his, if I
might judge by a fresh contortion of his visage.  All the
inequalities of my spirits are communicated to him, causing the
unfortunate Monsieur du Miroir to mope and scowl through a whole
summer's day, or to laugh as long, for no better reason than the gay
or gloomy crotchets of my brain.  Once we were joint sufferers of a
three months' sickness, and met like mutual ghosts in the first days
of convalescence.  Whenever I have been in love, Monsieur du Miroir
has looked passionate and tender; and never did my mistress discard
me, but this too susceptible gentleman grew lackadaisical.  His
temper, also, rises to blood heat, fever heat, or boiling-water
beat, according to the measure of any wrong which might seem to have
fallen entirely on myself.  I have sometimes been calmed down by the
sight of my own inordinate wrath depicted on his frowning brow.
Yet, however prompt in taking up my quarrels, I cannot call to mind
that he ever struck a downright blow in my behalf; nor, in fact, do
I perceive that any real and tangible good has resulted from his
constant interference in my affairs; so that, in my distrustful
moods, I am apt to suspect Monsieur du Miroir's sympathy to be mere
outward show, not a whit better nor worse than other people's
sympathy.  Nevertheless, as mortal man must have something in the
guise of sympathy,--and whether the true metal, or merely
copper-washed, is of less moment,--I choose rather to content myself
with Monsieur du Miroir's, such as it is, than to seek the sterling
coin, and perhaps miss even the counterfeit.

In my age of vanities I have often seen him in the ballroom, and
might again were I to seek him there.  We have encountered each
other at the Tremont Theatre, where, however, he took his seat
neither in the dress-circle, pit, nor upper regions, nor threw a
single glance at the stage, though the brightest star, even Fanny
Kemble herself, might be culminating there.  No; this whimsical
friend of mine chose to linger in the saloon, near one of the large
looking-glasses which throw back their pictures of the illuminated
room.  He is so full of these unaccountable eccentricities that I
never like to notice Monsieur du Miroir, nor to acknowledge the
slightest connection with him, in places of public resort.  He,
however, has no scruple about claiming my acquaintance, even when
his common-sense, if he had any, might teach him that I would as
willingly exchange a nod with the Old Nick.  It was but the other
day that he got into a large brass kettle at the entrance of a
hardware-store, and thrust his head, the moment afterwards, into a
bright, new warming-pan, whence he gave me a most merciless look of
recognition.  He smiled, and so did I; but these childish tricks
make decent people rather shy of Monsieur du Miroir, and subject him
to more dead cuts than any other gentleman in town.

One of this singular person's most remarkable peculiarities is his
fondness for water, wherein he excels any temperance man whatever.
His pleasure, it must be owned, is not so much to drink it (in which
respect a very moderate quantity will answer his occasions) as to
souse himself over head and ears wherever he may meet with it.
Perhaps he is a merman, or born of a mermaid's marriage with a
mortal, and thus amphibious by hereditary right, like the children
which the old river deities, or nymphs of fountains, gave to earthly
love. When no cleaner bathing-place happened to be at hand, I have
seen the foolish fellow in a horse-pond.  Some times he refreshes
himself in the trough of a town-pump, without caring what the people
think about him. Often, while carefully picking my way along the
street after a heavy shower, I have been scandalized to see Monsieur
du Miroir, in full dress, paddling from one mud-puddle to another,
and plunging into the filthy depths of each.  Seldom have I peeped
into a well without discerning this ridiculous gentleman at the
bottom, whence he gazes up, as through a long telescopic tube, and
probably makes discoveries among the stars by daylight. Wandering
along lonesome paths or in pathless forests, when I have come to
virgin fountains of which it would have been pleasant to deem myself
the first discoverer, I have started to find Monsieur du Miroir
there before me.  The solitude seemed lonelier for his presence.  I
have leaned from a precipice that frowns over Lake George, which the
French call nature's font of sacramental water, and used it in their
log-churches here and their cathedrals beyond the sea, and seen him
far below in that pure element.  At Niagara, too, where I would
gladly have forgotten both myself and him, I could not help
observing my companion in the smooth water on the very verge of the
cataract just above the Table Rock.  Were I to reach the sources of
the Nile, I should expect to meet him there.  Unless he be another
Ladurlad, whose garments the depth of ocean could not moisten, it is
difficult to conceive how he keeps himself in any decent pickle;
though I am bound to confess that his clothes seem always as dry and
comfortable as my own.  But, as a friend, I could wish that he would
not so often expose himself in liquor.

All that I have hitherto related may be classed among those little
personal oddities which agreeably diversify the surface of society,
and, though they may sometimes annoy us, yet keep our daily
intercourse fresher and livelier than if they were done away.  By an
occasional hint, however, I have endeavored to pave the way for
stranger things to come, which, had they been disclosed at once,
Monsieur du Miroir might have been deemed a shadow, and myself a
person of no veracity, and this truthful history a fabulous legend.
But, now that the reader knows me worthy of his confidence, I will
begin to make him stare.

To speak frankly, then, I could bring the most astounding proofs
that Monsieur du Miroir is at least a conjurer, if not one of that
unearthly tribe with whom conjurers deal.  He has inscrutable
methods of conveying himself from place to place with the rapidity
of the swiftest steamboat or rail-car.  Brick walls and oaken doors
and iron bolts are no impediment to his passage. Here in my chamber,
for instance, as the evening deepens into night, I sit alone,--the
key turned and withdrawn from the lock, the keyhole stuffed with
paper to keep out a peevish little blast of wind.  Yet, lonely as I
seem, were I to lift one of the lamps and step five paces eastward,
Monsieur du Miroir would be sure to meet me with a lamp also in his
hand; and were I to take the stage-coach to-morrow, without giving
him the least hint of my design, and post onward till the week's
end, at whatever hotel I might find myself I should expect to share
my private apartment with this inevitable Monsieur du Miroir.  Or,
out of a mere wayward fantasy, were I to go, by moonlight, and stand
beside the stone Pout of the Shaker Spring at Canterbury, Monsieur
du Miroir would set forth on the same fool's errand, and would not
fail to meet me there.  Shall I heighten the reader's wonder?  While
writing these latter sentences, I happened to glance towards the
large, round globe of one off the brass andirons, and lo! a
miniature apparition of Monsieur du Miroir, with his face widened
and grotesquely contorted, as if he were making fun of my amazement!
But he has played so many of these jokes that they begin to lose
their effect.  Once, presumptuous that he was, he stole into the
heaven of a young lady's eyes; so that, while I gazed and was
dreaming only of herself, I found him also in my dream.  Years have
so changed him since that he need never hope to enter those heavenly
orbs again.

From these veritable statements it will be readily concluded that,
had Monsieur du Miroir played such pranks in old witch times,
matters might have gone hard with him; at least if the constable and
posse comitatus could have executed a warrant, or the jailer had
been cunning enough to keep him.  But it has often occurred to me as
a very singular circumstance, and as betokening either a temperament
morbidly suspicious or some weighty cause of apprehension, that he
never trusts himself within the grasp even of his most intimate
friend.  If you step forward to meet him, he readily advances; if
you offer him your hand, he extends his own with an air of the
utmost frankness; but, though you calculate upon a hearty shake, you
do not get hold of his little finger. Ah, this Monsieur du Miroir is
a slippery fellow!

These truly are matters of special admiration.  After vainly
endeavoring, by the strenuous exertion of my own wits, to gain a
satisfactory insight into the character of Monsieur du Miroir, I had
recourse to certain wise men, and also to books of abstruse
philosophy, seeking who it was that haunted me, and why.  I heard
long lectures and read huge volumes with little profit beyond the
knowledge that many former instances are recorded, in successive
ages, of similar connections between ordinary mortals and beings
possessing the attributes of Monsieur du Miroir.  Some now alive,
perhaps, besides myself, have such attendants.  Would that Monsieur
du Miroir could be persuaded to transfer his attachment to one of
those, and allow some other of his race to assume the situation that
he now holds in regard to me!  If I must needs have so intrusive an
intimate, who stares me in the face in my closest privacy, and
follows me even to my bedchamber, I should prefer--scandal apart--
the laughing bloom of a young girl to the dark and bearded gravity
of my present companion.  But such desires are never to be
gratified.  Though the members of Monsieur du Miroir's family have
been accused, perhaps justly, of visiting their friends often in
splendid halls, and seldom in darksome dungeons, yet they exhibit a
rare constancy to the objects of their first attachment, however
unlovely in person or unamiable in disposition,--however
unfortunate, or even infamous, and deserted by all the world
besides.  So will it be with my associate.  Our fates appear
inseparably blended.  It is my belief, as I find him mingling with
my earliest recollections, that we came into existence together, as
my shadow follows me into the sunshine, and that hereafter, as
heretofore, the brightness or gloom of my fortunes will shine upon,
or darken, the face of Monsieur du Miroir.  As we have been young
together, and as it is now near the summer noon with both of us, so,
if long life be granted, shall each count his own wrinkles on the
other's brow and his white hairs on the other's head.  And when the
coffin-lid shall have closed over me and that face and form, which,
more truly than the lover swears it to his beloved, are the sole
light of his existence,--when they shall be laid in that dark
chamber, whither his swift and secret footsteps cannot bring him,--
then what is to become of poor Monsieur du Miroir?  Will he have the
fortitude, with my other friends, to take a last look at my pale
countenance?  Will he walk foremost in the funeral train? Will he
come often and haunt around my grave, and weed away the nettles, and
plant flowers amid the verdure, and scrape the moss out of the
letters of my burial-stone?  Will he linger where I have lived, to
remind the neglectful world of one who staked much to win a name,
but will not then care whether he lost or won?

Not thus will he prove his deep fidelity.  O, what terror, if this
friend of mine, after our last farewell, should step into the
crowded street, or roam along our old frequented path by the still
waters, or sit down in the domestic circle where our faces are most
familiar and beloved!  No; but when the rays of heaven shall bless
me no more, nor the thoughtful lamplight gleam upon my studies, nor
the cheerful fireside gladden the meditative man, then, his task
fulfilled, shall this mysterious being vanish from the earth
forever.  He will pass to the dark realm of nothingness, but will
not find me there.

There is something fearful in bearing such a relation to a creature
so imperfectly known, and in the idea that, to a certain extent, all
which concerns myself will be reflected in its consequences upon
him.  When we feel that another is to share the self-same fortune
with ourselves we judge more severely of our prospects, and withhold
our confidence from that delusive magic which appears to shed an
infallibility of happiness over our own pathway.  Of late years,
indeed, there has been much to sadden my intercourse with Monsieur
de Miroir.  Had not our union been a necessary condition of our
life, we must have been estranged ere now.  In early youth, when my
affections were warm and free, I loved him well, and could always
spend a pleasant hour in his society, chiefly because it gave me an
excellent opinion of myself.  Speechless as he was, Monsieur du
Miroir had then a most agreeable way of calling me a handsome
fellow; and I, of course, returned the compliment; so that, the more
we kept each other's company, the greater coxcombs we mutually grew.
But neither of us need apprehend any such misfortune now.  When we
chance to meet,--for it is chance oftener than design,--each glances
sadly at the other's forehead, dreading wrinkles there; and at our
temples, whence the hair is thinning away too early; and at the
sunken eyes, which no longer shed a gladsome light over the whole
face.  I involuntarily peruse him as a record of my heavy youth,
which has been wasted in sluggishness for lack of hope and impulse,
or equally thrown away in toil that had no wise motive and has
accomplished no good end.  I perceive that the tranquil gloom of a
disappointed soul has darkened through his countenance, where the
blackness of the future seems to mingle with the shadows of the
past, giving him the aspect of a fated man.  Is it too wild a
thought that my fate may have assumed this image of myself, and
therefore haunts me with such inevitable pertinacity, originating
every act which it appears to imitate, while it deludes me by
pretending to share the events of which it is merely the emblem and
the prophecy?  I must banish this idea, or it will throw too deep an
awe round my companion.  At our next meeting, especially if it be at
midnight or in solitude, I fear that I shall glance aside and
shudder; in which case, as Monsieur du Miroir is extremely sensitive
to ill-treatment, he also will avert his eyes and express horror or
disgust.

But no; this is unworthy of me.  As of old I sought his society for
the bewitching dreams of woman's love which he inspired, and because
I fancied a bright fortune in his aspect, so now will I hold daily
and long communion with hint for the sake of the stern lessons that
he will teach my manhood.  With folded arms we will sit face to
face, and lengthen out our silent converse till a wiser cheerfulness
shall have been wrought from the very texture of despondency.  He
will say, perhaps indignantly, that it befits only him to mourn for
the decay of outward grace, which, while he possessed it, was his
all.  But have not you, he will ask, a treasure in reserve, to which
every year may add far more value than age or death itself can
snatch from that miserable clay?  He will tell me that though the
bloom of life has been nipped with a frost, yet the soul must not
sit shivering in its cell, but bestir itself manfully, and kindle a
genial warmth from its own exercise against; the autumnal and the
wintry atmosphere.  And I, in return, will bid him be of good cheer,
nor take it amiss that I must blanch his locks and wrinkle him up
like a wilted apple, since it shall be my endeavor so to beautify
his face with intellect and mild benevolence that he shall profit
immensely by the change.  But here a smile will glimmer somewhat
sadly over Monsieur du Miroir's visage.

When this subject shall have been sufficiently discussed we may take
up others as important.  Reflecting upon his power of following me
to the remotest regions and into the deepest privacy, I will compare
the attempt to escape him to the hopeless race that men sometimes
run with memory, or their own hearts, or their moral selves, which,
though burdened with cares enough to crush an elephant, will never
be one step behind.  I will be self-contemplative, as nature bids
me, and make him the picture or visible type of what I muse upon,
that my mind may not wander so vaguely as heretofore, chasing its
own shadow through a chaos and catching only the monsters that abide
there.  Then will we turn our thoughts to the spiritual world, of
the reality of which my companions shall furnish me an illustration,
if not an argument; for, as we have only the testimony of the eye to
Monsieur du Miroir's existence, while all the other senses would
fail to inform us that such a figure stands within arm's-length,
wherefore should there not be beings innumerable close beside us,
and filling heaven and earth with their multitude, yet of whom no
corporeal perception can take cognizance?  A blind man might as
reasonably deny that Monsieur du Miroir exists, as we, because the
Creator has hitherto withheld the spiritual perception, can
therefore contend that there are no spirits.  O, there are!  And, at
this moment, when the subject of which I write has grown strong
within me and surrounded itself with those solemn and awful
associations which might have seemed most alien to it, I could fancy
that Monsieur du Miroir himself is a wanderer from the spiritual
world, with nothing human except his delusive garment of visibility.
Methinks I should tremble now were his wizard power of gliding
through all impediments in search of me to place him suddenly before
my eyes.

Ha!  What is yonder?  Shape of mystery, did the tremor of my
heartstrings vibrate to thine own, and call thee from thy home among
the dancers of the northern lights, and shadows flung from departed
sunshine, and giant spectres that appear on clouds at daybreak and
affright the climber of the Alps?  In truth it startled me, as I
threw a wary glance eastward across the chamber, to discern an
unbidden guest with his eyes bent on mine. The identical MONSIEUR DU
MIROIR!  Still there he sits and returns my gaze with as much of awe
and curiosity as if he, too, had spent a solitary evening in
fantastic musings and made me his theme.  So inimitably does he
counterfeit that I could almost doubt which of us is the visionary
form, or whether each be not the other's mystery, and both twin
brethren of one fate, in mutually reflected spheres.  O friend,
canst thou not hear and answer me?  Break down the barrier between
us!  Grasp my hand! Speak!  Listen!  A few words, perhaps, might
satisfy the feverish yearning of my soul for some master-thought
that should guide me through this labyrinth of life, teaching
wherefore I was born, and how to do my task on earth, and what is
death.  Alas!  Even that unreal image should forget to ape me and
smile at these vain questions.  Thus do mortals deify, as it were, a
mere shadow of themselves, a spectre of human reason, and ask of
that to unveil the mysteries which Divine Intelligence has revealed
so far as needful to our guidance, and hid the rest.

Farewell, Monsieur du Miroir.  Of you, perhaps, as of many men, it
may be doubted whether you are the wiser, though your whole business
is REFLECTION.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                       THE HALL OF FANTASY



It has happened to me, on various occasions, to find myself in a
certain edifice which would appear to have some of the
characteristics of a public exchange.  Its interior is a spacious
hall, with a pavement of white marble.  Overhead is a lofty dome,
supported by long rows of pillars of fantastic architecture, the
idea of which was probably taken from the Moorish ruins of the
Alhambra, or perhaps from some enchanted edifice in the Arabian
tales.  The windows of this hall have a breadth and grandeur of
design and an elaborateness of workmanship that have nowhere been
equalled, except in the Gothic cathedrals of the Old World.  Like
their prototypes, too, they admit the light of heaven only through
stained and pictured glass, thus filling the hall with many-colored
radiance and painting its marble floor with beautiful or grotesque
designs; so that its inmates breathe, as it were, a visionary
atmosphere, and tread upon the fantasies of poetic minds.  These
peculiarities, combining a wilder mixture of styles than even an
American architect usually recognizes as allowable,--Grecian,
Gothic, Oriental, and nondescript,--cause the whole edifice to give
the impression of a dream, which might be dissipated and shattered
to fragments by merely stamping the foot upon the pavement.  Yet,
with such modifications and repairs as successive ages demand, the
Hall of Fantasy is likely to endure longer than the most substantial
structure that ever cumbered the earth.

It is not at all times that one can gain admittance into this
edifice, although most persons enter it at some period or other of
their lives; if not in their waking moments, then by the universal
passport of a dream.  At my last visit I wandered thither unawares
while my mind was busy with an idle tale, and was startled by the
throng of people who seemed suddenly to rise up around me.

"Bless me!  Where am I?" cried I, with but a dim recognition of the
place.

"You are in a spot," said a friend who chanced to be near at hand,
"which occupies in the world of fancy the same position which the
Bourse, the Rialto, and the Exchange do in the commercial world.
All who have affairs in that mystic region, which lies above, below,
or beyond the actual, may here meet and talk over the business of
their dreams."

"It is a noble hall," observed I.

"Yes," he replied.  "Yet we see but a small portion of the edifice.
In its upper stories are said to be apartments where the inhabitants
of earth may hold converse with those of the moon; and beneath our
feet are gloomy cells, which communicate with the infernal regions,
and where monsters and chimeras are kept in confinement and fed with
all unwholesomeness."

In niches and on pedestals around about the hall stood the statues
or busts of men who in every age have been rulers and demigods in
the realms of imagination and its kindred regions. The grand old
countenance of Homer; the shrunken and decrepit form but vivid face
of AEsop; the dark presence of Dante; the wild Ariosto; Rabelais's
smile of deep-wrought mirth, the profound, pathetic humor of
Cervantes; the all-glorious Shakespeare; Spenser, meet guest for an
allegoric structure; the severe divinity of Milton; and Bunyan,
moulded of homeliest clay, but instinct with celestial fire,--were
those that chiefly attracted my eye.  Fielding, Richardson, and
Scott occupied conspicuous pedestals.  In an obscure and shadowy
niche was deposited the bust of our countryman, the author of Arthur
Mervyn.

"Besides these indestructible memorials of real genius," remarked my
companion, "each century has erected statues of its own ephemeral
favorites in wood."

"I observe a few crumbling relics of such," said I.  "But ever and
anon, I suppose, Oblivion comes with her huge broom and sweeps them
all from the marble floor.  But such will never be the fate of this
fine statue of Goethe."

"Nor of that next to it,--Emanuel Swedenborg," said he.  "Were ever
two men of transcendent imagination more unlike?"

In the centre of the hall springs an ornamental fountain, the water
of which continually throws itself into new shapes and snatches the
most diversified lines from the stained atmosphere around.  It is
impossible to conceive what a strange vivacity is imparted to the
scene by the magic dance of this fountain, with its endless
transformations, in which the imaginative beholder may discern what
form he will.  The water is supposed by some to flow from the same
source as the Castalian spring, and is extolled by others as uniting
the virtues of the Fountain of Youth with those of many other
enchanted wells long celebrated in tale and song.  Having never
tasted it, I can bear no testimony to its quality.

"Did you ever drink this water?" I inquired of my friend.

"A few sips now and then," answered he.  "But there are men here who
make it their constant beverage,--or, at least, have the credit of
doing so.  In some instances it is known to have intoxicating
qualities."

"Pray let us look at these water-drinkers," said I.

So we passed among the fantastic pillars till we came to a spot
where a number of persons were clustered together in the light of
one of the great stained windows, which seemed to glorify the whole
group as well as the marble that they trod on.  Most of them were
men of broad foreheads, meditative countenances, and thoughtful,
inward eyes; yet it required but a trifle to summon up mirth,
peeping out from the very midst of grave and lofty musings.  Some
strode about, or leaned against the pillars of the hall, alone and
in silence; their faces wore a rapt expression, as if sweet music
were in the air around them, or as if their inmost souls were about
to float away in song.  One or two, perhaps, stole a glance at the
bystanders, to watch if their poetic absorption were observed.
Others stood talking in groups, with a liveliness of expression, a
ready smile, and a light, intellectual laughter, which showed how
rapidly the shafts of wit were glancing to and fro among them.

A few held higher converse, which caused their calm and melancholy
souls to beam moonlight from their eyes.  As I lingered near them,--
for I felt an inward attraction towards these men, as if the
sympathy of feeling, if not of genius, had united me to their
order,--my friend mentioned several of their names.  The world has
likewise heard those names; with some it has been familiar for
years; and others are daily making their way deeper into the
universal heart.

"Thank Heaven," observed I to my companion, as we passed to another
part of the hall, "we have done with this techy, wayward, shy, proud
unreasonable set of laurel-gatherers.  I love them in their works,
but have little desire to meet them elsewhere."

"You have adopted all old prejudice, I see," replied my friend, who
was familiar with most of these worthies, being himself a student of
poetry, and not without the poetic flame.  "But, so far as my
experience goes, men of genius are fairly gifted with the social
qualities; and in this age there appears to be a fellow-feeling
among them which had not heretofore been developed.  As men, they
ask nothing better than to be on equal terms with their fellow-men;
and as authors, they have thrown aside their proverbial jealousy,
and acknowledge a generous brotherhood."

"The world does not think so," answered I.  "An author is received
in general society pretty much as we honest citizens are in the Hall
of Fantasy.  We gaze at him as if he had no business among us, and
question whether he is fit for any of our pursuits."

"Then it is a very foolish question," said he.  "Now, here are a
class of men whom we may daily meet on 'Change.  Yet what poet in
the hall is more a fool of fancy than the sagest of them?"

He pointed to a number of persons, who, manifest as the fact was,
would have deemed it an insult to be told that they stood in the
Hall of Fantasy.  Their visages were traced into wrinkles and
furrows, each of which seemed the record of some actual experience
in life.  Their eyes had the shrewd, calculating glance which
detects so quickly and so surely all that it concerns a man of
business to know about the characters and purposes of his fellow-
men.  Judging them as they stood, they might be honored and trusted
members of the Chamber of Commerce, who had found the genuine secret
of wealth and whose sagacity gave them the command of fortune.

There was a character of detail and matter of fact in their talk
which concealed the extravagance of its purport, insomuch that the
wildest schemes had the aspect of everyday realities.  Thus the
listener was not startled at the idea of cities to be built, as if
by magic, in the heart of pathless forests; and of streets to be
laid out where now the sea was tossing; and of mighty rivers to be
stayed in their courses in order to turn the machinery of a cotton-
mill.  It was only by an effort, and scarcely then, that the mind
convinced itself that such speculations were as much matter of
fantasy as the old dream of Eldorado, or as Mammon's Cave, or any
other vision of gold ever conjured up by the imagination of needy
poet or romantic adventurer.

"Upon my word," said I, "it is dangerous to listen to such dreamers
as these.  Their madness is contagious."

"Yes," said my friend, "because they mistake the Hall of Fantasy for
actual brick and mortar, and its purple atmosphere for
unsophisticated sunshine.  But the poet knows his whereabout, and
therefore is less likely to make a fool of himself in real life."

"Here again," observed I, as we advanced a little farther, "we see
another order of dreamers, peculiarly characteristic, too, of the
genius of our country."

These were the inventors of fantastic machines.  Models of their
contrivances were placed against some of the pillars of the hall,
and afforded good emblems of the result generally to be anticipated
from an attempt to reduce day-dreams to practice. The analogy may
hold in morals as well as physics; for instance, here was the model
of a railroad through the air and a tunnel under the sea.  Here was
a machine--stolen, I believe--for the distillation of heat from
moonshine; and another for the condensation of morning mist into
square blocks of granite, wherewith it was proposed to rebuild the
entire Hall of Fantasy. One man exhibited a sort of lens whereby he
had succeeded in making sunshine out of a lady's smile; and it was
his purpose wholly to irradiate the earth by means of this wonderful
invention.

"It is nothing new," said I; "for most of our sunshine comes from
woman's smile already."

"True," answered the inventor; "but my machine will secure a
constant supply for domestic use; whereas hitherto it has been very
precarious."

Another person had a scheme for fixing the reflections of objects in
a pool of water, and thus taking the most life-like portraits
imaginable; and the same gentleman demonstrated the practicability
of giving a permanent dye to ladies' dresses, in the gorgeous clouds
of sunset.  There were at least fifty kinds of perpetual motion, one
of which was applicable to the wits of newspaper editors and writers
of every description.  Professor Espy was here, with a tremendous
storm in a gum-elastic bag.  I could enumerate many more of these
Utopian inventions; but, after all, a more imaginative collection is
to be found in the Patent Office at Washington.

Turning from the inventors we took a more general survey of the
inmates of the hall.  Many persons were present whose right of
entrance appeared to consist in some crotchet of the brain, which,
so long as it might operate, produced a change in their relation to
the actual world.  It is singular how very few there are who do not
occasionally gain admittance on such a score, either in abstracted
musings, or momentary thoughts, or bright anticipations, or vivid
remembrances; for even the actual becomes ideal, whether in hope or
memory, and beguiles the dreamer into the Hall of Fantasy.  Some
unfortunates make their whole abode and business here, and contract
habits which unfit them for all the real employments of life.
Others--but these are few--possess the faculty, in their occasional
visits, of discovering a purer truth than the world call impart
among the lights and shadows of these pictured windows.

And with all its dangerous influences, we have reason to thank God
that there is such a place of refuge from the gloom and chillness of
actual life.  Hither may come the prisoner, escaping from his dark
and narrow cell and cankerous chain, to breathe free air in this
enchanted atmosphere.  The sick man leaves his weary pillow, and
finds strength to wander hither, though his wasted limbs might not
support him even to the threshold of his chamber.  The exile passes
through the Hall of Fantasy to revisit his native soil.  The burden
of years rolls down from the old man's shoulders the moment that the
door uncloses.  Mourners leave their heavy sorrows at the entrance,
and here rejoin the lost ones whose faces would else be seen no
more, until thought shall have become the only fact.  It may be
said, in truth, that there is but half a life--the meaner and
earthier half--for those who never find their way into the hall.
Nor must I fail to mention that in the observatory of the edifice is
kept that wonderful perspective-glass, through which the shepherds
of the Delectable Mountains showed Christian the far-off gleam of
the Celestial City.  The eye of Faith still loves to gaze through
it.

"I observe some men here," said I to my friend, "who might set up a
strong claim to be reckoned among the most real personages of the
day."

"Certainly," he replied.  "If a man be in advance of his age, he
must be content to make his abode in this hall until the lingering
generations of his fellow-men come up with him.  He can find no
other shelter in the universe.  But the fantasies of one day are the
deepest realities of a future one."

"It is difficult to distinguish them apart amid the gorgeous and
bewildering light of this ball," rejoined I.  "The white sunshine of
actual life is necessary in order to test them.  I am rather apt to
doubt both men and their reasonings till I meet them in that
truthful medium."

"Perhaps your faith in the ideal is deeper than you are aware," said
my friend.  "You are at least a democrat; and methinks no scanty
share of such faith is essential to the adoption of that creed."

Among the characters who had elicited these remarks were most of the
noted reformers of the day, whether in physics, politics, morals, or
religion.  There is no surer method of arriving at the Hall of
Fantasy than to throw one's-self into the current of a theory; for,
whatever landmarks of fact may be set up along the stream, there is
a law of nature that impels it thither.  And let it be so; for here
the wise head and capacious heart may do their work; and what is
good and true becomes gradually hardened into fact, while error
melts away and vanishes among the shadows of the ball.  Therefore
may none who believe and rejoice in the progress of mankind be angry
with me because I recognized their apostles and leaders amid the
fantastic radiance of those pictured windows.  I love and honor such
men as well as they.

It would be endless to describe the herd of real or self styled
reformers that peopled this place of refuge.  They were the
representatives of an unquiet period, when mankind is seeking to
cast off the whole tissue of ancient custom like a tattered garment.
Many of then had got possession of some crystal fragment of truth,
the brightness of which so dazzled them that they could see nothing
else in the wide universe.  Here were men whose faith had embodied
itself in the form of a potato; and others whose long beards had a
deep spiritual significance.  Here was the abolitionist, brandishing
his one idea like an iron flail.  In a word, there were a thousand
shapes of good and evil, faith and infidelity, wisdom and nonsense,
--a most incongruous throng.

Yet, withal, the heart of the stanchest conservative, unless he
abjured his fellowship with man, could hardly have helped throbbing
in sympathy with the spirit that pervaded these innumerable
theorists.  It was good for the man of unquickened heart to listen
even to their folly.  Far down beyond the fathom of the intellect
the soul acknowledged that all these varying and conflicting
developments of humanity were united in one sentiment.  Be the
individual theory as wild as fancy could make it, still the wiser
spirit would recognize the struggle of the race after a better and
purer life than had yet been realized on earth.  My faith revived
even while I rejected all their schemes. It could not be that the
world should continue forever what it has been; a soil where
Happiness is so rare a flower and Virtue so often a blighted fruit;
a battle-field where the good principle, with its shield flung above
its head, can hardly save itself amid the rush of adverse
influences.  In the enthusiasm of such thoughts I gazed through one
of the pictured windows, and, behold! the whole external world was
tinged with the dimly glorious aspect that is peculiar to the Hall
of Fantasy, insomuch that it seemed practicable at that very instant
to realize some plan for the perfection of mankind.  But, alas! if
reformers would understand the sphere in which their lot is cast
they must cease to look through pictured windows.  Yet they not only
use this medium, but mistake it for the whitest sunshine.

"Come," said I to my friend, starting from a deep revery, "let us
hasten hence, or I shall be tempted to make a theory, after which
there is little hope of any man."

"Come hither, then," answered he.  "Here is one theory that swallows
up and annihilates all others."

He led me to a distant part of the hall where a crowd of deeply
attentive auditors were assembled round an elderly man of plain,
honest, trustworthy aspect.  With an earnestness that betokened the
sincerest faith in his own doctrine, he announced that the
destruction of the world was close at hand.

"It is Father Miller himself!" exclaimed I.

"No less a man," said my friend; "and observe how picturesque a
contrast between his dogma and those of the reformers whom we have
just glanced at.  They look for the earthly perfection of mankind,
and are forming schemes which imply that the immortal spirit will be
connected with a physical nature for innumerable ages of futurity.
On the other hand, here comes good Father Miller, and with one puff
of his relentless theory scatters all their dreams like so many
withered leaves upon the blast."

"It is, perhaps, the only method of getting mankind out of the
various perplexities into which they have fallen," I replied. "Yet I
could wish that the world might be permitted to endure until some
great moral shall have been evolved.  A riddle is propounded.  Where
is the solution?  The sphinx did not slay herself until her riddle
had been guessed.  Will it not be so with the world?  Now, if it
should be burned to-morrow morning, I am at a loss to know what
purpose will have been accomplished, or how the universe will be
wiser or better for our existence and destruction."

"We cannot tell what mighty truths may have been embodied in act
through the existence of the globe and its inhabitants," rejoined my
companion.  "Perhaps it may be revealed to us after the fall of the
curtain over our catastrophe; or not impossibly, the whole drama, in
which we are involuntary actors, may have been performed for the
instruction of another set of spectators.  I cannot perceive that
our own comprehension of it is at all essential to the matter.  At
any rate, while our view is so ridiculously narrow and superficial
it would be absurd to argue the continuance of the world from the
fact that it seems to have existed hitherto in vain."

"The poor old earth," murmured I.  "She has faults enough, in all
conscience, but I cannot hear to have her perish."

"It is no great matter," said my friend.  "The happiest of us has
been weary of her many a time and oft."

"I doubt it," answered I, pertinaciously; "the root of human nature
strikes down deep into this earthly soil, and it is but reluctantly
that we submit to be transplanted, even for a higher cultivation in
heaven.  I query whether the destruction of the earth would gratify
any one individual, except perhaps some embarrassed man of business
whose notes fall due a day after the day of doom."

Then methought I heard the expostulating cry of a multitude against
the consummation prophesied by Father Miller.  The lover wrestled
with Providence for his foreshadowed bliss.  Parents entreated that
the earth's span of endurance might be prolonged by some seventy
years, so that their new-born infant should not be defrauded of his
lifetime.  A youthful poet murmured because there would be no
posterity to recognize the inspiration of his song.  The reformers,
one and all, demanded a few thousand years to test their theories,
after which the universe might go to wreck.  A mechanician, who was
busied with an improvement of the steam-engine, asked merely time to
perfect his model.  A miser insisted that the world's destruction
would be a personal wrong to himself, unless he should first be
permitted to add a specified sum to his enormous heap of gold.  A
little boy made dolorous inquiry whether the last day would come
before Christmas, and thus deprive him of his anticipated dainties.
In short, nobody seemed satisfied that this mortal scene of things
should have its close just now.  Yet, it must be confessed, the
motives of the crowd for desiring its continuance were mostly so
absurd, that unless infinite Wisdom had been aware of much better
reasons, the solid earth must have melted away at once.

For my own part, not to speak of a few private and personal ends, I
really desired our old mother's prolonged existence for her own dear
sake.

"The poor old earth!" I repeated.  "What I should chiefly regret in
her destruction would be that very earthliness which no other sphere
or state of existence can renew or compensate.  The fragrance of
flowers and of new-mown hay; the genial warmth of sunshine, and the
beauty of a sunset among clouds; the comfort and cheerful glow of
the fireside; the deliciousness of fruits and of all good cheer; the
magnificence of mountains, and seas, and cataracts, and the softer
charm of rural scenery; even the fast-falling snow and the gray
atmosphere through which it descends,--all these and innumerable
other enjoyable things of earth must perish with her.  Then the
country frolics; the homely humor; the broad, open-mouthed roar of
laughter, in which body and soul conjoin so heartily!  I fear that
no other world call show its anything just like this.  As for purely
moral enjoyments, the good will find them in every state of being.
But where the material and the moral exist together, what is to
happen then?  And then our mute four-footed friends and the winged
songsters of our woods!  Might it not be lawful to regret them, even
in the hallowed groves of paradise?"

"You speak like the very spirit of earth, imbued with a scent of
freshly turned soil," exclaimed my friend.

"It is not that I so much object to giving up these enjoyments on my
own account," continued I, "but I hate to think that they will have
been eternally annihilated from the list of joys."

"Nor need they be," he replied.  "I see no real force in what you
say.  Standing in this Hall of Fantasy, we perceive what even the
earth-clogged intellect of man can do in creating circumstances
which, though we call them shadowy and visionary, are scarcely more
so than those that surround us in actual life.  Doubt not then that
man's disembodied spirit may recreate time and the world for itself,
with all their peculiar enjoyments, should there still be human
yearnings amid life eternal and infinite. But I doubt whether we
shall be inclined to play such a poor scene over again."

"O, you are ungrateful to our mother earth!" rejoined I.  "Come what
may, I never will forget her!  Neither will it satisfy me to have
her exist merely in idea.  I want her great, round, solid self to
endure interminably, and still to be peopled with the kindly race of
man, whom I uphold to be much better than he thinks himself.
Nevertheless, I confide the whole matter to Providence, and shall
endeavor so to live that the world may come to an end at any moment
without leaving me at a loss to find foothold somewhere else."

"It is an excellent resolve," said my companion, looking at his
watch.  "But come; it is the dinner-hour.  Will you partake of my
vegetable diet?"

A thing so matter of fact as an invitation to dinner, even when the
fare was to be nothing more substantial than vegetables and fruit,
compelled us forthwith to remove from the Hall of Fantasy. As we
passed out of the portal we met the spirits of several persons who
had been sent thither in magnetic sleep.  I looked back among the
sculptured pillars and at the transformations of the gleaming
fountain, and almost desired that the whole of life might be spent
in that visionary scene where the actual world, with its hard
angles, should never rub against me, and only be viewed through the
medium of pictured windows.  But for those who waste all their days
in the Hall of Fantasy, good Father Miller's prophecy is already
accomplished, and the solid earth has come to an untimely end.  Let
us be content, therefore, with merely an occasional visit, for the
sake of spiritualizing the grossness of this actual life, and
prefiguring to ourselves a state in which the Idea shall be all in
all.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                       THE NEW ADAM AND EVE



We who are born into the world's artificial system can never
adequately know how little in our present state and circumstances is
natural, and how much is merely the interpolation of the perverted
mind and heart of man.  Art has become a second and stronger nature;
she is a step-mother, whose crafty tenderness has taught us to
despise the bountiful and wholesome ministrations of our true
parent.  It is only through the medium of the imagination that we
can lessen those iron fetters, which we call truth and reality, and
make ourselves even partially sensible what prisoners we are.  For
instance, let us conceive good Father Miller's interpretation of the
prophecies to have proved true.  The Day of Doom has burst upon the
globe and swept away the whole race of men.  From cities and fields,
sea-shore and midland mountain region, vast continents, and even the
remotest islands of the ocean, each living thing is gone.  No breath
of a created being disturbs this earthly atmosphere.  But the abodes
of man, and all that he has accomplished, the footprints of his
wanderings and the results of his toil, the visible symbols of his
intellectual cultivation and moral progress,--in short, everything
physical that can give evidence of his present position,--shall
remain untouched by the hand of destiny.  Then, to inherit and
repeople this waste and deserted earth, we will suppose a new Adam
and a new Eve to have been created, in the full development of mind
and heart, but with no knowledge of their predecessors nor of the
diseased circumstances that had become incrusted around them.  Such
a pair would at once distinguish between art and nature.  Their
instincts and intuitions would immediately recognize the wisdom and
simplicity of the latter; while the former, with its elaborate
perversities, would offer them a continual succession of puzzles.

Let us attempt, in a mood half sportive and half thoughtful, to
track these imaginary heirs of our mortality, through their first
day's experience.  No longer ago than yesterday the flame of human
life was extinguished; there has been a breathless night; and now
another morn approaches, expecting to find the earth no less
desolate than at eventide.

It is dawn.  The east puts on its immemorial blush, although no
human eye is gazing at it; for all the phenomena of the natural
world renew themselves, in spite of the solitude that now broods
around the globe.  There is still beauty of earth, sea, and sky, for
beauty's sake.  But soon there are to be spectators.  Just when the
earliest sunshine gilds earth's mountain-tops, two beings have come
into life, not in such an Eden as bloomed to welcome our first
parents, but in the heart of a modern city. They find themselves in
existence, and gazing into one another's eyes.  Their emotion is not
astonishment; nor do they perplex themselves with efforts to
discover what, and whence, and why they are.  Each is satisfied to
be, because the other exists likewise; and their first consciousness
is of calm and mutual enjoyment, which seems not to have been the
birth of that very moment, but prolonged from a past eternity.  Thus
content with an inner sphere which they inhabit together, it is not
immediately that the outward world can obtrude itself upon their
notice.

Soon, however, they feel the invincible necessity of this earthly
life, and begin to make acquaintance with the objects and
circumstances that surround them.  Perhaps no other stride so vast
remains to be taken as when they first turn from the reality of
their mutual glance to the dreams and shadows that perplex them
everywhere else.

"Sweetest Eve, where are we?" exclaims the new Adam; for speech, or
some equivalent mode of expression, is born with them, and comes
just as natural as breath.  "Methinks I do not recognize this
place."

"Nor I, dear Man," replies the new Eve.  "And what a strange place,
too!  Let me come closer to thy side and behold thee only; for all
other sights trouble and perplex my spirit."

"Nay, Eve," replies Adam, who appears to have the stronger tendency
towards the material world; "it were well that we gain some insight
into these matters.  We are in an odd situation here.  Let us look
about us."

Assuredly there are sights enough to throw the new inheritors of
earth into a state of hopeless perplexity.  The long lines of
edifices, their windows glittering in the yellow sunrise, and the
narrow street between, with its barren pavement tracked and battered
by wheels that have now rattled into an irrevocable past!  The
signs, with their unintelligible hieroglyphics!  The squareness and
ugliness, and regular or irregular deformity of everything that
meets the eye!  The marks of wear and tear, and unrenewed decay,
which distinguish the works of man from the growth of nature!  What
is there in all this, capable of the slightest significance to minds
that know nothing of the artificial system which is implied in every
lamp-post and each brick of the houses?  Moreover, the utter
loneliness and silence, in a scene that originally grew out of noise
and bustle, must needs impress a feeling of desolation even upon
Adam and Eve, unsuspicious as they are of the recent extinction of
human existence.  In a forest, solitude would be life; in a city, it
is death.

The new Eve looks round with a sensation of doubt and distrust, such
as a city dame, the daughter of numberless generations of citizens,
might experience if suddenly transported to the garden of Eden.  At
length her downcast eye discovers a small tuft of grass, just
beginning to sprout among the stones of the pavement; she eagerly
grasps it, and is sensible that this little herb awakens some
response within her heart.  Nature finds nothing else to offer her.
Adam, after staring up and down the street without detecting a
single object that his comprehension can lay hold of, finally turns
his forehead to the sky.  There, indeed, is something which the soul
within him recognizes.

"Look up yonder, mine own Eve," he cries; "surely we ought to dwell
among those gold-tinged clouds or in the blue depths beyond them.  I
know not how nor when, but evidently we have strayed away from our
home; for I see nothing hereabouts that seems to belong to us."

"Can we not ascend thither?" inquires Eve.

"Why not?"  answers Adam, hopefully.  "But no; something drags us
down in spite of our best efforts.  Perchance we may find a path
hereafter."

In the energy of new life it appears no such impracticable feat to
climb into the sky.  But they have already received a woful lesson,
which may finally go far towards reducing them to the level of the
departed race, when they acknowledge the necessity of keeping the
beaten track of earth.  They now set forth on a ramble through the
city, in the hope of making their escape from this uncongenial
sphere.  Already in the fresh elasticity of their spirits they have
found the idea of weariness.  We will watch them as they enter some
of the shops and public or private edifices; for every door, whether
of alderman or beggar, church or hall of state, has been flung wide
open by the same agency that swept away the inmates.

It so happens,--and not unlucklily for an Adam and Eve who are still
in the costume that might better have befitted Eden,--it so happens
that their first visit is to a fashionable dry-goods store.  No
courteous and importunate attendants hasten to receive their orders;
no throng of ladies are tossing over the rich Parisian fabrics.  All
is deserted; trade is at a stand-still; and not even an echo of the
national watchword, "Go ahead!" disturbs the quiet of the new
customers.  But specimens of the latest earthly fashions, silks of
every shade, and whatever is most delicate or splendid for the
decoration of the human form, he scattered around, profusely as
bright autumnal leaves in a forest.  Adam looks at a few of the
articles, but throws them carelessly aside with whatever exclamation
may correspond to "Pish!" or "Pshaw!" in the new vocabulary of
nature.  Eve, however,--be it said without offence to her native
modesty,--examines these treasures of her sex with somewhat livelier
interest.  A pair of corsets chance to be upon the counter; she
inspects them curiously, but knows not what to make of them. Then
she handles a fashionable silk with dim yearnings, thoughts that
wander hither and thither, instincts groping in the dark.

"On the whole, I do not like it," she observes, laying the glossy
fabric upon the counter.  "But, Adam, it is very strange.  What can
these things mean?  Surely I ought to know; yet they put me in a
perfect maze."

"Poh! my dear Eve, why trouble thy little head about such nonsense?"
cries Adam, in a fit of impatience.  "Let us go somewhere else.  But
stay; how very beautiful!  My loveliest Eve, what a charm you have
imparted to that robe by merely throwing it over your shoulders!"

For Eve, with the taste that nature moulded into her composition,
has taken a remnant of exquisite silver gauze and drawn it around
her forms, with an effect that gives Adam his first idea of the
witchery of dress.  He beholds his spouse in a new light and with
renewed admiration; yet is hardly reconciled to any other attire
than her own golden locks.  However, emulating Eve's example, he
makes free with a mantle of blue velvet, and puts it on so
picturesquely that it might seem to have fallen from heaven upon his
stately figure.  Thus garbed they go in search of new discoveries.

They next wander into a Church, not to make a display of their fine
clothes, but attracted by its spire pointing upwards to the sky,
whither they have already yearned to climb.  As they enter the
portal, a clock, which it was the last earthly act of the sexton to
wind up, repeats the hour in deep reverberating tones; for Time has
survived his former progeny, and, with the iron tongue that man gave
him, is now speaking to his two grandchildren.  They listen, but
understand him not.  Nature would measure time by the succession of
thoughts and acts which constitute real life, and not by hours of
emptiness.  They pass up the church-aisle, and raise their eyes to
the ceiling.  Had our Adam and Eve become mortal in some European
city, and strayed into the vastness and sublimity of an old
cathedral, they might have recognized the purpose for which the
deep-souled founders reared it.  Like the dim awfulness of an ancient
forest, its very atmosphere would have incited them to prayer.
Within the snug walls of a metropolitan church there can be no such
influence.

Yet some odor of religion is still lingering here, the bequest of
pious souls, who had grace to enjoy a foretaste of immortal life.
Perchance they breathe a prophecy of a better world to their
successors, who have become obnoxious to all their own cares and
calamities in the present one.

"Eve, something impels me to look upward," says Adam; "but it
troubles me to see this roof between us and the sky.  Let us go
forth, and perhaps we shall discern a Great Face looking down upon
us."

"Yes; a Great Face, with a beam of love brightening over it, like
sunshine," responds Eve.  "Surely we have seen such a countenance
somewhere."

They go out of the church, and kneeling at its threshold give way to
the spirit's natural instinct of adoration towards a beneficent
Father.  But, in truth, their life thus far has been a continual
prayer.  Purity and simplicity hold converse at every moment with
their Creator.

We now observe them entering a Court of Justice.  But what remotest
conception can they attain of the purposes of such an edifice?  How
should the idea occur to them that human brethren, of like nature
with themselves, and originally included in the same law of love
which is their only rule of life, should ever need an outward
enforcement of the true voice within their souls? And what, save a
woful experience, the dark result of many centuries, could teach
them the sad mysteries of crime?  O Judgment Seat, not by the pure
in heart vast thou established, nor in the simplicity of nature; but
by hard and wrinkled men, and upon the accumulated heap of earthly
wrong.  Thou art the very symbol of man's perverted state.

On as fruitless an errand our wanderers next visit a Hall of
Legislature, where Adam places Eve in the Speaker's chair,
unconscious of the moral which he thus exemplifies.  Man's
intellect, moderated by Woman's tenderness and moral sense!  Were
such the legislation of the world there would be no need of State
Houses, Capitols, Halls of Parliament, nor even of those little
assemblages of patriarchs beneath the shadowy trees, by whom freedom
was first interpreted to mankind on our native shores.

Whither go they next?  A perverse destiny seems to perplex them with
one after another of the riddles which mankind put forth to the
wandering universe, and left unsolved in their own destruction.
They enter an edifice of stern gray stone standing insulated in the
midst of others, and gloomy even in the sunshine, which it barely
suffers to penetrate through its iron grated windows.  It is a
prison.  The jailer has left his post at the summons of a stronger
authority than the sheriff's.  But the prisoners?  Did the messenger
of fate, when he shook open all the doors, respect the magistrate's
warrant and the judge's sentence, and leave the inmates of the
dungeons to be delivered by due course of earthly law?  No; a new
trial has been granted in a higher court, which may set judge, jury,
and prisoner at its bar all in a row, and perhaps find one no less
guilty than another. The jail, like the whole earth, is now a
solitude, and has thereby lost something of its dismal gloom.  But
here are the narrow cells, like tombs, only drearier and deadlier,
because in these the immortal spirit was buried with the body.
Inscriptions appear on the walls, scribbled with a pencil or
scratched with a rusty nail; brief words of agony, perhaps, or
guilt's desperate defiance to the world, or merely a record of a
date by which the writer strove to keep up with the march of life.
There is not a living eye that could now decipher these memorials.

Nor is it while so fresh from their Creator's hand that the new
denizens of earth--no, nor their descendants for a thousand years--
could discover that this edifice was a hospital for the direst
disease which could afflict their predecessors.  Its patients bore
the outward marks of that leprosy with which all were more or less
infected.  They were sick-and so were the purest of their brethren--
with the plague of sin.  A deadly sickness, indeed!  Feeling its
symptoms within the breast, men concealed it with fear and shame,
and were only the more cruel to those unfortunates whose pestiferous
sores were flagrant to the common eye.  Nothing save a rich garment
could ever hide the plague-spot.  In the course of the world's
lifetime, every remedy was tried for its cure and extirpation,
except the single one, the flower that grew in Heaven and was
sovereign for all the miseries of earth.  Man never had attempted to
cure sin by LOVE! Had he but once made the effort, it might well
have happened that there would have been no more need of the dark
lazar-house into which Adam and Eve have wandered.  Hasten forth
with your native innocence, lest the damps of these still conscious
walls infect you likewise, and thus another fallen race be
propagated!

Passing from the interior of the prison into the space within its
outward wall, Adam pauses beneath a structure of the simplest
contrivance, yet altogether unaccountable to him.  It consists
merely of two upright posts, supporting a transverse beam, from
which dangles a cord.

"Eve, Eve!" cries Adam, shuddering with a nameless horror.  "What
can this thing be?"

"I know not," answers Eve; "but, Adam, my heart is sick!  There
seems to be no more sky,--no more sunshine!"

Well might Adam shudder and poor Eve be sick at heart; for this
mysterious object was the type of mankind's whole system in regard
to the great difficulties which God had given to be solved,--a
system of fear and vengeance, never successful, yet followed to the
last.  Here, on the morning when the final summons came, a criminal
--one criminal, where none were guiltless--had died upon the gallows.
Had the world heard the footfall of its own approaching doom, it
would have been no inappropriate act thus to close the record of its
deeds by one so characteristic.

The two pilgrims now hurry from the prison.  Had they known how the
former inhabitants of earth were shut up in artificial error and
cramped and chained by their perversions, they might have compared
the whole moral world to a prison-house, and have deemed the removal
of the race a general jail-delivery.

They next enter, unannounced, but they might have rung at the door
in vain, a private mansion, one of the stateliest in Beacon Street.
A wild and plaintive strain of music is quivering through the house,
now rising like a solemn organ-peal, and now dying into the faintest
murmur, as if some spirit that had felt an interest in the departed
family were bemoaning itself in the solitude of hall and chamber.
Perhaps a virgin, the purest of mortal race, has been left behind to
perform a requiem for the whole kindred of humanity.  Not so.  These
are the tones of an Eolian harp, through which Nature pours the
harmony that lies concealed in her every breath, whether of summer
breeze or tempest.  Adam and Eve are lost in rapture, unmingled with
surprise.  The passing wind, that stirred the harp-strings, has been
hushed, before they can think of examining the splendid furniture,
the gorgeous carpets, and the architecture of the rooms.  These
things amuse their unpractised eyes, but appeal to nothing within
their hearts.  Even the pictures upon the walls scarcely excite a
deeper interest; for there is something radically artificial and
deceptive in painting with which minds in the primal simplicity
cannot sympathize.  The unbidden guests examine a row of family
portraits, but are too dull to recognize them as men and women,
beneath the disguise of a preposterous garb, and with features and
expression debased, because inherited through ages of moral and
physical decay.

Chance, however, presents them with pictures of human beauty, fresh
from the hand of Nature.  As they enter a magnificent apartment they
are astonished, but not affrighted, to perceive two figures
advancing to meet them.  Is it not awful to imagine that any life,
save their own, should remain in the wide world?

"How is this?"  exclaims Adam.  "My beautiful Eve, are you in two
places at once?"

"And you, Adam!"  answers Eve, doubtful, yet delighted.  "Surely
that noble and lovely form is yours.  Yet here you are by my side.
I am content with one,--methinks there should not be two."

This miracle is wrought by a tall looking-glass, the mystery of
which they soon fathom, because Nature creates a mirror for the
human face in every pool of water, and for her own great features in
waveless lakes.  Pleased and satisfied with gazing at themselves,
they now discover the marble statue of a child in a corner of the
room so exquisitely idealized that it is almost worthy to be the
prophetic likeness of their first-born. Sculpture, in its highest
excellence, is more genuine than painting, and might seem to be
evolved from a natural germ, by the same law as a leaf or flower.
The statue of the child impresses the solitary pair as if it were a
companion; it likewise hints at secrets both of the past and future.

"My husband!" whispers Eve.

"What would you say, dearest Eve?" inquires Adam.

"I wonder if we are alone in the world," she continues, with a sense
of something like fear at the thought of other inhabitants. This
lovely little form!  Did it ever breathe?  Or is it only the shadow
of something real, like our pictures in the mirror?"

"It is strange!" replies Adam, pressing his hand to his brow. "There
are mysteries all around us.  An idea flits continually before me,--
would that I could seize it!  Eve, Eve, are we treading in the
footsteps of beings that bore a likeness to ourselves?  If so,
whither are they gone?--and why is their world so unfit for our
dwelling-place?"

"Our great Father only knows," answers Eve.  "But something tells me
that we shall not always be alone.  And how sweet if other beings
were to visit us in the shape of this fair image!"

Then they wander through the house, and everywhere find tokens of
human life, which now, with the idea recently suggested, excite a
deeper curiosity in their bosoms.  Woman has here left traces of her
delicacy and refinement, and of her gentle labors.  Eve ransacks a
work-basket and instinctively thrusts the rosy tip of her finger
into a thimble.  She takes up a piece of embroidery, glowing with
mimic flowers, in one of which a fair damsel of the departed race
has left her needle.  Pity that the Day of Doom should have
anticipated the completion of such a useful task! Eve feels almost
conscious of the skill to finish it.  A pianoforte has been left
open.  She flings her hand carelessly over the keys, and strikes out
a sudden melody, no less natural than the strains of the AEolian
harp, but joyous with the dance of her yet unburdened life.  Passing
through a dark entry they find a broom behind the door; and Eve, who
comprises the whole nature of womanhood, has a dim idea that it is
an instrument proper for her hand.  In another apartment they behold
a canopied bed, and all the appliances of luxurious repose.  A heap
of forest-leaves would he more to the purpose.  They enter the
nursery, and are perplexed with the sight of little gowns and caps,
tiny slices, and a cradle, amid the drapery of which is still to be
seen the impress of a baby's form.  Adam slightly notices these
trifles; but Eve becomes involved in a fit of mute reflection from
which it is hardly possible to rouse her.

By a most unlucky arrangement there was to have been a grand dinner-
party in this mansion on the very day when the whole human family,
including the invited guests, were summoned to the unknown regions
of illimitable space.  At the moment of fate, the table was actually
spread, and the company on the point of sitting down.  Adam and Eve
come unbidden to the banquet; it has now been some time cold, but
otherwise furnishes them with highly favorable specimens of the
gastronomy of their predecessors.  But it is difficult to imagine
the perplexity of the unperverted couple, in endeavoring to find
proper food for their first meal, at a table where the cultivated
appetites of a fashionable party were to have been gratified.  Will
Nature teach them the mystery of a plate of turtle-soup?  Will she
embolden them to attack a haunch of venison?  Will she initiate them
into the merits of a Parisian pasty, imported by the last steamer
that ever crossed the Atlantic?  Will she not, rather, bid them turn
with disgust from fish, fowl, and flesh, which, to their pure
nostrils, steam with a loathsome odor of death and corruption?--
Food?  The bill of fare contains nothing which they recognize as
such.

Fortunately, however, the dessert is ready upon a neighboring table.
Adam, whose appetite and animal instincts are quicker than those of
Eve, discovers this fitting banquet.

"Here, dearest Eve," he exclaims,--"here is food."

"Well," answered she, with the germ of a housewife stirring within
her, "we have been so busy to-day, that a picked-up dinner must
serve."

So Eve comes to the table and receives a red-cheeked apple from her
husband's hand in requital of her predecessor's fatal gift to our
common grandfather.  She eats it without sin, and, let us hope, with
no disastrous consequences to her future progeny. They make a
plentiful, yet temperate, meal of fruit, which, though not gathered
in paradise, is legitimately derived from the seeds that were
planted there.  Their primal appetite is satisfied.

"What shall we drink, Eve?" inquires Adam.

Eve peeps among some bottles and decanters, which, as they contain
fluids, she naturally conceives must be proper to quench thirst.
But never before did claret, hock, and madeira, of rich and rare
perfume, excite such disgust as now.

"Pah!" she exclaims, after smelling at various wines.  "What stuff
is here?  The beings who have gone before us could not have
possessed the same nature that we do; for neither their hunger nor
thirst were like our own."

"Pray hand me yonder bottle," says Adam.  "If it be drinkable by any
manner of mortal, I must moisten my throat with it."

After some remonstrances, she takes up a champagne bottle, but is
frightened by the sudden explosion of the cork, and drops it upon
the floor.  There the untasted liquor effervesces.  Had they quaffed
it they would have experienced that brief delirium whereby, whether
excited by moral or physical causes, man sought to recompense
himself for the calm, life-long joys which he had lost by his revolt
from nature.  At length, in a refrigerator, Eve finds a glass
pitcher of water, pure, cold, and bright as ever gushed from a
fountain among the hills.  Both drink; and such refreshment does it
bestow, that they question one another if this precious liquid be
not identical with the stream of life within them.

"And now," observes Adam, "we must again try to discover what sort
of a world this is, and why we have been sent hither."

"Why? to love one another," cries Eve.  "Is not that employment
enough?"

"Truly is it," answers Adam, kissing her; "but still--I know not--
something tells us there is labor to be done.  Perhaps our allotted
task is no other than to climb into the sky, which is so much more
beautiful than earth."

"Then would we were there now," murmurs Eve, "that no task or duty
might come between us!"

They leave the hospitable mansion, and we next see them passing down
State Street.  The clock on the old State House points to high noon,
when the Exchange should be in its glory and present the liveliest
emblem of what was the sole business of life, as regarded a
multitude of the foregone worldlings.  It is over now. The Sabbath
of eternity has shed its stillness along the street. Not even a
newsboy assails the two solitary passers-by with an extra penny-
paper from the office of the Times or Mail, containing a full
account of yesterday's terrible catastrophe. Of all the dull times
that merchants and speculators have known, this is the very worst;
for, so far as they were concerned, creation itself has taken the
benefit of the Bankrupt Act.  After all, it is a pity.  Those mighty
capitalists who had just attained the wished-for wealth!  Those
shrewd men of traffic who had devoted so many years to the most
intricate and artificial of sciences, and had barely mastered it
when the universal bankruptcy was announced by peal of trumpet!  Can
they have been so incautious as to provide no currency of the
country whither they have gone, nor any bills of exchange, or
letters of credit from the needy on earth to the cash-keepers of
heaven?

Adam and Eve enter a Bank.  Start not, ye whose funds are treasured
there!  You will never need them now.  Call not for the police.  The
stones of the street and the coin of the vaults are of equal value
to this simple pair.  Strange sight!  They take up the bright gold
in handfuls and throw it sportively into the air for the sake of
seeing the glittering worthlessness descend again in a shower.  They
know not that each of those small yellow circles was once a magic
spell, potent to sway men's hearts and mystify their moral sense.
Here let them pause in the investigation of the past.  They have
discovered the mainspring, the life, the very essence of the system
that had wrought itself into the vitals of mankind, and choked their
original nature in its deadly gripe.  Yet how powerless over these
young inheritors of earth's hoarded wealth!  And here, too, are
huge, packages of back-notes, those talismanic slips of paper which
once had the efficacy to build up enchanted palaces like
exhalations, and work all kinds of perilous wonders, yet were
themselves but the ghosts of money, the shadows of a shade.  How
like is this vault to a magician's cave when the all-powerful wand
is broken, and the visionary splendor vanished, and the floor strewn
with fragments of shattered spells, and lifeless shapes, once
animated by demons!

"Everywhere, my dear Eve," observes Adam, "we find heaps of rubbish
of one kind or another.  Somebody, I am convinced, has taken pains
to collect them, but for what purpose?  Perhaps, hereafter, we shall
be moved to do the like.  Can that be our business in the world?"

"O no, no, Adam!" answers Eve.  "It would be better to sit down
quietly and look upward to tine sky."

They leave the Bank, and in good time; for had they tarried later
they would probably have encountered some gouty old goblin of a
capitalist, whose soul could not long be anywhere save in the vault
with his treasure.

Next they drop into a jeweller's shop.  They are pleased with the
glow of gems; and Adam twines a string of beautiful pearls around
the head of Eve, and fastens his own mantle with a magnificent
diamond brooch.  Eve thanks him, and views herself with delight, in
the nearest looking-glass.  Shortly afterward, observing a bouquet
of roses and other brilliant flowers in a vase of water, she flings
away the inestimable pearls, and adorns herself with these lovelier
gems of nature.  They charm her with sentiment as well as beauty.

"Surely they are living beings," she remarks to Adam.

"I think so," replies Adam, "and they seem to be as little at home
in the world as ourselves."

We must not attempt to follow every footstep of these investigators
whom their Creator has commissioned to pass unconscious judgment
upon the works and ways of the vanished race.  By this time, being
endowed with quick and accurate perceptions, they begin to
understand the purpose of the many things around them.  They
conjecture, for instance, that the edifices of the city were
erected, not by the immediate hand that made the world, but by
beings somewhat similar to themselves, for shelter and convenience.
But how will they explain the magnificence of one habitation as
compared with the squalid misery of another?  Through what medium
can the idea of servitude enter their minds?  When will they
comprehend the great and miserable fact--the evidences of which
appeal to their senses everywhere--that one portion of earth's lost
inhabitants was rolling in luxury while the multitude was toiling
for scanty food?  A wretched change, indeed, must be wrought in
their own hearts ere they can conceive the primal decree of Love to
have been so completely abrogated, that a brother should ever want
what his brother had.  When their intelligence shah have reached so
far, Earth's new progeny will have little reason to exult over her
old rejected one.

Their wanderings have now brought them into the suburbs of the city,
They stand on a grassy brow of a hill at the foot of a granite
obelisk which points its great finger upwards, as if the human
family had agreed, by a visible symbol of age-long endurance, to
offer some high sacrifice of thanksgiving or supplication.  The
solemn height of the monument, its deep simplicity, and the absence
of any vulgar and practical use, all strengthen its effect upon Adam
and Eve, and leave them to interpret it by a purer sentiment than
the builders thought of expressing.

"Eve, it is a visible prayer," observed Adam.

"And we will pray too," she replies.

Let us pardon these poor children of neither father nor mother for
so absurdly mistaking the purport of the memorial which man founded
and woman finished on far-famed Bunker Hill.  The idea of war is not
native to their souls.  Nor have they sympathies for the brave
defenders of liberty, since oppression is one of their unconjectured
mysteries.  Could they guess that the green sward on which they
stand so peacefully was once strewn with human corpses and purple
with their blood, it would equally amaze them that one generation of
men should perpetrate such carnage, and that a subsequent generation
should triumphantly commemorate it.

With a sense of delight they now stroll across green fields and
along the margin of a quiet river.  Not to track them too closely,
we next find the wanderers entering a Gothic edifice of gray stone,
where the bygone world has left whatever it deemed worthy of record,
in the rich library of Harvard University.

No student ever yet enjoyed such solitude and silence as now broods
within its deep alcoves.  Little do the present visitors understand
what opportunities are thrown away upon them.  Yet Adam looks
anxiously at the long rows of volumes, those storied heights of
human lore, ascending one above another from floor to ceiling.  He
takes up a bulky folio.  It opens in his hands as if spontaneously
to impart the spirit of its author to the yet unworn and untainted
intellect of the fresh-created mortal.  He stands poring over the
regular columns of mystic characters, seemingly in studious mood;
for the unintelligible thought upon the page has a mysterious
relation to his mind, and makes itself felt as if it were a burden
flung upon him.  He is even painfully perplexed, and grasps vainly
at he knows not what.  O Adam, it is too soon, too soon by at least
five thousand years, to put on spectacles and bury yourself in the
alcoves of a library!

"What can this be?" he murmurs at last.  "Eve, methinks nothing is
so desirable as to find out the mystery of this big and heavy object
with its thousand thin divisions.  See! it stares me in the face as
if it were about to speak!"

Eve, by a feminine instinct, is dipping into a volume of fashionable
poetry, the production certainly the most fortunate of earthly
bards, since his lay continues in vogue when all the great masters
of the lyre have passed into oblivion.  But let not, his ghost be
too exultant!  The world's one lady tosses the book upon the floor
and laughs merrily at her husband's abstracted mien.

"My dear Adam," cries she, "you look pensive and dismal.  Do fling
down that stupid thing; for even if it should speak it would not be
worth attending to.  Let us talk with one another, and with the sky,
and the green earth, and its trees and flowers.  They will teach us
better knowledge than we can find here."

"Well, Eve, perhaps you are right," replies Adam, with a sort of
sigh.  "Still I cannot help thinking that the interpretation of the
riddles amid which we have been wandering all day long might here be
discovered."

"It may be better not to seek the interpretation," persists Eve.
"For my part, the air of this place does not suit me.  If you love
me, come away!"

She prevails, and rescues him from the mysterious perils of the
library.  Happy influence of woman!  Had he lingered there long
enough to obtain a clew to its treasures,--as was not impossible,
his intellect being of human structure, indeed, but with an
untransmitted vigor and acuteness,--had he then and there become a
student, the annalist of our poor world would soon have recorded the
downfall of a second Adam.  The fatal apple of another Tree of
knowledge would have been eaten.  All the perversions, and
sophistries, and false wisdom so aptly mimicking the true,--all the
narrow truth, so partial that it becomes more deceptive than
falsehood,--all the wrong principles and worse practice, the
pernicious examples and mistaken rules of life,--all the specious
theories which turn earth into cloudland and men into shadows,--all
the sad experience which it took mankind so many ages to accumulate,
and from which they never drew a moral for their future guidance,
the whole heap of this disastrous lore would have tumbled at once
upon Adam's head.  There would have been nothing left for him but to
take up the already abortive experiment of life where he had dropped
it, and toil onward with it a little farther.

But, blessed in his ignorance, he may still enjoy a new world in our
worn-out one.  Should he fall short of good, even as far as we did,
he has at least the freedom--no worthless one--to make errors for
himself.  And his literature, when the progress of centuries shall
create it, will be no interminably repeated echo of our own poetry
and reproduction of the images that were moulded by our great
fathers of song and fiction, but a melody never yet heard on earth,
and intellectual forms unbreathed upon by our conceptions.
Therefore let the dust of ages gather upon the volumes of the
library, and in due season the roof of the edifice crumble down upon
the whole.  When the second Adam's descendants shall have collected
as much rubbish of their own, it will be time enough to dig into our
ruins and compare the literary advancement of two independent races.

But we are looking forward too far.  It seems to be the vice of
those who have a long past behind them.  We will return to the new
Adam and Eve, who, having no reminiscences save dim and fleeting
visions of a pre-existence, are content to live and be happy in the
present.

The day is near its close when these pilgrims, who derive their
being from no dead progenitors, reach the cemetery of Mount Auburn.
With light hearts--for earth and sky now gladden each other with
beauty--they tread along the winding paths, among marble pillars,
mimic temples, urns, obelisks, and sarcophagi, sometimes pausing to
contemplate these fantasies of human growth, and sometimes to admire
the flowers wherewith nature converts decay to loveliness.  Can
Death, in the midst of his old triumphs, make them sensible that
they have taken up the heavy burden of mortality which a whole
species had thrown down?  Dust kindred to their own has never lain
in the grave.  Will they then recognize, and so soon, that Time and
the elements have an indefeasible claim upon their bodies?  Not
improbably they may. There must have been shadows enough, even amid
the primal sunshine of their existence, to suggest the thought of
the soul's incongruity with its circumstances.  They have already
learned that something is to be thrown aside.  The idea of Death is
in them, or not far off.  But, were they to choose a symbol for him,
it would be the butterfly soaring upward, or the bright angel
beckoning them aloft, or the child asleep, with soft dreams visible
through her transparent purity.

Such a Child, in whitest marble, they have found among the monuments
of Mount Auburn.

"Sweetest Eve," observes Adam, while hand in hand they contemplate
this beautiful object, "yonder sun has left us, and the whole world
is fading from our sight.  Let us sleep as this lovely little figure
is sleeping.  Our Father only knows whether what outward things we
have possessed to-day are to be snatched from us forever.  But
should our earthly life be leaving us with the departing light, we
need not doubt that another morn will find us somewhere beneath the
smile of God.  I feel that he has imparted the boon of existence
never to be resumed."

"And no matter where we exist," replies Eve, "for we shall always be
together."









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                      THE CHRISTMAS BANQUET


        [FROM THE UNPUBLISHED "_ALLEGORIES OF THE HEART_."]


"I have here attempted," said Roderick, unfolding a few sheets of
manuscript, as he sat with Rosina and the sculptor in the summer-
house,--"I have attempted to seize hold of a personage who glides
past me, occasionally, in my walk through life.  My former sad
experience, as you know, has gifted me with some degree of insight
into the gloomy mysteries of the human heart, through which I have
wandered like one astray in a dark cavern, with his torch fast
flickering to extinction.  But this man, this class of men, is a
hopeless puzzle."

"Well, but propound him," said the sculptor.  "Let us have an idea
of hint, to begin with."

"Why, indeed," replied Roderick, "he is such a being as I could
conceive you to carve out of marble, and some yet unrealized
perfection of human science to endow with an exquisite mockery of
intellect; but still there lacks the last inestimable touch of a
divine Creator.  He looks like a man; and, perchance, like a better
specimen of man than you ordinarily meet.  You might esteem him
wise; he is capable of cultivation and refinement, and has at least
an external conscience; but the demands that spirit makes upon
spirit are precisely those to which he cannot respond. When at last
you come close to him you find him chill and unsubstantial,--a mere
vapor."

"I believe," said Rosina, "I have a glimmering idea of what you
mean."

"Then be thankful," answered her husband, smiling; "but do not
anticipate any further illumination from what I am about to read. I
have here imagined such a man to be--what, probably, he never is--
conscious of the deficiency in his spiritual organization. Methinks
the result would be a sense of cold unreality wherewith he would go
shivering through the world, longing to exchange his load of ice for
any burden of real grief that fate could fling upon a human being."

Contenting himself with this preface, Roderick began to read.

In a certain old gentleman's last will and testament there appeared
a bequest, which, as his final thought and deed, was singularly in
keeping with a long life of melancholy eccentricity.  He devised a
considerable sum for establishing a fund, the interest of which was
to be expended, annually forever, in preparing a Christmas Banquet
for ten of the most miserable persons that could be found.  It
seemed not to be the testator's purpose to make these half a score
of sad hearts merry, but to provide that the stern or fierce
expression of human discontent should not be drowned, even for that
one holy and joyful day, amid the acclamations of festal gratitude
which all Christendom sends up.  And he desired, likewise, to
perpetuate his own remonstrance against the earthly course of
Providence, and his sad and sour dissent from those systems of
religion or philosophy which either find sunshine in the world or
draw it down from heaven.

The task of inviting the guests, or of selecting among such as might
advance their claims to partake of this dismal hospitality, was
confided to the two trustees or stewards of the fund.  These
gentlemen, like their deceased friend, were sombre humorists, who
made it their principal occupation to number the sable threads in
the web of human life, and drop all the golden ones out of the
reckoning.  They performed their present office with integrity and
judgment.  The aspect of the assembled company, on the day of the
first festival, might not, it is true, have satisfied every beholder
that these were especially the individuals, chosen forth from all
the world, whose griefs were worthy to stand as indicators of the
mass of human suffering.  Yet, after due consideration, it could not
be disputed that here was a variety of hopeless discomfort, which,
if it sometimes arose from causes apparently inadequate, was thereby
only the shrewder imputation against the nature and mechanism of
life.

The arrangements and decorations of the banquet were probably
intended to signify that death in life which had been the testator's
definition of existence.  The hall, illuminated by torches, was hung
round with curtains of deep and dusky purple, and adorned with
branches of cypress and wreaths of artificial flowers, imitative of
such as used to be strewn over the dead.  A sprig of parsley was
laid by every plate.  The main reservoir of wine, was a sepulchral
urn of silver, whence the liquor was distributed around the table in
small vases, accurately copied from those that held the tears of
ancient mourners.  Neither had the stewards--if it were their taste
that arranged these details--forgotten the fantasy of the old
Egyptians, who seated a skeleton at every festive board, and mocked
their own merriment with the imperturbable grin of a death's-head.
Such a fearful guest, shrouded in a black mantle, sat now at the
head of the table.  It was whispered, I know not with what truth,
that the testator himself had once walked the visible world with the
machinery of that sane skeleton, and that it was one of the
stipulations of his will, that he should thus be permitted to sit,
from year to year, at the banquet which he had instituted. If so, it
was perhaps covertly implied that he had cherished no hopes of bliss
beyond the grave to compensate for the evils which he felt or
imagined here.  And if, in their bewildered conjectures as to the
purpose of earthly existence, the banqueters should throw aside the
veil, and cast an inquiring glance at this figure of death, as
seeking thence the solution otherwise unattainable, the only reply
would be a stare of the vacant eye-caverns and a grin of the
skeleton jaws.  Such was the response that the dead man had fancied
himself to receive when he asked of Death to solve the riddle of his
life; and it was his desire to repeat it when the guests of his
dismal hospitality should find themselves perplexed with the same
question.

"What means that wreath?"  asked several of the company, while
viewing the decorations of the table.

They alluded to a wreath of cypress, which was held on high by a
skeleton arm, protruding from within the black mantle.

"It is a crown," said one of the stewards, "not for the worthiest,
but for the wofulest, when he shall prove his claim to it."

The guest earliest bidden to the festival was a man of soft and
gentle character, who had not energy to struggle against the heavy
despondency to which his temperament rendered him liable; and
therefore with nothing outwardly to excuse him from happiness, he
had spent a life of quiet misery that made his blood torpid, and
weighed upon his breath, and sat like a ponderous night-fiend upon
every throb of his unresisting heart. His wretchedness seemed as
deep as his original nature, if not identical with it.  It was the
misfortune of a second guest to cherish within his bosom a diseased
heart, which had become so wretchedly sore that the continual and
unavoidable rubs of the world, the blow of an enemy, the careless
jostle of a stranger, and even the faithful and loving touch of a
friend, alike made ulcers in it.  As is the habit of people thus
afflicted, he found his chief employment in exhibiting these
miserable sores to any who would give themselves the pain of viewing
them.  A third guest was a hypochondriac, whose imagination wrought
necromancy in his outward and inward world, and caused him to see
monstrous faces in the household fire, and dragons in the clouds of
sunset, and fiends in the guise of beautiful women, and something
ugly or wicked beneath all the pleasant surfaces of nature.  His
neighbor at table was one who, in his early youth, had trusted
mankind too much, and hoped too highly in their behalf, and, in
meeting with many disappointments, had become desperately soured.
For several years back this misanthrope bad employed himself in
accumulating motives for hating and despising his race,--such as
murder, lust, treachery, ingratitude, faithlessness of trusted
friends, instinctive vices of children, impurity of women, hidden
guilt in men of saint-like aspect,--and, in short, all manner of
black realities that sought to decorate themselves with outward
grace or glory.  But at every atrocious fact that was added to his
catalogue, at every increase of the sad knowledge which he spent his
life to collect, the native impulses of the poor man's loving and
confiding heart made him groan with anguish.  Next, with his heavy
brow bent downward, there stole into the hall a man naturally
earnest and impassioned, who, from his immemorial infancy, had felt
the consciousness of a high message to the world; but, essaying to
deliver it, had found either no voice or form of speech, or else no
ears to listen.  Therefore his whole life was a bitter questioning
of himself: "Why have not men acknowledged my mission?  Am I not a
self-deluding fool?  What business have I on earth?  Where is my
grave?"  Throughout the festival, he quaffed frequent draughts from
the sepulchral urn of wine, hoping thus to quench the celestial fire
that tortured his own breast and could not benefit his race.

Then there entered, having flung away a ticket for a ball, a gay
gallant of yesterday, who had found four or five wrinkles in his
brow, and more gray hairs than he could well number on his head.
Endowed with sense and feeling, he had nevertheless spent his youth
in folly, but had reached at last that dreary point in life where
Folly quits us of her own accord, leaving us to make friends with
Wisdom if we can.  Thus, cold and desolate, he had come to seek
Wisdom at the banquet, and wondered if the skeleton were she.  To
eke out the company, the stewards had invited a distressed poet from
his home in the almshouse, and a melancholy idiot from the street-
corner.  The latter had just the glimmering of sense that was
sufficient to make him conscious of a vacancy, which the poor
fellow, all his life long, had mistily sought to fill up with
intelligence, wandering up and down the streets, and groaning
miserably because his attempts were ineffectual.  The only lady in
the hall was one who had fallen short of absolute and perfect
beauty, merely by the trifling defect of a slight cast in her left
eye.  But this blemish, minute as it was, so shocked the pure ideal
of her soul, rather than her vanity, that she passed her life in
solitude, and veiled her countenance even from her own gaze.  So the
skeleton sat shrouded at one end of the table, and this poor lady at
the other,

One other guest remains to be described.  He was a young man of
smooth brow, fair cheek, and fashionable mien.  So far as his
exterior developed him, he might much more suitably have found a
place at some merry Christmas table, than have been numbered among
the blighted, fate-stricken, fancy-tortured set of ill-starred
banqueters.  Murmurs arose among the guests as they noted, the
glance of general scrutiny which the intruder threw over his
companions.  What had he to do among them?  Why did not the skeleton
of the dead founder of the feast unbend its rattling joints, arise,
and motion the unwelcome stranger from the board?

"Shameful!" said the morbid man, while a new ulcer broke out in his
heart.  "He comes to mock us! we shall be the jest of his tavern
friends I--he will make a farce of our miseries, and bring it out
upon the stage!"

"O, never mind him!" said the hypochondriac, smiling sourly.  "He
shall feast from yonder tureen of viper-soup; and if there is a
fricassee of scorpions on the table, pray let him have his share of
it.  For the dessert, he shall taste the apples of Sodom, then, if
he like our Christmas fare, let him return again next year!"

"Trouble him not," murmured the melancholy man, with gentleness.
"What matters it whether the consciousness of misery come a few
years sooner or later?  If this youth deem himself happy now, yet
let him sit with us for the sake of the wretchedness to come."

The poor idiot approached the young man with that mournful aspect of
vacant inquiry which his face continually wore, and which caused
people to say that he was always in search of his missing wits.
After no little examination he touched the stranger's hand, but
immediately drew back his own, shaking his head and shivering,

"Cold, cold, cold!" muttered the idiot.

The young man shivered too, and smiled.

"Gentlemen, and you, madam," said one of the stewards of the
festival, "do not conceive so ill either of our caution or judgment,
as to imagine that we have admitted this young stranger--Gervayse
Hastings by name--without a full investigation and thoughtful
balance of his claims.  Trust me, not a guest at the table is better
entitled to his seat."

The steward's guaranty was perforce satisfactory.  The company,
therefore, took their places, and addressed themselves to the
serious business of the feast, but were soon disturbed by the
hypochondriac, who thrust back his chair, complaining that a dish of
stewed toads and vipers was set before him, and that there was green
ditchwater in his cup of wine.  This mistake being amended, he
quietly resumed his seat.  The wine, as it flowed freely from the
sepulchral urn, seemed to come imbued with all gloomy inspirations;
so that its influence was not to cheer, but either to sink the
revellers into a deeper melancholy, or elevate their spirits to an
enthusiasm of wretchedness.  The conversation was various.  They
told sad stories about people who might have been Worthy guests at
such a festival as the present.  They talked of grisly incidents in
human history; of strange crimes, which, if truly considered, were
but convulsions of agony; of some lives that had been altogether
wretched, and of others, which, wearing a general semblance of
happiness, had yet been deformed, sooner or later, by misfortune, as
by the intrusion of a grim face at a banquet; of death-bed scenes,
and what dark intimations might be gathered from the words of dying
men; of suicide, and whether the more eligible mode were by halter,
knife, poison, drowning, gradual starvation, or the fumes of
charcoal.  The majority of the guests, as is the custom with people
thoroughly and profoundly sick at heart, were anxious to make their
own woes the theme of discussion, and prove themselves most
excellent in anguish.  The misanthropist went deep into the
philosophy of evil, and wandered about in the darkness, with now and
then a gleam of discolored light hovering on ghastly shapes and
horrid scenery.  Many a miserable thought, such as men have stumbled
upon from age to age, did he now rake up again, and gloat over it as
an inestimable gem, a diamond, a treasure far preferable to those
bright, spiritual revelations of a better world, which are like
precious stones from heaven's pavement.  And then, amid his lore of
wretchedness he hid his face and wept.

It was a festival at which the woful man of Uz might suitably have
been a guest, together with all, in each succeeding age, who have
tasted deepest of the bitterness of life.  And be it said, too, that
every son or daughter of woman, however favored with happy fortune,
might, at one sad moment or another, have claimed the privilege of a
stricken heart, to sit down at this table. But, throughout the
feast, it was remarked that the young stranger, Gervayse Hastings,
was unsuccessful in his attempts to catch its pervading spirit.  At
any deep, strong thought that found utterance, and which was torn
out, as it were, from the saddest recesses of human consciousness,
he looked mystified and bewildered; even more than the poor idiot,
who seemed to grasp at such things with his earnest heart, and thus
occasionally to comprehend them.  The young man's conversation was
of a colder and lighter kind, often brilliant, but lacking the
powerful characteristics of a nature that had been developed by
suffering.

"Sir," said the misanthropist, bluntly, in reply to some observation
by Gervayse Hastings, "pray do not address me again. We have no
right to talk together.  Our minds have nothing in common.  By what
claim you appear at this banquet I cannot guess; but methinks, to a
man who could say what you have just now said, my companions and
myself must seem no more than shadows flickering on the wall.  And
precisely such a shadow are you to us."

The young man smiled and bowed, but, drawing himself back in his
chair, he buttoned his coat over his breast, as if the banqueting-
Ball were growing chill.  Again the idiot fixed his melancholy stare
upon the youth, and murmured, "Cold! cold! cold!"

The banquet drew to its conclusion, and the guests departed.
Scarcely had they stepped across the threshold of the hall, when the
scene that had there passed seemed like the vision of a sick fancy,
or an exhalation from a stagnant heart.  Now and then, however,
during the year that ensued, these melancholy people caught glimpses
of one another, transient, indeed, but enough to prove that they
walked the earth with the ordinary allotment of reality.  Sometimes
a pair of them came face to face, while stealing through the evening
twilight, enveloped in their sable cloaks.  Sometimes they casually
met in churchyards.  Once, also, it happened that two of the dismal
banqueters mutually started at recognizing each other in the noonday
sunshine of a crowded street, stalking there like ghosts astray.
Doubtless they wondered why the skeleton did not come abroad at
noonday too.

But whenever the necessity of their affairs compelled these
Christmas guests into the bustling world, they were sure to
encounter the young man who had so unaccountably been admitted to
the festival.  They saw him among the gay and fortunate; they caught
the sunny sparkle of his eye; they heard the light and careless
tones of his voice, and muttered to themselves with such indignation
as only the aristocracy of wretchedness could kindle, "The traitor!
The vile impostor!  Providence, in its own good time, may give him a
right to feast among us!"  But the young man's unabashed eye dwelt
upon their gloomy figures as they passed him, seeming to say,
perchance with somewhat of a sneer, "First, know my secret then,
measure your claims with mine!"

The step of Time stole onward, and soon brought merry Christmas
round again, with glad and solemn worship in the churches, and
sports, games, festivals, and everywhere the bright face of Joy
beside the household fire.  Again likewise the hall, with its
curtains of dusky purple, was illuminated by the death-torches
gleaming on the sepulchral decorations of the banquet.  The veiled,
skeleton sat in state, lifting the cypress-wreath above its head, as
the guerdon of some guest illustrious in the qualifications which
there claimed precedence.  As the stewards deemed the world
inexhaustible in misery, and were desirous of recognizing it in all
its forms, they had not seen fit to reassemble the company of the
former year.  New faces now threw their gloom across the table.

There was a man of nice conscience, who bore a blood-stain in his
heart--the death of a fellow-creature--which, for his more
exquisite torture, had chanced with such a peculiarity of
circumstances, that he could not absolutely determine whether his
will had entered into the deed or not.  Therefore, his whole life
was spent in the agony of an inward trial for murder, with a
continual sifting of the details of his terrible calamity, until his
mind had no longer any thought, nor his soul any emotion,
disconnected with it, There was a mother, too,--a mother once, but a
desolation now,--who, many years before, had gone out on a pleasure-
party, and, returning, found her infant smothered in its little bed.
And ever since she has been tortured with the fantasy that her
buried baby lay smothering in its coffin.  Then there was an aged
lady, who had lived from time immemorial with a constant tremor
quivering through her-frame.  It was terrible to discern her dark
shadow tremulous upon the wall; her lips, likewise, were tremulous;
and the expression of her eye seemed to indicate that her soul was
trembling too.  Owing to the bewilderment and confusion which made
almost a chaos of her intellect, it was impossible to discover what
dire misfortune had thus shaken her nature to its depths; so that
the stewards had admitted her to the table, not from any
acquaintance with her history, but on the safe testimony of her
miserable aspect.  Some surprise was expressed at the presence of a
bluff, red-faced gentleman, a certain Mr. Smith, who had evidently
the fat of many a rich feast within him, and the habitual twinkle of
whose eye betrayed a disposition to break forth into uproarious
laughter for little cause or none.  It turned out, however, that,
with the best possible flow of spirits, our poor friend was
afflicted with a physical disease of the heart, which threatened
instant death on the slightest cachinnatory indulgence, or even that
titillation of the bodily frame produced by merry thoughts.  In this
dilemma he had sought admittance to the banquet, on the ostensible
plea of his irksome and miserable state, but, in reality, with the
hope of imbibing a life-preserving melancholy.

A married couple had been invited from a motive of bitter humor, it
being well understood that they rendered each other unutterably
miserable whenever they chanced to meet, and therefore must
necessarily be fit associates at the festival.  In contrast with
these was another couple still unmarried, who had interchanged their
hearts in early life, but had been divided by circumstances as
impalpable as morning mist, and kept apart so long that their
spirits now found it impossible to meet, Therefore, yearning for
communion, yet shrinking from one another and choosing none beside,
they felt themselves companionless in life, and looked upon eternity
as a boundless desert.  Next to the skeleton sat a mere son of
earth,--a hunter of the Exchange,--a gatherer of shining dust,--a
man whose life's record was in his ledger, and whose soul's prison-
house the vaults of the bank where he kept his deposits.  This
person had been greatly perplexed at his invitation, deeming himself
one of the most fortunate men in the city; but the stewards
persisted in demanding his presence, assuring him that he had no
conception how miserable he was.

And now appeared a figure which we must acknowledge as our
acquaintance of the former festival.  It was Gervayse Hastings,
whose presence had then caused so much question and criticism, and
who now took his place with the composure of one whose claims were
satisfactory to himself and must needs be allowed by others. Yet his
easy and unruffled face betrayed no sorrow.

The well-skilled beholders gazed a moment into his eves and shook
their heads, to miss the unuttered sympathy--the countersign never
to be falsified--of those whose hearts are cavern-mouths through
which they descend into a region of illimitable woe and recognize
other wanderers there.

"Who is this youth?" asked the man with a bloodstain on his
conscience.  "Surely he has never gone down into the depths!  I know
all the aspects of those who have passed through the dark valley.
By what right is he among us?"

"Ah, it is a sinful thing to come hither without a sorrow," murmured
the aged lady, in accents that partook of the eternal tremor which
pervaded her whole being "Depart, young man!  Your soul has never
been shaken, and, therefore, I tremble so much the more to look at
you."

"His soul shaken!  No; I'll answer for it," said bluff Mr. Smith,
pressing his hand upon his heart and making himself as melancholy as
he could, for fear of a fatal explosion of laughter.  "I know the
lad well; he has as fair prospects as any young man about town, and
has no more right among us miserable creatures than the child
unborn.  He never was miserable and probably never will be!"

"Our honored guests," interposed the stewards, "pray have patience
with us, and believe, at least, that our deep veneration for the
sacredness of this solemnity would preclude any wilful violation of
it.  Receive this young man to your table.  It may not be too much
to say, that no guest here would exchange his own heart for the one
that beats within that youthful bosom!"

"I'd call it a bargain, and gladly, too," muttered Mr. Smith, with a
perplexing mixture of sadness and mirthful conceit.  "A plague upon
their nonsense!  My own heart is the only really miserable one in
the company; it will certainly be the death of me at last!"

Nevertheless, as on the former occasion, the judgment of the
stewards being without appeal, the company sat down.  The obnoxious
guest made no more attempt to obtrude his conversation on those
about him, but appeared to listen to the table-talk with peculiar
assiduity, as if some inestimable secret, otherwise beyond his
reach, might be conveyed in a casual word.  And in truth, to those
who could understand and value it, there was rich matter in the
upgushings and outpourings of these initiated souls to whom sorrow
had been a talisman, admitting them into spiritual depths which no
other spell can open.  Sometimes out of the midst of densest gloom
there flashed a momentary radiance, pure as crystal, bright as the
flame of stars, and shedding such a glow upon the mysteries of life,
that the guests were ready to exclaim, "Surely the riddle is on the
point of being solved!"  At such illuminated intervals the saddest
mourners felt it to be revealed that mortal griefs are but shadowy
and external; no more than the sable robes voluminously shrouding a
certain divine reality, and thus indicating what might otherwise be
altogether invisible to mortal eye.

"Just now," remarked the trembling old woman, "I seemed to see
beyond the outside.  And then my everlasting tremor passed away!"

"Would that I could dwell always in these momentary gleams of
light!" said the man of stricken conscience.  "Then the blood-stain
in my heart would be washed clean away."

This strain of conversation appeared so unintelligibly absurd to
good Mr. Smith, that he burst into precisely the fit of laughter
which his physicians had warned him against, as likely to prove
instantaneously fatal.  In effect, he fell back in his chair a
corpse, with a broad grin upon his face, while his ghost, perchance,
remained beside it bewildered at its unpremeditated exit.  This
catastrophe of course broke up the festival.

"How is this?  You do not tremble!" observed the tremulous old woman
to Gervayse Hastings, who was gazing at the dead man with singular
intentness.  "Is it not awful to see him so suddenly vanish out of
the midst of life,--this man of flesh and blood, whose earthly
nature was so warm and strong?  There is a never-ending tremor in my
soul, but it trembles afresh at, this!  And you are calm!"

"Would that he could teach me somewhat!" said Gervayse Hastings,
drawing a long breath.  "Men pass before me like shadows on the
wall; their actions, passions, feelings, are flickerings of the
light, and then they vanish!  Neither the corpse, nor yonder
skeleton, nor this old woman's everlasting tremor, can give me what
I seek."

And then the company departed.

We cannot linger to narrate, in such detail, more circumstances of
these singular festivals, which, in accordance with the founder's
will, continued to be kept with the regularity of an established
institution.  In process of time the stewards adopted the custom of
inviting, from far and near, those individuals whose misfortunes
were prominent above other men's, and whose mental and moral
development might, therefore, be supposed to possess a corresponding
interest.  The exiled noble of the French Revolution, and the broken
soldier of the Empire, were alike represented at the table.  Fallen
monarchs, wandering about the earth, have found places at that
forlorn and miserable feast. The statesman, when his party flung him
off, might, if he chose it, be once more a great man for the space
of a single banquet. Aaron Burr's name appears on the record at a
period when his ruin--the profoundest and most striking, with more
of moral circumstance in it than that of almost any other man--was
complete in his lonely age.  Stephen Guard, when his wealth weighed
upon him like a mountain, once sought admittance of his own accord.
It is not probable, however, that these men had any lesson to teach
in the lore of discontent and misery which might not equally well
have been studied in the common walks of life. Illustrious
unfortunates attract a wider sympathy, not because their griefs are
more intense, but because, being set on lofty pedestals, they the
better serve mankind as instances and bywords of calamity.

It concerns our present purpose to say that, at each successive
festival, Gervayse Hastings showed his face, gradually changing from
the smooth beauty of his youth to the thoughtful comeliness of
manhood, and thence to the bald, impressive dignity of age. He was
the only individual invariably present.  Yet on every occasion there
were murmurs, both from those who knew his character and position,
and from them whose hearts shrank back as denying his companionship
in their mystic fraternity.

"Who is this impassive man?" had been asked a hundred times. "Has he
suffered?  Has he sinned?  There are no traces of either. Then
wherefore is he here?"

"You must inquire of the stewards or of himself," was the constant
reply.  "We seem to know him well here in our city, and know
nothing of him but what is creditable and fortunate.  Yet hither he
comes, year after year, to this gloomy banquet, and sits among the
guests like a marble statue.  Ask yonder skeleton, perhaps that may
solve the riddle!"

It was in truth a wonder.  The life of Gervayse Hastings was not
merely a prosperous, but a brilliant one.  Everything had gone well
with him.  He was wealthy, far beyond the expenditure that was
required by habits of magnificence, a taste of rare purity and
cultivation, a love of travel, a scholar's instinct to collect a
splendid library, and, moreover, what seemed a magnificent
liberality to the distressed.  He had sought happiness, and not
vainly, if a lovely and tender wife, and children of fair promise,
could insure it.  He had, besides, ascended above the limit which
separates the obscure from the distinguished, and had won a
stainless reputation in affairs of the widest public importance.
Not that he was a popular character, or had within him the
mysterious attributes which are essential to that species of
success.  To the public he was a cold abstraction, wholly destitute
of those rich lines of personality, that living warmth, and the
peculiar faculty of stamping his own heart's impression on a
multitude of hearts, by which the people recognize their favorites.
And it must be owned that, after his most intimate associates had
done their best to know him thoroughly, and love him warmly, they
were startled to find how little hold he had upon their affections.
They approved, they admired, but still in those moments when the
human spirit most craves reality, they shrank back from Gervayse
Hastings, as powerless to give them what they sought.  It was the
feeling of distrustful regret with which we should draw back the
hand after extending it, in an illusive twilight, to grasp the hand
of a shadow upon the wall.

As the superficial fervency of youth decayed, this peculiar effect
of Gervayse Hastings's character grew more perceptible. His
children, when he extended his arms, came coldly to his knees, but
never climbed them of their own accord.  His wife wept secretly, and
almost adjudged herself a criminal because she shivered in the chill
of his bosom.  He, too, occasionally appeared not unconscious of the
chillness of his moral atmosphere, and willing, if it might be so,
to warm himself at a kindly fire.  But age stole onward and benumbed
him snore and more.  As the hoar-frost began to gather on him his
wife went to her grave, and was doubtless warmer there; his children
either died or were scattered to different homes of their own; and
old Gervayse Hastings, unscathed by grief,--alone, but needing no
companionship,--continued his steady walk through life, and still
one very Christmas day attended at the dismal banquet.  His
privilege as a guest had become prescriptive now.  Had he claimed
the head of the table, even the skeleton would have been ejected
from its seat.

Finally, at the merry Christmas-tide, when he had numbered fourscore
years complete, this pale, highbrowed, marble-featured old man once
more entered the long-frequented hall, with the same impassive
aspect that had called forth so much dissatisfied remark at his
first attendance.  Time, except in matters merely external, had done
nothing for him, either of good or evil.  As he took his place he
threw a calm, inquiring glance around the table, as if to ascertain
whether any guest had yet appeared, after so many unsuccessful
banquets, who might impart to him the mystery--the deep, warm
secret--the life within the life--which, whether manifested in joy
or sorrow, is what gives substance to a world of shadows.

"My friends," said Gervayse Hastings, assuming a position which his
long conversance with the festival caused to appear natural, "you
are welcome!  I drink to you all in this cup of sepulchral wine."

The guests replied courteously, but still in a manner that proved
them unable to receive the old man as a member of their sad
fraternity.  It may be well to give the reader an idea of the
present company at the banquet.

One was formerly a clergyman, enthusiastic in his profession, and
apparently of the genuine dynasty of those old Puritan divines whose
faith in their calling, and stern exercise of it, had placed them
among the mighty of the earth.  But yielding to the speculative
tendency of the age, he had gone astray from the firm foundation of
an ancient faith, and wandered into a cloud-region, where everything
was misty and deceptive, ever mocking him with a semblance of
reality, but still dissolving when he flung himself upon it for
support and rest.  His instinct and early training demanded
something steadfast; but, looking forward, he beheld vapors piled on
vapors, and behind him an impassable gulf between the man of
yesterday and to-day, on the borders of which he paced to and fro,
sometimes wringing his hands in agony, and often making his own woe
a theme of scornful merriment.  This surely was a miserable man.
Next, there was a theorist,--one of a numerous tribe, although he
deemed himself unique since the creation,--a theorist, who had
conceived a plan by which all the wretchedness of earth, moral and
physical, might be done away, and the bliss of the millennium at
once accomplished.  But, the incredulity of mankind debarring him
from action, he was smitten with as much grief as if the whole mass
of woe which he was denied the opportunity to remedy were crowded
into his own bosom. A plain old man in black attracted much of the
company's notice, on the supposition that he was no other than
Father Miller, who, it seemed, had given himself up to despair at
the tedious delay of the final conflagration.  Then there was a man
distinguished for native pride and obstinacy, who, a little while
before, had possessed immense wealth, and held the control of a vast
moneyed interest which he had wielded in the same spirit as a
despotic monarch would wield the power of his empire, carrying on a
tremendous moral warfare, the roar and tremor of which was felt at
every fireside in the land.  At length came a crushing ruin,--a
total overthrow of fortune, power, and character,--the effect of
which on his imperious and, in many respects, noble and lofty nature
might have entitled him to a place, not merely at our festival, but
among the peers of Pandemonium.

There was a modern philanthropist, who had become so deeply sensible
of the calamities of thousands and millions of his fellow-creatures,
and of the impracticableness of any general measures for their
relief, that he had no heart to do what little good lay immediately
within his power, but contented himself with being miserable for
sympathy.  Near him sat a gentleman in a predicament hitherto
unprecedented, but of which the present epoch probably affords
numerous examples.  Ever since he was of capacity to read a
newspaper, this person had prided himself on his consistent
adherence to one political party, but, in the confusion of these
latter days, had got bewildered and knew not whereabouts his party
was.  This wretched condition, so morally desolate and disheartening
to a man who has long accustomed himself to merge his individuality
in the mass of a great body, can only be conceived by such as have
experienced it.  His next companion was a popular orator who had
lost his voice, and--as it was pretty much all that he had to lose--
had fallen into a state of hopeless melancholy.  The table was
likewise graced by two of the gentler sex,--one, a half-starved,
consumptive seamstress, the representative of thousands just as
wretched; the other, a woman of unemployed energy, who found herself
in the world with nothing to achieve, nothing to enjoy, and nothing
even to suffer. She had, therefore, driven herself to the verge of
madness by dark breedings over the wrongs of her sex, and its
exclusion from a proper field of action.  The roll of guests being
thus complete, a side-table had been set for three or four
disappointed office-seekers, with hearts as sick as death, whom the
stewards had admitted partly because their calamities really
entitled them to entrance here, and partly that they were in
especial need of a good dinner.  There was likewise a homeless dog,
with his tail between his legs, licking up the crumbs and gnawing
the fragments of the feast,--such a melancholy cur as one sometimes
sees about the streets without a master, and willing to follow the
first that will accept his service.

In their own way, these were as wretched a set of people as ever had
assembled at the festival.  There they sat, with the veiled skeleton
of the founder holding aloft the cypress-wreath, at one end of the
table, and at the other, wrapped in furs, the withered figure of
Gervayse Hastings, stately, calm, and cold, impressing the company
with awe, yet so little interesting their sympathy that he might
have vanished into thin air without their once exclaiming, "Whither
is he gone?"

"Sir," said the philanthropist, addressing the old man, "you have
been so long a guest at this annual festival, and have thus been
conversant with so many varieties of human affliction, that, not
improbably, you have thence derived some great and important
lessons.  How blessed were your lot could you reveal a secret by
which all this mass of woe might be removed!"

"I know of but one misfortune," answered Gervayse Hastings, quietly,
"and that is my own."

"Your own!" rejoined the philanthropist.  "And looking back on your
serene and prosperous life, how can you claim to be the sole
unfortunate of the human race?"

"You will not understand it," replied Gervayse Hastings, feebly, and
with a singular inefficiency of pronunciation, and sometimes putting
one word for another.  "None have understood it, not even those who
experience the like.  It is a chillness, a want of earnestness, a
feeling as if what should be my heart were a thing of vapor, a
haunting perception of unreality!  Thus seeming to possess all that
other men have, all that men aim at, I have really possessed
nothing, neither joy nor griefs.  All things, all persons,--as was
truly said to me at this table long and long ago,--have been like
shadows flickering on the wall.  It was so with my wife and
children, with those who seemed my friends: it is so with
yourselves, whom I see now before one.  Neither have I myself any
real existence, but am a shadow like the rest."

"And how is it with your views of a future life?" inquired the
speculative clergyman.

"Worse than with you," said the old man, in a hollow and feeble
tone; "for I cannot conceive it earnestly enough to feel either hope
or fear.  Mine,--mine is the wretchedness!  This cold heart,--this
unreal life!  Ah! it grows colder still."

It so chanced that at this juncture the decayed ligaments of the
skeleton gave way, and the dry hones fell together in a heap, thus
causing the dusty wreath of cypress to drop upon the table. The
attention of the company being thus diverted for a single instant
from Gervayse Hastings, they perceived, on turning again towards
him, that the old man had undergone a change.  His shadow had ceased
to flicker on the wall.


"Well, Rosina, what is your criticism?" asked Roderick, as he rolled
up the manuscript.

"Frankly, your success is by no means complete," replied she. "It is
true, I have an idea of the character you endeavor to describe; but
it is rather by dint of my own thought than your expression."

"That is unavoidable," observed the sculptor, "because the
characteristics are all negative.  If Gervayse Hastings could have
imbibed one human grief at the gloomy banquet, the task of
describing him would have been infinitely easier.  Of such persons--
and we do meet with these moral monsters now and then--it is
difficult to conceive how they came to exist here, or what there is
in them capable of existence hereafter.  They seem to be on the
outside of everything; and nothing wearies the soul more than an
attempt to comprehend them within its grasp."









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                     THE INTELLIGENCE OFFICE



Grave figure, with a pair of mysterious spectacles on his nose and a
pen behind his ear, was seated at a desk in the corner of a
metropolitan office.  The apartment was fitted up with a counter,
and furnished with an oaken cabinet and a Chair or two, in simple
and business-like style.  Around the walls were stuck advertisements
of articles lost, or articles wanted, or articles to be disposed of;
in one or another of which classes were comprehended nearly all the
Conveniences, or otherwise, that the imagination of man has
contrived.  The interior of the room was thrown into shadow, partly
by the tall edifices that rose on the opposite side of the street,
and partly by the immense show-bills of blue and crimson paper that
were expanded over each of the three windows. Undisturbed by the
tramp of feet, the rattle of wheels, the hump of voices, the shout
of the city crier, the scream of the newsboys, and other tokens of
the multitudinous life that surged along in front of the office, the
figure at the desk pored diligently over a folio volume, of ledger-
like size and aspect, He looked like the spirit of a record--the
soul of his own great volume made visible in mortal shape.

But scarcely an instant elapsed without the appearance at the door
of some individual from the busy population whose vicinity was
manifested by so much buzz, and clatter, and outcry.  Now, it was a
thriving mechanic in quest of a tenement that should come within his
moderate means of rent; now, a ruddy Irish girl from the banks of
Killarney, wandering from kitchen to kitchen of our land, while her
heart still hung in the peat-smoke of her native cottage; now, a
single gentleman looking out for economical board; and now--for this
establishment offered an epitome of worldly pursuits--it was a faded
beauty inquiring for her lost bloom; or Peter Schlemihl, for his
lost shadow; or an author of ten years' standing, for his vanished
reputation; or a moody man, for yesterday's sunshine.

At the next lifting of the latch there entered a person with his hat
awry upon his head, his clothes perversely ill-suited to his form,
his eyes staring in directions opposite to their intelligence, and a
certain odd unsuitableness pervading his whole figure.  Wherever he
might chance to be, whether in palace or cottage, church or market,
on land or sea, or even at his own fireside, he must have worn the
characteristic expression of a man out of his right place.

"This," inquired he, putting his question in the form of an
assertion,--"this is the Central Intelligence Office?"

"Even so," answered the figure at the desk, turning another leaf of
his volume; he then looked the applicant in the face and said
briefly, "Your business?"

"I want," said the latter, with tremulous earnestness, "a place!"

"A place! and of what nature?" asked the Intelligencer.  "There are
many vacant, or soon to be so, some of which will probably suit,
since they range from that of a footman up to a seat at the council-
board, or in the cabinet, or a throne, or a presidential chair."

The stranger stood pondering before the desk with an unquiet,
dissatisfied air,--a dull, vague pain of heart, expressed by a
slight contortion of the brow,--an earnestness of glance, that asked
and expected, yet continually wavered, as if distrusting. In short,
he evidently wanted, not in a physical or intellectual sense, but
with an urgent moral necessity that is the hardest of all things to
satisfy, since it knows not its own object.

"Ah, you mistake me!"  said he at length, with a gesture of nervous
impatience."  Either of the places you mention, indeed, might answer
my purpose; or, more probably, none of them.  I want my place! my
own place! my true place in the world! my proper sphere! my thing to
do, which Nature intended me to perform when she fashioned me thus
awry, and which I have vainly sought all my lifetime!  Whether it be
a footman's duty or a king's is of little consequence, so it be
naturally mine.  Can you help me here?"

"I will enter your application," answered the Intelligencer, at the
same time writing a few lines in his volume.  "But to undertake such
a business, I tell you frankly, is quite apart from the ground
covered by my official duties.  Ask for something specific, and it
may doubtless be negotiated for you, on your compliance with the
conditions.  But were I to go further, I should have the whole
population of the city upon my shoulders; since far the greater
proportion of them are, more or less, in your predicament."

The applicant sank into a fit of despondency, and passed out of the
door without again lifting his eyes; and, if he died of the
disappointment, he was probably buried in the wrong tomb, inasmuch
as the fatality of such people never deserts them, and, whether
alive or dead, they are invariably out of place.

Almost immediately another foot was heard on the threshold.  A youth
entered hastily, and threw a glance around the office to ascertain
whether the man of intelligence was alone.  He then approached close
to the desk, blushed like a maiden, and seemed at a loss how to
broach his business.

"You come upon an affair of the heart," said the official personage,
looking into him through his mysterious spectacles. "State it in as
few words as may be."

"You are right," replied the youth.  "I have a heart to dispose of."

"You seek an exchange?" said the Intelligencer.  "Foolish youth, why
not be contented with your own?"

"Because," exclaimed the young man, losing his embarrassment in a
passionate glow,--"because my heart burns me with an intolerable
fire; it tortures me all day long with yearnings for I know not
what, and feverish throbbings, and the pangs of a vague sorrow; and
it awakens me in the night-time with a quake, when there is nothing
to be feared.  I cannot endure it any longer.  It were wiser to
throw away such a heart, even if it brings me nothing in return."

"O, very well," said the man of office, making an entry in his
volume.  "Your affair will be easily transacted.  This species of
brokerage makes no inconsiderable part of my business; and there is
always a large assortment of the article to select from. Here, if I
mistake not, comes a pretty fair sample."

Even as he spoke the door was gently and slowly thrust ajar,
affording a glimpse of the slender figure of a young girl, who, as
she timidly entered, seemed to bring the light and cheerfulness of
the outer atmosphere into the somewhat gloomy apartment.  We know
not her errand there, nor can we reveal whether the young man gave
up his heart into her custody.  If so, the arrangement was neither
better nor worse than in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, where
the parallel sensibilities of a similar age, importunate affections,
and the easy satisfaction of characters not deeply conscious of
themselves, supply the place of any profounder sympathy.

Not always, however, was the agency of the passions and affections
an office of so little trouble.  It happened, rarely, indeed, in
proportion to the cases that came under an ordinary rule, but still
it did happen, that a heart was occasionally brought hither of such
exquisite material, so delicately attempered, and so curiously
wrought, that no other heart could be found to match it.  It might
almost be considered a misfortune, in a worldly point of view, to be
the possessor of such a diamond of the purest water; since in any
reasonable probability it could only be exchanged for an ordinary
pebble, or a bit of cunningly manufactured glass, or, at least, for
a jewel of native richness, but ill-set, or with some fatal flaw, or
an earthy vein running through its central lustre.  To choose
another figure, it is sad that hearts which have their wellspring in
the infinite, and contain inexhaustible sympathies, should ever be
doomed to pour themselves into shallow vessels, and thus lavish
their rich affections on the ground.  Strange that the finer and
deeper nature, whether in man or woman, while possessed of every
other delicate instinct, should so often lack that most invaluable
one of preserving itself front contamination with what is of a baser
kind!  Sometimes, it is true, the spiritual fountain is kept pure by
a wisdom within itself, and sparkles into the light of heaven
without a stain from the earthy strata through which it had gushed
upward.  And sometimes, even here on earth, the pure mingles with
the pure, and the inexhaustible is recompensed with the infinite.
But these miracles, though he should claim the credit of them, are
far beyond the scope of such a superficial agent in human affairs as
the figure in the mysterious spectacles.

Again the door was opened, admitting the bustle of the city with a
fresher reverberation into the Intelligence Office.  Now entered a
man of woe-begone and downcast look; it was such an aspect as if he
had lost the very soul out of his body, and had traversed all the
world over, searching in the dust of the highways, and along the
shady footpaths, and beneath the leaves of the forest, and among the
sands of the sea-shore, in hopes to recover it again.  He had bent
an anxious glance along the pavement of the street as he came
hitherward; he looked also in the angle of the doorstep, and upon
the floor of the room; and, finally, coming up to the Man of
Intelligence, he gazed through the inscrutable spectacles which the
latter wore, as if the lost treasure might be hidden within his
eyes.

"I have lost--" he began; and then he paused.

"Yes," said the Intelligencer, "I see that you have lost,--but
what?"

"I have lost a precious jewel!" replied the unfortunate person, "the
like of which is not to be found among any prince's treasures.
While I possessed it, the contemplation of it was my sole and
sufficient happiness.  No price should have purchased it of me; but
it has fallen from my bosom where I wore it in my careless
wanderings about the city."

After causing the stranger to describe the marks of his lost jewel,
the Intelligencer opened a drawer of the oaken cabinet which has
been mentioned as forming a part of the furniture of the room.  Here
were deposited whatever articles had been picked up in the streets,
until the right owners should claim them.  It was a strange and
heterogeneous collection.  Not the least remarkable part of it was a
great number of wedding-rings, each one of which had been riveted
upon the finger with holy vows, and all the mystic potency that the
most solemn rites could attain, but had, nevertheless, proved too
slippery for the wearer's vigilance.  The gold of some was worn
thin, betokening the attrition of years of wedlock; others,
glittering from the jeweller's shop, must have been lost within the
honeymoon.  There were ivory tablets, the leaves scribbled over with
sentiments that had been the deepest truths of the writer's earlier
years, but which were now quite obliterated from his memory.  So
scrupulously were articles preserved in this depository, that not
even withered flowers were rejected; white roses, and blush-roses,
and moss-roses, fit emblems of virgin purity and shamefacedness,
which bad been lost or flung away, and trampled into the pollution
of the streets; locks of hair,--the golden and the glossy dark,--the
long tresses of woman and the crisp curls of man, signified that
lovers were now and then so heedless of the faith intrusted to them
as to drop its symbol from the treasure-place of the bosom.  Many of
these things were imbued with perfumes, and perhaps a sweet scent
had departed from the lives of their former possessors ever since
they had so wilfully or negligently lost them.  Here were gold
pencil-cases, little ruby hearts with golden arrows through them,
bosom-pins, pieces of coin, and small articles of every description,
comprising nearly all that have been lost since a long time ago.
Most of them, doubtless, had a history and a meaning, if there were
time to search it out and room to tell it.  Whoever has missed
anything valuable, whether out of his heart, mind, or pocket, would
do well to make inquiry at the Central Intelligence Office.

And in the corner of one of the drawers of the oaken cabinet, after
considerable research, was found a great pearl, looking like the
soul of celestial purity, congealed and polished.

"There is my jewel! my very pearl!" cried the stranger, almost
beside himself with rapture.  "It is mine!  Give it me this moment!
or I shall perish!"

"I perceive," said the Man of Intelligence, examining it more
closely, "that this is the Pearl of Great Price!"

"The very same," answered the stranger.  "Judge, then, of my misery
at losing it out of my bosom!  Restore it to me!  I must not live
without it an instant to longer."

"Pardon me," rejoined the Intelligencer, calmly, "you ask what is
beyond my duty.  This pearl, as you well know, is held upon a
peculiar tenure; and having once let it escape from your keeping,
you have no greater claim to it--nay, not so great--as any other
person.  I cannot give it back."

Nor could the entreaties of the miserable man--who saw before his
eyes the jewel of his life without the power to reclaim it--soften
the heart of this stern being, impassive to human sympathy, though
exercising such an apparent influence over human fortunes.  Finally
the loser of the inestimable pearl clutched his hands among his
hair, and ran madly forth into the world, which was affrighted at
his desperate looks.  There passed him on the doorstep a fashionable
young gentleman, whose business was to inquire for a damask rosebud,
the gift of his lady-love, which he had lost out of his buttonhole
within a hour after receiving it. So various were the errands of
those who visited this Central Office, where all human wishes seemed
to be made known, and, so far as destiny would allow, negotiated to
their fulfilment.

The next that entered was a man beyond the middle age, bearing the
look of one who knew the world and his own course in it.  He had
just alighted from a handsome private carriage, which had orders to
wait in the street while its owner transacted his business.  This
person came up to the desk with a quick, determined step, and looked
the Intelligencer in the face with a resolute eye; though, at the
same time, some secret trouble gleamed from it in red and dusky
light.

"I have an estate to dispose of," said he, with a brevity that
seemed characteristic.

"Describe it," said the Intelligencer.

The applicant proceeded to give the boundaries of his property, its
nature, comprising tillage, pasture, woodland, and pleasure-grounds,
in ample circuit; together with a mansion-house, in the construction
of which it had been his object to realize a castle in the air,
hardening its shadowy walls into granite, and rendering its
visionary splendor perceptible to the awakened eye. Judging from his
description, it was beautiful enough to vanish like a dream, yet
substantial enough to endure for centuries.  He spoke, too, of the
gorgeous furniture, the refinements of upholstery, and all the
luxurious artifices that combined to render this a residence where
life might flow onward in a stream of golden days, undisturbed by
the ruggedness which fate loves to fling into it.

"I am a man of strong will," said he, in conclusion; "and at my
first setting out in life, as a poor, unfriended youth, I resolved
to make myself the possessor of such a mansion and estate as this,
together with the abundant revenue necessary to uphold it.  I have
succeeded to the extent of my utmost wish. And this is the estate
which I have now concluded to dispose of."

"And your terms?" asked the Intelligencer, after taking down the
particulars with which the stranger had supplied him.

"Easy, abundantly easy!" answered the successful man, smiling, but
with a stern and almost frightful contraction of the brow, as if to
quell an inward pang.  "I have been engaged in various sorts of
business,--a distiller, a trader to Africa, an East India merchant,
a speculator in the stocks,--and, in the course of these affairs,
have contracted an encumbrance of a certain nature.  The purchaser
of the estate shall merely be required to assume this burden to
himself."

"I understand you," said the Man of Intelligence, putting his pen
behind his ear.  "I fear that no bargain can be negotiated on these
conditions.  Very probably the next possessor may acquire the estate
with a similar encumbrance, but it will be of his own contracting,
and will not lighten your burden in the least."

"And am I to live on," fiercely exclaimed the stranger, "with the
dirt of these accursed acres and the granite of this infernal
mansion crushing down my soul?  How, if I should turn the edifice
into an almshouse or a hospital, or tear it down and build a
church?"

"You can at least make the experiment," said the Intelligencer; "but
the whole matter is one which you must settle for yourself."

The man of deplorable success withdrew, and got into his coach,
which rattled off lightly over the wooden pavements, though laden
with the weight of much land, a stately house, and ponderous heaps
of gold, all compressed into an evil conscience.

There now appeared many applicants for places; among the most
noteworthy of whom was a small, smoke-dried figure, who gave himself
out to be one of the bad spirits that had waited upon Dr. Faustus in
his laboratory.  He pretended to show a certificate of character,
which, he averred, had been given him by that famous necromancer,
and countersigned by several masters whom he had subsequently
served.

"I am afraid, my good friend," observed the Intelligencer, "that
your chance of getting a service is but poor.  Nowadays, men act the
evil spirit for themselves and their neighbors, and play the part
more effectually than ninety-nine out of a hundred of your
fraternity."

But, just as the poor fiend was assuming a vaporous consistency,
being about to vanish through the floor in sad disappointment and
chagrin, the editor of a political newspaper chanced to enter the
office in quest of a scribbler of party paragraphs.  The former
servant of Dr. Faustus, with some misgivings as to his sufficiency
of venom, was allowed to try his hand in this capacity.  Next
appeared, likewise seeking a service, the mysterious man in Red, who
had aided Bonaparte in his ascent to imperial power.  He was
examined as to his qualifications by an aspiring politician, but
finally rejected, as lacking familiarity with the cunning tactics of
the present day.

People continued to succeed each other with as much briskness as if
everybody turned aside, out of the roar and tumult of the city, to
record here some want, or superfluity, or desire.  Some had goods or
possessions, of which they wished to negotiate the sale.  A China
merchant had lost his health by a long residence in that wasting
climate.  He very liberally offered his disease, and his wealth
along with it, to any physician who would rid him of both together.
A soldier offered his wreath of laurels for as good a leg as that
which it had cost him on the battle-field. One poor weary wretch
desired nothing but to be accommodated with any creditable method of
laying down his life; for misfortune and pecuniary troubles had so
subdued his spirits that he could no longer conceive the possibility
of happiness, nor had the heart to try for it.  Nevertheless,
happening to, overhear some conversation in the Intelligence Office
respecting wealth to be rapidly accumulated by a certain mode of
speculation, he resolved to live out this one other experiment of
better fortune.  Many persons desired to exchange their youthful
vices for others better suited to the gravity of advancing age; a
few, we are glad to say, made earnest, efforts to exchange vice for
virtue, and, hard as the bargain was, succeeded in effecting it.
But it was remarkable that what all were the least willing to give
up, even on the most advantageous terms, were the habits, the
oddities, the characteristic traits, the little ridiculous
indulgences, somewhere between faults and follies, of which nobody
but themselves could understand the fascination.

The great folio, in which the Man of Intelligence recorded all these
freaks of idle hearts, and aspirations of deep hearts, and desperate
longings of miserable hearts, and evil prayers of perverted hearts,
would be curious reading were it possible to obtain it for
publication.  Human character in its individual developments-human
nature in the mass--may best be studied in its wishes; and this was
the record of them all.  There was an endless diversity of mode and
circumstance, yet withal such a similarity in the real groundwork,
that any one page of the volume-whether written in the days before
the Flood, or the yesterday that is just gone by, or to be written
on the morrow that is close at hand, or a thousand ages hence--might
serve as a specimen of the whole.  Not but that there were wild
sallies of fantasy that could scarcely occur to more than one man's
brain, whether reasonable or lunatic.  The strangest wishes--yet
most incident to men who had gone deep into scientific pursuits, and
attained a high intellectual stage, though not the loftiest--were,
to contend with Nature, and wrest from her some secret, or some
power, which she had seen fit to withhold from mortal grasp.  She
loves to delude her aspiring students, and mock them with mysteries
that seem but just beyond their utmost reach.  To concoct new
minerals, to produce new forms of vegetable life, to create an
insect, if nothing higher in the living scale, is a sort of wish
that has often revelled in the breast of a man of science.  An
astronomer, who lived far more among the distant worlds of space
than in this lower sphere, recorded a wish to behold the opposite
side of the moon, which, unless the system of the firmament be
reversed, she can never turn towards the earth.  On the same page of
the volume was written the wish of a little child to have the stars
for playthings.

The most ordinary wish, that was written down with wearisome
recurrence, was, of course, for wealth, wealth, wealth, in sums from
a few shillings up to unreckonable thousands.  But in reality this
often-repeated expression covered as many different desires.  Wealth
is the golden essence of the outward world, embodying almost
everything that exists beyond the limits of the soul; and therefore
it is the natural yearning for the life in the midst of which we
find ourselves, and of which gold is the condition of enjoyment,
that men abridge into this general wish. Here and there, it is true,
the volume testified to some heart so perverted as to desire gold
for its own sake.  Many wished for power; a strange desire indeed,
since it is but another form of slavery.  Old people wished for the
delights of youth; a fop for a fashionable coat; an idle reader, for
a new novel; a versifier, for a rhyme to some stubborn word; a
painter, for Titian's secret of coloring; a prince, for a cottage; a
republican, for a kingdom and a palace; a libertine, for his
neighbor's wife; a man of palate, for green peas; and a poor man,
for a crust of bread. The ambitious desires of public men, elsewhere
so craftily concealed, were here expressed openly and boldly, side
by side with the unselfish wishes of the philanthropist for the
welfare of the race, so beautiful, so comforting, in contrast with
the egotism that continually weighed self against the world.  Into
the darker secrets of the Book of Wishes we will not penetrate.

It would be an instructive employment for a student of mankind,
perusing this volume carefully and comparing its records with men's
perfected designs, as expressed in their deeds and daily life, to
ascertain how far the one accorded with the other. Undoubtedly, in
most cases, the correspondence would be found remote.  The holy and
generous wish, that rises like incense from a pure heart towards
heaven, often lavishes its sweet perfume on the blast of evil times.
The foul, selfish, murderous wish, that steams forth from a
corrupted heart, often passes into the spiritual atmosphere without
being concreted into an earthly deed.  Yet this volume is probably
truer, as a representation of the human heart, than is the living
drama of action as it evolves around us.  There is more of good and
more of evil in it; more redeeming points of the bad and more errors
of the virtuous; higher upsoarings, and baser degradation of the
soul; in short, a more perplexing amalgamation of vice and virtue
than we witness in the outward world.  Decency and external
conscience often produce a far fairer outside than is warranted by
the stains within.  And be it owned, oil the other hand, that a man
seldom repeats to his nearest friend, any more than he realizes in
act, the purest wishes, which, at some blessed time or other, have
arisen from the depths of his nature and witnessed for him in this
volume.  Yet there is enough on every leaf to make the good man
shudder for his own wild and idle wishes, as well as for the sinner,
whose whole life is the incarnation of a wicked desire.

But again the door is opened, and we hear the tumultuous stir of the
world,--a deep and awful sound, expressing in another form some
portion of what is written in the volume that lies before the Man of
Intelligence.  A grandfatherly personage tottered hastily into the
office, with such an earnestness in his infirm alacrity that his
white hair floated backward as he hurried up to the desk, while his
dim eyes caught a momentary lustre from his vehemence of purpose.
This venerable figure explained that he was in search of To-morrow.

"I have spent all my life in pursuit of it," added the sage old
gentleman, "being assured that To-morrow has some vast benefit or
other in store for me.  But I am now getting a little in years, and
must make haste; for, unless I overtake To-morrow soon, I begin to
be afraid it will finally escape me."

"This fugitive To-morrow, my venerable friend," said the Man of
Inelligence, "is a stray child of Time, and is flying from his
father into the region of the infinite.  Continue your pursuit, and
you will doubtless come up with him; but as to the earthly gifts
which you expect, he has scattered them all among a throng of
Yesterdays."

Obliged to content himself with this enigmatical response, the
grandsire hastened forth with a quick clatter of his staff upon the
floor; and, as he disappeared, a little boy scampered through the
door in chase of a butterfly which had got astray amid the barren
sunshine of the city.  Had the old gentleman been shrewder, he might
have detected To-morrow under the semblance of that gaudy insect.
The golden butterfly glistened through the shadowy apartment, and
brushed its wings against the Book of Wishes, and fluttered forth
again with the child still in pursuit.

A man now entered, in neglected attire, with the aspect of a
thinker, but somewhat too roughhewn and brawny for a scholar. His
face was full of sturdy vigor, with some finer and keener attribute
beneath.  Though harsh at first, it was tempered with the glow of a
large, warm heart, which had force enough to heat his powerful
intellect through and through.  He advanced to the Intelligencer and
looked at him with a glance of such stern sincerity that perhaps few
secrets were beyond its scope.

"I seek for Truth," said he.

"It is precisely the most rare pursuit that has ever come under my
cognizance," replied the Intelligencer, as he made the new
inscription in his volume.  "Most men seek to impose some cunning
falsehood upon themselves for truth.  But I can lend no help to your
researches.  You must achieve the miracle for yourself.  At some
fortunate moment you may find Truth at your side, or perhaps she may
be mistily discerned far in advance, or possibly behind you."

"Not behind me," said the seeker; "for I have left nothing on my
track without a thorough investigation.  She flits before me,
passing now through a naked solitude, and now mingling with the
throng of a popular assembly, and now writing with the pen of a
French philosopher, and now standing at the altar of an old
cathedral, in the guise of a Catholic priest, performing the high
mass.  O weary search!  But I must not falter; and surely my heart-
deep quest of Truth shall avail at last."

He paused and fixed his eyes upon the Intelligencer with a depth of
investigation that seemed to hold commerce with the inner nature of
this being, wholly regardless of his external development.

"And what are you?" said he.  "It will not satisfy me to point to
this fantastic show of an Intelligence Office and this mockery of
business.  Tell me what is beneath it, and what your real agency in
life and your influence upon mankind."

"Yours is a mind," answered the Man of Intelligence, "before which
the forms and fantasies that conceal the inner idea from the
multitude vanish at once and leave the naked reality beneath. Know,
then, the secret.  My agency in worldly action, my connection with
the press, and tumult, and intermingling, and development of human
affairs, is merely delusive.  The desire of man's heart does for him
whatever I seem to do.  I am no minister of action, but the
Recording Spirit."

What further secrets were then spoken remains a mystery, inasmuch as
the roar of the city, the bustle of human business, the outcry of
the jostling masses, the rush and tumult of man's life, in its noisy
and brief career, arose so high that it drowned the words of these
two talkers; and whether they stood talking in the moon, or in
Vanity Fair, or in a city of this actual world, is more than I can
say.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                       P.'S CORRESPONDENCE



My unfortunate friend P. has lost the thread of his life by the
interposition of long intervals of partially disordered reason. The
past and present are jumbled together in his mind in a manner often
productive of curious results, and which will be better understood
after the perusal of the following letter than from any description
that I could give.  The poor fellow, without once stirring from the
little whitewashed, iron-grated room to which he alludes in his
first paragraph, is nevertheless a great traveller, and meets in his
wanderings a variety of personages who have long ceased to be
visible to any eye save his own.  In my opinion, all this is not so
much a delusion as a partly wilful and partly involuntary sport of
the imagination, to which his disease has imparted such morbid
energy that he beholds these spectral scenes and characters with no
less distinctness than a play upon the stage, and with somewhat more
of illusive credence. Many of his letters are in my possession, some
based upon the same vagary as the present one, and others upon
hypotheses not a whit short of it in absurdity.  The whole form a
series of correspondence, which, should fate seasonably remove my
poor friend from what is to him a world of moonshine, I promise
myself a pious pleasure in editing for the public eye.  P. had
always a hankering after literary reputation, and has made more than
one unsuccessful effort to achieve it.  It would not be a little
odd, if, after missing his object while seeking it by the light of
reason, he should prove to have stumbled upon it in his misty
excursions beyond the limits of sanity.


LONDON, February 29, 1845.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Old associations cling to the mind with astonishing
tenacity.  Daily custom grows up about us like a stone wall, and
consolidates itself into almost as material an entity as mankind's
strongest architecture.  It is sometimes a serious question with me
whether ideas be not really visible and tangible, and endowed with
all the other qualities of matter. Sitting as I do at this moment in
my hired apartment, writing beside the hearth, over which hangs a
print of Queen Victoria, listening to the muffled roar of the
world's metropolis, and with a window at but five paces distant,
through which, whenever I please, I can gaze out on actual London,--
with all this positive certainty as to my whereabouts, what kind of
notion, do you think, is just now perplexing my brain?  Why,--would
you believe it?--that all this time I am still an inhabitant of that
wearisome little chamber,--that whitewashed little chamber,--that
little chamber with its one small window, across which, from some
inscrutable reason of taste or convenience, my landlord had placed a
row of iron bars,--that same little chamber, in short, whither your
kindness has so often brought you to visit me!  Will no length of
time or breadth of space enfranchise me from that unlovely abode?  I
travel; but it seems to be like the snail, with my house upon my
head.  Ah, well!  I am verging, I suppose, on that period of life
when present scenes and events make but feeble impressions in
comparison with those of yore; so that I must reconcile myself to be
more and more the prisoner of Memory, who merely lets me hop about a
little with her chain around my leg.

My letters of introduction have been of the utmost service, enabling
me to make the acquaintance of several distinguished characters who,
until now, have seemed as remote from the sphere of my personal
intercourse as the wits of Queen Anne's time or Ben Jenson's
compotators at the Mermaid.  One of the first of which I availed
myself was the letter to Lord Byron.  I found his lordship looking
much older than I had anticipated, although, considering his former
irregularities of life and the various wear and tear of his
constitution, not older than a man on the verge of sixty reasonably
may look.  But I had invested his earthly frame, in my imagination,
with the poet's spiritual immortality.  He wears a brown wig, very
luxuriantly curled, and extending down over his forehead.  The
expression of his eyes is concealed by spectacles.  His early
tendency to obesity having increased, Lord Byron is now enormously
fat,--so fat as to give the impression of a person quite overladen
with his own flesh, and without sufficient vigor to diffuse his
personal life through the great mass of corporeal substance which
weighs upon him so cruelly.  You gaze at the mortal heap; and, while
it fills your eye with what purports to be Byron, you murmur within
yourself, "For Heaven's sake, where is he?"  Were I disposed to be
caustic, I might consider this mass of earthly matter as the symbol,
in a material shape, of those evil habits and carnal vices which
unspiritualize man's nature and clog up his avenues of communication
with the better life.  But this would be too harsh; and, besides,
Lord Byron's morals have been improving while his outward man has
swollen to such unconscionable circumference. Would that he were
leaner; for, though he did me the honor to present his hand, yet it
was so puffed out with alien substance that I could not feel as if I
had touched the hand that wrote Childe Harold.

On my entrance his lordship apologized for not rising to receive me,
on the sufficient plea that the gout for several years past had
taken up its constant residence in his right foot, which accordingly
was swathed in many rolls of flannel and deposited upon a cushion.
The other foot was hidden in the drapery of his chair.  Do you
recollect whether Byron's right or left foot was the deformed one.

The noble poet's reconciliation with Lady Byron is now, as you are
aware, of ten years' standing; nor does it exhibit, I am assured,
any symptom of breach or fracture.  They are said to be, if not a
happy, at least a contented, or at all events a quiet couple,
descending the slope of life with that tolerable degree of mutual
support which will enable them to come easily and comfortably to the
bottom.  It is pleasant to reflect how entirely the poet has
redeemed his youthful errors in this particular.  Her ladyship's
influence, it rejoices me to add, has been productive of the
happiest results upon Lord Byron in a religious point of view.  He
now combines the most rigid tenets of Methodism with the ultra
doctrines of the Puseyites; the former being perhaps due to the
convictions wrought upon his mind by his noble consort, while the
latter are the embroidery and picturesque illumination demanded by
his imaginative character. Much of whatever expenditure his
increasing habits of thrift continue to allow him is bestowed in the
reparation or beautifying of places of worship; and this nobleman,
whose name was once considered a synonyme of the foul fiend, is now
all but canonized as a saint in many pulpits of the metropolis and
elsewhere.  In politics, Lord Byron is an uncompromising
conservative, and loses no opportunity, whether in the House of
Lords or in private circles, of denouncing and repudiating the
mischievous and anarchical notions of his earlier day.  Nor does he
fail to visit similar sins in other people with the sincerest
vengeance which his somewhat blunted pen is capable of inflicting.
Southey and he are on the most intimate terms.  You are aware that,
some little time before the death of Moore, Byron caused that
brilliant but reprehensible man to be evicted from his house.  Moore
took the insult so much to heart that, it is said to have been one
great cause of the fit of illness which brought him to the grave.
Others pretend that the lyrist died in a very happy state of mind,
singing one of his own sacred melodies, and expressing his belief
that it would be heard within the gate of paradise, and gain him
instant and honorable admittance.  I wish he may have found it so.

I failed not, as you may suppose, in the course of conversation with
Lord Byron, to pay the weed of homage due to a mighty poet, by
allusions to passages in Childe Harold, and Manfred, and Don Juan,
which have made so large a portion of the music of my life. My
words, whether apt or otherwise, were at least warm with the
enthusiasm of one worthy to discourse of immortal poesy.  It was
evident, however, that they did not go precisely to the right spot.
I could perceive that there was some mistake or other, and was not a
little angry with myself, and ashamed of my abortive attempt to
throw back, from my own heart to the gifted author's ear, the echo
of those strains that have resounded throughout the world.  But by
and by the secret peeped quietly out.  Byron,--I have the
information from his own lips, so that you need not hesitate to
repeat it in literary circles,--Byron is preparing a new edition of
his complete works, carefully corrected, expurgated, and amended, in
accordance with his present creed of taste, morals, politics, and
religion.  It so happened that the very passages of highest
inspiration to which I had alluded were among the condemned and
rejected rubbish which it is his purpose to cast into the gulf of
oblivion.  To whisper you the truth, it appears to me that his
passions having burned out, the extinction of their vivid and
riotous flame has deprived Lord Byron of the illumination by which
he not merely wrote, but was enabled to feel and comprehend what he
had written.  Positively he no longer understands his own poetry.

This became very apparent on his favoring me so far as to read a few
specimens of Don Juan in the moralized version.  Whatever is
licentious, whatever disrespectful to the sacred mysteries of our
faith, whatever morbidly melancholic or splenetically sportive,
whatever assails settled constitutions of government or systems of
society, whatever could wound the sensibility of any mortal, except
a pagan, a republican, or a dissenter, has been unrelentingly
blotted out, and its place supplied by unexceptionable verses in his
lordship's later style.  You may judge how much of the poem remains
as hitherto published.  The result is not so good as might be
wished; in plain terms, it is a very sad affair indeed; for, though
the torches kindled in Tophet have been extinguished, they leave an
abominably ill odor, and are succeeded by no glimpses of hallowed
fire.  It is to be hoped, nevertheless, that this attempt on Lord
Byron's part to atone for his youthful errors will at length induce
the Dean of Westminster, or whatever churchman is concerned, to
allow Thorwaldsen's statue of the poet its due niche in the grand
old Abbey.  His bones, you know, when brought from Greece, were
denied sepulture among those of his tuneful brethren there.

What a vile slip of the pen was that!  How absurd in me to talk
about burying the bones of Byron, who, I have just seen alive, and
incased in a big, round bulk of flesh!  But, to say the truth, a
prodigiously fat man always impresses me as a kind of hobgoblin; in
the very extravagance of his mortal system I find something akin to
the immateriality of a ghost.  And then that ridiculous old story
darted into my mind, how that Byron died of fever at Missolonghi,
above twenty years ago.  More and more I recognize that we dwell in
a world of shadows; and, for my part, I hold it hardly worth the
trouble to attempt a distinction between shadows in the mind and
shadows out of it.  If there be any difference, the former are
rather the more substantial.

Only think of my good fortune!  The venerable Robert Burns--now, if
I mistake not, in his eighty-seventh year--happens to be making a
visit to London, as if on purpose to afford me an opportunity of
grasping him by the hand.  For upwards of twenty years past he has
hardly left his quiet cottage in Ayrshire for a single night, and
has only been drawn hither now by the irresistible persuasions of
all the distinguished men in England. They wish to celebrate the
patriarch's birthday by a festival. It will be the greatest literary
triumph on record.  Pray Heaven the little spirit of life within the
aged bard's bosom may not be extinguished in the lustre of that
hour!  I have already had the honor of an introduction to him at the
British Museum, where he was examining a collection of his own
unpublished letters, interspersed with songs, which have escaped the
notice of all his biographers.

Poh!  Nonsense!  What am I thinking of?  How should Burns have been
embalmed in biography when he is still a hearty old man?

The figure of the bard is tall and in the highest degree reverend,
nor the less so that it is much bent by the burden of time.  His
white hair floats like a snowdrift around his face, in which are
seen the furrows of intellect and passion, like the channels of
headlong torrents that have foamed themselves away. The old
gentleman is in excellent preservation, considering his time of
life.  He has that crickety sort of liveliness,--I mean the
cricket's humor of chirping for any cause or none,--which is perhaps
the most favorable mood that can befall extreme old age. Our pride
forbids us to desire it for ourselves, although we perceive it to be
a beneficence of nature in the case of others. I was surprised to
find it in Burns.  It seems as if his ardent heart and brilliant
imagination had both burned down to the last embers, leaving only a
little flickering flame in one corner, which keeps dancing upward
and laughing all by itself.  He is no longer capable of pathos.  At
the request of Allan Cunningham, he attempted to sing his own song
to Mary in Heaven; but it was evident that the feeling of those
verses, so profoundly true and so simply expressed, was entirely
beyond the scope of his present sensibilities; and, when a touch of
it did partially awaken him, the tears immediately gushed into his
eyes and his voice broke into a tremulous cackle.  And yet he but
indistinctly knew wherefore he was weeping.  Ah, he must not think
again of Mary in Heaven until he shake off the dull impediment of
time and ascend to meet her there.

Burns then began to repeat Tan O'Shanter; but was so tickled with
its wit and humor--of which, however, I suspect he had but a
traditionary sense--that he soon burst into a fit of chirruping
laughter, succeeded by a cough, which brought this not very
agreeable exhibition to a close.  On the whole, I would rather not
have witnessed it.  It is a satisfactory idea, however, that the
last forty years of the peasant poet's life have been passed in
competence and perfect comfort.  Having been cured of his bardic
improvidence for many a day past, and grown as attentive to the main
chance as a canny Scotsman should be, he is now considered to he
quite well off as to pecuniary circumstances. This, I suppose, is
worth having lived so long for.

I took occasion to inquire of some of the countrymen of Burns in
regard to the health of Sir Walter Scott.  His condition, I am sorry
to say, remains the same as for ten years past; it is that of a
hopeless paralytic, palsied not more in body than in those nobler
attributes of which the body is the instrument.  And thus he
vegetates from day to day and from year to year at that splendid
fantasy of Abbotsford, which grew out of his brain, and became a
symbol of the great romancer's tastes, feelings, studies,
prejudices, and modes of intellect.  Whether in verse, prose, or
architecture, he could achieve but one thing, although that one in
infinite variety.  There he reclines, on a couch in his library, and
is said to spend whole hours of every day in dictating tales to an
amanuensis,--to an imaginary amanuensis; for it is not deemed worth
any one's trouble now to take down what flows from that once
brilliant fancy, every image of which was formerly worth gold and
capable of being coined.  Yet Cunningham, who has lately seen him,
assures me that there is now and then a touch of the genius,--a
striking combination of incident, or a picturesque trait of
character, such as no other man alive could have bit off,--a glimmer
from that ruined mind, as if the sun had suddenly flashed on a half-
rusted helmet in the gloom of an ancient ball.  But the plots of
these romances become inextricably confused; the characters melt
into one another; and the tale loses itself like the course of a
stream flowing through muddy and marshy ground.

For my part, I can hardly regret that Sir Walter Scott had lost his
consciousness of outward things before his works went out of vogue.
It was good that he should forget his fame rather than that fame
should first have forgotten him.  Were he still a writer, and as
brilliant a one as ever, he could no longer maintain anything like
the same position in literature.  The world, nowadays, requires a
more earnest purpose, a deeper moral, and a closer and homelier
truth than he was qualified to supply it with.  Yet who can be to
the present generation even what Scott has been to the past?  I had
expectations from a young man,--one Dickens,--who published a few
magazine articles, very rich in humor, and not without symptoms of
genuine pathos; but the poor fellow died shortly after commencing an
odd series of sketches, entitled, I think, the Pickwick Papers.  Not
impossibly the world has lost more than it dreams of by the untimley
death of this Mr. Dickens.

Whom do you think I met in Pall Mall the other day?  You would not
hit it in ten guesses.  Why, no less a man than Napoleon Bonaparte,
or all that is now left of him,--that is to say, the skin, bones,
and corporeal substance, little cocked hat, green coat, white
breeches, and small sword, which are still known by his redoubtable
name.  He was attended only by two policemen, who walked quietly
behind the phantasm of the old ex-emperor, appearing to have no duty
in regard to him except to see that none of the light-fingered
gentry should possess themselves of thee star of the Legion of
Honor.  Nobody save myself so much as turned to look after him; nor,
it grieves me to confess, could even I contrive to muster up any
tolerable interest, even by all that the warlike spirit, formerly
manifested within that now decrepit shape, had wrought upon our
globe.  There is no surer method of annihilating the magic influence
of a great renown than by exhibiting the possessor of it in the
decline, the overthrow, the utter degradation of his powers,--buried
beneath his own mortality,--and lacking even the qualities of sense
that enable the most ordinary men to bear themselves decently in the
eye of the world.  This is the state to which disease, aggravated by
long endurance of a tropical climate, and assisted by old age,--for
he is now above seventy,--has reduced Bonaparte.  The British
government has acted shrewdly in retransporting him from St. Helena
to England.  They should now restore him to Paris, and there let him
once again review the relics of his armies.  His eye is dull and
rheumy; his nether lip hung down upon his chin. While I was
observing him there chanced to be a little extra bustle in the
street; and he, the brother of Caesar and Hannibal,--the great
captain who had veiled the world in battle-smoke and tracked it
round with bloody footsteps,--was seized with a nervous trembling,
and claimed the protection of the two policemen by a cracked and
dolorous cry.  The fellows winked at one another, laughed aside,
and, patting Napoleon on the back, took each an arm and led him
away.

Death and fury!  Ha, villain, how came you hither?  Avaunt! or I
fling my inkstand at your head.  Tush, tusk; it is all a mistake.
Pray, my dear friend, pardon this little outbreak.  The fact is, the
mention of those two policemen, and their custody of Bonaparte, had
called up the idea of that odious wretch--you remember him well--who
was pleased to take such gratuitous and impertinent care of my
person before I quitted New England. Forthwith up rose before my
mind's eye that same little whitewashed room, with the iron-grated
window,--strange that it should have been iron-grated!--where, in
too easy compliance with the absurd wishes of my relatives, I have
wasted several good years of my life.  Positively it seemed to me
that I was still sitting there, and that the keeper--not that he
ever was my keeper neither, but only a kind of intrusive devil of a
body-servant--had just peeped in at the door.  The rascal!  I owe
him an old grudge, and will find a time to pay it yet.  Fie! fie!
The mere thought of him has exceedingly discomposed me.  Even now
that hateful chamber--the iron-grated window, which blasted the
blessed sunshine as it fell through the dusty panes and made it
poison to my soul-looks more distinct to my view than does this my
comfortable apartment in the heart of London.  The reality--that
which I know to be such--hangs like remnants of tattered scenery
over the intolerably prominent illusion.  Let us think of it no
more.

You will be anxious to hear of Shelley.  I need not say, what is
known to all the world, that this celebrated poet has for many years
past been reconciled to the Church of England.  In his more recent
works he has applied his fine powers to the vindication of the
Christian faith, with an especial view to that particular
development.  Latterly, as you may not have heard, he has taken
orders, and been inducted to a small country living in the gift of
the Lord Chancellor.  Just now, luckily for me, he has come to the
metropolis to superintend the publication of a volume of discourses
treating of the poetico-philosophical proofs of Christianity on the
basis of the Thirty-nine Articles.  On my first introduction I felt
no little embarrassment as to the manner of combining what I had to
say to the author of _Queen Mali_, the _Revolt of Islam_, and
_Prometheus Unbound_ with such acknowledgments as might be
acceptable to a Christian minister and zealous upholder of the
Established Church.  But Shelley soon placed me at my ease.
Standing where he now does, and reviewing all his successive
productions from a higher point, he assures me that there is a
harmony, an order, a regular procession, which enables him to lay
his hand upon any one of the earlier poems and say, "This is my
work," with precisely the same complacency of conscience wherewithal
he contemplates the volume of discourses above mentioned.  They are
like the successive steps of a staircase, the lowest of which, in
the depth of chaos, is as essential to the support of the whole as
the highest and final one resting upon the threshold of the heavens.
I felt half inclined to ask him what would have been his fate had he
perished on the lower steps of his staircase, instead of building
his way aloft into the celestial brightness.

How all this may be I neither pretend to understand nor greatly
care, so long as Shelley has really climbed, as it seems he has,
from a lower region to a loftier one.  Without touching upon their
religious merits, I consider the productions of his maturity
superior, as poems, to those of his youth.  They are warmer with
human love, which has served as an interpreter between his mind and
the multitude.  The author has learned to dip his pen oftener into
his heart, and has thereby avoided the faults into which a too
exclusive use of fancy and intellect are wont to betray him.
Formerly his page was often little other than a concrete arrangement
of crystallizations, or even of icicles, as cold as they were
brilliant.  Now you take it to your heart, and are conscious of a
heart-warmth responsive to your own.  In his private character
Shelley can hardly have grown more gentle, kind, and affectionate
than his friends always represented him to be up to that disastrous
night when he was drowned in the Mediterranean.  Nonsense, again,--
sheer nonsense! What, am I babbling about?  I was thinking of that
old figment of his being lost in the Bay of Spezzia, and washed
ashore near Via Reggio, and burned to ashes on a funeral pyre, with
wine, and spices, and frankincense; while Byron stood on the beach
and beheld a flame of marvellous beauty rise heavenward from the
dead poet's heart, and that his fire-purified relics were finally
buried near his child in Roman earth.  If all this happened three-
and-twenty years ago, how could I have met the drowned and burned
and buried man here in London only yesterday?

Before quitting the subject, I may mention that Dr. Reginald Heber,
heretofore Bishop of Calcutta, but recently translated to a see in
England, called on Shelley while I was with him.  They appeared to
be on terms of very cordial intimacy, and are said to have a joint
poem in contemplation.  What a strange, incongruous dream is the
life of man!

Coleridge has at last finished his poem of Christabel.  It will be
issued entire by old John Murray in the course of the present
publishing season.  The poet, I hear, is visited with a troublesome
affection of the tongue, which has put a period, or some lesser
stop, to the life-long discourse that has hitherto been flowing from
his lips.  He will not survive it above a month, unless his
accumulation of ideas be sluiced off in some other way.  Wordsworth
died only a week or two ago.  Heaven rest his soul, and grant that
he may not have completed _The Excursion_!  Methinks I am sick of
everything he wrote, except his _Laodamia_.  It is very sad, this
inconstancy of the mind to the poets whom it once worshipped.
Southey is as hale as ever, and writes with his usual diligence.
Old Gifford is still alive, in the extremity of age, and with most
pitiable decay of what little sharp and narrow intellect the Devil
had gifted him withal.  One hates to allow such a man the privilege
of growing old and infirm.  It takes away our speculative license of
kicking him.

Keats?  No; I have not seen him except across a crowded street, with
coaches, drays, horsemen, cabs, omnibuses, foot-passengers, and
divers other sensual obstructions intervening betwixt his small and
slender figure and my eager glance.  I would fain have met him on
the sea-shore, or beneath a natural arch of forest trees, or the
Gothic arch of an old cathedral, or among Grecian ruins, or at a
glimmering fireside on the verge of evening, or at the twilight
entrance of a cave, into the dreamy depths of which he would have
led me by the hand; anywhere, in short, save at Temple Bar, where
his presence was blotted out by the porter-swollen bulks of these
gross Englishmen.  I stood and watched him fading away, fading away
along the pavement, and could hardly tell whether he were an actual
man or a thought that had slipped out of my mind and clothed itself
in human form and habiliments merely to beguile me.  At one moment
he put his handkerchief to his lips, and withdrew it, I am almost
certain, stained with blood.  You never saw anything so fragile as
his person.  The truth is, Keats has all his life felt the effects
of that terrible bleeding at the lungs caused by the article on his
Endymion in the Quarterly Review, and which so nearly brought him to
the grave.  Ever since he has glided about the world like a ghost,
sighing a melancholy tone in the ear of here and there a friend, but
never sending forth his voice to greet the multitude. I can hardly
think him a great poet.  The burden of a mighty genius would never
have been imposed upon shoulders so physically frail and a spirit so
infirmly sensitive.  Great poets should have iron sinews.

Yet Keats, though for so many years he has given nothing to the
world, is understood to have devoted himself to the composition of
an epic poem.  Some passages of it have been communicated to the
inner circle of his admirers, and impressed them as the loftiest
strains that have been audible on earth since Milton's days.  If I
can obtain copies of these specimens, I will ask you to present them
to James Russell Lowell, who seems to be one of the poet's most
fervent and worthiest worshippers.  The information took me by
surprise.  I had supposed that all Keats's poetic incense, without
being embodied in human language, floated up to heaven and mingled
with the songs of the immortal choristers, who perhaps were
conscious of an unknown voice among them, and thought their melody
the sweeter for it.  But it is not so; he has positively written a
poem on the subject of _Paradise Regained_, though in another sense
than that which presented itself to the mind of Milton.  In
compliance, it may be imagined, with the dogma of those who pretend
that all epic possibilities in the past history of the world are
exhausted, Keats has thrown his poem forward into an indefinitely
remote futurity.  He pictures mankind amid the closing circumstances
of the time-long warfare between good and evil.  Our race is on the
eve of its final triumph.  Man is within the last stride of
perfection; Woman, redeemed from the thraldom against which our
sibyl uplifts so powerful and so sad a remonstrance, stands equal by
his side or communes for herself with angels; the Earth,
sympathizing with her children's happier state, has clothed herself
in such luxuriant and loving beauty as no eye ever witnessed since
our first parents saw the sun rise over dewy Eden.  Nor then indeed;
for this is the fulfilment of what was then but a golden promise.
But the picture has its shadows.  There remains to mankind another
peril,--a last encounter with the evil principle.  Should the battle
go against us, we sink back into the slime and misery of ages.  If
we triumph--But it demands a poet's eye to contemplate the splendor
of such a consummation and not to be dazzled.

To this great work Keats is said to have brought so deep and tender
a spirit of humanity that the poem has all the sweet and warm
interest of a village tale no less than the grandeur which befits so
high a theme.  Such, at least, is the perhaps partial representation
of his friends; for I have not read or heard even a single line of
the performance in question.  Keats, I am told, withholds it from
the press, under an idea that the age has not enough of spiritual
insight to receive it worthily.  I do not like this distrust; it
makes me distrust the poet.  The universe is waiting to respond to
the highest word that the best child of time and immortality can
utter.  If it refuse to listen, it is because he mumbles and
stammers, or discourses things unseasonable and foreign to the
purpose.

I visited the House of Lords the other day to hear Canning, who, you
know, is now a peer, with I forget what title.  He disappointed me.
Time blunts both point and edge, and does great mischief to men of
his order of intellect.  Then I stepped into the lower House and
listened to a few words from Cobbett, who looked as earthy as a real
clodhopper, or rather as if he had lain a dozen years beneath the
clods.  The men whom I meet nowadays often impress me thus; probably
because my spirits are not very good, and lead me to think much
about graves, with the long grass upon them, and weather-worn
epitaphs, and dry bones of people who made noise enough in their
day, but now can only clatter, clatter, clatter, when the sexton's
spade disturbs them. Were it only possible to find out who are alive
and who dead, it would contribute infinitely to my peace of mind.
Every day of my life somebody comes and stares me in the face whom I
had quietly blotted out of the tablet of living men, and trusted
nevermore to be pestered with the sight or sound of him.  For
instance, going to Drury Lane Theatre a few evenings since, up rose
before me, in the ghost of Hamlet's father, the bodily presence of
the elder Kean, who did die, or ought to have died, in some drunken
fit or other, so long ago that his fame is scarcely traditionary
now. His powers are quite gone; he was rather the ghost of himself
than the ghost of the Danish king.

In the stage-box sat several elderly and decrepit people, and among
them a stately ruin of a woman on a very large scale, with a
profile--for I did not see her front face--that stamped itself into
my brain as a seal impresses hot wax.  By the tragic gesture with
which she took a pinch of snuff, I was sure it must be Mrs. Siddons.
Her brother, John Kemble, sat behind,--a brokendown figure, but
still with a kingly majesty about him.  In lieu of all former
achievements, Nature enables him to look the part of Lear far better
than in the meridian of his genius.  Charles Matthews was likewise
there; but a paralytic affection has distorted his once mobile
countenance into a most disagreeable one-sidedness, from which he
could no more wrench it into proper form than he could rearrange the
face of the great globe itself. It looks as if, for the joke's sake,
the poor man had twisted his features into an expression at once the
most ludicrous and horrible that he could contrive, and at that very
moment, as a judgment for making himself so hideous, an avenging
Providence had seen fit to petrify him.  Since it is out of his own
power, I would gladly assist him to change countenance, for his ugly
visage haunts me both at noontide and night-time.  Some other
players of the past generation were present, but none that greatly
interested me.  It behooves actors, more than all other men of
publicity, to vanish from the scene betimes.  Being at best but
painted shadows flickering on the wall and empty sounds that echo
anther's thought, it is a sad disenchantment when the colors begin
to fade and the voice to croak with age.

What is there new in the literary way on your side of the water?
Nothing of the kind has come under any inspection, except a volume
of poems published above a year ago by Dr. Channing.  I did not
before know that this eminent writer is a poet; nor does the volume
alluded to exhibit any of the characteristics of the author's mind
as displayed in his prose works; although some of the poems have a
richness that is not merely of the surface, but glows still the
brighter the deeper and more faithfully you look into then.  They
seem carelessly wrought, however, like those rings and ornaments of
the very purest gold, but of rude, native manufacture, which are
found among the gold-dust from Africa.  I doubt whether the American
public will accept them; it looks less to the assay of metal than to
the neat and cunning manufacture. How slowly our literature grows
up!  Most of our writers of promise have come to untimely ends.
There was that wild fellow, John Neal, who almost turned my boyish
brain with his romances; he surely has long been dead, else he never
could keep himself so quiet.  Bryant has gone to his last sleep,
with the _Thanatopsis_ gleaming over him like a sculptured marble
sepulchre by moonlight.  Halleck, who used to write queer verses in
the newspapers and published a Don Juanic poem called _Fanny_, is
defunct as a poet, though averred to be exemplifying the
metempsychosis as a man of business.  Somewhat later there was
Whittier, a fiery Quaker youth, to whom the muse had perversely
assigned a battle-trumpet, and who got himself lynched, ten years
agone, in South Carolina.  I remember, too, a lad just from college,
Longfellow by name, who scattered some delicate verses to the winds,
and went to Germany, and perished, I think, of intense application,
at the University of Gottingen.  Willis--what a pity!--was lost, if
I recollect rightly, in 1833, on his voyage to Europe, whither he
was going to give us sketches of the world's sunny face.  If these
had lived, they might, one or all of them, have grown to be famous
men.

And yet there is no telling: it may be as well that they have died.
I was myself a young man of promise.  O shattered brain, O broken
spirit, where is the fulfilment of that promise?  The sad truth is,
that, when fate would gently disappoint the world, it takes away the
hopefulest mortals in their youth; when it would laugh the world's
hopes to scorn, it lets them live.  Let me die upon this apothegm,
for I shall never make a truer one.

What a strange substance is the human brain!  Or rather,--for there
is no need of generalizing the remark,--what an odd brain is mine!
Would you believe it?  Daily and nightly there come scraps of poetry
humming in my intellectual ear--some as airy as birdnotes, and some
as delicately neat as parlor-music, and a few as grand as organ-
peals--that seem just such verses as those departed poets would have
written had not an inexorable destiny snatched them from their
inkstands.  They visit me in spirit, perhaps desiring to engage my
services as the amanuensis of their posthumous productions, and thus
secure the endless renown that they have forfeited by going hence
too early.  But I have my own business to attend to; and besides, a
medical gentleman, who interests himself in some little ailments of
mine, advises me not to make too free use of pen and ink.  There are
clerks enough out of employment who would be glad of such a job.

Good by!  Are you alive or dead? and what are you about?  Still
scribbling for the Democratic?  And do those infernal compositors
and proof-readers misprint your unfortunate productions as vilely as
ever? It is too bad.  Let every man manufacture his own nonsense,
say I.  Expect me home soon, and--to whisper you a secret--in
company with the poet Campbell, who purposes to visit Wyoming and
enjoy the shadow of the laurels that he planted there.  Campbell is
now an old man.  He calls himself well, better than ever in his
life, but looks strangely pale, and so shadow-like that one might
almost poke a finger through his densest material.  I tell him, by
way of joke, that he is as dim and forlorn as Memory, though as
unsubstantial as Hope.


Your true friend,  P.

P. S.--Pray present my most respectful regards to our venerable and
revered friend Mr. Brockden Brown.


It gratifies me to learn that a complete edition of his works, in a
double-columned octavo volume, is shortly to issue from the press at
Philadelphia.  Tell him that no American writer enjoys a more
classic reputation on this side of the water.  Is old Joel Barlow
yet alive?  Unconscionable man!  Why, he must have nearly fulfilled
his century.  And does he meditate an epic on the war between Mexico
and Texas with machinery contrived on the principle of the steam-
engine, as being the nearest to celestial agency that our epoch can
boast?  How can he expect ever to rise again, if, while just sinking
into his grave, he persists in burdening himself with such a
ponderosity of leaden verses?









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                        EARTH'S HOLOCAUST



Once upon a time--but whether in the time past or time to come is a
matter of little or no moment--this wide world had become so
overburdened with an accumulation of worn-out trumpery, that the
inhabitants determined to rid themselves of it by a general bonfire.
The site fixed upon at the representation of the insurance
companies, and as being as central a spot as any other on the globe,
was one of the broadest prairies of the West, where no human
habitation would be endangered by the flames, and where a vast
assemblage of spectators might commodiously admire the show.  Having
a taste for sights of this kind, and imagining, likewise, that the
illumination of the bonfire might reveal some profundity of moral
truth heretofore hidden in mist or darkness, I made it convenient to
journey thither and be present.  At my arrival, although the heap of
condemned rubbish was as yet comparatively small, the torch had
already been applied.  Amid that boundless plain, in the dusk of the
evening, like a far off star alone in the firmament, there was merely
visible one tremulous gleam, whence none could have anticipated so
fierce a blaze as was destined to ensue.  With every moment,
however, there came foot-travellers, women holding up their aprons,
men on horseback, wheelbarrows, lumbering baggage-wagons, and other
vehicles, great and small, and from far and near, laden with
articles that were judged fit for nothing but to be burned.

"What materials have been used to kindle the flame?" inquired I of a
bystander; for I was desirous of knowing the whole process of the
affair from beginning to end.

The person whom I addressed was a grave man, fifty years old or
thereabout, who had evidently come thither as a looker-on.  He
struck me immediately as having weighed for himself the true value
of life and its circumstances, and therefore as feeling little
personal interest in whatever judgment the world might form of them.
Before answering my question, he looked me in the face by the
kindling light of the fire.

"O, some very dry combustibles," replied he, "and extremely suitable
to the purpose,--no other, in fact, than yesterday's newspapers,
last month's magazines, and last year's withered leaves.  Here now
comes some antiquated trash that will take fire like a handful of
shavings."

As he spoke, some rough-looking men advanced to the verge of the
bonfire, and threw in, as it appeared, all the rubbish of the
herald's office,--the blanzonry of coat armor, the crests and
devices of illustrious families, pedigrees that extended back, like
lines of light, into the mist of the dark ages, together with stars,
garters, and embroidered collars, each of which, as paltry a bawble
as it might appear to the uninstructed eye, had once possessed vast
significance, and was still, in truth, reckoned among the most
precious of moral or material facts by the worshippers of the
gorgeous past.  Mingled with this confused heap, which was tossed
into the dames by armfuls at once, were innumerable badges of
knighthood, comprising those of all the European sovereignties, and
Napoleon's decoration of the Legion of Honor, the ribbons of which
were entangled with those of the ancient order of St. Louis.  There,
too, were the medals of our own Society of Cincinnati, by means of
which, as history tells us, an order of hereditary knights came near
being constituted out of the king quellers of the Revolution.  And
besides, there were thee patents of nobility of German counts and
barons, Spanish grandees, and English peers, from the worm-eaten
instruments signed by William the Conqueror down to the bran-new
parchment of the latest lord who has received his honors from the
fair hand of Victoria.

At sight of the dense volumes of smoke, mingled with vivid jets of
flame, that gushed and eddied forth from this immense pile of
earthly distinctions, the multitude of plebeian spectators set up a
joyous shout, and clapped their hands with an emphasis that made the
welkin echo.  That was their moment of triumph, achieved, after long
ages, over creatures of the same clay and the same spiritual
infirmities, who had dared to assume the privileges due only to
Heaven's later workmanship.  But now there rushed towards the
blazing heap a gray-haired man, of stately presence, wearing a coat,
from the breast of which a star, or other badge of rank, seemed to
have been forcibly wrenched away. He had not the tokens of
intellectual power in his face; but still there was the demeanor,
the habitual and almost native dignity, of one who had been born to
the idea of his own social superiority, and had never felt it
questioned till that moment.

"People," cried he, gazing at the ruin of what was dearest to his
eyes with grief and wonder, but nevertheless with a degree of
stateliness,--"people, what have you done?  This fire is consuming
all that marked your advance from barbarism, or that could have
prevented your relapse thither.  We, the men of the privileged
orders, were those who kept alive from age to age the old chivalrous
spirit; the gentle and generous thought; the higher, the purer, the
more refined and delicate life.  With the nobles, too, you cast off
the poet, the painter, the sculptor,--all the beautiful arts; for
we were their patrons, and created the atmosphere in which they
flourish.  In abolishing the majestic distinctions of rank, society
loses not only its grace, but its steadfastness--"

More he would doubtless have spoken; but here there arose an outcry,
sportive, contemptuous, and indignant, that altogether drowned the
appeal of the fallen nobleman, insomuch that, casting one look of
despair at his own half-burned pedigree, he shrunk back into the
crowd, glad to shelter himself under his new-found insignificance.

"Let him thank his stars that we have not flung him into the same
fire!" shouted a rude figure, spurning the embers with his foot.
"And henceforth let no man dare to show a piece of musty parchment
as his warrant for lording it over his fellows.  If he have strength
of arm, well and good; it is one species of superiority.  If he have
wit, wisdom, courage, force of character, let these attributes do
for him what they may; but from this day forward no mortal must hope
for place and consideration by reckoning up the mouldy bones of his
ancestors. That nonsense is done away."

"And in good time," remarked the grave observer by my side, in a low
voice, however, "if no worse nonsense comes in its place; but, at
all events, this species of nonsense has fairly lived out its life."

There was little space to muse or moralize over the embers of this
time-honored rubbish; for, before it was half burned out, there came
another multitude from beyond the sea, bearing the purple robes of
royalty, and the crowns, globes, and sceptres of emperors and kings.
All these had been condemned as useless bawbles, playthings at best,
fit only for the infancy of the world or rods to govern and chastise
it in its nonage, but with which universal manhood at its full-grown
stature could no longer brook to be insulted.  Into such contempt
had these regal insignia now fallen that the gilded crown and
tinselled robes of the player king from Drury Lane Theatre had been
thrown in among the rest, doubtless as a mockery of his brother
monarchs on the great stage of the world.  It was a strange sight to
discern the crown jewels of England glowing and flashing in the
midst of the fire.  Some of them had been delivered down from the
time of the Saxon princes; others were purchased with vast revenues,
or perchance ravished from the dead brows of the native potentates
of Hindustan; and the whole now blazed with a dazzling lustre, as if
a star had fallen in that spot and been shattered into fragments.
The splendor of the ruined monarchy had no reflection save in those
inestimable precious stones.  But enough on this subject.  It were
but tedious to describe how the Emperor of Austria's mantle was
converted to tinder, and how the posts and pillars of the French
throne became a heap of coals, which it was impossible to
distinguish from those of any other wood.  Let me add, however, that
I noticed one of the exiled Poles stirring up the bonfire with the
Czar of Russia's sceptre, which he afterwards fling into the flames.

"The smell of singed garments is quite intolerable here," observed
my new acquaintance, as the breeze enveloped us in the smoke of a
royal wardrobe.  "Let us get to windward and see what they are doing
on the other side of the bonfire."

We accordingly passed around, and were just in time to witness the
arrival of a vast procession of Washingtonians,--as the votaries of
temperance call themselves nowadays,--accompanied by thousands of
the Irish disciples of Fathew Mathew, with that great apostle at
their head.  They brought a rich contribution to the bonfire, being
nothing less than all the hogsheads and barrels of liquor in the
world, which they rolled before them across the prairie.

"Now, my children," cried Father Mathew, when they reached the verge
of the fire, "one shove more, and the work is done.  And now let us
stand off and see Satan deal with his own liquor."

Accordingly, having placed their wooden vessels within reach of the
flames, the procession stood off at a safe distance, and soon beheld
them burst into a blaze that reached the clouds and threatened to
set the sky itself on fire.  And well it might; for here was the
whole world's stock of spirituous liquors, which, instead of
kindling a frenzied light in the eyes of individual topers as of
yore, soared upwards with a bewildering gleam that startled all
mankind.  It was the aggregate of that fierce fire which would
otherwise have scorched the hearts of millions. Meantime numberless
bottles of precious wine were flung into the blaze, which lapped up
the contents as if it loved them, and grew, like other drunkards,
the merrier and fiercer for what it quaffed.  Never again will the
insatiable thirst of the fire-fiend be so pampered.  Here were the
treasures of famous bon vivants,--liquors that had been tossed on
ocean, and mellowed in the sun, and hoarded long in the recesses of
the earth,--the pale, the gold, the ruddy juice of whatever
vineyards were most delicate,--the entire vintage of Tokay,--all
mingling in one stream with the vile fluids of the common pot house,
and contributing to heighten the self-same blaze.  And while it rose
in a gigantic spire that seemed to wave against the arch of the
firmament and combine itself with the light of stars, the multitude
gave a shout as if the broad earth were exulting in its deliverance
from the curse of ages.

But the joy was not universal.  Many deemed that human life would be
gloomier than ever when that brief illumination should sink down.
While the reformers were at work I overheard muttered expostulations
from several respectable gentlemen with red noses and wearing gouty
shoes; and a ragged worthy, whose face looked like a hearth where
the fire is burned out, now expressed his discontent more openly and
boldly.

"What is this world good for," said the last toper, now that we can
never be jolly any more?  What is to comfort the poor man in sorrow
and perplexity?  How is he to keep his heart warm against the cold
winds of this cheerless earth?  And what do you propose to give him
in exchange for the solace that you take away?  How are old friends
to sit together by the fireside without a cheerful glass between
them?  A plague upon your reformation!  It is a sad world, a cold
world, a selfish world, a low world, not worth an honest fellow's
living in, now that good fellowship is gone forever!

This harangue excited great mirth among the bystanders; but,
preposterous as was the sentiment, I could not help commiserating
the forlorn condition of the, last toper, whose boon companions had
dwindled away from his side, leaving the poor fellow without a soul
to countenance him in sipping his liquor, nor indeed any liquor to
sip.  Not that this was quite the true state of the case; for I had
observed him at a critical moment filch a bottle of fourth-proof
brandy that fell beside the bonfire and hide it in his pocket.

The spirituous and fermented liquors being thus disposed of, the
zeal of the reformers next induced them to replenish the fire with
all the boxes of tea and bags of coffee in the world.  And now came
the planters of Virginia, bringing their crops of tobacco.  These,
being cast upon the heap of inutility, aggregated it to the size of
a mountain, and incensed the atmosphere with such potent fragrance
that methought we should never draw pure breath again.  The present
sacrifice seemed to startle the lovers of the weed more than any
that they had hitherto witnessed.

"Well, they've put my pipe out," said an old gentleman, flinging it
into the flames in a pet.  "What is this world coming to? Everything
rich and racy--all the spice of life--is to be condemned as useless.
Now that they have kindled the bonfire, if these nonsensical
reformers would fling themselves into it, all would he well enough!"

"Be patient," responded a stanch conservative; "it will come to that
in the end.  They will first fling us in, and finally themselves."

From the general and systematic measures of reform I now turn to
consider the individual contributions to this memorable bonfire. In
many instances these were of a very amusing character.  One poor
fellow threw in his empty purse, and another a bundle of counterfeit
or insolvable bank-notes.  Fashionable ladies threw in their last
season's bonnets, together with heaps of ribbons, yellow lace, and
much other half-worn milliner's ware, all of which proved even more
evanescent in the fire than it had been in the fashion.  A multitude
of lovers of both sexes--discarded maids or bachelors and couples
mutually weary of one another--tossed in bundles of perfumed letters
and enamored sonnets. A hack politician, being deprived of bread by
the loss of office, threw in his teeth, which happened to be false
ones.  The Rev. Sydney Smith--having voyaged across the Atlantic for
that sole purpose--came up to the bonfire with a bitter grin and
threw in certain repudiated bonds, fortified though they were with
the broad seal of a sovereign state.  A little boy of five years
old, in the premature manliness of the present epoch, threw in his
playthings; a college graduate, his diploma; an apothecary, ruined
by the spread of homeopathy, his whole stock of drugs and medicines;
a physician, his library; a parson, his old sermons; and a fine
gentleman of the old school, his code of manners, which he had
formerly written down for the benefit of the next generation.  A
widow, resolving on a second marriage, slyly threw in her dead
husband's miniature.  A young man, jilted by his mistress, would
willingly have flung his own desperate heart into the flames, but
could find no means to wrench it out of his bosom.  An American
author, whose works were neglected by the public, threw his pen and
paper into the bonfire and betook himself to some less discouraging
occupation.  It somewhat startled me to overhear a number of ladies,
highly respectable in appearance, proposing to fling their gowns and
petticoats into the flames, and assume the garb, together with the
manners, duties, offices, and responsibilities, of the opposite sex.

What favor was accorded to this scheme I am unable to say, my
attention being suddenly drawn to a poor, deceived, and half-
delirious girl, who, exclaiming that she was the most worthless
thing alive or dead, attempted to cast herself into the fire amid
all that wrecked and broken trumpery of the world.  A good man,
however, ran to her rescue.

"Patience, my poor girl!"  said he, as he drew her back from the
fierce embrace of the destroying angel.  "Be patient, and abide
Heaven's will.  So long as you possess a living soul, all may be
restored to its first freshness.  These things of matter and
creations of human fantasy are fit for nothing but to be burned when
once they have had their day; but your day is eternity!"

"Yes," said the wretched girl, whose frenzy seemed now to have sunk
down into deep despondency, "yes, and the sunshine is blotted out of
it!"

It was now rumored among the spectators that all the weapons and
munitions of war were to be thrown into the bonfire with the
exception of the world's stock of gunpowder, which, as the safest
mode of disposing of it, had already been drowned in the sea. This
intelligence seemed to awaken great diversity of opinion. The
hopeful philanthropist esteemed it a token that the millennium was
already come; while persons of another stamp, in whose view mankind
was a breed of bulldogs, prophesied that all the old stoutness,
fervor, nobleness, generosity, and magnanimity of the race would
disappear,--these qualities, as they affirmed, requiring blood for
their nourishment.  They comforted themselves, however, in the belief
that the proposed abolition of war was impracticable for any length
of time together.

Be that as it might, numberless great guns, whose thunder had long
been the voice of battle,--the artillery of the Armada, the
battering trains of Marlborough, and the adverse cannon of Napoleon
and Wellington,--were trundled into the midst of the fire.  'By the
continual addition of dry combustibles, it had now waxed so intense
that neither brass nor iron could withstand it. It was wonderful to
behold how these terrible instruments of slaughter melted away like
playthings of wax.  Then the armies of the earth wheeled around the
mighty furnace, with their military music playing triumphant
marches,--and flung in their muskets and swords.  The standard-
bearers, likewise, cast one look upward at their banners, all
tattered with shot-holes and inscribed with the names of victorious
fields; and, giving them a last flourish on the breeze, they lowered
them into the flame, which snatched them upward in its rush towards
the clouds.  This ceremony being over, the world was left without a
single weapon in its hands, except possibly a few old king's arms
and rusty swords and other trophies of the Revolution in some of our
State armories.  And now the drums were beaten and the trumpets
brayed all together, as a prelude to the proclamation of universal
and eternal peace and the announcement that glory was no longer to
be won by blood, but that it would henceforth be the contention of
the human race to work out the greatest mutual good, and that
beneficence, in the future annals of the earth, would claim the
praise of valor. The blessed tidings were accordingly promulgated,
and caused infinite rejoicings among those who had stood aghast at
the horror and absurdity of war.

But I saw a grim smile pass over the seared visage of a stately
old commander,--by his war-worn figure and rich military dress, he
might have been one of Napoleon's famous marshals,--who, with the
rest of the world's soldiery, had just flung away the sword that had
been familiar to his right hand for half a century.

"Ay! ay!" grumbled he.  "Let them proclaim what they please; but,
in the end, we shall find that all this foolery has only made more
work for the armorers and cannon-founders."

"Why, sir," exclaimed I, in astonishment, "do you imagine that the
human race will ever so far return on the steps of its past madness
as to weld another sword or cast another cannon?"

"There will be no need," observed, with a sneer, one who neither
felt benevolence nor had faith in it.  "When Cain wished to slay his
brother, he was at no loss for a weapon."

"We shall see," replied the veteran commander.  "If I am mistaken,
so much the better; but in my opinion, without pretending to
philosophize about the matter, the necessity of war lies far deeper
than these honest gentlemen suppose.  What! is there a field for all
the petty disputes of individuals? and shall there be no great law
court for the settlement of national difficulties?  The battle-field
is the only court where such suits can be tried."

"You forget, general," rejoined I, "that, in this advanced stage of
civilization, Reason and Philanthropy combined will constitute just
such a tribunal as is requisite."

"Ah, I had forgotten that, indeed!" said the old warrior, as he
limped away.

The fire was now to be replenished with materials that had hitherto
been considered of even greater importance to the well-being of
society than the warlike munitions which we had already seen
consumed.  A body of reformers had travelled all over the earth in
quest of the machinery by which the different nations were
accustomed to inflict the punishment of death.  A shudder passed
through the multitude as these ghastly emblems were dragged forward.
Even the flames seemed at first to shrink away, displaying the shape
and murderous contrivance of each in a full blaze of light, which of
itself was sufficient to convince mankind of the long and deadly
error of human law.  Those old implements of cruelty; those horrible
monsters of mechanism; those inventions which it seemed to demand
something worse than man's natural heart to contrive, and which had
lurked in the dusky nooks of ancient prisons, the subject of terror-
stricken legend,--were now brought forth to view.  Headsmen's axes,
with the rust of noble and royal blood upon them, and a vast
collection of halters that had clicked the breath of plebeian
victims, were thrown in together.  A shout greeted the arrival of
the guillotine, which was thrust forward on the same wheels that had
borne it from one to another of the bloodstained streets of Paris.
But the loudest roar of applause went up, telling the distant sky of
the triumph of the earth's redemption, when the gallows made its
appearance.  An ill-looking fellow, however, rushed forward, and,
putting himself in the path of the reformers, bellowed hoarsely, and
fought with brute fury to stay their progress.

It was little matter of surprise, perhaps, that the executioner
should thus do his best to vindicate and uphold the machinery by
which he himself had his livelihood and worthier individuals their
death; but it deserved special note that men of a far different
sphere--even of that consecrated class in whose guardianship the
world is apt to trust its benevolence--were found to take the
hangman's view of the question.

"Stay, my brethren!" cried one of them.  "You are misled by a false
philanthropy; you know not what you do.  The gallows is a Heaven--
ordained instrument.  Bear it back, then, reverently, and set it up
in its old place, else the world will fall to speedy ruin and
desolation!"

"Onward! onward!" shouted a leader in the reform.

"Into the flames with the accursed instrument of man's bloody
policy!  How can human law inculcate benevolence and love while it
persists in setting up the gallows as its chief symbol?  One heave
more, good friends, and the world will be redeemed from its greatest
error."

A thousand hands, that nevertheless loathed the touch, now lent
their assistance, and thrust the ominous burden far, far into the
centre of the raging furnace.  There its fatal and abhorred image
was beheld, first black, then a red coal, then ashes.

"That was well done!" exclaimed I.

"Yes, it was well done," replied, but with less enthusiasm than I
expected, the thoughtful observer, who was still at my side,--"well
done, if the world be good enough for the measure.  Death, however,
is an idea that cannot easily be dispensed with in any condition
between the primal innocence and that other purity and perfection
which perchance we are destined to attain after travelling round the
full circle; but, at all events, it is well that the experiment
should now be tried."

"Too cold! too cold!" impatiently exclaimed the young and ardent
leader in this triumph.  "Let the heart have its voice here as well
as the intellect.  And as for ripeness, and as for progress, let
mankind always do the highest, kindest, noblest thing that, at any
given period, it has attained the perception of; and surely that
thing cannot be wrong nor wrongly timed."

I know not whether it were the excitement of the scene, or whether
the good people around the bonfire were really growing more
enlightened every instant; but they now proceeded to measures in the
full length of which I was hardly prepared to keep them company.
For instance, some threw their marriage certificates into the
flames, and declared themselves candidates for a higher, holier, and
more comprehensive union than that which had subsisted from the
birth of time under the form of the connubial tie.  Others hastened
to the vaults of banks and to the coffers of the rich--all of which
were opened to the first comer on this fated occasion--and brought
entire bales of paper-money to enliven the blaze, and tons of coin
to be melted down by its intensity.  Henceforth, they said,
universal benevolence, uncoined and exhaustless, was to be the
golden currency of the world.  At this intelligence the bankers and
speculators in the stocks grew pale, and a pickpocket, who had
reaped a rich harvest among the crowd, fell down in a deadly
fainting fit.  A few men of business burned their day-books and
ledgers, the notes and obligations of their creditors, and all other
evidences of debts due to themselves; while perhaps a somewhat
larger number satisfied their zeal for reform with the sacrifice of
any uncomfortable recollection of their own indebtment.  There was
then a cry that the period was arrived when the title-deeds of
landed property should be given to the flames, and the whole soil of
the earth revert to the public, from whom it had been wrongfully
abstracted and most unequally distributed among individuals.
Another party demanded that all written constitutions, set forms of
government, legislative acts, statute-books, and everything else on
which human invention had endeavored to stamp its arbitrary laws,
should at once be destroyed, leaving the consummated world as free
as the man first created.

Whether any ultimate action was taken with regard to these
propositions is beyond my knowledge; for, just then, some matters
were in progress that concerned my sympathies more nearly.

"See! see!  What heaps of books and pamphlets!" cried a fellow, who
did not seem to be a lover of literature.  "Now we shall have a
glorious blaze!"

"That's just the thing!" said a modern philosopher.  "Now we shall
get rid of the weight of dead men's thought, which has hitherto
pressed so heavily on the living intellect that it has been
incompetent to any effectual self-exertion.  Well done, my lads!
Into the fire with them!  Now you are enlightening the world
indeed!"

"But what is to become of the trade?" cried a frantic bookseller.

"O, by all means, let them accompany their merchandise," coolly
observed an author.  "It will be a noble funeral-pile!"

The truth was, that the human race had now reached a stage of
progress so far beyond what the wisest and wittiest men of former
ages had ever dreamed of, that it would have been a manifest
absurdity to allow the earth to be any longer encumbered with their
poor achievements in the literary line.  Accordingly a thorough and
searching investigation had swept the booksellers' shops, hawkers'
stands, public and private libraries, and even the little book-shelf
by the country fireside, and had brought the world's entire mass of
printed paper, bound or in sheets, to swell the already mountain
bulk of our illustrious bonfire. Thick, heavy folios, containing the
labors of lexicographers, commentators, and encyclopedists, were
flung in, and, falling among the embers with a leaden thump,
smouldered away to ashes like rotten wood.  The small, richly gilt
French tomes of the last age, with the hundred volumes of Voltaire
among them, went off in a brilliant shower of sparkles and little
jets of flame; while the current literature of the same nation
burned red and blue, and threw an infernal light over the visages of
the spectators, converting them all to the aspect of party-colored
fiends.  A collection of German stories emitted a scent of
brimstone.  The English standard authors made excellent fuel,
generally exhibiting the properties of sound oak logs.  Milton's
works, in particular, sent up a powerful blaze, gradually reddening
into a coal, which promised to endure longer than almost any other
material of the pile.  From Shakespeare there gushed a flame of such
marvellous splendor that men shaded their eyes as against the sun's
meridian glory; nor even when the works of his own elucidators were
flung upon him did he cease to flash forth a dazzling radiance from
beneath the ponderous heap.  It is my belief that he is still
blazing as fervidly as ever.

"Could a poet but light a lamp at that glorious flame," remarked I,
"he might then consume the midnight oil to some good purpose."

"That is the very thing which modern poets have been too apt to do,
or at least to attempt," answered a critic.  "The chief benefit to
be expected from this conflagration of past literature undoubtedly
is, that writers will henceforth be compelled to light their lamps
at the sun or stars."

"If they can reach so high," said I; "but that task requires a
giant, who may afterwards distribute the light among inferior men.
It is not every one that can steal the fire from heaven like
Prometheus; but, when once he had done the deed, a thousand hearths
were kindled by it."

It amazed me much to observe how indefinite was the proportion
between the physical mass of any given author and the property of
brilliant and long-continued combustion.  For instance, there was
not a quarto volume of the last century--nor, indeed, of the
present--that could compete in that particular with a child's little
gilt-covered book, containing _Mother Goose's Melodies_. _The Life
and Death of Tom Thumb_ outlasted the biography of Marlborough.  An
epic, indeed a dozen of them, was converted to white ashes before
the single sheet of all old ballad was half consumed.  In more than
one case, too, when volumes of applauded verse proved incapable of
anything better than a stifling smoke, an unregarded ditty of some
nameless bard perchance in the corner of a newspaper--soared up
among the stars with a flame as brilliant as their own.  Speaking of
the properties of flame, methought Shelley's poetry emitted a purer
light than almost any other productions of his day, contrasting
beautifully with the fitful and lurid gleams and gushes of black
vapor that flashed and eddied from the volumes of Lord Byron.  As
for Tom Moore, some of his songs diffused an odor like a burning
pastil.

I felt particular interest in watching the combustion of American
authors, and scrupulously noted by my watch the precise number of
moments that changed most of them from shabbily printed books to
indistinguishable ashes.  It would be invidious, however, if not
perilous, to betray these awful secrets; so that I shall content
myself with observing that it was not invariably the writer most
frequent in the public mouth that made the most splendid appearance
in the bonfire.  I especially remember that a great deal of
excellent inflammability was exhibited in a thin volume of poems by
Ellery Channing; although, to speak the truth, there were certain
portions that hissed and spluttered in a very disagreeable fashion.
A curious phenomenon occurred in reference to several writers,
native as well as foreign.  Their books, though of highly
respectable figure, instead of bursting into a blaze or even
smouldering out their substance in smoke, suddenly melted away in a
manner that proved them to be ice.

If it be no lack of modesty to mention my own works, it must here be
confessed that I looked for them with fatherly interest, but in
vain.  Too probably they were changed to vapor by the first action
of the heat; at best, I can only hope that, in their quiet way, they
contributed a glimmering spark or two to the splendor of the
evening.

"Alas! and woe is me!" thus bemoaned himself a heavy-looking
gentleman in green spectacles.  "The world is utterly ruined, and
there is nothing to live for any longer.  The business of my life is
snatched from me.  Not a volume to be had for love or money!"

"This," remarked the sedate observer beside me, "is a bookworm,--one
of those men who are born to gnaw dead thoughts.  His clothes, you
see, are covered with the dust of libraries.  He has no inward
fountain of ideas; and, in good earnest, now that the old stock is
abolished, I do not see what is to become of the poor fellow.  Have
you no word of comfort for him?"

"My dear sir," said I to the desperate bookworm, "is not nature
better than a book?  Is not the human heart deeper than any system
of philosophy?  Is not life replete with more instruction than past
observers have found it possible to write down in maxims?  Be of
good cheer.  The great book of Time is still spread wide open before
its; and, if we read it aright, it will be to us a volume of eternal
truth."

"O, my books, my books, my precious printed books!" reiterated the
forlorn bookworm.  "My only reality was a bound volume; and now they
will not leave me even a shadowy pamphlet!"

In fact, the last remnant of the literature of all the ages--was now
descending upon the blazing heap in the shape of a cloud of
pamphlets from the press of the New World.  These likewise were
consumed in the twinkling of an eye, leaving the earth, for the
first time since the days of Cadmus, free from the plague of
letters,--an enviable field for the authors of the next generation.

"Well, and does anything remain to be done?" inquired I, somewhat
anxiously.  "Unless we set fire to the earth itself, and then leap
boldly off into infinite space, I know not that we can carry reform
to any farther point."

"You are vastly mistaken, my good friend," said the observer.
"Believe me, the fire will not be allowed to settle down without the
addition of fuel that will startle many persons who have lent a
willing hand thus far."

Nevertheless there appeared to be a relaxation of effort for a
little time, during which, probably, the leaders of the movement
were considering what should be done next.  In the interval, a
philosopher threw his theory into the flames,--a sacrifice which, by
those who knew how to estimate it, was pronounced the most
remarkable that had yet been made.  The combustion, however, was by
no means brilliant.  Some indefatigable people, scorning to take a
moment's ease, now employed themselves in collecting all the
withered leaves and fallen boughs of the forest, and thereby
recruited the bonfire to a greater height than ever.  But this was
mere by-play.

"Here comes the fresh fuel that I spoke of," said my companion.

To my astonishment the persons who now advanced into the vacant
space around the mountain fire bore surplices and other priestly
garments, mitres, crosiers, and a confusion of Popish and Protestant
emblems with which it seemed their purpose to consummate the great
act of faith.  Crosses from the spires of old cathedrals were cast
upon the heap with as little remorse as if the reverence of
centuries passing in long array beneath the lofty towers had not
looked up to them as the honest of symbols.  The font in which
infants were consecrated to God, the sacramental vessels whence
piety received the hallowed draught, were given to the same
destruction. Perhaps it most nearly touched my heart to see among
these devoted relics fragments of the humble communion-tables and
undecorated pulpits which I recognized as having been torn from the
meeting-houses of New England.  Those simple edifices might have
been permitted to retain all of sacred embellishment that their
Puritan founders had bestowed, even though the mighty structure of
St.  Peter's had sent its spoils to the fire of this terrible
sacrifice.  Yet I felt that these were but the externals of
religion, and might most safely be relinquished by spirits that best
knew their deep significance.

"All is well," said I, cheerfully.  "The wood-paths shall be the
aisles of our cathedral, the firmament itself shall be its ceiling.
What needs an earthly roof between the Deity and his worshippers?
Our faith can well afford to lose all the drapery that even the
honest men have thrown around it, and be only the more sublime in
its simplicity."

"True," said my companion; "but will they pause here?"

The doubt implied in his question was well founded.  In the general
destruction of books already described, a holy volume, that stood
apart from the catalogue of human literature, and yet, in one sense,
was at its head, had been spared.  But the Titan of innovation,--
angel or fiend, double in his nature, and capable of deeds befitting
both characters,--at first shaking down only the old and rotten
shapes of things, had now, as it appeared, laid his terrible hand
upon the main pillars which supported the whole edifice of our moral
and spiritual state.  The inhabitants of the earth had grown too
enlightened to define their faith within a form of words, or to
limit the spiritual by any analogy to our material existence.
Truths which the heavens trembled at were now but a fable of the
world's infancy.  Therefore, as the final sacrifice of human error,
what else remained to be thrown upon the embers of that awful pile,
except the book which, though a celestial revelation to past ages,
was but a voice from a lower sphere as regarded the present race of
man?  It was done!  Upon the blazing heap of falsehood and worn-out
truth--things that the earth had never needed, or had ceased to
need, or had grown childishly weary of-fell the ponderous church
Bible, the great old volume that had lain so long on the cushion of
the pulpit, and whence the pastor's solemn voice had given holy
utterance on so many a Sabbath day.  There, likewise, fell the
family Bible, which the long-buried patriarch had read to his
children,--in prosperity or sorrow, by the fireside and in the
summer shade of trees,--and had bequeathed downward as the heirloom
of generations. There fell the bosom Bible, the little volume that
had been the soul's friend of some sorely tried child of dust, who
thence took courage, whether his trial were for life or death,
steadfastly confronting both in the strong assurance of immortality.

All these were flung into the fierce and riotous blaze; and then a
mighty wind came roaring across the plain with a desolate howl, as
if it were the angry lamentation of the earth for the loss of
heaven's sunshine; and it shook the gigantic pyramid of flame and
scattered the cinders of half-consumed abominations around upon the
spectators.

"This is terrible!" said I, feeling that my check grew pale, and
seeing a like change in the visages about me.

"Be of good courage yet," answered the man with whom I had so often
spoken.  He continued to gaze steadily at the spectacle with a
singular calmness, as if it concerned him merely as an observer.
"Be of good courage, nor yet exult too much; for there is far less
both of good and evil in the effect of this bonfire than the world
might be willing to believe."

"How can that be?" exclaimed I, impatiently.  "Has it not consumed
everything?  Has it not swallowed up or melted down every human or
divine appendage of our mortal state that had substance enough to be
acted on by fire?  Will there be anything left us to-morrow morning
better or worse than a heap of embers and ashes?"

"Assuredly there will," said my grave friend.  "Come hither
to-morrow morning, or whenever the combustible portion of the pile
shall be quite burned out, and you will find among the ashes
everything really valuable that you have seen cast into the flames.
Trust me, the world of to-morrow will again enrich itself with the
gold and diamonds which have been cast off by the world of today.
Not a truth is destroyed nor buried so deep among the ashes but it
will be raked up at last."

This was a strange assurance.  Yet I felt inclined to credit it, the
more especially as I beheld among the wallowing flames a copy of the
Holy Scriptures, the pages of which, instead of being blackened into
tinder, only assumed a more dazzling whiteness as the fingermarks of
human imperfection were purified away. Certain marginal notes and
commentaries, it is true, yielded to the intensity of the fiery
test, but without detriment to the smallest syllable that had flamed
from the pen of inspiration.

"Yes; there is the proof of what you say," answered I, turning to
the observer; "but if only what is evil can feel the action of the
fire, then, surely, the conflagration has been of inestimable
utility.  Yet, if I understand aright, you intimate a doubt whether
the world's expectation of benefit would be realized by it."

"Listen to the talk of these worthies," said he, pointing to a group
in front of the blazing pile; "possibly they may teach you something
useful, without intending it."

The persons whom he indicated consisted of that brutal and most
earthy figure who had stood forth so furiously in defence of the
gallows,--the hangman, in short,--together with the last thief and
the last murderer, all three of whom were clustered about the last
toper.  The latter was liberally passing the brandy bottle, which he
had rescued from the general destruction of wines and spirits.  This
little convivial party seemed at the lowest pitch of despondency, as
considering that the purified world must needs be utterly unlike the
sphere that they had hitherto known, and therefore but a strange and
desolate abode for gentlemen of their kidney.

"The best counsel for all of us is," remarked the hangman, "that,
as soon as we have finished the last drop of liquor, I help you, my
three friends, to a comfortable end upon the nearest tree, and then
hang myself on the same bough.  This is no world for us any longer."

"Poh, poh, my good fellows!" said a dark-complexioned personage, who
now joined the group,--his complexion was indeed fearfully dark, and
his eyes glowed with a redder light than that of the bonfire; "be
not so cast down, my dear friends; you shall see good days yet.
There is one thing that these wiseacres have forgotten to throw into
the fire, and without which all the rest of the conflagration is
just nothing at all; yes, though they had burned the earth itself to
a cinder."

"And what may that be?" eagerly demanded the last murderer.

"What but the human heart itself?" said the darkvisaged stranger,
with a portentous grin.  "And, unless they hit upon some method of
purifying that foul cavern, forth from it will reissue all the
shapes of wrong and misery--the same old shapes or worse ones--which
they have taken such a vast deal of trouble to consume to ashes.  I
have stood by this livelong night and laughed in my sleeve at the
whole business.  O, take my word for it, it will be the old world
yet!"

This brief conversation supplied me with a theme for lengthened
thought.  How sad a truth, if true it were, that man's age-long
endeavor for perfection had served only to render him the mockery of
the evil principle, from the fatal circumstance of an error at the
very root of the matter!  The heart, the heart, there was the little
yet boundless sphere wherein existed the original wrong of which the
crime and misery of this outward world were merely types.  Purify
that inward sphere, and the many shapes of evil that haunt the
outward, and which now seem almost our only realities, will turn to
shadowy phantoms and vanish of their own accord; but if we go no
deeper than the intellect, and strive, with merely that feeble
instrument, to discern and rectify what is wrong, our whole
accomplishment will be a dream, so unsubstantial that it matters
little whether the bonfire, which I have so faithfully described,
were what we choose to call a real event and a flame that would
scorch the finger, or only a phosphoric radiance and a parable of my
own brain.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                 PASSAGES FROM A RELINQUISHED WORK



AT HOME

From infancy I was under the guardianship of a village parson, who
made me the subject of daily prayer and the sufferer of innumerable
stripes, using no distinction, as to these marks of paternal love,
between myself and his own three boys.  The result, it must be
owned, has been very different in their cases and mine, they being
all respectable men and well settled in life; the eldest as the
successor to his father's pulpit, the second as a physician, and the
third as a partner in a wholesale shoe-store; while I, with better
prospects than either of them, have run the course which this volume
will describe.  Yet there is room for doubt whether I should have
been any better contented with such success as theirs than with my
own misfortunes,--at least, till after my experience of the latter
had made it too late for another trial.

My guardian had a name of considerable eminence, and fitter for the
place it occupies in ecclesiastical history than for so frivolous a
page as mine.  In his own vicinity, among the lighter part of his
hearers, he was called Parson Thumpcushion, from the very forcible
gestures with which he illustrated his doctrines. Certainly, if his
powers as a preacher were to be estimated by the damage done to his
pulpit-furniture, none of his living brethren, and but few dead
ones, would have been worthy even to pronounce a benediction after
him.  Such pounding and expounding the moment he began to grow
warm, such slapping with his open palm, thumping with his closed
fist, and banging with the whole weight of the great Bible,
convinced me that he held, in imagination, either the Old Nick or
some Unitarian infidel at bay, and belabored his unhappy cushion as
proxy for those abominable adversaries.  Nothing but this exercise
of the body while delivering his sermons could have supported the
good parson's health under the mental toil which they cost him in
composition.

Though Parson Thumpcushion had an upright heart, and some called it
a warm one, he was invariably stern and severe, on principle, I
suppose, to me.  With late justice, though early enough, even now,
to be tinctured with generosity I acknowledge him to have been a
good and wise man after his own fashion.  If his management failed
as to myself, it succeeded with his three sons; nor, I must frankly
say, could any mode of education with which it was possible for him
to be acquainted have made me much better than what I was or led me
to a happier fortune than the present. He could neither change the
nature that God gave me nor adapt his own inflexible mind to my
peculiar character.  Perhaps it was my chief misfortune that I had
neither father nor mother alive; for parents have an instinctive
sagacity in regard to the welfare of their children, and the child
feels a confidence both in the wisdom and affection of his parents
which he cannot transfer to any delegate of their duties, however
conscientious.  An orphan's fate is hard, be he rich or poor.  As
for Parson Thumpcushion, whenever I see the old gentleman in my
dreams he looks kindly and sorrowfully at me, holding out his hand
as if each had something to forgive.  With such kindness and such
forgiveness, but without the sorrow, may our next meeting be!

I was a youth of gay and happy temperament, with an incorrigible
levity of spirit, of no vicious propensities, sensible enough, but
wayward and fanciful.  What a character was this to be brought in
contact with the stern old Pilgrim spirit of my guardian!  We were
at variance on a thousand points; but our chief and final dispute
arose from the pertinacity with which he insisted on my adopting a
particular profession; while I, being heir to a moderate competence,
had avowed my purpose of keeping aloof from the regular business of
life.  This would have been a dangerous resolution anywhere in the
world; it was fatal in New England.  There is a grossness in the
conceptions of my countrymen; they will not be convinced that any
good thing may consist with what they call idleness; they can
anticipate nothing but evil of a young man who neither studies
physic, law, nor gospel, nor opens a store, nor takes to farming,
but manifests an incomprehensible disposition to be satisfied with
what his father left him.  The principle is excellent in its general
influence, but most miserable in its effect on the few that violate
it.  I had a quick sensitiveness to public opinion, and felt as if
it ranked me with the tavern haunters and town paupers,--with the
drunken poet who hawked his own Fourth of July odes, and the broken
soldier who had been good for nothing since last war.  The
consequence of all this was a piece of light-hearted desperation.

I do not over-estimate my notoriety when I take it for granted that
many of my readers must have heard of me in the wild way of life
which I adopted.  The idea of becoming a wandering story-teller had
been suggested, a year or two before, by an encounter with several
merry vagabonds in a showman's wagon, where they and I had sheltered
ourselves during a summer shower.  The project was not more
extravagant than most which a young man forms. Stranger ones are
executed every day; and, not to mention my prototypes in the East,
and the wandering orators and poets whom my own ears have heard, I
had the example of one illustrious itinerant in the other
hemisphere,--of Goldsmith, who planned and performed his travels
through France and Italy on a less promising scheme than mine.  I
took credit to myself for various qualifications, mental and
personal, suited to the undertaking. Besides, my mind had latterly
tormented me for employment, keeping up an irregular activity even
in sleep, and making me conscious that I must toil, if it were but
in catching butterflies.  But my chief motives were, discontent with
home and a bitter grudge against Parson Thumpcushion, who would
rather have laid me in my father's tomb than seen me either a
novelist or an actor, two characters which I thus hit upon a method
of uniting.  After all, it was not half so foolish as if I had
written romances instead of reciting them.

The following pages will contain a picture of my vagrant life,
intermixed with specimens, generally brief and slight, of that great
mass of fiction to which I gave existence, and which has vanished
like cloud-shapes.  Besides the occasions when I sought a pecuniary
reward, I was accustomed to exercise my narrative faculty wherever
chance had collected a little audience idle enough to listen.  These
rehearsals were useful in testing the strong points of my stories;
and, indeed, the flow of fancy soon came upon me so abundantly that
its indulgence was its own reward, though the hope of praise also
became a powerful incitement.  Since I shall never feel the warm
gush of new thought as I did then, let me beseech the reader to
believe that my tales were not always so cold as he may find them
now.  With each specimen will be given a sketch of the circumstances
in which the story was told.  Thus my air-drawn pictures will be set
in frames perhaps more valuable than the pictures themselves, since
they will be embossed with groups of characteristic figures, amid
the lake and mountain scenery, the villages and fertile fields, of
our native land. But I write the book for the sake of its moral,
which many a dreaming youth may profit by, though it is the
experience of a wandering story-teller.



A FLIGHT IN THE FOG.

I set out on my rambles one morning in June about sunrise.  The day
promised to be fair, though at that early hour a heavy mist lay
along the earth and settled in minute globules on the folds of my
clothes, so that I looked precisely as if touched with a hoar-frost.
The sky was quite obscured, and the trees and houses invisible till
they grew out of the fog as I came close upon them.  There is a hill
towards the west whence the road goes abruptly down, holding a level
course through the village and ascending an eminence on the other
side, behind which it disappears.  The whole view comprises an
extent of half a mile. Here I paused; and, while gazing through the
misty veil, it partially rose and swept away with so sudden an
effect that a gray cloud seemed to have taken the aspect of a small
white town. A thin vapor being still diffused through the
atmosphere, the wreaths and pillars of fog, whether hung in air or
based on earth, appeared not less substantial than the edifices, and
gave their own indistinctness to the whole.  It was singular that
such an unromantic scene should look so visionary.

Half of the parson's dwelling was a dingy white house, and half of
it was a cloud; but Squire Moody's mansion, the grandest in the
village, was wholly visible, even the lattice-work of the balcony
under the front window; while in another place only two red chimneys
were seen above the mist, appertaining to my own paternal residence,
then tenanted by strangers.  I could not remember those with whom I
had dwelt there, not even my mother. The brick edifice of the bank
was in the clouds; the foundations of what was to be a great block
of buildings had vanished, ominously, as it proved; the dry-goods
store of Mr. Nightingale seemed a doubtful concern; and Dominicus
Pike's tobacco manufactory an affair of smoke, except the splendid
image of an Indian chief in front.  The white spire of the meeting-
house ascended out of the densest heap of vapor, as if that shadowy
base were its only support: or, to give a truer interpretation, the
steeple was the emblem of Religion, enveloped in mystery below, yet
pointing to a cloudless atmosphere, and catching the brightness of
the east on its gilded vane.

As I beheld these objects, and the dewy street, with grassy
intervals and a border of trees between the wheeltrack and the
sidewalks, all so indistinct, and not to be traced without an
effort, the whole seemed more like memory than reality.  I would
have imagined that years had already passed, and I was far away,
contemplating that dim picture of my native place, which I should
retain in my mind through the mist of time.  No tears fell from my
eyes among the dewdrops of the morning; nor does it occur to me that
I heaved a sigh.  In truth, I had never felt such a delicious
excitement nor known what freedom was till that moment when I gave
up my home and took the whole world in exchange, fluttering the
wings of my spirit as if I would have flown from one star to another
through the universe.  I waved my hand towards the dusky village,
bade it a joyous farewell, and turned away to follow any path but
that which might lead me back.  Never was Childe Harold's sentiment
adopted in a spirit more unlike his own.

Naturally enough, I thought of Don Quixote.  Recollecting how the
knight and Sancho had watched for auguries when they took the road
to Toboso, I began, between jest and earnest, to feel a similar
anxiety.  It was gratified, and by a more poetical phenomenon than
the braying of the dappled ass or the neigh of Rosinante.  The sun,
then just above the horizon, shone faintly through the fog, and
formed a species of rainbow in the west, bestriding my intended road
like a gigantic portal.  I had never known before that a bow could
be generated between the sunshine and the morning mist.  It had no
brilliancy, no perceptible hues, but was a mere unpainted framework,
as white and ghostlike as the lunar rainbow, which is deemed ominous
of evil.  But, with a light heart, to which all omens were
propitious, I advanced beneath the misty archway of futurity.

I had determined not to enter on my profession within a hundred
miles of home, and then to cover myself with a fictitious name. The
first precaution was reasonable enough, as otherwise Parson
Thumpcushion might have put an untimely catastrophe to my story; but
as nobody would be much affected by my disgrace, and all was to be
suffered in my own person, I know not why I cared about a name.  For
a week or two I travelled almost at random, seeking hardly any
guidance except the whirling of a leaf at, some turn of the road, or
the green bough that beckoned me, or the naked branch that pointed
its withered finger onward.  All my care was to be farther from home
each night than the preceding morning.



A FELLOW-TRAVELLER.

One day at noontide, when the sun had burst suddenly out of a cloud,
and threatened to dissolve me, I looked round for shelter, whether
of tavern, cottage, barn, or shady tree.  The first which offered
itself was a wood,--not a forest, but a trim plantation of young
oaks, growing just thick enough to keep the mass of sunshine out,
while they admitted a few straggling beams, and thus produced the
most cheerful gloom imaginable.  A brook, so small and clear, and
apparently so cool, that I wanted to drink it up, ran under the road
through a little arch of stone without once meeting the sun in its
passage from the shade on one side to the shade on the other.  As
there was a stepping-place over the stone wall and a path along the
rivulet, I followed it and discovered its source,--a spring gushing
out of an old barrel.

In this pleasant spot I saw a light pack suspended from the branch
of a tree, a stick leaning against the trunk, and a person seated on
the grassy verge of the spring, with his back towards me.  He was a
slender figure, dressed in black broadcloth, which was none of the
finest nor very fashionably cut.  On hearing my footsteps he started
up rather nervously, and, turning round, showed the face of a young
man about my own age, with his finger in a volume which he had been
reading till my intrusion.  His book was evidently a pocket Bible.
Though I piqued myself at that period on my great penetration into
people's characters and pursuits, I could not decide whether this
young man in black were an unfledged divine from Andover, a college
student, or preparing for college at some academy.  In either case I
would quite as willingly have found a merrier companion; such, for
instance, as the comedian with whom Gil Blas shared his dinner
beside a fountain in Spain.

After a nod, which was duly returned, I made a goblet of oak-leaves,
filled and emptied it two or three times, and then remarked, to hit
the stranger's classical associations, that this beautiful fountain
ought to flow from an urn instead of an old barrel.  He did not show
that he understood the allusion, and replied very briefly, with a
shyness that was quite out of place between persons who met in such
circumstances.  Had he treated my next observation in the same way,
we should have parted without another word.

"It is very singular," said I,--"though doubtless there are good
reasons for it,--that Nature should provide drink so abundantly, and
lavish it everywhere by the roadside, but so seldom anything to eat.
Why should not we find a loaf of bread on this tree as well as a
barrel of good liquor at the foot of it?"

"There is a loaf of bread on the tree," replied the stranger,
without even smiling--at a coincidence which made me laugh.  "I have
something to eat in my bundle; and, if you can make a dinner with
me, you shall be welcome."

"I accept your offer with pleasure," said I.  "A pilgrim such as I
am must not refuse a providential meal."

The young man had risen to take his bundle from the branch of the
tree, but now turned round and regarded me with great earnestness,
coloring deeply at the same time.  However, he said nothing, and
produced part of a loaf of bread and some cheese, the former being
evidently home baked, though some days out of the oven.  The fare
was good enough, with a real welcome, such as his appeared to be.
After spreading these articles on the stump of a tree, he proceeded
to ask a blessing on our food, an, unexpected ceremony, and quite an
impressive one at our woodland table, with the fountain gushing
beside us and the bright sky glimmering through the boughs; nor did
his brief petition affect me less because his embarrassment made his
voice tremble.  At the end of the meal he returned thanks with the
same tremulous fervor.

He felt a natural kindness for me after thus relieving my
necessities, and showed it by becoming less reserved.  On my part, I
professed never to have relished a dinner better; and, in requital
of the stranger's hospitality, solicited the pleasure of his company
to supper.

"Where?  At your home?"  asked he.

"Yes," said I, smiling.

"Perhaps our roads are not the same," observed he.

"O, I can take any road but one, and yet not miss my way," answered
I.  "This morning I breakfasted at home; I shall sup at home
to-night; and a moment ago I dined at home.  To be sure, there was a
certain place which I called home; but I have resolved not to see it
again till I have been quite round the globe and enter the street on
the east as I left it on the west. In the mean time, I have a home
everywhere, or nowhere, just as you please to take it."

"Nowhere, then; for this transitory world is not our home," said the
young man, with solemnity.  "We are all pilgrims and wanderers; but
it is strange that we two should meet."

I inquired the meaning of this remark, but could obtain no
satisfactory reply.  But we had eaten salt together, and it was
right that we should form acquaintance after that ceremony as the
Arabs of the desert do, especially as he had learned something about
myself, and the courtesy of the country entitled me to as much
information in return.  I asked whither he was travelling.

"I do not know," said he; "but God knows."

"That is strange!"  exclaimed I; "not that God should know it, but
that you should not.  And how is your road to be pointed out?"

"Perhaps by an inward conviction," he replied, looking sideways at
me to discover whether I smiled; "perhaps by an outward sign."

"Then, believe me," said I, "the outward sign is already granted
you, and the inward conviction ought to follow.  We are told of
pious men in old times who committed themselves to the care of
Providence, and saw the manifestation of its will in the slightest
circumstances, as in the shooting of a star, the flight of a bird,
or the course taken by some brute animal.  Sometimes even a stupid
ass was their guide.  May I not be as good a one?"

"I do not know," said the pilgrim, with perfect simplicity.

We did, however, follow the same road, and were not overtaken, as I
partly apprehended, by the keepers of any lunatic asylum in pursuit
of a stray patient.  Perhaps the stranger felt as much doubt of my
sanity as I did of his, though certainly with less justice, since I
was fully aware of my own extravagances, while he acted as wildly,
and deemed it heavenly wisdom.  We were a singular couple,
strikingly contrasted, yet curiously assimilated, each of us
remarkable enough by himself, and doubly so in the other's company.
Without any formal compact, we kept together day after day till our
union appeared permanent.  Even had I seen nothing to love and
admire in him, I could never have thought of deserting one who
needed me continually; for I never knew a person; not even a woman,
so unfit to roam the world in solitude as he was,--so painfully shy,
so easily discouraged by slight obstacles, and so often depressed by
a weight within himself.

I was now far from my native place, but had not yet stepped before
the public.  A slight tremor seized me whenever I thought of
relinquishing the immunities of a private character, and giving
every man, and for money too, the right which no man yet possessed,
of treating me with open scorn.  But about a week after contracting
the above alliance I made my bow to an audience of nine persons,
seven of whom hissed me in a very disagreeable manner, and not
without good cause.  Indeed, the failure was so signal that it would
have been mere swindling to retain the money, which had been paid on
my implied contract to give its value of amusement.  So I called in
the doorkeeper, bade him refund the whole receipts, a mighty sum and
was gratified with a round of applause by way of offset to the
hisses.  This event would have looked most horrible in
anticipation,--a thing to make a man shoot himself, or run amuck, or
hide himself in caverns where he might not see his own burning
blush; but the reality was not so very hard to bear.  It is a fact
that I was more deeply grieved by an almost parallel misfortune
which happened to my companion on the same evening.  In my own
behalf I was angry and excited, not depressed; my blood ran quick,
my spirits rose buoyantly, and I had never felt such a confidence of
future success and determination to achieve it as at that trying
moment. I resolved to persevere, if it were only to wring the
reluctant praise from my enemies.

Hitherto I had immensely underrated the difficulties of my idle
trade; now I recognized that it demanded nothing short of my whole
powers cultivated to the utmost, and exerted with the same
prodigality as if I were speaking for a great party or for the
nation at large on the floor of the Capitol.  No talent or
attainment could come amiss; everything, indeed, was requisite,--
wide observation, varied knowledge, deep thoughts, and sparkling
ones; pathos and levity, and a mixture of both, like sunshine in a
raindrop; lofty imagination, veiling itself in the garb of common
life; and the practised art which alone could render these gifts,
and more than these, available.  Not that I ever hoped to be thus
qualified.  But my despair was no ignoble one; for, knowing the
impossibility of satisfying myself, even should the world be
satisfied, I did my best to overcome it; investigated the causes of
every defect; and strove, with patient stubbornness, to remove them
in the next attempt.  It is one of my few sources of pride, that,
ridiculous as the object was, I followed it up with the firmness and
energy of a man.

I manufactured a great variety of plots and skeletons of tales, and
kept them ready for use, leaving the filling up to the inspiration
of the moment; though I cannot remember ever to have told a tale
which did not vary considerably from my preconceived idea, and
acquire a novelty of aspect as often as I repeated it. Oddly enough,
my success was generally in proportion to the difference between the
conception and accomplishment.  I provided two or more commencements
and catastrophes to many of the tales,--a happy expedient, suggested
by the double sets of sleeves and trimmings which diversified the
suits in Sir Piercy Shafton's wardrobe.  But my best efforts had a
unity, a wholeness, and a separate character that did not admit of
this sort of mechanism.



THE VILLAGE THEATRE

About the first of September my fellow-traveller and myself arrived
at a country town, where a small company of actors, on their return
from a summer's campaign in the British Provinces, were giving a
series of dramatic exhibitions.  A moderately sized hall of the
tavern had been converted into a theatre.  The performances that
evening were, The Heir at Law, and No Song, no Supper, with the
recitation of Alexander's Feast between the play and farce.  The
house was thin and dull.  But the next day there appeared to be
brighter prospects, the playbills announcing at every corner, on the
town-pump, and--awful sacrilege!--on the very door of the meeting-
house, an Unprecedented Attraction! After setting forth the ordinary
entertainments of a theatre, the public were informed, in the hugest
type that the printing-office could supply, that the manager had
been fortunate enough to accomplish an engagement with the
celebrated Story-Teller.  He would make his first appearance that
evening, and recite his famous tale of Mr. Higginbotham's
Catastrophe, which had been received with rapturous applause by
audiences in all the principal cities.  This outrageous flourish of
trumpets, be it known, was wholly unauthorized by me, who had merely
made an engagement for a single evening, without assuming any more
celebrity than the little I possessed.  As for the tale, it could
hardly have been applauded by rapturous audiences, being as yet an
unfilled plot; nor even when I stepped upon the stage was it decided
whether Mr. Higginbotham should live or die.

In two or three places, underneath the flaming bills which announced
the Story-Teller, was pasted a small slip of paper, giving notice,
in tremulous characters, of a religious meeting to be held at the
school-house, where, with divine permission, Eliakim Abbott would
address sinners on the welfare of their immortal souls.

In the evening, after the commencement of the tragedy of Douglas, I
took a ramble through the town to quicken my ideas by active motion.
My spirits were good, with a certain glow of mind which I had
already learned to depend upon as the sure prognostic of success.
Passing a small and solitary school-house, where a light was burning
dimly and a few people were entering the door, I went in with them,
and saw my friend Eliakim at the desk.  He had collected about
fifteen hearers, mostly females.  Just as I entered he was beginning
to pray in accents so low and interrupted that he seemed to doubt
the reception of his efforts both with God and man.  There was room
for distrust in regard to the latter.  At the conclusion of the
prayer several of the little audience went out, leaving him to begin
his discourse under such discouraging circumstances, added to his
natural and agonizing diffidence.  Knowing that my presence on these
occasions increased his embarrassment, I had stationed myself in a
dusky place near the door, and now stole softly out.

On my return to the tavern the tragedy was already concluded; and,
being a feeble one in itself and indifferently performed, it left so
much the better chance for the Story-Teller.  The bar was thronged
with customers, the toddy-stick keeping a continual tattoo; while in
the hall there was a broad, deep, buzzing sound, with an occasional
peal of impatient thunder,--all symptoms of all overflowing house
and an eager audience.  I drank a glass of wine-and-water, and stood
at the side scene conversing with a young person of doubtful sex.
If a gentleman, how could he have performed the singing girl the
night before in No Song, no Supper?  Or, if a lady, why did she
enact Young Norval, and now wear a green coat and white pantaloons
in the character of Little Pickle?  In either case the dress was
pretty and the wearer bewitching; so that, at the proper moment, I
stepped forward with a gay heart and a hold one; while the orchestra
played a tune that had resounded at many a country ball, and the
curtain, as it rose, discovered something like a country bar-room.
Such a scene was well enough adapted to such a tale.

The orchestra of our little theatre consisted of two fiddles and a
clarinet; but, if the whole harmony of the Tremont had been there,
it might have swelled in vain beneath the tumult of applause that
greeted me.  The good people of the town, knowing that the world
contained innumerable persons of celebrity undreamed of by them,
took it for granted that I was one, and that their roar of welcome
was but a feeble echo of those which had thundered around me in
lofty theatres.  Such an enthusiastic uproar was never heard.  Each
person seemed a Briarcus clapping a hundred hands, besides keeping
his feet and several cudgels in play with stamping and thumping on
the floor; while the ladies flourished their white cambric
handkerchiefs, intermixed with yellow and red bandanna, like the
flags of different nations. After such a salutation, the celebrated
Story-Teller felt almost ashamed to produce so humble an affair as
Mr. Higginbotham's Catastrophe.

This story was originally more dramatic than as there presented, and
afforded good scope for mimicry and buffoonery, neither of which, to
my shame, did I spare.  I never knew the "magic of a name" till I
used that of Mr. Higginbotham.  Often as I repeated it, there were
louder bursts of merriment than those which responded to what, in my
opinion, were more legitimate strokes of humor.  The success of the
piece was incalculably heightened by a stiff cue of horsehair, which
Little Pickle, in the spirit of that mischief-loving character, had
fastened to my collar, where, unknown to me, it kept making the
queerest gestures of its own in correspondence with all mine.  The
audience, supposing that some enormous joke was appended to this
long tail behind, were ineffably delighted, and gave way to such a
tumult of approbation that, just as the story closed, the benches
broke beneath them and left one whole row of my admirers on the
floor.  Even in that predicament they continued their applause.  In
after times, when I had grown a bitter moralizer, I took this scene
for an example how much of fame is humbug; how much the meed of what
our better nature blushes at; how much an accident; how much
bestowed on mistaken principles; and how small and poor the remnant.
From pit and boxes there was now a universal call for the Story-
Teller.

That celebrated personage came not when they did call to him.  As I
left the stage, the landlord, being also the postmaster, had given
me a letter with the postmark of my native village, and directed to
my assumed name in the stiff old handwriting of Parson Thumpcushion.
Doubtless he had heard of the rising renown of the Story-Teller, and
conjectured at once that such a nondescript luminary could be no
other than his lost ward.  His epistle, though I never read it,
affected me most painfully.  I seemed to see the Puritanic figure of
my guardian standing among the fripperies of the theatre and
pointing to the players,--the fantastic and effeminate men, the
painted women, the giddy girl in boy's clothes, merrier than
modest,--pointing to these with solemn ridicule, and eying me with
stern rebuke.  His image was a type of the austere duty, and they of
the vanities of life.

I hastened with the letter to my chamber and held it unopened in my
hand, while the applause of my buffoonery yet sounded through the
theatre.  Another train of thought came over me.  The stern old man
appeared again, but now with the gentleness of sorrow, softening his
authority with love as a father might, and even bending his
venerable head, as if to say that my errors had an apology in his
own mistaken discipline.  I strode twice across the chamber, then
held the letter in the flame of the candle, and beheld it consume
unread.  It is fixed in my mind, and was so at the time, that he had
addressed me in a style of paternal wisdom, and love, and
reconciliation which I could not have resisted had I but risked the
trial.  The thought still haunts me that then I made my irrevocable
choice between good and evil fate.

Meanwhile, as this occurrence had disturbed my mind and indisposed
me to the present exercise of my profession, I left the town, in
spite of a laudatory critique in the newspaper, and untempted by the
liberal offers of the manager.  As we walked onward, following the
same road, on two such different errands, Eliakim groaned in spirit,
and labored with tears to convince me of the guilt and madness of my
life.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                       SKETCHES FROM MEMORY



THE NOTCH OF THE WHITE MOUNTAINS.


It was now the middle of September.  We had come since sunrise from
Bartlett, passing up through the valley of the Saco, which extends
between mountainous walls, sometimes with a steep ascent, but often
as level as a church-aisle.  All that day and two preceding ones we
had been loitering towards the heart of the White Mountains,--those
old crystal hills, whose mysterious brilliancy had gleamed upon our
distant wanderings before we thought of visiting them.  Height after
height had risen and towered one above another till the clouds began
to hang below the peaks.  Down their slopes were the red pathways of
the slides, those avalanches of earth, stones, and trees, which
descend into the hollows, leaving vestiges of their track hardly to
be effaced by the vegetation of ages.  We had mountains behind us
and mountains on each side, and a group of mightier ones ahead.
Still our road went up along the Saco, right towards the centre of
that group, as if to climb above the clouds in its passage to the
farther region.

In old times the settlers used to be astounded by the inroads of the
Northern Indians, coming down upon them from this mountain rampart
through some defile known only to themselves.  It is, indeed, a
wondrous path.  A demon, it might be fancied, or one of the Titans,
was travelling up the valley, elbowing the heights carelessly aside
as he passed, till at length a great mountain took its stand
directly across his intended road.  He tarries not for such an
obstacle, but, rending it asunder a thousand feet from peak to base,
discloses its treasures of hidden minerals, its sunless waters, all
the secrets of the mountain's inmost heart, with a mighty fracture
of rugged precipices on each side. This is the Notch of the White
Hills.  Shame on me that I have attempted to describe it by so mean
an image, feeling, as I do, that it is one of those symbolic scenes
which lead the mind to the sentiment, though not to the conception,
of Omnipotence.

.     .     .     .     .

We had now reached a narrow passage, which showed almost the
appearance of having been cut by human strength and artifice in the
solid rock.  There was a wall of granite on each side, high and
precipitous, especially on our right, and so smooth that a few
evergreens could hardly find foothold enough to grow there. This is
the entrance, or, in the direction we were going, the extremity, of
the romantic defile of the Notch.  Before emerging from it, the
rattling of wheels approached behind us, and a stage-coach rumbled
out of the mountain, with seats on top and trunks behind, and a
smart driver, in a drab great-coat, touching the wheel-horses with
the whip-stock and reigning in the leaders. To my mind there was a
sort of poetry in such an incident, hardly inferior to what would
have accompanied the painted array of an Indian war-party gliding
forth from the same wild chasm.  All the passengers, except a very
fat lady on the back seat, had alighted.  One was a mineralogist, a
scientific, green-spectacled figure in black, bearing a heavy
hammer, with which he did great damage to the precipices, and put
the fragments in his pocket. Another was a well-dressed young man,
who carried an operaglass set in gold, and seemed to be making a
quotation from some of Byron's rhapsodies on mountain scenery.
There was also a trader, returning from Portland to the upper part
of Vermont; and a fair young girl, with a very faint bloom like one
of those pale and delicate flowers which sometimes occur among
alpine cliffs.

They disappeared, and we followed them, passing through a deep pine
forest, which for some miles allowed us to see nothing but its own
dismal shade.  Towards nightfall we reached a level amphitheatre,
surrounded by a great rampart of hills, which shut out the sunshine
long before it left the external world.  It was here that we
obtained our first view, except at a distance, of the principal
group of mountains.  They are majestic, and even awful, when
contemplated in a proper mood, yet, by their breadth of base and the
long ridges which support them, give the idea of immense bulk rather
than of towering height.  Mount Washington, indeed, looked near to
Heaven: he was white with snow a mile downward, and had caught the
only cloud that was sailing through the atmosphere to veil his head.
Let us forget the other names of American statesmen that have been
stamped upon these hills, but still call the loftiest WASHINGTON.
Mountains are Earth's undecaying monuments.  They must stand while
she endures, and never should be consecrated to the mere great men
of their own age and country, but to the mighty ones alone, whose
glory is universal, and whom all time will render illustrious.

The air, not often sultry in this elevated region, nearly two
thousand feet above the sea, was now sharp and cold, like that of a
clear November evening in the lowlands.  By morning, probably, there
would be a frost, if not a snowfall, on the grass and rye, and an
icy surface over the standing water.  I was glad to perceive a
prospect of comfortable quarters in a house which we were
approaching, and of pleasant company in the guests who were
assembled at the door.



OUR EVENING PARTY AMONG THE MOUNTAINS.

WE stood in front of a good substantial farm-house, of old date in
that wild country.  A sign over the door denoted it to be the White
Mountain Post-Office,--an establishment which distributes letters
and newspapers to perhaps a score of persons, comprising the
population of two or three townships among the hills.  The broad and
weighty antlers of a deer, "a stag of ten," were fastened at the
corner of the house; a fox's bushy tail was nailed beneath them; and
a huge black paw lay on the ground, newly severed and still
bleeding, the trophy of a bear-hunt. Among several persons collected
about the doorsteps, the most remarkable was a sturdy mountaineer,
of six feet two, and corresponding bulk, with a heavy set of
features, such as might be moulded on his own blacksmith's anvil,
but yet indicative of mother wit and rough humor.  As we appeared,
he uplifted a tin trumpet, four or five feet long, and blew a
tremendous blast, either in honor of our arrival or to awaken an
echo from the opposite hill.

Ethan Crawford's guests were of such a motley description as to form
quite a picturesque group, seldom seen together except at some place
like this, at once the pleasure-house of fashionable tourists and
the homely inn of country travellers.  Among the company at the door
were the mineralogist and the owner of the gold operaglass whom we
had encountered in the Notch; two Georgian gentlemen, who had
chilled their Southern blood that morning on the top of Mount
Washington; a physician and his wife from Conway; a trader of
Burlington and an old squire of the Green Mountains; and two young
married couples, all the way from Massachusetts, on the matrimonial
jaunt.  Besides these strangers, the rugged county of Coos, in which
we were, was represented by half a dozen wood-cutters, who had slain
a bear in the forest and smitten off his paw.

I had joined the party, and had a moment's leisure to examine them
before the echo of Ethan's blast returned from the hill. Not one,
but many echoes had caught up the harsh and tuneless sound,
untwisted its complicated threads, and found a thousand aerial
harmonies in one stern trumpet-tone.  It was a distinct yet distant
and dream-like symphony of melodious instruments, as if an airy band
had been hidden on the hillside and made faint music at the summons.
No subsequent trial produced so clear, delicate, and spiritual a
concert as the first.  A field-piece was then discharged from the
top of a neighboring hill, and gave birth to one long reverberation,
which ran round the circle of mountains in an unbroken chain of
sound and rolled away without a separate echo.  After these
experiments, the cold atmosphere drove us all into the house, with
the keenest appetites for supper.

It did one's heart good to see the great fires that were kindled in
the parlor and bar-room, especially the latter, where the fireplace
was built of rough stone, and might have contained the trunk of an
old tree for a backlog.

A man keeps a comfortable hearth when his own forest is at his very
door.  In the parlor, when the evening was fairly set in, we held
our hands before our eyes to shield them from the ruddy glow, and
began a pleasant variety of conversation.  The mineralogist and the
physician talked about the invigorating qualities of the mountain
air, and its excellent effect on Ethan Crawford's father, an old man
of seventy-five, with the unbroken frame of middle life.  The two
brides and the doctor's wife held a whispered discussion, which, by
their frequent titterings and a blush or two, seemed to have
reference to the trials or enjoyments of the matrimonial state.  The
bridegrooms sat together in a corner, rigidly silent, like Quakers
whom the spirit moveth not, being still in the odd predicament of
bashfulness towards their own young wives.  The Green Mountain
squire chose me for his companion, and described the difficulties he
had met with half a century ago in travelling from the Connecticut
River through the Notch to Conway, now a single day's journey,
though it had cost him eighteen.  The Georgians held the album
between them, and favored us with the few specimens of its contents,
which they considered ridiculous enough to be worth hearing.  One
extract met with deserved applause.  It was a "Sonnet to the Snow on
Mount Washington," and had been contributed that very afternoon,
bearing a signature of great distinction in magazines and annuals.
The lines were elegant and full of fancy, but too remote from
familiar sentiment, and cold as their subject, resembling those
curious specimens of crystallized vapor which I observed next day on
the mountain-top. The poet was understood to be the young gentleman
of the gold opera-glass, who heard our laudatory remarks with the
composure of a veteran.

Such was our party, and such their ways of amusement.  But on a
winter evening another set of guests assembled at the hearth where
these summer travellers were now sitting.  I once had it in
contemplation to spend a month hereabouts, in sleighing-time, for
the sake of studying the yeomen of New England, who then elbow each
other through the Notch by hundreds, on their way to Portland.
There could be no better school for such a purpose than Ethan
Crawford's inn.  Let the student go thither in December, sit down
with the teamsters at their meals, share their evening merriment,
and repose with them at night when every bed has its three
occupants, and parlor, bar-room, and kitchen are strewn with
slumberers around the fire.  Then let him rise before daylight,
button his great-coat, muffle up his ears, and stride with the
departing caravan a mile or two, to see how sturdily they make head
against the blast.  A treasure of characteristic traits will repay
all inconveniences, even should a frozen nose be of the number.

The conversation of our party soon became more animated and sincere,
and we recounted some traditions of the Indians, who believed that
the father and mother of their race were saved from a deluge by
ascending the peak of Mount Washington.  The children of that pair
have been overwhelmed, and found no such refuge.  In the mythology
of the savage, these mountains were afterwards considered sacred and
inaccessible, full of unearthly wonders, illuminated at lofty
heights by the blaze of precious stones, and inhabited by deities,
who sometimes shrouded themselves in the snow-storm and came down on
the lower world.  There are few legends more poetical than that of
the "Great Carbuncle" of the White Mountains.  The belief was
communicated to the English settlers, and is hardly yet extinct,
that a gem, of such immense size as to be seen shining miles away,
hangs from a rock over a clear, deep lake, high up among the hills.
They who had once beheld its splendor were enthralled with an
unutterable yearning to possess it.  But a spirit guarded that
inestimable jewel, and bewildered the adventurer with a dark mist
from the enchanted lake.  Thus life was worn away in the vain search
for an unearthly treasure, till at length the deluded one went up
the mountain, still sanguine as in youth, but returned no more.  On
this theme methinks I could frame a tale with a deep moral.

The hearts of the palefaces would not thrill to these superstitions
of the red men, though we spoke of them in the centre of their
haunted region.  The habits and sentiments of that departed people
were too distinct from those of their successors to find much real
sympathy.  It has often been a matter of regret to me that I was
shut out from the most peculiar field of American fiction by an
inability to see any romance, or poetry, or grandeur, or beauty in
the Indian character, at least till such traits were pointed out by
others.  I do abhor an Indian story.  Yet no writer can be more
secure of a permanent place in our literature than the biographer of
the Indian chiefs. His subject, as referring to tribes which have
mostly vanished from the earth, gives him a right to be placed on a
classic shelf, apart from the merits which will sustain him there.

I made inquiries whether, in his researches about these parts, our
mineralogist had found the three "Silver Hills" which an Indian
sachem sold to an Englishman nearly two hundred years ago, and the
treasure of which the posterity of the purchaser have been looking
for ever since.  But the man of science had ransacked every hill
along the Saco, and knew nothing of these prodigious piles of
wealth.  By this time, as usual with men on the eve of great
adventure, we had prolonged our session deep into the night,
considering how early we were to set out on our six miles' ride to
the foot of Mount Washington.  There was now a general breaking up.
I scrutinized the faces of the two bridegrooms, and saw but little
probability of their leaving the bosom of earthly bliss, in the
first week of the honeymoon and at the frosty hour of three, to
climb above the clouds; nor, when I felt how sharp the wind was as
it rushed through a broken pane and eddied between the chinks of my
unplastered chamber, did I anticipate much alacrity on my own part,
though we were to seek for the "Great Carbuncle."



THE CANAL-BOAT.

I was inclined to be poetical about the Grand Canal.  In my
imagination De Witt Clinton was an enchanter, who had waved his
magic wand from the Hudson to Lake Erie and united them by a watery
highway, crowded with the commerce of two worlds, till then
inaccessible to each other.  This simple and mighty conception had
conferred inestimable value on spots which Nature seemed to have
thrown carelessly into the great body of the earth, without
foreseeing that they could ever attain importance. I pictured the
surprise of the sleepy Dutchmen when the new river first glittered
by their doors, bringing them hard cash or foreign commodities in
exchange for their hitherto unmarketable produce.  Surely the water
of this canal must be the most fertilizing of all fluids; for it
causes towns, with their masses of brick and stone, their churches
and theatres, their business and hubbub, their luxury and
refinement, their gay dames and polished citizens, to spring up,
till in time the wondrous stream may flow between two continuous
lines of buildings, through one thronged street, from Buffalo to
Albany.  I embarked about thirty miles below Utica, determining to
voyage along the whole extent of the canal at least twice in the
course of the summer.

Behold us, then, fairly afloat, with three horses harnessed to our
vessel, like the steeds of Neptune to a huge scallop-shell in
mythological pictures.  Bound to a distant port, we had neither
chart nor compass, nor cared about the wind, nor felt the heaving of
a billow, nor dreaded shipwreck, however fierce the tempest, in our
adventurous navigation of an interminable mudpuddle; for a mudpuddle
it seemed, and as dark and turbid as if every kennel in the
land paid contribution to it.  With an imperceptible current, it
holds its drowsy way through all the dismal swamps and unimpressive
scenery that could be found between the great lakes and the sea-
coast.  Yet there is variety enough, both on the surface of the
canal and along its banks, to amuse the traveller, if an
overpowering tedium did not deaden his perceptions.

Sometimes we met a black and rusty-looking vessel, laden with
lumber, salt from Syracuse, or Genesee flour, and shaped at both
ends like a square-toed boot, as if it had two sterns, and were
fated always to advance backward.  On its deck would be a square
hut, and a woman seen through the window at her household work, with
a little tribe of children who perhaps had been born in this strange
dwelling and knew no other home.  Thus, while the husband smoked his
pipe at the helm and the eldest son rode one of the horses, on went
the family, travelling hundreds of miles in their own house and
carrying their fireside with them.  The most frequent species of
craft were the "line-boats," which had a cabin at each end, and a
great bulk of barrels, bales, and boxes in the midst, or light
packets like our own decked all over with a row of curtained windows
from stem to stern, and a drowsy face at every one.  Once we
encountered a boat of rude construction, painted all in gloomy
black, and manned by three Indians, who gazed at us in silence and
with a singular fixedness of eye. Perhaps these three alone, among
the ancient possessors of the land, had attempted to derive benefit
from the white mail's mighty projects and float along the current of
his enterprise. Not long after, in the midst of a swamp and beneath
a clouded sky, we overtook a vessel that seemed full of mirth and
sunshine. It contained a little colony of Swiss on their way to
Michigan, clad in garments of strange fashion and gay colors,
scarlet, yellow, and bright blue, singing, laughing, and making
merry in odd tones and a babble of outlandish words.  One pretty
damsel, with a beautiful pair of naked white arms, addressed a
mirthful remark to me.  She spoke in her native tongue, and I
retorted in good English, both of us laughing heartily at each
other's unintelligible wit.  I cannot describe how pleasantly this
incident affected me.  These honest Swiss were all itinerant
community of jest and fun journeying through a gloomy land and among
a dull race of money-getting drudges, meeting none to understand
their mirth, and only one to sympathize with it, yet still retaining
the happy lightness of their own spirit.

Had I been on my feet at the time instead of sailing slowly along in
a dirty canal-boat, I should often have paused to contemplate the
diversified panorama along the banks of the canal.  Sometimes the
scene was a forest, dark, dense, and impervious, breaking away
occasionally and receding from a lonely tract, covered with dismal
black stumps, where, on the verge of the canal, might be seen a log-
cottage and a sallow-faced woman at the window.  Lean and aguish,
she looked like poverty personified, half clothed, half fed, and
dwelling in a desert, while a tide of wealth was sweeping by her
door.  Two or three miles farther would bring us to a lock, where
the slight impediment to navigation had created a little mart of
trade.  Here would be found commodities of all sorts, enumerated in
yellow letters on the window-shutters of a small grocery-store, the
owner of which had set his soul to the gathering of coppers and
small change, buying and selling through the week, and counting his
gains on the blessed Sabbath.  The next scene might be the dwelling-
houses and stores of a thriving village, built of wood or small gray
stones, a church-spire rising in the midst, and generally two
taverns, bearing over their piazzas the pompous titles of "hotel,"
"exchange," "tontine," or "coffee-house."  Passing on, we glide now
into the unquiet heart of an inland city,--of Utica, for instance,--
and find ourselves amid piles of brick, crowded docks and quays,
rich warehouses, and a busy population.  We feel the eager and
hurrying spirit of the place, like a stream and eddy whirling us
along with it.  Through the thickest of the tumult goes the canal,
flowing between lofty rows of buildings and arched bridges of hewn
stone.  Onward, also, go we, till the hum and bustle of struggling
enterprise die away behind us and we are threading an avenue of the
ancient woods again.

This sounds not amiss in description, but was so tiresome in reality
that we were driven to the most childish expedients for amusement.
An English traveller paraded the deck, with a rifle in his walking-
stick, and waged war on squirrels and woodpeckers, sometimes sending
an unsuccessful bullet among flocks of tame ducks and geese which
abound in the dirty water of the canal.  I, also, pelted these
foolish birds with apples, and smiled at the ridiculous earnestness
of their scrambles for the prize while the apple bobbed about like a
thing of life.  Several little accidents afforded us good-natured
diversion.  At the moment of changing horses the tow-rope caught a
Massachusetts farmer by the leg and threw him down in a very
indescribable posture, leaving a purple mark around his sturdy limb.
A new passenger fell flat on his back in attempting to step on deck
as the boat emerged from under a bridge.  Another, in his Sunday
clothes, as good luck would have it, being told to leap aboard from
the bank, forthwith plunged up to his third waistcoat-button in the
canal, and was fished out in a very pitiable plight, not at all
amended by our three rounds of applause.  Anon a Virginia
schoolmaster, too intent on a pocket Virgil to heed the helmsman's
warning, "Bridge! bridge!" was saluted by the said bridge on his
knowledge-box.  I had prostrated myself like a pagan before his
idol, but heard the dull, leaden sound of the contact, and fully
expected to see the treasures of the poor man's cranium scattered
about the deck.  However, as there was no harm done, except a large
bump on the head, and probably a corresponding dent in the bridge,
the rest of us exchanged glances and laughed quietly.  O, bow
pitiless are idle people!


.     .     .     .     .     .     .    .

The table being now lengthened through the cabin and spread for
supper, the next twenty minutes were the pleasantest I had spent on
the canal, the same space at dinner excepted.  At the close of the
meal it had become dusky enough for lamplight.  The rain pattered
unceasingly on the deck, and sometimes came with a sullen rush
against the windows, driven by the wind as it stirred through an
opening of the forest.  The intolerable dulness of the scene
engendered an evil spirit in me.  Perceiving that the Englishman was
taking notes in a memorandum-book, with occasional glances round the
cabin, I presumed that we were all to figure in a future volume of
travels, and amused my ill-humor by falling into the probable vein
of his remarks.  He would hold up an imaginary mirror, wherein our
reflected faces would appear ugly and ridiculous, yet still retain
all undeniable likeness to the originals.  Then, with more sweeping
malice, he would make these caricatures the representatives of great
classes of my countrymen.

He glanced at the Virginia schoolmaster, a Yankee by birth, who, to
recreate himself, was examining a freshman from Schenectady College
in the conjugation of a Greek verb.  Him the Englishman would
portray as the scholar of America, and compare his erudition to a
school-boy's Latin theme made up of scraps ill-selected and worse
put together.  Next the tourist looked at the Massachusetts farmer,
who was delivering a dogmatic harangue on the iniquity of Sunday
mails.  Here was the far-famed yeoman of New England; his religion,
writes the Englishman, is gloom on the Sabbath, long prayers every
morning and eventide, and illiberality at all times; his boasted
information is merely an abstract and compound of newspaper
paragraphs, Congress debates, caucus harangues, and the argument and
judge's charge in his own lawsuits.  The book-monger cast his eye at
a Detroit merchant, and began scribbling faster than ever.  In this
sharp-eyed man, this lean man, of wrinkled brow, we see daring
enterprise and close-fisted avarice combined.  Here is the
worshipper of Mammon at noonday; here is the three times bankrupt,
richer after every ruin; here, in one word, (O wicked Englishman to
say it!) here is the American.  He lifted his eyeglass to inspect a
Western lady, who at once became aware of the glance, reddened, and
retired deeper into the female part of the cabin.  Here was the
pure, modest, sensitive, and shrinking woman of America,--shrinking
when no evil is intended, and sensitive like diseased flesh, that
thrills if you but point at it; and strangely modest, without
confidence in the modesty of other people; and admirably pure, with
such a quick apprehension of all impurity.

In this manner I went all through the cabin, hitting everybody as
hard a lash as I could, and laying the whole blame on the infernal
Englishman.  At length I caught the eyes of my own image in the
looking-glass, where a number of the party were likewise reflected,
and among them the Englishman, who at that moment was intently
observing myself.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .    .

The crimson curtain being let down between the ladies and gentlemen,
the cabin became a bedchamber for twenty persons, who were laid on
shelves one above another.  For a long time our various
incommodities kept us all awake except five or six, who were
accustomed to sleep nightly amid the uproar of their own snoring,
and had little to dread from any other species of disturbance.  It
is a curious fact that these snorers had been the most quiet people
in the boat while awake, and became peace-breakers only when others
cease to be so, breathing tumult out of their repose.  Would it were
possible to affix a wind-instrument to the nose, and thus make
melody of a snore, so that a sleeping lover might serenade his
mistress or a congregation snore a psalm-tune!  Other, though
fainter, sounds than these contributed to my restlessness.  My head
was close to the crimson curtain,--the sexual division of the boat,
--behind which I continually heard whispers and stealthy footsteps;
the noise of a comb laid on the table or a slipper dropped on the
floor; the twang, like a broken harp-string, caused by loosening a
tight belt; the rustling of a gown in its descent; and the unlacing
of a pair of stays.  My ear seemed to have the properties of an eye;
a visible image pestered my fancy in the darkness; the curtain was
withdrawn between me and the Western lady, who yet disrobed herself
without a blush.

Finally all was hushed in that quarter.  Still I was more broad
awake than through the whole preceding day, and felt a feverish
impulse to toss my limbs miles apart and appease the unquietness of
mind by that of matter.  Forgetting that my berth was hardly so wide
as a coffin, I turned suddenly over and fell like an avalanche on
the floor, to the disturbance of the whole community of sleepers.
As there were no bones broken, I blessed the accident and went on
deck.  A lantern was burning at each end of the boat, and one of the
crew was stationed at the bows, keeping watch, as mariners do on the
ocean.  Though the rain had ceased, the sky was all one cloud, and
the darkness so intense that there seemed to be no world except the
little space on which our lanterns glimmered.  Yet it was an
impressive scene.

We were traversing the "long level," a dead flat between Utica and
Syracuse, where the canal has not rise or fall enough to require a
lock for nearly seventy miles.  There can hardly be a more dismal
tract of country.  The forest which covers it, consisting chiefly of
whitecedar, black-ash, and other trees that live in excessive
moisture, is now decayed and death-struck by the partial draining of
the swamp into the great ditch of the canal.  Sometimes, indeed, our
lights were reflected from pools of stagnant water which stretched
far in among the trunks of the trees, beneath dense masses of dark
foliage.  But generally the tall stems and intermingled branches
were naked, and brought into strong relief amid the surrounding
gloom by the whiteness of their decay.  Often we beheld the
prostrate form of some old sylvan giant which had fallen and crushed
down smaller trees under its immense ruin.  In spots where
destruction had been riotous, the lanterns showed perhaps a hundred
trunks, erect, half overthrown, extended along the ground, resting
on their shattered limbs or tossing them desperately into the
darkness, but all of one ashy white, all naked together, in desolate
confusion.  Thus growing out of the night as we drew nigh, and
vanishing as we glided on, based on obscurity, and overhung and
bounded by it, the scene was ghostlike,--the very land of
unsubstantial things, whither dreams might betake themselves when
they quit the slumberer's brain.

My fancy found another emblem.  The wild nature of America had been
driven to this desert-place by the encroachments of civilized man.
And even here, where the savage queen was throned on the ruins of
her empire, did we penetrate, a vulgar and worldly throng, intruding
on her latest solitude.  In other lands decay sits among fallen
palaces; but here her home is in the forests.

Looking ahead, I discerned a distant light, announcing the approach
of another boat, which soon passed us, and proved to be a rusty old
scow,--just such a craft as the "Flying Dutchman" would navigate on
the canal.  Perhaps it was that celebrated personage himself whom I
imperfectly distinguished at the helm in a glazed cap and rough
great-coat, with a pipe in his mouth, leaving the fumes of tobacco a
hundred yards behind.  Shortly after our boatman blew a horn,
sending a long and melancholy note through the forest avenue, as a
signal for some watcher in the wilderness to be ready with a change
of horses.  We had proceeded a mile or two with our fresh team when
the tow-rope got entangled in a fallen branch on the edge of the
canal, and caused a momentary delay, during which I went to examine
the phosphoric light of an old tree a little within the forest.  It
was not the first delusive radiance that I had followed.

The tree lay along the ground, and was wholly converted into a mass
of diseased splendor, which threw a ghastliness around. Being full
of conceits that night, I called it a frigid fire, a funeral light,
illumining decay and death, an emblem of fame that gleams around the
dead man without warming him, or of genius when it owes its
brilliancy to moral rottenness, and was thinking that such ghostlike
torches were just fit to light up this dead forest or to blaze
coldly in tombs, when, starting from my abstraction, I looked up the
canal.  I recollected myself, and discovered the lanterns glimmering
far away.

"Boat ahoy!" shouted I, making a trumpet of my closed fists.

Though the cry must have rung for miles along that hollow passage of
the woods, it produced no effect.  These packet-boats make up for
their snail-like pace by never loitering day nor night, especially
for those who have paid their fare.  Indeed, the captain had an
interest in getting rid of me; for I was his creditor for a
breakfast.

"They are gone, Heaven be praised!" ejaculated I; "for I cannot
possibly overtake them.  Here am I, on the 'long level,' at
midnight, with the comfortable prospect of a walk to Syracuse, where
my baggage will be left.  And now to find a house or shed wherein to
pass the night."  So thinking aloud, I took a flambeau from the old
tree, burning, but consuming not, to light my steps withal, and,
like a jack-o'-the-lantern, set out on my midnight tour.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                       THE OLD APPLE DEALER



The lover of the moral picturesque may sometimes find what he, seeks
in a character which is nevertheless of too negative a description
to be seized upon and represented to the imaginative vision by word-
painting.  As an instance, I remember an old man who carries on a
little trade of gingerbread and apples at the depot of one of our
railroads.  While awaiting the departure of the cars, my
observation, flitting to and fro among the livelier characteristics
of the scene, has often settled insensibly upon this almost hueless
object.  Thus, unconsciously to myself and unsuspected by him, I
have studied the old apple-dealer until he has become a naturalized
citizen of my inner world.  How little would he imagine--poor,
neglected, friendless, unappreciated, and with little that demands
appreciation--that the mental eye of an utter stranger has so often
reverted to his figure!  Many a noble form, many a beautiful face,
has flitted before me and vanished like a shadow.  It is a strange
witchcraft whereby this faded and featureless old apple-dealer has
gained a settlement in my memory.

He is a small man, with gray hair and gray stubble beard, and is
invariably clad in a shabby surtout of snuff-color, closely
buttoned, and half concealing a pair of gray pantaloons; the whole
dress, though clean and entire, being evidently flimsy with much
wear.  His face, thin, withered, furrowed, and with features which
even age has failed to render impressive, has a frost-bitten aspect.
It is a moral frost which no physical warmth or comfortableness
could counteract.  The summer sunshine may fling its white heat upon
him or the good fire of the depot room may slake him the focus of
its blaze on a winter's day; but all in vain; for still the old roan
looks as if he were in a frosty atmosphere, with scarcely warmth
enough to keep life in the region about his heart.  It is a patient,
long-suffering, quiet, hopeless, shivering aspect.  He is not
desperate,--that, though its etymology implies no more, would be too
positive an expression,--but merely devoid of hope.  As all his past
life, probably, offers no spots of brightness to his memory, so he
takes his present poverty and discomfort as entirely a matter of
course! he thinks it the definition of existence, so far as himself
is concerned, to be poor, cold, and uncomfortable.  It may be added,
that time has not thrown dignity as a mantle over the old man's
figure: there is nothing venerable about him: you pity him without a
scruple.

He sits on a bench in the depot room; and before him, on the floor,
are deposited two baskets of a capacity to contain his whole stock
in trade.  Across from one basket to the other extends a board, on
which is displayed a plate of cakes and gingerbread, some russet and
red-cheeked apples, and a box containing variegated sticks of candy,
together with that delectable condiment known by children as
Gibraltar rock, neatly done up in white paper.  There is likewise a
half-peck measure of cracked walnuts and two or three tin half-pints
or gills filled with the nut-kernels, ready for purchasers.

Such are the small commodities with which our old friend comes daily
before the world, ministering to its petty needs and little freaks
of appetite, and seeking thence the solid subsistence--so far as he
may subsist of his life.

A slight observer would speak of the old man's quietude; but, on
closer scrutiny, you discover that there is a continual unrest
within him, which somewhat resembles the fluttering action of the
nerves in a corpse from which life has recently departed.  Though he
never exhibits any violent action, and, indeed, might appear to be
sitting quite still, yet you perceive, when his minuter
peculiarities begin to be detected, that he is always making some
little movement or other.  He looks anxiously at his plate of cakes
or pyramid of apples and slightly alters their arrangement, with an
evident idea that a great deal depends on their being disposed
exactly thus and so.  Then for a moment he gazes out of the window;
then he shivers quietly and folds his arms across his breast, as if
to draw himself closer within himself, and thus keep a flicker of
warmth in his lonesome heart.  Now he turns again to his merchandise
of cakes, apples, and candy, and discovers that this cake or that
apple, or yonder stick of red and white candy, has somehow got out
of its proper position.  And is there not a walnut-kernel too many
or too few in one of those small tin measures?  Again the whole
arrangement appears to be settled to his mind; but, in the course of
a minute or two, there will assuredly be something to set right.  At
times, by an indescribable shadow upon his features, too quiet,
however, to be noticed until you are familiar with his ordinary
aspect, the expression of frostbitten, patient despondency becomes
very touching.  It seems as if just at that instant the suspicion
occurred to him that, in his chill decline of life, earning scanty
bread by selling cakes, apples, and candy, he is a very miserable
old fellow.

But, if he thinks so, it is a mistake.  He can never suffer the
extreme of misery, because the tone of his whole being is too much
subdued for him to feel anything acutely.

Occasionally one of the passengers, to while away a tedious
interval, approaches the old man, inspects the articles upon his
board, and even peeps curiously into the two baskets.  Another,
striding to and fro along the room, throws a look at the apples and
gingerbread at every turn.  A third, it may be of a more sensitive
and delicate texture of being, glances shyly thitherward, cautious
not to excite expectations of a purchaser while yet undetermined
whether to buy.  But there appears to be no need of such a
scrupulous regard to our old friend's feelings. True, he is
conscious of the remote possibility to sell a cake or an apple; but
innumerable disappointments have rendered him so far a philosopher,
that, even if the purchased article should be returned, he will
consider it altogether in the ordinary train of events.  He speaks
to none, and makes no sign of offering his wares to the public: not
that he is deterred by pride, but by the certain conviction that
such demonstrations would not increase his custom.  Besides, this
activity in business would require an energy that never could have
been a characteristic of his almost passive disposition even in
youth.  Whenever an actual customer customer appears the old man
looks up with a patient eye: if the price and the article are
approved, he is ready to make change; otherwise his eyelids droop
again sadly enough, but with no heavier despondency than before.  He
shivers, perhaps folds his lean arms around his lean body, and
resumes the life-long, frozen patience in which consists his
strength.

Once in a while a school-boy comes hastily up, places cent or two
upon the board, and takes up a cake, or stick of candy, or a measure
of walnuts, or an apple as red-checked as himself.  There are no
words as to price, that being as well known to the buyer as to the
seller.  The old apple-dealer never speaks an unnecessary word not
that he is sullen and morose; but there is none of the cheeriness
and briskness in him that stirs up people to talk.

Not seldom he is greeted by some old neighbor, a man well to do in
the world, who makes a civil, patronizing observation about the
weather; and then, by way of performing a charitable deed, begins to
chaffer for an apple.  Our friend presumes not on any past
acquaintance; he makes the briefest possible response to all general
remarks, and shrinks quietly into himself again.  After every
diminution of his stock he takes care to produce from the basket
another cake, another stick of candy, another apple, or another
measure of walnuts, to supply the place of the article sold.  Two or
three attempts--or, perchance, half a dozen--are requisite before
the board can be rearranged to his satisfaction. If he have received
a silver coin, he waits till the purchaser is out of sight, then
examines it closely, and tries to bend it with his finger and thumb:
finally he puts it into his waistcoat-pocket with seemingly a gentle
sigh.  This sigh, so faint as to be hardly perceptible, and not
expressive of any definite emotion, is the accompaniment and
conclusion of all his actions. It is the symbol of the chillness and
torpid melancholy of his old age, which only make themselves felt
sensibly when his repose is slightly disturbed.

Our man of gingerbread and apples is not a specimen of the "needy
man who has seen better days."  Doubtless there have been better and
brighter days in the faroff time of his youth; but none with so much
sunshine of prosperity in them that the chill, the depression, the
narrowness of means, in his declining years, can have come upon him
by surprise.  His life has all been of a piece.  His subdued and
nerveless boyhood prefigured his abortive prime, which likewise
contained within itself the prophecy and image of his lean and
torpid age.  He was perhaps a mechanic, who never came to be a
master in his craft, or a petty tradesman, rubbing onward between
passably to do and poverty.  Possibly he may look back to some
brilliant epoch of his career when there were a hundred or two of
dollars to his credit in the Savings Bank.  Such must have been the
extent of his better fortune,--his little measure of this world's
triumphs,--all that he has known of success.  A meek, downcast,
humble, uncomplaining creature, he probably has never felt himself
entitled to more than so much of the gifts of Providence.  Is it not
still something that he has never held out his hand for charity, nor
has yet been driven to that sad home and household of Earth's
forlorn and broken-spirited children, the almshouse?  He cherishes
no quarrel, therefore, with his destiny, nor with the Author of it.
All is as it should be.

If, indeed, he have been bereaved of a son, a bold, energetic,
vigorous young man, on whom the father's feeble nature leaned as on
a staff of strength, in that case he may have felt a bitterness that
could not otherwise have been generated in his heart.  But methinks
the joy of possessing such a son and the agony of losing him would
have developed the old man's moral and intellectual nature to a much
greater degree than we now find it. Intense grief appears to be as
much out of keeping with his life as fervid happiness.

To confess the truth, it is not the easiest matter in the world to
define and individualize a character like this which we are now
handling.  The portrait must be so generally negative that the most
delicate pencil is likely to spoil it by introducing some too
positive tint.  Every touch must be kept down, or else you destroy
the subdued tone which is absolutely essential to the whole effect.
Perhaps more may be done by contrast than by direct description.
For this purpose I make use of another cake and candy merchant, who,
likewise infests the railroad depot. This latter worthy is a very
smart and well-dressed boy of ten years old or thereabouts, who
skips briskly hither and thither, addressing the passengers in a
pert voice, yet with somewhat of good breeding in his tone and
pronunciation.  Now he has caught my eye, and skips across the room
with a pretty pertness, which I should like to correct with a box on
the ear.  "Any cake, sir? any candy?"

No, none for me, my lad.  I did but glance at your brisk figure in
order to catch a reflected light and throw it upon your old rival
yonder.

Again, in order to invest my conception of the old man with a more
decided sense of reality, I look at him in the very moment of
intensest bustle, on the arrival of the cars.  The shriek of the
engine as it rushes into the car-house is the utterance of the steam
fiend, whom man has subdued by magic spells and compels to serve as
a beast of burden.  He has skimmed rivers in his headlong rush,
dashed through forests, plunged into the hearts of mountains, and
glanced from the city to the desert-place, and again to a far-off
city, with a meteoric progress, seen and out of sight, while his
reverberating roar still fills the ear.  The travellers swarm forth
from the cars.  All are full of the momentum which they have caught
from their mode of conveyance. It seems as if the whole world, both
morally and physically, were detached from its old standfasts and
set in rapid motion.  And, in the midst of this terrible activity,
there sits the old man of gingerbread, so subdued, so hopeless, so
without a stake in life, and yet not positively miserable,--there
he sits, the forlorn old creature, one chill and sombre day after
another, gathering scanty coppers for his cakes, apples, and.
candy,--there sits the old apple-dealer, in his threadbare suit of
snuff-color and gray and his grizzly stubble heard.  See! he folds
his lean arms around his lean figure with that quiet sigh and that
scarcely perceptible shiver which are the tokens of his inward
state.  I have him now.  He and the steam fiend are each other's
antipodes; the latter is the type of all that go ahead, and the old
man the representative of that melancholy class who by some sad
witchcraft are doomed never to share in the world's exulting
progress.  Thus the contrast between mankind and this desolate
brother becomes picturesque, and even sublime.

And now farewell, old friend!  Little do you suspect that a student
of human life has made your character the theme of more than one
solitary and thoughtful hour.  Many would say that you have hardly
individuality enough to be the object of your own self-love.  How,
then, can a stranger's eye detect anything in your mind and heart to
study and to wonder at?  Yet, could I read but a tithe of what is
written there, it would be a volume of deeper and more comprehensive
import than all that the wisest mortals have given to the world; for
the soundless depths of the human soul and of eternity have an
opening through your breast. God be praised, were it only for your
sake, that the present shapes of human existence are not cast in
iron nor hewn in everlasting adamant, but moulded of the vapors that
vanish away while the essence flits upward to the infinite.  There
is a spiritual essence in this gray and lean old shape that shall
flit upward too.  Yes; doubtless there is a region where the life-
long shiver will pass away from his being, and that quiet sigh,
which it has taken him so many years to breathe, will be brought to
a close for good and all.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                      A VIRTUOSO'S COLLECTION



The other day, having a leisure hour at my disposal, I stepped into
a new museum, to which my notice was casually drawn by a small and
unobtrusive sign: "TO BE SEEN HERE, A VIRTUOSO'S COLLECTION."  Such
was the simple yet not altogether unpromising announcement that
turned my steps aside for a little while from the sunny sidewalk of
our principal thoroughfare.  Mounting a sombre staircase, I pushed
open a door at its summit, and found myself in the presence of a
person, who mentioned the moderate sum that would entitle me to
admittance.

"Three shillings, Massachusetts tenor," said he.  "No, I mean half a
dollar, as you reckon in these days."

While searching my pocket for the coin I glanced at the doorkeeper,
the marked character and individuality of whose aspect encouraged me
to expect something not quite in the ordinary way.  He wore an
old-fashioned great-coat, much faded, within which his meagre person
was so completely enveloped that the rest of his attire was
undistinguishable.  But his visage was remarkably wind-flushed,
sunburnt, and weather-worn, and had a most, unquiet, nervous, and
apprehensive expression.  It seemed as if this man had some
all-important object in view, some point of deepest interest to be
decided, some momentous question to ask, might he but hope for a
reply.  As it was evident, however, that I could have nothing to do
with his private affairs, I passed through an open doorway, which
admitted me into the extensive hall of the museum.

Directly in front of the portal was the bronze statue of a youth
with winged feet.  He was represented in the act of flitting away
from earth, yet wore such a look of earnest invitation that it
impressed me like a summons to enter the hall.

"It is the original statue of Opportunity, by the ancient sculptor
Lysippus," said a gentleman who now approached me.  "I place it at
the entrance of my museum, because it is not at all times that one
can gain admittance to such a collection."

The speaker was a middle-aged person, of whom it was not easy to
determine whether he had spent his life as a scholar or as a man of
action; in truth, all outward and obvious peculiarities had been
worn away by an extensive and promiscuous intercourse with the
world.  There was no mark about him of profession, individual
habits, or scarcely of country; although his dark complexion and
high features made me conjecture that he was a native of some
southern clime of Europe. At all events, he was evidently the
virtuoso in person.

"With your permission," said he, "as we have no descriptive
catalogue, I will accompany you through the museum and point out
whatever may be most worthy of attention.  In the first place, here
is a choice collection of stuffed animals."

Nearest the door stood the outward semblance of a wolf, exquisitely
prepared, it is true, and showing a very wolfish fierceness in the
large glass eyes which were inserted into its wild and crafty head.
Still it was merely the skin of a wolf, with nothing to distinguish
it from other individuals of that unlovely breed.

"How does this animal deserve a place in your collection?" inquired
I.

"It is the wolf that devoured Little Red Riding Hood," answered the
virtuoso; "and by his side--with a milder and more matronly look, as
you perceive--stands the she-wolf that suckled Romulus and Remus."

"Ah, indeed!" exclaimed I.  "And what lovely lamb is this with the
snow-white fleece, which seems to be of as delicate a texture as
innocence itself?"

"Methinks you have but carelessly read Spenser," replied my guide,
"or you would at once recognize the 'milk-white lamb' which Una led.
But I set no great value upon the lamb.  The next specimen is better
worth our notice."

"What!" cried I, "this strange animal, with the black head of an ox
upon the body of a white horse?  Were it possible to suppose it, I
should say that this was Alexander's steed Bucephalus."

"The same," said the virtuoso.  "And can you likewise give a name to
the famous charger that stands beside him?"

Next to the renowned Bucephalus stood the mere skeleton of a horse,
with the white bones peeping through his ill-conditioned hide; but,
if my heart had not warmed towards that pitiful anatomy, I might as
well have quitted the museum at once.  Its rarities had not been
collected with pain and toil from the four quarters of the earth,
and from the depths of the sea, and from the palaces and sepulchres
of ages, for those who could mistake this illustrious steed.

"It, is Rosinante!" exclaimed I, with enthusiasm.

And so it proved.  My admiration for the noble and gallant horse
caused me to glance with less interest at the other animals,
although many of them might have deserved the notice of Cuvier
himself.  There was the donkey which Peter Bell cudgelled so
soundly, and a brother of the same species who had suffered a
similar infliction from the ancient prophet Balaam.  Some doubts
were entertained, however, as to the authenticity of the latter
beast.  My guide pointed out the venerable Argus, that faithful dog
of Ulysses, and also another dog (for so the skin bespoke it),
which, though imperfectly preserved, seemed once to have had three
heads.  It was Cerberus.  I was considerably amused at detecting in
an obscure corner the fox that became so famous by the loss of his
tail.  There were several stuffed cats, which, as a dear lover of
that comfortable beast, attracted my affectionate regards.  One was
Dr. Johnson's cat Hodge; and in the same row stood the favorite cats
of Mahomet, Gray, and Walter Scott, together with Puss in Boots, and
a cat of very noble aspect--who had once been a deity of ancient
Egypt.  Byron's tame bear came next.  I must not forget to mention
the Eryruanthean boar, the skin of St. George's dragon, and that of
the serpent Python; and another skin with beautifully variegated
hues, supposed to have been the garment of the "spirited sly snake,"
which tempted Eve. Against the walls were suspended the horns of the
stag that Shakespeare shot; and on the floor lay the ponderous shell
of the tortoise which fell upon the head of Aeschylus.  In one row,
as natural as life, stood the sacred bull Apis, the "cow with the
crumpled horn," and a very wild-looking young heifer, which I guessed
to be the cow that jumped over the moon.  She was probably killed by
the rapidity of her descent.  As I turned away, my eyes fell upon an
indescribable monster, which proved to be a griffin.

"I look in vain," observed I, "for the skin of an animal which might
well deserve the closest study of a naturalist,--the winged horse,
Pegasus."

"He is not yet dead," replied the virtuoso; "but he is so hard
ridden by many young gentlemen of the day that I hope soon to add
his skin and skeleton to my collection."

We now passed to the next alcove of the hall, in which was a
multitude of stuffed birds.  They were very prettily arranged, some
upon the branches of trees, others brooding upon nests, and others
suspended by wires so artificially that they seemed in the very act
of flight.  Among them was a white dove, with a withered branch of
olive-leaves in her mouth.

"Can this be the very dove," inquired I, "that brought the message
of peace and hope to the tempest-beaten passengers of the ark?"

"Even so," said my companion.

"And this raven, I suppose," continued I, "is the same that fed
Elijah in the wilderness."

"The raven?  No," said the virtuoso; "it is a bird of modern date.
He belonged to one Barnaby Rudge, and many people fancied that the
Devil himself was disguised under his sable plumage. But poor Grip
has drawn his last cork, and has been forced to 'say die' at last.
This other raven, hardly less curious, is that in which the soul of
King George I.  revisited his lady-love, the Duchess of Kendall."

My guide next pointed out Minerva's owl and the vulture that preyed
upon the liver of Prometheus.  There was likewise the sacred ibis of
Egypt, and one of the Stymphalides which Hercules shot in his sixth
labor.  Shelley's skylark, Bryant's water-fowl, and a pigeon from
the belfry of the Old South Church, preserved by N. P. Willis, were
placed on the same perch.  I could not but shudder on beholding
Coleridge's albatross, transfixed with the Ancient Mariner's
crossbow shaft.  Beside this bird of awful poesy stood a gray goose
of very ordinary aspect.

"Stuffed goose is no such rarity," observed I.  "Why do you preserve
such a specimen in your museum?"

"It is one of the flock whose cackling saved the Roman Capitol,"
answered the virtuoso.  "Many geese have cackled and hissed both
before and since; but none, like those, have clamored themselves
into immortality."

There seemed to be little else that demanded notice in this
department of the museum, unless we except Robinson Crusoe's parrot,
a live phoenix, a footless bird of paradise, and a splendid peacock,
supposed to be the same that once contained the soul of Pythagoras.
I therefore passed to the next alcove, the shelves of which were
covered with a miscellaneous collection of curiosities such as are
usually found in similar establishments. One of the first things
that took my eye was a strange-looking cap, woven of some substance
that appeared to be neither woollen, cotton, nor linen.

"Is this a magician's cap?" I asked.

"No," replied the virtuoso; it is merely Dr. Franklin's cap of
asbestos.  But here is one which, perhaps, may suit you better. It
is the wishing-cap of Fortunatus.  Will you try it on?"

"By no means," answered I, putting it aside with my hand.  "The day
of wild wishes is past with me.  I desire nothing that may not come
in the ordinary course of Providence."

"Then probably," returned the virtuoso, "you will not be tempted to
rub this lamp?"

While speaking, he took from the shelf an antique brass lamp,
curiously wrought with embossed figures, but so covered with
verdigris that the sculpture was almost eaten away.

"It is a thousand years," said he, "since the genius of this lamp
constructed Aladdin's palace in a single night.  But he still
retains his power; and the man who rubs Aladdin's lamp has but to
desire either a palace or a cottage."

"I might desire a cottage," replied I; "but I would have it founded
on sure and stable truth, not on dreams and fantasies.  I have
learned to look for the real and the true."

My guide next showed me Prospero's magic wand, broken into three
fragments by the hand of its mighty master.  On the same shelf lay
the gold ring of ancient Gyges, which enabled the wearer to walk
invisible.  On the other side of the alcove was a tall looking-glass
in a frame of ebony, but veiled with a curtain of purple silk,
through the rents of which the gleam of the mirror was perceptible.

"This is Cornelius Agrippa's magic glass," observed the virtuoso.
"Draw aside the curtain, and picture any human form within your
mind, and it will be reflected in the mirror."

"It is enough if I can picture it within my mind," answered I. "Why
should I wish it to be repeated in the mirror?  But, indeed, these
works of magic have grown wearisome to me.  There are so many
greater wonders in the world, to those who keep their eyes open and
their sight undimmed by custom, that all the delusions of the old
sorcerers seem flat and stale.  Unless you can show me something
really curious, I care not to look further into your museum."

"Ah, well, then," said the virtuoso, composedly, "perhaps you may
deem some of my antiquarian rarities deserving of a glance."

He pointed out the iron mask, now corroded with rust; and my heart
grew sick at the sight of this dreadful relic, which had shut out a
human being from sympathy with his race.  There was nothing half so
terrible in the axe that beheaded King Charles, nor in the dagger
that slew Henry of Navarre, nor in the arrow that pierced the heart
of William Rufus,--all of which were shown to me.  Many of the
articles derived their interest, such as it was, from having been
formerly in the possession of royalty.  For instance, here was
Charlemagne's sheepskin cloak, the flowing wig of Louis Quatorze,
the spinning-wheel of Sardanapalus, and King Stephen's famous
breeches which cost him but a crown.  The heart of the Bloody Mary,
with the word "Calais" worn into its diseased substance, was
preserved in a bottle of spirits; and near it lay the golden case in
which the queen of Gustavus Adolphus treasured up that hero's heart.
Among these relics and heirlooms of kings I must not forget the
long, hairy ears of Midas, and a piece of bread which had been
changed to gold by the touch of that unlucky monarch.  And as
Grecian Helen was a queen, it may here be mentioned that I was
permitted to take into my hand a lock of her golden hair and the
bowl which a sculptor modelled from the curve of her perfect breast.
Here, likewise, was the robe that smothered Agamemnon, Nero's
fiddle, the Czar Peter's brandy-bottle, the crown of Semiramis, and
Canute's sceptre which he extended over the sea.  That my own land
may not deem itself neglected, let me add that I was favored with a
sight of the skull of King Philip, the famous Indian chief, whose
head the Puritans smote off and exhibited upon a pole.

"Show me something else," said I to the virtuoso.  "Kings are in
such an artificial position that people in the ordinary walks of
life cannot feel an interest in their relics.  If you could show me
the straw hat of sweet little Nell, I would far rather see it than a
king's golden crown."

"There it is," said my guide, pointing carelessly with his staff to
the straw hat in question.  "But, indeed, you are hard to please.
Here are the seven-league boots.  Will you try them on?"

"Our modern railroads have superseded their use," answered I; "and
as to these cowhide boots, I could show you quite as curious a pair
at the Transcendental community in Roxbury."

We next examined a collection of swords and other weapons, belonging
to different epochs, but thrown together without much attempt at
arrangement.  Here Was Arthur's sword Excalibar, and that of the Cid
Campeader, and the sword of Brutus rusted with Caesar's blood and
his own, and the sword of Joan of Arc, and that of Horatius, and
that with which Virginius slew his daughter, and the one which
Dionysius suspended over the head of Damocles. Here also was Arria's
sword, which she plunged into her own breast, in order to taste of
death before her husband.  The crooked blade of Saladin's cimeter
next attracted my notice.  I know not by what chance, but so it
happened, that the sword of one of our own militia generals was
suspended between Don Quixote's lance and the brown blade of
Hudibras.  My heart throbbed high at the sight of the helmet of
Miltiades and the spear that was broken in the breast of
Epaminondas.  I recognized the shield of Achilles by its resemblance
to the admirable cast in the possession of Professor Felton.
Nothing in this apartment interested me more than Major Pitcairn's
pistol, the discharge of which, at Lexington, began the war of the
Revolution, and was reverberated in thunder around the land for
seven long years. The bow of Ulysses, though unstrung for ages, was
placed against the wall, together with a sheaf of Robin Hood's
arrows and the rifle of Daniel Boone.

"Enough of weapons," said I, at length; "although I would gladly
have seen the sacred shield which fell from heaven in the time of
Numa.  And surely you should obtain the sword which Washington
unsheathed at Cambridge.  But the collection does you much credit.
Let us pass on."

In the next alcove we saw the golden thigh of Pythagoras, which had
so divine a meaning; and, by one of the queer analogies to which the
virtuoso seemed to be addicted, this ancient emblem lay on the same
shelf with Peter Stuyvesant's wooden leg, that was fabled to be of
silver.  Here was a remnant of the Golden Fleece, and a sprig of
yellow leaves that resembled the foliage of a frost-bitten elm, but
was duly authenticated as a portion of the golden branch by which
AEneas gained admittance to the realm of Pluto.  Atalanta's golden
apple and one of the apples of discord were wrapped in the napkin of
gold which Rampsinitus brought from Hades; and the whole were
deposited in the golden vase of Bias, with its inscription: "TO THE
WISEST."

"And how did you obtain this vase?" said I to the virtuoso.

"It was given me long ago," replied he, with a scornful expression
in his eye, "because I had learned to despise all things."

It had not escaped me that, though the virtuoso was evidently a man
of high cultivation, yet he seemed to lack sympathy with the
spiritual, the sublime, and the tender.  Apart from the whim that
had led him to devote so much time, pains, and expense to the
collection of this museum, he impressed me as one of the hardest and
coldest men of the world whom I had ever met.

"To despise all things!" repeated I.  "This, at best, is the wisdom
of the understanding.  It is the creed of a man whose soul, whose
better and diviner part, has never been awakened, or has died out of
him."

"I did not think that you were still so young," said the virtuoso.
"Should you live to my years, you will acknowledge that the vase of
Bias was not ill bestowed."

Without further discussion of the point, he directed my attention to
other curiosities.  I examined Cinderella's little glass slipper,
and compared it with one of Diana's sandals, and with Fanny
Elssler's shoe, which bore testimony to the muscular character of
her illustrious foot.  On the same shelf were Thomas the Rhymer's
green velvet shoes, and the brazen shoe of Empedocles which was
thrown out of Mount AEtna.  Anacreon's drinking-cup was placed in
apt juxtaposition with one of Tom Moore's wineglasses and Circe's
magic bowl.  These were symbols of luxury and riot; but near them
stood the cup whence Socrates drank his hemlock, and that which Sir
Philip Sidney put from his death-parched lips to bestow the draught
upon a dying soldier. Next appeared a cluster of tobacco-pipes,
consisting of Sir Walter Raleigh's, the earliest on record, Dr.
Parr's, Charles Lamb's, and the first calumet of peace which was
ever smoked between a European and an Indian.  Among other musical
instruments, I noticed the lyre of Orpheus and those of Homer and
Sappho, Dr. Franklin's famous whistle, the trumpet of Anthony Van
Corlear, and the flute which Goldsmith played upon in his rambles
through the French provinces.  The staff of Peter the Hermit stood
in a corner with that of good old Bishop Jewel, and one of ivory,
which had belonged to Papirius, the Roman senator.  The ponderous
club of Hercules was close at hand.  The virtuoso showed me the
chisel of Phidias, Claude's palette, and the brush of Apelles,
observing that he intended to bestow the former either on Greenough,
Crawford, or Powers, and the two latter upon Washington Allston.
There was a small vase of oracular gas from Delphos, which I trust
will be submitted to the scientific analysis of Professor Silliman.
I was deeply moved on beholding a vial of the tears into which Niobe
was dissolved; nor less so on learning that a shapeless fragment of
salt was a relic of that victim of despondency and sinful regrets,--
Lot's wife.  My companion appeared to set great value upon some
Egyptian darkness in a blacking-jug.  Several of the shelves were
covered by a collection of coins, among which, however, I remember
none but the Splendid Shilling, celebrated by Phillips, and a
dollar's worth of the iron money of Lycurgus, weighing about fifty
pounds.

Walking carelessly onward, I had nearly fallen over a huge bundle,
like a peddler's pack, done up in sackcloth, and very securely
strapped and corded.

"It is Christian's burden of sin," said the virtuoso.

"O, pray let us open it!" cried I.  "For many a year I have longed
to know its contents."

"Look into your own consciousness and memory," replied the virtuoso.
"You will there find a list of whatever it contains."

As this was all undeniable truth, I threw a melancholy look at the
burden and passed on.  A collection of old garments, banging on
pegs, was worthy of some attention, especially the shirt of Nessus,
Caesar's mantle, Joseph's coat of many colors, the Vicar of Bray's
cassock, Goldsmith's peach-bloom suit, a pair of President
Jefferson's scarlet breeches, John Randolph's red baize
hunting-shirt, the drab small-clothes of the Stout Gentleman, and the
rags of the "man all tattered and torn."  George Fox's hat impressed
me with deep reverence as a relic of perhaps the truest apostle that
has appeared on earth for these eighteen hundred years.  My eye was
next attracted by an old pair of shears, which I should have taken
for a memorial of some famous tailor, only that the virtuoso pledged
his veracity that they were the identical scissors of Atropos.  He
also showed me a broken hourglass which had been thrown aside by
Father Time, together with the old gentleman's gray forelock,
tastefully braided into a brooch.  In the hour-glass was the handful
of sand, the grains of which had numbered the years of the Cumeean
sibyl.  I think it was in this alcove that I saw the inkstand which
Luther threw at the Devil, and the ring which Essex, while under
sentence of death, sent to Queen Elizabeth.  And here was the
blood-incrusted pen of steel with which Faust signed away his
salvation.

The virtuoso now opened the door of a closet and showed me a lamp
burning, while three others stood unlighted by its side.  One of the
three was the lamp of Diogenes, another that of Guy Fawkes, and the
third that which Hero set forth to the midnight breeze in the high
tower of Ahydos.

"See!" said the virtuoso, blowing with all his force at the lighted
lamp.

The flame quivered and shrank away from his breath, but clung to the
wick, and resumed its brilliancy as soon as the blast was exhausted.

"It is an undying lamp from the tomb of Charlemagne," observed my
guide.  "That flame was kindled a thousand years ago."

"How ridiculous to kindle an unnatural light in tombs!" exclaimed I.
"We should seek to behold the dead in the light of heaven. But what
is the meaning of this chafing-dish of glowing coals?"

"That," answered the virtuoso, "is the original fire which
Prometheus stole from heaven.  Look steadfastly into it, and you
will discern another curiosity."

I gazed into that fire,--which, symbolically, was the origin of all
that was bright and glorious in the soul of man,--and in the midst
of it, behold a little reptile, sporting with evident enjoyment of
the fervid heat!  It was a salamander.

"What a sacrilege!" cried I, with inexpressible disgust.  "Can you
find no better use for this ethereal fire than to cherish a
loathsome reptile in it?  Yet there are men who abuse the sacred fire
of their own souls to as foul and guilty a purpose."

The virtuoso made no answer except by a dry laugh and an assurance
that the salamander was the very same which Benvenuto Cellini had
seen in his father's household fire.  He then proceeded to show me
other rarities; for this closet appeared to be the receptacle of
what he considered most valuable in his collection.

"There," said he, "is the Great Carbuncle of the White Mountains."

I gazed with no little interest at this mighty gem, which it had
been one of the wild projects of my youth to discover.  Possibly it
might have looked brighter to me in those days than now; at all
events, it had not such brilliancy as to detain me long from the
other articles of the museum.  The virtuoso pointed out to me a
crystalline stone which hung by a gold chain against the wall.

"That is the philosopher's stone," said he.

"And have you the elixir vita which generally accompanies it?"
inquired I.

"Even so; this urn is filled with it," he replied.  "A draught would
refresh you.  Here is Hebe's cup; will you quaff a health from it?"

My heart thrilled within me at the idea of such a reviving draught;
for methought I had great need of it after travelling so far on the
dusty road of life.  But I know not whether it were a peculiar
glance in the virtuoso's eye, or the circumstance that this most
precious liquid was contained in an antique sepulchral urn, that
made me pause.  Then came many a thought with which, in the calmer
and better hours of life, I had strengthened myself to feel that
Death is the very friend whom, in his due season, even the happiest
mortal should be willing to embrace.

"No; I desire not an earthly immortality," said I.

Were man to live longer on the earth, the spiritual would die out of
him.  The spark of ethereal fire would be choked by the material,
the sensual.  There is a celestial something within us that
requires, after a certain time, the atmosphere of heaven to preserve
it from decay and ruin.  I will have none of this liquid.  You do
well to keep it in a sepulchral urn; for it would produce death
while bestowing the shadow of life."

"All this is unintelligible to me," responded my guide, with
indifference.  "Life--earthly life--is the only good.  But you
refuse the draught?  Well, it is not likely to be offered twice
within one man's experience.  Probably you have griefs which you
seek to forget in death.  I can enable you to forget them in life.
Will you take a draught of Lethe?"

As he spoke, the virtuoso took from the shelf a crystal vase
containing a sable liquor, which caught no reflected image from the
objects around.

"Not for the world!" exclaimed I, shrinking back.  "I can spare none
of my recollections, not even those of error or sorrow. They are all
alike the food of my spirit.  As well never to have lived as to lose
them now."

Without further parley we passed to the next alcove, the shelves of
which were burdened with ancient volumes and with those rolls of
papyrus in which was treasured up the eldest wisdom of the earth.
Perhaps the most valuable work in the collection, to a bibliomaniac,
was the Book of Hermes.  For my part, however, I would have given a
higher price for those six of the Sibyl's books which Tarquin
refused to purchase, and which the virtuoso informed me he had
himself found in the cave of Trophonius. Doubtless these old volumes
contain prophecies of the fate of Rome, both as respects the decline
and fall of her temporal empire and the rise of her spiritual one.
Not without value, likewise, was the work of Anaxagoras on Nature,
hitherto supposed to be irrecoverably lost, and the missing
treatises of Longinus, by which modern criticism might profit, and
those books of Livy for which the classic student has so long
sorrowed without hope. Among these precious tomes I observed the
original manuscript of the Koran, and also that of the Mormon Bible
in Joe Smith's authentic autograph.  Alexander's copy of the Iliad
was also there, enclosed in the jewelled casket of Darius, still
fragrant of the perfumes which the Persian kept in it.

Opening an iron-clasped volume, bound in black leather, I discovered
it to be Cornelius Agrippa's book of magic; and it was rendered
still more interesting by the fact that many flowers, ancient and
modern, were pressed between its leaves.  Here was a rose from Eve's
bridal bower, and all those red and white roses which were plucked
in the garden of the Temple by the partisans of York and Lancaster.
Here was Halleck's Wild Rose of Alloway. Cowper had contributed a
Sensitive Plant, and Wordsworth an Eglantine, and Burns a Mountain
Daisy, and Kirke White a Star of Bethlehem, and Longfellow a Sprig
of Fennel, with its yellow flowers.  James Russell Lowell had given
a Pressed Flower, but fragrant still, which had been shadowed in the
Rhine.  There was also a sprig from Southey's Holly Tree.  One of
the most beautiful specimens was a Fringed Gentian, which had been
plucked and preserved for immortality by Bryant.  From Jones Very, a
poet whose voice is scarcely heard among us by reason of its depth,
there was a Wind Flower and a Columbine.

As I closed Cornelius Agrippa's magic volume, an old, mildewed
letter fell upon the floor.  It proved to be an autograph from the
Flying Dutchman to his wife.  I could linger no longer among books;
for the afternoon was waning, and there was yet much to see.  The
bare mention of a few more curiosities must suffice. The immense
skull of Polyphemus was recognizable by the cavernous hollow in the
centre of the forehead where once had blazed the giant's single eye.
The tub of Diogenes, Medea's caldron, and Psyche's vase of beauty
were placed one within another. Pandora's box, without the lid,
stood next, containing nothing but the girdle of Venus, which had
been carelessly flung into it.  A bundle of birch-rods which had
been used by Shenstone's schoolmistress were tied up with the
Countess of Salisbury's garter.  I know not which to value most, a
roc's egg as big as an ordinary hogshead, or the shell of the egg
which Columbus set upon its end.  Perhaps the most delicate article
in the whole museum was Queen Mab's chariot, which, to guard it from
the touch of meddlesome fingers, was placed under a glass tumbler.

Several of the shelves were occupied by specimens of entomology.
Feeling but little interest in the science, I noticed only
Anacreon's grasshopper, and a bumblebee which had been presented to
the virtuoso by Ralph Waldo Emerson.

In the part of the hall which we had now reached I observed a
curtain, that descended from the ceiling to the floor in voluminous
folds, of a depth, richness, and magnificence which I had never seen
equalled.  It was not to be doubted that this splendid though dark
and solemn veil concealed a portion of the museum even richer in
wonders than that through which I had already passed; but, on my
attempting to grasp the edge of the curtain and draw it aside, it
proved to be an illusive picture.

"You need not blush," remarked the virtuoso; "for that same curtain
deceived Zeuxis.  It is the celebrated painting of Parrhasius."

In a range with the curtain there were a number of other choice
pictures by artists of ancient days.  Here was the famous cluster of
grapes by Zeuxis, so admirably depicted that it seemed as if the
ripe juice were bursting forth.  As to the picture of the old woman
by the same illustrious painter, and which was so ludicrous that he
himself died with laughing at it, I cannot say that it particularly
moved my risibility.  Ancient humor seems to have little power over
modern muscles.  Here, also, was the horse painted by Apelles which
living horses neighed at; his first portrait of Alexander the Great,
and his last unfinished picture of Venus asleep.  Each of these
works of art, together with others by Parrhasius, Timanthes,
Polygnotus, Apollodorus, Pausias, and Pamplulus, required more time
and study than I could bestow for the adequate perception of their
merits.  I shall therefore leave them undescribed and uncriticised,
nor attempt to settle the question of superiority between ancient
and modern art.

For the same reason I shall pass lightly over the specimens of
antique sculpture which this indefatigable and fortunate virtuoso
had dug out of the dust of fallen empires.  Here was AEtion's cedar
statue of AEsculapius, much decayed, and Alcon's iron statue of
Hercules, lamentably rusted.  Here was the statue of Victory, six
feet high, which the Jupiter Olympus of Phidias had held in his
hand.  Here was a forefinger of the Colossus of Rhodes, seven feet
in length.  Here was the Venus Urania of Phidias, and other images
of male and female beauty or grandeur, wrought by sculptors who
appeared never to have debased their souls by the sight of any
meaner forms than those of gods or godlike mortals.  But the deep
simplicity of these great works was not to be comprehended by a mind
excited and disturbed, as mine was, by the various objects that had
recently been presented to it.  I therefore turned away with merely
a passing glance, resolving on some future occasion to brood over
each individual statue and picture until my inmost spirit should
feel their excellence.  In this department, again, I noticed the
tendency to whimsical combinations and ludicrous analogies which
seemed to influence many of the arrangements of the museum.  The
wooden statue so well known as the Palladium of Troy was placed in
close apposition with the wooden head of General Jackson, which was
stolen a few years since from the bows of the frigate Constitution.

We had now completed the circuit of the spacious hall, and found
ourselves again near the door.  Feeling somewhat wearied with the
survey of so many novelties and antiquities, I sat down upon
Cowper's sofa, while the virtuoso threw himself carelessly into
Rabelais's easychair.  Casting my eyes upon the opposite wall, I was
surprised to perceive the shadow of a man flickering unsteadily
across the wainscot, and looking as if it were stirred by some
breath of air that found its way through the door or windows.  No
substantial figure was visible from which this shadow might be
thrown; nor, had there been such, was there any sunshine that would
have caused it to darken upon the wall.

"It is Peter Schlemihl's shadow," observed the virtuoso, "and one of
the most valuable articles in my collection."

"Methinks a shadow would have made a fitting doorkeeper to such a
museum," said I; "although, indeed, yonder figure has something
strange and fantastic about him, which suits well enough with many
of the impressions which I have received here.  Pray, who is he?"

While speaking, I gazed more scrutinizingly than before at the
antiquated presence of the person who had admitted me, and who still
sat on his bench with the same restless aspect, and dim, confused,
questioning anxiety that I had noticed on my first entrance.  At
this moment he looked eagerly towards us, and, half starting from
his seat, addressed me.

"I beseech you, kind sir," said he, in a cracked, melancholy tone,
"have pity on the most unfortunate man in the world.  For Heaven's
sake, answer me a single question!  Is this the town of Boston?"

"You have recognized him now," said the virtuoso.  "It is Peter
Rugg, the missing man.  I chanced to meet him the other day still in
search of Boston, and conducted him hither; and, as he could not
succeed in finding his friends, I have taken him into my service as
doorkeeper.  He is somewhat too apt to ramble, but otherwise a man
of trust and integrity."

"And might I venture to ask," continued I, "to whom am I indebted
for this afternoon's gratification?"

The virtuoso, before replying, laid his hand upon an antique dart,
or javelin, the rusty steel head of winch seemed to have been
blunted, as if it had encountered the resistance of a tempered
shield, or breastplate.

"My name has not been without its distinction in the world for a
longer period than that of any other man alive," answered he. "Yet
many doubt of my existence; perhaps you will do so to-morrow.  This
dart which I hold in my hand was once grim Death's own weapon.  It
served him well for the space of four thousand years; but it fell
blunted, as you see, when he directed it against my breast."

These words were spoken with the calm and cold courtesy of manner
that had characterized this singular personage throughout our
interview.  I fancied, it is true, that there was a bitterness
indefinably mingled with his tone, as of one cut off from natural
sympathies and blasted with a doom that had been inflicted on no
other human being, and by the results of which he had ceased to be
human.  Yet, withal, it seemed one of the most terrible consequences
of that doom that the victim no longer regarded it as a calamity,
but had finally accepted it as the greatest good that could have
befallen him.

"You are the Wandering Jew!"  exclaimed I.

The virtuoso bowed without emotion of any kind; for, by centuries of
custom, he had almost lost the sense of strangeness in his fate, and
was but imperfectly conscious of the astonishment and awe with which
it affected such as are capable of death.

"Your doom is indeed a fearful one!"  said I, with irrepressible
feeling and a frankness that afterwards startled me; "yet perhaps
the ethereal spirit is not entirely extinct under all this
corrupted or frozen mass of earthly life.  Perhaps the immortal
spark may yet be rekindled by a breath of heaven.  Perhaps you may
yet be permitted to die before it is too late to live eternally.
You have my prayers for such a consummation. Farewell."

"Your prayers will be in vain," replied he, with a smile of cold
triumph.  "My destiny is linked with the realities of earth.  You
are welcome to your visions and shadows of a future state; but give
me what I can see, and touch, and understand, and I ask no more."

"It is indeed too late," thought I.  "The soul is dead within him."

Struggling between pity and horror, I extended my hand, to which the
virtuoso gave his own, still with the habitual courtesy of a man of
the world, but without a single heart-throb of human brotherhood.
The touch seemed like ice, yet I know not whether morally or
physically.  As I departed, he bade me observe that the inner door
of the hall was constructed with the ivory leaves of the gateway
through which Aeneas and the Sibyl had been dismissed from Hades.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES


                         MAIN STREET

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne




Respectable-looking individual makes his bow and addresses the public.
In my daily walks along the principal street of my native town, it has
often occurred to me, that, if its growth from infancy upward, and the
vicissitude of characteristic scenes that have passed along this
thoroughfare during the more than two centuries of its existence, could
be presented to the eye in a shifting panorama, it would bean exceedingly
effective method of illustrating the march of time.  Acting on this idea,
I have contrived a certain pictorial exhibition, somewhat in the nature
of a puppet-show, by means of which I propose to call up the multiform
and many-colored Past before the spectator, and show him the ghosts of
his forefathers, amid a succession of historic incidents, with no greater
trouble than the turning of a crank.  Be pleased, therefore, my indulgent
patrons, to walk into the show-room, and take your seats before yonder
mysterious curtain.  The little wheels and springs of my machinery have
been well oiled; a multitude of puppets are dressed in character,
representing all varieties of fashion, from the Puritan cloak and jerkin
to the latest Oak Hall coat; the lamps are trimmed, and shall brighten
into noontide sunshine, or fade away in moonlight, or muffle their
brilliancy in a November cloud, as the nature of the scene may require;
and, in short, the exhibition is just ready to commence.  Unless
something should go wrong,--as, for instance, the misplacing of a
picture, whereby the people and events of one century might be thrust
into the middle of another; or the breaking of a wire, which would bring
the course of time to a sudden period,--barring, I say, the casualties to
which such a complicated piece of mechanism is liable,--I flatter myself,
ladies and gentlemen,--that the performance will elicit your generous
approbation.

Ting-a-ting-ting!  goes the bell; the curtain rises; and we behold-not,
indeed, the Main Street--but the track of leaf-strewn forest-land over
which its dusty pavement is hereafter to extend.

You perceive, at a glance, that this is the ancient and primitive wood,--
the ever-youthful and venerably old,--verdant with new twigs, yet hoary,
as it were, with the snowfall of innumerable years, that have accumulated
upon its intermingled branches.  The white man's axe has never smitten a
single tree; his footstep has never crumpled a single one of the withered
leaves, which all the autumns since the flood have been harvesting
beneath.  Yet, see! along through the vista of impending boughs, there is
already a faintly traced path, running nearly east and west, as if a
prophecy or foreboding of the future street had stolen into the heart of
the solemn old wood.  Onward goes this hardly perceptible track, now
ascending over a natural swell of land, now subsiding gently into a
hollow; traversed here by a little streamlet, which glitters like a snake
through the gleam of sunshine, and quickly hides itself among the
underbrush, in its quest for the neighboring cove; and impeded there by
the massy corpse of a giant of the forest, which had lived out its
incalculable term of life, and been overthrown by mere old age, and lies
buried in the new vegetation that is born of its decay.  What footsteps
can have worn this half-seen path?  Hark!  Do we not hear them now
rustling softly over the leaves?  We discern an Indian woman,--a majestic
and queenly woman, or else her spectral image does not represent her
truly,--for this is the great Squaw Sachem, whose rule, with that of her
sons, extends from Mystic to Agawam.  That red chief, who stalks by her
side, is Wappacowet, her second husband, the priest and magician, whose
incantations shall hereafter affright the pale-faced settlers with grisly
phantoms, dancing and shrieking in the woods, at midnight.  But greater
would be the affright of the Indian necromancer, if, mirrored in the pool
of water at his feet, he could catch a prophetic glimpse of the noonday
marvels which the white man is destined to achieve; if he could see, as
in a dream, the stone front of the stately hall, which will cast its
shadow over this very spot; if he could be aware that the future edifice
will contain a noble Museum, where, among countless curiosities of earth
and sea, a few Indian arrow-heads shall be treasured up as memorials of a
vanished race!

No such forebodings disturb the Squaw Sachem and Wappacowet.  They pass
on, beneath the tangled shade, holding high talk on matters of state and
religion, and imagine, doubtless, that their own system of affairs will
endure forever.  Meanwhile, how full of its own proper life is the scene
that lies around them!  The gray squirrel runs up the trees, and rustles
among the upper branches.  Was not that the leap of a deer?  And there is
the whirr of a partridge!  Methinks, too, I catch the cruel and stealthy
eye of a wolf, as he draws back into yonder impervious density of
underbrush.  So, there, amid the murmur of boughs, go the Indian queen
and the Indian priest; while the gloom of the broad wilderness impends
over them, and its sombre mystery invests them as with something
preternatural; and only momentary streaks of quivering sunlight, once in
a great while, find their way down, and glimmer among the feathers in
their dusky hair.  Can it be that the thronged street of a city will ever
pass into this twilight solitude,--over those soft heaps of the decaying
tree-trunks, and through the swampy places, green with water-moss, and
penetrate that hopeless entanglement of great trees, which have been
uprooted and tossed together by a whirlwind?  It has been a wilderness
from the creation.  Must it not be a wilderness forever?

Here an acidulous-looking gentleman in blue glasses, with bows of Berlin
steel, who has taken a seat at the extremity of the front row, begins, at
this early stage of the exhibition, to criticise.

"The whole affair is a manifest catchpenny!" observes he, scarcely under
his breath.  "The trees look more like weeds in a garden than a primitive
forest; the Squaw Sachem and Wappacowet are stiff in their pasteboard
joints; and the squirrels, the deer, and the wolf move with all the
grace of a child's wooden monkey, sliding up and down a stick."

"I am obliged to you, sir, for the candor of your remarks," replies the
showman, with a bow.  "Perhaps they are just.  Human art has its limits,
and we must now and then ask a little aid from the spectator's
imagination."

"You will get no such aid from mine," responds the critic.  "I make it a
point to see things precisely as they are.  But come! go ahead! the stage
is waiting!"

The showman proceeds.

Casting our eyes again over the scene, we perceive that strangers have
found their way into the solitary place.  In more than one spot, among
the trees, an upheaved axe is glittering in the sunshine.  Roger Conant,
the first settler in Naumkeag, has built his dwelling, months ago, on the
border of the forest-path; and at this moment he comes eastward through
the vista of woods, with his gun over his shoulder, bringing home the
choice portions of a deer.  His stalwart figure, clad in a leathern
jerkin and breeches of the same, strides sturdily onward, with such an
air of physical force and energy that we might almost expect the very
trees to stand aside, and give him room to pass.  And so, indeed, they
must; for, humble as is his name in history, Roger Conant still is of
that class of men who do not merely find, but make, their place in the
system of human affairs; a man of thoughtful strength, he has planted the
germ of a city.  There stands his habitation, showing in its rough
architecture some features of the Indian wigwam, and some of the log-
cabin, and somewhat, too, of the straw-thatched cottage in Old England,
where this good yeoman had his birth and breeding.  The dwelling is
surrounded by a cleared space of a few acres, where Indian corn grows
thrivingly among the stumps of the trees; while the dark forest hems it
in, and scenes to gaze silently and solemnly, as if wondering at the
breadth of sunshine which the white man spreads around him.  An Indian,
half hidden in the dusky shade, is gazing and wondering too.

Within the door of the cottage you discern the wife, with her ruddy
English cheek.  She is singing, doubtless, a psalm tune, at her household
work; or, perhaps she sighs at the remembrance of the cheerful gossip,
and all the merry social life, of her native village beyond the vast and
melancholy sea.  Yet the next moment she laughs, with sympathetic glee,
at the sports of her little tribe of children; and soon turns round, with
the homelook in her face, as her husband's foot is heard approaching the
rough-hewn threshold.  How sweet must it be for those who have an Eden in
their hearts, like Roger Conant and his wife, to find a new world to
project it into, as they have, instead of dwelling among old haunts of
men, where so many household fires have been kindled and burnt out, that
the very glow of happiness has something dreary in it!  Not that this
pair are alone in their wild Eden, for here comes Goodwife Massey, the
young spouse of Jeffrey Massey, from her home hard by, with an infant at
her breast.  Dame Conant has another of like age; and it shall hereafter
be one of the disputed points of history which of these two babies was
the first town-born child.

But see!  Roger Conant has other neighbors within view.  Peter Palfrey
likewise has built himself a house, and so has Balch, and Norman, and
Woodbury.  Their dwellings, indeed,--such is the ingenious contrivance of
this piece of pictorial mechanism,--seem to have arisen, at various
points of the scene, even while we have been looking at it.  The forest-
track, trodden more and more by the hobnailed shoes of these sturdy and
ponderous Englishmen, has now a distinctness which it never could have
acquired from the light tread of a hundred times as many Indian
moccasins.  It will be a street, anon!  As we observe it now, it goes
onward from one clearing to another, here plunging into a shadowy strip
of woods, there open to the sunshine, but everywhere showing a decided
line, along which human interests have begun to hold their career.  Over
yonder swampy spot, two trees have been felled, and laid side by side to
make a causeway.  In another place, the axe has cleared away a confused
intricacy of fallen trees and clustered boughs, which had been tossed
together by a hurricane.  So now the little children, just beginning to
run alone, may trip along the path, and not often stumble over an
impediment, unless they stray from it to gather wood-berries beneath the
trees.  And, besides the feet of grown people and children, there are the
cloven hoofs of a small herd of cows, who seek their subsistence from the
native grasses, and help to deepen the track of the future thoroughfare.
Goats also browse along it, and nibble at the twigs that thrust
themselves across the way.  Not seldom, in its more secluded portions,
where the black shadow of the forest strives to hide the trace of human-
footsteps, stalks a gaunt wolf, on the watch for a kid or a young calf;
or fixes his hungry gaze on the group of children gathering berries, and
can hardly forbear to rush upon them.  And the Indians, coming from their
distant wigwams to view the white man's settlement, marvel at the deep
track which he makes, and perhaps are saddened by a flitting presentiment
that this heavy tread will find its way over all the land; and that the
wild-woods, the wild wolf, and the wild Indian will alike be trampled
beneath it.  Even so shall it be.  The pavements of the Main Street must
be laid over the red man's grave.

Behold! here is a spectacle which should be ushered in by the peal of
trumpets, if Naumkeag had ever yet heard that cheery music, and by the
roar of cannon, echoing among the woods.  A procession,--for, by its
dignity, as marking an epoch in the history of the street, it deserves
that name,--a procession advances along the pathway.  The good ship
Abigail has arrived from England, bringing wares and merchandise, for the
comfort of the inhabitants, and traffic with the Indians; bringing
passengers too, and, more important than all, a governor for the new
settlement.  Roger Conant and Peter Palfrey, with their companions, have
been to the shore to welcome him; and now, with such honor and triumph as
their rude way of life permits, are escorting the sea-flushed voyagers to
their habitations.  At the point where Endicott enters upon the scene,
two venerable trees unite their branches high above his head; thus
forming a triumphal arch of living verdure, beneath which he pauses, with
his wife leaning on his arm, to catch the first impression of their new-
found home.  The old settlers gaze not less earnestly at him, than he at
the hoary woods and the rough surface of the clearings.  They like his
bearded face, under the shadow of the broad-brimmed and steeple-crowned
Puritan hat;--a visage resolute, grave, and thoughtful, yet apt to kindle
with that glow of a cheerful spirit by which men of strong character are
enabled to go joyfully on their proper tasks.  His form, too, as you see
it, in a doublet and hose of sad-colored cloth, is of a manly make, fit
for toil and hardship, and fit to wield the heavy sword that hangs from
his leathern belt.  His aspect is a better warrant for the ruler's office
than the parchment commission which he bears, however fortified it may be
with the broad seal of the London council.  Peter Palfrey nods to Roger
Conant.  "The worshipful Court of Assistants have done wisely," say they
between themselves.  "They have chosen for our governor a man out of a
thousand."  Then they toss up their hats,--they, and all the uncouth
figures of their company, most of whom are clad in skins, inasmuch as
their old kersey and linsey-woolsey garments have been torn and tattered
by many a long month's wear,--they all toss up their hats, and salute
their new governor and captain with a hearty English shout of welcome.
We seem to hear it with our own ears, so perfectly is the action
represented in this life-like, this almost magic picture!  But have you
observed the lady who leans upon the arm of Endicott?---a rose of beauty
from an English garden, now to be transplanted to a fresher soil.  It may
be that, long years--centuries indeed--after this fair flower shall have
decayed, other flowers of the same race will appear in the same soil, and
gladden other generations with hereditary beauty.  Does not the vision
haunt us yet?  Has not Nature kept the mould unbroken, deeming it a pity
that the idea should vanish from mortal sight forever, after only once
assuming earthly substance?  Do we not recognize, in that fair woman's
face, a model of features which still beam, at happy meets, on what was
then the woodland pathway, but has out since grown into a busy street?

"This is too ridiculous!--positively insufferable!" mutters the same
critic who had before expressed his disapprobation.  "Here is a
pasteboard figure, such as a child would cut out of a card, with a pair
of very dull scissors; and the fellow modestly requests us to see in it
the prototype of hereditary beauty!"

"But, sir, you have not the proper point of view," remarks the showman.
"You sit altogether too near to get the best effect of my pictorial
exhibition.  Pray, oblige me by removing to this other bench, and I
venture assure you the proper light and shadow will transform the
spectacle into quite another thing."

"Pshaw!" replies the critic; "I want no other light and shade.  I have
already told you that it is my business to see things just as they are."

"I would suggest to the author of this ingenious exhibition," observes a
gentlemanly person, who has shown signs of being much interested,--"I
would suggest that Anna Gower, the first wife of Governor Endicott, and
who came with him from England, left no posterity; and that,
consequently, we cannot be indebted to that honorable lady for any
specimens of feminine loveliness now extant among us."

Having nothing to allege against this genealogical objection, the showman
points again to the scene.

During this little interruption, you perceive that the Anglo-Saxon
energy--as the phrase now goes--has been at work in the spectacle before
us.  So many chimneys now send up their smoke, that it begins to have the
aspect of a village street; although everything is so inartificial and
inceptive, that it seems as if one returning wave of the wild nature
might overwhelm it all.  But the one edifice which gives the pledge of
permanence to this bold enterprise is seen at the central point of the
picture.  There stands the meeting-house, a small structure, lowroofed,
without a spire, and built of rough timber, newly hewn, with the sap
still in the logs, and here and there a strip of bark adhering to them.
A meaner temple was never consecrated to the worship of the Deity.  With
the alternative of kneeling beneath the awful vault of the firmament, it
is strange that men should creep into this pent-up nook, and expect God's
presence there.  Such, at least, one would imagine, might be the feeling
of these forest-settlers, accustomed, as they had been, to stand under
the dim arches of vast cathedrals, and to offer up their hereditary
worship in the old ivy-covered churches of rural England, around which
lay the bones of many generations of their forefathers.  How could they
dispense with the carved altar-work?--how, with the pictured windows,
where the light of common day was hallowed by being transmitted through
the glorified figures of saints?--how, with the lofty roof, imbued, as it
must have been, with the prayers that had gone upward for centuries?--
how, with the rich peal of the solemn organ, rolling along the aisles,
pervading the whole church, and sweeping the soul away on a flood of
audible religion?  They needed nothing of all this.  Their house of
worship, like their ceremonial, was naked, simple, and severe.  But the
zeal of a recovered faith burned like a lamp within their hearts,
enriching everything around them with its radiance; making of these new
walls, and this narrow compass, its own cathedral; and being, in itself,
that spiritual mystery and experience, of which sacred architecture,
pictured windows, and the organ's grand solemnity are remote and
imperfect symbols.  All was well, so long as their lamps were freshly
kindled at heavenly flame.  After a while, however, whether in their time
or their children's, these lamps began to burn more dimly, or with a less
genuine lustre; and then it might be seen how hard, cold, and confined
was their system,--how like an iron cage was that which they called
Liberty.

Too much of this.  Look again at the picture, and observe how the
aforesaid Anglo-Saxon energy is now trampling along the street, and
raising a positive cloud of dust beneath its sturdy footsteps.  For there
the carpenters are building a new house, the frame of which was hewn and
fitted in England, of English oak, and sent hither on shipboard; and here
a blacksmith makes huge slang and clatter on his anvil, shaping out tools
and weapons; and yonder a wheelwright, who boasts himself a London
workman, regularly bred to his handicraft, is fashioning a set of wagon-
wheels, the track of which Wall soon be visible.  The wild forest is
shrinking back; the street has lost the aromatic odor of the pine-trees,
and of the sweet-fern that grew beneath them.  The tender and modest
wild-flowers, those gentle children of savage nature that grew pale
beneath the ever-brooding shade, have shrank away and disappeared, like
stars that vanish in the breadth of light.  Gardens are fenced in, and
display pumpkin-beds and rows of cabbages and beans; and, though the
governor and the minister both view them with a disapproving eye, plants
of broadleaved tobacco, which the cultivators are enjoined to use
privily, or not at all.  No wolf, for a year past, has been heard to
bark, or known to range among the dwellings, except that single one,
whose grisly head, with a plash of blood beneath it, is now affixed to
the portal of the meeting-house.  The partridge has ceased to run across
the too-frequented path.  Of all the wild life that used to throng here,
only the Indians still come into the settlement, bringing the skins of
beaver and otter, bear and elk, which they sell to Endicott for the wares
of England.  And there is little John Massey, the son of Jeffrey Massey
and first-born of Naumkeag, playing beside his father's threshold, a
child of six or seven years old.  Which is the better-grown infant,--the
town or the boy?

The red men have become aware that the street is no longer free to them,
save by the sufferance and permission of the settlers.  Often, to impress
them with an awe of English power, there is a muster and training of the
town-forces, and a stately march of the mail-clad band, like this which
we now see advancing up the street.  There they come, fifty of them, or
more; all with their iron breastplates and steel caps well burnished, and
glimmering bravely against the sun; their ponderous muskets on their
shoulders, their bandaliers about their waists, their lighted matches in
their hands, and the drum and fife playing cheerily before them.  See! do
they not step like martial men?  Do they not manoeuvre like soldiers who
have seen stricken fields?  And well they may; for this band is composed
of precisely such materials as those with which Cromwell is preparing to
beat down the strength of a kingdom; and his famous regiment of Ironsides
might be recruited from just such men.  In everything, at this period,
New England was the essential spirit and flower of that which was about
to become uppermost in the mother-country.  Many a bold and wise man lost
the fame which would have accrued to him in English history, by crossing
the Atlantic with our forefathers.  Many a valiant captain, who might
have been foremost at Marston Moor or Naseby, exhausted his martial ardor
in the command of a log-built fortress, like that which you observe on
the gently rising ground at the right of the pathway,--its banner
fluttering in the breeze, and the culverins and sakers showing their
deadly muzzles over the rampart.

A multitude of people were now thronging to New England: some, because
the ancient and ponderous framework of Church and State threatened to
crumble down upon their heads; others, because they despaired of such a
downfall.  Among those who came to Naumkeag were men of history and
legend, whose feet leave a track of brightness along any pathway which
they have trodden.  You shall behold their life-like images--their
spectres, if you choose so to call them--passing, encountering with a
familiar nod, stopping to converse together, praying, bearing weapons,
laboring or resting from their labors, in the Main Street.  Here, now,
comes Hugh Peters, an earnest, restless man, walking swiftly, as being
impelled by that fiery activity of nature which shall hereafter thrust
him into the conflict of dangerous affairs, make him the chaplain and
counsellor of Cromwell, and finally bring him to a bloody end.  He
pauses, by the meetinghouse, to exchange a greeting with Roger Williams,
whose face indicates, methinks, a gentler spirit, kinder and more
expansive, than that of Peters; yet not less active for what he discerns
to be the will of God, or the welfare of mankind.  And look! here is a
guest for Endicott, coming forth out of the forest, through which he has
been journeying from Boston, and which, with its rude branches, has
caught hold of his attire, and has wet his feet with its swamps and
streams.  Still there is something in his mild and venerable, though not
aged presence--a propriety, an equilibrium, in Governor Winthrop's
nature--that causes the disarray of his costume to be unnoticed, and
gives us the same impression as if he were clad in such rave and rich
attire as we may suppose him to have worn in the Council Chamber of the
colony.  Is not this characteristic wonderfully perceptible in our
spectral representative of his person?  But what dignitary is this
crossing from the other side to greet the governor?  A stately personage,
in a dark velvet cloak, with a hoary beard, and a gold chain across his
breast; he has the authoritative port of one who has filled the highest
civic station in the first of cities.  Of all men in the world, we should
least expect to meet the Lord Mayor of London--as Sir Richard Saltonstall
has been, once and again--in a forest-bordered settlement of the western
wilderness.

Farther down the street, we see Emanuel Downing, a grave and worthy
citizen, with his son George, a stripling who has a career before him;
his shrewd and quick capacity and pliant conscience shall not only exalt
him high, but secure him from a downfall.  Here is another figure, on
whose characteristic make and expressive action I will stake the credit
of my pictorial puppet-show.

Have you not already detected a quaint, sly humor in that face,--an
eccentricity in the manner,--a certain indescribable waywardness,--all
the marks, in short, of an original man, unmistakably impressed, yet kept
down by a sense of clerical restraint?  That is Nathaniel Ward, the
minister of Ipswich, but better remembered as the simple cobbler of
Agawam.  He hammered his sole so faithfully, and stitched his upper-
leather so well, that the shoe is hardly yet worn out, though thrown
aside for some two centuries past.  And next, among these Puritans and
Roundheads, we observe the very model of a Cavalier, with the curling
lovelock, the fantastically trimmed beard, the embroidery, the ornamented
rapier, the gilded dagger, and all other foppishnesses that distinguished
the wild gallants who rode headlong to their overthrow in the cause of
King Charles.  This is Morton of Merry Mount, who has come hither to hold
a council with Endicott, but will shortly be his prisoner.  Yonder pale,
decaying figure of a white-robed woman, who glides slowly along the
street, is the Lady Arabella, looking for her own grave in the virgin
soil.  That other female form, who seems to be talking--we might almost
say preaching or expounding--in the centre of a group of profoundly
attentive auditors, is Ann Hutchinson.  And here comes Vane--

"But, my dear sir," interrupts the same gentleman who before questioned
the showman's genealogical accuracy, "allow me to observe that these
historical personages could not possibly have met together in the Main
Street.  They might, and probably did, all visit our old town, at one
time or another, but not simultaneously; and you have fallen into
anachronisms that I positively shudder to think of!"

"The fellow," adds the scarcely civil critic, "has learned a bead-roll of
historic names, whom he lugs into his pictorial puppet-show, as he calls
it, helter-skelter, without caring whether they were contemporaries or
not,--and sets them all by the ears together.  But was there ever such a
fund of impudence?  To hear his running commentary, you would suppose
that these miserable slips of painted pasteboard, with hardly the
remotest outlines of the human figure, had all the character and
expression of Michael Angele's pictures.  Well! go on, sir!"

"Sir, you break the illusion of the scene," mildly remonstrates the
showman.

"Illusion!  What illusion?" rejoins the critic, with a contemptuous
snort.  "On the word of a gentleman, I see nothing illusive in the
wretchedly bedaubed sheet of canvas that forms your background, or in
these pasteboard slips that hitch and jerk along the front.  The only
illusion, permit me to say, is in the puppet-showman's tongue,--and that
but a wretched one, into the bargain!"

"We public men," replies the showman, meekly, "must lay our account,
sometimes, to meet an uncandid severity of criticism.  But--merely for
your own pleasure, sir--let me entreat you to take another point of view.
Sit farther back, by that young lady, in whose face I have watched the
reflection of every changing scene; only oblige me by sitting there; and,
take my word for it, the slips of pasteboard shall assume spiritual life,
and the bedaubed canvas become an airy and changeable reflex of what it
purports to represent."

"I know better," retorts the critic, settling himself in his seat, with
sullen but self-complacent immovableness.  "And, as for my own pleasure,
I shall best consult it by remaining precisely where I am."

The showman bows, and waves his hand; and, at the signal, as if time and
vicissitude had been awaiting his permission to move onward, the mimic
street becomes alive again.

Years have rolled over our scene, and converted the forest-track into a
dusty thoroughfare, which, being intersected with lanes and cross-paths,
may fairly be designated as the Main Street.  On the ground-sites of many
of the log-built sheds, into which the first settlers crept for shelter,
houses of quaint architecture have now risen.  These later edifices are
built, as you see, in one generally accordant style, though with such
subordinate variety as keeps the beholder's curiosity excited, and causes
each structure, like its owner's character, to produce its own peculiar
impression.  Most of them have a huge chimney in the centre, with flues
so vast that it must have been easy for the witches to fly out of them as
they were wont to do, when bound on an aerial visit to the Black Man in
the forest.  Around this great chimney the wooden house clusters itself,
in a whole community of gable-ends, each ascending into its own karate
peak; the second story, with its lattice-windows, projecting over the
first; and the door, which is perhaps arched, provided on the outside
with an iron hammer, wherewith the visitor's hand may give a thundering
rat-a-tat.

The timber framework of these houses, as compared with those of recent
date, is like the skeleton of an old giant, beside the frail bones of a
modern man of fashion.  Many of them, by the vast strength and soundness
of their oaken substance, have been preserved through a length of time
which would have tried the stability of brick and stone; so that, in all
the progressive decay and continual reconstruction of the street, down
our own days, we shall still behold these old edifices occupying their
long-accustomed sites.  For instance, on the upper corner of that green
lane which shall hereafter be North Street, we see the Curwen House,
newly built, with the carpenters still at work on the roof nailing down
the last sheaf of shingles.  On the lower corner stands another
dwelling,--destined, at some period of its existence, to be the abode of
an unsuccessful alchemist,--which shall likewise survive to our own
generation, and perhaps long outlive it.  Thus, through the medium of
these patriarchal edifices, we have now established a sort of kindred and
hereditary acquaintance with the Main Street.

Great as is the transformation produced by a short term of years, each
single day creeps through the Puritan settlement sluggishly enough.  It
shall pass before your eyes, condensed into the space of a few moments.
The gray light of early morning is slowly diffusing itself over the
scene; and the bellman, whose office it is to cry the hour at the street-
corners, rings the last peal upon his hand bell, and goes wearily
homewards, with the owls, the bats, and other creatures of the night.
Lattices are thrust back on their hinges, as if the town were opening its
eyes, in the summer morning.  Forth stumbles the still drowsy cowherd,
with his horn; putting which to his lips, it emits a bellowing bray,
impossible to be represented in the picture, but which reaches the
pricked-up ears of every cow in the settlement, and tells her that the
dewy pasture-hour is come.  House after house awakes, and sends the smoke
up curling from its chimney, like frosty breath from living nostrils; and
as those white wreaths of smoke, though impregnated with earthy
admixtures, climb skyward, so, from each dwelling, does the morning
worship--its spiritual essence, bearing up its human imperfection--find
its way to the heavenly Father's throne.

The breakfast-hour being passed, the inhabitants do not, as usual, go to
their fields or workshops, but remain within doors; or perhaps walk the
street, with a grave sobriety, yet a disengaged and unburdened aspect,
that belongs neither to a holiday nor a Sabbath.  And, indeed, this
passing day is neither, nor is it a common week-day, although partaking
of all the three.  It is the Thursday Lecture; an institution which New
England has long ago relinquished, and almost forgotten, yet which it
would have been better to retain, as bearing relations to both the
spiritual and ordinary life, and bringing each acquainted with the other.
The tokens of its observance, however, which here meet our eyes, are of
rather a questionable cast.  It is, in one sense, a day of public shame;
the day on which transgressors, who have made themselves liable to the
minor severities of the Puritan law receive their reward of ignominy.  At
this very moment, this constable has bound an idle fellow to the
whipping-post, and is giving him his deserts with a cat-o'-nine tails.
Ever since sunrise, Daniel Fairfield has been standing on the steps of
the meeting-house, with a halter about his neck, which he is condemned to
wear visibly throughout his lifetime; Dorothy Talby is chained to a post
at the corner of Prison Lane, with the hot sun blazing on her matronly
face, and all for no other offence than lifting her hand against her
husband; while, through the bars of that great wooden cage, in the centre
of the scene, we discern either a human being or a wild beast, or both in
one, whom this public infamy causes to roar, and gnash his teeth, and
shake the strong oaken bars, as if he would breakforth, and tear in
pieces the little children who have been peeping at him.  Such are the
profitable sights that serve the good people to while away the earlier
part of lecture-day.  Betimes in the forenoon, a traveller--the first
traveller that has come hitherward this morning-rides slowly into the
street on his patient steed.  He seems a clergyman; and, as he draws
near, we recognize the minister of Lynn, who was pre-engaged to lecture
here, and has been revolving his discourse, as he rode through the hoary
wilderness.  Behold, now, the whole town thronging into the meeting-
house, mostly with such sombre visages that the sunshine becomes little
better than a shadow when it falls upon them.  There go the Thirteen Men,
grim rulers of a grim community!  There goes John Massey, the first town-
born child, now a youth of twenty, whose eye wanders with peculiar
interest towards that buxom damsel who comes up the steps at the same
instant.  There hobbles Goody Foster, a sour and bitter old beldam,
looking as if she went to curse, and not to pray, and whom many of her
neighbors suspect of taking an occasional airing on a broomstick.  There,
too, slinking shamefacedly in, you observe that same poor do-nothing and
good-for-nothing whom we saw castigated just now at the whipping-post.
Last of all, there goes the tithing-man, lugging in a couple of small
boys, whom he has caught at play beneath God's blessed sunshine, in a
back lane.  What native of Naumkeag, whose recollections go back more
than thirty years, does not still shudder at that dark ogre of his
infancy, who perhaps had long ceased to have an actual existence, but
still lived in his childish belief, in a horrible idea, and in the
nurse's threat, as the Tidy Man!

It will be hardly worth our while to wait two, or it may be three,
turnings of the hour-glass, for the conclusion of the lecture.
Therefore, by my control over light and darkness, I cause the dusk, and
then the starless night, to brood over the street; and summon forth again
the bellman, with his lantern casting a gleam about his footsteps, to
pace wearily from corner to corner, and shout drowsily the hour to drowsy
or dreaming ears.  Happy are we, if for nothing else, yet because we did
not live in those days.  In truth, when the first novelty and stir of
spirit had subsided,--when the new settlement, between the forest-border
and the sea, had become actually a little town,--its daily life must have
trudged onward with hardly anything to diversify and enliven it, while
also its rigidity could not fail to cause miserable distortions of the
moral nature.  Such a life was sinister to the intellect, and sinister to
the heart; especially when one generation had bequeathed its religious
gloom, and the counterfeit of its religious ardor, to the next; for these
characteristics, as was inevitable, assumed the form both of hypocrisy
and exaggeration, by being inherited from the example and precept of
other human beings, and not from an original and spiritual source.  The
sons and grandchildren of the first settlers were a race of lower and
narrower souls than their progenitors had been.  The latter were stern,
severe, intolerant, but not superstitious, not even fanatical; and
endowed, if any men of that age were, with a far-seeing worldly sagacity.
But it was impossible for the succeeding race to grow up, in heaven's
freedom, beneath the discipline which their gloomy energy of character
had established; nor, it may be, have we even yet thrown off all the
unfavorable influences which, among many good ones, were bequeathed to us
by our Puritan forefathers.  Let us thank God for having given us such
ancestors; and let each successive generation thank him, not less
fervently, for being one step further from them in the march of ages.

"What is all this?" cries the critic.  "A sermon?  If so, it is not in
the bill."

"Very true," replies the showman; "and I ask pardon of the audience."

Look now at the street, and observe a strange people entering it.  Their
garments are torn and disordered, their faces haggard, their figures
emaciated; for they have made their way hither through pathless deserts,
suffering hunger and hardship, with no other shelter thin a hollow tree,
the lair of a wild beast, or an Indian wigwam.  Nor, in the most
inhospitable and dangerous of such lodging-places, was there half the
peril that awaits them in this thoroughfare of Christian men, with those
secure dwellings and warm hearths on either side of it, and yonder
meeting-house as the central object of the scene.  These wanderers have
received from Heaven a gift that, in all epochs of the world, has brought
with it the penalties of mortal suffering and persecution, scorn, enmity,
and death itself;--a gift that, thus terrible to its possessors, has ever
been most hateful to all other men, since its very existence seems to
threaten the overthrow of whatever else the toilsome ages have built up;
--the gift of a new idea.  You can discern it in them, illuminating their
faces--their whole persons, indeed, however earthly and cloddish--with a
light that inevitably shines through, and makes the startled community
aware that these men are not as they themselves are,--not brethren nor
neighbors of their thought.  Forthwith, it is as if an earthquake rumbled
through the town, making its vibrations felt at every hearthstone, and
especially causing the spire of the meeting-house to totter.  The Quakers
have come.  We are in peril!  See! they trample upon our wise and well-
established laws in the person of our chief magistrate; for Governor
Endicott is passing, now an aged man, and dignified with long habits of
authority,--and not one of the irreverent vagabonds has moved his bat.
Did you note the ominous frown of the white-bearded Puritan governor, as
he turned himself about, and, in his anger, half uplifted the staff that
has become a needful support to his old age?  Here comes old Mr. Norris,
our venerable minister.  Will they doff their hats, and pay reverence to
him?  No: their hats stick fast to their ungracious heads, as if they
grew there; and--impious varlets that they are, and worse than the
heathen Indians!--they eye our reverend pastor with a peculiar scorn,
distrust, unbelief, and utter denial of his sanctified pretensions, of
which he himself immediately becomes conscious; the more bitterly
conscious, as he never knew nor dreamed of the like before.

But look yonder!  Can we believe our eyes?  A Quaker woman, clad in
sackcloth, and with ashes on her head, has mounted the steps of the
meeting-house.  She addresses the people in a wild, shrill voice,--wild
and shrill it must be to suit such a figure,--which makes them tremble
and turn pale, although they crowd open-mouthed to hear her.  She is bold
against established authority; she denounces the priest and his steeple-
house.  Many of her hearers are appalled; some weep; and others listen
with a rapt attention, as if a living truth had now, for the first time,
forced its way through the crust of habit, reached their hearts, and
awakened them to life.  This matter must be looked to; else we have
brought our faith across the seas with us in vain; and it had been better
that the old forest were still standing here, waving its tangled boughs
and murmuring to the sky out of its desolate recesses, instead of this
goodly street, if such blasphemies be spoken in it.

So thought the old Puritans.  What was their mode of action may be partly
judged from the spectacles which now pass before your eyes.  Joshua
Buffum is standing in the pillory.  Cassandra Southwick is led to prison.
And there a woman, it is Ann Coleman,--naked from the waist upward, and
bound to the tail of a cart, is dragged through the Main Street at the
pace of a brisk walk, while the constable follows with a whip of knotted
cords.  A strong-armed fellow is that constable; and each time that he
flourishes his lash in the air, you see a frown wrinkling and twisting
his brow, and, at the same instant, a smile upon his lips.  He loves his
business, faithful officer that he is, and puts his soul into every
stroke, zealous to fulfil the injunction of Major Hawthorne's warrant, in
the spirit and to the letter.  There came down a stroke that has drawn
blood!  Ten such stripes are to be given in Salem, ten in Boston, and ten
in Dedham; and, with those thirty stripes of blood upon her, she is to be
driven into the forest.  The crimson trail goes wavering along the Main
Street; but Heaven grant that, as the rain of so many years has wept upon
it, time after time, and washed it all away, so there may have been a dew
of mercy, to cleanse this cruel blood-stain out of the record of the
persecutor's life!

Pass on, thou spectral constable, and betake thee to thine own place of
torment.  Meanwhile, by the silent operation of the mechanism behind the
scenes, a considerable space of time would seem to have lapsed over the
street.  The older dwellings now begin to look weather-beaten, through
the effect of the many eastern storms that have moistened their unpainted
shingles and clapboards, for not less than forty years.  Such is the age
we would assign to the town, judging by the aspect of John Massey, the
first town-born child, whom his neighbors now call Goodman Massey, and
whom we see yonder, a grave, almost autumnal-looking man, with children
of his own about him.  To the patriarchs of the settlement, no doubt, the
Main Street is still but an affair of yesterday, hardly more antique,
even if destined to be more permanent, than a path shovelled through the
snow.  But to the middle-aged and elderly men who came hither in
childhood or early youth, it presents the aspect of a long and well-
established work, on which they have expended the strength and ardor of
their life.  And the younger people, native to the street, whose earliest
recollections are of creeping over the paternal threshold, and rolling on
the grassy margin of the track, look at it as one of the perdurable
things of our mortal state,--as old as the hills of the great pasture, or
the headland at the harbor's mouth.  Their fathers and grandsires tell
them how, within a few years past, the forest stood here, with but a
lonely track beneath its tangled shade.  Vain legend!  They cannot make
it true and real to their conceptions.  With them, moreover, the Main
Street is a street indeed, worthy to hold its way with the thronged and
stately avenues of cities beyond the sea.  The old Puritans tell them of
the crowds that hurry along Cheapside and Fleet Street and the Strand,
and of the rush of tumultuous life at Temple Bar.  They describe London
Bridge, itself a street, with a row of houses on each side.  They speak
of the vast structure of the Tower, and the solemn grandeur of
Westminster Abbey.  The children listen, and still inquire if the streets
of London are longer and broader than the one before their father's door;
if the Tower is bigger than the jail in Prison Lane; if the old Abbey
will hold a larger congregation than our meeting-house.  Nothing
impresses them, except their own experience.

It seems all a fable, too, that wolves have ever prowled here; and not
less so, that the Squaw Sachem, and the Sagamore her son, once ruled over
this region, and treated as sovereign potentates with the English
settlers, then so few and storm-beaten, now so powerful.  There stand
some school-boys, you observe, in a little group around a drunken Indian,
himself a prince of the Squaw Sachem's lineage.  He brought hither some
beaver-skins for sale, and has already swallowed the larger portion of
their price, in deadly draughts of firewater.  Is there not a touch of
pathos in that picture? and does it not go far towards telling the whole
story of the vast growth and prosperity of one race, and the fated decay
of another?--the children of the stranger making game of the great Squaw
Sachem's grandson!

But the whole race of red men have not vanished with that wild princess
and her posterity.  This march of soldiers along the street betokens the
breaking out of King Philip's war; and these young men, the flower of
Essex, are on their way to defend the villages on the Connecticut; where,
at Bloody Brook, a terrible blow shall be smitten, and hardly one of that
gallant band be left alive.  And there, at that stately mansion, with its
three peaks in front, and its two little peaked towers, one on either
side of the door, we see brave Captain Gardner issuing forth, clad in his
embroidered buff-coat, and his plumed cap upon his head.  His trusty
sword, in its steel scabbard, strikes clanking on the doorstep.  See how
the people throng to their doors and windows, as the cavalier rides past,
reining his mettled steed so gallantly, and looking so like the very soul
and emblem of martial achievement,--destined, too, to meet a warrior's
fate, at the desperate assault on the fortress of the Narragansetts!

"The mettled steed looks like a pig," interrupts the critic, "and Captain
Gardner himself like the Devil, though a very tame one, and
on a most diminutive scale."

"Sir, sir!" cries the persecuted showman, losing all patience,--for,
indeed, he had particularly prided himself on these figures of Captain
Gardner and his horse,--"I see that there is no hope of pleasing you.
Pray, sir, do me the favor to take back your money, and withdraw!"

"Not I!" answers the unconscionable critic.  "I am just beginning to get
interested in the matter.  Come! turn your crank, and grind out a few
more of these fooleries!"

The showman rubs his brow impulsively, whisks the little rod with which
he points out the notabilities of the scene, but, finally, with the
inevitable acquiescence of all public servants, resumes his composure and
goes on.

Pass onward, onward, Time!  Build up new houses here, and tear down thy
works of yesterday, that have already the rusty moss upon them!  Summon
forth the minister to the abode of the young maiden, and bid him unite
her to the joyful bridegroom!  Let the youthful parents carry their
first-born to the meeting-house, to receive the baptismal rite!  Knock at
the door, whence the sable line of the funeral is next to issue!  Provide
other successive generations of men, to trade, talk, quarrel, or walk in
friendly intercourse along the street, as their fathers did before them!
Do all thy daily and accustomed business, Father Time, in this
thoroughfare, which thy footsteps, for so many years, have now made
dusty!  But here, at last, thou leadest along a procession which, once
witnessed, shall appear no more, and be remembered only as a hideous
dream of thine, or a frenzy of thy old brain.

"Turn your crank, I say," bellows the remorseless critic, "and grind it
out, whatever it be, without further preface!"

The showman deems it best to comply.

Then, here comes the worshipful Captain Curwen, sheriff of Essex, on
horseback, at the head of an armed guard, escorting a company of
condemned prisoners from the jail to their place of execution on Gallows
Hill.  The witches!  There is no mistaking them!  The witches!  As they
approach up Prison Lane, and turn into the Main Street, let us watch
their faces, as if we made a part of the pale crowd that presses so
eagerly about them, yet shrinks back with such shuddering dread, leaving
an open passage betwixt a dense throng on either side.  Listen to what
the people say.

There is old George Jacobs, known hereabouts, these sixty years, as a man
whom we thought upright in all his way of life, quiet, blameless,
a good husband before his pious wife was summoned from the evil to come,
and a good father to the children whom she left him.  Ah! but when that
blessed woman went to heaven, George Jacobs's heart was empty, his hearth
lonely, his life broken tip; his children were married, and betook
themselves to habitations of their own; and Satan, in his wanderings up
and down, beheld this forlorn old man, to whom life was a sameness and a
weariness, and found the way to tempt him.  So the miserable sinner was
prevailed with to mount into the air, and career among the clouds; and he
is proved to have been present at a witch-meeting as far off as Falmouth,
on the very same night that his next neighbors saw him, with his
rheumatic stoop, going in at his own door.  There is John Willard, too;
an honest man we thought him, and so shrewd and active in his business,
so practical, so intent on every-day affairs, so constant at his little
place of trade, where he bartered English goods for Indian corn and all
kinds of country produce!  How could such a man find time, or what could
put it into his mind, to leave his proper calling, and become a wizard?
It is a mystery, unless the Black Man tempted him with great heaps of
gold.  See that aged couple,--a sad sight, truly,--John Proctor, and his
wife Elizabeth.  If there were two old people in all the county of Essex
who seemed to have led a true Christian life, and to be treading
hopefully the little remnant of their earthly path, it was this very
pair.  Yet have we heard it sworn, to the satisfaction of the worshipful
Chief-Justice Sewell, and all the court and jury, that Proctor and his
wife have shown their withered faces at children's bedsides, mocking,
making mouths, and affrighting the poor little innocents in the night-
time.  They, or their spectral appearances, have stuck pins into the
Afflicted Ones, and thrown them into deadly fainting-fits with a touch,
or but a look.  And, while we supposed the old man to be reading the
Bible to his old wife,--she meanwhile knitting in the chimney-corner,--
the pair of hoary reprobates have whisked up the chimney, both on one
broomstick, and flown away to a witch-communion, far into the depths of
the chill, dark forest.  How foolish!  Were it only for fear of rheumatic
pains in their old bones, they had better have stayed at home.  But away
they went; and the laughter of their decayed, cackling voices has been
heard at midnight, aloft in the air.  Now, in the sunny noontide, as they
go tottering to the gallows, it is the Devil's turn to laugh.

Behind these two,--who help another along, and seem to be comforting and
encouraging each other, in a manner truly pitiful, if it were not a sin
to pity the old witch and wizard,--behind them comes a woman, with a dark
proud face that has been beautiful, and a figure that is still majestic.
Do you know her?  It is Martha Carrier, whom the Devil found in a humble
cottage, and looked into her discontented heart, and saw pride there, and
tempted her with his promise that she should be Queen of Hell.  And now,
with that lofty demeanor, she is passing to her kingdom, and, by her
unquenchable pride, transforms this escort of shame into a triumphal
procession, that shall attend her to the gates of her infernal palace,
and seat her upon the fiery throne.  Within this hour, she shall assume
her royal dignity.

Last of the miserable train comes a man clad in black, of small stature
and a dark complexion, with a clerical band about his neck.  Many a time,
in the years gone by, that face has been uplifted heavenward from the
pulpit of the East Meeting-House, when the Rev. Mr. Burroughs seemed to
worship God.  What!--he?  The holy man!--the learned!--the wise!  How has
the Devil tempted him?  His fellow-criminals, for the most part, are
obtuse, uncultivated creatures, some of them scarcely half-witted by
nature, and others greatly decayed in their intellects through age.  They
were an easy prey for the destroyer.  Not so with this George Burroughs,
as we judge by the inward light which glows through his dark countenance,
and, we might almost say, glorifies his figure, in spite of the soil and
haggardness of long imprisonment,--in spite of the heavy shadow that must
fall on him, while death is walking by his side.  What bribe could Satan
offer, rich enough to tempt and overcome this mail?  Alas! it may have
been in the very strength of his high and searching intellect, that the
Tempter found the weakness which betrayed him.  He yearned for knowledge
he went groping onward into a world of mystery; at first, as the
witnesses have sworn, he summoned up the ghosts of his two dead wives,
and talked with them of matters beyond the grave; and, when their
responses failed to satisfy the intense and sinful craving of his spirit,
he called on Satan, and was heard.  Yet--to look at him--who, that had
not known the proof, could believe him guilty?  Who would not say, while
we see him offering comfort to the weak and aged partners of his horrible
crime,--while we hear his ejaculations of prayer, that seem to bubble up
out of the depths of his heart, and fly heavenward, unawares,--while we
behold a radiance brightening on his features as from the other world,
which is but a few steps off,--who would not say, that, over the dusty
track of the Main Street, a Christian saint is now going to a martyr's
death?  May not the Arch-Fiend have been too subtle for the court and
jury, and betrayed them--laughing in his sleeve, the while--into the
awful error of pouring out sanctified blood as an acceptable sacrifice
upon God's altar?  Ah! no; for listen to wise Cotton Mather, who, as he
sits there on his horse, speaks comfortably to the perplexed multitude,
and tells them that all has been religiously and justly done, and that
Satan's power shall this day receive its death-blow in New England.

Heaven grant it be so!--the great scholar must be right; so lead the poor
creatures to their death!  Do you see that group of children and half-
grown girls, and, among them, an old, hag-like Indian woman, Tituba by
me?  Those are the Afflicted Ones.  Behold, at this very instant, a proof
of Satan's power and malice!  Mercy Parris, the minister's daughter, has
been smitten by a flash of Martha Carrier's eye, and falls down in the
street, writhing with horrible spasms and foaming at the mouth, like the
possessed one spoken of in Scripture.  Hurry on the accursed witches to
the gallows, ere they do more mischief!--ere they fling out their
withered aims, and scatter pestilence by handfuls among the crowd!
--ere,as their parting legacy, they cast a blight over the land, so that
henceforth it may bear no fruit nor blade of grass, and be fit for
nothing but a sepulchre for their unhallowed carcasses!  So, on they go;
and old George Jacobs has stumbled, by reason of his infirmity; but
Goodman Proctor and his wife lean on one another, and walk at a
reasonably steady pace, considering their age.  Mr. Burroughs seems to
administer counsel to Martha Carrier, whose face and mien, methinks, are
milder and humbler than they were.  Among the multitude, meanwhile, there
is horror, fear, and distrust; and friend looks askance at friend, and
the husband at his wife, and the wife at him, and even the mother at her
little child; as if, in every creature that God has made, they suspected
a witch, or dreaded an accuser.  Never, never again, whether in this or
any other shape, may Universal Madness riot in the Main Street!

I perceive in your eyes, my indulgent spectators, the criticism which you
are too kind to utter.  These scenes, you think, are all too sombre.  So,
indeed, they are; but the blame must rest on the sombre spirit of our
forefathers, who wove their web of life with hardly a single thread of
rose-color or gold, and not on me, who have a tropic-love of sunshine,
and would gladly gild all the world with it, if I knew where to find so
much.  That you may believe me, I will exhibit one of the only class of
scenes, so far as my investigation has taught me, in which our ancestors
were wont to steep their tough old hearts in wine and strong drink, and
indulge an outbreak of grisly jollity.

Here it comes, out of the same house whence we saw brave Captain Gardner
go forth to the wars.  What!  A coffin, borne on men's shoulders, and six
aged gentlemen as pall-bearers, and a long train of mourners, with
black gloves and black hat-bands, and everything black, save a white
handkerchief in each mourner's hand, to wipe away his tears withal.  Now,
my kind patrons, you are angry with me.  You were bidden to a bridal-
dance, and find yourselves walking in a funeral procession.  Even so; but
look back through all the social customs of New England, in the first
century of her existence, and read all her traits of character; and if
you find one occasion, other than a funeral feast, where jollity was
sanctioned by universal practice, I will set fire to my puppet-show
without another word.  These are the obsequies of old Governor
Bradstreet, the patriarch and survivor of the first settlers, who, having
intermarried with the Widow Gardner, is now resting from his labors, at
the great age of ninety-four.  The white-bearded corpse, which was his
spirit's earthly garniture, now lies beneath yonder coffin-lid.  Many a
cask of ale and cider is on tap, and many a draught of spiced wine and
aqua-vitae has been quaffed.  Else why should the bearers stagger, as
they tremulously uphold the coffin?--and the aged pall-bearers, too, as
they strive to walk solemnly beside it?--and wherefore do the mourners
tread on one another's heels?--and why, if we may ask without offence,
should the nose of the Rev. Mr. Noyes, through which he has just been
delivering the funeral discourse, glow like a ruddy coal of fire?  Well,
well, old friends!  Pass on, with your burden of mortality, And lay it in
the tomb with jolly hearts.  People should be permitted to enjoy
themselves in their own fashion; every man to his taste; but New England
must have been a dismal abode for the man of pleasure, when the only
boon-companion was Death!

Under cover of a mist that has settled over the scene, a few years flit
by, and escape our notice.  As the atmosphere becomes transparent, we
perceive a decrepit grandsire, hobbling along the street.  Do you
recognize him?  We saw him, first, as the baby in Goodwife Massey's arms,
when the primeval trees were flinging their shadow over Roger Conant's
cabin; we have seen him, as the boy, the youth, the man, bearing his
humble part in all the successive scenes, and forming the index-figure
whereby to note the age of his coeval town.  And here he is, old Goodman
Massey, taking his last walk,--often pausing,--often leaning over his
staff,--and calling to mind whose dwelling stood at such and such a spot,
and whose field or garden occupied the site of those more recent houses.
He can render a reason for all the bends and deviations of the
thoroughfare, which, in its flexible and plastic infancy, was made to
swerve aside from a straight line, in order to visit every settler's
door.  The Main Street is still youthful; the coeval man is in his latest
age.  Soon he will be gone, a patriarch of fourscore, yet shall retain a
sort of infantine life in our local history, as the first town-born
child.

Behold here a change, wrought in the twinkling of an eye, like an
incident in a tale of magic, even while your observation has been fixed
upon the scene.  The Main Street has vanished out of sight.  In its stead
appears a wintry waste of snow, with the sun just peeping over it, cold
and bright, and tingeing the white expanse with the faintest and most
ethereal rose-color.  This is the Great Snow of 1717, famous for the
mountain-drifts in which it buried the whole country.  It would seem as
if the street, the growth of which we have noted so attentively,
following it from its first phase, as an Indian track, until it reached
the dignity of sidewalks, were all at once obliterated, and resolved into
a drearier pathlessness than when the forest covered it.  The gigantic
swells and billows of the snow have swept over each man's metes and
bounds, and annihilated all the visible distinctions of human property.
So that now the traces of former times and hitherto accomplished deeds
being done away, mankind should be at liberty to enter on new paths, and
guide themselves by other laws than heretofore; if, indeed, the race be
not extinct, and it be worth our while to go on with the march of life,
over the cold and desolate expanse that lies before us.  It may be,
however, that matters are not so desperate as they appear.  That vast
icicle, glittering so cheerlessly in the sunshine, must be the spire of
the meeting-house, incrusted with frozen sleet.  Those great heaps, too,
which we mistook for drifts, are houses, buried up to their eaves, and
with their peaked roofs rounded by the depth of snow upon them.  There,
now, comes a gush of smoke from what I judge to be the chimney of the
Ship Tavern;--and another--another--and another--from the chimneys of
other dwellings, where fireside comfort, domestic peace, the sports of
children, and the quietude of age are living yet, in spite of the frozen
crust above them.

But it is time to change the scene.  Its dreary monotony shall not test
your fortitude like one of our actual New England winters, which leaves
so large a blank--so melancholy a death-spot-in lives so brief that they
ought to be all summer-time.  Here, at least, I may claim to be ruler of
the seasons.  One turn of the crank shall melt away the snow from the
Main Street, and show the trees in their full foliage, the rose-bushes in
bloom, and a border of green grass along the sidewalk.  There!  But what!
How!  The scene will not move.  A wire is broken.  The street continues
buried beneath the snow, and the fate of Herculaneum and Pompeii has its
parallel in this catastrophe.

Alas!  my kind and gentle audience, you know not the extent of your
misfortune.  The scenes to come were far better than the past.  The
street itself would have been more worthy of pictorial exhibition; the
deeds of its inhabitants not less so.  And how would your interest have
deepened, as, passing out of the cold shadow of antiquity, in my long and
weary course, I should arrive within the limits of man's memory, and,
leading you at last into the sunshine of the present, should give a
reflex of the very life that is flitting past us!  Your own beauty, my
fair townswomen, would have beamed upon you, out of my scene.  Not a
gentleman that walks the street but should have beheld his own face and
figure, his gait, the peculiar swing of his arm, and the coat that he put
on yesterday.  Then, too,--and it is what I chiefly regret,--I had
expended a vast deal of light and brilliancy on a representation of the
street in its whole length, from Buffum's Corner downward, on the night
of the grand illumination for General Taylor's triumph.  Lastly, I should
have given the crank one other turn, and have brought out the future,
showing you who shall walk the Main Street to-morrow, and, perchance,
whose funeral shall pass through it!

But these, like most other human purposes, lie unaccomplished; and I have
only further to say, that any lady or gentlemen who may feel dissatisfied
with the evening's entertainment shall receive back the admission fee at
the door.

"Then give me mine," cries the critic, stretching out his palm.  "I said
that your exhibition would prove a humbug, and so it has turned out.  So,
hand over my quarter!"









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                       A BELL'S BIOGRAPHY

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



Hearken to our neighbor with the iron tongue.  While I sit musing over my
sheet of foolscap, he emphatically tells the hour, in tones loud enough
for all the town to hear, though doubtless intended only as a gentle hint
to myself, that I may begin his biography before the evening shall be
further wasted.  Unquestionably, a personage in such an elevated
position, and making so great a noise in the world, has a fair claim to
the services of a biographer.  He is the representative and most
illustrious member of that innumerable class, whose characteristic
feature is the tongue, and whose sole business, to clamor for the public
good.  If any of his noisy brethren, in our tongue-governed democracy, be
envious of the superiority which I have assigned him, they have my free
consent to hang themselves as high as he.  And, for his history, let not
the reader apprehend an empty repetition of ding-dong-bell.
He has been the passive hero of wonderful vicissitudes, with which I have
chanced to become acquainted, possibly from his own mouth; while the
careless multitude supposed him to be talking merely of the time of day,
or calling them to dinner or to church, or bidding drowsy people go
bedward, or the dead to their graves.  Many a revolution has it been his
fate to go through, and invariably with a prodigious uproar.  And whether
or no he have told me his reminiscences, this at least is true, that the
more I study his deep-toned language, the more sense, and sentiment, and
soul, do I discover in it.

This bell--for we may as well drop our quaint personification--is of
antique French manufacture, and the symbol of the cross betokens that it
was meant to be suspended in the belfry of a Romish place of worship.
The old people hereabout have a tradition, that a considerable part of
the metal was supplied by a brass cannon, captured in one of the
victories of Louis the Fourteenth over the Spaniards, and that a Bourbon
princess threw her golden crucifix into the molten mass.  It is said,
likewise, that a bishop baptized and blessed the bell, and prayed that a
heavenly influence might mingle with its tones.  When all due ceremonies
had been performed, the Grand Monarque bestowed the gift--than which none
could resound his beneficence more loudly--on the Jesuits, who were then
converting the American Indians to the spiritual dominion of the Pope.
So the bell,--our self-same bell, whose familiar voice we may hear at all
hours, in the streets,--this very bell sent forth its first-born accents
from the tower of a log-built chapel, westward of Lake Champlain, and
near the mighty stream of the St. Lawrence.  It was called Our Lady's
Chapel of the Forest.  The peal went forth as if to redeem and consecrate
the heathen wilderness.  The wolf growled at the sound, as he prowled
stealthily through the underbrush; the grim bear turned his back, and
stalked sullenly away; the startled doe leaped up, and led her fawn into
a deeper solitude.  The red men wondered what awful voice was speaking
amid the wind that roared through the tree-tops; and, following
reverentially its summons, the dark-robed fathers blessed them, as they
drew near the cross-crowned chapel.  In a little time, there was a
crucifix on every dusky bosom.  The Indians knelt beneath the lowly roof,
worshipping in the same forms that were observed under the vast dome of
St. Peter's, when the Pope performed high mass in the presence of
kneeling princes.  All the religious festivals, that awoke the chiming
bells of lofty cathedrals, called forth a peal from Our Lady's Chapel of
the Forest.  Loudly rang the bell of the wilderness while the streets of
Paris echoed with rejoicings for the birthday of the Bourbon, or whenever
France had triumphed on some European battle-field.  And the solemn woods
were saddened with a melancholy knell, as often as the thickstrewn leaves
were swept away from the virgin soil, for the burial of an Indian chief.

Meantime, the bells of a hostile people and a hostile faith were ringing
on Sabbaths and lecture-days, at Boston and other Puritan towns.  Their
echoes died away hundreds of miles southeastward of Our Lady's Chapel.
But scouts had threaded the pathless desert that lay between, and, from
behind the huge tree-trunks, perceived the Indians assembling at the
summons of the bell.  Some bore flaxen-haired scalps at their girdles, as
if to lay those bloody trophies on Our Lady's altar.  It was reported,
and believed, all through New England, that the Pope of Rome, and the
King of France, had established this little chapel in the forest, for the
purpose of stirring up the red men to a crusade against the English
settlers.  The latter took energetic measures to secure their religion
and their lives.  On the eve of an especial fast of the Romish Church,
while the bell tolled dismally, and the priests were chanting a doleful
stave, a band of New England rangers rushed from the surrounding woods.
Fierce shouts, and the report of musketry, pealed suddenly within the
chapel.  The ministering priests threw themselves before the altar, and
were slain even on its steps.  If, as antique traditions tell us, no
grass will grow where the blood of martyrs has been shed, there should be
a barren spot, to this very day, on the site of that desecrated altar.

While the blood was still plashing from step to step, the leader of the
rangers seized a torch, and applied it to the drapery of the shrine.  The
flame and smoke arose, as from a burnt-sacrifice, at once illuminating
and obscuring the whole interior of the chapel,--now hiding the dead
priests in a sable shroud, now revealing them and their slayers in one
terrific glare.  Some already wished that the altar-smoke could cover the
deed from the sight of Heaven.  But one of the rangers--a man of
sanctified aspect, though his hands were bloody--approached the captain.

"Sir," said he, "our village meeting-house lacks a bell, and hitherto we
have been fain to summon the good people to worship by beat of drum.
Give me, I pray you, the bell of this popish chapel, for the sake of the
godly Mr. Rogers, who doubtless hath remembered us in the prayers of the
congregation, ever since we began our march.  Who can tell what share of
this night's good success we owe to that holy man's wrestling with the
Lord?"

"Nay, then," answered the captain, "if good Mr. Rogers hath holpen our
enterprise, it is right that he should share the spoil.  Take the bell
and welcome, Deacon Lawson, if you will be at the trouble of carrying it
home.  Hitherto it hath spoken nothing but papistry, and that too in the
French or Indian gibberish; but I warrant me, if Mr. Rogers consecrate it
anew, it will talk like a good English and Protestant bell."

So Deacon Lawson and half a score of his townsmen took down the bell,
suspended it on a pole, and bore it away on their sturdy shoulders,
meaning to carry it to the shore of Lake Champlain, and thence homeward
by water.  Far through the woods gleamed the flames of Our Lady's Chapel,
flinging fantastic shadows from the clustered foliage, and glancing on
brooks that had never caught the sunlight.  As the rangers traversed the
midnight forest, staggering under their heavy burden, the tongue of the
bell gave many a tremendous stroke,--clang, clang, clang!--a most
doleful sound, as if it were tolling for the slaughter of the priests and
the ruin of the chapel.  Little dreamed Deacon Lawson and his townsmen
that it was their own funeral knell.  A war-party of Indians had heard
the report, of musketry, and seen the blaze of the chapel, and now were
on the track of the rangers, summoned to vengeance by the bell's dismal
murmurs.  In the midst of a deep swamp, they made a sudden onset on the
retreating foe.  Good Deacon Lawson battled stoutly, but had his skull
cloven by a tomahawk, and sank into the depths of the morass, with the
ponderous bell above him.  And, for many a year thereafter, our hero's
voice was heard no more on earth, neither at the hour of worship, nor at
festivals nor funerals.

And is he still buried in that unknown grave?  Scarcely so, dear reader.
Hark!  How plainly we hear him at this moment, the spokesman of Time,
proclaiming that it is nine o'clock at night!  We may therefore safely
conclude that some happy chance has restored him to upper air.

But there lay the bell, for many silent years; and the wonder is, that be
did not lie silent there a century, or perhaps a dozen centuries, till
the world should have forgotten not only his voice, but the voices of the
whole brotherhood of bells.  How would the first accent of his iron
tongue have startled his resurrectionists!  But he was not fated to be a
subject of discussion among the antiquaries of far posterity.  Near the
close of the Old French War, a party of New England axe-men, who preceded
the march of Colonel Bradstreet toward Lake Ontario, were building a
bridge of logs through a swamp.  Plunging down a stake, one of these
pioneers felt it graze against some hard, smooth substance.  He called
his comrades, and, by their united efforts, the top of the bell was
raised to the surface, a rope made fast to it, and thence passed over the
horizontal limb of a tree.  Heave ho! up they hoisted their prize,
dripping with moisture, and festooned with verdant water-moss.  As the
base of the bell emerged from the swamp, the pioneers perceived that a
skeleton was clinging with its bony fingers to the clapper, but
immediately relaxing its nerveless grasp, sank back into the stagnant
water.  The bell then gave forth a sullen clang.  No wonder that he was
in haste to speak, after holding his tongue for such a length of time!
The pioneers shoved the bell to and fro, thus ringing a loud and heavy
peal, which echoed widely through the forest, and reached the ears of
Colonel Bradstreet, and his three thousand men.  The soldiers paused on
their march; a feeling of religion, mingled with borne-tenderness,
overpowered their rude hearts; each seemed to hear the clangor of the old
church-bell, which had been familiar to hint from infancy, and had tolled
at the funerals of all his forefathers.  By what magic had that holy
sound strayed over the wide-murmuring ocean, and become audible amid the
clash of arms, the loud crashing of the artillery over the rough
wilderness-path, and the melancholy roar of the wind among the boughs?

The New-Englanders hid their prize in a shadowy nook, betwixt a large
gray stone and the earthy roots of an overthrown tree; and when the
campaign was ended, they conveyed our friend to Boston, and put him up at
auction on the sidewalk of King Street.  He was suspended, for the nonce,
by a block and tackle, and being swung backward and forward, gave such
loud and clear testimony to his own merits, that the auctioneer had no
need to say a word.  The highest bidder was a rich old representative
from our town, who piously bestowed the bell on the meeting-house where
he had been a worshipper for half a century.  The good man had his
reward.  By a strange coincidence, the very first duty of the sexton,
after the bell had been hoisted into the belfry, was to toll the funeral
knell of the donor.  Soon, however, those doleful echoes were drowned by
a triumphant peal for the surrender of Quebec.

Ever since that period, our hero has occupied the same elevated station,
and has put in his word on all matters of public importance, civil,
military, or religious.  On the day when Independence was first
proclaimed in the street beneath, he uttered a peal which many deemed
ominous and fearful, rather than triumphant.  But he has told the same
story these sixty years, and none mistake his meaning now.  When
Washington, in the fulness of his glory, rode through our flower-strewn
streets, this was the tongue that bade the Father of his Country welcome!
Again the same voice was heard, when La Fayette came to gather in his
half-century's harvest of gratitude.  Meantime, vast changes have been
going on below.  His voice, which once floated over a little provincial
seaport, is now reverberated between brick edifices, and strikes the ear
amid the buzz and tumult of a city.  On the Sabbaths of olden time, the
summons of the bell was obeyed by a picturesque and varied throng;
stately gentlemen in purple velvet coats, embroidered waistcoats, white
wigs, and gold-laced hats, stepping with grave courtesy beside ladies in
flowered satin gowns, and hoop-petticoats of majestic circumference;
while behind followed a liveried slave or bondsman, bearing the psalm-
book, and a stove for his mistress's feet.  The commonalty, clad in
homely garb, gave precedence to their betters at the door of the
meetinghouse, as if admitting that there were distinctions between them,
even in the sight of God.  Yet, as their coffins were borne one after
another through the street, the bell has tolled a requiem for all alike.
What mattered it, whether or no there were a silver scutcheon on the
coffin-lid?  "Open thy bosom, Mother Earth!"  Thus spake the bell.
"Another of thy children is coming to his long rest.  Take him to thy
bosom, and let him slumber in peace." Thus spake the bell, and Mother
Earth received her child.  With the self-same tones will the present
generation be ushered to the embraces of their mother; and Mother Earth
will still receive her children.  Is not thy tongue a-weary, mournful
talker of two centuries?  O funeral bell! wilt thou never be shattered
with thine own melancholy strokes?  Yea, and a trumpet-call shall arouse
the sleepers, whom thy heavy clang could awake no more!

Again--again thy voice, reminding me that I am wasting the "midnight
oil."  In my lonely fantasy, I can scarce believe that other mortals have
caught the sound, or that it vibrates elsewhere than in my secret soul.
But to many hast thou spoken.  Anxious men have heard thee on their
sleepless pillows, and bethought themselves anew of to-morrow's care.  In
a brief interval of wakefulness, the sons of toil have heard thee, and
say, "Is so much of our quiet slumber spent?--is the morning so near at
hand?"  Crime has heard thee, and mutters, "Now is the very hour!"
Despair answers thee, "Thus much of this weary life is gone!" The young
mother, on her bed of pain and ecstasy, has counted thy echoing strokes,
and dates from them her first-born's share of life and immortality.  The
bridegroom and the bride have listened, and feel that their night of
rapture flits like a dream away.  Thine accents have fallen faintly on
the ear of the dying man, and warned him that, ere thou speakest again,
his spirit shall have passed whither no voice of time can ever reach.
Alas for the departing traveller, if thy voice--the voice of fleeting
time--have taught him no lessons for Eternity!









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                        SYLPH ETHEREGE

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



On a bright summer evening, two persons stood among the shrubbery of a
garden, stealthily watching a young girl, who sat in the window seat of a
neighboring mansion.  One of these unseen observers, a gentleman, was
youthful, and had an air of high breeding and refinement, and a face
marked with intellect, though otherwise of unprepossessing aspect.  His
features wore even an ominous, though somewhat mirthful expression, while
he pointed his long forefinger at the girl, and seemed to regard her as a
creature completely within the scope of his influence.

"The charm works!" said he, in a low, but emphatic whisper.

"Do you know, Edward Hamilton,--since so you choose to be named,--do you
know," said the lady beside him, "that I have almost a mind to break the
spell at once?  What if the lesson should prove too severe!  True, if my
ward could be thus laughed out of her fantastic nonsense, she might be
the better for it through life.  But then, she is such a delicate
creature!  And, besides, are you not ruining your own chance, by putting
forward this shadow of a rival?"

"But will he not vanish into thin air, at my bidding?"  rejoined Edward
Hamilton.  "Let the charm work!"

The girl's slender and sylph-like figure, tinged with radiance from the
sunset clouds, and overhung with the rich drapery of the silken curtains,
and set within the deep frame of the window, was a perfect picture; or,
rather, it was like the original loveliness in a painter's fancy, from
which the most finished picture is but an imperfect copy.  Though her
occupation excited so much interest in the two spectators, she was merely
gazing at a miniature which she held in her hand, encased in white satin
and red morocco; nor did there appear to be any other cause for the smile
of mockery and malice with which Hamilton regarded her.

"The charm works! " muttered he, again.  "Our pretty Sylvia's scorn will
have a dear retribution!"

At this moment the girl raised her eyes, and, instead of a life-like
semblance of the miniature, beheld the ill-omened shape of Edward
Hamilton, who now stepped forth from his concealment in the shrubbery.

Sylvia Etherege was an orphan girl, who had spent her life, till within a
few months past, under the guardianship, and in the secluded dwelling, of
an old bachelor uncle.  While yet in her cradle, she had been the
destined bride of a cousin, who was no less passive in the betrothal than
herself.  Their future union had been projected, as the means of uniting
two rich estates, and was rendered highly expedient, if not
indispensable, by the testamentary dispositions of the parents on both
sides.  Edgar Vaughan, the promised bridegroom, had been bred from
infancy in Europe, and had never seen the beautiful girl whose heart he
was to claim as his inheritance.  But already, for several years, a
correspondence had been kept up between tine cousins, and had produced an
intellectual intimacy, though it could but imperfectly acquaint them with
each other's character.

Sylvia was shy, sensitive, and fanciful; and her guardian's secluded
habits had shut her out from even so much of the world as is generally
open to maidens of her age.  She had been left to seek associates and
friends for herself in the haunts of imagination, and to converse with
them, sometimes in the language of dead poets, oftener in the poetry of
her own mind.  The companion whom she chiefly summoned up was the cousin
with whose idea her earliest thoughts had been connected.  She made a
vision of Edgar Vaughan, and tinted it with stronger hues than a mere
fancy-picture, yet graced it with so many bright and delicate
perfections, that her cousin could nowhere have encountered so dangerous
a rival.  To this shadow she cherished a romantic fidelity.  With its
airy presence sitting by her side, or gliding along her favorite paths,
the loneliness of her young life was blissful; her heart was satisfied
with love, while yet its virgin purity was untainted by the earthliness
that the touch of a real lover would have left there.  Edgar Vaughan
seemed to be conscious of her character; for, in his letters, he gave her
a name that was happily appropriate to the sensitiveness of her
disposition, the delicate peculiarity of her manners, and the ethereal
beauty both of her mind and person.  Instead of Sylvia, he called her
Sylph,--with the prerogative of a cousin and a lover,--his dear Sylph
Etherege.

When Sylvia was seventeen, her guardian died, and she passed under the
care of Mrs. Grosvenor, a lady of wealth and fashion, and Sylvia's
nearest relative, though a distant one.  While an inmate of Mrs.
Grosvenor's family, she still preserved somewhat of her life-long habits
of seclusion, and shrank from a too familiar intercourse with those
around her.  Still, too, she was faithful to her cousin, or to the shadow
which bore his name.

The time now drew near when Edgar Vaughan, whose education had been
completed by an extensive range of travel, was to revisit the soil of his
nativity.  Edward Hamilton, a young gentleman, who had been Vaughan's
companion, both in his studies and rambles, had already recrossed the
Atlantic, bringing letters to Mrs. Grosvenor and Sylvia Etherege.  These
credentials insured him an earnest welcome, which, however, on Sylvia's
part, was not followed by personal partiality, or even the regard that
seemed due to her cousin's most intimate friend.  As she herself could
have assigned no cause for her repugnance, it might be termed
instinctive.  Hamilton's person, it is true, was the reverse of
attractive, especially when beheld for the first time.  Yet, in the eyes
of the most fastidious judges, the defect of natural grace was
compensated by the polish of his manners, and by the intellect which so
often gleamed through his dark features.  Mrs. Grosvenor, with whom he
immediately became a prodigious favorite, exerted herself to overcome
Sylvia's dislike.  But, in this matter, her ward could neither be
reasoned with nor persuaded.  The presence of Edward Hamilton was sure to
render her cold, shy, and distant, abstracting all the vivacity from her
deportment, as if a cloud had come betwixt her and the sunshine.

The simplicity of Sylvia's demeanor rendered it easy for so keen an
observer as Hamilton to detect her feelings.  Whenever any slight
circumstance made him sensible of them, a smile might be seen to flit
over the young man's sallow visage.  None, that had once beheld this
smile, were in any danger of forgetting it; whenever they recalled to
memory the features of Edward Hamilton, they were always duskily
illuminated by this expression of mockery and malice.

In a few weeks after Hamilton's arrival, he presented to Sylvia Etherege
a miniature of her cousin, which, as he informed her, would have been
delivered sooner, but was detained with a portion of his baggage.  This
was the miniature in the contemplation of which we beheld Sylvia so
absorbed, at the commencement of our story.  Such, in truth, was too
often the habit of the shy and musing girl.  The beauty of the pictured
countenance was almost too perfect to represent a human creature, that
had been born of a fallen and world-worn race, and had lived to manhood
amid ordinary troubles and enjoyments, and must become wrinkled with age
and care.  It seemed too bright for a thing formed of dust, and doomed to
crumble into dust again.  Sylvia feared that such a being would be too
refined and delicate to love a simple girl like her.  Yet, even while her
spirit drooped with that apprehension, the picture was but the masculine
counterpart of Sylph Etherege's sylphlike beauty.  There was that
resemblance between her own face and the miniature which is said often to
exist between lovers whom Heaven has destined for each other, and which,
in this instance, might be owing to the kindred blood of the two parties. 
Sylvia felt, indeed, that there was something familiar in the
countenance, so like a friend did the eyes smile upon her, and seem to
imply a knowledge of her thoughts.  She could account for this impression
only by supposing that, in some of her day-dreams, imagination had
conjured up the true similitude of her distant and unseen lover.

But now could Sylvia give a brighter semblance of reality to those day-
dreams.  Clasping the miniature to her heart, she could summon forth,
from that haunted cell of pure and blissful fantasies, the life-like
shadow, to roam with her in the moonlight garden.  Even at noontide it
sat with her in the arbor, when the sunshine threw its broken flakes of
gold into the clustering shade.  The effect upon her mind was hardly less
powerful than if she had actually listened to, and reciprocated, the vows
of Edgar Vaughan; for, though the illusion never quite deceived her, yet
the remembrance was as distinct as of a remembered interview.  Those
heavenly eyes gazed forever into her soul, which drank at them as at a
fountain, and was disquieted if reality threw a momentary cloud between. 
She heard the melody of a voice breathing sentiments with which her own
chimed in like music.  O happy, yet hapless girl!  Thus to create the
being whom she loves, to endow him with all the attributes that were most
fascinating to her heart, and then to flit with the airy creature into
the realm of fantasy and moonlight, where dwelt his dreamy kindred!  For
her lover wiled Sylvia away from earth, which seemed strange, and dull,
and darksome, and lured her to a country where her spirit roamed in
peaceful rapture, deeming that it had found its home.  Many, in their
youth, have visited that land of dreams, and wandered so long in its
enchanted groves, that, when banished thence, they feel like exiles
everywhere.

The dark-browed Edward Hamilton, like the villain of a tale, would often
glide through the romance wherein poor Sylvia walked.  Sometimes, at the
most blissful moment of her ecstasy, when the features of the miniature
were pictured brightest in the air, they would suddenly change, and
darken, and be transformed into his visage.  And always, when such change
occurred, the intrusive visage wore that peculiar smile with which
Hamilton had glanced at Sylvia.

Before the close of summer, it was told Sylvia Etherege that Vaughan had
arrived from France, and that she would meet him--would meet, for the
first time, the loved of years--that very evening.  We will not tell how
often and how earnestly she gazed upon the miniature, thus endeavoring to
prepare herself for the approaching interview, lest the throbbing of her
timorous heart should stifle the words of welcome.  While the twilight
grew deeper and duskier, she sat with Mrs. Grosvenor in an inner
apartment, lighted only by the softened gleam from an alabaster lamp,
which was burning at a distance on the centre-table of the drawing-room. 
Never before had Sylph Etherege looked so sylph-like.  She had communed
with a creature of imagination, till her own loveliness seemed but the
creation of a delicate and dreamy fancy.  Every vibration of her spirit
was visible in her frame, as she listened to the rattling of wheels and
the tramp upon the pavement, and deemed that even the breeze bore the
sound of her lover's footsteps, as if he trode upon the viewless air. 
Mrs. Grosvenor, too, while she watched the tremulous flow of Sylvia's
feelings, was deeply moved; she looked uneasily at the agitated girl, and
was about to speak, when the opening of the street-door arrested the
words upon her lips.

Footsteps ascended the staircase, with a confident and familiar tread,
and some one entered the drawing-room.  From the sofa where they sat, in
the inner apartment, Mrs. Grosvenor and Sylvia could not discern the
visitor.

"Sylph!" cried a voice.  "Dearest Sylph!  Where are you, sweet Sylph
Etherege?  Here is your Edgar Vaughan!"

But instead of answering, or rising to meet her lover,--who had greeted
her by the sweet and fanciful name, which, appropriate as it was to her
character, was known only to him,--Sylvia grasped Mrs. Grosvenor's arm,
while her whole frame shook with the throbbing of her heart.

"Who is it?" gasped she.  "Who calls me Sylph?"

Before Mrs. Grosvenor could reply, the stranger entered the room, bearing
the lamp in his hand.  Approaching the sofa, he displayed to Sylvia the
features of Edward Hamilton, illuminated by that evil smile, from which
his face derived so marked an individuality.

"Is not the miniature an admirable likeness?" inquired he.

Sylvia shuddered, but had not power to turn away her white face from his
gaze.  The miniature, which she had been holding in her hand, fell down
upon the floor, where Hamilton, or Vaughan, set his foot upon it, and
crushed the ivory counterfeit to fragments.

"There, my sweet Sylph," he exclaimed.  "It was I that created your
phantom-lover, and now I annihilate him!  Your dream is rudely broken. 
Awake, Sylph Etherege, awake to truth!  I am the only Edgar Vaughan!"

"We have gone too far, Edgar Vaughan," said Mrs. Grosvenor, catching
Sylvia in her arms.  The revengeful freak, which Vaughan's wounded vanity
had suggested, had been countenanced by this lady, in the hope of curing
Sylvia of her romantic notions, and reconciling her to the truths and
realities of life.  "Look at the poor child!" she continued.  "I protest
I tremble for the consequences!"

"Indeed, madam!" replied Vaughan, sneeringly, as he threw the light of
the lamp on Sylvia's closed eyes and marble features.  "Well, my
conscience is clear.  I did but look into this delicate creature's heart;
and with the pure fantasies that I found there, I made what seemed a
man,--and the delusive shadow has wiled her away to Shadow-land, and
vanished there!  It is no new tale.  Many a sweet maid has shared the lot
of poor Sylph Etherege!"

"And now, Edgar Vaughan," said Mrs. Grosvenor, as Sylvia's heart began
faintly to throb again, "now try, in good earnest, to win back her love
from the phantom which you conjured up.  If you succeed, she will be the
better, her whole life long, for the lesson we have given her."

Whether the result of the lesson corresponded with Mrs. Grosvenor's
hopes, may be gathered from the closing scene of our story.  It had been
made known to the fashionable world that Edgar Vaughan had returned from
France, and, under the assumed name of Edward Hamilton, had won the
affections of the lovely girl to whom he had been affianced in his
boyhood.  The nuptials were to take place at an early date.  One evening,
before the day of anticipated bliss arrived, Edgar Vaughan entered Mrs.
Grosvenor's drawing-room, where he found that lady and Sylph Etherege.

"Only that Sylvia makes no complaint," remarked Mrs. Grosvenor, "I should
apprehend that the town air is ill-suited to her constitution.  She was
always, indeed, a delicate creature; but now she is a mere gossamer.  Do
but look at her!  Did you ever imagine anything so fragile?"

Vaughan was already attentively observing his mistress, who sat in a
shadowy and moonlighted recess of the room, with her dreamy eyes fixed
steadfastly upon his own.  The bough of a tree was waving before the
window, and sometimes enveloped her in the gloom of its shadow, into
which she seemed to vanish.

"Yes," he said, to Mrs. Grosvenor.  "I can scarcely deem her of the
earth, earthy.  No wonder that I call her Sylph!  Methinks she will fade
into the moonlight, which falls upon her through the window.  Or, in the
open air, she might flit away upon the breeze, like a wreath of mist!"

Sylvia's eyes grew yet brighter.  She waved her hand to Edgar Vaughan,
with a gesture of ethereal triumph.

"Farewell!" she said.  "I will neither fade into the moonlight, nor flit
away upon the breeze.  Yet you cannot keep me here!"

There was something in Sylvia's look and tones that startled Mrs.
Grosvenor with a terrible apprehension.  But, as she was rushing towards
the girl, Vaughan held her back.

"Stay!" cried he, with a strange smile of mockery and anguish.  "Can our
sweet Sylph be going to heaven, to seek the original of the miniature?"









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                           OLD NEWS

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



There is a volume of what were once newspapers each on a small half-
sheet, yellow and time-stained, of a coarse fabric, and imprinted with
a rude old type.  Their aspect conveys a singular impression of
antiquity, in a species of literature which we are accustomed to consider
as connected only with the present moment.  Ephemeral as they were
intended and supposed to be, they have long outlived the printer and his
whole subscription-list, and have proved more durable, as to their
physical existence, than most of the timber, bricks, and stone of the
town where they were issued.  These are but the least of their triumphs.
The government, the interests, the opinions, in short, all the moral
circumstances that were contemporary with their publication, have passed
away, and left no better record of what they were than may be found in
these frail leaves.  Happy are the editors of newspapers!  Their
productions excel all others in immediate popularity, and are certain to
acquire another sort of value with the lapse of time.  They scatter their
leaves to the wind, as the sibyl did, and posterity collects them, to be
treasured up among the best materials of its wisdom.  With hasty pens
they write for immortality.

It is pleasant to take one of these little dingy halfsheets between the
thumb and finger, and picture forth the personage who, above ninety years
ago, held it, wet from the press, and steaming, before the fire.  Many of
the numbers bear the name of an old colonial dignitary.  There he sits, a
major, a member of the council, and a weighty merchant, in his high-
backed arm-chair, wearing a solemn wig and grave attire, such as befits
his imposing gravity of mien, and displaying but little finery, except a
huge pair of silver shoe-buckles, curiously carved.  Observe the awful
reverence of his visage, as he reads his Majesty's most gracious speech;
and the deliberate wisdom with which he ponders over some paragraph of
provincial politics, and the keener intelligence with which he glances at
the ship-news and commercial advertisements.  Observe, and smile!  He may
have been a wise man in his day; but, to us, the wisdom of the politician
appears like folly, because we can compare its prognostics with actual
results; and the old merchant seems to have busied himself about
vanities, because we know that the expected ships have been lost at sea,
or mouldered at the wharves; that his imported broadcloths were long ago
worn to tatters, and his cargoes of wine quaffed to the lees; and that
the most precious leaves of his ledger have become waste-paper.  Yet, his
avocations were not so vain as our philosophic moralizing.  In this world
we are the things of a moment, and are made to pursue momentary things,
with here and there a thought that stretches mistily towards eternity,
and perhaps may endure as long.  All philosophy that would abstract
mankind from the present is no more than words.

The first pages of most of these old papers are as soporific as a bed of
poppies.  Here we have an erudite clergyman, or perhaps a Cambridge
professor, occupying several successive weeks with a criticism on Tate
and Brady, as compared with the New England version of the Psalms.  Of
course, the preference is given to the native article.  Here are doctors
disagreeing about the treatment of a putrid fever then prevalent, and
blackguarding each other with a characteristic virulence that renders the
controversy not altogether unreadable.  Here are President Wigglesworth
and the Rev. Dr. Colman, endeavoring to raise a fund for the support of
missionaries among the Indians of Massachusetts Bay.  Easy would be the
duties of such a mission now!  Here--for there is nothing new under the
sun--are frequent complaints of the disordered state of the currency, and
the project of a bank with a capital of five hundred thousand pounds,
secured on lands.  Here are literary essays, from the Gentleman's
Magazine; and squibs against the Pretender, from the London newspapers.
And here, occasionally, are specimens of New England honor, laboriously
light and lamentably mirthful, as if some very sober person, in his zeal
to be merry, were dancing a jig to the tune of a funeral-psalm.  All this
is wearisome, and we must turn the leaf.

There is a good deal of amusement, and some profit, in the perusal of
those little items which characterize the manners and circumstances of
the country.  New England was then in a state incomparably more
picturesque than at present, or than it has been within the memory of
man; there being, as yet, only a narrow strip of civilization along the
edge of a vast forest, peopled with enough of its original race to
contrast the savage life with the old customs of another world.  The
white population, also, was diversified by the influx of all sorts of
expatriated vagabonds, and by the continual importation of bond-servants
from Ireland and elsewhere, so that there was a wild and unsettled
multitude, forming a strong minority to the sober descendants of the
Puritans.  Then, there were the slaves, contributing their dark shade to
the picture of society.  The consequence of all this was a great variety
and singularity of action and incident, many instances of which might be
selected from these columns, where they are told with a simplicity and
quaintness of style that bring the striking points into very strong
relief.  It is natural to suppose, too, that these circumstances affected
the body of the people, and made their course of life generally less
regular than that of their descendants.  There is no evidence that the
moral standard was higher then than now; or, indeed, that morality was so
well defined as it has since become.  There seem to have been quite as
many frauds and robberies, in proportion to the number of honest deeds;
there were murders, in hot-blood and in malice; and bloody quarrels over
liquor.  Some of our fathers also appear to have been yoked to unfaithful
wives, if we may trust the frequent notices of elopements from bed and
board.  The pillory, the whipping-post, the prison, and the gallows, each
had their use in those old times; and, in short, as often as our
imagination lives in the past, we find it a ruder and rougher age than
our own, with hardly any perceptible advantages, and much that gave life
a gloomier tinge. In vain we endeavor to throw a sunny and joyous air
over our picture of this period; nothing passes before our fancy but a
crowd of sad-visaged people, moving duskily through a dull gray
atmosphere.  It is certain that winter rushed upon them with fiercer
storms than now, blocking up the narrow forest-paths, and overwhelming
the roads along the sea-coast with mountain snow drifts; so that weeks
elapsed before the newspaper could announce how many travellers had
perished, or what wrecks had strewn the shore.  The cold was more
piercing then, and lingered further into the spring, making the chimney-
corner a comfortable seat till long past May-day.  By the number of such
accidents on record, we might suppose that the thunder-stone, as they
termed it, fell oftener and deadlier on steeples, dwellings, and
unsheltered wretches.  In fine, our fathers bore the brunt of more raging
and pitiless elements than we.  There were forebodings, also, of a more
fearful tempest than those of the elements.  At two or three dates, we
have stories of drums, trumpets, and all sorts of martial music, passing
athwart the midnight sky, accompanied with the--roar of cannon and rattle
of musketry, prophetic echoes of the sounds that were soon to shake the
land.  Besides these airy prognostics, there were rumors of French fleets
on the coast, and of the march of French and Indians through the
wilderness, along the borders of the settlements.  The country was
saddened, moreover, with grievous sicknesses.  The small-pox raged in
many of the towns, and seems, though so familiar a scourge, to have been
regarded with as much affright as that which drove the throng from Wall
Street and Broadway at the approach of a new pestilence.  There were
autumnal fevers too, and a contagious and destructive throat-distemper,--
diseases unwritten in medical hooks.  The dark superstition of former
days had not yet been so far dispelled as not to heighten the gloom of
the present times.  There is an advertisement, indeed, by a committee of
the Legislature, calling for information as to the circumstances of
sufferers in the "late calamity of 1692," with a view to reparation for
their losses and misfortunes.  But the tenderness with which, after above
forty years, it was thought expedient to allude to the witchcraft
delusion, indicates a good deal of lingering error, as well as the
advance of more enlightened opinions.  The rigid hand of Puritanism might
yet be felt upon the reins of government, while some of the ordinances
intimate a disorderly spirit on the part of the people.  The Suffolk
justices, after a preamble that great disturbances have been committed by
persons entering town and leaving it in coaches, chaises, calashes, and
other wheel-carriages, on the evening before the Sabbath, give notice
that a watch will hereafter be set at the "fortification-gate," to
prevent these outrages.  It is amusing to see Boston assuming the aspect
of a walled city, guarded, probably, by a detachment of church-members,
with a deacon at their head.  Governor Belcher makes proclamation against
certain "loose and dissolute people" who have been wont to stop
passengers in the streets, on the Fifth of November, "otherwise called
Pope's Day," and levy contributions for the building of bonfires.  In
this instance, the populace are more puritanic than the magistrate.

The elaborate solemnities of funerals were in accordance with the sombre
character of the times.  In cases of ordinary death, the printer seldom
fails to notice that the corpse was "very decently interred."  But when
some mightier mortal has yielded to his fate, the decease of the
"worshipful" such-a-one is announced, with all his titles of deacon,
justice, councillor, and colonel; then follows an heraldic sketch of his
honorable ancestors, and lastly an account of the black pomp of his
funeral, and the liberal expenditure of scarfs, gloves, and mourning
rings.  The burial train glides slowly before us, as we have seen it
represented in the woodcuts of that day, the coffin, and the bearers,
and the lamentable friends, trailing their long black garments, while
grim Death, a most misshapen skeleton, with all kinds of doleful
emblems, stalks hideously in front.  There was a coach maker at this
period, one John Lucas, who scents to have gained the chief of his
living by letting out a sable coach to funerals. It would not be fair,
however, to leave quite so dismal an impression on the reader's mind;
nor should it be forgotten that happiness may walk soberly in dark
attire, as well as dance lightsomely in a gala-dress.  And this reminds
us that there is an incidental notice of the "dancing-school near the
Orange-Tree," whence we may infer that the salutatory art was
occasionally practised, though perhaps chastened into a characteristic
gravity of movement.  This pastime was probably confined to the
aristocratic circle, of which the royal governor was the centre.  But we
are scandalized at the attempt of Jonathan Furness to introduce a more
reprehensible amusement: be challenges the whole country to match his
black gelding in a race for a hundred pounds, to be decided on Metonomy
Common or Chelsea Beach. Nothing as to the manners of the times can be
inferred from this freak of an individual.  There were no daily and
continual opportunities of being merry; but sometimes the people
rejoiced, in their own peculiar fashion, oftener with a calm, religious
smile than with a broad laugh, as when they feasted, like one great
family, at Thanksgiving time, or indulged a livelier mirth throughout
the pleasant days of Election-week.  This latter was the true holiday
season of New England.  Military musters were too seriously important in
that warlike time to be classed among amusements; but they stirred up
and enlivened the public mind, and were occasions of solemn festival to
the governor and great men of the province, at the expense of the field-
offices.  The Revolution blotted a feast-day out of our calendar; for
the anniversary of the king's birth appears to have been celebrated with
most imposing pomp, by salutes from Castle William, a military parade, a
grand dinner at the town-house, and a brilliant illumination in the
evening.  There was nothing forced nor feigned in these testimonials of
loyalty to George the Second.  So long as they dreaded the
re-establishment of a popish dynasty, the people were fervent for the
house of Hanover: and, besides, the immediate magistracy of the country
was a barrier between the monarch and the occasional discontents of the
colonies; the waves of faction sometimes reached the governor's chair,
but never swelled against the throne.  Thus, until oppression was felt
to proceed from the king's own hand, New England rejoiced with her whole
heart on his Majesty's birthday.

But the slaves, we suspect, were the merriest part of the population,
since it was their gift to be merry in the worst of circumstances; and
they endured, comparatively, few hardships, under the domestic sway of
our fathers.  There seems to have been a great trade in these human
commodities.  No advertisements are more frequent than those of "a negro
fellow, fit for almost any household work"; "a negro woman, honest,
healthy, and capable"; "a negro wench of many desirable qualities";
"a negro man, very fit for a taylor."  We know not in what this natural
fitness for a tailor consisted, unless it were some peculiarity of
conformation that enabled him to sit cross-legged.  When the slaves of a
family were inconveniently prolific,--it being not quite orthodox to
drown the superfluous offspring, like a litter of kittens,--notice was
promulgated of "a negro child to be given away."  Sometimes the slaves
assumed the property of their own persons, and made their escape; among
many such instances, the governor raises a hue-and-cry after his negro
Juba.  But, without venturing a word in extenuation of the general
system, we confess our opinion that Caesar, Pompey, Scipio, and all such
great Roman namesakes, would have been better advised had they stayed at
home, foddering the cattle, cleaning dishes,--in fine, performing their
moderate share of the labors of life, without being harassed by its
cares.  The sable inmates of the mansion were not excluded from the
domestic affections: in families of middling rank, they had their places
at the board; and when the circle closed round the evening hearth, its
blaze glowed on their dark shining faces, intermixed familiarly with
their master's children.  It must have contributed to reconcile them to
their lot, that they saw white men and women imported from Europe as they
had been from Africa, and sold, though only for a term of years, yet as
actual slaves to the highest bidder.  Slave labor being but a small part
of the industry of the country, it did not change the character of the
people; the latter, on the contrary, modified and softened the
institution, making it a patriarchal, and almost a beautiful, peculiarity
of the times.

Ah!  We had forgotten the good old merchant, over whose shoulder we were
peeping, while he read the newspaper.  Let us now suppose him putting on
his three-cornered gold-laced hat, grasping his cane, with a head inlaid
of ebony and mother-of-pearl, and setting forth, through the crooked
streets of Boston, on various errands, suggested by the advertisements of
the day.  Thus he communes with himself: I must be mindful, says he, to
call at Captain Scut's, in Creek Lane, and examine his rich velvet,
whether it be fit for my apparel on Election-day,--that I may wear a
stately aspect in presence of the governor and my brethren of the
council.  I will look in, also, at the shop of Michael Cario, the
jeweller: he has silver buckles of a new fashion; and mine have lasted me
some half-score years.  My fair daughter Miriam shall have an apron of
gold brocade, and a velvet mask,--though it would be a pity the wench
should hide her comely visage; and also a French cap, from Robert
Jenkins's, on the north side of the town-house.  He hath beads, too, and
ear-rings, and necklaces, of all sorts; these are but vanities,
nevertheless, they would please the silly maiden well.  My dame desireth
another female in the kitchen; wherefore, I must inspect the lot of Irish
lasses, for sale by Samuel Waldo, aboard the schooner Endeavor; as also
the likely negro wench, at Captain Bulfinch's.  It were not amiss that I
took my daughter Miriam to see the royal waxwork, near the town-dock,
that she may learn to honor our most gracious King and Queen, and their
royal progeny, even in their waxen images; not that I would approve of
image-worship.  The camel, too, that strange beast from Africa, with two
great humps, to be seen near the Common; methinks I would fain go
thither, and see how the old patriarchs were wont to ride.  I will tarry
awhile in Queen Street, at the bookstore of my good friends Kneeland &
Green, and purchase Dr. Colman's new sermon, and the volume of discourses
by Mr. Henry Flynt; and look over the controversy on baptism, between the
Rev. Peter Clarke and an unknown adversary; and see whether this George
Whitefield be as great in print as he is famed to be in the pulpit.  By
that time, the auction will have commenced at the Royal Exchange, in King
Street.  Moreover, I must look to the disposal of my last cargo of West
India rum and muscovado sugar; and also the lot of choice Cheshire
cheese, lest it grow mouldy.  It were well that I ordered a cask of good
English beer, at the lower end of Milk Street.

Then am I to speak with certain dealers about the lot of stout old
Vidonia, rich Canary, and Oporto-wines, which I have now lying in the
cellar of the Old South meeting-house. But, a pipe or two of the rich
Canary shall be reserved, that it may grow mellow in mine own
wine-cellar, and gladden my heart when it begins to droop with old age.

Provident old gentleman! But, was he mindful of his sepulchre? Did he
bethink him to call at the workshop of Timothy Sheaffe, in Cold Lane, and
select such a gravestone as would best please him?  There wrought the man
whose handiwork, or that of his fellow-craftsmen, was ultimately in
demand by all the busy multitude who have left a record of their earthly
toil in these old time-stained papers. And now, as we turn over the
volume, we seem to be wandering among the mossy stones of a
burial-ground.


II. THE OLD FRENCH WAR.

At a period about twenty years subsequent to that of our former sketch,
we again attempt a delineation of some of the characteristics of life and
manners in New England. Our text-book, as before, is a file of antique
newspapers. The volume which serves us for a writing-desk is a folio of
larger dimensions than the one before described; and the papers are
generally printed on a whole sheet, sometimes with a supplemental leaf of
news and advertisements. They have a venerable appearance, being
overspread with a duskiness of more than seventy years, and discolored,
here and there, with the deeper stains of some liquid, as if the contents
of a wineglass had long since been splashed upon the page.  Still, the
old book conveys an impression that, when the separate numbers were
flying about town, in the first day or two of their respective
existences, they might have been fit reading for very stylish people.
Such newspapers could have been issued nowhere but in a metropolis the
centre, not only of public and private affairs, but of fashion and
gayety.  Without any discredit to the colonial press, these might have
been, and probably were, spread out on the tables of the British coffee-
house, in king Street, for the perusal of the throng of officers who then
drank their wine at that celebrated establishment.  To interest these
military gentlemen, there were bulletins of the war between Prussia and
Austria; between England and France, on the old battle-plains of
Flanders; and between the same antagonists, in the newer fields of the
East Indies,--and in our own trackless woods, where white men never trod
until they came to fight there.  Or, the travelled American, the petit-
maitre of the colonies,--the ape of London foppery, as the newspaper was
the semblance of the London journals,--he, with his gray powdered
periwig, his embroidered coat, lace ruffles, and glossy silk stockings,
golden-clocked,--his buckles of glittering paste, at knee-band and shoe-
strap,--his scented handkerchief, and chapeau beneath his arm, even such
a dainty figure need not have disdained to glance at these old yellow
pages, while they were the mirror of passing times.  For his amusement,
there were essays of wit and humor, the light literature of the day,
which, for breadth and license, might have proceeded from the pen of
Fielding or Smollet; while, in other columns, he would delight his
imagination with the enumerated items of all sorts of finery, and with
the rival advertisements of half a dozen peruke-makers.  In short, newer
manners and customs had almost entirely superseded those of the Puritans,
even in their own city of refuge.

It was natural that, with the lapse of time and increase of wealth and
population, the peculiarities of the early settlers should have waxed
fainter and fainter through the generations of their descendants, who
also had been alloyed by a continual accession of emigrants from many
countries and of all characters.  It tended to assimilate the colonial
manners to those of the mother-country, that the commercial intercourse
was great, and that the merchants often went thither in their own ships.
Indeed, almost every man of adequate fortune felt a yearning desire, and
even judged it a filial duty, at least once in his life, to visit the
home of his ancestors.  They still called it their own home, as if New
England were to them, what many of the old Puritans had considered it,
not a permanent abiding-place, but merely a lodge in the wilderness,
until the trouble of the times should be passed.  The example of the
royal governors must have had much influence on the manners of the
colonists; for these rulers assumed a degree of state and splendor which
had never been practised by their predecessors, who differed in nothing
from republican chief-magistrates, under the old charter.  The officers
of the crown, the public characters in the interest of the
administration, and the gentlemen of wealth and good descent, generally
noted for their loyalty, would constitute a dignified circle, with the
governor in the centre, bearing a very passable resemblance to a court.
Their ideas, their habits, their bode of courtesy, and their dress would
have all the fresh glitter of fashions immediately derived from the
fountain-head, in England.  To prevent their modes of life from becoming
the standard with all who had the ability to imitate them, there was no
longer an undue severity of religion, nor as yet any disaffection to
British supremacy, nor democratic prejudices against pomp.  Thus, while
the colonies were attaining that strength which was soon to render them
an independent republic, it might have been supposed that the wealthier
classes were growing into an aristocracy, and ripening for hereditary
rank, while the poor were to be stationary in their abasement, and the
country, perhaps, to be a sister monarchy with England.  Such, doubtless,
were the plausible conjectures deduced from the superficial phenomena of
our connection with a monarchical government, until the prospective
nobility were levelled with the mob, by the mere gathering of winds that
preceded the storm of the Revolution.  The portents of that storm were
not yet visible in the air.  A true picture of society, therefore, would
have the rich effect produced by distinctions of rank that seemed
permanent, and by appropriate habits of splendor on the part of the
gentry.

The people at large had been somewhat changed in character, since the
period of our last sketch, by their great exploit, the conquest of
Louisburg.  After that event, the New-Englanders never settled into
precisely the same quiet race which all the world had imagined them to
be.  They had done a deed of history, and were anxious to add new ones to
the record.  They had proved themselves powerful enough to influence the
result of a war, and were thenceforth called upon, and willingly
consented, to join their strength against the enemies of England; on
those fields, at least, where victory would redound to their peculiar
advantage.  And now, in the heat of the Old French War, they might well
be termed a martial people.  Every man was a soldier, or the father or
brother of a soldier; and the whole land literally echoed with the roll
of the drum, either beating up for recruits among the towns and villages,
or striking the march towards the frontiers.  Besides the provincial
troops, there were twenty-three British regiments in the northern
colonies.  The country has never known a period of such excitement and
warlike life; except during the Revolution,--perhaps scarcely then; for
that was a lingering war, and this a stirring and eventful one.

One would think that no very wonderful talent was requisite for an
historical novel, when the rough and hurried paragraphs of these
newspapers can recall the past so magically.  We seem to be waiting in
the street for the arrival of the post-rider--who is seldom more than
twelve hours beyond his time--with letters, by way of Albany, from the
various departments of the army.  Or, we may fancy ourselves in the
circle of listeners, all with necks stretched out towards an old
gentleman in the centre, who deliberately puts on his spectacles, unfolds
the wet newspaper, and gives us the details of the broken and
contradictory reports, which have been flying from mouth to mouth, ever
since the courier alighted at Secretary Oliver's office.  Sometimes we
have an account of the Indian skirmishes near Lake George, and how a
ranging party of provincials were so closely pursued, that they threw
away their arms, and eke their shoes, stockings, and breeches, barely
reaching the camp in their shirts, which also were terribly tattered by
the bushes.  Then, there is a journal of the siege of Fort Niagara, so
minute that it almost numbers the cannon-shot and bombs, and describes
the effect of the latter missiles on the French commandant's stone
mansion, within the fortress.  In the letters of the provincial officers,
it is amusing to observe how some of them endeavor to catch the careless
and jovial turn of old campaigners.  One gentleman tells us that he holds
a brimming glass in his hand, intending to drink the health of his
correspondent, unless a cannon ball should dash the liquor from his lips;
in the midst of his letter he hears the bells of the French churches
ringing, in Quebec, and recollects that it is Sunday; whereupon, like a
good Protestant, he resolves to disturb the Catholic worship by a few
thirty-two pound shot.  While this wicked man of war was thus making a
jest of religion, his pious mother had probably put up a note, that very
Sabbath-day, desiring the "prayers of the congregation for a son gone a
soldiering."  We trust, however, that there were some stout old worthies
who were not ashamed to do as their fathers did, but went to prayer, with
their soldiers, before leading them to battle; and doubtless fought none
the worse for that.  If we had enlisted in the Old French War, it should
have been under such a captain; for we love to see a man keep the
characteristics of his country.

     [The contemptuous jealousy of the British army, from the general
     downwards, was very galling to the provincial troops.  In one of the
     newspapers, there is an admirable letter of a New England man,
     copied from the London Chronicle, defending the provincials with an
     ability worthy of Franklin, and somewhat in his style.  The letter
     is remarkable, also, because it takes up the cause of the whole
     range of colonies, as if the writer looked upon them all as
     constituting one country, and that his own.  Colonial patriotism had
     not hitherto been so broad a sentiment.]

These letters, and other intelligence from the army, are pleasant and
lively reading, and stir up the mind like the music of a drum and fife.
It is less agreeable to meet with accounts of women slain and scalped,
and infants dashed against trees, by the Indians on the frontiers.  It is
a striking circumstance, that innumerable bears, driven from the woods,
by the uproar of contending armies in their accustomed haunts, broke into
the settlements, and committed great ravages among children, as well as
sheep and swine.  Some of them prowled where bears had never been for a
century, penetrating within a mile or two of Boston; a fact that gives a
strong and gloomy impression of something very terrific going on in the
forest, since these savage beasts fled townward to avoid it.  But it is
impossible to moralize about such trifles, when every newspaper contains
tales of military enterprise, and often a huzza for victory; as, for
instance, the taking of Ticonderoga, long a place of awe to the
provincials, and one of the bloodiest spots in the present war.  Nor is
it unpleasant, among whole pages of exultation, to find a note of sorrow
for the fall of some brave officer; it comes wailing in, like a funeral
strain amidst a peal of triumph, itself triumphant too.  Such was the
lamentation over Wolfe.  Somewhere, in this volume of newspapers, though
we cannot now lay our finger upon the passage, we recollect a report that
General Wolfe was slain, not by the enemy, but by a shot from his own
soldiers.

In the advertising columns, also, we are continually reminded that the
country was in a state of war.  Governor Pownall makes proclamation for
the enlisting of soldiers, and directs the militia colonels to attend to
the discipline of their regiments, and the selectmen of every town to
replenish their stocks of ammunition.  The magazine, by the way, was
generally kept in the upper loft of the village meeting-house.  The
provincial captains are drumming up for soldiers, in every newspaper.
Sir Jeffrey Amherst advertises for batteaux-men, to be employed on the
lakes; and gives notice to the officers of seven British regiments,
dispersed on the recruiting service, to rendezvous in Boston.  Captain
Hallowell, of the province ship-of-war King George, invites able-bodied
seamen to serve his Majesty, for fifteen pounds, old tenor, per month.
By the rewards offered, there would appear to have been frequent
desertions from the New England forces: we applaud their wisdom, if not
their valor or integrity.  Cannon of all calibres, gunpowder and balls,
firelocks, pistols, swords, and hangers, were common articles of
merchandise.  Daniel Jones, at the sign of the hat and helmet, offers to
supply officers with scarlet broadcloth, gold-lace for hats and
waistcoats, cockades, and other military foppery, allowing credit until
the payrolls shall be made up.  This advertisement gives us quite a
gorgeous idea of a provincial captain in full dress.

At the commencement of the campaign of 1759, the British general informs
the farmers of New England that a regular market will be established at
Lake George, whither they are invited to bring provisions and
refreshments of all sorts, for the use of the army.  Hence, we may form a
singular picture of petty traffic, far away from any permanent
settlements, among the hills which border that romantic lake, with the
solemn woods overshadowing the scene.  Carcasses of bullocks and fat
porkers are placed upright against the huge trunks of the trees; fowls
hang from the lower branches, bobbing against the heads of those beneath;
butter-firkins, great cheeses, and brown loaves of household bread, baked
in distant ovens, are collected under temporary shelters or pine-boughs,
with gingerbread, and pumpkin-pies, perhaps, and other toothsome
dainties.  Barrels of cider and spruce-beer are running freely into the
wooden canteens of the soldiers.  Imagine such a scene, beneath the dark
forest canopy, with here and there a few struggling sunbeams, to
dissipate the gloom.  See the shrewd yeomen, haggling with their scarlet-
coated customers, abating somewhat in their prices, but still dealing at
monstrous profit; and then complete the picture with circumstances that
bespeak war and danger.  A cannon shall be seen to belch its smoke from
among the trees, against some distant canoes on the lake; the traffickers
shall pause, and seem to hearken, at intervals, as if they heard the
rattle of musketry or the shout of Indians; a scouting-party shall be
driven in, with two or three faint and bloody men among them.  And, in
spite of these disturbances, business goes on briskly in the market of
the wilderness.

It must not be supposed that the martial character of the times
interrupted all pursuits except those connected with war.  On the
contrary, there appears to have been a general vigor and vivacity
diffused into the whole round of colonial life.  During the winter of
1759, it was computed that about a thousand sled-loads of country produce
were daily brought into Boston market.  It was a symptom of an irregular
and unquiet course of affairs, that innumerable lotteries were projected,
ostensibly for the purpose of public improvements, such as roads and
bridges.  Many females seized the opportunity to engage in business: as,
among others, Alice Quick, who dealt in crockery and hosiery, next door
to Deacon Beautiueau's; Mary Jackson, who sold butter, at the Brazen-
Head, in Cornhill; Abigail Hiller, who taught ornamental work, near the
Orange-Tree, where also were to be seen the King and Queen, in wax-work;
Sarah Morehead, an instructor in glass-painting, drawing, and japanning;
Mary Salmon, who shod horses, at the South End; Harriet Pain, at the Buck
and Glove, and Mrs. Henrietta Maria Caine, at the Golden Fan, both
fashionable milliners; Anna Adams, who advertises Quebec and Garrick
bonnets, Prussian cloaks, and scarlet cardinals, opposite the old brick
meeting-house; besides a lady at the head of a wine and spirit
establishment.  Little did these good dames expect to reappear before the
public, so long after they had made their last courtesies behind the
counter.  Our great-grandmothers were a stirring sisterhood, and seem not
to have been utterly despised by the gentlemen at the British coffee-
house; at least, some gracious bachelor, there resident, gives public
notice of his willingness to take a wife, provided she be not above
twenty-three, and possess brown hair, regular features, a brisk eye, and
a fortune.  Now, this was great condescension towards the ladies of
Massachusetts Bay, in a threadbare lieutenant of foot.

Polite literature was beginning to make its appearance.  Few native works
were advertised, it is true, except sermons and treatises of
controversial divinity; nor were the English authors of the day much
known on this side of the Atlantic.  But catalogues were frequently
offered at auction or private sale, comprising the standard English
books, history, essays, and poetry, of Queen Anne's age, and the
preceding century.  We see nothing in the nature of a novel, unless it be
"_The Two Mothers_, price four coppers."  There was an American poet,
however, of whom Mr. Kettell has preserved no specimen,--the author of
"War, an Heroic Poem"; he publishes by subscription, and threatens to
prosecute his patrons for not taking their books.  We have discovered a
periodical, also, and one that has a peculiar claim to be recorded here,
since it bore the title of "_THE NEW ENGLAND MAGAZINE_," a forgotten
predecessor, for which we should have a filial respect, and take its
excellence on trust.  The fine arts, too, were budding into existence.
At the "old glass and picture shop," in Cornhill, various maps, plates,
and views are advertised, and among them a "Prospect of Boston," a
copperplate engraving of Quebec, and the effigies of all the New England
ministers ever done in mezzotinto.  All these must have been very salable
articles.  Other ornamental wares were to be found at the same shop; such
as violins, flutes, hautboys, musical books, English and Dutch toys, and
London babies.  About this period, Mr. Dipper gives notice of a concert
of vocal and instrumental music.  There had already been an attempt at
theatrical exhibitions.

There are tokens, in every newspaper, of a style of luxury and
magnificence which we do not usually associate with our ideas of the
times.  When the property of a deceased person was to be sold, we find,
among the household furniture, silk beds and hangings, damask table-
cloths, Turkey carpets, pictures, pier-glasses, massive plate, and all
things proper for a noble mansion.  Wine was more generally drunk than
now, though by no means to the neglect of ardent spirits.  For the
apparel of both sexes, the mercers and milliners imported good store of
fine broadcloths, especially scarlet, crimson, and sky-blue, silks,
satins, lawns, and velvets, gold brocade, and gold and silver lace, and
silver tassels, and silver spangles, until Cornhill shone and sparkled
with their merchandise.  The gaudiest dress permissible by modern taste
fades into a Quaker-like sobriety, compared with the deep, rich, glowing
splendor of our ancestors.  Such figures were almost too fine to go about
town on foot; accordingly, carriages were so numerous as to require a
tax; and it is recorded that, when Governor Bernard came to the province,
he was met between Dedham and Boston by a multitude of gentlemen in their
coaches and chariots.

Take my arm, gentle reader, and come with me into some street, perhaps
trodden by your daily footsteps, but which now has such an aspect of
half-familiar strangeness, that you suspect yourself to be walking abroad
in a dream.  True, there are some brick edifices which you remember from
childhood, and which your father and grandfather remembered as well; but
you are perplexed by the absence of many that were here only an hour or
two since; and still more amazing is the presence of whole rows of wooden
and plastered houses, projecting over the sidewalks, and bearing iron
figures on their fronts, which prove them to have stood on the same sites
above a century.  Where have your eyes been that you never saw them
before?  Along the ghostly street,--for, at length, you conclude that all
is unsubstantial, though it be so good a mockery of an antique town,--
along the ghostly street, there are ghostly people too.  Every gentleman
has his three-cornered hat, either on his head or under his arm; and all
wear wigs in infinite variety,--the Tie, the Brigadier, the Spencer, the
Albemarle, the Major, the Ramillies, the grave Full-bottom, or the giddy
Feather-top.  Look at the elaborate lace-ruffles, and the square-skirted
coats of gorgeous hues, bedizened with silver and gold!  Make way for the
phantom-ladies, whose hoops require such breadth of passage, as they pace
majestically along, in silken gowns, blue, green, or yellow, brilliantly
embroidered, and with small satin hats surmounting their powdered hair.
Make way; for the whole spectral show will vanish, if your earthly
garments brush against their robes.  Now that the scene is brightest, and
the whole street glitters with imaginary sunshine,--now hark to the bells
of the Old South and the Old North, ringing out with a sudden and merry
peal, while the cannon of Castle William thunder below the town, and
those of the Diana frigate repeat the sound, and the Charlestown
batteries reply with a nearer roar!  You see the crowd toss up their hats
in visionary joy.  You hear of illuminations and fire-works, and of
bonfires, built oil scaffolds, raised several stories above the ground,
that are to blaze all night in King Street and on Beacon Hill.  And here
come the trumpets and kettle-drums, and the tramping hoofs of the Boston
troop of horseguards, escorting the governor to King's Chapel, where he
is to return solemn thanks for the surrender of Quebec.  March on, thou
shadowy troop! and vanish, ghostly crowd! and change again, old street!
for those stirring times are gone.

Opportunely for the conclusion of our sketch, a fire broke out, on the
twentieth of March, 1760, at the Brazen-Head, in Cornhill, and consumed
nearly four hundred buildings.  Similar disasters have always been epochs
in the chronology of Boston.  That of 1711 had hitherto been termed the
Great Fire, but now resigned its baleful dignity to one which has ever
since retained it.  Did we desire to move the reader's sympathies on this
subject, we would not be grandiloquent about the sea of billowy flame,
the glowing and crumbling streets, the broad, black firmament of smoke,
and the blast or wind that sprang up with the conflagration and roared
behind it.  It would be more effective to mark out a single family at the
moment when the flames caught upon an angle of their dwelling: then would
ensue the removal of the bedridden grandmother, the cradle with the
sleeping infant, and, most dismal of all, the dying man just at the
extremity of a lingering disease.  Do but imagine the confused agony of
one thus awfully disturbed in his last hour; his fearful glance behind at
the consuming fire raging after him, from house to house, as its devoted
victim; and, finally, the almost eagerness with which he would seize some
calmer interval to die!  The Great Fire must have realized many such a
scene.

Doubtless posterity has acquired a better city by the calamity of that
generation.  None will be inclined to lament it at this late day, except
the lover of antiquity, who would have been glad to walk among those
streets of venerable houses, fancying the old inhabitants still there,
that he might commune with their shadows, and paint a more vivid picture
of their times.


III.  THE OLD TORY.

Again we take a leap of about twenty years, and alight in the midst of
the Revolution.  Indeed, having just closed a volume of colonial
newspapers, which represented the period when monarchical and
aristocratic sentiments were at the highest,--and now opening another
volume printed in the same metropolis, after such sentiments had long
been deemed a sin and shame,--we feel as if the leap were more than
figurative.  Our late course of reading has tinctured us, for the moment,
with antique prejudices; and we shrink from the strangely contrasted
times into which we emerge, like one of those immutable old Tories, who
acknowledge no oppression in the Stamp Act.  It may be the most effective
method of going through the present file of papers, to follow out this
idea, and transform ourself, perchance, from a modern Tory into such a
sturdy King-man as once wore that pliable nickname.

Well, then, here we sit, an old, gray, withered, sour-visaged, threadbare
sort of gentleman, erect enough, here in our solitude, but marked out by
a depressed and distrustful mien abroad, as one conscious of a stigma
upon his forehead, though for no crime.  We were already in the decline
of life when the first tremors of the earthquake that has convulsed the
continent were felt.  Our mind had grown too rigid to change any of its
opinions, when the voice of the people demanded that all should be
changed.  We are an Episcopalian, and sat under the High-Church doctrines
of Dr. Caner; we have been a captain of the provincial forces, and love
our king the better for the blood that we shed in his cause on the Plains
of Abraham.  Among all the refugees, there is not one more loyal to the
backbone than we.  Still we lingered behind when the British army
evacuated Boston, sweeping in its train most of those with whom we held
communion; the old, loyal gentlemen, the aristocracy of the colonies, the
hereditary Englishman, imbued with more than native zeal and admiration
for the glorious island and its monarch, because the far-intervening
ocean threw a dim reverence around them.  When our brethren departed, we
could not tear our aged roots out of the soil.

We have remained, therefore, enduring to be outwardly a freeman, but
idolizing King George in secrecy and silence,--one true old heart amongst
a host of enemies.  We watch, with a weary hope, for the moment when all
this turmoil shall subside, and the impious novelty that has distracted
our latter years, like a wild dream, give place to the blessed quietude
of royal sway, with the king's name in every ordinance, his prayer in the
church, his health at the board, and his love in the people's heart.
Meantime, our old age finds little honor.  Hustled have we been, till
driven from town-meetings; dirty water has been cast upon our ruffles by
a Whig chambermaid; John Hancock's coachman seizes every opportunity to
bespatter us with mud; daily are we hooted by the unbreeched rebel brats;
and narrowly, once, did our gray hairs escape the ignominy of tar and
feathers.  Alas! only that we cannot bear to die till the next royal
governor comes over, we would fain be in our quiet grave.

Such an old man among new things are we who now hold at arm's-length the
rebel newspaper of the day.  The very figure-head, for the thousandth
time, elicits it groan of spiteful lamentation.  Where are the united
heart and crown, the loyal emblem, that used to hallow the sheet on which
it was impressed, in our younger days?  In its stead we find a
continental officer, with the Declaration of Independence in one hand, a
drawn sword in the other, and above his head a scroll, bearing the motto,
"WE APPEAL TO HEAVEN."  Then say we, with a prospective triumph, let
Heaven judge, in its own good time!  The material of the sheet attracts
our scorn.  It is a fair specimen of rebel manufacture, thick and coarse,
like wrapping-paper, all overspread with little knobs; and of such a
deep, dingy blue color, that we wipe our spectacles thrice before we can
distinguish a letter of the wretched print.  Thus, in all points, the
newspaper is a type of the times, far more fit for the rough hands of a
democratic mob, than for our own delicate, though bony fingers.  Nay we
will not handle it without our gloves!

Glancing down the page, our eyes are greeted everywhere by the offer of
lands at auction, for sale or to be leased, not by the rightful owners,
but a rebel committee; notices of the town constable, that he is
authorized to receive the taxes on such all estate, in default of which,
that also is to be knocked down to the highest bidder; and notifications
of complaints filed by the attorney-general against certain traitorous
absentees, and of confiscations that are to ensue.  And who are these
traitors?  Our own best friends; names as old, once as honored, as any in
the land where they are no longer to have a patrimony, nor to be
remembered as good men who have passed away.  We are ashamed of not
relinquishing our little property, too; but comfort ourselves because we
still keep our principles, without gratifying the rebels with our
plunder.  Plunder, indeed, they are seizing everywhere,--by the strong
hand at sea, as well as by legal forms oil shore.  Here are prize-vessels
for sale; no French nor Spanish merchantmen, whose wealth is the
birthright of British subjects, but hulls of British oak, from Liverpool,
Bristol, and the Thames, laden with the king's own stores, for his army
in New York.  And what a fleet of privateers--pirates, say we--are
fitting out for new ravages, with rebellion in their very names!  The
Free Yankee, the General Greene, the Saratoga, the Lafayette, and the
Grand Monarch!  Yes, the Grand Monarch; so is a French king styled, by
the sons of Englishmen.  And here we have an ordinance from the Court of
Versailles, with the Bourbon's own signature affixed, as if New England
were already a French province.  Everything is French,--French soldiers,
French sailors, French surgeons, and French diseases too, I trow; besides
French dancing-masters and French milliners, to debauch our daughters
with French fashions!  Everything in America is French, except the
Canadas, the loyal Canadas, which we helped to wrest, from
France.  And to that old French province the Englishman of the colonies
must go to find his country!

O, the misery of seeing the whole system of things changed in my old
days, when I would be loath to change even a pair of buckles!  The
British coffee-house, where oft we sat, brimful of wine and loyalty, with
the gallant gentlemen of Amherst's army, when we wore a redcoat too,--the
British coffee-house, forsooth, must now be styled the American, with a
golden eagle instead of the royal arms above the door.  Even the street
it stands in is no longer King Street!  Nothing is the king's, except
this heavy heart in my old bosom.  Wherever I glance my eyes, they meet
something that pricks them like a needle.  This soap-maker, for instance,
this Hobert Hewes, has conspired against my peace, by notifying that his
shop is situated near Liberty Stump.  But when will their misnamed
liberty have its true emblem in that Stump, hewn down by British steel?

Where shall we buy our next year's almanac?  Not this of Weatherwise's,
certainly; for it contains a likeness of George Washington, the upright
rebel, whom we most hate, though reverentially, as a fallen angel, with
his heavenly brightness undiminished, evincing pure fame in an unhallowed
cause.  And here is a new book for my evening's recreation,--a History of
the War till the close of the year 1779, with the heads of thirteen
distinguished officers, engraved on copperplate.  A plague upon their
heads!  We desire not to see them till they grin at us from the balcony
before the town-house, fixed on spikes, as the heads of traitors.  How
bloody-minded the villains make a peaceable old man!  What next?  An
Oration, on the Horrid Massacre of 1770.  When that blood was shed,--the
first that the British soldier ever drew from the bosoms of our
countrymen,--we turned sick at heart, and do so still, as often as they
make it reek anew from among the stones in King Street.  The pool that we
saw that night has swelled into a lake,--English blood and American,--no!
all British, all blood of my brethren.  And here come down tears.  Shame
on me, since half of them are shed for rebels!  Who are not rebels now!
Even the women are thrusting their white hands into the war, and come out
in this very paper with proposals to form a society--the lady of George
Washington at their head--for clothing the continental troops.  They will
strip off their stiff petticoats to cover the ragged rascals, and then
enlist in the ranks themselves.

What have we here?  Burgoyne's proclamation turned into Hudibrastic
rhyme!  And here, some verses against the king, in which the scribbler
leaves a blank for the name of George, as if his doggerel might yet exalt
him to the pillory.  Such, after years of rebellion, is the heart's
unconquerable reverence for the Lord's anointed!  In the next column, we
have scripture parodied in a squib against his sacred Majesty.  What
would our Puritan great-grandsires have said to that?  They never laughed
at God's word, though they cut off a king's head.

Yes; it was for us to prove how disloyalty goes hand in hand with
irreligion, and all other vices come trooping in the train.  Nowadays men
commit robbery and sacrilege for the mere luxury of wickedness, as this
advertisement testifies.  Three hundred pounds reward for the detection
of the villains who stole and destroyed the cushions and pulpit drapery
of the Brattle Street and Old South churches.  Was it a crime?  I can
scarcely think our temples hallowed, since the king ceased to be prayed
for.  But it is not temples only that they rob.  Here a man offers a
thousand dollars--a thousand dollars, in Continental rags!--for the
recovery of his stolen cloak, and other articles of clothing.  Horse-
thieves are innumerable.  Now is the day when every beggar gets on
horseback.  And is not the whole land like a beggar on horseback riding
post to the Davil?  Ha! here is a murder, too.  A woman slain at
midnight, by all unknown ruffian, and found cold, stiff, and bloody, in
her violated bed!  Let the hue-and-cry follow hard after the man in the
uniform of blue and buff who last went by that way.  My life on it, he is
the blood-stained ravisher!  These deserters whom we see proclaimed in
every column,--proof that the banditti are as false to their Stars and
Stripes as to the Holy Red Cross,--they bring the crimes of a rebel camp
into a soil well suited to them; the bosom of a people, without the heart
that kept them virtuous,--their king!

Here flaunting down a whole column, with official seal and signature,
here comes a proclamation.  By whose authority?  Ah! the United States,
--these thirteen little anarchies, assembled in that one grand anarchy,
their Congress.  And what the import?  A general Fast.  By Heaven! for
once the traitorous blockheads have legislated wisely!  Yea; let a
misguided people kneel down in sackcloth and ashes, from end to end, from
border to border, of their wasted country.  Well may they fast where
there is no food, and cry aloud for whatever remnant of God's mercy their
sins may not have exhausted.  We too will fast, even at a rebel summons.
Pray others as they will, there shall be at least an old man kneeling for
the righteous cause.  Lord, put down the rebels!  God save the king!

Peace to the good old Tory!  One of our objects has been to exemplify,
without softening a single prejudice proper to the character which we
assumed, that the Americans who clung to the losing side in the
Revolution were men greatly to be pitied and often worthy of our
sympathy.  It would be difficult to say whose lot was most lamentable,
that of the active Tories, who gave up their patrimonies for a pittance
from the British pension-roll, and their native land for a cold reception
in their miscalled home, or the passive ones who remained behind to
endure the coldness of former friends, and the public opprobrium, as
despised citizens, under a government which they abhorred.  In justice to
the old gentleman who has favored us with his discontented musings, we
must remark that the state of the country, so far as can be gathered from
these papers, was of dismal augury for the tendencies of democratic rule.
It was pardonable in the conservative of that day to mistake the
temporary evils of a change for permanent diseases of the system which
that change was to establish.  A revolution, or anything that interrupts
social order, may afford opportunities for the individual display of
eminent virtues; but its effects are pernicious to general morality.
Most people are so constituted that they can be virtuous only in a
certain routine; and an irregular course of public affairs demoralizes
them.  One great source of disorder was the multitude of disbanded
troops, who were continually returning home, after terms of service just
long enough to give them a distaste to peaceable occupations; neither
citizens nor soldiers, they were very liable to become ruffians.  Almost
all our impressions in regard to this period are unpleasant, whether
referring to the state of civil society, or to the character of the
contest, which, especially where native Americans were opposed to each
other, was waged with the deadly hatred of fraternal enemies.  It is the
beauty of war, for men to commit mutual havoc with undisturbed good-
humor.

The present volume of newspapers contains fewer characteristic traits
than any which we have looked over.  Except for the peculiarities
attendant on the passing struggle, manners seem to have taken a modern
cast.  Whatever antique fashions lingered into the War of the Revolution,
or beyond it, they were not so strongly marked as to leave their traces
in the public journals.  Moreover, the old newspapers had an
indescribable picturesqueness, not to be found in the later ones.
Whether it be something in the literary execution, or the ancient print
and paper, and the idea that those same musty pages have been handled by
people once alive and bustling amid the scenes there recorded, yet now in
their graves beyond the memory of man; so it is, that in those elder
volumes we seem to find the life of a past age preserved between the
leaves, like a dry specimen of foliage.  It is so difficult to discover
what touches are really picturesque, that we doubt whether our attempts
have produced any similar effect.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                      THE MAN OF ADAMANT

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



In the old times of religious gloom and intolerance lived Richard Digby,
the gloomiest and most intolerant of a stern brotherhood.  His plan of
salvation was so narrow, that, like a plank in a tempestuous sea, it
could avail no sinner but himself, who bestrode it triumphantly, and
hurled anathemas against the wretches whom he saw struggling with the
billows of eternal death.  In his view of the matter, it was a most
abominable crime--as, indeed, it is a great folly--for men to trust to
their own strength, or even to grapple to any other fragment of the
wreck, save this narrow plank, which, moreover, he took special care to
keep out of their reach.  In other words, as his creed was like no man's
else, and being well pleased that Providence had intrusted him alone, of
mortals, with the treasure of a true faith, Richard Digby determined to
seclude himself to the sole and constant enjoyment of his happy fortune.

"And verily," thought he, "I deem it a chief condition of Heaven's mercy
to myself, that I hold no communion with those abominable myriads which
it hath cast off to perish.  Peradventure, were I to tarry longer in the
tents of Kedar, the gracious boon would be revoked, and I also be
swallowed up in the deluge of wrath, or consumed in the storm of fire and
brimstone, or involved in whatever new kind of ruin is ordained for the
horrible perversity of this generation."

So Richard Digby took an axe, to hew space enough for a tabernacle in the
wilderness, and some few other necessaries, especially a sword and gun,
to smite and slay any intruder upon his hallowed seclusion; and plunged
into the dreariest depths of the forest.  On its verge, however, he
paused a moment, to shake off the dust of his feet against the village
where he had dwelt, and to invoke a curse on the meeting-house, which he
regarded as a temple of heathen idolatry.  He felt a curiosity, also, to
see whether the fire and brimstone would not rush down from Heaven at
once, now that the one righteous man had provided for his own safety.
But, as the sunshine continued to fall peacefully on the cottages and
fields, and the husbandmen labored and children played, and as there were
many tokens of present happiness, and nothing ominous of a speedy
judgment, he turned away, somewhat disappointed.  The farther he went,
however, and the lonelier he felt himself, and the thicker the trees
stood along his path, and the darker the shadow overhead, so much the
more did Richard Digby exult.  He talked to himself, as he strode onward;
he read his Bible to himself, as he sat beneath the trees; and, as the
gloom of the forest hid the blessed sky, I had almost added, that, at
morning, noon, and eventide, he prayed to himself.  So congenial was this
mode of life to his disposition, that he often laughed to himself, but
was displeased when an echo tossed him back the long loud roar.

In this manner, he journeyed onward three days and two nights, and came,
on the third evening, to the mouth of a cave, which, at first sight,
reminded him of Elijah's cave at Horeb, though perhaps it more resembled
Abraham's sepulchral cave at Machpelah.  It entered into the heart of a
rocky hill.  There was so dense a veil of tangled foliage about it, that
none but a sworn lover of gloomy recesses would have discovered the low
arch of its entrance, or have dared to step within its vaulted chamber,
where the burning eyes of a panther might encounter him.  If Nature meant
this remote and dismal cavern for the use of man, it could only be to
bury in its gloom the victims of a pestilence, and then to block up its
mouth with stones, and avoid the spot forever after.  There was nothing
bright nor cheerful near it, except a bubbling fountain, some twenty
paces off, at which Richard Digby hardly threw away a glance.  But he
thrust his head into the cave, shivered, and congratulated himself.

"The finger of Providence hath pointed my way!" cried he, aloud, while
the tomb-like den returned a strange echo, as if some one within were
mocking him.  "Here my soul will be at peace; for the wicked will not
find me.  Here I can read the Scriptures, and be no more provoked with
lying interpretations.  Here I can offer up acceptable prayers, because
my voice will not be mingled with the sinful supplications of the
multitude.  Of a truth, the only way to heaven leadeth through the narrow
entrance of this cave,--and I alone have found it!"

In regard to this cave it was observable that the roof, so far as the
imperfect light permitted it to be seen, was hung with substances
resembling opaque icicles; for the damps of unknown centuries, dripping
down continually, had become as hard as adamant; and wherever that
moisture fell, it seemed to possess the power of converting what it
bathed to stone.  The fallen leaves and sprigs of foliage, which the wind
had swept into the cave, and the little feathery shrubs, rooted near the
threshold, were not wet with a natural dew, but had been embalmed by this
wondrous process.  And here I am put in mind that Richard Digby, before
he withdrew himself from the world, was supposed by skilful physicians to
have contracted a disease for which no remedy was written in their
medical books.  It was a deposition of calculous particles within his
heart, caused by an obstructed circulation of the blood; and, unless a
miracle should be wrought for him, there was danger that the malady might
act on the entire substance of the organ, and change his fleshy heart to
stone.  Many, indeed, affirmed that the process was already near its
consummation.  Richard Digby, however, could never be convinced that any
such direful work was going on within him; nor when he saw the sprigs of
marble foliage, did his heart even throb the quicker, at the similitude
suggested by these once tender herbs.  It may be that this same
insensibility was a symptom of the disease.

Be that as it might, Richard Digby was well contented with his sepulchral
cave.  So dearly did he love this congenial spot, that, instead of going
a few paces to the bubbling spring for water, he allayed his thirst with
now and then a drop of moisture from the roof, which, had it fallen
anywhere but on his tongue, would have been congealed into a pebble.  For
a man predisposed to stoniness of the heart, this surely was unwholesome
liquor.  But there he dwelt, for three days more eating herbs and roots,
drinking his own destruction, sleeping, as it were, in a tomb, and
awaking to the solitude of death, yet esteeming this horrible mode of
life as hardly inferior to celestial bliss.  Perhaps superior; for, above
the sky, there would be angels to disturb him.  At the close of the third
day, he sat in the portal of his mansion, reading the Bible aloud,
because no other ear could profit by it, and reading it amiss, because
the rays of the setting sun did not penetrate the dismal depth of shadow
round about him, nor fall upon the sacred page.  Suddenly, however, a
faint gleam of light was thrown over the volume, and, raising his eyes,
Richard Digby saw that a young woman stood before the mouth of the cave,
and that the sunbeams bathed her white garment, which thus seemed to
possess a radiance of its own.

"Good evening, Richard," said the girl; "I have come from afar to find
thee."

The slender grace and gentle loveliness of this young woman were at once
recognized by Richard Digby.  Her name was Mary Goffe.  She had been a
convert to his preaching of the word in England, before he yielded
himself to that exclusive bigotry which now enfolded him with such an
iron grasp that no other sentiment could reach his bosom.  When he came a
pilgrim to America, she had remained in her father's hall; but now, as it
appeared, had crossed the ocean after him, impelled by the same faith
that led other exiles hither, and perhaps by love almost as holy.  What
else but faith and love united could have sustained so delicate a
creature, wandering thus far into the forest, with her golden hair
dishevelled by the boughs, and her feet wounded by the thorns?  Yet,
weary and faint though she must have been, and affrighted at the
dreariness of the cave, she looked on the lonely man with a mild and
pitying expression, such as might beam from an angel's eyes, towards an
afflicted mortal.  But the recluse, frowning sternly upon her, and
keeping his finger between the leaves of his half-closed Bible, motioned
her away with his hand.

"Off!"  cried he.  "I am sanctified, and thou art sinful.  Away!"

"O Richard," said she, earnestly, "I have come this weary way because I
heard that a grievous distemper had seized upon thy heart; and a great
Physician hath given me the skill to cure it.  There is no other remedy
than this which I have brought thee.  Turn me not away, therefore, nor
refuse my medicine; for then must this dismal cave be thy sepulchre."

"Away!" replied Richard Digby, still with a dark frown.  "My heart is in
better condition than thine own.  Leave me, earthly one; for the sun is
almost set; and when no light reaches the door of the cave, then is my
prayer-time."

Now, great as was her need, Mary Goffe did not plead with this stony-
hearted man for shelter and protection, nor ask anything whatever for her
own sake.  All her zeal was for his welfare.

"Come back with me!" she exclaimed, clasping her hands,--"come back to
thy fellow-men; for they need thee, Richard, and thou hast tenfold need
of them.  Stay not in this evil den; for the air is chill, and the damps
are fatal; nor will any that perish within it ever find the path to
heaven.  Hasten hence, I entreat thee, for thine own soul's sake; for
either the roof will fall upon thy head, or some other speedy destruction
is at hand."

"Perverse woman!" answered Richard Digby, laughing aloud,--for he was
moved to bitter mirth by her foolish vehemence,--"I tell thee that the
path to heaven leadeth straight through this narrow portal where I sit.
And, moreover, the destruction thou speakest of is ordained, not for this
blessed cave, but for all other habitations of mankind, throughout the
earth.  Get thee hence speedily, that thou mayst have thy share!"

So saving, he opened his Bible again, and fixed his eyes intently on the
page, being resolved to withdraw his thoughts from this child of sin and
wrath, and to waste no more of his holy breath upon her.  The shadow had
now grown so deep, where he was sitting, that he made continual mistakes
in what he read, converting all that was gracious and merciful to
denunciations of vengeance and unutterable woe on every created being but
himself.  Mary Goffe, meanwhile, was leaning against a tree, beside the
sepulchral cave, very sad, yet with something heavenly and ethereal in
her unselfish sorrow.  The light from the setting sun still glorified her
form, and was reflected a little way within the darksome den, discovering
so terrible a gloom that the maiden shuddered for its self-doomed
inhabitant.  Espying the bright fountain near at hand, she hastened
thither, and scooped up a portion of its water, in a cup of birchen bark.
A few tears mingled with the draught, and perhaps gave it all its
efficacy.  She then returned to the mouth of the cave, and knelt down at
Richard Digby's feet.

"Richard," she said, with passionate fervor, yet a gentleness in all her
passion, "I pray thee, by thy hope of heaven, and as thou wouldst not
dwell in this tomb forever, drink of this hallowed water, be it but a
single drop!  Then, make room for me by thy side, and let us read
together one page of that blessed volume; and, lastly, kneel down with me
and pray!  Do this, and thy stony heart shall become softer than a
babe's, and all be well."

But Richard Digby, in utter abhorrence of the proposal, cast the Bible at
his feet, and eyed her with such a fixed and evil frown, that he looked
less like a living man than a marble statue, wrought by some dark-
imagined sculptor to express the most repulsive mood that human features
could assume.  And, as his look grew even devilish, so, with an equal
change did Mary Goffe become more sad, more mild, more pitiful, more like
a sorrowing angel.  But, the more heavenly she was, the more hateful did
she seem to Richard Digby, who at length raised his hand, and smote down
the cup of hallowed water upon the threshold of the cave, thus rejecting
the only medicine that could have cured his stony heart.  A sweet perfume
lingered in the air for a moment, and then was gone.

"Tempt me no more, accursed woman," exclaimed he, still with his marble
frown, "lest I smite thee down also!  What hast thou to do with my
Bible?--what with my prayers?--what with my heaven?"

No sooner had he spoken these dreadful words, than Richard Digby's heart
ceased to beat; while--so the legend says-the form of Mary Goffe melted
into the last sunbeams, and returned from the sepulchral cave to heaven.
For Mary Golfe had been buried in an English churchyard, months before;
and either it was her ghost that haunted the wild forest, or else a
dream-like spirit, typifying pure Religion.

Above a century afterwards, when the trackless forest of Richard Digby's
day had long been interspersed with settlements, the children of a
neighboring farmer were playing at the foot of a hill.  The trees, on
account of the rude and broken surface of this acclivity, had never been
felled, and were crowded so densely together as to hide all but a few
rocky prominences, wherever their roots could grapple with the soil.  A
little boy and girl, to conceal themselves from their playmates, had
crept into the deepest shade, where not only the darksome pines, but a
thick veil of creeping plants suspended from an overhanging rock,
combined to make a twilight at noonday, and almost a midnight at all
other seasons.  There the children hid themselves, and shouted, repeating
the cry at intervals, till the whole party of pursuers were drawn
thither, and, pulling aside the matted foliage, let in a doubtful glimpse
of daylight.  But scarcely was this accomplished, when the little group
uttered a simultaneous shriek, and tumbled headlong down the hill, making
the best of their way homeward, without a second glance into the gloomy
recess.  Their father, unable to comprehend what had so startled them,
took his axe, and, by felling one or two trees, and tearing away the
creeping plants, laid the mystery open to the day.  He had discovered the
entrance of a cave, closely resembling the mouth of a sepulchre, within
which sat the figure of a man, whose gesture and attitude warned the
father and children to stand back, while his visage wore a most
forbidding frown.  This repulsive personage seemed to have been carved in
the same gray stone that formed the walls and portal of the cave.  On
minuter inspection, indeed, such blemishes were observed, as made it
doubtful whether the figure were really a statue, chiselled by human art
and somewhat worn and defaced by the lapse of ages, or a freak of Nature,
who might have chosen to imitate, in stone, her usual handiwork of flesh.
Perhaps it was the least unreasonable idea, suggested by this strange
spectacle, that the moisture of the cave possessed a petrifying quality,
which had thus awfully embalmed a human corpse.

There was something so frightful in the aspect of this Man of Adamant,
that the farmer, the moment that he recovered from the fascination of his
first gaze, began to heap stones into the mouth of the cavern.  His wife,
who had followed him to the hill, assisted her husband's efforts.  The
children, also, approached as near as they durst, with their little hands
full of pebbles, and cast them on the pile.  Earth was then thrown into
the crevices, and the whole fabric overlaid with sods.  Thus all traces
of the discovery were obliterated, leaving only a marvellous legend,
which grew wilder from one generation to another, as the children told it
to their grandchildren, and they to their posterity, till few believed
that there had ever been a cavern or a statue, where now they saw but a
grassy patch on the shadowy hillside.  Yet, grown people avoid the spot,
nor do children play there.  Friendship, and Love, and Piety, all human
and celestial sympathies, should keep aloof from that hidden cave; for
there still sits, and, unless an earthquake crumble down the roof upon
his head, shall sit forever, the shape of Richard Digby, in the attitude
of repelling the whole race of mortals,--not from heaven,--but from the
horrible loneliness of his dark, cold sepulchre!









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                 JOHN INGLEFIELD'S THANKSGIVING

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



On the evening of Thanksgiving day, John Inglefield, the blacksmith, sat
in his elbow-chair, among those who had been keeping festival at his
board.  Being the central figure of the domestic circle, the fire threw
its strongest light on his massive and sturdy frame, reddening his rough
visage, so that it looked like the head of an iron statue, all aglow,
from his own forge, and with its features rudely fashioned on his own
anvil.  At John Inglefield's right hand was an empty chair.  The other
places round the hearth were filled by the members of the family, who all
sat quietly, while, with a semblance of fantastic merriment, their
shadows danced on the wall behind then.  One of the group was John
Inglefield's son, who had been bred at college, and was now a student of
theology at Andover.  There was also a daughter of sixteen, whom nobody
could look at without thinking of a rosebud almost blossomed.  The only
other person at the fireside was Robert Moore, formerly an apprentice of
the blacksmith, but now his journeyman, and who seemed more like an own
son of John Inglefield than did the pale and slender student.

Only these four had kept New England's festival beneath that roof.  The
vacant chair at John Inglefield's right hand was in memory of his wife,
whom death had snatched from him since the previous Thanksgiving.  With a
feeling that few would have looked for in his rough nature, the bereaved
husband had himself set the chair in its place next his own; and often
did his eye glance thitherward, as if he deemed it possible that the cold
grave might send back its tenant to the cheerful fireside, at least for
that one evening.  Thus did he cherish the grief that was dear to him.
But there was another grief which he would fain have torn from his heart;
or, since that could never be, have buried it too deep for others to
behold, or for his own remembrance.  Within the past year another member
of his household had gone from him, but not to the grave.  Yet they kept
no vacant chair for her.

While John Inglefield and his family were sitting round the hearth with
the shadows dancing behind them on the wall, the outer door was opened,
and a light footstep came along the passage.  The latch of the inner door
was lifted by sonic familiar hand, and a young girl came in, wearing a
cloak and hood, which she took off, and laid on the table beneath the
looking-glass.  Then, after gazing a moment at the fireside circle, she
approached, and took the seat at John Inglefield's right hand, as if it
had been reserved on purpose for her.

"Here I am, at last, father," said she.  "You ate your Thanksgiving
dinner without me, but I have come back to spend the evening with you."

Yes, it was Prudence Inglefield.  She wore the same neat and maidenly
attire which she had been accustomed to put on when the household work
was over for the day, and her hair was parted from her brow, in the
simple and modest fashion that became her best of all.  If her cheek
might otherwise have been pale, yet the glow of the fire suffused it with
a healthful bloom.  If she had spent the many mouths of her absence in
guilt and infamy, yet they seemed to have left no traces on her gentle
aspect.  She could not have looked less altered, had she merely stepped
away from her father's fireside for half an hour, and returned while the
blaze was quivering upwards from the same brands that were burning at her
departure.  And to John Inglefield she was the very image of his buried
wife, such as he remembered her on the first Thanksgiving which they had
passed under their own roof.  Therefore, though naturally a stern and
rugged man, he could not speak unkindly to his sinful child, nor yet
could he take her to his bosom.

"You are welcome home, Prudence," said he, glancing sideways at her, and
his voice faltered.  "Your mother would have rejoiced to see you, but she
has been gone from us these four months."

"I know it, father, I know it," replied Prudence, quickly.  "And yet,
when I first came in, my eyes were so dazzled by the firelight, that she
seemed to be sitting in this very chair!"

By this time the other members of the family had begun to recover from
their surprise, and became sensible that it was no ghost from the grave,
nor vision of their vivid recollections, but Prudence, her own self.  Her
brother was the next that greeted her.  He advanced and held out his hand
affectionately, as a brother should; yet not entirely like a brother,
for, with all his kindness, he was still a clergyman, and speaking to a
child of sin.

"Sister Prudence," said he, earnestly, "I rejoice that a merciful
Providence hath turned your steps homeward, in time for me to bid you a
last farewell.  In a few weeks, sister, I am to sail as a missionary to
the far islands of the Pacific.  There is not one of these beloved faces
that I shall ever hope to behold again on this earth.  O, may I see all
of them--yours and all--beyond the grave!"

A shadow flitted across the girl's countenance.

"The grave is very dark, brother," answered she, withdrawing her hand
somewhat hastily from his grasp.  "You must look your last at me by the
light of this fire."

While this was passing, the twin-girl-the rosebud that had grown on the
same stem with the castaway--stood gazing at her sister, longing to fling
herself upon her bosom, so that the tendrils of their hearts might
intertwine again.  At first she was restrained by mingled grief and
shame, and by a dread that Prudence was too much changed to respond to
her affection, or that her own purity would be felt as a reproach by the
lost one.  But, as she listened to the familiar voice, while the face
grew more and more familiar, she forgot everything save that Prudence had
come back.  Springing forward, she would have clasped her in a close
embrace.  At that very instant, however, Prudence started from her chair,
and held out both her hands, with a warning gesture.

"No, Mary,--no, my sister," cried she, "do not you touch me.  Your bosom
must not be pressed to mine!"

Mary shuddered and stood still, for she felt that something darker than
the grave was between Prudence and herself, though they seemed so near
each other in the light of their father's hearth, where they had grown up
together.  Meanwhile Prudence threw her eyes around the room, in search
of one who had not yet bidden her welcome.  He had withdrawn from his
seat by the fireside, and was standing near the door, with his face
averted, so that his features could be discerned only by the flickering
shadow of the profile upon the wall.  But Prudence called to him, in a
cheerful and kindly tone:--

"Come, Robert," said she, "won't you shake hands with your old friend?"

Robert Moore held back for a moment, but affection struggled powerfully,
and overcame his pride and resentment; he rushed towards Prudence, seized
her hand, and pressed it to his bosom.

"There, there, Robert!" said she, smiling sadly, as she withdrew her
hand, "you must not give me too warm a welcome."

And now, having exchanged greetings with each member of the family,
Prudence again seated herself in the chair at John Inglefield's right
hand.  She was naturally a girl of quick and tender sensibilities,
gladsome in her general mood, but with a bewitching pathos interfused
among her merriest words and deeds.  It was remarked of her, too, that
she had a faculty, even from childhood, of throwing her own feelings,
like a spell, over her companions.  Such as she had been in her days of
innocence, so did she appear this evening.  Her friends, in the surprise
and bewilderment of her return, almost forgot that she had ever left
them, or that she had forfeited any of her claims to their affection.  In
the morning, perhaps, they might have looked at her with altered eyes,
but by the Thanksgiving fireside they felt only that their own Prudence
had come back to them, and were thankful.  John Inglefleld's rough visage
brightened with the glow of his heart, as it grew warm and merry within
him; once or twice, even, he laughed till the room rang again, yet seemed
startled by the echo of his own mirth.  The grave young minister became
as frolicsome as a school-boy.  Mary, too, the rosebud, forgot that her
twin-blossom had ever been torn from the stem, and trampled in the dust.
And as for Robert Moore, he gazed at Prudence with the bashful
earnestness of love new-born, while she, with sweet maiden coquetry, half
smiled upon and half discouraged him.

In short, it was one of those intervals when sorrow vanishes in its own
depth of shadow, and joy starts forth in transitory brightness.  When the
clock struck eight, Prudence poured out her father's customary draught of
herb-tea, which had been steeping by the fireside ever since twilight.

"God bless you, child!" said John Inglefield, as he took the cup from her
hand; "you have made your old father happy again.  But we miss your
mother sadly, Prudence, sadly.  It seems as if she ought to be here now."

"Now, father, or never," replied Prudence.

It was now the hour for domestic worship.  But while the family were
making preparations for this duty, they suddenly perceived that Prudence
had put on her cloak and hood, and was lifting the latch of the door.

"Prudence, Prudence! where are you going?" cried they all, with one
voice.

As Prudence passed out of the door, she turned towards them, and flung
back her hand with a gesture of farewell.  But her face was so changed
that they hardly recognized it.  Sin and evil passions glowed through its
comeliness, and wrought a horrible deformity; a smile gleamed in her
eyes, as of triumphant mockery, at their surprise and grief.

"Daughter," cried John Inglefield, between wrath and sorrow, "stay and be
your father's blessing, or take his curse with you!"

For an instant Prudence lingered and looked back into the fire-lighted
room, while her countenance wore almost the expression as if she were
struggling with a fiend, who had power to seize his victim even within
the hallowed precincts of her father's hearth.  The fiend prevailed; and
Prudence vanished into the outer darkness.  When the family rushed to the
door, they could see nothing, but heard the sound of wheels rattling over
the frozen ground.

That same night, among the painted beauties at the theatre of a
neighboring city, there was one whose dissolute mirth seemed inconsistent
with any sympathy for pure affections, and for the joys and griefs which
are hallowed by them.  Yet this was Prudence Inglefield.  Her visit to
the Thanksgiving fireside was the realization of one of those waking
dreams in which the guilty soul will sometimes stray back to its
innocence.  But Sin, alas! is careful of her bond-slaves; they hear her
voice, perhaps, at the holiest moment, and are constrained to go whither
she summons them.  The same dark power that drew Prudence Inglefleld from
her father's hearth--the same in its nature, though heightened then to a
dread necessity--would snatch a guilty soul from the gate of heaven, and
make its sin and its punishment alike eternal.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                       OLD TICONDEROGA
                    A PICTURE OF THE PAST

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



The greatest attraction, in this vicinity, is the famous old fortress of
Ticonderoga, the remains of which are visible from the piazza of the
tavern, on a swell of land that shuts in the prospect of the lake.  Those
celebrated heights, Mount Defiance and Mount Independence, familiar to
all Americans in history, stand too prominent not to be recognized,
though neither of them precisely corresponds to the images excited by
their names.  In truth, the whole scene, except the interior of the
fortress, disappointed me.  Mount Defiance, which one pictures as a
steep, lofty, and rugged hill, of most formidable aspect, frowning down
with the grim visage of a precipice on old Ticonderoga, is merely a long
and wooded ridge; and bore, at some former period, the gentle name of
Sugar Hill.  The brow is certainly difficult to climb, and high enough to
look into every corner of the fortress.  St. Clair's most probable
reason, however, for neglecting to occupy it, was the deficiency of
troops to man the works already constructed, rather than the supposed
inaccessibility of Mount Defiance.  It is singular that the French never
fortified this height, standing, as it does, in the quarter whence they
must have looked for the advance of a British army.

In my first view of the ruins, I was favored with the scientific guidance
of a young lieutenant of engineers, recently from West Point, where he
bad gained credit for great military genius.  I saw nothing but confusion
in what chiefly interested him; straight lines and zigzags, defence
within defence, wall opposed to wall, and ditch intersecting ditch;
oblong squares of masonry below the surface of the earth, and huge
mounds, or turf-covered hills of stone, above it.  On one of these
artificial hillocks, a pine-tree has rooted itself, and grown tall and
strong, since the banner-staff was levelled.  But where my unmilitary
glance could trace no regularity, the young lieutenant was perfectly at
home.  He fathomed the meaning of every ditch, and formed an entire plan
of the fortress from its half-obliterated lines.  His description of
Ticonderoga would be as accurate as a geometrical theorem, and as barren
of the poetry that has clustered round its decay.  I viewed Ticonderoga
as a place of ancient strength, in ruins for half a century: where the
flags of three nations had successively waved, and none waved now; where
armies had struggled, so long ago that the bones of the slain were
mouldered; where Peace had found a heritage in the forsaken haunts of
War.  Now the young West-Pointer, with his lectures on ravelins,
counterscarps, angles, and covered ways, made it an affair of brick and
mortar and hewn stone, arranged on certain regular principles, having a
good deal to do with mathematics, but nothing at all with poetry.

I should have been glad of a hoary veteran to totter by my side, and tell
me, perhaps, of the French garrisons and their Indian allies,--of
Abercrombie, Lord Howe, and Amherst,--of Ethan Allen's triumph and St.
Clair's surrender.  The old soldier and the old fortress would be emblems
of each other.  His reminiscences, though vivid as the image of
Ticonderoga in the lake, would harmonize with the gray influence of the
scene.  A survivor of the long-disbanded garrisons, though but a private
soldier, might have mustered his dead chiefs and comrades,--some from
Westminster Abbey, and English churchyards, and battle-fields in Europe,
--others from their graves here in America,--others, not a few, who lie
sleeping round the fortress; he might have mustered them all, and bid
them march through the ruined gateway, turning their old historic faces
on me, as they passed.  Next to such a companion, the best is one's own
fancy.

At another visit I was alone, and, after rambling all over the ramparts,
sat down to rest myself in one of the roofless barracks.  These are old
French structures, and appear to have occupied three sides of a large
area, now overgrown with grass, nettles, and thistles.  The one in which
I sat was long and narrow, as all the rest had been, with peaked gables.
The exterior walls were nearly entire, constructed of gray, flat,
unpicked stones, the aged strength of which promised long to resist the
elements, if no other violence should precipitate their fall.--The roof,
floors, partitions, and the rest of the wood-work had probably been
burnt, except some bars of stanch old oak, which were blackened with
fire, but still remained imbedded into the window-sills and over the
doors.  There were a few particles of plastering near the chimney,
scratched with rude figures, perhaps by a soldier's hand.  A most
luxuriant crop of weeds had sprung up within the edifice, and hid the
scattered fragments of the wall.  Grass and weeds grew in the windows,
and in all the crevices of the stone, climbing, step by step, till a tuft
of yellow flowers was waving on the highest peak of the gable.  Some
spicy herb diffused a pleasant odor through the ruin.  A verdant heap of
vegetation had covered the hearth of the second floor, clustering on the
very spot where the huge logs had mouldered to glowing coals, and
flourished beneath the broad flue, which had so often puffed the smoke
over a circle of French or English soldiers.  I felt that there was no
other token of decay so impressive as that bed of weeds in the place of
the backlog.

Here I sat, with those roofless walls about me, the clear sky over my
head, and the afternoon sunshine falling gently bright through the
window-frames and doorway.  I heard the tinkling of a cow-bell, the
twittering of birds, and the pleasant hum of insects.  Once a gay
butterfly, with four gold-speckled wings, came and fluttered about my
head, then flew up and lighted on the highest tuft of yellow flowers, and
at last took wing across the lake.  Next a bee buzzed through the
sunshine, and found much sweetness among the weeds.  After watching him
till he went off to his distant hive, I closed my eyes on Ticonderoga in
ruins, and cast a dream-like glance over pictures of the past, and scenes
of which this spot had been the theatre.

At first, my fancy saw only the stern hills, lonely lakes, and venerable
woods.  Not a tree, since their seeds were first scattered over the
infant soil, had felt the axe, but had grown up and flourished through
its long generation, had fallen beneath the weight of years, been buried
in green moss, and nourished the roots of others as gigantic.  Hark!  A
light paddle dips into the lake, a birch canoe glides round the point,
and an Indian chief has passed, painted and feather-crested, armed with a
bow of hickory, a stone tomahawk, and flint-headed arrows.  But the
ripple had hardly vanished from the water, when a white flag caught the
breeze, over a castle in the wilderness, with frowning ramparts and a
hundred cannon.  There stood a French chevalier, commandant of the
fortress, paying court to a copper-colored lady, the princess of the
land, and winning her wild love by the arts which had been successful
with Parisian dames.  A war-party of French and Indians were issuing from
the gate to lay waste some village of New England.  Near the fortress
there was a group of dancers.  The merry soldiers footing it with the
swart savage maids; deeper in the wood, some red men were growing frantic
around a keg of the fire-water; and elsewhere a Jesuit preached the faith
of high cathedrals beneath a canopy of forest boughs, and distributed
crucifixes to be worn beside English scalps.

I tried to make a series of pictures from the old French war, when fleets
were on the lake and armies in the woods, and especially of Abercrombie's
disastrous repulse, where thousands of lives were utterly thrown away;
but, being at a loss how to order the battle, I chose an evening scene in
the barracks, after the fortress had surrendered to Sir Jeffrey Amherst.
What an immense fire blazes on that hearth, gleaming on swords, bayonets,
and musket-barrels, and blending with the hue of the scarlet coats till
the whole barrack-room is quivering with ruddy light!  One soldier has
thrown himself down to rest, after a deer-hunt, or perhaps a long run
through the woods with Indians on his trail.  Two stand up to wrestle,
and are on the point of coming to blows.  A fifer plays a shrill
accompaniment to a drummer's song,--a strain of light love and bloody
war, with a chorus thundered forth by twenty voices.  Meantime, a veteran
in the corner is prosing about Dettingen and Fontenoy, and relates camp-
traditions of Marlborough's battles, till his pipe, having been roguishly
charged with gunpowder, makes a terrible explosion under his nose.  And
now they all vanish in a puff of smoke from the chimney.

I merely glanced at the ensuing twenty years, which glided peacefully
over the frontier fortress, till Ethan Allen's shout was heard, summoning
it to surrender "in the name of the great Jehovah and of the Continental
Congress."  Strange allies! thought the British captain.  Next came the
hurried muster of the soldiers of liberty, when the cannon of Burgoyne,
pointing down upon their stronghold from the brow of Mount Defiance,
announced a new conqueror of Ticonderoga.  No virgin fortress, this!
Forth rushed the motley throng from the barracks, one man wearing the
blue and buff of the Union, another the red coat of Britain, a third a
dragoon's jacket, and a fourth a cotton frock; here was a pair of leather
breeches, and striped trousers there; a grenadier's cap on one head, and
a broad-brimmed hat, with a tall feather, on the next; this fellow
shouldering a king's arm, that might throw a bullet to Crown Point, and
his comrade a long fowling-piece, admirable to shoot ducks on the lake.
In the midst of the bustle, when the fortress was all alive with its last
warlike scene, the ringing of a bell on the lake made me suddenly unclose
my eyes, and behold only the gray and weed-grown ruins.  They were as
peaceful in the sun as a warrior's grave.

Hastening to the rampart, I perceived that the signal had been given by
the steamboat Franklin, which landed a passenger from Whitehall at the
tavern, and resumed its progress northward, to reach Canada the next
morning.  A sloop was pursuing the same track; a little skiff had just
crossed the ferry; while a scow, laden with lumber, spread its huge
square sail, and went up the lake.  The whole country was a cultivated
farm.  Within musket-shot of the ramparts lay the neat villa of Mr. Pell,
who, since the Revolution, has become proprietor of a spot for which
France, England, and America have so often struggled.  How forcibly the
lapse of time and change of circumstances came home to my apprehension!
Banner would never wave again, nor cannon roar, nor blood be shed, nor
trumpet stir up a soldier's heart, in this old fort of Ticonderoga.  Tall
trees have grown upon its ramparts, since the last garrison marched out,
to return no more, or only at some dreamer's summons, gliding from the
twilight past to vanish among realities.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                     THE WIVES OF THE DEAD

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



The following story, the simple and domestic incidents of which may be
deemed scarcely worth relating, after such a lapse of time, awakened some
degree of interest, a hundred years ago, in a principal seaport of the
Bay Province.  The rainy twilight of an autumn day,--a parlor on the
second floor of a small house, plainly furnished, as beseemed the
middling circumstances of its inhabitants, yet decorated with little
curiosities from beyond the sea, and a few delicate specimens of Indian
manufacture,--these are the only particulars to be premised in regard to
scene and season.  Two young and comely women sat together by the
fireside, nursing their mutual and peculiar sorrows.  They were the
recent brides of two brothers, a sailor and a landsman, and two
successive days had brought tidings of the death of each, by the chances
of Canadian warfare and the tempestuous Atlantic.  The universal sympathy
excited by this bereavement drew numerous condoling guests to the
habitation of the widowed sisters.  Several, among whom was the minister,
had remained till the verge of evening; when, one by one, whispering many
comfortable passages of Scripture, that were answered by more abundant
tears, they took their leave, and departed to their own happier homes.
The mourners, though not insensible to the kindness of their friends, had
yearned to be left alone.  United, as they had been, by the relationship
of the living, and now more closely so by that of the dead, each felt as
if whatever consolation her grief admitted were to be found in the bosom
of the other.  They joined their hearts, and wept together silently.  But
after an hour of such indulgence, one of the sisters, all of whose
emotions were influenced by her mild, quiet, yet not feeble character,
began to recollect the precepts of resignation and endurance which piety
had taught her, when she did not think to need them.  Her misfortune,
besides, as earliest known, should earliest cease to interfere with her
regular course of duties; accordingly, having placed the table before the
fire, and arranged a frugal meal, she took the hand of her companion.

"Come, dearest sister; you have eaten not a morsel to-day," she said.
"Arise, I pray you, and let us ask a blessing on that which is provided
for us."

Her sister-in-law was of a lively and irritable temperament, and the
first pangs of her sorrow had been expressed by shrieks and passionate
lamentation.  She now shrunk from Mary's words, like a wounded sufferer
from a hand that revives the throb.

"There is no blessing left for me, neither will I ask it!" cried
Margaret, with a fresh burst of tears.  "Would it were His will that I
might never taste food more!"

Yet she trembled at these rebellious expressions, almost as soon as they
were uttered, and, by degrees, Mary succeeded in bringing her sister's
mind nearer to the situation of her own.  Time went on, and their usual
hour of repose arrived.  The brothers and their brides, entering the
married state with no more than the slender means which then sanctioned
such a step, had confederated themselves in one household, with equal
rights to the parlor, and claiming exclusive privileges in two sleeping-
rooms contiguous to it.  Thither the widowed ones retired, after heaping
ashes upon the dying embers of their fire, and placing a lighted lamp
upon the hearth.  The doors of both chambers were left open, so that a
part of the interior of each, and the beds with their unclosed curtains,
were reciprocally visible.  Sleep did not steal upon the sisters at one
and the same time.  Mary experienced the effect often consequent upon
grief quietly borne, and soon sunk into temporary forgetfulness, while
Margaret became more disturbed and feverish, in proportion as the night
advanced with its deepest and stillest hours.  She lay listening to the
drops of rain, that came down in monotonous succession, unswayed by a
breath of wind; and a nervous impulse continually caused her to lift her
head from the pillow, and gaze into Mary's chamber and the intermediate
apartment.  The cold light of the lamp threw the shadows of the furniture
up against the wall, stamping them immovably there, except when they were
shaken by a sudden flicker of the flame.  Two vacant arm-chairs were in
their old positions on opposite sides of the hearth, where the brothers
had been wont to sit in young and laughing dignity, as heads of families;
two humbler seats were near them, the true thrones of that little empire,
where Mary and herself had exercised in love a power that love had won.
The cheerful radiance of the fire had shone upon the happy circle, and
the dead glimmer of the lamp might have befitted their reunion now.
While Margaret groaned in bitterness, she heard a knock at the street
door.

"How would my heart have leapt at that sound but yesterday!" thought she,
remembering the anxiety with which she had long awaited tidings from her
husband.

"I care not for it now; let them begone, for I will not arise."

But even while a sort of childish fretfulness made her thus resolve, she
was breathing hurriedly, and straining her ears to catch a repetition of
the summons.  It is difficult to be convinced of the death of one whom we
have deemed another self.  The knocking was now renewed in slow and
regular strokes, apparently given with the soft end of a doubled fist,
and was accompanied by words, faintly heard through several thicknesses
of wall.  Margaret looked to her sister's chamber, and beheld her still
lying in the depths of sleep.  She arose, placed her foot upon the floor,
and slightly arrayed herself, trembling between fear and eagerness as she
did so.

"Heaven help me!" sighed she.  "I have nothing left to fear, and methinks
I am ten times more a coward than ever."

Seizing the lamp from the hearth, she hastened to the window that
overlooked the street-door.  It was a lattice, turning upon hinges; and
having thrown it back, she stretched her head a little way into the moist
atmosphere.  A lantern was reddening the front of the house, and melting
its light in the neighboring puddles, while a deluge of darkness
overwhelmed every other object.  As the window grated on its hinges, a
man in a broad-brimmed hat and blanket-coat stepped from under the
shelter of the projecting story, and looked upward to discover whom his
application had aroused.  Margaret knew him as a friendly innkeeper of
the town.

"What would you have, Goodman Parker?" cried the widow.

"Lackaday, is it you, Mistress Margaret?" replied the innkeeper.  "I was
afraid it might be your sister Mary; for I hate to see a young woman in
trouble, when I have n't a word of comfort to whisper her."

"For Heaven's sake, what news do you bring?"  screamed Margaret.

"Why, there has been an express through the town within this half-hour,"
said Goodman Parker, "travelling from the eastern jurisdiction with
letters from the governor and council.  He tarried at my house to refresh
himself with a drop and a morsel, and I asked him what tidings on the
frontiers.  He tells me we had the better in the skirmish you wot of, and
that thirteen men reported slain are well and sound, and your husband
among them.  Besides, he is appointed of the escort to bring the
captivated Frenchers and Indians home to the province jail.  I judged you
would n't mind being broke of your rest, and so I stepped over to tell
you.  Good night."

So saying, the honest man departed; and his lantern gleamed along the
street, bringing to view indistinct shapes of things, and the fragments
of a world, like order glimmering through chaos, or memory roaming over
the past.  But Margaret stayed not to watch these picturesque effects.
Joy flashed into her heart, and lighted it up at once; and breathless,
and with winged steps, she flew to the bedside of her sister.  She
paused, however, at the door of the chamber, while a thought of pain
broke in upon her.

"Poor Mary!" said she to herself.  "Shall I waken her, to feel her sorrow
sharpened by my happiness?  No; I will keep it within my own bosom till
the morrow."

She approached the bed, to discover if Mary's sleep were peaceful.  Her
face was turned partly inward to the pillow, and had been hidden there to
weep; but a look of motionless contentment was now visible upon it, as if
her heart, like a deep lake, had grown calm because its dead had sunk
down so far within.  Happy is it, and strange, that the lighter sorrows
are those from which dreams are chiefly fabricated.  Margaret shrunk from
disturbing her sister-in-law, and felt as if her own better fortune had
rendered her involuntarily unfaithful, and as if altered and diminished
affection must be the consequence of the disclosure she had to make.
With a sudden step she turned away.  But joy could not long be repressed,
even by circumstances that would have excited heavy grief at another
moment.  Her mind was thronged with delightful thoughts, till sleep stole
on, and transformed them to visions, more delightful and more wild, like
the breath of winter (but what a cold comparison!) working fantastic
tracery upon a window.

When the night was far advanced, Mary awoke with a sudden start.  A vivid
dream had latterly involved her in its unreal life, of which, however,
she could only remember that it had been broken in upon at the most
interesting point.  For a little time, slumber hung about her like a
morning mist, hindering her from perceiving the distinct outline of her
situation.  She listened with imperfect consciousness to two or three
volleys of a rapid and eager knocking; and first she deemed the noise a
matter of course, like the breath she drew; next, it appeared a thing in
which she had no concern; and lastly, she became aware that it was a
summons necessary to be obeyed.  At the same moment, the pang of
recollection darted into her mind; the pall of sleep was thrown back from
the face of grief; the dim light of the chamber, and the objects therein
revealed, had retained all her suspended ideas, and restored them as soon
as she unclosed her eyes.  Again there was a quick peal upon the street-
door.  Fearing that her sister would also be disturbed, Mary wrapped
herself in a cloak and hood, took the lamp from the hearth, and hastened
to the window.  By some accident, it had been left unhasped, and yielded
easily to her hand.

"Who's there?" asked Mary, trembling as she looked forth.

The storm was over, and the moon was up; it shone upon broken clouds
above, and below upon houses black with moisture, and upon little lakes
of the fallen rain, curling into silver beneath the quick enchantment of
a breeze.  A young man in a sailor's dress, wet as if he had come out of
the depths of the sea, stood alone under the window.  Mary recognized him
as one whose livelihood was gained by short voyages along the coast; nor
did she forget that, previous to her marriage, he had been an
unsuccessful wooer of her own.

"What do you seek here, Stephen?" said she.

"Cheer up, Mary, for I seek to comfort you," answered the rejected lover.
"You must know I got home not ten minutes ago, and the first thing my
good mother told me was the news about your husband.  So, without saying
a word to the old woman, I clapped on my hat, and ran out of the house.
I could n't have slept a wink before speaking to you, Mary, for the sake
of old times."

"Stephen, I thought better of you!" exclaimed the widow, with gushing
tears and preparing to close the lattice; for she was no whit inclined to
imitate the first wife of Zadig.

"But stop, and hear my story out," cried the young sailor.  "I tell you
we spoke a brig yesterday afternoon, bound in from Old England.  And who
do you think I saw standing on deck, well and hearty, only a bit thinner
than he was five months ago?"

Mary leaned from the window, but could not speak.  "Why, it was your
husband himself," continued the generous seaman.  "He and three others
saved themselves on a spar, when the Blessing turned bottom upwards.  The
brig will beat into the bay by daylight, with this wind, and you'll see
him here to-morrow.  There's the comfort I bring you, Mary, and so good
night."

He hurried away, while Mary watched him with a doubt of waking reality,
that seemed stronger or weaker as he alternately entered the shade of the
houses, or emerged into the broad streaks of moonlight.  Gradually,
however, a blessed flood of conviction swelled into her heart, in
strength enough to overwhelm her, had its increase been more abrupt.
Her first impulse was to rouse her sister-in-law, and communicate the new-
born gladness.  She opened the chamber-door, which had been closed in the
course of the night, though not latched, advanced to the bedside, and was
about to lay her hand upon the slumberer's shoulder.  But then she
remembered that Margaret would awake to thoughts of death and woe,
rendered not the less bitter by their contrast with her own felicity.
She suffered the rays of the lamp to fall upon the unconscious form of
the bereaved one.  Margaret lay in unquiet sleep, and the drapery was
displaced around her; her young cheek was rosy-tinted, and her lips half
opened in a vivid smile; an expression of joy, debarred its passage by
her sealed eyelids, struggled forth like incense from the whole
countenance.

"My poor sister! you will waken too soon from that happy dream," thought
Mary.

Before retiring, she set down the lamp, and endeavored to arrange the
bedclothes so that the chill air might not do harm to the feverish
slumberer.  But her hand trembled against Margaret's neck, a tear also
fell upon her cheek, and she suddenly awoke.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                      LITTLE DAFFYDOWNDILLY

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne


Daffydowndilly was so called because in his nature he resembled a flower,
and loved to do only what was beautiful and agreeable, and took no
delight in labor of any kind.  But, while Daffydowndilly was yet a little
boy, his mother sent him away from his pleasant home, and put him under
the care of a very strict schoolmaster, who went by the name of Mr. Toil.
Those who knew him best affirmed that this Mr. Toil was a very worthy
character; and that be had done more good, both to children and grown
people, than anybody else in the world.  Certainly he had lived long
enough to do a great deal of good; for, if all stories he true, he had
dwelt upon earth ever since Adam was driven from the garden of Eden.

Nevertheless, Mr. Toil had a severe and ugly countenance, especially for
such little boys or big men as were inclined to be idle; his voice, too,
was harsh; and all his ways and customs seemed very disagreeable to our
friend Daffydowndilly.  The whole day long, this terrible old
schoolmaster sat at his desk overlooking the scholars, or stalked about
the school-room with a certain awful birch rod in his hand.  Now came a
rap over the shoulders of a boy whom Mr. Toil had caught at play; now he
punished a whole class who were behindhand with their lessons; and, in
short, unless a lad chose to attend quietly and constantly to his book,
he had no chance of enjoying a quiet moment in the school-room of Mr.
Toil.

"This will never do for me," thought Daffydowndilly.

Now, the whole of Daffydowndilly's life had hitherto been passed with his
dear mother, who had a much sweeter face than old Mr. Toil, and who had
always been very indulgent to her little boy.  No wonder, therefore, that
poor Daffydowndilly found it a woful change, to be sent away from the
good lady's side, and put under the care of this ugly-visaged
schoolmaster, who never gave him any apples or cakes, and seemed to think
that little boys were created only to get lessons.

"I can't bear it any longer," said Daffydowndilly to himself, when he had
been at school about a week.  "I'll run away, and try to find my dear
mother; and, at any rate, I shall never find anybody half so disagreeable
as this old Mr. Toil!"

So, the very next morning, off started poor Daffydowndilly, and began his
rambles about the world, with only some bread and cheese for his
breakfast, and very little pocket-money to pay his expenses.  But he had
gone only a short distance, when he overtook a man of grave and sedate
appearance, who was trudging at a moderate pace along the road.

"Good morning, my fine lad," said the stranger; and his voice seemed hard
and severe, but yet had a sort of kindness in it; "whence do you come so
early, and whither are you going?"

Little Daffydowndilly was a boy of very ingenuous disposition, and had
never been known to tell a lie in all his life.  Nor did he tell one now.
He hesitated a moment or two, but finally confessed that he had run away
from school, on account of his great dislike to Mr. Toil; and that lie
was resolved to find some place in the world where he should never see or
hear of the old schoolmaster again.

"O, very well, my little friend!" answered the stranger.  "Then we will
go together; for I, likewise, have had a good deal to do with Mr. Toil,
and should be glad to find some place where he was never heard of."

Our friend Daffydowndilly would have been better pleased with a companion
of his own age, with whom he might have gathered flowers along the
roadside, or have chased butterflies, or have done many other things to
make the journey pleasant.  But he had wisdom enough to understand that
he should get along through the world much easier by having a man of
experience to show him the way.  So he accepted the stranger's proposal,
and they walked on very sociably together.

They had not gone far, when the road passed by a field where some
haymakers were at work, mowing down the tall grass, and spreading it out
in the sun to dry.  Daffydowndilly was delighted with the sweet smell of
the new-mown grass, and thought how much pleasanter it must be to make
hay in the sunshine, under the blue sky, and with the birds singing
sweetly in the neighboring trees and bushes, than to be shut up in a
dismal school-room, learning lessons all day long, and continually
scolded by old Mr. Toil.  But, in the midst of these thoughts, while he
was stopping to peep over the stone wall, he started back and caught hold
of his companion's hand.

"Quick, quick!" cried he.  "Let us run away, or lie will catch us!"

"Who will catch us?" asked the stranger.

"Mr. Toil, the old schoolmaster!" answered Daffydowndilly.  "Don't you
see him amongst the haymakers?"

And Daffydowndilly pointed to an elderly man, who seemed to be the owner
of the field, and the employer of the men at work there.  He had stripped
off his coat and waistcoat, and was busily at work in his shirt-sleeves.
The drops of sweat stood upon his brow; but he gave himself not a
moment's rest, and kept crying out to the haymakers to make hay while the
sun shone.  Now, strange to say, the figure and features of this old
farmer were precisely the same as those of old Mr. Toil, who, at that
very moment, must have been just entering his school-room.

"Don't be afraid," said the stranger.  "This is not Mr. Toil the
schoolmaster, but a brother of his, who was bred a farmer; and people say
he is the most disagreeable man of the two.  However, he won't trouble
you, unless you become a laborer on the farm."

Little Daffydowndilly believed what his companion said, but was very
glad, nevertheless, when they were out of sight of the old farmer, who
bore such a singular resemblance to Mr. Toil.  The two travellers had
gone but little farther, when they came to a spot where some carpenters
were erecting a house.  Daffydowndilly begged his companion to stop a
moment; for it was a very pretty sight to see how neatly the carpenters
did their work, with their broad-axes, and saws, and planes, and hammers,
shaping out the doors, and putting in the window-sashes, and nailing on
the clapboards; and he could not help thinking that he should like to
take a broad-axe, a saw, a plane, and a hammer, and build a little house
for himself.  And then, when he should have a house of his own, old Mr.
Toil would never dare to molest him.

But, just while he was delighting himself with this idea, little
Daffydowndilly beheld something that made him catch hold of his
companion's hand, all in a fright.

"Make haste.  Quick, quick!" cried he.  "There he is again!"

"Who?" asked the stranger, very quietly.

"Old Mr. Toil," said Daffydowndilly, trembling.  "There! he that is
overseeing the carpenters.  'T is my old schoolmaster, as sure as I 'm
alive!"

The stranger cast his eyes where Daffydowndilly pointed his finger; and
he saw an elderly man, with a carpenter's rule and compasses in his hand.
This person went to and fro about the unfinished house, measuring pieces
of timber, and marking out the work that was to be done, and continually
exhorting the other carpenters to be diligent.  And wherever he turned
his hard and wrinkled visage, the men seemed to feel that they bad a
task-master over them, and sawed, and hammered, and planed, as if for
dear life.

"O no! this is not Mr. Toil, the schoolmaster," said the stranger.  "It
is another brother of his, who follows the trade of carpenter."

"I am very glad to hear it," quoth Daffydowndilly; "but if you please,
sir, I should like to get out of his way as soon as possible."

Then they went on a little farther, and soon heard the sound of a drum
and fife.  Daffydowndilly pricked up his ears at this, and besought his
companion to hurry forward, that they might not miss seeing the
soldiers. Accordingly, they made what haste they could, and soon met a
company of soldiers, gayly dressed, with beautiful feathers in their
caps, and bright muskets on their shoulders.  In front marched two
drummers and two fifers, beating on their drums and playing on their
fifes with might and main, and making such lively music that little
Daffydowndilly would gladly have followed them to the end of the world.
And if he was only a soldier, then, he said to himself, old Mr. Toil
would never venture to look him in the face.

"Quick step!  Forward march!" shouted a gruff voice.

Little Daffydowndilly started, in great dismay; for this voice which had
spoken to the soldiers sounded precisely the same as that which he had
heard every day in Mr. Toil's school-room, out of Mr. Toil's own mouth.
And, turning his eyes to the captain of the company, what should he see
but the very image of old Mr. Toil himself, with a smart cap and feather
on his head, a pair of gold epaulets on his shoulders, a laced coat on
his back, a purple sash round his waist, and a long sword, instead of a
birch rod, in his hand.  And though he held his head so high, and
strutted like a turkey-cock, still he looked quite as ugly and
disagreeable as when he was hearing lessons in the schoolroom.

"This is certainly old Mr. Toil," said Daffydowndilly, in a trembling
voice.  "Let us run away, for fear he should make us enlist in his
company!"

"You are mistaken again, my little friend," replied the stranger, very
composedly.  "This is not Mr. Toil, the schoolmaster, but a brother of
his, who has served in the army all his life.  People say he's a terribly
severe fellow; but you and I need not he afraid of him."

"Well, well," said little Daffydowndilly, "but, if you please, sir, I
don't want to see the soldiers any more."

So the child and the stranger resumed their journey; and, by and by, they
came to a house by the roadside, where a number of people were making
merry.  Young men and rosy-checked girls, with smiles on their faces,
were dancing to the sound of a fiddle.  It was the pleasantest sight that
Daffydowndilly had yet met with, and it comforted him for all his
disappointments.

"O, let us stop here," cried he to his companion; "for Mr. Toil will never
dare to show his face where there is a fiddler, and where people are
dancing and making merry.  We shall be quite safe here!"

But these last words died away upon Daffydowndilly's tongue; for,
happening to cast his eyes on the fiddler, whom should be behold again,
but the likeness of Mr. Toil, holding a fiddle-bow instead of a birch
rod, and flourishing it with as much ease and dexterity as if he had been
a fiddler all his life!  He had somewhat the air of a Frenchman, but
still looked exactly like the old schoolmaster; and Daffydowndilly even
fancied that he nodded and winked at him, and made signs for him to join
in the dance.

"O dear me!"  whispered he, turning pale.  "It seems as if there was
nobody but Mr. Toil in the world.  Who could have thought of his playing
on a fiddle!"

"This is not your old schoolmaster," observed the stranger, "but another
brother of his, who was bred in France, where he learned the profession
of a fiddler.  He is ashamed of his family, and generally calls himself
Monsieur le Plaisir; but his real name is Toil, and those who have known
him best think him still more disagreeable than his brothers."

"Pray let us go a little farther," said Daffydowndilly.  "I don't like
the looks of this fiddler at all."

Well, thus the stranger and little Daffydowndilly went wandering along
the highway, and in shady lanes, and through pleasant villages; and
whithersoever they went, behold!  there was the image of old Mr. Toil.
He stood like a scarecrow in the cornfields.  If they entered a house, he
sat in the parlor; if they peeped into the kitchen, he was there.  He
made himself at home in every cottage, and stole, under one disguise or
another, into the most splendid mansions.  Everywhere there was sure to
be somebody wearing the likeness of Mr. Toil, and who, as the stranger
affirmed, was one of the old schoolmaster's innumerable brethren.

Little Daffydowndilly was almost tired to death, when he perceived some
people reclining lazily in a shady place, by the side of the road.  The
poor child entreated his companion that they might sit down there, and
take some repose.

"Old Mr. Toil will never come here," said lie; "for he hates to see
people taking their ease."

But, even while he spoke, Daffydowndilly's eyes fell upon a person who
seemed the laziest, and heaviest, and most torpid of all those lazy and
heavy and torpid people who had lain down to sleep in the shade.  Who
should it be, again, but the very image of Mr. Toil!

"There is a large family of these Toils," remarked the stranger.  "This
is another of the old schoolmaster's brothers, who was bred in Italy,
where he acquired very idle habits, and goes by the name of Signor Far
Niente.  He pretends to lead an easy life, but is really the most
miserable fellow in the family."

"O, take me back!--take me back!" cried poor little Daffydowndilly,
bursting into tears.  "If there is nothing but Toil all the world over, I
may just as well go back to the school-house!"

"Yonder it is,--there is the school-house!" said the stranger; for though
he and little Daffydowndilly had taken a great many steps, they had
travelled in a circle, instead of a straight line.  "Come; we will go
hack to school together."

There was something in his companion's voice that little Daffydowndilly
now remembered; and it is strange that he had not remembered it sooner.
Looking up into his face, behold! there again was the likeness of old Mr.
Toil; so that the poor child had been in company with Toil all day, even
while he was doing his best to run away from him.  Some people, to whom I
have told little Daffydowndilly's story, are of opinion that old Mr. Toil
was a magician, and possessed the power of multiplying himself into as
many shapes as lie saw fit.

Be this as it may, little Daffydowndilly had learned a good lesson, and
from that time forward was diligent at his task, because he knew that
diligence is not a whit more toilsome than sport or idleness.  And when
he became better acquainted with Mr. Toil, he began to think that his
ways were not so very disagreeable, and that the old schoolmaster's smile
of approbation made his face almost as pleasant as even that of
Daffydowndilly's mother.









This eBook was produced by David Widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                     FANSHAWE AND OTHER PIECES

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne


                       BIOGRAPHICAL STUDIES




CONTENTS:
     Mrs. Hutchinson
     Sir William Phips
     Sir William Pepperell
     Thomas Green Fessenden
     Jonathan Cilley



MRS. HUTCHINSON.

The character of this female suggests a train of thought which will form
as natural an Introduction to her story, as most of the Prefaces to
Gay's Fables, or the tales of Prior; besides that, the general soundness
of the moral may excuse any want of  present applicability.  We will not
look for a living resemblance of Mrs. Hutchinson, though the search
might not be altogether fruitless.  But there are portentous
indications, changes gradually taking place in the habits and feelings
of the gentle sex, which seem to threaten our posterity with many of
those public women, whereof one was a burden too grievous for our
fathers.  The  press, however, is now the medium through which feminine
ambition chiefly manifests itself; and we will not anticipate the period
(trusting to be gone hence ere it arrive) when fair orators shall be as
numerous as the fair authors of our own day.  The hastiest glance may
show  how much of the texture and body of cisatlantic literature is the
work of those slender fingers from which only a light and fanciful
embroidery has heretofore been required, that might sparkle upon the
garment without enfeebling the web.  Woman's intellect should never give
the tone to that of man; and even her morality is not exactly the
material for masculine virtue.  A false liberality, which mistakes the
strong division-lines of Nature for arbitrary distinctions, and a
courtesy, which might polish criticism, but should never soften it, have
done their best to add a girlish feebleness to the tottering infancy of
our literature.  The evil is likely to be a growing one.  As yet, the
great body of American women are a domestic race; but when a continuance
of ill-judged incitements shall have turned their hearts away from the
fireside, there are obvious circumstances which will render female pens
more numerous and more prolific than those of men, though but equally
encouraged; and (limited, of course, by the scanty support of the
public, but increasing indefinitely within those limits) the inkstained
Amazons will expel their rivals by actual pressure, and petticoats wave
triumphantly over all the field.  But, allowing that such forebodings
are slightly exaggerated, is it good for woman's self that the path of
feverish hope, of tremulous success, of bitter and ignominious
disappointment, should be left wide open to her?  Is the prize worth her
having, if she win it?  Fame does not increase the peculiar respect
which men pay to female excellence, and there is a delicacy (even in
rude bosoms, where few would think to find it) that perceives, or
fancies, a sort of impropriety in the display of woman's natal mind to
the gaze of the world, with indications by which its inmost secrets may
be searched out.  In fine, criticism should examine with a stricter,
instead of a more indulgent eye, the merits of females at its bar,
because they are to justify themselves for an irregularity which men do
not commit in appearing there; and woman, when she feels the impulse of
genius like a command of Heaven within her, should be aware that she is
relinquishing a part of the loveliness of her sex, and obey the inward
voice with sorrowing reluctance, like the Arabian maid who bewailed the
gift of prophecy.  Hinting thus imperfectly at sentiments which may be
developed on a future occasion, we proceed to consider the celebrated
subject of this sketch.

Mrs. Hutchinson was a woman of extraordinary talent and strong
imagination, whom the latter quality, following the general direction
taken by the enthusiasm of the times, prompted to stand forth as a
reformer in religion.  In her native country, she had shown symptoms of
irregular and daring thought, but, chiefly by the influence of a
favorite pastor, was restrained from open indiscretion.  On the removal
of this clergyman, becoming dissatisfied with the ministry under which
she lived, she was drawn in by the great tide of Puritan emigration, and
visited Massachusetts within a few years after its first settlement.
But she bore trouble in her own bosom, and could find no peace in this
chosen land.  She soon began to promulgate strange and dangerous
opinions, tending, in the peculiar situation of the colony, and from the
principles which were its basis, and indispensable for its temporary
support, to eat into its very existence.  We shall endeavor to give a
more practical idea of this part of her course.

It is a summer evening.  The dusk has settled heavily upon the woods,
the waves, and the Trimountain peninsula, increasing that dismal aspect
of the embryo town, which was said to have drawn tears of despondency
from Mrs. Hutchinson, though she believed that her mission thither was
divine.  The houses, straw thatched and lowly roofed, stand irregularly
along streets that are yet roughened by the roots of the trees, as if
the forest, departing at the approach of man, had left its reluctant
footprints behind.  Most of the dwellings are lonely and silent: from a
few we may hear the reading of some sacred text, or the quiet voice of
prayer; but nearly all the sombre life of the scene is collected near
the extremity of the village.  A crowd of hooded women, and of men in
steeple-hats and close-cropped hair, are assembled at the door and open
windows of a house newly built.  An earnest expression glows in every
face; and some press inward, as if the bread of life were to be dealt
forth, and they feared to lose their share; while others would fain hold
them back, but enter with them, since they may not be restrained.  We,
also, will go in, edging through the thronged doorway to an apartment
which occupies the whole breadth of the house. At the upper end, behind
a table, on which a