 it!" exclaimed Nan. "Papa has bought the Marvin's houseboat,
Mamma, and we're going to have lovely times in it this summer."

"And I'm going to run the engine," declared Bert.

"I'm going to be fireman!" cried fat Freddie. "I'm going to put on
coal and squirt water on the fires!"

"I'm going to sit on deck and play with my dolls," spoke Flossie, who
was trying to climb up on Snap's back to get a ride.

Mrs. Bobbsey looked at her husband.

"Really?" she asked. "Have you bought the boat?"

"Yes," he replied, "I have. You know we have been thinking of it for
some time. Lake Metoka would be just fine for a houseboat, and we
could go on quite a cruise with one. Mr. Marvin wanted to sell his
boat, and as he and I had some business dealings, and as he owed me
some money, I took the boat in part payment."

"And is it ours now, Papa?" asked Bert.

"Yes, the houseboat is ours. It is called the Bluebird, and that is a
good name for it, since it is painted blue--like your eyes, little fat
fairy!" he cried, catching Flossie up in his arms.

"Is it a big boat, Papa?" asked Bert. Like most boys he liked things
big and strong.

"Well, I think it will be large enough," said Mr. Bobbsey with a smile
as he set down Flossie and caught up Freddie in the same way. "Were
you frightened when you fell down and saw the lumber team coming
toward you?" he asked.

"A little," Freddie said. "But I wished my legs were long enough so I
could ride Bert's bicycle. Then I could get out of the way."

"You'd better keep away from the wheel until you are bigger," said his
father, who had been told about the accident and the excitement. "But
now I must get back to the office. I have plenty of work to do."

"Oh, but can't you stay just a little longer, to tell us more about
the boat!" pleaded Nan. "When can we have a ride in it?"

"A boat is called 'her,'" interrupted Bert,

"Well, 'her' then," said Nan. "Tell us about HER, papa. I didn't hear
much at your office."

"You heard more than I meant you to," said Mr. Bobbsey with a smile.
"Nan came in with that letter just as Mr. Marvin and I were finishing
our talk about the houseboat," he went on. "I was going to keep it
secret a little longer, but it's just as well you should know now.

"I think you will like the Bluebird. It has a little gasoline engine,
so we can travel from place to place. And there is a large living
room, a kitchen, several bed rooms and a nice open deck, where we can
sit, when it is too hot to be inside."

"Oh, that's going to be great!" cried Bert. "I want a room near the
engine."

"And can I be a fireman?" asked Freddie.

"I want to be near mamma--and you," spoke little Flossie.

"Oh, isn't it going to be lovely!" exclaimed Nan, clapping her hands.

"Scrumptious, I call it!" cried Bert, and he ran into the house,
through the hall, and into the dining-room, just as big, fat Dinah,
the cook, was entering the same room, carefully holding a big cake
which she had just covered with white frosting.

"Oh dear!" cried Bert, as he ran, full tilt, Into the big cook.

"Good land ob massy!" fairly yelled Dinah. "Wha--wha---"

But that was all she could say. She tried to save herself from
falling, but she could not. Nor could Bert. He went down, on one side
of the doorsill, and Dinah sat down, very hard, on the other, the cake
bouncing from her hands, up toward her head, and then falling into her
lap.




CHAPTER IV

AT THE HOUSEBOAT


"Did--did I hurt you, Dinah?" asked Bert, after he had gotten his
breath. "I'm--I'm sorry--but did I hurt you?"

"Hurt me? Hurt me, honey lamb? No indeedy, but I done reckon yo' has
hurt yo'se'f, honey! Look at yo' pore haid!" and she pointed her fat
finger at Bert.

"Why, what's the matter with my head?" he asked, putting up his hand.
He felt something sticky, and when he looked at his fingers, he saw
that they were covered with white stuff.

"Oh, it's the frosting off the cake!" said Nan with a laugh. "You look
something like one of the clowns in the circus, Bert, only you haven't
enough of the white stuff on."

"And look at Dinah!" laughed Freddie. "She's turning white!"

"What's dat, honey lamb? Turnin' white?" gasped the big, colored cook.
"Don't say dat!"

"It's the cake frosting on Dinah, too!" said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Oh, Bert!
why aren't you a little more careful?"

"I'm sorry, mamma," Bert said, as he watched Dinah wipe the frosting
off her face with her apron. "I didn't know she was coming through the
door then."

"And I shore didn't see yo', honey lamb," went on the cook. "Land ob
massy! Look at mah cake!" she cried, as she gazed at the mass in her
lap. "All de frostin' am done slid off it!"

"Yes, you're a regular wedding cake yourself, Dinah," said Mr.
Bobbsey, who had come in to see what all the noise meant. "Well, this
seems to be a day of excitement. I'm glad it was no worse, though.
Better go up stairs and wash, Bert."

"The cake itself isn't spoiled," said Mrs. Bobbsey, lifting it from
Dinah's lap, so the colored cook could get up. It was no easy work for
her to do this, as she was so fat. But at last, after many groanings
and gruntings, she rose to her feet, and took the cake from Mrs.
Bobbsey.

"I'll put some mo' frostin' on it right away, ma'am," she said. "An' I
hopes nobody else runs inter me," she went on with a laugh. "I shuah
did feel skeered dat Bert was hurt bad."

They could all laugh at the happening now, and after Mr. Bobbsey had
told a little more about the new houseboat, he went back to the
office.

"Come on, Flossie," suggested Freddie. "Now you've found the book
straps, we can hitch Snap to the express wagon. Where'd you find 'em?"

"The straps were on our books, under the hall rack," said Flossie.

"That's just where I left 'em!" exclaimed Freddie. "I knew I left 'em
somewhere."

"But next time you must remember," cautioned his mother. "And remember
another thing--no more bicycle rides--you stay on your velocipede."

"Yes'm," said Freddie. "Come on, Flossie. Where's Snap?"

When the little twins went to look for their big, shaggy pet, who
could do so many circus tricks, they could not find him.

"Have you seen Snap?" asked Freddie of Dinah's husband, Sam Johnson,
who was out in the barn.

"Snap?" repeated the colored man. "Why, Freddie, I done jest see Snap
paradin' down de road wif dat black dog from Mr. Brown's house."

"Then Snap's gone away again," said Flossie with a sigh. "Never mind,
Freddie. Let's play steamboat, and you can be the fireman."

"All right," he agreed, much pleased with this idea. "We'll make
believe we're in our new houseboat. Come on."

"Steamboat" was a game the smaller twins often played on the long
Saturdays, when there was no school. All they needed was an old soap
box for the boat, and some sticks for oars. Then, with some bits of
bread or cake, which Dinah gave them to eat, in case they were
"shipwrecked," they had fine times.

Meanwhile, Bert and Nan had asked permission of their mother to go
over to where some of their boy and girl friends lived, so they were
prepared to have a good time, too.

"Oh, but what fun we'll have on the houseboat, won't we, Bert?" said
Nan.

"That's what we will," he agreed with a laugh.

Monday morning came, after Sunday (as it always does if you wait long
enough) and the two sets of Bobbsey twins started for school.

"I wish we didn't have to go," said Bert, as he strapped up his books.
"I want to go down to our new houseboat."

"But you must go to school," said his mother with a smile. "There will
not be many more days now. June will soon be over, and you know school
closes a little earlier than usual this year. So run along, like good
children."

Off they hurried and soon they were mingling with their boy and girl
friends, who were also on their way to their classes.

"You can't guess what we're going to have," said Freddie to a boy
named Johnnie Wilson, who was in his room.

"Kittens?" asked Johnnie.

"No."

"Puppies?"

"No."

"I give up--what is it?"

"A houseboat," said Freddie. "It's a house on a boat, and you can live
in it on water."

"Huh!" said Johnnie. "There isn't any such thing."

"Yes, there is, too, isn't there, Flossie?" and Freddie appealed to
his small sister.

"'Course there is," she said. "Our papa bought one, and Freddie's
going to be the fireman, and I'm going to cook the meals, so there!
Haven't we got a houseboat, Nan?"

"Yes, dear," answered the older sister, who was walking with Bert. At
this, coming from Nan, Johnnie had nothing to say, except that he
murmured, as he walked away:

"Huh! A houseboat's nothing. We've got a baby at our house, and it's
got hair on its head, and two teeth!"

"A houseboat's better'n a baby," was Freddie's opinion.

"It is not!" cried Johnnie.

"It is so!" Freddie exclaimed.

"Hush!" begged Nan. "Please don't dispute. Houseboats and babies are
both nice. But now it's time to go to school."

The Bobbsey twins could hardly wait for the classes to be out that
day, for their mother had promised to call for them after lessons,
and, with their father, they were going to see the Bluebird. The
houseboat had been brought up the lake by Mr. Marvin, and tied to a
dock not far from Mr. Bobbsey's lumber office. The boat was now the
property of Mr. Bobbsey, but that gentleman had not yet fully planned
what he would do with her.

Just as the children were trooping out of the school yard, along came
Mrs. Bobbsey. Nan and Flossie saw their mother and hastened toward
her, while Freddie and Bert came along more slowly.

In a little while all five of them were at Mr. Bobbsey's lumber
office. He came out of his private room, when one of his clerks told
him Mrs. Bobbsey and the children were there.

"Ah, what can I do for you to-day?" asked Mr. Bobbsey of his wife,
just like Mr. Fitch, the grocery-store-keeper. "Would you like a
barrel of sawdust, ma'am; or a bundle of shingles to fry for the
children's suppers?" and Mr. Bobbsey pretended he was no relation to
his family.

"I think we'll have a houseboat," said his wife with a laugh. "Have
you time to take us down to it? I can't do a thing with these
children, they are so anxious to see the Bluebird." "Well, I hope
they'll like her," said Mr. Bobbsey, "and not pull any feathers out of
her tail."

"Oh, is there a real bird on the boat?" asked Flossie.

"No, papa is only joking," said Nan, with a smile.

Mr. Bobbsey put on his hat, and soon the whole Bobbsey family had
reached the place where the boat was tied. At the first sight of her,
with her pretty blue paint and white trimming, Nan cried:

"Oh, how lovely!"

"And how big it is!" exclaimed Freddie his eyes large and round with
wonder.

"Let's go aboard--where's the gang-plank?" asked Bert, trying to use
some boat language he had heard from his father's lumbermen.

The Bluebird was indeed a fine, large houseboat, roomy and
comfortable. The children went inside, and, after looking around the
main, or living room, and peering into the dining-room, Nan opened the
door of a smaller compartment. Inside she saw a cunning little bed.

"Oh, may I have this room?" she asked. "Isn't it sweet!"

"Here's another just like it," said Mrs. Bobbsey, opening the next
door.

"That will be mine," said Flossie.

"My room's going to be back here, by the engine," spoke Bert, as he
picked out his sleeping place.

"And I'll come with you," said Freddie. "I'm going to be fireman!"
Gleefully the children were running about, clapping their hands, and
finding something new and strange every minute.

"Where is your room, mamma?" asked Nan. "We ought to have let you and
papa have first choice."

"Oh, there are plenty of rooms," said Mr. Bobbsey. "Let's go up on
deck and---"

He stopped suddenly, and seemed to be listening.

"What is it?" asked his wife.

"There seems to be some one on this boat beside ourselves," answered
Mr. Bobbsey. "I'll go look."




CHAPTER V

THE STRANGE BOY


The Bobbsey twins looked at one another, and then at their mother, as
Mr. Bobbsey went out of the living room of the houseboat, toward the
stairway that led up on deck.

Bert tried to look brave, and as though he did not care. Nan moved a
little closer to her mother. As for Flossie, she, too, was a little
frightened, but Freddie did not seem at all alarmed.

"Is it somebody come to take the boat away from us?" he asked in his
high-pitched, childish voice. "If it is--don't let 'em, papa."

They all laughed at this--even Mr. Bobbsey, and he turned to look
around, half way up the stairs, saying:

"No, Freddie, I won't let them take our boat."

"Pooh! Just as if they could--it's ours!" spoke Bert.

"Who could it be on board here, mamma?" asked Nan.

"I don't know, dear, unless it was some one passing through the lumber
yard, who stopped to see what the boat looked like," answered Mrs.
Bobbsey. "Papa will soon find out."

The noise they had heard was the footsteps of some one walking about
on the deck of the houseboat.

"Perhaps it was one of the men from the office, who came to tell papa
he was wanted up there, or that some one wanted to speak to him on the
telephone," went on Mrs. Bobbsey. She saw that the children, even
Bert, were a little alarmed, for the boat was tied at a lonely place
in the lumber yard, and tramps frequently had to be driven away from
the piles of boards under which there were a number of good places to
sleep.

Mr. Bobbsey did not mean to be unkind to the poor men who had no
homes, but tramps often smoke, and are not careful about their
matches. There had been one or two fires in the lumber yard, and Mr.
Bobbsey did not want any more blazes.

Soon the footsteps of the children's father were heard on the deck
above them, and, a little later Freddie and the others could hear the
talk of two persons.

"I guess it was one of the men," said Mrs. Bobbsey.

"I'm going to see," spoke Bert, and he moved toward the stairway,
followed by Nan, Flossie and Freddie. They went up on deck and saw
their father talking to a strange boy. None of the Bobbsey children
knew him.

"Are you looking for some one?" asked Mr. Bobbsey kindly, of the
strange boy. Often, when he was in distant parts of the lumber yard,
and he was wanted at the office, or telephone, his men might ask some
boy to run and tell the owner of the yard he was needed. But Mr.
Bobbsey had never seen this lad before.

"No, sir, I--I wasn't looking for any one," said the boy, as he looked
down at his shoes, which were full of holes, and put his hands into
the pockets of his trousers, which were quite ragged. "I was just
looking at the boat. It's a fine one!"

"I'm glad you like it," said Mr. Bobbsey with a smile.

"Could you go to sea in this boat?" asked the boy, who was not very
much older than Bert.

"Go to sea? Oh, no!" answered Mr. Bobbsey. "This boat is all right on
a lake, or river, but the big waves of the ocean would be too strong
for it. We don't intend to go to sea. Why? Are you fond of sailing?"

"That's what I am!" cried the boy. "I'm going to sea in a ship some
day. I'm sick of farm-life!" and his eyes snapped.

"Are you a farmer?" asked the twins' father.

"I work for a farmer, and I don't like it--the work is too hard," the
boy said, as he hung his head.

"There is plenty of hard work in this world," went on Mr. Bobbsey. "Of
course too much hard work isn't good for any one, but we must all do
our share. Where do you work?"

"I work for Mr. Hardee, who lives just outside the town of Lemby,"
answered the boy.

"Oh, yes, I know Mr. Hardee," spoke Mr. Bobbsey. "I sold him some
lumber with which he built his house. So you work for him? But what
are you doing so far away from the farm?"

"Mr. Hardee sent me over here, to Lakeport, on an errand."

"Well, if I were you I wouldn't come so far away from where I left my
horse and wagon," cautioned Mr. Bobbsey, for the place where the boat
was tied was a long distance from the main road leading from Lakeport
to Lemby.

"I didn't come in a wagon," said the boy. "I walked."

"What! You don't mean to say you walked all the way from Lemby to
Lakeport?" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey, who had now come up on deck.

"Yes'm, I did," answered the boy. "Mr. Hardee said he needed the
horses to work on the farm. He said I was young, and the walk would do
me good. So Mrs. Hardee, she gave me some bread and butter for my
lunch, and I walked. I'm walking back now, and I came this way by the
lake. It's a short cut.

"Then I happened to see this boat here. I like boats, so I thought it
wouldn't hurt to come on board."

"Oh, no, that's all right!" said Mr. Bobbsey quickly. "I'll be glad to
have you look around, though this is only a houseboat, and not built
for ocean travel. So you work for Mr. Hardee, eh? What's your name?"

"Will Watson," the boy said. Mrs. Bobbsey was trying to motion to her
husband to come toward her. It seemed as though she wanted to say
something to him privately.

"Will Watson, eh?" went on Mr. Bobbsey. "I don't seem to know any
family of that name around here."

"No, I don't belong around here," the boy said. "I come from out west
--or I used to live there when I was littler. I've got an uncle out
there now, if I could ever find him. He's a gold miner."

"A gold miner?" said Mr. Bobbsey, and then his wife came up to him,
and whispered in his ear. Just what she said the twins could not hear,
but, a moment later Mr. Bobbsey said:

"Bert, suppose you take Will down and show him the boat, since he is
so interested."

"Oh, I'm going to!" cried Freddie. "I want to show him where I'm going
to be a fireman."

"And I want to show him my room," said Flossie.

The strange boy looked at the little twins and smiled. He had a nice
face, and was quite clean, though his clothes were ragged and poor.

"Come along down if you like," said Bert kindly. "There's a lot to see
below the deck."

With a friendly nod of his head Will Watson followed the three
children. Nan stayed on deck with her parents.

"It's a shame to make him walk all the way from Lemby here and back,"
said Mrs. Bobbsey. "It must be all of five miles each way."

"It is," said Mr. Bobbsey. "Quite a tramp for a little fellow."

"Can't you find some way to give him a ride back?" asked his wife.
"Aren't any of your wagons going that way?"

"Perhaps," replied Mr. Bobbsey. "I'll find out, and I'll send him as
near to Mr. Hardee's place as I can."

"Poor little fellow," said Mrs. Bobbsey, and she thought how hard it
would be if her son Bert had to go to work for his living so young.

"He seems like a nice boy," spoke Mr. Bobbsey, "and from what I know
of Mr. Hardee he isn't an easy man to work for. Well, have you seen
enough of the boat, Nan? Do you think you'll like it?"

"Oh, I just love it," Nan answered. "I'm so anxious for the time to
come when we can go sailing, or whatever you do in a boat like this.
Mamma, may I bring some of my things from home to fix up my room?"

"I think so--yes. We shall have to talk about that later. I think it
is time we started home now. Dinah will not want to wait supper for
us."

"Well then, run along," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I'll get the others up
from down below."

"And you won't forget about trying to give that boy a ride home?"
asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"No, indeed," replied her husband. "I'm going right back to the office
now, and I'll take him with me. I'll let him ride on the wagon that's
going nearest to Lemby."

Mr. Bobbsey met Bert and the strange boy coming up.

"It sure is a dandy boat!" said Will Watson with a sigh of envy. "If
ever I go away to sea, I hope I'll have as nice a room as yours," and
he looked at Bert. "I just couldn't help coming on the boat when I saw
her tied here," he went on. "I hope you didn't mind."

"Not a bit!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey, wishing she had some of Dinah's
cake or crullers with her to give to the boy, for the twins' mother
thought he looked hungry.

The door, leading into the cabin of the houseboat was locked, and they
all went on shore, over the gangplank, the board that extended from
the dock to the boat.

"Good-bye, Bluebird!" called Flossie, waving her fat, chubby, little
hand toward the houseboat. "We'll soon be back."

"And I'm going to bring my fire engine, when I come again," exclaimed
Freddie. "If the boat gets on fire I can put it out."

"Boats can't get on fire in the water!" declared Flossie.

"They can so--can't they, papa?" appealed the little boy.

"Well, sometimes, perhaps. But we hope ours doesn't," replied Mr.
Bobbsey with a smile. He led the way off the boat, and as Will was
about to walk on along the lake shore, on his return to Lemby, Mrs.
Bobbsey said:

"Wouldn't you like a ride back, little boy?"

"Indeed I would," he said. "My feet hurt, on account of my shoes being
so full of holes, I guess. I'm pretty tired, but I had a little rest.
I don't expect to get back much before dark."

"Well, perhaps you can ride nearly all the way," went on Mrs. Bobbsey.
"My husband has some lumber wagons going in your direction."

"Yes, come along and we'll see what we can do for you," put in the
twins' father, nodding at the strange boy.

Will went off with Mr. Bobbsey, while Nan, Bert, Flossie and Freddie
walked with their mother.

"Oh, mamma, when do you think we can go in our boat?" asked Flossie.

"Well, as soon as school closes, my dear."

"And will we sail across the ocean?" Freddie wanted to know.

"Of course not!" cried Bert. "A houseboat isn't a ship."

"That boy knew about ships," said Nan. "I like him, don't you, mamma?"

"Yes, he seemed real nice. He hasn't a very easy life, I'm afraid,
working on a farm. But we must hurry on to supper. We'll talk about
the boat after papa comes home."




CHAPTER VI

FREDDIE'S FIRE ENGINE


"Papa, when can we go sailing in the houseboat?"

"May I take my fire engine along?"

"Where did you leave that boy?"

"Did he get a ride to Lemby?"

"Thus Bert, Freddie, Flossie and Nan questioned Mr. Bobbsey when he
came home to supper after the visit to the Bluebird.

"My! My!" exclaimed the lumber merchant, as he stopped in the hall to
hang up his hat. "What a lot of talk all at once! Let me see--whose
question shall I answer first?"

"Did you manage to get that poor boy a ride?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

It was the first time she had had a chance to ask her question.

"Answer mamma first," said Bert politely. "The rest of us can wait."

Mr. Bobbsey gave his older son a pleased look, and then replied:

"Yes, I found that one of our lumber wagons was going within half a
mile of the village of Lemby, so I let the boy ride with the driver.
It will give him a good lift."

"Indeed it will," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "I felt so sorry for him. I wish
I could help him!"

"I hope the horses don't run away," spoke Freddie with such a serious
air that they all laughed.

"I guess they won't run away, little fat fireman!" said Mr. Bobbsey,
as he caught Freddie up in his arms. "They are good, steady horses,
and they had a pretty heavy load to drag. So Will won't be in any
danger. But I hope supper is ready. I'm hungry!"

"But you didn't answer my question," said Nan. "When are we going in
the houseboat, father?"

"Oh, whenever school ends and your mother is ready," was the answer.
"I should say in about two weeks."

"Good!" cried Bert. "And are we going to take Snap along?" he asked,
as he caught sight of the trick dog outside, standing on his hind
legs, while Sam Johnson held up a bone for him. Snap was "begging" for
his supper, as he often did.

"Yes, I think we can find room for Snap on board," the lumber man
said.

"What about our cat, Snoop?" asked Flossie. "I want to take Snoop
along. Wouldn't you like to go in a boat, Snoop?" and Flossie picked
the fat cat up in her arms. Snoop was quite an armful now. "Don't you
want to go, Snoop?"

"Meow!" was all Snoop said, and that might have meant anything at all.

"Supper first," suggested Mr. Bobbsey, "and after that we'll talk
about the boat."

The meal was a merry one, and there was much talk and laughter. As
Dinah brought on one good thing to eat after another, Mrs. Bobbsey
said:

"I hope every one has as nice a supper as we have."

"Were you thinking of any one in particular?" asked her husband.

"Yes, of that poor boy who came on the boat to-day," she answered. "I
wonder if he has a good supper after his long walk this morning?"

"Well, they say Mr. Hardee doesn't feed his help any too well," spoke
Mr. Bobbsey. "But now let's talk about our houseboat trip."

"Oh, what fun we'll have!" cried Freddie and Flossie, clapping their
chubby hands.

"Did you plan a trip?" Mrs. Bobbsey wanted to know.

"Well, partly, yes. I thought we could go down Lake Metoka to Lemby
Creek. We haven't been down that direction in some time."

"Lemby Creek!" exclaimed Bert. "Isn't that the name of the place where
that boy came from?" "Well, Lemby is a town on Lemby Creek," spoke his
father. "Will Watson works on Mr. Hardee's farm, and that is just
outside the village. Lemby Creek is about ten miles long, and by going
along that we can get into Lake Romano. That is a large body of water,
and there is a waterfall at the farther end."

"A waterfall!" cried Freddie. "Oh, goodie! Can we go see it, papa?"

"I guess so," said Mr. Bobbsey. "We'll make this a long trip. It will
take over a month, but of course we won't travel every day. Some days
we'll just anchor the boat in a shady place, and---"

"Fish!" interrupted Bert.

"Yes, fish, or go in swimming--anything to have a good time," Mr.
Bobbsey said.

"Oh, won't we have fun!" cried Freddie again. "We'll take Snoop and
Snap along, and they'll like it, too."

"I guess Snap will, because he's fond of the water," said Bert, with a
laugh. "But Snoop doesn't care for it."

"Snoop can sleep on deck in the sun," said Nan. "She'll like that. I
wish I could ask one of my girl friends to come along with us for the
houseboat trip. We have so many nice rooms on the Bluebird it seems a
pity not to use them."

"And I'd like one of my boy chums, too," spoke Bert. Flossie and
Freddie were busy trying to make Snoop do one of the tricks the circus
lady had taught her. But Snoop wanted to go out in the kitchen, and
have Dinah give her some supper.

"Company, eh?" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey, slowly. "Well, I don't know. We
have plenty of room on the Bluebird. I wonder how it would do to ask
Harry and Dorothy to come with us?" he inquired of his wife.

"Oh, Cousin Harry!" cried Bert. "That would be fine!"

"And Cousin Dorothy!" added Nan. "She and I could have lovely times
together. Do ask her, mother!"

"We might ask the cousins," agreed Mrs. Bobbsey. "They haven't been to
visit us in some time, and I think both Harry and Dorothy would enjoy
the trip."

Harry and Dorothy, as I have told you, were cousins of the Bobbseys.
Harry lived at Meadow Brook, in the country, and Dorothy at Ocean
Cliff, near the sea.

"I'll write to-morrow," said Mrs. Bobbsey, "and find out if they can
go with us. Now have we anything else to settle about our trip?"

"What about something to eat?" asked Freddie, in such a funny, anxious
voice, that all the others laughed.

"My goodness, little fat fireman!" exclaimed his father. "Here you
have just finished your supper, and you are already hungry again."

"Oh, I'm not hungry now," explained Freddie, "but I will be on the
boat."

"Don't worry," said his mother. "Dinah is coming with us."

"Oh, then it will be all right," went on the little twin, with a
contented sigh. "Come on, Flossie," he called to his small sister, "I
know how we can have some fun. 'Scuse me," he murmured, as he and the
other little twin slipped from their chairs.

Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey, with Nan and Bert, remained at the table for
some time longer, talking about the coming trip in the Bluebird. As
Mr. Bobbsey had said, it would be about two weeks, yet, before they
could start. There were two weeks more of school, but the classes
would close earlier than usual that summer, because an addition was to
be built to the school building, and the men wanted to get to work on
it, to have it finished in time for school early in September.

"So we'll get an extra week or so of vacation," explained Bert. "And
we'll spend it all on the houseboat."

"Well, perhaps not all of it," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I may not be able to
stay with you all that while. But we'll spend a month or two on the
Bluebird."

"What will we do the rest of vacation?" asked Bert.

"Oh, perhaps we'll go to the mountains, or some place like that," his
mother said with a smile. "It isn't settled yet."

"Is it a high waterfall at Lake Romano?" asked Nan. "I just love
them."

"Yes, it's a pretty high one," her father said. "I haven't been to
Lake Romano in some years, but I remember it as a very beautiful
place."

"I'm sure we shall enjoy it," Mrs. Bobbsey said.

"Is the fishing good?" Bert wanted to know.

"So I have heard. We'll take some poles and lines along, anyhow, and
try our luck," his father replied.

Mr. Bobbsey pushed back his chair from the table, and looked around
for the evening paper. Bert and Nan had some home work to do, to get
ready their lessons for the next day's school classes, and Mrs.
Bobbsey got out her sewing basket. There were always stockings to
mend, if there was nothing else of the children's that needed
attention.

The house was quiet except for the distant rattling of dishes in the
kitchen, where fat Dinah was singing away as she worked. Suddenly her
song ceased, and she was heard to exclaim:

"Now yo' want t' be careful, honey lamb! Doan't yo' go to muxin' up
Dinah's clean kitchen flo'."

"No, we won't, Dinah!" replied Freddie's voice.

"If any gets spilled, I'll wipe it up," said Flossie.

"I wonder what those children are up to now?" remarked Mrs. Bobbsey,
as she rolled up two stockings she had just darned.

"Oh, I guess they're all right," said Mr. Bobbsey easily, as he turned
over a page of the evening paper.

The next moment there came a shout from Dinah in the kitchen.

"Stop it, Freddie. Stop it, I say!" cried the fat, colored cook. "Yo'
suah am gittin' me all wet! Oh, there it goes ag'in! Stop it!"

"I--I can't!" cried Freddie. "Hold your hand over it, Flossie!"

"Oh, now it's squirting on me!" came in Flossie's tones. "Make it
stop, Freddie."

"It--it won't stop!" was the frightened answer.

"Oh! Land ob massy!" shouted Dinah. "Sam! Sam! Mr. Bobbsey, come heah
quick! It's squirtin' all ober!"

"Oh! Something has happened!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey, starting toward
the kitchen.

"Maybe a water pipe has burst," suggested Mr. Bobbsey, dropping his
paper and making a jump toward the kitchen. As he did so, he heard
Dinah cry again:

"Oh, yo' am all wet, honey lamb! Yo' is all soakin' wet! Oh, now it's
comin' fo' me ag'in! Oh, stop it, Freddie! Stop it!"

"I--I can't!" was all Freddie said.

The next moment Mr. Bobbsey, followed by his wife, had reached the
kitchen. There they saw a queer sight.

In the middle of the floor stood Flossie and Freddie, water dripping
from their hands and faces. Dinah, too, was wet, and she was fairly
flying around, with a plate in one hand and a dish towel in the other.

And, all about the kitchen was spurting a stream of water, while over
by the stove stood Freddie's toy fire engine. It was this engine that
was spraying the water all over the room.




CHAPTER VII

THE TWO COUSINS


"Oh, Freddie! What has happened?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey.

"It--it's the---" began Freddie, but that was as far as he got, for
just then the stream of water from his toy engine spurted right into
his open mouth.

"Shut it off!" cried Mr. Bobbsey. "Here, I'll do it!"

He started across the kitchen floor.

"Look out, Massa Bobbsey!" yelled Dinah. "It'll cotch yo' shuah. It
done cotched me!" and then as she saw the little rubber hose of
Freddie's fire engine swing around, and the nozzle point at her, the
fat cook ran into the dish-closet and shut the door.

"How did it happen?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, not so excited, now that she
found nothing serious was the matter.

"Freddie--Freddie--he wanted to try how his fire engine worked, 'cause
he hadn't played with it this week," explained Flossie. Freddie was
busy wiping the water from his face. "So he filled the tank, and wound
it up, and now--and now--it won't--it won't stop-squirtin'!" went on
Flossie. "It--it---"

And then she, too, had to stop talking, for the hose was spurting
water at her now.

"I'll shut it off. Something must be the matter with the spring," said
Mr. Bobbsey. He walked toward Freddie's fire engine, which was pretty
large, for a toy. But before he reached it, the water hose had swung
around, and, instead of sprinkling Flossie, was aimed at Mr. Bobbsey.
However he did not mind. Holding the newspaper in front of his face,
Freddie's father reached the fire engine, and turned off the machinery
that pumped the water.

"There!" he cried. "The fire's out! The only damage is from water,"
and he laughed, for he was wet, and so were Mrs. Bobbsey, Flossie and
Freddie; and the kitchen itself was pretty well sprinkled.

"What's it all about?" asked Bert, for he and Nan, who had been
studying their lessons, had heard the noise of the excitement, and had
run to the kitchen to see what had caused it.

"Oh, Freddie turned in a false alarm," said Mr. Bobbsey. "How did you
come to put water in your engine, when mamma has told you not to do so
in the house?" he asked the little boy.

"Be--be--cause," said Freddie slowly, "I wanted to see if it would--
work. I'm going to take it on the houseboat with me."

"Well, I guess it WORKED all right," Bert said, as he looked around at
the wet kitchen. Luckily there was oil cloth on the floor, and the
walls were painted, so the water really did no harm.

Dinah slowly opened the door of the dish-closet, and peered out.

"Am it all done, honey lamb?" she asked, looking at Freddie.

"Yes, Dinah! It's all done squirtin'," he said. "I guess there isn't
any more water, anyhow."

"No," said Mr. Bobbsey, with a smile, as he looked in the tank of the
engine, "it's all pumped out."

Freddie's toy fire engine was a large and expensive one his uncle had
given him on Christmas. It was made as nearly like a real engine as
possible, only instead of working by steam, it worked by a spring.
When a spring was wound up, it operated a small pump in the engine.
The pump made water spurt out through a little rubber hose, and the
water for the engine was poured into a tank. The tank held about two
gallons, so you see when it was all pumped out in the kitchen, and
spurted on those in the room, it made them pretty wet.

"It's clean water," said Nan, when every one had somewhat cooled down,
"and it's so warm to-night, I wouldn't mind being sprayed with a hose
myself."

"Still, Freddie shouldn't have done it," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "I have
told you not to play with your engine in the house, when it had water
in it, Freddie. How did you come to disobey me?" she asked, for
usually the little fellow was very good about minding.

"I--I didn't mean to, mamma," he said "First I just wanted to see if
the engine tank leaked, so I put in some water. I didn't think it
would hurt, out here on the kitchen oil cloth, and honestly I wasn't
going to squirt it."

"No, I suppose not," said Mr. Bobbsey, wiping the water from his face,
and glancing at his soaked newspaper.

"So I just filled the tank with water from the sink," explained
Freddie.

"I--I helped him," confessed Flossie, ready to take her share of the
blame.

"What happened next?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Why--er--I just wanted to see if the spring was all right, so I wound
that up," Freddie went on. "Then I sort of forgot about the water in
the tank, and before I knew it, why it--it went off--sudden like."

"Land ob massy! I should say it done did go off--suddint laik!"
exclaimed Dinah. "Fust I knowed I was dryin' de dishes an' den I got a
mouth full ob watah. I shuah did t'ink a watah pipe had done gone an'
busted. I shuah did!"

"It--it just kept on squirtin'!" said Freddie. "I couldn't stop it
like it always used to stop."

"No, the pump is out of order," said Mr. Bobbsey, as he looked at the
now empty fire engine. "It wouldn't stop pumping. Well, I'm glad it
wasn't a real fire, and glad that no one is hurt. Put your engine away
now, Freddie, and, after this, don't play with water in the house,
when mamma has told you not to."

"I won't," promised Freddie. "But it's a good engine, isn't it?"

"Oh, yes, it's a good engine, all right."

"And I can take it on the houseboat, can't I?"

"Yes, but you won't need to put any water in. There'll be enough in
the creek and lakes," said Mrs. Bobbsey with a smile. "Come now,
Flossie and Freddie, you are wet, so you might as well get undressed
and go to bed. It is nearly time, anyhow, and you have had quite a day
of it. Off to bed!"

Off to bed the twins went.

Dinah wiped up the kitchen, and, as she did so, she murmured over and
over again: "It shuah did go off suddint laik! It shuah did!"

Flossie and Freddie, little the worse for their wetting, went off to
school next day, with Nan and Bert. The two sets of twins talked of
many things on their way to their classes, but, most of all, they
talked of the coming trip on the houseboat, and of the accident to the
fire engine the night before.

"I do hope Cousin Dorothy can come with us," said Nan, as she left
Bert to walk along with Nellie Parks.

"And I hope Harry can go," said Bert. "Better hurry along, Freddie,"
he called to his little brother. "There goes your bell, and yours,
too, Flossie."

The two little tots turned into the gate of the school that led to the
yard where the smallest pupils formed in line.

"Well, even if Harry and Dorothy can't go, I'll take my fire engine,"
said Freddie.

"And we'll take Snoop and Snap, so we won't be lonesome," suggested
Flossie. "Oh, won't it be fun, Freddie!"

"Yes, I wish it was time to go now. I'm tired of school," said the
little fellow.

But school must go on, whether there are houseboat parties or not, so
the Bobbsey twins had to study their lessons. I think that day,
however, Bert must have been thinking of other things than his books,
for when the teacher asked him what an island was, Bert gave a queer
answer. Instead of saying it was a body of land, surrounded by water,
Bert said:

"An island is a fire engine in the kitchen."

"Why, Bert Bobbsey! What ARE you thinking of?" asked the teacher.

"Oh, I--I was thinking of something that happened at our house last
night," Bert went on, while all the children in the room laughed.

"Then you'd better tell us about it," suggested Miss Teeter, the
instructor, for she was very kind. So Bert told of Freddie's mishap,
and how it was he happened to be thinking of that instead of the right
answer to the question about the island.

"I hear you have a houseboat, Bert," said John Blake, a boy in the
same room, as the children came out of school that afternoon.

"Yes, my father bought the one Mr. Marvin owned," said Bert. "It's a
fine one, too. We're going to have a trip in her soon."

"You're a lucky boy!" exclaimed John. "Can't you take me down and show
me over the boat?"

"I'd like to," said Bert, "but father said I wasn't to go aboard, when
he was not with me."

"Pooh! He'll never know," suggested Danny Rugg, a boy with whom Bert
had had more or less trouble. "You needn't tell your father you went
to the boat. Come on, take us down and let's see it."

"No," said Bert, quietly but firmly. "Maybe my father wouldn't know I
had been on board, but I'd know it."

"Aw, you're a fraid-cat!" sneered Danny. "Come on, take us down, and
we'll have some fun."

"No," said Bert with a shake of his head. "I'm sorry. Some other time,
after I've asked my father if I may, I'll show you all over the
Bluebird."

"I want to go now," Danny said.

"Oh, there's plenty of time," spoke John, pleasantly. "I wouldn't want
Bert to do what his father told him not to, just to oblige me. I'll
see the boat some other time, Bert; that will do just as well."

"Huh! He's a fraid-cat!" muttered Danny again, as he shuffled off,
muttering to himself. Several times he had made trouble for the
Bobbsey twins, and Bert was not any too friendly with him. Danny was a
bully in the school.

Bert wished, very much indeed, that he could have taken some of his
boy friends down to the houseboat, but his father had a good reason
for not wanting any boys aboard, unless he could be with them. Workmen
were making certain changes in the craft, and doing some painting
inside and outside.

A few days after this, when the Bobbsey twins reached home from
school, Mrs. Bobbsey met them at the door, saying:

"I have good news for you, children!"

"What is it?" cried Bert.

"Don't we have to go to school any more?" Freddie.

"Are we going on the houseboat sooner than we expected?" Nan wanted to
know.

"It's about your two cousins--Harry and Dorothy," went on Mrs.
Bobbsey. "They have both accepted our invitations, and they will come
with us on the trip! Won't that be nice?"

"Lovely!" exclaimed Nan, her eyes shining with delight. "Dorothy and
I'll have such nice times together!"

"And Harry and I'll catch a lot of fish," declared Bert.

The days went on. The houseboat was nearly ready for her trip. Very
soon school would close.

"Come on, Bert, can't you show us over the boat now?" asked Danny Rugg
one afternoon, on his way home from school, with Nan's brother, and
some other boys.

"I can't to-day, but perhaps I can to-morrow," said Bert. "I'll ask my
father."

"He'll never know about it," tempted Danny again, but Bert could not
be influenced that way.

"Never mind, I'll fix you!" threatened Danny, which was what he
usually said, when he could not have his own way.

Bert thought little of the threat at the time, though later he
recalled it vividly.

It was that night, just as the smaller twins were getting ready for
bed, that the telephone in the Bobbsey house rang out a call.

"I'll answer it," said Mr. Bobbsey, as he went to the instrument.
"Hello!" he called. Then his wife and children heard him cry:

"What! Is that so! That's too bad! Yes, I'll attend to it right away.
I wonder how it happened?"

"Oh, what has happened?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, in alarm.

"Is the lumber yard on fire again?" asked Freddie, thinking of his toy
engine.

"Not as bad as that," said Mr. Bobbsey, as he quickly put on his hat.
"But the watchman at the dock just telephoned me that our houseboat,
the Bluebird, has gotten adrift, and is floating out into the lake."




CHAPTER VIII

OFF IN THE "BLUEBIRD"


For a few seconds after Mr. Bobbsey told of the news he had heard over
the telephone, none of the twins seemed to know what to say. They just
stared at their father, and I really believe, for a moment, that
Flossie and Freddie thought he was playing a joke on them. Then Mrs.
Bobbsey seemed to understand it.

"What!" she cried. "Our houseboat adrift?"

"That's what the watchman tells me," said Mr. Bobbsey, as he started
for the front door.

"But who did it?" asked Bert, managing to get his tongue in working
order.

"Can't you get her back again?" asked Nan. "Our boat, I mean."

"Let me come with you!" pleaded Freddie.

"And I want to come, too!" added Flossie. She seldom wanted to be left
behind, when her twin brother went anywhere.

"No, no! You children must stay here," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I will hurry
down to the lake, and come right back. I'll tell you all about it,
when I return."

"But what could have happened?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey. "What would make
our boat go adrift?"

"Oh, some of the ropes might have come loose," replied her husband.
"Or the ropes might even have been cut through, rubbing against the
dock. The wind is blowing a little, and that is sending the boat out
into the lake. I'll get one of our steam tugs, and go after her. It
will not take long nor be hard work to bring her back."

A number of small steam tugs were owned by Mr. Bobbsey for use in
hauling lumber boats, and lumber rafts about Lake Metoka. Some of
these tugs were always at the dock, and one always had steam up, ready
for instant use.

"Well, I hope you get the Bluebird back all right," said Bert. "We
don't want to miss our trip, especially after we have asked Harry and
Dorothy."

"Oh, it would be too bad to disappoint them," put in Nan.

"Oh, I'll get the boat back all right," declared Mr. Bobbsey.

Flossie and Freddie breathed sighs of relief. They were not worried
now, for they knew their father would do as he said.

Fat Dinah put her head in through the door of the sitting room.

"Am anyt'ing de mattah?" she asked. "I done heah yo' all talkin' in
heah, an' I t'inks maybe dat honey lamb Freddie done got his steam
enjine squirtin' watah ag'in."

"Not this time, Dinah," said Mrs. Bobbsey, for the cook was almost
like one of the family. Then the twins' mother explained what the
trouble was.

"I 'clar t' goodness!" Dinah exclaimed. "Suffin's always happenin' in
dish yeah fambily."

It was not a very serious happening this time. Mr. Bobbsey hurried
down to his lumber yard in the darkness of the June evening.

He was gone about an hour, when the telephone rang. On account of the
little excitement Flossie and Freddie had been allowed to stay up,
although it was long past their usual bedtime.

"I'll answer it," said Mrs. Bobbsey, as the telephoned bell stopped
jingling, for Bert had started from his seat.

"Oh, it's papa," the twins' mother went on, after she had listened for
a second after saying "Hello!"

"Is the boat all right?" asked Nan, anxiously.

"Yes," answered her mother, and then she turned to listen to the rest
of Mr. Bobbsey's talk over the telephone.

"Papa went after the Bluebird, and brought her safely back," Mrs.
Bobbsey explained, when she had hung up the receiver. "He'll be here
in a few minutes to tell us all about it. He telephoned from the
lumber office after he had our boat safe."

"Oh, I'm so glad the boat's all right," said Nan.

"Pooh, I knowed it would be--when papa went after it," said Freddie,
with a sleepy yawn.

"You must say 'knew,' not 'knowed,' dear," spoke Mamma Bobbsey. "And
now I think it is time for you and Flossie to go to bed."

Neither of the smaller twins offered any objection. They were too
sleepy to want to stay up and listen to the story of the bringing back
of the Bluebird.

Nan and Bert were anxious to hear it, and Mr. Bobbsey came in soon
after Flossie and Freddie were tucked in bed. He told the story of the
drifting houseboat.

"How did it break loose?" asked Bert.

"It didn't break loose," said his father. "Some one untied the knots
in the ropes."

"Untied!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey. "How did it happen?"

"Why, some one went aboard the boat," explained Mr. Bobbsey, "and I
think it must have been some boys, for I found this cap," and he held
up a gray one.

"Why!" cried Bert when he saw it. "That's Danny Rugg's cap!"

"I thought so," went on Mr. Bobbsey. "Danny, and some of his chums,
must have gone on the boat early this evening. They played about, as
boys will, and some of them, either on purpose or accidentally, must
have loosed the knots in the ropes before coming ashore. Then the boat
just drifted away after that."

"Those boys had no right to go on our boat!" said Nan.

"No, they had not," agreed her father, "But I'm glad there was no real
damage done. The watchman saw the Bluebird soon after she had drifted
away from the dock, and he telephoned me. I went out in one of our
tugs and soon brought her back. So you think this is Danny Rugg's cap,
Bert?"

"I'm sure of it, yes, sir. Danny wanted me to take him, and some of
the other boys, on the boat, but I wouldn't."

"I'm glad you remembered what I told you," spoke Mr. Bobbsey, and Bert
blushed with pleasure.

"I'll give Danny his cap in the morning," Bert went on. "It may
surprise him to know where he lost it."

"I don't believe you can surprise that Danny Rugg very much," said
Mrs. Bobbsey.

The next morning, when Bert took Danny's cap to school with him, and
handed it to the boy who had caused so much trouble, a queer look came
over Danny's face.

"Thanks," he said. "I was wondering where I left that. I guess I must
have dropped it, when I was--playing football over in the fields."

"No, you dropped it on our houseboat, the Bluebird, just before you
and the other fellows untied the ropes that let her go adrift," said
Bert. "And you'd better keep off her after this!"

"Huh! I'm not afraid of your father!" was all Danny growled, as he
stuffed his cap in his pocket, for he had worn another to school.

When Danny's chums learned that it was known who had set the boat
adrift, they were rather frightened. When they realized the damage
they might have done, they kept away from Mr. Bobbsey's lumber yard
for a long time.

One day, about a week after this, the Bobbsey twins hurried home from
school without stopping to play with any of their friends.

"Why are you in such a hurry?" asked Grace Lavine of Nan.

"We expect our cousins to-day," Nan answered. "Then we are going to
get ready to go away in our houseboat."

Surely enough, when the twins reached home, there the cousins were to
greet them--Dorothy and Harry, one from the seashore, and the other
from the country.

"Oh, but I'm SO glad to see you!" cried Nan, as she hugged and kissed
Dorothy.

"And I'm SO glad to come," Dorothy answered with a smile. "It was
lovely of you to invite me to go on your boat."

"We'll have a lot of fun," said Bert to Harry.

"That's what we will," replied the boy from the country.

"We're both awful glad to see you!" chimed in Flossie, speaking both
for herself and for Freddie. "But we can't play with the fire engine."

"Not if we put water in," added Freddie.

"What in the world do they mean?" asked Dorothy, wonderingly.

"Oh, I'll have to tell you," laughed Nan, as she explained about the
accident.

The cousins had much to tell the twins, and talk about, and the twins
had as much more to tell, so, for a time, there was a merry sound of
talk and laughter.

Dorothy and Harry had come by different trains, one from the seashore
and the other from the country, but they had reached the Bobbsey house
at the same time. Their schools had not yet closed, but as they were
both well advanced in their studies, their parents had allowed them to
leave their classes ahead of time, since they were both sure to
"pass."

"Just think!" cried Nan, when there was a moment of quiet. "In three
days more OUR school will close, and then we'll go on the trip."

"Won't it be lovely!" murmured Dorothy.

I leave you to imagine all that took place in those three days.
Schooldays came to an end, and the Bobbsey twins were among those at
the heads of their classes. Then came a packing-up time, and the
Bobbsey house was a scene of great excitement. Trunks and boxes were
taken aboard the Bluebird, a man was hired to run the gasoline engine.
Plenty of good things to eat were stowed away in the kitchen lockers,
as cupboards are called on a boat. At last all was ready for the
start.

Snoop and Snap, of course, were on hand, as was Dinah. Mr. Bobbsey saw
to it that his family, and the two cousins, were safely aboard, and
then he gave the order to cast off the lines. The Bluebird floated
away from the dock, and out into the lake that was almost as blue as
her name.

"All aboard!" cried Bert.

"Toot! Toot!" whistled Freddie, pretending to be an engine.

"Oh, look out! You're stepping on my doll!" screamed Flossie, who had
put her toy down on the deck a moment.

"Good-bye! Good-bye!" called Nan to Grace Lavine, and some others of
her girl friends, who had come down to the dock to see them off.
"Good-bye!"

"Good-bye!" echoed the girls, waving their hands.

"Come on!" called Bert to Harry, as he started for the lower cabin.

"What are you going to do?" asked the boy from the country.

"Let's get out our fishing poles. Maybe we can catch something for
dinner."

"That's right!" agreed Harry.

Slowly the Bluebird moved out into the lake, for the gasoline engine
was working. The houseboat trip of the Bobbsey twins had begun, and
many things were to happen before it was to end.




CHAPTER IX

SNOOP AND SNAP


Nan and Dorothy, after waving good-bye to the girl friends on the
dock, went down to the living room of the houseboat. There they found
Mrs. Bobbsey and Dinah putting away some of the things that had been
brought on board at the last moment.

"I 'clar t' goodness!" exclaimed the colored cook, "dish yeah
houseboatin' am wuss dan movin'!"

"Oh, not quite as bad as that," said Mrs. Bobbsey, with a laugh. "But
what are you going to do, Nan, dear? Do you like it, Dorothy?"

"Oh! indeed I do," answered the "seashore cousin," as Nan called her
to distinguish her from Harry, who lived in the country.

"We are just going to our rooms for a minute, mother," Nan answered.
"I want to show Dorothy my new sailor suit."

Every body on the houseboat was busy, even down to Flossie and
Freddie, and the two little twins were busy having fun.

Mrs. Bobbsey and Dinah were engaged in putting to rights the different
rooms, for there were a number on the Bluebird, which was built for a
large family. Bert and Harry were up on deck fishing, as the boat
moved slowly through the blue waters of Metoka Lake. Flossie and
Freddie, as I have said, were playing, the little girl with her doll,
and Freddie with a new toy his father had bought him.

As for Mr. Bobbsey, he was down in the engine room with "Captain
White." Mr. White was one of Mr. Bobbsey's men who had once been in
charge of a tugboat, but one day there was an accident aboard, and Mr.
White was made lame for life.

But Mr. Bobbsey liked his faithful employee, and kept him at work, and
since Mr. White could not do heavy tasks, he was allowed to do easy
ones.

Mr. White was called "Captain" by every one, though he was not really
a captain. Still, he knew a great deal about boats, the weather clouds
and storms, and all things such as sea captains are supposed to know.

When Mr. Bobbsey bought Mr. Marvin's houseboat, he at once began to
think of some one who could sail it for him, and take care of the
gasoline engine. Naturally, he thought of Captain White. So the
Bluebird was put in charge of Captain White, who, you may be sure, was
very glad to be on the water again, even if it was only in a slow-
moving houseboat, and not in a swift steam tug.

Mr. Bobbsey and Captain White were down in the motor, or engine room
together. Mr. Bobbsey was learning how to run the gasoline engine.

I have told you how the Bluebird was driven along through the water by
a small engine. It was not a steam engine, such as are found in many
boats, but a gasoline one, such as those in most automobiles.

Mr. Bobbsey did not intend to sail very fast in the houseboat. In
fact, for many days, he expected to just drift along, or push the boat
with a long pole through some shallow creek, or in parts of the lake
where it was not deep. When he wanted to move more quickly from place
to place, there was the gasoline engine all ready to use. And Captain
White knew how to use it.

Mr. Bobbsey came up out of the little motor room after a while, and
watched his wife and Dinah putting things away. The boat was moving
down the lake.

"Oh, look at your face!" suddenly cried Mrs. Bobbsey.

"What's the matter with it?" asked her husband, putting his hand up to
his nose, as almost any person will do when you speak of his face.

"It's all black!" went on Mrs. Bobbsey. "So are your hands. Oh,
Richard! What have you been doing?"

"Learning to run the gasoline engine," he said. "I want to know how it
works so that if we need to start any time when Captain White is on
shore, or asleep, I can do it."

"I hope you won't start off any time when Captain White is on shore,"
said Mrs. Bobbsey. "You don't know enough about a boat to run it
without him."

"Very well, then. I promise I'll run the gasoline engine only when
Captain White is asleep," said Mr. Bobbsey, with a laugh. "And then,
if anything happens, I'll only have to awaken him, and ask him what is
wrong."

"That's the best plan," said Mrs. Bobbsey, also laughing. "And now you
had better go wash your face. Some one might see you--looking like
that."

There was a nice little bathroom aboard the Bluebird, and Mr. Bobbsey
was soon splashing away with the water and soap. Meanwhile Mrs.
Bobbsey and Dinah finished their work, and went up on deck.

It was a very pleasant day, and with the sun shining down from a blue
sky overhead, just warm enough, and not too hot, with a gentle breeze
that hardly ruffled the surface of the lake, but which made it
delightfully cool as the boat moved slowly along. In short, it was
just perfect weather, as the Bobbsey twins started off on their
houseboat.

Nan and Dorothy, having finished looking at each other's dresses,
which always seems to delight girls, had come up on deck so that now
the whole Bobbsey family, and their country, and seashore cousin
visitors also, were there.

"Have you caught any fish yet?" asked Mr. Bobbsey, walking over to
where Bert and Harry were dangling their lines in the water.

"Not yet, but we've had two or three bites," said Bert, hopefully.

"I think you'll have better luck when we reach some quiet place, and
anchor," Mr. Bobbsey went on. "At any rate, you need not worry, if you
don't catch any fish. Dinah will be able to give us something else for
dinner, I think."

"I think so, too," said Harry with a laugh. "I can smell something
cooking now."

This was so. For, though the Bobbseys had started early that morning,
there was so much to do that it was now nearly noon. To them it seemed
only an hour or so since they had started. Dinah was a good cook. She
kept one eye on the clock and the other on the things she was cooking.
And she made up her mind that the meals would be on time, even if they
were served on a houseboat. So it was the cooking of dinner that Harry
smelled.

"Oh, Dorothy!" exclaimed Nan, after a little while, during which the
two girls looked across the lake to the distant shores they had left.
"I must show you a new trick Snap has learned."

"What! Another trick?" cried Dorothy. "My! He knows a lot of them now.
He certainly is a clever dog!"

Snap, as I have told you, used to belong to a circus before the
Bobbseys bought him, so perhaps learning tricks came easier to him
than to most dogs.

"Yes, I taught him this trick myself," went on Nan. "He will walk
around on his hind legs, and carry a doll in his front paws, just like
a nurse girl. When I dress him up in one of my old skirts and a
jacket, he is too funny for anything! I'll make him do the trick now,
only I won't dress him up, for I can't find the clothes he wears. I
don't believe we brought them. But I'll make him carry the doll for
you. Here, Snap!" called Nan.

The dog, who had been sleeping in a sunny Spot on deck, near Snoop,
the black cat, sprang up, when he heard his name called.

"Where are you going to get a doll for him to carry?" asked Dorothy.

"I'll take Flossie's. You'll let sister take your doll to make Snap do
a trick, won't you, dear?" she asked.

"Yes, Nan," answered flaxen-haired Flossie. "I just love to see Snap
do that trick! He carries the doll so cute!"

Flossie brought her doll to Nan, and Snap stood near, wagging his
tail, for he seemed to know what was coming.

"Now, Snap," said Nan, pointing her finger at the dog, "I want you to
show Dorothy how you play nurse-girl, and carry a doll."

"Bow wow!" barked Snap. That was what he always said when any one
spoke to him. I suppose HE knew what he meant, but no one else did. At
any rate, he seemed to understand what was said to him.

"Up, Snap! Up!" called Nan suddenly, and Snap rose on his hind legs,
holding his fore paws out in front of him, so Nan could place the doll
on them.

This the little girl did, putting Flossie's "sawdust baby" carefully
across Snap's paws.

"Now take the doll for a walk!" ordered Nan, and, with another bark,
off Snap started, parading across the deck.

"Oh, isn't he too cute!" cried Dorothy, laughing and clapping her
hands. "Oh, what a smart dog he is!"

"Isn't he!" agreed Nan. "Bert said I never could teach him to do a
trick, but I did."

"Indeed you did!" agreed Dorothy.

"Now come back here, Snap!" ordered Nan. But just then something
happened.

How it was no one knew exactly, but Bert suddenly caught a fish. He
was so surprised at getting a hard bite on his line, that he jerked it
up quickly. Something flashed in the sunlight, and, the next moment, a
little sunfish landed flapping on the deck, right in front of the
sleeping black cat Snoop.

"Flop!" went the fish, and Snoop awakened with a jump. Up to her feet
she leaped like a flash, and then she saw the fish. Snoop was very
fond of fish, and made a spring for the one Bert had caught. But the
fish was wet and slippery, and no sooner had Snoop pounced on it with
her claws than the fish slid across the deck of the houseboat. Snoop
slid after it, just as she often slid across the kitchen oilcloth,
when she sprang for a piece of string that Flossie or Freddie would
pull along to make the cat play.

Right across the deck, after the slippery fish slid Snoop, and, the
next instant, the poor cat had slid right off the deck, and fallen
into the lake with a splash!




CHAPTER X

DOWN THE CREEK


"There goes Snoop!"

"Oh, somebody get her!"

Nan and Dorothy both shouted at the same time. As for Bert, he was so
surprised at having caught a fish, and at seeing the cat slide off the
deck with it, that he could say nothing. It was almost the same with
Harry. He had jumped to his feet, however, and had run toward Snoop,
but too late.

Then, all of a sudden, Snap, with a loud bark, gave one spring, and
the next moment he had jumped right over the deck railing, under which
Snoop had slid. Right over it went Snap, and down into the lake. For
he knew that Snoop had fallen in, and, being the kind of a dog that
asks nothing better than to save something, or somebody, from the
water, Snap was right on hand.

"Oh, my doll! My doll!" cried Flossie. "Snap is taking my doll into
the lake with him! Come back, Snap! Come back!"

Snap did not stop to listen. He had, indeed, taken Flossie's doll with
him. He had been holding it on his front paws as Snoop slid overboard,
and, as he gave a jump, Snap did not come down on all four legs. He
jumped while he was yet standing on his hind ones, and of course the
doll went over the rail with him.

"What has happened?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, as she heard the screaming,
and the splashes in the water. "Have any of the children fallen in?"
For she had gone to another part of the deck, with Dinah, out of sight
of the twins for a moment. Now she came hurrying back, and a single
look showed her that the children were all safe.

"What has happened?" she asked again.

"As nearly as I can figure out," said Mr. Bobbsey, "Bert caught a
fish, Snoop tried to get it and fell into the water, and now Snap has
gone in after Snoop."

"And Snap has my doll! She'll get all wet--she'll be drowned!" cried
Flossie.

"I'll get her for you," offered Harry. But just now they were all
anxious to see what Snap and Snoop did. Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey and the
children looked over the side of the houseboat. They saw the black cat
swimming about in the lake, and Snap, who was a fine water-dog, was
paddling toward her.

"Hadn't you better stop the boat?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, for the
Bluebird was slowly floating away from the dog and the cat.

"Yes, I guess it would be best," said Mr. Bobbsey. So he called out:

"Captain! Captain White! Stop the boat! Something overboard!"

Down in the little motor room Mr. White heard the shout, and he at
once shut off the gasoline engine. Then he came up on deck as fast as
his lame leg would let him, to see what was wrong.

"What's that you say?" he asked. "Somebody fell overboard?"

"The dog and the cat," explained Mr. Bobbsey. "I wonder how we can get
them out? It's Snoop and Snap who are in the water."

"And my doll!" added Flossie. "I want my doll back!"

"Oh, yes, and Flossie's doll," added Mr. Bobbsey. "I guess you'd
better get in the rowboat, Captain White. It will be easier to lift
them out from there."

"I'll do it, Mr. Bobbsey," the captain said, as he limped down stairs
again. By this time Snap had swum to where poor Snoop was paddling
about in the water. The dog gently took hold of the cat by the back of
the neck, where her loose fur would give a good hold. Then Snap,
holding Snoop's head well up out of the water, started back for the
houseboat.

"Good old Snap!" called Mr. Bobbsey. Snap wanted to bark and wag his
tail, as he always did when any one spoke pleasantly to him, but he
knew if he opened his mouth to bark now, he would have to drop Snoop.
And Snap had hard enough work swimming, without trying to wag his
tail. On he came toward the boat.

By this time Captain White had gotten into the small boat, which was
pulled after the Bluebird, by a rope, and he was rowing toward the
dog. Seeing that the smaller boat was nearer, Snap swam toward that,
instead of toward the larger one. He held Snoop carefully up out of
the water.

"That's a good dog, Snap!" called Captain White, as Snap came nearer.
"I'll take her now."

The engineer lifted poor, wet, dripping Snoop into his boat. She
crawled close up to Captain White, for she was much frightened. After
Snap had delivered the cat he had rescued, he turned back again.

"Where are you going?" asked Captain White. "Don't you want to get in
my boat, too, Snap?"

"Bow wow!" barked Snap. This time he could open his mouth, as he was
not carrying a cat.

"Oh, he's going to get my doll!" cried Flossie. "Look, Snap is after
my doll!"

And so he was. After taking Snoop safely to the boat, Snap had seen
Flossie's doll floating on the top of the water, and had swum toward
that, just as he would have gone toward a floating stick, had there
been one near.

"OK, now he's got her!" cried the happy Flossie. "Now Snap has my
doll. Goodie!"

"And, as she's a wooden doll, the water won't hurt her," said Nan,
with a laugh, "Everything is coming out all right."

And so it seemed.

Taking the doll in his mouth, as he had taken the cat, Snap swam back
toward the small boat, where Captain White waited for him, now and
then petting poor Snoop. Just as the dog had done with the cat, so he
did with the doll, giving her to the engineer of the Bluebird. Then,
seeing that his work was all done, Snap once more swam toward the big
boat, not trying to get into the small one.

"Good dog, Snap!" cried Mr. Bobbsey, as he leaned over to lift him in,
for there were no steps by which to climb up the side of the Bluebird.

This time Snap barked and wagged his tail, and then he gave himself a
big shake to get rid of the water. He sent a regular shower of spray
all about.

"Come, girls!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey with a laugh, "this is no place for
us. We haven't our bathing suits on!" and she, with Nan and Dorothy,
ran back out of the way of the scattering drops from Snap's shaggy
coat.

A little later Captain White rowed up with Snoop and Flossie's doll,
and the little girl at once said she was going to put a dry dress on
the doll, so she wouldn't "take cold."

"Well," said Mr. Bobbsey, when the excitement had died down. "That's
over, at any rate. All that over one little fish!"

"That's so--my fish started it all!" said Bert. "I wonder what became
of it?" and he looked at his empty hook, dangling from the line of his
pole.

"The fish dropped off," said Harry. "I saw it. But it was only a
little one. It wouldn't have been any good."

"Poor Snoop!" said Mrs. Bobbsey. "All your trouble for nothing! You
didn't get the fish."

"Oh, I'll soon catch some more for her, won't we, Harry?" Bert asked.

"That's what we will," answered the country cousin.

"Now if yo' folks am all done fallin' ovahbo'd I'se ready t' gib yo'
all suffin t' eat," said Dinah, coming up from the dining-room.

"And I think we are ready to eat," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "This traveling
on the water has given me an appetite."

"I guess it has all of us," spoke Mr. Bobbsey with a laugh, as he
noticed the eager, hungry looks on the faces of the children.

"And give Snoop and Snap something good and hot, so they won't take
cold," suggested Nan. "Though I don't believe they will this weather,
it's so warm."

"I'm going to give my dollie hot chocolate," said Flossie, who, by
this time, had put a dry dress on her pet.

The meal was a merry one, though at first the children, especially
Flossie and Freddie, were too excited to eat. Then, too, it was so
strange eating on a boat that was moving through the water, for the
engine had been started again. Several times, during the meal, the two
smaller twins jumped up from the table to run to the windows and look
out over the lake. At last their mother said:

"Now, Flossie and Freddie, you must sit still and finish your dinner.
Otherwise you may be ill. You'll have plenty of time to see things
after you leave the table."

Snap was soon dry, from lying in the sun, and, a little later, Snoop
was as warm and fluffy as before she had fallen into the lake. She
picked out a warm spot on deck near Snap, for they had been the best
of friends since the first day they had met, when Snoop came back from
her long trip to Cuba, as I have told you in another book.

All the rest of that day the houseboat traveled over Lake Metoka. The
children sat on Heck, and watched other boats pass them. Some of them
were loaded with lumber for Mr. Bobbsey. Others were pleasure boats,
and those on board waved their hands to the Bobbsey twins and their
cousins.

"Are we going to travel all night?" asked Bert of his father, when
Dinah called that supper was ready.

"No, we are going to anchor soon. We will go a little nearer shore
first, though."

"And when will we start through Lemby Creek toward Lake Romano?"

"Oh, in a day or so, I fancy."

It was such a pleasant evening, that even the little twins were
allowed to stay up on deck past their usual bedtime, looking at the
twinkling stars, and the lights of other boats on the lake.

When Flossie and Freddie did get to bed, they did not go to sleep at
once. It was very strange to them, sleeping on a boat in the water.

Finally the two little people dozed off, and then the older folks went
to bed. In the middle of the night Freddie woke up. At first he could
not remember where he was, and he wondered at the queer rocking motion
of the boat, for a little wind was ruffling the lake.

Suddenly there came a loud toot.

"Mamma! Papa! I heard something!" cried Freddie, sitting up.

"Yes, dear. It was only the whistle of another boat," said his mother,
who was in the room next to him. "Go to sleep again."

Freddie did.

"Well, I sure am going to catch some fish to-day," said Bert, when he
and Harry went up on deck next morning, after breakfast.

"We'll try, anyhow," Harry said. "We're nearer shore now, and the
fishing ought to be better. I'll get my line.".

Whether it was on account of the bait they used, or because the fish
were not plentiful, the boys did not know, but they did not get even
one bite. Anyhow, they had fun.

The Bluebird went slowly across the lake. The Bobbseys were in no
hurry, and they wanted to enjoy the pleasant weather. For three days
they sailed over the blue waters, and then Mr. Bobbsey told Captain
White to steer toward Lemby Creek.

"We'll go through the creek into Lake Romano," said the twins' father.
"That is a much larger lake. We'll spend most of our houseboat
vacation there. We will also visit the big waterfall."

"That will be lovely!" exclaimed Dorothy. Though she lived near the
sea, she also loved inland waters, such as rivers and lakes.

The houseboat moved so slowly, and was such a safe craft, that Bert
and Harry were allowed to steer at times, when Mr. Bobbsey or Captain
White stood near them in case of any danger. The two boy cousins had
taken turns steering, until the Bluebird was close to the place where
Lemby Creek emptied into Lake Metoka.

"You'd better let me take the steering wheel, now," said Mr. Bobbsey
to Bert. "There is a little current from the creek into the lake, and
we don't want to run ashore."

In a little while the houseboat was safely in the creek. This stream
of water was narrow, though it was deep enough to float the Bluebird
easily. The shores were so close, at times, that the tree branches
overhung the deck, and brushed the rails.

"I could almost jump ashore," said Harry.

"But you mustn't try it!" cautioned his aunt. "You might fall in, and
Snap couldn't rescue you as easily as he did Snoop or the doll."

As the houseboat went slowly around a bend in the creek, Nan, who
stood in front, near her father, suddenly uttered a cry, and pointed
toward shore.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"There's that boy--Will Watson!" spoke Nan. "You know--the one who
liked our boat so," and she pointed to the strange lad who worked for
Mr. Hardee. The boy was walking along the shore of the creek, a fish
pole over his shoulder.

"Oh, let's ask him how to catch fish!" proposed Bert. "We haven't had
any luck at all!"




CHAPTER XI

THE MEAN MAN


Certainly it seemed a good place to fish, in Lemby Creek, for there
were many shady pools near the banks--pools that looked as though fish
swam in them, just waiting to be caught.

As Harry and Bert looked more closely at the boy Nan had pointed out
to them, they saw that he carried a string of fish, as well as the
pole.

"Oh, he's caught some!" cried Bert. "Let's ask how he does it."

"And where he caught them," suggested Harry.

"I will," agreed Bert. "Hey there, Will!" he called. "Where'd you get
the fish?"

The farm boy, who had seen the houseboat, and who was hurrying toward
her, waved his hand as Bert called to him. Then, as he came nearer
across the green meadow through which the creek ran, he shouted:

"Plenty of fish all around you. Just throw in from the boat, and
you'll get all you want."

"What kind of bait do you use?" asked Mr. Bobbsey, for neither Bert
nor Harry had thought to inquire about that, and the right kind of
bait is as much needed in catching fish, as is water itself.

"Grasshoppers are best just now," answered Will.

"And we've been fishing with worms!" said Bert. "No wonder!"

"Oh, worms are all right most times," Will went on. "But the fish are
hungry for grasshoppers now. I'll give you some. I've got lots left."

He came to the edge of the creek, and Mr. Bobbsey, who was steering
the boat, sent it in close to shore.

"We might as well tie up here for the night, I think," he said. "That
will give you boys a chance to talk to Will, and learn how to catch
fish."

A little later the houseboat was rubbing along the grassy bank, and
the water was so deep close to shore that there was really no need of
putting out the board, called the "gangplank," for any one to get off.
Mr. Bobbsey, knowing that Flossie and Freddie could not make the
little jump needed to take them ashore, called to Captain White to run
out a small board instead of the regular large one.

"Come on, Harry!" called Bert. "We'll get some of those grasshoppers."

He started down the stairs leading from the deck, intending to go
ashore, but his mother touched him on the arm, and said, in a low
voice:

"Why don't you ask that boy to come on board?"

"Why?" asked Bert.

"Well, I was just going to give you children some of the corn muffins
Dinah has just baked, and perhaps Will would like---"

"Oh, of course! Now I understand!" cried Bert. "Of course. I say,
Will!" he went on, calling down from the upper deck, "can't you come
aboard? We're going to have some of Dinah's corn muffins, and maybe
you'd like to sample one."

Somewhat to the surprise of Mrs. Bobbsey, as well as to the wonderment
of Bert and Harry, Will did not seem eager to accept the invitation.

"I'd like to come on board, very much," he said, looking back of him,
and on all sides, as though he feared some one was after him. "But you
see I haven't got much time. I ought to be back at the farm now. Mr.
Hardee set me to hoeing a patch of corn, and I'm supposed to be back
in time to feed the horses before supper. And it's almost supper time
now."

"Well, we don't want you to be late," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Here, Bert,"
she said, as Dinah came out of the kitchen with a big plate of
muffins, "you take some of these to Will, and you can walk along a
little way with him, and talk about fishing. Then he won't be late.

"But don't go too far," she added, "for supper will soon be ready."

"We won't!" promised Bert. Taking some of the delicious corn muffins,
the two boys hurried ashore, Snap, the dog, barking joyously, bounding
along with them. Flossie and Freddie did not care to go ashore just
then, as the little girl twin was playing with her doll, and her
brother was trying to make Snoop do one of the tricks that the circus
lady had taught the cat in Cuba.

Mrs. Bobbsey went down to the dining-room, to talk to Dinah about the
evening meal, while Mr. Bobbsey and Captain White got out the ropes
with which to tie the houseboat fast to some trees on the bank of the
creek.

Meanwhile Bert and Harry walked along with Will.

"Have some muffins," invited Bert politely, passing his new friend
some of the corn cakes that Dinah knew so well how to bake.

"Thanks! They're good!" said Will, as he bit into one.

"Say, you have some fine fish!" exclaimed Harry, half enviously.
"Where'd you catch them?"

"Oh, up the creek aways--near where I was hoeing corn. You can have
'em, if you want 'em."

"What! Do you mean to GIVE them to us?" asked Bert in surprise. "After
all the work you had catching them?"

"Oh, it wasn't any work catching 'em," said Will quickly. "It was fun.
But it won't be any fun taking 'em home, for Mr. Hardee will be mad."

"Why?" asked Harry, as he began eating a second muffin.

"Well, he'll say I was catching fish instead of hoeing corn. But I
caught all these in the noon hour, when I'm supposed to have a little
time off. But he wouldn't believe that, so there's no use taking the
fish home. You can have 'em. There's some pretty big sunnies, and a
couple o' nice perch."

"Sure you don't want them?" asked Bert.

"No. I'd be glad to give 'em to you. And here's some grasshoppers I
didn't use. They'll be good to fish with to-morrow."

"Thanks," said Bert, as he took the tin box Will held out. Inside
could be heard a queer little "ticking" noise, as the grasshoppers
leaped up against the cover.

"Say, these are sure some fine fish!" exclaimed Will.

"Oh, you'll catch just as nice ones to-morrow," the country boy said.
"I'll have to run now, or I'll be late at the farm."

"Good-bye!" called Bert and Harry as Will hurried off along the edge
of the creek. "See you to-morrow, maybe."

Will had no idea that he would see his friends then. He knew he had a
hard day's work in prospect for the next day--weeding a large patch of
onions that were so far away from the creek that he would have no
chance, even at his noon hour, of going down to the water for a cool
little swim.

Will did not know what queer things were going to happen to him very
soon, nor did any of the Bobbseys realize what a part they were to
play in the life of poor, friendless Will Watson.

"He's a nice boy, isn't he?" asked Harry of Bert, as they turned back
toward the boat, with their fish and bait.

"Yes, I like him a lot. It's too bad he has to work so hard on the
farm."

"Yes, it sure is."

Talking of the luck they expected to have the next day, fishing, the
cousins soon reached the Bluebird. There they found their father and
Captain White waiting for them.

"We've decided to move the boat farther down the creek before we tie
up for the night," said Mr. Bobbsey, "but we didn't want to go before
you boys came back."

"Are you going to start up the engine again?" asked Bert. "If you are,
I wish you'd let me try to do it."

"No, you are too small to go near gasoline motors," said his father.
"Besides, we are not going to use the engine. We'll just push the boat
along with poles from the bank. We're not going very far, but your
mother thought it would be nicer to spend the night in a more open
place."

"Yes," said Mrs. Bobbsey, "I thought perhaps some animals might jump
out of the trees on our deck."

The trees on shore were very close to the boat, some of the branches
overhanging the railing. At the mention of animals, Bert's eyes opened
wider.

"Say, if I had a gun I could shoot them, if they came aboard," he
said, his eyes glistening.

"Nonsense!" exclaimed his mother. "I'd rather have an animal on board
than let you have a gun. You might get shot."

"I--I could squirt water on 'em with my fire engine!" shouted Freddie,
who had given up trying to make Snoop do any tricks.

"Oh, we had enough of your engine, little fat fireman," said Mr.
Bobbsey with a laugh. "Now then, if you're all ready, we'll move the
boat."

It was rather hard work to start the Bluebird, but once it had begun
to move, it went more easily through the water. Captain White had one
pushing pole, Mr. Bobbsey another, and Bert and Harry used one between
them. Soon the houseboat moved out from the narrow part of the creek,
and from under the trees, to a place where wide meadows were found on
either side. A little farther, going around a bend in the stream, the
Bobbseys came in sight of a farmhouse, a barn and several other
buildings near it.

"Oh, look!" cried Nan. "Somebody lives there."

"Yes, that's Mr. Hardee's farm, I think," said Mr. Bobbsey. "We can
tie up our boat here, and then, if we want some milk or eggs, we can
easily get them."

"I needs some aigs," spoke Dinah. "Done used de lastest one in dem
muffins."

"Then we'll make the boat fast here," decided Mr. Bobbsey. "With your
corn muffins, Dinah, and the fish Will gave us, we'll have a fine
supper. As soon as the boat is fast you and Harry can clean the fish,
Bert."

Beyond the broad expanse which lay between the wide meadows, the creek
had narrowed again opposite the farmhouse and barn. In fact, it was so
narrow, that if there had been another houseboat on the stream, there
would have been trouble for the Bluebird to pass. This narrow part was
not, however, very long, and beyond it the creek broadened out again.

Mr. Bobbsey and Captain White had just finished fastening the ropes
from the boat to some stakes driven into the ground, when Mrs.
Bobbsey, who had come up from the dining-room, called out:

"Oh, look, Richard!"

"What is it?" asked her husband.

"That man! See! I'm afraid he is going to give that boy a whipping.
And see, it's Will--the boy who gave Bert the fish!"

Mr. Bobbsey looked to where his wife pointed, and saw, coming out of
the barn, a grizzled farmer, leading by the arm a boy whom Mr. Bobbsey
at once recognized as Will Watson. Keeping a tight grip on the lad's
arm with one hand, the farmer raised his other hand, in which was a
long horsewhip.

Then he cried:

"I'll teach you to waste your time goin' fishin'! I'll teach you! Th'
idea o' fishin' when I set you to hoein' corn! Wastin' my time! I'll
learn you!"

"Oh, but, Mr. Hardee!" cried poor Will. "I only fished in the noon
hour when I'm not supposed to work!"

"Not supposed to work!" cried the mean man, as he brought the whip
down on Will's shoulders. "You're supposed t' work here all th' while
I tell you--'cept when you're asleep! I'll teach you!" and again the
cruel whip swished down.

"Oh, Richard!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey faintly, as she covered her eyes
with her hands. "Can't you stop that?"




CHAPTER XII

THE WIRE FENCE


Mr. Bobbsey did not waste any time talking. With a run and a jump he
was on shore, and then he started across the meadow toward the place
where the mean farmer was whipping Will, who was crying out loud. For
the cruel whip hurt.

"Hold on a minute, Mr. Hardee!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey, when he was
near enough to make himself heard. Back on the deck of the houseboat
Mrs. Bobbsey, the twins, their cousins and Dinah watched and waited to
see what would happen.

"You talkin' to me?" sharply demanded the mean farmer of Mr. Bobbsey.

"Yes, Mr. Hardee. I asked you to wait a minute before you keep on
whipping that boy. I happened to hear part of what he said, and I
think he is in the right."

"In th' right? What do you mean?"

"I mean I think he tells the truth, when he says he fished only during
the noon hour. We saw him as he came along, and he gave the fish he
had caught to my boy."

"Oh, he did, hey?" exclaimed Mr. Hardee. "I was wonderin' what become
of 'em. Give 'em away, did he? Wa'al, he knowed better'n to bring 'em
here. I knowed he'd been wastin' his time. When I set a boy to hoein'
corn, an' he comes home smellin' of fish, I know what he's been doin'
jest th' same as when I see a boy's head wet on a hot day I know he's
been in swimmin'! You can't fool me. He's frittered away his time,
when he ought t' be hoein' corn, an' now I'm goin' to take it out of
him!"

Again he raised the whip, and struck the boy.

"Oh, please don't!" begged Will. "Honest I didn't fish except at noon
hour, an' I ate my lunch in one hand, and fished with the other, so I
wouldn't waste any time. I only took half an hour, instead of three-
quarters you said I could have at noon, and I went right to work
hoein' corn again."

"Humph! That's easy enough to say," spoke Mr. Hardee, "but I don't
believe you. I told you I'd whip you if you went fishin' ag'in, an'
I'm goin' to do it!"

Again the lash fell.

"Please don't!" begged Will, trying to break loose. But the angry
farmer held him in too firm a grip.

"Look here!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey with flashing eyes. "I believe that
boy is telling the truth!"

"Wa'al, I don't," snapped the mean farmer. "An' I'm goin' to give him
a good lesson."

"Not that way, Mr. Hardee!" cried Mr. Bobbsey, taking a step forward.

"Huh! You seem to know my name," said the farmer, stopping in his
beating of the boy, "but I don't know you."

"My name is Bobbsey," said the twins' lather, and the farmer started.
"I'm in the lumber business over at Lakeport. I guess you bought some
lumber of me, didn't you, for your house."

"Wa'al, s'posin' I did?" asked Mr. Hardee. "I paid you for it, didn't
I?"

"Yes, I think so."

"Wa'al, then that don't give you no right to interfere with me! This
is my hired boy, an' I can do as I please with him."

"Oh, no, you can't, Mr. Hardee!" said Mr. Bobbsey quickly.

"What's that? I can't? Wa'al, I'll show you! Stand back now, I'm goin'
to give him a good threshin'!"

Again he raised the whip, but it did not fall on poor, timid,
shrinking Will. For Mr. Bobbsey snatched it away from the angry
farmer's hand and flung it far to one side.

"Here! What'd you mean by that?" demanded Mr. Hardee, his face more
flushed than ever with anger.

"I mean you're not going to beat that boy!" replied the twins' father.
"He hasn't done anything to deserve it, and I'm not going to stand by
and see him abused. Is he your hired boy?"

"I took him out of the poorhouse--nobody would hire him. He's bound
out to me until he's of age, an' I can do as I please with him."

"Oh, no, you can't," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I happen to know something of
the law. You have no right to beat this boy, and if you try to do it
now, or again, and I hear of it, I'll make a complaint against you.
Don't you strike him again, especially when he hasn't done anything."

Mr. Hardee seemed so surprised that he did not know what to say. His
grip on Will's arm slipped off, and Will quickly stepped to one side.
There were tears in his eyes, and on his face.

"I believe this boy was telling the truth," said Mr. Bobbsey. "Even if
he did fish a little during the time you call yours, that would be no
excuse for using a horsewhip on him."

"I tell you he's bound out to me, and I can. do as I please with him!"
cried Mr. Hardee.

"No, you can't," said Mr. Bobbsey. "You have no right to be cruel,
even if he is a poor boy, and is bound out to you. Haven't you any
folks, Will?" he asked.

"No--no, sir," was the half-sobbed answer. "No near folks. I come from
th' poorhouse, just as he says. But I've got an uncle somewhere out
west. He's a miner. If he knew where I was, he'd look after me."

"Where is your uncle?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"I--I got his address, but I can't write very good, or I'd send him a
letter."

"Let me have his address," went on Mr. Bobbsey. "And I'll see what I
can do."

"Look here!" cried the farmer. "I won't have you interferin' in my
business! You ain't got a right to!"

"Every one has a right to stop a poor boy from being unjustly beaten,"
said the twins' father. "Will, you get me that address. I'll be here a
day or so, in my houseboat, and you can bring it down to me. Do you
think you can find it, and let me know where your uncle lives?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then do it."

"Now you look-a-here!" began Mr. Hardee, "I won't have you, nor
anybody else, interferin' with my hired help. I---"

"I'm not interfering except to stop you from horsewhipping a boy,"
said Mr. Bobbsey. "Any one has a right to do that."

"Humph!" was all the farmer said, as he over and picked up the
horsewhip Mr. Bobbsey had taken from him. The twins' father thought
perhaps the farmer was going to use it again, but he did not. Mr.
Hardee turned to Will and said:

"Get along up to the house, and eat your supper! There's lots o' work
to be done afore dark. An' if I catch you fishin' any more, I'll make
you---"

"But I wasn't fishin' except at the noon hour," the boy interrupted.

"That's enough of your talk!" the farmer cried as he walked toward the
barn. "Go on!"

Mr. Bobbsey went back to the houseboat.

"It's all right," he said cheerfully to his wife and children. "I made
him stop hurting Will."

"Did he--did he hit him very hard?" asked Freddie, for punishment of
that sort was totally unknown in the Bobbsey home. Of course the
children did not always do right, but they were punished by having
some pleasure taken away from them, and never whipped.

"No, Will wasn't much hurt," said Mr. Bobbsey, for he did not want his
children, or their cousins, to worry too much over what they had seen.
Yet Mr. Bobbsey could not help but think that the cruel lash must have
hurt Will more than the boy himself showed.

"He--he won't whip him any more, will he?" asked little Flossie.

"No, not any more," said Mr. Bobbsey, for he had made up his mind he
would, if necessary, take the boy away from the mean farmer before any
more whipping could be done.

"Suppah am ready!" called Dinah from the kitchen. "An' I done wants
yo' all t' come right away fo' it gits cold!"

"We're coming!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey. "And after supper we'll sit on
deck and sing songs."

She wanted to do something to take out of the minds of the children
the memory of the unpleasant scene they had just observed.

"I wish it would hurry up and come morning," said Bert.

"Why?" asked his father.

"So Harry and I can go fishing. I'm sure we'll catch some with the
grasshoppers for bait."

"Well, I hope you have good luck," laughed Mr. Bobbsey.

The supper was much enjoyed. The fish, which Will had given the
Bobbseys, made a fine meal, with the corn muffins and other things
Dinah cooked. After supper they all sat out on the deck of the
houseboat, enjoying the beautiful June evening. From the farm of Mr.
Hardee came the sounds of mooing cows, and whinnying horses, with an
occasional grunt of the pigs, or the barking of dogs.

Nothing was seen of the farmer himself, or of poor Will.

"Can you do anything for him?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey of her husband,
after the children had gone to bed that night.

"I hope so, yes. If, as he says, he has an uncle somewhere in the
West, and I can get his address, I'll write to him, and ask him to
look after Will. The boy needs a good home."

"Indeed he does. Oh, I'm so glad you didn't let him get that
whipping!"

"I'll help him all I can," promised Mr. Bobbsey.

The twins' father rather hoped that the hired boy might slip down to
the houseboat that evening, with his uncle's address, but nothing was
seen of him.

In the morning a strange thing happened.

Mr. Bobbsey and Captain White decided that it would be better to take
the boat a little farther down Lemby Creek, and tie it fast to the
bank in a more shady spot than the one opposite the farm buildings.

"It will be better fishing in the shade, too," Mr. Bobbsey said to the
boys.

So the gasoline engine was started, and the boat started off. It had
not gone very far, though, before Mr. Bobbsey, who was steering,
called to Captain White to shut off the engine.

"What's the matter?" asked Captain White. "You're going farther than
this; aren't you?"

"I wanted to, yes. But we can't go any farther."

"Why not?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey. "Nothing has happened to the boat, has
there, Richard?"

"No, not to the boat. But look there!" and Mr. Bobbsey pointed ahead.
Stretched across a narrow part of Lemby Creek was a strong wire fence,
fastened to posts driven into the bottom of the stream. The Bluebird
could go no farther on her voyage. The fence stopped her.

As Mr. Bobbsey, the twins and the cousins looked at the strong wire
fence, they saw Mr. Hardee come along the shore. He looked at the
houseboat, and shook his fist, grinning in no pleasant fashion.

"I guess you won't go no farther!" he cried. "I've put a stop to your
fancy trip all right! Huh!"




CHAPTER XIII

THE RUNAWAY BOY


"Oh, papa, can't we go on to Lake Romano?" asked Nan, as she came up
on deck with Dorothy, and saw the big wire fence stretched across the
creek to stop them.

"It doesn't look so--unless we can fly over that," and her brother
Bert pointed to the metal strands that went from post to post.

"It does seem to hinder us," said Mr. Bobbsey. He was trying to think
of what would be best to do. He looked at Mr. Hardee, who seemed to
think it all a fine joke.

"Papa, I know how we can get through," eagerly said little Freddie,
who was holding Snoop in his arms. The big black cat was almost too
much of a load for the little boy, but Freddie wanted her to do some
tricks, and he held her so she would not run away.

"I know how to get past that fence," the little twin went on.

"How?" asked his father, rather absentmindedly. "How?"

"Just cut the wires!" said Freddie, as though no one but himself had
thought of that. "If I had one of those cutter-things the telephone
man had, when he climbed the pole in front of our house, I could cut
the wires and we could go right on up the creek."

"Yes, I suppose so, my little fat fireman," said Mr. Bobbsey. "But I
don't believe the man who put that fence up there would let us cut the
wires."

"It's queer," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "That fence wasn't across the creek
before, was it?"

"I don't know," answered her husband. "It looks as though it had been
put up lately--even last night, perhaps. But I haven't been along the
creek in some time, so I can't be sure."

"It wasn't here last week, that's certain," Captain White spoke. "For
I was up here then fishing, and I didn't see it. I fancy that Mr.
Hardee knows something about it."

"I shouldn't wonder," agreed Mr. Bobbsey. "Now the question is: What
are we to do? We can't go on through the fence, and we can't very well
go around it, for the Bluebird won't float on dry ground. And I don't
want to go back. This is the only way to get to Lake Romano."

"I know what to do, papa," spoke Flossie. "We can ask that man to take
down the wires, if Freddie can't cut them with the cutter-thing."

"Yes, I suppose we could do that," Mr. Bobbsey said, slowly.

By this time Mr. Hardee had come closer to the houseboat, which had
drifted near to the shore.

"Will you take that fence down, and let us go past?" asked Mr.
Bobbsey, as politely as he could.

"No, I won't!" snapped Mr. Hardee in reply. "No!"

"But we want to go on down the creek," explained the twins' father,
"and we can't get past the fence."

"I know you can't!" said Mr. Hardee with a chuckle. "That's what I put
it up there for. I strung it last night--me and my hired men. I didn't
think you'd hear, and you didn't. Give you a sort of surprise, didn't
it?"

"It certainly did," and Mr. Bobbsey's voice was stern. "And I want to
say that you had no right to stretch that fence across the creek to
stop my boat. You had no right!"

"Oh, yes, I had!" said Mr. Hardee with a sneer.

"This is a public creek," went on Mr. Bobbsey.

"Maybe it is, in certain places," said the mean farmer, "but here the
creek runs through my land. I own on both sides of it, and I own the
creek itself. If I don't want to let anybody go through in a boat, I
don't have to."

"Oh, so you own the creek here, do you?" asked Mr. Bobbsey, rather
surprised.

"Yes, I do."

"And you aren't going to let us pass?"

"Nope! That's why I strung that fence last night. It's a good, strong
fence, and if you run into it, and try to bust it I'll have th' law on
ye!"

"Oh, you needn't worry that I'll do anything like that," spoke Mr.
Bobbsey. "But why won't you let us pass?"

"Because of what you did last night--interferin' between me and my
help. You wouldn't let me give Will Watson the threshin' he deserved,
an' I won't let you pass through my creek. I want you to back up your
boat, too, and go back where you come from. I own that part of the
creek where you are now."

"Come now, be reasonable," suggested Mr. Bobbsey. "I stopped you from
beating that boy only because you were in the wrong. If you'll just
think it over, you'll say so yourself. And, just for that, you
shouldn't stop my boat from going up the creek."

"Well, I have stopped you, and I'm going to keep on stoppin' you!"
cried Mr. Hardee, again shaking his fist. "You can't get past my
fence. It's a good strong fence."

"I--I could cut it, if I had one of those cutter-things, the telephone
man had," said Freddie, in his clear, high voice.

"Hush, Freddie dear," said his mother. "Leave it to papa."

Mr. Bobbsey was silent a moment, and then he went on:

"And so you strung that fence in the night, and won't let my houseboat
pass, just because I stopped you from beating that boy?"

"That's it," the mean farmer said. "And for more than that, too."

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Bobbsey quickly.

"I mean that you made that boy, Will Watson, run away."

"Run away!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey, in surprise.

"Yes, run away," repeated the farmer. "He didn't come down to
breakfast this mornin', and when I went to call him to do the chores,
he was gone. And, what's more, I think you had somethin' to do with
him runnin' away," went on the angry farmer. "You put a lot o' notions
in his head. You're to blame!"

"Now look here!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey. "We don't know any more about
that boy running away than you do, Mr. Hardee. If he has gone, I'm
sorry for him, for he may have a hard time. I'm not sorry I stopped
you from beating him, though. Perhaps he is around the farm
somewhere."

"No, he isn't!" insisted the farmer. "He's gone. What clothes he had
he took with him. He's run away, and it's your fault, too. I put up
that fence last night to pay you back for interferin', an' now I'm
glad I did, for you're to blame for Will runnin' off."

"I tell you that you are mistaken," went on Mr. Bobbsey. "But if you
feel that way about it, there is no use talking to you. Then you won't
take down that wire fence and let us pass?"

"No, I won't, and I order you, and your boat, out of my part of the
creek. Go back where you come from. You can't go through to Lake
Romano this way!"

Mr. Bobbsey turned and looked at the wire fence. It certainly was a
strong one, and the farmer and his hired men had worked well during
the night. It was far enough off from where the Bluebird then was so
that the pounding on the posts, to drive them into the mud of the
creek bottom, was not heard.

"Well, I guess there's nothing for us to do but to go back," said Mr.
Bobbsey. He felt very sorry, when he saw the looks of disappointment
on the faces of the twins and their cousins.

"Papa," said Freddie again, "if I had one of those wire-cutter things,
I could snip that wire like the telephone men did."

"Yes, but we haven't one, little fat fireman, and we would have no
right to use it if we had," said Mr. Bobbsey. "No, I must think of
some other way."

"It's too bad," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "I wonder what has become of that
poor runaway boy?" she asked.

"I don't know," answered Mr. Bobbsey. But, had he only known it, Will
Watson was nearer than any one suspected.




CHAPTER XIV

OFF AGAIN


"What are we going to do?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, as she stood at the
side of her husband on the deck of the houseboat. Mr. Bobbsey was
looking at the wire fence, as though trying to find a way to get past
it--either under it, or over it, or to one side or the other of it. Of
course he did not think it wise to try little Freddie's plan of
breaking the wire with a "cutter thing" such as the telephone men
carried.

"Well," said Mr. Bobbsey, after a bit, "I guess the only thing for us
to do is to go back, until we are anchored in some part of Lemby Creek
that doesn't belong to Mr. Hardee."

"Does he really own this water?" asked Bert.

"Well, he says so, and I have no doubt but what he does," said Mr.
Bobbsey. "If he owns land on both sides of the creek, naturally he
owns the creek, too."

"And we can't go up or down it?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Not unless he lets us."

"What about the fishes?" asked Bert "He can't stop them from swimming
up and down."

"No, he can't do that," agreed his father, with a smile.

"Then can he stop Harry and me from catching fish?" Bert wanted next
to know.

"Not if you fish somewhere else than in his waters," spoke the twins'
father. "The best thing for us to do is to go back where we were at
first, near where the creek runs into Lake Metoka. There we can anchor
for a time."

"But how are we going to get to Lake Romano?" asked Nan. "I want to
show Dorothy the big waterfall."

"Well, perhaps we can get there a little later," her father said.
"Just now Mr. Hardee has the best of us, and we'll have to do as he
says. So, Captain White, I guess we'll have to back up the boat, as we
can't go past the fence."

"If I had one of those wire-cutter things," began Freddie, "I could
snip that wire as easy as anything." He seemed to think of nothing
else.

"Oh, you and Flossie had better go play with Snap, or Snoop,"
suggested Bert with a laugh. "Or you can come and watch Harry and me
fish. We're going to as soon as we get back aways."

"I'm going to fish, too," declared Freddie, eagerly.

The creek, near Mr. Hardee's farm, was so narrow that the houseboat
could not be turned around in it, and it had to go backward. This was
easy, since the Bluebird was something like a ferry boat, built to go
backward or forward.

The twins were a little sad as they saw their boat backing up, but it
could not be helped.

"We'll have a good time fishing, anyhow," said Harry.

"That's right," agreed Bert. "I wonder if that boy Will took his
fishing rod with him? He'd probably need it, if he has run away, and
is going out west to find his uncle."

"Why would he need a fish-rod?" asked Nan.

"To catch fish to eat," her brother said. "He'll have to have
something, and fish are the easiest to get. I almost wish I had gone
with him. It will be lots of fun."

"Oh, but it will be very hard, too," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Think of the
lonely nights he'll have to spend, and perhaps with no place to sleep,
but on the hard ground. And when it rains---"

"I guess I'll stay home!" laughed Bert, as though he had ever had an
idea of running away from home.

Slowly the Bluebird made her way backward until she had passed some
posts near the edge of the water. These posts marked the boundary line
of Mr. Hardee's farm. He did not own beyond them, and Captain White
said the creek was public property there.

"Then we'll anchor here," decided Mr. Bobbsey, as he steered the
houseboat toward shore. "Then I think I'll take a little trip back to
Lakeport."

"And leave us alone?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Only for a short while. I want to see some friends of mine, and find
out if Mr. Hardee really has the right to fence off Lemby Creek. I
don't believe he has."

"Will you be back to-night?"

"Oh, yes. It isn't far to Lakeport. I can walk across the fields and
go by trolley."

"I do hope you can find some way of getting past the fence," said Mrs.
Bobbsey. "It would be too bad to have our trip spoiled."

As Mr. Bobbsey was getting ready to go back to town, Dinah came out of
the dining-room, looking rather puzzled.

"What is the matter?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey. "Are you worried because we
can't get those eggs from Mr. Hardee?"

"Well, yessum, dat's partly it," said the fat cook. "We's got t' hab
eggs, an' other things too."

"Bert and Harry can walk to the village," said Mr. Bobbsey. "It isn't
far from here. I'll go part way with them. So don't worry, Dinah."

"Oh, dat isn't all dat's worryin' me, Massa Bobbsey. But did yo' say
de chillums could hab dem corn muffins whut was left over?" and she
looked at Mrs. Bobbsey.

"The corn muffins that were left over?" repeated the twins' mother.
"No, I said nothing about them. And they know they should not eat
between meals without asking me. Why, are the muffins gone, Dinah?"

"Yessum; fo' ob 'em. I put 'em on a plate on de dinin' room table, but
now dey's gone."

"Maybe Snap took them," suggested Mr. Bobbsey. "Snoop wouldn't, for
she doesn't like such things. But Snap is very fond of them."

Freddie, who heard the talk, hurried over to where the dog was lying
asleep in a patch of sunlight, and opened his mouth.

"No, Snap didn't take 'em," said Freddie. "There aren't any crumbs in
his teeth."

"Well, maybe you can tell that way, but I doubt it," laughed Mr.
Bobbsey. "Perhaps you forgot where you put the muffins, Dinah, or
maybe there were none left."

"Oh, I'se shuah I done put 'em on de table," said the fat cook, "an'
I'se shuah dey was some left. I'll go look some mo', though."

As there were a few other things besides eggs that were needed for the
kitchen of the houseboat, Bert and Harry planned to take a basket, and
go to the nearest village store for them. They would walk across the
fields with Mr. Bobbsey.

"We'll fish when we come back," said Bert.

"And get enough for dinner and supper," added Harry.

"Better get enough for one meal first," suggested Nan, with a laugh.

The houseboat was now made fast to the bank of the creek some distance
away from the wire fence Mr. Hardee had stretched across the stream.
It was not to be seen, nor were the farm buildings. The last the
Bobbseys had observed of the farmer was as he stood near his wire
fence, shaking his fist at the houseboat.

Mr. Bobbsey did not just know how he was going to get past the fence
with the Bluebird, or how he could get Mr. Hardee to cut the wire. The
twins' father decided to ask the advice of some friends.

Meanwhile Bert and Harry had reached the store, and had brought the
eggs, and other groceries, back to Dinah.

"Did you find those corn muffins?" asked Bert. "Because, if you did,
Harry and I would like some. May we have one, mother?"

"If Dinah has them, yes."

"But I cain't find 'em!" complained the fat cook. "Dem muffins hab
jest done gone an' hid de'se'ves."

"Oh, I guess we ate them up without knowing it," Bert said, with a
laugh. "Never mind, Dinah, a piece of cake, or pie will do just as
well."

"Go 'long wif yo'!" cried the cook with a laugh. "I'se got suffin else
t' do 'cept make cake an' pies fo' two hungry boys. Yo' jest take a
piece ob bread an' butter 'till dinnah am ready."

"All right," agreed Bert. "It won't be long until twelve o'clock. Come
on, Harry, and we'll see what luck we have fishing."

"I'm ready," was Harry's answer.

"I'll get you the bread and butter," offered Nan, and she did, adding
some jam to the bread, which was a delightful surprise to the two
boys.

"I want to fish, too," said Freddie.

"All right, I'll fix you a line," offered Bert. "But be careful you
don't fall in. A fish might pull you overboard."

Soon the three boys were dangling their lines over the rail of the
Bluebird, while Nan helped her mother with some of the rooms, which,
even though they were on a boat, needed "putting to rights." Dinah was
busy in the kitchen.

By this time Mr. Bobbsey had reached Lakeport by the trolley. He was
going to his lumber office, thinking some of his friends, whom he
might call on the telephone could suggest a way out of the trouble.
Before he reached the lumber yard, however, he met an acquaintance on
the street, a Mr. Murphy.

"Why, hello, Mr. Bobbsey!" exclaimed Mr. Murphy. "I thought you were
off on a vacation with your family in a houseboat."

"I was," said the lumber merchant, "but I came back."

"Back so soon? Didn't you like it?"

"Oh, yes, first rate. But we can't go any farther."

"Can't go any farther? What's the matter, did your boat sink?"

"No, but we're stuck in Lemby Creek. Mr. Hardee, a farmer who owns
land on both sides of the creek, has put a wire fence across to stop
us from going on to Lake Romano."

"Is that so! Well, that's too bad. How did it happen?"

"I'll tell you," said Mr. Bobbsey.

Then he told the story of stopping the angry farmer from beating Will
Watson, and how the fence had been built in the night.

"Well, that certainly was a mean trick on the part of Mr. Hardee,"
said Mr. Murphy. "And so the boy ran away?"

"Yes, and Mr. Hardee accused me of knowing something about him, but I
don't--any more than you do."

"I suppose not. But now the question is, How are you going to get past
that wire fence?"

"I don't know. The only way I see is to get Mr. Hardee to cut it, or
take it down, and he says he won't do either."

"Humph! Let me see. There ought to be a way out of it. I believe he
has the right, as far as the law goes, to put that fence up, but no
one else would be so mean. I guess we'll just have to force him to cut
those wires, as your little boy, Freddie, suggested."

"Yes, but how can we do it?" asked Mr. Bobbsey. "Mr. Hardee is very
headstrong, and set in his ways."

"Let me see," spoke Mr. Murphy slowly, "isn't his name Jake Hardee?"

"Yes, I believe it is."

"And didn't he buy from you the lumber to build his house?"

"Yes, I sold him the lumber, but he paid me for it," said Mr. Bobbsey.
"I couldn't get any hold on him that way. He paid for the lumber in
cash."

"Yes," cried Mr. Murphy, "but he got the money from me to pay you, and
he hasn't paid ME back. He still owes ME the money, and he gave me a
mortgage on his house as security. I've got a hold on him all right.
He owes me some interest money, too."

I might say to you little children that when a man wants to build a
house and has not enough money, he goes to another man and borrows
cash, just as your mamma sometimes borrows sugar, or tea, from the
lady next door.

When the man borrows money to build his house, he gives to the man who
lends him the cash, a piece of paper, called a mortgage. That paper
says that if the man who borrowed the money does not pay it back, and
also pay interest for the use of it, the man who lent him the money
can take the house. The house is "security" for the loaned money.

It is just as if your mamma went next door to borrow a cup of sugar,
and said:

"Now, Mrs. Jones, if I don't pay you back this sugar, and a little
more than you gave me, for being so kind as to lend it to me--if I
don't pay it back in a week, why you can keep my new Sunday hat." And
your mamma might give Mrs. Jones a Sunday hat as "security" for the
cup of sugar. Of course ladies do not do those things, but that is
what a mortgage is like.

"Yes." said Mr. Murphy to Mr. Bobbsey, "Mr. Hardee borrowed from me
the money to buy from you the lumber for his house. And he hasn't paid
me back the money, nor any interest on it. I think I'll go up and have
a talk with him. And, when I get through talking, I guess he'll let
you go through his wire fence."

"I hope he will," said Mr. Bobbsey, "for it would be too bad to have
our trip spoiled."

"I'll go right back with you," offered Mr. Murphy.

So it happened that Mr. Bobbsey, with his friend, reached the
houseboat, in Lemby Creek, shortly after dinner.

"Oh, back so soon?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey. "What are you going to do, Mr.
Murphy?"

"Have a talk with Mr. Hardee."

Mr. Bobbsey and Mr. Murphy walked down the bank of the creek to the
farm. They found Mr. Hardee mending a broken harness.

"Mr. Hardee," said Mr. Murphy, "I hear you have put a wire fence
across Lemby Creek, so my friend, Mr. Bobbsey, can't get past with his
houseboat."

"Yes, I have," growled the farmer, "and that fence is going to stay
up, too! I'll show him he can't come around here, interferin' with me
when I try to punish my help. He made Will run away too."

"No, I did not. I know nothing of him," said Mr. Bobbsey.

"Mr. Hardee," went on Mr. Murphy. "I want you to take down that fence,
and let the houseboat go on up the creek."

"And I'm not going to!"

"Very well, then," said Mr. Murphy, quietly, "perhaps you are ready to
pay me the interest on my mortgage which has been due me for some
time, Mr. Hardee."

The farmer seemed uneasy.

"Well, to tell you the truth," he said, "I haven't got that money just
now, Mr. Murphy. Times have been hard, and crops are poor, and I'm
short of cash. Can't you wait a while?"

"I have waited some time."

"Well, I'd like to have you wait a little longer. I'll pay you after a
while."

"And I suppose you'll take down that wire fence, and let Mr. Bobbsey
and the twins go past--after a while?"

"Well--maybe," growled the mean farmer.

"Maybe won't do!" exclaimed Mr. Murphy. "I want you to take the wire
fence down RIGHT AWAY."

"Well, I'm not going to do it. He interfered with me, and made that
boy run away, and I'm not going to let him go up my part of the
creek."

"Well, then, Mr. Hardee, if you can't do something for Mr. Bobbsey, as
a favor, I can't do anything to oblige you. Mr. Bobbsey is a friend of
mine and unless you cut your wire fence, I'll have to foreclose that
mortgage, and take your house in payment for the money you owe me.
That's all there is about it. Either pay me my money--or cut that
fence. It must be one or the other."

Mr. Hardee squirmed in his seat, and seemed very uneasy.

"I--I just can't pay that money," he said.

"Then I'll have to take your house away."

"I--I don't want you to do that, either."

"Then cut the wire fence!" cried Mr. Murphy.

"Wa'al, I--I guess I'll have to," said Mr. Hardee, but it was clearly
to be seen that he did not want to. He went into the barn, and came
out wearing a pair of rubber boots, and carrying a pair of pincers--
the "wire-cutting things," as Freddie called them.

Wading out into the creek Mr. Hardee snipped the wires of the fence.

"There, now you can go on," he said to Mr. Bobbsey, but his tone was
not pleasant.

"I thought I knew how to make him give in," whispered Mr. Murphy.

"Thank you," said Mr. Bobbsey to his friend. They hurried back to the
houseboat.

"We're going on again!" cried the twins' father. "The fence is down."

"Oh, fine!" said Bert.

"Now for the waterfall!" sighed Nan, who loved beautiful scenery.

"Oh, I've caught a fish!" suddenly shouted Freddie and he jumped about
so that his mother, with a scream, ran toward him, fearing he would go
overboard.




CHAPTER XV

OVERBOARD


"Look out, Freddie!"

"Be careful there, little fat fireman!"

Thus Mrs. Bobbsey cried to the small twin, and thus Mr. Bobbsey also
warned his son, who had pulled up his pole with a jerk, when he felt a
nibble on the fish-line.

"I'll look out for him!" cried Bert, and he got between his little
brother and the railing of the boat, so there would be no danger of
Freddie's falling overboard. Freddie had no intention of getting into
the water, but he was much excited over his fish.

"I caught it all myself!" he cried. "I caught a fish all by myself,
and nobody helped me. Didn't I, Bert?"

"Yes, Freddie, except that Harry put on the grasshopper bait."

"But where's the fish?" asked Nan, who, as yet, had not seen one.

"Here it is!" cried Freddie, as he ran toward the end of his line
which lay on deck. "I caught a fish, and it's all mine--every bit,"
and he held up a little, wiggling sunfish which, somehow or other, had
been caught on the tiny hook.

"Oh, it's a real, live fish!" squealed Flossie, dropping her doll to
get a better view of this new plaything. "Are we going to have it for
supper, Freddie?"

"No!" cried the little fat fellow, as he tried to hold the fish up by
the swinging line in one hand, and grasp it in the other. The fish was
so slippery that, every time Freddie had it, his hand slid off of it.
"We're not going to eat my fish!" cried Freddie. "I'm going to keep it
forever, in a glass globe, and make it do tricks!"

The others gathered around to see Freddie's catch, for the little
fellow was very proud of his success, though, once or twice before, on
trips to the country, he had been allowed to fish with Bert and Nan.
He was too impatient to sit still long, so he never caught much.

"Here comes Snoop," said Mr. Bobbsey, with a laughing glance at his
friend Mr. Murphy, who had come back to the houseboat with him, after
the mean farmer had cut the wire fence.

"Snoop can't have my fish!" cried Freddie, now hugging his dangling
prize close to his waist.

"Oh, you'll get your clothes all dirty!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, as the
black cat came snooping and sniffing around, for she smelled fish,
which she very much liked.

"Go 'way, Snoop! You can't have my fish!" cried Freddie. "I'm going to
put it in a glass globe, and keep it forever and teach it to do
tricks."

"I guess swimming is the only trick a fish can do," said Bert, with a
laugh, "and you don't have to teach them that. They know it already."

Freddie was so afraid that Snoop might get his fish, that Dinah
brought him up a glass dish, in which, when it was filled with water,
the little "sunny" was allowed to swim around. The hook had become
fastened in only a corner of the mouth, and the fish was not hurt in
the least.

Freddie was as proud as though he had caught a whale or a shark. He
did not care to fish any more, but stood on deck near the box on which
had been placed the dish containing his fish.

Bert and Harry, who had caught some larger fish, went back to their
rods and lines, while Nan took up Freddie's pole and used it for
herself. Flossie divided her time between getting her doll to "sleep"
and watching Freddie's fish.

"Well, are we really going up the creek?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Yes, Mr. Murphy got the farmer to cut the wire fence, so we can get
past," said Mr. Bobbsey. "We had better start, too, for Mr. Hardee
might change his mind, and put back the wire fence."

"I guess there isn't much danger of that," spoke Mr. Murphy. "But you
have a fine boat. I don't wonder that you didn't want to stay cooped
up here in this creek."

Flossie, who had come over near the visitor, said:

"There's a stove in our kitchen, and Dinah cooks things on it--good
things to eat!"

"Does she?" cried Mr. Murphy, catching the little girl up in his arms.
"That's fine!"

"I think you might take that as an invitation to dinner," said Mrs.
Bobbsey, with a laugh.

"Thanks, I will stay, and see how it feels to eat on board a
houseboat," replied the man who had helped Mr. Bobbsey.

Bert and Harry decided that they had caught enough fish now, so they
pulled in their lines, and soon the Bluebird was moving slowly up the
creek, toward Lake Romano, though it would be a day or so before the
Bobbseys reached it.

As the houseboat went past the wire fence, which had been cut, the
twins and their cousins looked at it in wonder. Only the posts stood
there now, and there was room enough between them for the houseboat to
pass. A little way back from the shore stood Mr. Hardee.

"I'm not going to let every boat go past that wants to!" he called to
Mr. Bobbsey. "I'll let you through, as a favor to Mr. Murphy, but I'm
not going to have a whole lot of them sailin' up and down my creek!"

"Just as if it would hurt the water," said Bert, in a low voice.

They were all glad when a turn of the stream hid Mr. Hardee from
sight. The mean farmer evidently thought he had not been unpleasant
enough, for he ran after the houseboat a little way, crying:

"If you see anything of that good-for-nothing boy of mine, I want you
to tell him to come back here, or it will be the worse for him."

"We're not likely to see him," said Mr. Bobbsey.

"I don't know about that," went on the farmer. "I believe you folks
know something about him."

"That's all nonsense!" said Mr. Bobbsey, sharply. "I've told you we
don't know where he is, and haven't seen him since you tried to
horsewhip him. That ought to be enough."

"Wa'al, we'll see," was the growling answer, as the mean farmer turned
away.

The houseboat kept on, until it was well past Mr. Hardee's land, and
then, in a pleasant part of the creek, it was tied to the bank. Dinah
served supper.

"See! I told you we had a stove, and that Dinah could cook things,"
said Flossie, as a plate full of steaming hot corn muffins was set on
the table.

"So you did, my dear!" exclaimed Mr. Murphy, who sat next to the
little "fat fairy."

Flossie seemed to think the most wonderful part of the houseboat was
the kitchen and the stove.

When the pleasant meal was over, they sat on deck in the evening,
until it was time for Mr. Murphy to go home. He was to walk across the
meadow, about a mile, to get a trolley car. Mr. Bobbsey went with him,
part of the way.

For several days after this, the Bobbsey twins had all sorts of
amusements on the house-boat. The BLUEBIRD was still kept in the
creek, for it was so pleasant there, along the shady waterway, that
Mrs. Bobbsey said they might as well enjoy it as long as possible.

"But I want to see the big lake and the waterfall," said Nan.

"We'll soon be there," promised her father.

One day the houseboat was moved along the creek for about a mile, and
anchored there. Bert and Harry found the fishing so good, that they
wanted to stay a long time. They really caught some large perch and
chub.

"But we didn't come on this trip just to fish," said Mr. Bobbsey.
"There are other things to do. We want to go in swimming, when it gets
a little warmer, and then, too, we can take some walks in the woods on
the shores of Lake Romano."

"And can we have picnics, and take our lunch?" asked Freddie.

"Yes, little fat fireman," answered his father, laughing.

Freddie had been kept so busy with other amusements, that he had not
once played with his fire engine, since coming on board.

"Let me catch some fish," begged Flossie, on the afternoon of the day
when they were to move from the place that Bert and Harry liked so
well.

"You may take my line," offered Freddie. "I'm tired of fishing."

I think perhaps Freddie grew weary because he had had no bites. That
one fish he had caught, and which had caused so much excitement,
seemed to be all he could get. That one was still alive in the glass
dish, which Bert had made into sort of an aquarium.

"I'm going to catch a big fish," said Flossie, as she laid her doll
down beside the sleeping dog Snap, and took Freddie's pole.

"Don't fall in--that's all," cautioned Mrs. Bobbsey.

"I'll watch her," offered Dorothy, for Nan had gone down to help dry
the dishes, it being her "turn."

Somehow or other, every one forgot Flossie for a moment, and even
Dorothy, who had promised to watch her, forgot when she saw some small
boats, filled with young folks on an excursion, pass the houseboat.

Suddenly there came a scream from little Flossie.

"I see him! I see him!" she cried. "He's on our boat!"

The next moment her mother, who turned quickly as she heard Flossie's
voice, saw the little girl lean far over the rail of the Bluebird.
Then came a splash. Flossie had fallen overboard!




CHAPTER XVI

THE MISSING SANDWICHES


"Flossie is in the water!"

"Get the boat!"

"Snap! Jump in and get her!"

"Oh, Flossie!"

So many were the excited cries that followed the falling over the rail
of little Flossie, that no one could tell who was speaking, or crying
out.

Harry, who was near the rail, turned sharply as he heard the splash,
and then, quickly casting off his coat, he gave a clean dive over the
side. Harry was a country boy, and had learned to swim when very
young. He was not at all afraid of the water, and, more than once, he
had pulled from "the old swimming hole," boys smaller than himself,
who had gone beyond their depth, and could not get out.

"I'll get her!" cried Harry, as he dived over the side.

"Oh, it's all my fault!" sobbed Dorothy. "I said I'd watch her. But I
forgot! It's all my fault!"

"No, it isn't, dear!" said Nan, quickly putting her arms around her
cousin. "Flossie does things so quickly, sometimes, that no one can
watch her. But we'll get her out, for the water isn't deep."

It was deep enough though, on that side of the boat, to be well over
Flossie's head, and of course, plunging down from the height she did,
she at once went under water.

Snap seemed to understand what had happened, and to know that his
services were needed, for he gave a bark, and made a rush for the
rail.

"Don't let him jump in!" cried Mr. Bobbsey to Bert. "If Harry can get
her, Snap might only make trouble. Hold him back, Bert, while I get
the rowboat."

Mrs. Bobbsey, with one arm around Freddie, had rushed to the rail to
look down. She saw Flossie come to the surface, choking and gasping
for breath, and then saw Harry, who had gone under, but who had come
up again, strike out for the little girl.

"Oh, save her!" gasped Mrs. Bobbsey.

"He will!" said Bert. "Harry's a fine swimmer. Come back, Snap!" he
called to the big dog, getting his hands on his collar, just in time,
for Snap was determined to go to the rescue himself. He whined, pulled
and tugged to get away from Bert.

"Help me hold him!" cried Bert to Nan.

"I will!" she answered, glad to be doing something. Together the two
older Bobbsey twins managed to keep Snap back. Dorothy, too, helped,
for Snap was very strong.

"Did Flossie go after a fish?" asked Freddie, and he asked it in such
a queer way that it would have caused a laugh at any other time. Just
now every one was too frightened to laugh.

After all, there really was not so much danger. Mr. Bobbsey had taught
Flossie some of the things one must do when learning to swim, and that
is to hold your breath when you are under water. For it is the water
getting into the lungs that causes a person to drown. After her first
plunge into the creek, the little girl thought of what her father had
told her, and did hold her breath.

"I--I'll get you!" called Harry to her. "Don't be afraid, Flossie!
I'll get you!"

Flossie was too much out of breath to answer, so she did not try to
speak. Harry was soon at her side, and called to her:

"Now put your hands on my shoulders, Flossie, and I'll swim to the
boat with you. Don't try to grab me around the neck."

Harry knew how dangerous it was for a person trying to rescue another
in the water to be choked. Flossie was a wise little girl, even if she
was not very old. She did as her cousin told her, and, with Flossie's
hands on his shoulders, Harry began to swim toward the Bluebird.

He did not have to go very far, though, for by this time Mr. Bobbsey
and Captain White were there with the rowboat, and the two children
were soon lifted in. They were safe, and not harmed a bit, except for
being wet through.

"Oh, Flossie, whatever did you do it for?" asked her mother, when she
had hugged the dripping little girl in her arms. "Why did you do it?"

"Do what, mamma?" Flossie asked.

"Lean over so far."

"I wanted to see if I had a fish," went on Flossie. "And I had to lean
over. And then I saw him."

"Saw whom?" asked her father. "What do you mean?"

"Why, I saw him--that boy," and Flossie seemed surprised that her
father did not understand.

"What boy?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey. "Did you fall asleep there, Flossie,
and were you dreaming, when you fell in?"

"No, mamma. I didn't fall asleep. I saw HIM, I tell you."

"I heard her say something about seeing some one, just as she went
over the rail, head first," Dorothy said.

"But whom do you mean, Flossie?" asked puzzled Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Why, that boy--the one the bad man whipped."

"Oh, Will Watson!" exclaimed Bert. "Where did you see him, Flossie?
Was he in one of the excursion boats that went past?"

"No, he was on our boat--down there," and Flossie pointed straight
down. "I saw him!" she declared.

"I guess she must have dozed off a little, and dreamed it," spoke Mr.
Bobbsey, with a smile. "That was it. The sun was so hot, that she just
slept a little as she was fishing. She might have had a bite, and that
awakened her so suddenly that she gave a jump and fell over the rail.
I must have it built higher. Then there won't be any danger."

"Yes, do," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "We've had scares enough."

"But I did see that boy--the one that gave Bert the fish," insisted
Flossie. "He was on our boat. I saw him as plain as anything."

"It must have been some one in the excursion boats that looked like
him," spoke Nan.

"No, I saw Will!" declared the little twin, and, rather than get her
excited by disputing, they allowed her to think she really had seen a
strange face, as she leaned over.

"But of course she either dreamed it, or saw some one she thought was
that runaway boy," Mr. Bobbsey said, afterward. "It's all nonsense to
think he was on our boat."

Snap, who had not been allowed to go to the rescue, much as he had
wanted to, leaped about Flossie, barking and wagging his tail in joy.

"Anybody would think he'd done it all," said Bert. "Say, Harry, you're
all right! That was a dandy dive!" and he clapped his cousin on the
back.

"Indeed we never can thank you enough. Harry," said Mrs. Bobbsey, and
tears of thankfulness glistened in her eyes.

"Oh, it wasn't anything at all," the country boy said, modestly
blushing, for he did not like such a "fuss" made over him. "I knew I
could get her out."

"Well, it was very fine of you," said Mr. Bobbsey, warmly. "Now then,
you had better change your clothes, for, though it is summer, you
might take cold. And Flossie, too, must change."

"Yes, I'll look after her," said her mother "Now remember, little fat
fairy," Mrs. Bobbsey went on, giving Flossie her father's pet name,
"you must never lean over the rail again. If you do---"

"But I saw---" began Flossie.

"No matter what you saw--don't lean over the rail!" said her mother.
"If you do, we shall have to give up this houseboat trip."

This seemed such a dreadful thing, that Flossie quickly promised to be
very careful indeed.

"But I did see him, all the same!" she murmured, as her mother took
her to the bedroom to change her clothes. "I saw that boy on our
boat."

The others only laughed at Flossie for thinking such a queer thing.

"That poor boy is far enough away from here now," said Bert. "I wonder
if he will really try to make his way out west?"

"I don't know," answered Harry, who had changed to a dry suit, hanging
his other in the sun to let the water drip out of it. "I've read of
boys making long journeys that way."

"I wouldn't want to try it," spoke Bert.

"Neither would I," said his cousin. "This houseboat suits me!"

Flossie was little the worse for her accident, and was soon playing
about again with Snoop and Snap, and with Freddie. The little fellow
and his sister made the dog and cat do many tricks.

It was the day after this, when the Bluebird had gone a little farther
up the creek, that Mrs. Bobbsey planned a little picnic on shore. They
were not far from a nice, green forest.

"We'll have Dinah put us up a little lunch, and we'll go in the woods
and eat it," said Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Oh, that will be fun!" cried Nan. "Won't it, Dorothy?"

"Indeed it will," said the seashore cousin.

"I'm going to take my doll," Flossie said. "There's no water in the
woods for her to fall in, is there, mamma?"

"No, not unless you drop her into a spring," laughed Mrs. Bobbsey.

"I'll see if Dinah has finished making the sandwiches," offered Nan.
"She had them almost finished a little while ago."

But when Nan went to the dining-room, she found the colored cook very
much excited.

"What is the matter, Dinah?" asked Nan.

"Mattah! What am de mattah?" Dinah repeated, "Dey's lots de mattah,
Missie Nan."

"Why, what can it be?"

"De sandwiches is gone, dat's what's de mattah!"

"The sandwiches, Dinah?"

"Yes'm, de sandwiches what I done make fo' de excursnick!"

"Oh, you mean for our picnic, Dinah?"

"Yes'm, dat's it. Excursnick I calls it. But de sandwiches I done jest
made am gone. I s'pects Massa Bert or his cousin done take 'em fo'
fun."

"Oh, no, Dinah. Bert nor Harry wouldn't do that. Are you sure you made
the sandwiches?"

"I'se jest as shuah, Missie Nan, as I am dat I'se standin' heah. I'se
jest as shuah as I is dat time when I made de corn cakes, an' somebody
tuck dem! Dat's how shuah I is! Dem sandwiches what was fo' de
excursnick am done gone completely."

"But have you looked everywhere, Dinah?" asked Nan.

"Eberywhere! Under de table an' on top ob de table. I had dem
sandwiches all made an' on a plate. I left dem in de dinin' room to go
git a basket, an' when I come back, dey was gone entirely. I want t'
see yo' ma, Missie Nan. I ain't gwing t' stay on dish yeah boat no mo,
dat's what I ain't!"

"But why not, Dinah?" asked Nan, in some alarm.

"Because dey's ghostests on dish yeah boat; dat's what dey is! An' I
ain't gwine stay on no ha'nted boat. Fust it were de corn cakes, an'
now it's de sandwiches. I'se gwine away--I ain't gwine stay heah no
mo'!"




CHAPTER XVII

IN THE STORM


Dinah was certainly very much frightened, but Nan was not. She knew
better than to believe in such things as "ghosts," and, though the
sandwiches might have disappeared, the little girl felt sure there
must be some reasonable explanation about the mystery.

"I'll call mamma, Dinah," offered Nan. "She won't want you to leave us
now, when we have just started on this trip."

"Go on, honey lamb, call yo' ma," agreed the fat cook. "But I ain't
gwine t' stay on dish yeah boat no mo'! Dat's settled. Call yo' ma,
honey lamb, an' I'll tell her about it."

Mrs. Bobbsey had heard the excited voice of Dinah and had come down to
the dining-room of the houseboat to see what it was all about.

"What is it, Dinah?" she asked.

"It's ghostests, Mrs. Bobbsey--dat's what it is," said the cook.
"Ghostests what takes de sandwiches as fast as I make 'em--dat's de
trouble. I can't stay heah no mo'!"

Mrs. Bobbsey looked to Nan for an explanation. The little girl said:

"Dinah made a plate of sandwiches for our picnic---"

"Dat's right, for de excursnick," put in Dinah.

"And she left them on the table," went on Nan. "But when she went to
get a basket to put them in, and came back---"

"Dey was clean gone!" burst out the colored cook, finishing the story
for Nan. "An' ghostests took 'em; ob dat I'se shuah. So you'd bettah
look fo' anoder cook, Mrs. Bobbsey."

"Nonsense, Dinah! We can't let you go that way. It's all foolishness
to talk about ghosts. Probably the door was left open, and Snap might
have taken the sandwiches, though I never knew him to take anything
off the table. But it must have been Snap."

"No'm, it couldn't be," said Dinah. "It wasn't Snap."

"How do you know?"

"Could Snap come through a closed do', Mrs. Bobbsey. Could Snap do
that?"

"Come through a door? No, I don't believe he could. But he might open
it. Snoop can open doors."

"Yes, maybe do's that hab a catch on, but not knob-do's, Snoop can't
open, an' Snap can't neither. Besides, de do' was shut when I left de
sandwiches on de table an' went fo' de basket."

"Oh, was it?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, trying to think of how the pieces of
bread and meat could have been taken.

"It shuah was," went on Dinah. "Nobody took dem sandwiches, but a
ghostest, an' I can't stay in no boat what has ghostests."

"Nonsense!" laughed Mrs. Bobbsey. "I know how it was done, Dinah. I
know how the sandwiches were taken."

"How, Mrs. Bobbsey?" asked the colored cook, as she stood looking
first at the empty plate on the table, and then at Nan and lastly at
Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Why, through that window," said the twins' mother, pointing to an
open window on the side of the Bluebird. "Snap must have come in that
window, and taken the sandwiches. He was probably very hungry, poor
dog, though he knows better than to do anything like that." "No'm,
Mrs. Bobbsey," went on Dinah. "Snap couldn't hab come in fru dat
window, fo' it opens right on to de watah. He'd hab to stand in de
watah to jump in, an' he can't do that."

"No, perhaps not," admitted Mrs. Bobbsey. "Oh, I dare say you forgot
where you put the sandwiches, Dinah. Now don't worry a bit more about
them. Just make some fresh ones, and we'll go on our little picnic."

"But I'se gwine t' leab," said Dinah. "I ain't gwine stay on a boat,
where ghostests takes sandwiches as fast as I can make 'em."

"You shall come with us on the picnic," said Nan's mother. "When we
come back, there won't be any ghost. Now don't fuss. Just make some
fresh sandwiches, and we'll go. I'm sure it was Snap."

"And I'se shuah it were a ghostest," murmured Dinah, as she went out
to the kitchen.

"Mamma, who do you think it could have been?" asked Nan of her mother.

"Why, Snap, to be sure, little daughter."

"But with the door shut, and the window opening out on the water?"
went on Nan.

"Oh, dogs are very smart," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Smarter than we think.
Now suppose you help Dinah make more sandwiches. We are late."

Nan went out to the kitchen, while Mrs. Bobbsey made her way up on
deck, where she found her husband talking to Captain White about the
motor engine of the houseboat.

"Richard, I want to speak to you," said Mrs. Bobbsey, and when she and
the twins' father were in a quiet corner of the deck, Mrs. Bobbsey
went on:

"Richard, I think there are thieves about here."

"Bless my soul!" he exclaimed. "Thieves! What do you mean?"

"Well, I mean that Dinah says a plate of sandwiches was just taken,
and you remember the time the corn muffins were missing?"

"Yes, but perhaps Dinah was mistaken both times, or Snap might have
taken a bite between meals."

"Hardly Snap this time," Mrs. Bobbsey went on, "and Dinah, though she
does forget once in a while, would not be likely to do so twice in
such a short time. No, I think some tramps along shore must have come
along quietly in a boat, reached or climbed in through the window and
taken the sandwiches."

"Well, perhaps they did," Mr. Bobbsey, said. "I'll tell Captain White,
and we'll keep a lookout. We don't want thieves coming around."

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Dinah threatens to leave, if any
more queer things happen."

"Well, we wouldn't know how to get along without Dinah," said Mr.
Bobbsey, with a smile. "I'll put some wire netting over the windows. I
was going to do it anyhow, for the mosquitoes will soon be buzzing
around. The netting will keep thieves from reaching in and taking our
nice sandwiches."

"Yes, I think the netting would be a good idea," said his wife. "But
it certainly is queer."

A little later, the Bobbsey twins--both sets of them--with their
cousins, mother, father, and Dinah went ashore for the little picnic
in the woods, taking with them the fresh sandwiches that Nan had
helped to make.

"You shan't have any of these--at least not until we want you to have
them," said Nan to Snap, the dog, who, of course, was not left behind.
Yet, the more she thought of it the more sure Nan was that Snap had
not taken the others.

"But, if he didn't, who did?" she wondered.

"Oh, isn't it just lovely in these woods!" exclaimed Dorothy, as they
walked along on the soft moss under the trees. At the seashore, where
she lived, the woods were too far away to allow her to pay many visits
to them, and she always liked to walk in the cool forests.

Harry, though he lived in the country, not far from the woods, liked
them as well as did the Bobbsey twins, and the children were soon
running about, playing games, while Snap raced about with them,
barking and wagging his tail.

Dinah sat down near the lunch basket.

"Don't you want to walk around a bit?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"No'm," answered the fat cook. "I ain't gwine t' leab dish yeah basket
ob victuals until dey's eaten. Dey ain't no ghostests, nor no dogs,
gwine t' git nothin' when I'se heah! No'm!" and Dinah slipped her fat
arm in through the handle of the basket.

"Let's look for chestnuts!" cried Freddie. "I love chestnuts!"

"It's too early for them," said his father. "But if you find me a
willow tree, I can make you some whistles."

The children found one, near a little brook, and Mr. Bobbsey was soon
busy with his knife. The bark slipped off easily from the willow wood,
which is why it is so often used for whistles.

Soon all four children were blowing whistles of different tones, and
making so much noise that, with the barking of Snap, who seemed to
think he must bark every time a whistle was blown, Mrs. Bobbsey cried
out for quietness.

"Come on, we'll go farther off in the woods and play Indian,"
suggested Bert, and soon this game was under way.

It was lunch time almost before the children knew it, and what fun it
was to sit around the table cloth Dinah spread out on the grass, and
eat the good things from the basket. Snap was given his share, but
Snoop, the black cat, had not come along, staying on the houseboat
with Captain White.

"Isn't this fun?" cried Nan to Dorothy.

"Indeed it is! Oh, I can't tell you how glad I am that you asked me to
come on this trip!"

"Oh! Look at that big bug!" suddenly cried Freddie, and he made a jump
toward his mother, to get out of the way of a big cricket that had
hopped onto the white table cloth.

"Look out, Freddie!" called his father. "You'll upset your glass of
lemonade!"

Mr. Bobbsey spoke too late. Freddie's heel kicked over the glass, and
the lemonade spilled right into Mrs. Bobbsey's lap.

"Oh, Freddie!" cried Bert.

"Never mind--it's an old dress," laughed Mrs. Bobbsey, "and there's
more lemonade. Accidents will happen on picnics. Never mind, Freddie."

The cricket was "shooed" away by Nan, Freddie's glass was filled
again, and the picnic went on merrily. Soon it was time to go back to
the boat.

As they walked along through the woods, Mr. Bobbsey glanced up now and
then through the trees at the sky.

"Do you think it's going to rain?" his wife asked.

"Not right away, but I think we are soon going to have a storm," he
said.

"Oh, well, the houseboat doesn't leak, does it?"

"No, but I don't want to go out on Lake Romano in a storm, and I
intended this evening to go on up the creek until we reached the lake.
But I'll wait and see what the weather does."

"Well, did anything happen while we were gone?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey of
Captain White, as they got back to the houseboat.

"No, not a thing," he answered. "It was so still and quiet here, that
Snoop and I had a nice sleep," and he pointed to the black cat, who
was stretched out in his lap, as he sat on deck.

As it did not look so much like a storm now, Mr. Bobbsey decided to
move the houseboat farther up the creek, almost to where the stream
flowed from Lake Romano, so as to be ready to go out on the larger
body of water in the morning, if everything was all right.

The engine was started, and just before supper, the Bluebird came to a
stop in Lemby Creek about a mile from the big lake. She was tied to
the bank, and then supper was served.

Then followed a pleasant hour or two on deck, and when it was dark,
the children went into the cabin and played games until bedtime--Nan
and Bert, as well as the smaller twins and the cousins, were asleep
when Mrs. Bobbsey, who had sat up to write some letters, heard her
husband walking about on deck.

"What are you doing?" she called to him through a window.

"Oh, just looking at the weather," he answered. "I think we're going
to have a storm after all, and a hard one, too. I'm glad we're safely
anchored."

Sure enough. That night, about twelve o'clock, the storm came. There
was at first distant, muttering thunder, which soon became louder.
Then lightning followed, flashing in through the windows of the
houseboat, so that Mrs. Bobbsey was awakened.

"Oh, it's going to be a terrible storm," she said to her husband.

"Oh, perhaps not so very bad," he answered. "Here comes the rain!"

Then it began to pour. But the houseboat was well built, and did not
leak a bit.

Next the wind began to blow, gently at first, but finally so hard that
Mr. Bobbsey could hear the creaking of the ropes that tied the boat to
trees on shore.

"I think I'd better look and see if those ropes are well tied," he
said, getting up to dress, and putting on a raincoat.

He had hardly gotten out on deck, before the houseboat gave a sudden
lurch to one side, and then began to move quickly down stream.

"Oh, what has happened?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey.

At the same time Flossie and Freddie awakened, because of the loud
noise from the storm.

"Mamma! Mamma!" they cried.

"Richard, has anything happened?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Yes!" he shouted. "The strong wind has broken the ropes, and we are
adrift. But don't worry. We'll soon be all right!"

Faster and faster went the Bluebird, while all about her the rain
splashed down, the wind blew, the thunder roared, and the lightning
flashed.




CHAPTER XVIII

STRANGE NOISES


The frightened cries of Flossie and Freddie soon awakened Nan and
Bert, and it was not long before Harry and Dorothy, too, had roused
themselves.

"What's the matter?" asked Bert.

"Oh, we've gone adrift in the storm," his mother said. "But don't
worry. Papa says it will be all right."

"Come up on deck and see what's going on!" cried Bert to Harry.

He had begun to dress, and now he thrust his head out from his room.
"Hurry up, Harry," he added. "We want to see this storm."

"No, you must stay here," Mrs. Bobbsey said. "It is too bad a storm
for you children to be out in, especially this dark night. Your papa
and Captain White will do all that needs to be done."

"Mamma, it--it isn't dark when the lightning comes," said Freddie. He
did not seem to be afraid of the brilliant flashes.

"No, it's light when the flashes come," said his mother. "But I want
you all to stay here with me. It is raining very hard."

"I should say it was!" exclaimed Harry, as he heard the swish of the
drops against the windows of the houseboat.

"Is Snap all right, mamma?" asked Flossie. "And Snoop? I wouldn't want
them out in the storm."

"They're all right," Mrs. Bobbsey said.

"Oh, what's that!" suddenly cried Nan, as the houseboat gave a bump,
and leaned to one side.

"We hit something," Bert said. "Oh, I wish I could go out on the
deck!"

"No, indeed!" cried his mother. "There! They've started the engine.
Now we'll be all right."

As soon as Mr. Bobbsey had found out that the houseboat had broken
loose from the mooring ropes in the storm, he awakened Captain White,
and told him to start the motor.

This had been done, and now, instead of drifting with the current of
the creek, the boat could be more easily steered. Soon it had been run
into a sheltered place, against the bank, where, no matter how hard
the wind blew, it would be safe.

"Are we all right now?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, as her husband came down
to the cabin.

"Yes, all right again," he said. "There really was not much danger,
once we got the motor started."

"Is it raining yet?" asked Freddie, who was sitting in his mother's
lap, wrapped in a sweater.

"Indeed it is, little fat fireman," his father answered. "You wouldn't
need your engine to put out a fire to-night."

The patter of the raindrops on the deck of the houseboat could still
be heard, and the wind still blew hard. But the thunder and lightning
were not so bad, and gradually the storm grew less.

"Well, we'd better get to bed now," said Mr. Bobbsey. "To-morrow we
shall go to the big lake."

"Did the storm take us far back down the creek?" asked Bert.

"Not more than a mile," said his father.

"And the man can't tie us in with wire again, can he?" Freddie wanted
to know. "If he does, and I had one of those cutter-things, I could
snip it."

"You won't have to, Freddie," laughed Bert.

"Speaking of that mean farmer reminds me of the poor boy who ran away
from him," said Mrs. Bobbsey to her husband, when the children had
gone to bed. "I wonder where he is to-night, in this storm?"

"I hope he has a sheltered place," spoke the father of the Bobbsey
twins.

Not very much damage had been done by the storm, though it was a very
hard one. In the morning the children could see where some big tree
branches had blown off, and there had been so much rain, that the
water of the creek was higher. But the houseboat was all right, and
after breakfast, when they went up the creek again, they stopped and
got the pieces of broken rope, where the Bluebird had been tied
before.

The houseboat then went on, and at noon, just before Dinah called them
to dinner, Nan, who was standing near her father at the steering
wheel, cried:

"Oh, what a lot of water!"

"Yes, that is Lake Romano," said Mr. Bobbsey. "We'll soon be floating
on that, and we'll spend the rest of our houseboat vacation there."

"And where shall we spend the rest of our vacation?" asked Bert, for
it had been decided that the houseboat voyage would last only until
about the middle of August.

"Oh, we haven't settled that yet," his father answered.

On and on went the Bluebird, and, in a little while, she was on the
sparkling waters of the lake.

"I don't see any waterfall," said Freddie, coming toward his father,
after having made Snap do some of his circus tricks.

"The waterfall is at the far end of the lake," said Mr. Bobbsey.

"I wonder if there are any fish in this lake?" spoke Bert.

"Let's try to catch some," suggested his cousin Harry, and soon the
two boys were busy with poles and lines.

The Bobbsey twins, and their cousin-guests, liked Lake Romano very
much indeed. It was much bigger than the lake at home, and there were
some very large boats on it.

Bert and Harry caught no fish before dinner, but in the afternoon they
had better luck, and got enough for supper. The evening meal had been
served by Dinah, Snap and Snoop had been fed, and the family and their
guests were up on deck, watching the sunset, when Dinah came waddling
up the stairs, with a queer look on her face.

"Why, Dinah! What is the matter?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, seeing that
something was wrong. "Have you lost some more sandwiches?"

"No'm, it ain't sandwiches dish yeah time," Dinah answered. "But I
done heard a funny noise jest now down near mah kitchen."

"A funny noise?" repeated Mr. Bobbsey. "What was it like?"

"Jes like some one cryin'," Dinah answered. "I thought mebby one ob de
chilluns done got locked in de pantry, but I opened de do', an' dey
wasn't anybody dere. 'Sides, all de chilluns is up heah. But I shuah
did heah a funny noise ob somebody cryin'!"

Mrs. Bobbsey looked at her husband and said:

"You'd better go see what it is, Richard."




CHAPTER XIX

SNAP'S QUEER ACTIONS


The Bobbsey twins looked at one another. Then they glanced at their
cousins, Harry and Dorothy. Next the eyes of all the children were
turned on fat Dinah.

"Was--was it a baby crying?" Freddie wanted to know.

"Yes, honey lamb--it done did sound laik a baby--only a big baby,"
explained the colored cook.

"Maybe it was one of Flossie's dolls," the little "fat fireman" went
on.

"Flossie's dolls can't cry!" exclaimed Nan. "Not even the one that
says 'mama,' when you punch it in the back. That can't cry, because
it's broken."

"Well, Flossie says her dolls cry, sometimes," said Freddie, "and I
thought maybe It was one of them now."

"It was Snoop, our cat," said Bert, with a laugh. "That's what you
heard, Dinah, Snoop crying for something to eat. Maybe she's shut up
in a closet."

"Probably that's what it was, Dinah," said Mrs. Bobbsey.

"I'll go let her out," said Mr. Bobbsey, starting toward the lower
part of the houseboat.

"'Scuse me, Mr. Bobbsey," said Dinah firmly, "but dey ain't no use yo'
going t' let out no cat Snoop."

"Why not, Dinah?"

"Because it wasn't any cat dat I done heah. It was a human bein' dat I
heard cryin', dat's what it was, an' I know who it was, too," the
colored woman insisted.

"Who, Dinah?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"It was de same ghostest dat done took mah cakes an' sandwiches, dat's
who it was. I'se mighty sorry t' leab yo', Mrs. Bobbsey, but I guess
I'll done be goin' now."

"What, Dinah!" cried her mistress. "Going? Where?"

"Offen dish yeah boat, Mrs. Bobbsey. I cain't stay heah any mo' wif a
lot of ghostests."

"Nonsense, Dinah!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey. "There isn't any such thing
as a ghost, and you know it! It's silly to even talk about such a
thing. Now you just come with me, and show me where you heard those
noises."

"No, sah, I cain't do it, Mr. Bobbsey," the colored cook exclaimed,
moving backward.

"Why not?" Mr. Bobbsey wanted to know.

"'Cause it's bad luck, dat's why. I ain't goin' neah no ghostest---"

"Don't say that again, Dinah!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey sharply, with a
glance at the children.

"Oh, we're not afraid, mother!" chimed in Bert. "We know there's no
such thing as a ghost."

"That's right," spoke his father. "But, Dinah, I must get this matter
settled. It won't do for you to be frightened all the while. You must
come and show me where you heard the noise."

"Has I got to do it, Mrs. Bobbsey?" asked Dinah.

"Yes, I think you had better."

"Well, den, I heard de noise right down in de passageway dat goes from
de kitchen to de dinin' room. Dat's where it was. A noise laik
somebody cryin' an' weepin'."

"And are you sure it wasn't Snoop, Dinah?"

"Shuah, Mr. Bobbsey. 'Cause why? 'Cause heah's Snoop now, right ober
by Miss Dorothy."

This was very true. The little seashore Cousin had been playing with
the black cat.

"Snap howls sometimes," said Freddie, who seemed to be trying to find
some explanation of the queer noise. "Lots of times he used to howl
under my window, and I'd think it was some boy, but it was only Snap.
He used to like to howl at the moon."

"Dat's right, so he does, honey lamb," Dinah admitted. "But dere ain't
no moon now, an' Snap's eatin' a bone. He don't never howl when he's
eatin' a bone, I'se sartain ob dat."

"Oh, well, if it wasn't the dog or cat, it was some other noise that
can easily be found," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I'll go have a look."

"I'm coming, too," said Nan.

"And so am I!" exclaimed Bert.

Harry and Dorothy looked at each other a moment, and then Dorothy
said, rather unhesitatingly:

"I'm not afraid!"

"I should say not!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey. "What is there to be afraid
of, just in a noise?"

"Let's all go!" suggested Harry.

"Good!" cried Mr. Bobbsey, for he wanted his children not to give way
to foolish fears. They were not "afraid of the dark," as some children
are, and from the time when they were little tots, their parents had
tried to teach them that most things, such as children fear, are
really nothing but things they think they see, or hear.

"Aren't you coming, Dinah?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, as they all started
for the lower part of the houseboat.

"No'm, I'll jest stay up heah an'--an' git a breff ob fresh air," said
the colored cook.

"Come on, children," called Mr. Bobbsey, with a laugh. "We'll very
soon find out what it was."

They went down off the deck, to the passageway between the kitchen and
dining-room. This place was like a long, narrow hall, and on one side
of it were closets, or "lockers," as they are called on ships. They
were places where different articles could be stored away. Just now,
the lockers were filled with odds and ends--bits of canvass that were
sometimes used as sails, or awnings, old boxes, barrels and the like.
Mr. Bobbsey opened the lockers and looked in.

"There isn't a thing here that could make a crying noise, unless it
was a little mouse," he said, "and they are so little, I can't see
them. I guess Dinah must have imagined it."

"Let's listen and see if we can hear it," suggested Mrs. Bobbsey.

All of them, including the children, kept very quiet. Snap, the trick
dog, was still gnawing his bone in the kitchen. They could hear him
banging it on the floor as he tried to get from it the last shreds of
meat. Snoop, the black cat, was up on deck in the sun.

"I don't hear a thing," said Mrs. Bobbsey.

Indeed it was very quiet.

"Hark!" suddenly called Nan. "Isn't that a noise?"

They all listened sharply, and then they did hear a faint sort of
crying, or whining, noise.

"Oh!" exclaimed Freddie. "It's a---"

"It's the boat pulling on one of the anchor ropes," said Mr. Bobbsey,
for the Bluebird was anchored out in the lake by two anchors and
ropes, one at each end. "The wind blows the boat a little," the
children's father explained, "and that makes it pull on the ropes,
which creak on the wooden posts with a crying noise."

"I know!" exclaimed Flossie. "Just like our swing rope creaks, when
it's going slow."

"Exactly," said her mother. Mrs. Bobbsey was glad that the little girl
could think out an explanation for herself that way.

"There it goes again!" suddenly exclaimed Bert.

They all heard the funny noise. There was no doubt but that it was the
creaking of the rope by which the boat was tied.

"Here, Dinah!" called Mr. Bobbsey, with a laugh. "Come down here.
We've found your ghost."

"I doan't want to see it!" exclaimed the colored cook, "Jest toss it
overbo'd!"

"It's nothing but a noise made by a creaking rope," said Nan. "And you
can't throw that overboard."

"All right, honey lamb. Yo' can call it a rope-noise ef yo' all
laiks," said Dinah, when finally she had been induced to come down.
"But I knows it wasn't. It was some real pusson cryin', dat's what it
was."

"But you said it was a ghost, Dinah!" laughed Bert, "and a ghost is
never a real person, you know. Oh, Dinah!"

"Oh, go long wif yo', honey lamb!" exclaimed the fat cook. "I ain't
got no time t' bodder wif you'. I'se got t' set mah bread t' bake
t'morrow. An' dere's some corn cakes, ef yo' ma will let yo' hab 'em."

"I guess she will," said Bert, with a laugh. "Some cakes and then
bed."

They all thought the "ghost" scare was over, but Mr. Bobbsey noticed
that when Dinah went through the passage between the kitchen and
dining-room, she hurried as fast as her feet would take her, and she
glanced from side to side, as though afraid of seeing something.

Every one slept soundly that sight, except perhaps Dinah, but if
anything disturbed her, she said nothing about it, when she got up to
get breakfast. It was a fine, sunny day, and a little later the
Bluebird was moving across the lake, the motor turning the propeller,
which churned the blue water into foam.

Mr. Bobbsey steered the boat to various places of interest on the
lake. There were several little islands that were to be visited, and
on one of the tiniest, they went ashore to eat their lunch.

"Let's play we're shipwrecked," suggested Freddie, who was always
anxious to "pretend" something or other.

"All right," agreed Flossie. "You'll be Robinson Crusoe, and I'll be
your man Thursday."

"Friday--not Thursday," corrected Freddie, for his father had read to
him part of Robinson's adventures.

The little twins were allowed to take some of their lunch, and go off
to one side of the island, there to play at being shipwrecked. Mr. and
Mrs. Bobbsey sat in the shade and talked, while Nan, Dorothy, Bert and
Harry went off on a little "exploring expedition," as Bert called it.
Bert was making a collection of stones and minerals that year, and he
wanted to see what new specimens he could find.

Suddenly the peacefulness of the little island was broken by a cry of:

"Oh, Mamma! Papa! Come quick! Freddie's in the cave, and can't get
out. Oh, hurry!"

"That's Flossie's voice!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, in alarm.

Mr. Bobbsey did not say anything. He just ran, and soon he came to the
place where Flossie and Freddie had gone to play shipwreck. He saw
Flossie jumping up and down in front of a little hill.

"Where's Freddie?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"In there," Flossie answered, pointing to the pile of dirt that looked
to have been freshly dug. "We made a cave in the side of the and
Freddie went in to hide, but he dirt slid down on him and he--he's
there yet!"

"Gracious!" cried Mr. Bobbsey. "It's a good thing we're here!"

With a piece of board he soon scattered the dirt until he came to
Freddie's head. Fortunately the little fellow was covered with only a
few inches of the soil, and as a piece of brush had fallen over his
face, he had had no trouble in breathing. He was rather badly
frightened, however, when he was dug out, little the worse, otherwise,
for his adventure.

"What did you do it for?" asked his father, when he and his mother had
brushed the dirt from the little chap, while the other children
gathered around to look on.

"I--I was making a cave, same as Robinson Crusoe did," Freddie
explained. "I dug it with a board in the sand, and I went in--I mean,
I went in the cave, and it--it came down--all of a sudden."

"Well, don't do it again," cautioned his mother. "You might have been
badly hurt."

They finished their visit on the island, and went back on board the
Bluebird again. Snap, who always went with them on these little
excursions, bounded on deck, and then made a rush for the kitchen, for
he was hungry, and he knew Dinah generally had a bone, or something
nice for him.

Mr. Bobbsey, who was following close behind Snap, was surprised to see
the dog come to a sudden stop in the passageway between the kitchen
and dining-room. Snap growled, and showed his teeth, as he did when
some savage dog, or other enemy, was near at hand.

"What's the matter, old fellow?" asked Mr. Bobbsey. "Do you see
something?"

Snap turned and looked at Mr. Bobbsey. Then the dog looked at one of
the locker doors, and, with a loud bark, sprang toward it, as though
he would go through the panels.




CHAPTER XX

AT THE WATERFALL


"What's the matter?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, who had followed her husband
into the passageway. "Snap and Snoop aren't quarreling, are they?"

"Indeed, no," answered Mr. Bobbsey. "But Snap is acting very
strangely. I don't know what to make of him."

By this time Mrs. Bobbsey had come up, where she could see the dog.
Snap was still standing in front of the door, growling, whining, and,
now and then, uttering a low bark.

"What's the matter with him?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey. "Is he hungry?"

"Well, I guess he's always more or less hungry," her husband said,
"but that isn't the matter with him now. I think perhaps he imagines
he sees Dinah's ghost!" and he laughed.

"Snap, come here!" called Mrs. Bobbsey, and, though the dog usually
minded her, this time he did not obey. He only stood near the door,
growling.

"Why don't you open it, and let him see what's in there," said Bert.
"Maybe it's only some of those mice that made the noise," he went on.

"Perhaps it is," his father answered. "I'll let Snap have a chance at
them."

As Mr. Bobbsey stepped up to turn the knob of the "locker," or closet
door, there was a noise inside, as though something had been knocked
down off a shelf. Snap barked loudly and made a spring, to be ready to
jump inside the closet as soon as it was opened.

"What's that?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, while Flossie and Freddie, a little
alarmed, clung together and moved nearer to their mother.

"There's something inside there, that's sure," declared Mr. Bobbsey.
"It must be a big rat!"

"Mercy!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey. "A rat!"

"I'll have to set a trap," Mr. Bobbsey went on. "That rat has probably
been taking the things to eat that Dinah missed--the corn-cakes and
the sandwiches."

"That's right!" cried Bert. "That ends the mystery. Go for him, Snap!"

"Bow wow!" barked the dog, only too willing to get in the closet and
shake the rat.

But, when Mr. Bobbsey opened the door, no rat ran out, not even a
little mouse. Snap was ready for one, had there been any; but though
he pawed around on the floor, and nosed behind the boxes and barrels,
he caught nothing.

"Where is it?" asked Flossie.

"I want to see the rat!" cried Freddie. Neither of the smaller twins
was afraid of animals. Of course, they did not know that rats can
sometimes bite very fiercely, or they might not have been nearly so
anxious to see one.

"I guess the rat got away," said Mr. Bobbsey, as he watched Snap
pawing around in the locker, even pushing aside boxes with his nose.

"Hab yo' cotched de ghost?" asked Dinah, looking out from her kitchen.

"Not yet--but almost," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I must clean out this
closet, and find the rat-hole. Then I'll set the trap. Come away Snap.
You missed him that time."

The dog was not so sure of this. He stayed near the closet, while Mr.
Bobbsey set out the boxes and barrels, but no rat was to be seen, nor
even a mouse. And, the odd part of it was that, when everything was
out of the locker, there was no hole to be seen, through which any of
the gnawing animals might have slipped.

"That's funny," said the twins' father, as he peered about. "I don't
see how that rat got in here, or got out again."

"Perhaps it wasn't a rat," suggested Mrs. Bobbsey.

"What was it, then, that made the noise?" asked her husband.

"I don't know," she answered. "Something might have bumped against the
boat outside."

"Yes, that's so," admitted Mr. Bobbsey. "But Snap wouldn't act that
way just on account of a noise."

The boxes and barrels were put back into the closet, but even that did
not seem to satisfy Snap. He remained near the locker for some time,
now and then growling and showing his teeth. Mr. Bobbsey looked in
some of the other, and smaller, lockers, but all he found was a tiny
hole, hardly big enough for a mouse.

"Perhaps it was a mouse," he said. "Anyhow, I'll set a trap there.
Dinah, toast me a bit of cheese."

"Cheese, Massa Bobbsey!" exclaimed the colored cook. "Yo' knows yo'
cain't eat cheese. Ebery time yo' does, yo' gits de insispepsia suffin
terrible--specially toasted cheese."

"I don't intend to eat it!" answered the twins' father, with a laugh.
"I'm going to bait a trap with cheese to catch the mice. I don't care
whether they get the indigestion or not."

"Oh! Dat's diffunt," said Dinah. "I'll toast yo' some."

The trap was set, but for two or three days, though it was often
looked at, no mice were caught. Meanwhile, several times, Dinah said
she missed food from her kitchen. It was only little things, though,
and the Bobbseys paid small attention to her, for Dinah was often
forgetful, and might have been mistaken.

"I really think we have some rats aboard," said Mr. Bobbsey. "There
are some on nearly every boat. I have heard noises in the night that
could be made only by rats."

"And Snap still acts queerly, whenever he passes that locker," said
Mrs. Bobbsey. "I'm not so sure it is a rat that made that noise,
Richard."

"No?" her husband asked. "What was it, then?"

But Mrs. Bobbsey either could not, or would not, say.

"I say, Harry," said Bert to his country cousin one day, when the
Bluebird had come to anchor some distance down the lake, "let's try to
get to the bottom of this mystery."

"What mystery?"

"Why, the one about the noise, and the sandwiches and cakes being
taken, and Snap acting so funny. I'm sure there's a mystery on this
boat, and we ought to find out what it is."

"I'm with you!" exclaimed Harry. "What shall we do?"

"Let's sit up some night and watch that closet," said Bert. "We can
easily do it."

"Will your folks let us?"

"We won't ask them. Oh, I wouldn't do anything I knew they didn't want
me to do without asking," Bert said quickly, as he saw his cousin's
startled glance.

"But there's no harm in this," Bert went on. "We'll go to bed early
some night, and, when all the rest of them are asleep, we'll get up
and stand watch all night. You can watch part of the time, and when
you get sleepy I'll take my turn. Then we can see whether anything is
hiding in that closet."

"Do you think there is?" asked Harry.

"I'm sure I don't know what to think," Bert answered. "Only it's a
mystery, and we ought to find out what it is."

"I'm with you," said Harry again.

"Are you talking secrets?" asked Nan, suddenly coming up just then.

"Sort of," admitted her brother, laughing.

"Oh, tell me--do!" she begged.

"No, Nan. Not now," said Bert. "This is only for us boys."

Nan tried to find out the secret, but they would not tell her.

Two days later, during which the Bluebird cruised about on the lake,
Bert said to Harry, after supper:

"We'll watch to-night, and find out what's, in that closet. Snap
barked and growled every time to-day, that he passed it. I'm sure
something's there."

"It does seem so," admitted Harry.

Mr. Bobbsey was steering the boat toward shore, intending to come to
anchor for the night, when Flossie, who was standing up in front
cried:

"Oh, look! Here's the waterfall! Oh, isn't it beautiful!"

Just before them, as they turned around a bend in the bank, was a
cataract of white water, tumbling down into the lake over a precipice
of black rocks--a most beautiful sight.




CHAPTER XXI

WHAT BERT SAW


The waterfall of Lake Romano was still some little distance off, and,
as the wind was blowing toward it, only a faint roar of the falling
water came to the ears of the Bobbsey twins, and the others on the
houseboat.

"Oh, papa!" exclaimed Nan. "May we go close up and see the cataract?"

"Yes," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I intended to give you a good view of the
waterfall. We shall spend a day or so here, as it is a great
curiosity. There is one place where you can walk right behind the
falls."

"Behind it!" cried Harry. "I don't understand how that can be, uncle."

"You'll see to-morrow, when we visit them," said the twins' father.
"And there are some oddly-marked stones to be picked up, too, Bert.
They will do for your collection."

"Fine!" Bert exclaimed. "Say, this has been a dandy trip all right!"

"It isn't ended yet, is it, Dorothy?" asked Nan.

"No, indeed," replied the seashore cousin, with a smile.

"And we haven't solved the mystery," said Bert in a low voice to
Harry. "But we will to-night, all right."

"We sure will," agreed the boy from the country.

The Bobbsey twins stayed up rather later that night than usual. Mr.
Bobbsey did not find a good anchorage for the boat for some time, as
he wanted to get in a safe place. It looked as though there might be a
storm before morning, and he did not want to drift away again. Then,
too, he wanted to get nearer to the waterfall, so they could reach it
early the next morning and look at it more closely.

So the motor was kept in action by Captain White until after supper,
and finally the Bluebird came to rest not far from the waterfall. Then
Bert and Nan, with Dorothy and Harry were so interested in listening
to Mr. Bobbsey tell stories about waterfalls, and what caused them,
that the older twins and their cousins did not get to bed until nearly
ten o'clock, whereas nine was the usual hour.

Of course Flossie and Freddie "turned in," as sailors say, about eight
o'clock, for their little eyes would not stay open any longer.

"We'll wake up as soon as my father and mother are asleep," said Bert
to Harry, as they went to their rooms, which were adjoining ones.
"Then we'll take turns watching that closet."

"Sure," agreed Harry. "Whoever wakes up first, will call the other."

To this Bert agreed, but the truth of it was that neither of them
awakened until morning. Whether it was that they were too tired, or
slept later than usual, they could not tell. But it was broad
daylight, when they sat up in their beds, or "bunks," as beds are
called on ships.

"I thought you were going to call me," said Bert to his cousin.

"And I thought you were going to call ME," laughed the boy from the
country.

Then they both laughed, for it was a good joke on each of them.

"Never mind," spoke Bert, as he got up and dressed. "We'll try it
again to-night."

"Try what?" asked Nan from the next room, for she could hear her
brother speak. "If you boys try to play any tricks on us girls---"

"Don't worry," broke in Harry. "The secret isn't about you."

"I think you're real mean not to tell us!" called Dorothy, from her
room. "Nan and I are going to have a marshmallow roast, when we go on
shore near the waterfall, and we won't give you boys a single one,
will we, Nan?"

"Not a one!" cried Bert's sister.

"Will you give me one--whatever it is?" asked Freddie from the room
where his mother was dressing him.

"And me, too?" added Flossie, for she always wanted to share in her
little twin brother's fun.

"Yes, you may have some, but not Bert and Harry," went on Nan, though
she knew when the time came, that she would share her treat with her
brother and cousin.

"Well, I didn't hear any noises last night," said Mr. Bobbsey to his
wife at the breakfast table.

"Nor I," said she. But when Dinah came in with a platter of ham and
eggs, there was such a funny look on the cook's face that Mrs. Bobbsey
asked:

"Aren't you well, Dinah?"

"Oh, yes'm, I'se well enough," the fat cook answered. "But dey shuah
is suffin strange gwine on abo'd dish yeah boat."

"What's the matter now?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"A whole loaf of bread was tooken last night," said Dinah. "It was
tooken right out ob de bread box," she went on, "and I'se shuah it
wasn't no rat, fo' he couldn't open my box."

"I don't know," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Rats are pretty smart sometimes."

"They are smart enough to keep out of my trap," said Papa Bobbsey. "I
must set some new ones, I think."

"Well, I don't think it was any rat," said Dinah, as she went on
serving breakfast.

There was so much to do that day, and so much to see, that the Bobbsey
twins, at least, and their cousins, paid little attention to the story
of the missing loaf of bread. Bert did say to Harry:

"It's too bad we didn't watch last night. We might have caught whoever
it was that took the bread."

"Who do you think it was?" asked Harry.

"Oh, some tramps," said Bert. "It couldn't be anybody else."

They went ashore after breakfast, close to the waterfall.

"Papa, you said you would show us where we could walk under the water
without getting wet," Nan reminded him.

"Oh, yes," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I have never been to these falls, but I
have read about them." Then he showed the children a place, near the
shore of the lake, where they could slip in right behind the thin veil
of water that fell over the black rocks, high above their heads. Back
of the falling water there was a space which the waves had worn in the
stone. It was damp, but not enough to wet their feet. There they
stood, behind the sheet of water, and looked out through it to the
lake, into which it fell with a great splashing and foaming.

"Oh, isn't this wonderful!" cried Nan.

"It surely is," said Dorothy, with a sigh. "I never saw anything so
pretty."

"And what queer stones!" cried Bert, as he picked up some that had
been worn into odd shapes by the action of the water.

The Bobbseys spent some little time at the waterfall, and then, as
there was a pretty little island near it, where picnic parties often
went for the day, they went there in the Bluebird, going ashore for
their dinner.

"But I'm not going to play Robinson Crusoe again," said Freddie, as he
remembered the time he had been caught in the cave.

At the end of a pleasant day on the island, the Bobbseys again went on
board the houseboat for supper.

"We'll watch sure to-night," said Bert to Harry, as they got ready for
bed. "We won't go to sleep at all."

"All right," agreed the country cousin.

It was hard work, but they managed to stay awake. When the boat was
quiet, and every one else asleep, Harry and Bert stole softly out of
their room and went to the passageway between the dining-room and
kitchen.

"You watch from the kitchen, and I'll watch from the dining-room,"
Bert told his cousin. "Then, no matter which way that rat goes, we'll
see him."

"Do you think it was a rat?" asked Harry.

"Well, I'm not sure," his cousin answered. "But maybe we'll find out
to-night."

"We ought to have something to hit him with, if we see a rat,"
suggested Harry.

"That's right," Bert agreed. "I'll take the stove poker, and you can
have the fire shovel. Now keep very still."

The two cousins took their places, Bert in the dining-room, and Harry
in the kitchen. It was very still and quiet on the Bluebird. Up on
deck Snap, the dog, could be heard moving about now and then, for he
slept up there.

Bert, who had sat down in a dining-room chair, began to feel sleepy.
He tried to keep open his eyes, but it was hard work. Suddenly he
dozed off, and he was just on the point of falling asleep, when he
heard a noise. It was a squeaking sound, as though a door had been
opened.

"Or," thought Bert, "it might be the squeak of a mouse. I wonder if
Harry heard it?"

He wanted to call out, in a whisper, and ask his cousin in the dining-
room, just beyond the passage. Bert could not see Harry. But Bert
thought if he called, even in a whisper, he might scare the rat, or
whoever, or whatever, it was, that had caused the mystery.

So Bert kept quiet and watched. The squeaking noise of the loose
boards in the floor went on, and then Bert heard a sound, as though
soft footsteps were coming toward him. He wanted to jump up and yell,
but he kept still.

Then, suddenly, Bert saw something.

Standing in the dining-room door, looking at him, was a boy, about his
own age--a boy dressed in ragged clothes, and in bare feet, and in his
hand this boy held a piece of bread, and a slice of cake.

"You--you!" began Bert, wondering where he had seen that boy before.
And then, before Bert could say any more, the boy turned to run away,
and Bert jumped up to catch him.




CHAPTER XXII

THE STOWAWAY


"Come back here!" cried Bert, as he rushed on.

There was the sound of a fall in the passageway, and some one groaned.

"What is it?" cried Harry, running from the kitchen. "What's the
matter, Bert? Did you catch the rat?"

"No, but I caught something else," Bert answered. By this time he had
run into the passageway, and there, in front of the locker, or closet,
where the strange noises had been heard, lay the ragged boy. He had
fallen and hurt his head. The cake and bread had been knocked from his
hands. The door of the locker or closet was open.

"Why--why---" began Harry, in surprise. "It's a--a boy."

"Yes, and now I know who he is," said Bert, as the stowaway sat up,
not having been badly hurt by his fall. He had tripped in his bare
feet.

"Who--who is it?" asked Harry.

"It's that boy who gave us the fish--Will Watson, who worked for the
man that made the wire fence--Mr. Hardee."

"Yes, I'm that boy," said the other, slowly. "Oh, I hope your folks
won't be very mad at me. I--I didn't know what to do, so when I ran
away, I hid on your boat."

"And have you been here ever since?" asked Bert.

"Yes," answered Will. "I've been hiding here ever since."

"And was it you who took the things?" Harry wanted to know.

"Yes, I took them. I was half starved. But I'll pay you back as soon
as I get out west, where my uncle lives. He's a gold miner, and I
guess he's got lots of money. Oh, I hope your father and mother will
forgive me."

"Of course they will," said Bert, seeing tears in the eyes of the
ragged boy.

"What's the matter there?" called Mr. Bobbsey. "Has anything happened,
Bert?"

"Yes," answered Bert. "We've solved the mystery--Harry and I."

"Solved the mystery!" cried Mr. Bobbsey. "I'll be right there."

"Oh, what can it be?" his wife asked.

Meanwhile, Captain White, Dinah and the little Bobbsey twins had been
awakened by the loud voices. Up on deck Snap, the dog, feeling that
something was wrong, was barking loudly.

"I--I hope the dog doesn't get me!" said Will, looking about.

"I won't let him hurt you," promised Bert. "So it was you, hiding in
the closet that made Snap act so funny?" he asked. "He knew you were
there."

"Yes, only I wasn't in the closet all the while. There was a loose
board at the back. I could slip out of the closet through that hole. I
hid down in the lower part of the boat. I'll show you."

"You poor boy!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey when, with her husband, she had
come to see the "mystery," as Bert laughingly called him.

"Indeed we'll forgive you. You must have had a terrible time, hiding
away as you did. Now tell us all about it. But first I want you to
drink this warm milk Dinah has made for you," for Mrs. Bobbsey had
told the cook to heat some. "You look half starved," she said to the
boy.

"I am," answered Will. "I--I didn't take any more of your food than I
could help, though."

"Yo' am welcome to all yo' want, honey lamb!" exclaimed Dinah. "Mah
land, but I shuah am glad yo' ain't no ghostest! I shuah am!" and she
sighed in relief, as she saw that Will was a real, flesh-and-blood
boy. He was, however, very thin and starved-looking.

"Now tell us all about it," said Mr. Bobbsey. "How did you come on our
boat?"

Will told them. After Mr. Bobbsey had stopped the cruel farmer from
beating him, Will crawled up to his room to sob himself to sleep. Then
he began to think that after the houseboat had gone, Mr. Hardee would
probably treat him all the more meanly, on account of having been
interfered with.

"So I just ran away," said Will. "I packed up what few things I had,
and when I saw your boat near shore, I crept aboard and hid myself
away. I easily found a place down--down cellar," he said with a smile.

"I suppose you mean in the hold, or the place below the lower deck,"
spoke Mr. Bobbsey. "Cellars on a boat are called 'holds.' Well, what
happened?"

"I--I just stayed there. I found some old bags, and made a bed on
them," Will said. "Then when my food gave out, I used to crawl out
during the nights and take some from your kitchen.

"I had some bread when I ran away," Will went on. "I took it from Mrs.
Hardee's kitchen, but they owed me money for working, and I didn't
take more bread than I ought."

"I'm sure you didn't," said Mrs. Bobbsey, kindly.

"I didn't want you to know I was on board the boat," Will resumed,
"for I was afraid you'd send me off, and I didn't want Mr. Hardee to
find me again. I was afraid he'd whip me."

"But what did you intend to do?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"Well, I heard you say you were going to Lake Romano," said the boy,
"and I thought I would ride as far as you went. Then I wouldn't have
so far to walk to get to my uncle out west. I'm going to him. He'll
look after me, I know. I can't stand Mr. Hardee any more."

"You poor boy. We'll help you find your uncle," said Mrs. Bobbsey.

"And you've been on board ever since?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"Yes, sir. I hid down in the 'hold,' as you call it. Then when I got
hungry, I found a loose board, so I could get into the closet. Then at
night I would come out and get things to eat and a little water or
milk to drink. I didn't mean any harm."

"No, I'm sure you did not," the twins' father said. "Well, I'm glad
Bert found you," he went on, as Bert and Harry told how they had kept
watch. "So it was you who took the things, and who made the noises
that frightened Dinah?"

"Yes, but I didn't mean, to scare her," Will said. "That day I got my
hand caught in the loose board, and it hurt so, and I felt so bad that
I--I cried. That was what she heard, I guess."

"You poor boy!" said Mrs. Bobbsey again.

"And--and did you see any rats in the cellar?" asked Freddie, who was
moving about in his little night dress.

"No," answered Will, "I didn't see any rats. It was bad enough in the
dark place, without any rats."

"Well, I guess your troubles are over, for a time," said Mr. Bobbsey.
"We'll fix you up a bed, and then I'll have a talk with you about this
miner uncle of yours."

Will finished his warm milk, and ate some bread and cake--the same he
had taken from Dinah's kitchen. He had gone in there and taken it, but
Harry had not heard him, for Harry had fallen asleep.

"And so it was a stowaway boy, and not rats or ghosts or anything else
that was the mystery," said Mrs. Bobbsey, when everything once more
quiet on the Bluebird.

"That's what it was," her husband said "Bert was real smart to sit up
and watch."

"And he never told us a thing about it."

"Oh, he wanted to surprise us," laughed Mr. Bobbsey.

"And didn't I see you, the time I fell overboard?" asked Flossie,
looking at Will.

"I think you did," he laughed. "I happened to put my head out of a
ventilating hole just as you looked. I pulled it in again, soon
enough, though. I hope I didn't scare you."

"Not very much," Flossie said. "I was sure I saw you, but nobody else
would believe me."

Snap soon made friends with the new boy. It was Will, hiding behind
the closet wall, that had made the dog act as though a rat were there.

I must bring my story to a close, now that the mystery is explained.
And, really, there is little else to tell. Will had, in the little
bundle of things he had brought away from Mr. Hardee's with him, the
address of a man he thought knew where the miner uncle was. Mr.
Bobbsey wrote several letters, and, in due time, word came back that
Will's uncle was well off now, and would look after him. His name was
Mr. Jackson. He had lost track of Will for some years and had just
begun a search for him, when Mr. Bobbsey's letter came. Enough money
was sent on to enable Will to make the trip out west, where he would
be well cared for. He could not thank the Bobbsey family enough for
what they had done for him.

Mr. Hardee heard where his runaway boy had been found, and tried to
get him back, but Mr. Bobbsey would not permit this. So Will's life
began to be a pleasant one. The time he had spent on the houseboat,
after coming from his hiding place, was the happiest he had ever
known.

"Well, what shall we do now?" asked Bert one day, after Will had gone.
"It seems queer not to have to be on the lookout for a mystery or
something like that."

"Doesn't it," agreed Harry.

"And so that was your secret?" asked Nan.

"Yes, that was it," her brother answered. "But I wish we had something
to do now."

"Whatever you do, you want to do in the next two weeks," said Mr.
Bobbsey, coming up on deck.

"Why?" asked Bert.

"Because our houseboat trip will come to an end then."

"Oh!" cried the Bobbsey twins in a chorus. "That's too bad!"

"But I have other pleasures for you," went on Mr. Bobbsey. "The summer
vacation is not yet over."

And those of you who wish to read of what further pleasures the
children had, may do so in the following volume, which will be called
"The Bobbsey Twins at Meadow Brook."

"Let's have one more picnic on an island!" proposed Nan, a few days
before the trip on Lake Romano was to end.

"And a marshmallow roast!" added Dorothy.

"Fine!" cried Bert. "I'll eat all the candies you toast!"

"And I'll help!" added Harry.

"You boys will have to make the fire," Nan said.

"I'll gather wood!" offered Freddie. "And I'll have my little fire
engine all ready to put out the blaze, if it gets too big."

"A pail of water will be better," laughed Bert. "Your engine might get
going so fast, like it did once, we couldn't stop it."

"I'll sharpen the sticks to put the marshmallows on," offered Harry.

"I wish Will Watson was here to help us eat these," said Nan a little
later that afternoon, when the children were having their marshmallow
roast on a little island in the lake. "He was a nice boy."

"Yes, and he will be well looked after now," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Your
father had a letter from the miner uncle to-day, saying he was going
to make a miner of Will. He gave up the idea of going to sea."

"And will he dig gold?" asked Flossie.

"I suppose so, dear!"

"Oh, I'm going to dig gold when I grow to be a man," said Freddie.
"May I have another marshmallow, Nan?" "Yes, little fat fireman," she
laughed.

A few days later, after making a trip around the lower end of the
lake, the Bobbsey twins started for home, reaching there safely, and
having no more trouble with Mr. Hardee and his wire fence.

And so, as they are now safe at home, we shall say good-bye to the
Bobbsey twins and their friends.

THE END






End of Project Gutenberg's The Bobbsey Twins on a Houseboat, by Laura Lee Hope





Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.



The Bobbsey Twins
in Washington

BY LAURA LEE HOPE

AUTHOR OF "THE BOBBSEY TWINS," "THE BUNNY
BROWN SERIES," "THE OUTDOOR GIRLS
SERIES," ETC.

ILLUSTRATED



BOOKS BY LAURA LEE HOPE

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated.

THE BOBBSEY TWINS SERIES
THE BOBBSEY TWINS
THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN THE COUNTRY
THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT THE SEASHORE
THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT SCHOOL
THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT SNOW LODGE
THE BOBBSEY TWINS ON A HOUSEBOAT
THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT MEADOW BROOK
THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT HOME
THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN A GREAT CITY
THE BOBBSEY TWINS ON BLUEBERRY ISLAND
THE BOBBSEY TWINS ON THE DEEP BLUE SEA
THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN WASHINGTON
THE BUNNY BROWN SERIES
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE ON GRANDPA'S FARM
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE PLAYING CIRCUS
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE AT AUNT LU'S CITY HOME
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE AT CAMP REST-A-WHILE
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE IN THE BIG WOODS
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE ON AN AUTO TOUR
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE AND THEIR SHETLAND PONY
BUNNY BROWN AND HIS SISTER SUE GIVING A SHOW
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS SERIES
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS OF DEEPDALE
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT RAINBOW LAKE
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A MOTOR CAR
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A WINTER CAMP
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN FLORIDA
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON PINE ISLAND
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN ARMY SERVICE
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT HOSTESS HOUSE




CONTENTS

I     UNDER THE HAY
II    DIGGING OUT
III   THE WASHINGTON CHILDREN
IV    MISS POMPRET'S CHINA
V     "WHAT A LOT OF MONEY!"
VI    WONDERFUL NEWS
VII   ON A TRIP
VIII  IN NEW YORK
IX    WASHINGTON AT LAST
X     LOST
XI    THE PRESIDENT
XII   WASHINGTON MONUMENT
XIII  A STRAY CAT
XIV   STRAY CHILDREN
XV    "WHERE ARE THEY?"
XVI   THE FIRE BELL
XVII  FREDDIE'S REAL ALARM
XVIII THE ORIENTAL CHILDREN
XIX   "OH LOOK!"
XX    A GREAT BARGAIN
XXI   JUST SUPPOSE
XXII  HAPPY DAYS




CHAPTER I

UNDER THE HAY

"This is 'most as much fun as we had on Blueberry Island, or when we
went to Florida on the deep, blue sea, isn't it, Bert?" asked Nan
Bobbsey, as she sat on the porch and fanned herself with her hat. She
and her brother had been running around the house, playing a new game,
and Nan was warm.

"Yes, it's fun all right," agreed Bert. "But I liked the deep, blue sea
better--or even Blueberry Island," and off came his hat to cool his
flushed face, for, though it was late in September, the day was warm.

"But we couldn't stay on the island, always," went on Nan. "We have to
go to school, daddy says!"

"Don't speak about it!" begged Bert. "I don't want to go to school for a
long, long time, and not then!"

"Have we got to go to school?" asked a little light-haired and blue-eyed
girl, as she ran up the steps, to sink in a heap at the feet of her
sister, Nan Bobbsey. "When do we go?" she went on.

"Oh, not right away, 'little fat fairy!'" laughed Nan, giving Flossie
the name her father sometimes called her. "School won't open for two
weeks more."

"Hurray!" cried Bert. "The longer it stays closed the better I like it.
But come on, Nan! Let's have some more fun. This isn't like Blueberry
Island, sitting still on a porch!"

"You haven't sat still more than three minutes, Bert Bobbsey!" cried his
sister. "I can hardly get my breath, you made me run so fast!"

Just then a little boy, who had the same sort of blue eyes and golden
hair that made Flossie such a pretty little girl, came tumbling up the
steps with a clatter and a bang, falling down at Bert's feet. The older
boy caught his small brother just in time, or there might have been a
bumped nose.

"Hi there, Freddie, what's the matter?" asked Bert, with a laugh. "Is
our dog Snap chasing you, or have you been playing a trick on our cat
Snoop?"

"I--I--I'm a--a fireman!" panted Freddie. for he, too, was out of breath
from running. "I'm a fireman, and I--I've got to get the engine. There's
a big, big fire!" and his eyes opened wide and round.

"A big fire--really?" asked Nan quickly.

"Course not! He's only making believe!" replied Bert.

"Well, I thought maybe he might have seen some boys start a bonfire
somewhere," explained Nan. "They sometimes do."

"I know they do," admitted Bert. "And I hope they don't start one near
daddy's lumberyard."

"There was a fire down in the lumber once!" exclaimed Freddie. He was
too young to have seen it, but he had heard his father and mother talk
about the time Mr. Bobbsey's lumberyard was nearly burned out. Freddie
Bobbsey was very fond of a toy fire engine he had been given for
Christmas, and his father often called Freddie a "little fireman," just
as Flossie was named a "fairy."

"Well, if it's only a make-believe fire we can sit here and cool off,"
went on Nan. "What were you doing, Flossie?" she asked her little
sister.

"Oh, I was having a race with our cat Snoop; but I guess I beat, 'cause
Snoop didn't get here to the porch before I did."

"Yes, you won the race all right," laughed Bert. "But it's too hot for
any more running games. I wish we were back on the island where we found
that boy, Jack Nelson, and could play we were sailors and could splash
in the water."

"That would be fun!" sighed Nan, as she fanned herself harder than ever
with her hat.

The Bobbsey twins had, a few days before, returned to their home from a
vacation spent on a strange island off the coast of Florida. They had
gone there with Cousin Jasper Dent to rescue a boy who had been left in
a lonely cave, and very many strange adventures the Bobbsey twins and
their father and mother, to say nothing of Cousin Jasper, had had on
that voyage.

Now the simple games they tried to get up around the house, and the
thought of having to go back to school soon, made them feel a bit
lonesome for the deep, blue sea, over which they had made a voyage to
rescue the boy, Jack Nelson, and also for Blueberry Island, where once
they spent a vacation.

"I know what we can do!" cried Nan, after a rest.

"What?" asked Bert, always ready to join Nan in any fun she thought of.
"What can we do?"

"Go out to the barn and play that's a ship like the one we went on to
Florida. It'll be cooler in the barn than it is here, anyhow."

"That's so," admitted Bert. "And oh! I know how we can have packs of
fun!"

"How?" This time it was Nan who eagerly asked.

"Why we can swing on some of the ropes that are in the haymow. I guess
the ropes are there to tie things up on in the winter. But we can swing
on 'em now, and make believe we're sailors, just as we did when we found
that boy in the cave where we went with Cousin Jasper."

"Oh, so we can!" cried Nan. "Come on!"

"I'll be a fireman on the ship!" declared fat Freddie, as he got slowly
to his feet from the floor where he had been sitting near Bert. I'll be
a fireman and squirt water."

"Not real--only make believe" cried Bert. "Water spoils hay, you know,
Freddie. You can't splash any water on daddy's hay in the barn."

"No, I'll only make believe," agreed the light-haired little boy. "Come
on Flossie!" he called to his sister, who had slipped down off the porch
to run after a big black cat that marched along with his tail in the
air, "like a fishing pole," Bert said. "Come on, Flossie!" called
Freddie. "We'll go out to the barn and play ship and sailors, and I'll
be a fireman and you can be----"

"I'm going to be hungry, and have something good to eat! That's what
I'll be," declared Flossie quickly. "I'm going to be AWFUL hungry!"

"Oh dear!" exclaimed Nan, but she was laughing. "That's always the way.
Those two want to do something different."

"Well, we can all make believe we're hungry," said Bert. "And maybe
Dinah will give us some cookies to eat."

"There she goes now. I'll ask her!" offered Nan, as she saw the
Bobbsey's fat and good-natured colored cook cross the lawn with a small
basket of clothes to hang up. "We'll have a little play-party out in the
barn."

"But I'm going to be real hungry--not make believe!" said Freddie. "I
want to eat real."

"And so you can!" declared Nan. "I'll get enough for all of us."

A little later the Bobbsey twins--the two pairs of them--were on the way
to the barn that stood a little way back of the house. Mr. Bobbsey did
not live on a farm. He lived in a town, but his place was large enough
to have a barn on it as well as a house. He kept a horse, and sometimes
a cow, but just now there was no cow in the stable--only a horse.

And the horse was not there, either, just then, for it was being used to
pull a wagon about the streets of Lakeport. Mr. Bobbsey had an
automobile, but he also kept the horse, and this animal was sometimes
used by the clerks from the lumber office.

So out to the barn, which had in it the winter supply of hay and oats
for the horse, went the Bobbsey twins. Nan and Bert, being older,
reached the place first, each one carrying some sugar and molasses
cookies Dinah had given them. After Nan and Bert ran Flossie and
Freddie, each one looking anxiously at the packages of cookies,

"Don't those cookies look good?" cried Flossie.

"And I guess they'll eat just as good as they look," was Freddie's
comment.

Just then Nan's foot slipped on a small stone, and she came very near
falling down.

"Oh!" cried Flossie and Freddie together.

"Don't drop your cookies, Nan!" came quickly from Bert.

"Oh, if you dropped 'em they'd get all dirty," said Flossie.

"They wouldn't get very dirty," answered Freddie hopefully. "Anyway, we
could brush 'em off. They'd be good enough to eat, wouldn't they?" and
he looked at Bert.

"I guess they wouldn't get very dirty," answered Bert. "Anyway, Nan
didn't drop them. But you'd better be careful, Nan," he went on.

"Don't be so scared, Bert Bobbsey," answered his sister. "I won't drop
them."

In a minute more the Bobbsey twins were at the barn where the sugar and
molasses cookies Dinah had given them were put in a safe place.

"There are the ropes!" exclaimed Bert, as he pointed to some dangling
from a beam near the haymow.

"They're too high to climb!" Nan said, for some of the ropes were fast
to the rafters of the barn.

"Oh, we won't climb 'em!" Bert quickly returned, for he knew his mother
would never allow this. "We'll just swing on 'em, low down near this
pile of hay, so if we fall we can't hurt ourselves."

"I want to swing on a rope, too!" exclaimed Freddie, as he heard what
his older brother and sister were talking of. "I like to be a sailor and
swing on a rope."

"Not now, Freddie," answered Bert. "The ropes are too high for you and
Flossie. You just play around on the barn floor, and you can watch Nan
and me swing. Then we'll play steamboat, maybe."

"I want to be the steam, and go puff-puff!" cried Freddie.

"And I want to be the captain and say 'All aboard!'" was Flossie's wish.

"You can take turns," agreed Bert. "Now don't get in our way, Flossie
and Freddie. Nan and I want to see how big a swing we can take by
holding to the ropes."

"All right. I'll go and see if I can find any eggs," replied Freddie.
"Hens lay eggs in the barn."

"Well, if you find a nest don't step in it and break all the eggs,"
warned Nan.

She and Bert, as Flossie and Freddie went marching around the big barn,
climbed up on the pile of hay, and began swinging on the ropes. To and
fro swung the older Bobbsey twins.

"Isn't this better than Blueberry Island?" asked Nan.

"Well no, it isn't any better," said Bert; "but it's just as good. Look,
I'm going to let go and drop on the hay."

"Be careful and don't hurt yourself!" begged Nan, as she swung to and
fro, her feet raised from the hay beneath her, while Bert, also, swayed
slowly to and fro.

"Oh, I'll be careful!" Bert promised. "Anyhow, the hay is nice and soft
to fall in. I'll make believe I'm a man in the circus, falling from the
top of the tent."

He swung a little farther to and fro, and then suddenly cried:

"Here I go!"

"Oh!" screamed Nan, but, really, nothing happened to harm Bert. He just
dropped into the pile of soft hay.

"Come on, Nan! You try it! Lots of fun!" laughed Bert as he scrambled up
and made for his rope again.

Nan said "no" at first, but when Bert had swung once more and again
dropped into the hay, she took her turn. Into the hay she plunged, and
sank down to her shoulders in the soft, dried grass.

"Come on--let's do it some more!" laughed Bert. Then he and his older
sister had lots of fun swinging on the ropes and dropping into a pile of
hay.

"I wonder what Flossie and Freddie are doing," said Bert, after they had
had about an hour of this fun. "I haven't seen them for a long while."

"Maybe they found a hen's nest and took the eggs to the house," said
Nan. "They'd do that."

"Yes, if they found one," agreed Bert. "Well, we'll see where they are
after I take another swing. And I'm going to take a big one."

"So will I!" decided Nan. "Oh, it's just as nice as Blueberry Island or
on the deep, blue sea, isn't it, Bert?"

"It is when we play this way--yes. But just watch me."

"Here come Flossie and Freddie now!" exclaimed Nan, as she glanced at
her older brother, who was taking a firm hold of the rope for his big
swing. The two smaller twins, at this moment, came into the barn through
the door that led to the cow stable.

"Where have you been?" asked Nan, as she watched Bert get ready for his
swing.

"Oh, we had fun," said Flossie.

"And I squirted water, out where the horse "drinks," added Freddie,

"I hope you didn't get wet!" exclaimed Nan. "If you did----"

"Well, I have on a dirty waist, so it won't hurt me any if I am wet,"
said Freddie calmly. "I want to swing like that, Bert," he added. "Give
me a swing!"

"After I've had my turn I'll give you and Flossie each one," promised
Nan. "Watch me, Bert!" she called.

Off the mow swung Nan, clinging to the swaying rope with both hands.

"Come on--let's both let go together and see who falls into the hay
first!" proposed Bert.

"All right!" agreed Nan.

"One, two, three!" cried Bert. "Ready! Let go!"

He and Nan let go of the ropes at the same time. Together they dropped
down to the hay--and then something happened! The two older Bobbsey
children jumped too near the edge of the mow, where the hay was piled in
a big roll, like a great feather bed bolster, over the top rail. And
Bert and Nan, in their drop, caused a big pile of hay--almost a
wagonload--to slip from the mow and down to the barn floor. And directly
underneath were Flossie and Freddie!

Down on the two little twins fell Bert and Nan and the big pile of dried
grass, and, in an instant, the two golden heads were buried out of sight
on the barn floor in a large heap of hay.



 CHAPTER II

DIGGING OUT

"Oh, Bert Bobbsey! look what you did," cried Nan.

She picked herself up from the barn floor, to which she had slid after
having come down with the pile of hay, with her brother, right where
Flossie and Freddie had been playing a moment before.

"Look what you did!" she cried again.

"I didn't do it any more than you did!" exclaimed Bert. "But where is
Flossie? And where's Freddie?" He looked around, not seeing the smaller
twins, and not having noticed exactly what had happened to them. "Where
are they, Nan?"

"Under the hay, and we've got to dig 'em out! I'll get the pitchfork.
That's what Sam does when he gets the hay to feed the horse. I can dig
out Flossie and Freddie!" cried Nan,

She started to run across the barn floor, but was stopped by a call from
Bert.

"Don't do that!" he said.

"What?" she asked.

"Don't get the pitchfork! It's sharp and might hurt Flossie and Freddie.
I'll pull the hay off with my hands. You go and tell mother or Dinah!
Somebody's got to help! There's 'most a whole load of hay on 'em I
guess!"

And indeed it was a large part of the pile of hay in the Bobbsey barn
that had slid from the mow when Bert jumped on it. And this hay now
covered from sight the "little fireman" and the "little fat fairy," as
Daddy Bobbsey called his two little twins.

"Yes, I'll go for Dinah!" cried Nan. "She knows how to dig under the
hay, I guess!"

"And I'll start digging now," added Bert, as he began tossing aside the
wisps of dried grass that covered his small brother and sister from
sight.

And while the rescue of Freddie and Flossie is being arranged for, I
will take this chance to tell my new readers something of the four
children, about whom I am going to write in this book.

There are other books ahead of this one, and the first is named after
the children. It is called "The Bobbsey Twins," and relates some of the
early adventures of Bert, Nan, Flossie and Freddie. Those are the names
of the twins, as you have already learned.

The Bobbsey family lived in an eastern city called Lakeport, at the head
of Lake Metoka. Mr. Bobbsey was in the lumber business and had an office
near his lumberyard, which was "down town" as the children called it.

Now I'll tell you just a little about the four children, their friends
and something about the other books, and then I'll get on with the
story, which I hope you will wish to read.

There were two sets of twins, you see. Bert and Nan were the older. They
each had dark brown hair, brown eyes and were rather tall for their age,
and not so very fat; though, of late, with all the good times they had
had in the country at Blueberry Island and on the deep, blue sea, the
older twins were getting stouter. "Fatter," Freddie called it.

Flossie and Freddie were just the opposite of Bert and Nan. The smaller
pair of twins were short and stout, and each had light hair, and blue
eyes that looked at you, sometimes, in the funniest way you can imagine.

Besides Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey there was Dinah, the fat, good-natured
colored cook, who knew how to make more kinds of cake than you could eat
in one day. And then there was Sam Johnson, her husband. Sam worked
about the Bobbsey house and barn, looked after the horse and sometimes
drove the automobile, though he said he liked a horse better. But the
Bobbsey family liked the automobile, so the horse was used down in the
lumberyard more often than to take Bert, Nan, Flossie and Freddie for a
ride.

The Bobbsey twins had many friends and relations, but I will not take up
your time, now, telling you about them. I must not forget, however, to
mention Snoop and Snap. Snoop was a fine, big cat, and he was named
"Snoop" because he always seemed to be "snooping" into everything, as
Dinah said. Snoop didn't do that to be bad, he just wanted to find out
about things. Once he wanted to find out what was inside an empty tin
can, and so he stuck his head in and he couldn't get it out until Bert
helped him.

Snap was the Bobbsey dog, and he wasn't called "Snap" because he would
snap at you. No indeed! It was because, when Bert put a cracker on his
dog's nose, the animal would "snap" it off with a jerk of his head and
eat it--eat the cracker I mean. That was one reason he was called
"Snap." But there were other reasons, too.

And so the Bobbsey twins lived in a fine house in a pleasant city and
they had lots of fun. Those of you who have read the other books know
that. They went to the country and to the seashore, to visit Uncle
William at the latter place, and Uncle Daniel Bobbsey in the former.

Of course the Bobbsey twins went to school, and there is a book telling
about them there, and the fun and adventures they had. Later on they
went to "Snow Lodge," and after an exciting winter, they spent part of
the summer on a houseboat.

When Bert, Nan, Flossie and Freddie went to Meadow Brook, which was the
country home of Uncle Daniel, the twins never expected very much to
happen. But it did, and they talked about it for a long time. Then they
came home to have more good times, and, later on, went to a great city.
I haven't space, here, to tell you all that happened. You must get the
book and read it for yourself.

After that they spent a summer on Blueberry Island, and there were
gypsies on the island. Some strange things happened, but the Bobbsey
twins enjoyed every hour of their stay, and did not want to come home.

But they had to, of course, and still more strange adventures awaited
them. Those you may read about in the book just before this. It is
called: "The Bobbsey Twins on the Deep, Blue Sea," and in it is related
how the family went on a voyage to an island off the coast of Florida,
to rescue a poor, sick boy who had been left there by mistake.

Now they were home once more.

It was almost time for school to open for the fall term, and the twins
were playing in the barn, making the most of the last days of their
vacation, when the accident happened about the hay, as I have told you.

"Flossie! Freddie! Are you under there?" called Bert, anxiously, as he
threw aside armful after armful of the dried grass. "Are you down there
under the hay?"

He paused a moment to listen for an answer, but none came. If Flossie
and Freddie were there, either they did not hear him or they were so
smothered by the hay that they could not answer.

"Oh, I hope nothing has happened to them!" exclaimed Bert, and he began
digging away faster than before.

Certainly it was a large pile of hay to have fallen on two little
children. But then the hay was soft, and Bert, himself, had often been
buried under a pile in the field. It had not hurt, but the dust had made
him sneeze.

Faster and faster Bert dug away at the hay. He heard feet pattering on
the barn floor back of him, and, turning, saw Snap, the big dog, come
running in.

"Oh, Snap!" cried Bert, "Flossie and Freddie are under the hay! Help me
dig 'em out!"

"Bow wow!" barked Snap, just as if he understood. Of course he didn't
really know what had happened, but he saw Bert digging away and Snap
himself knew enough to do that. Often enough he had dug up, with his
front paws, a bone he had buried in the hard ground. This digging in the
soft hay was easier than that.

So Snap began to paw aside the hay, just as Bert was doing, and while
boy and dog were doing this into the barn came fat Dinah, with Nan
running ahead of her.

"Whut's dish yeah has happened, Bert? Whut's all dish yeah I heah Nan
say?" demanded the black cook. "Whut you done gone an' done to yo' l'il
broth' an' sistah? De pooh l'il honey lambs!"

"I didn't do anything!" declared Bert. "I was swinging on a rope, over
the haymow, and so was Nan. And Flossie and Freddie were playing on the
barn floor under the mow. I fell on the hay and so did Nan, and a whole
lot of it slid down and fell on top of Flossie and Freddie and--and--now
they're down under there, I guess!"

"Good land ob massy!" exclaimed Dinah. "Dat suah is a lot to happen to
mah poor l'il lambkins! Where is you, Flossie? Where is you, Freddie?"
she cried.

There was no answer.

"Oh, Dinah! do get them out," begged Nan.

"I will, honey! I will!" exclaimed the colored woman.

"Shall I go to get Sam?" Nan wanted to know. "Mother isn't at home," she
added to Bert. "She went over to Mrs. Black's. Oh, maybe we can't ever
get Flossie and Freddie out!"

"Hush yo' talk laik dat!" cried Dinah. "Co'se we git 'em out! We kin do
it. No need to git Sam. Come on now, Bert an' Nan! Dig as fast as yo'
kin make yo' hands fly!"

Dinah bent over and began tossing aside the hay as Bert had been doing.
Nan also helped, and Snap--well he meant to help, but he got in the way
more than he did anything else, and Bert tried to send his dog out, but
Snap would not go.

Faster and faster worked Dinah, Nan and Bert, and soon the big pile of
hay, which had fallen on Flossie and Freddie grew smaller. It was being
stacked on another part of the floor.

"Maybe I'd better go and telephone to daddy!" suggested Nan, when the
hay pile had been made much smaller. "You don't see anything of them
yet, do you Dinah?" she asked anxiously.

"No, not yet, honey! But I soon will. We's 'most to de bottom ob de
heap. No use worritin' yo' pa. We'll git Freddie and Flossie out all
right!"

Bert was tossing aside the hay so fast that his arms seemed like the
spokes of a wheel going around. He felt that it was partly his fault
that the hay had fallen on his little brother and sister.

"Now we'll git 'em!" cried Dinah, after a bit. "I see de barn flo' in
one place. Come on out, chilluns!" she cried. "Come on out, Flossie an'
Freddie! We's dug de hay offen yo' now! Come on out!"

Indeed the hay pile was now so small at the place where it had slid from
the mow, that it would not have hidden Snap, to say nothing of covering
the two Bobbsey twins.

But something seemed to be wrong. There were no little fat legs or
chubby arms sticking out. The little Bobbsey twins were not in sight,
though nearly all the hay had been moved aside.

Bert, Nan and Dinah gazed at the few wisps remaining. Then, in a queer
voice Nan said:

"Why--why! They're not there!"



 CHAPTER II

THE WASHINGTON CHILDREN

THERE was no doubt of it. Flossie and Freddie were not under the pile of
hay that had fallen on them. The hay had all been cast aside now, so far
away from the place where it had fallen that it could not serve for a
hiding place. And Bert and Nan could see the bare floor of the barn.

"Where are they?" asked Bert, looking in surprise at Nan. "Where are
Flossie and Freddie?"

"Dat's whut I wants to know!" declared Dinah. "Where is dey? Has yo' all
been playin' a trick on ole Dinah?" and she looked sadly at Bert and
Nan.

"Playing a trick?" cried Nan.

"We didn't play any trick!" exclaimed Bert. "Flossie and Freddie were
down under that hay!"

"But they're not there now!" went on Nan.

"No," said Dinah, as she poked aside some of the wisps of hay with her
foot. "Dey isn't heah now, an' where is dey? Dat's whut I'se askin' yo'
all, Bert an' Nan? Where is dem two little lambkins?"

Bert looked at Nan and Nan looked at Bert. It was a puzzle. What had
become of Flossie and Freddie between the time they disappeared under
the sliding pile of hay and now, when it had been cleared away to
another part of the barn.

"I saw them playing on the floor," said Nan. "Then, when Bert and I let
go the ropes and jumped in the mow, a lot of hay came down all at once,
and then I--I didn't see Flossie and Freddie any more. They surely were
under the hay!"

"Yes," agreed Bert, "they were. But they aren't here now. Maybe they
fell down through the floor!" he added hopefully. "The cow stable is
under this part of the barn."

"Yes, but there isn't any hole in the barn floor here," said Nan. "And
the cracks aren't big enough for Flossie and Freddie to slip through."

"No, dey didn't go t'rough de flo', dat's suah!" exclaimed Dinah. "It's
mighty queer! I guess yo' all had best go call Sam," she went on to Nan.
"Mebby he know something 'bout dish yeah barn dat I don't know. Go git
Sam an'--"

Just then there came a joyous shout from the big barn doors behind Nan,
Bert and Dinah.

"Here we are! Here we are! Oh, we fooled you! We fooled you!" cried two
childish voices, and there stood the missing Flossie and Freddie, hay in
their fluffy, golden hair, hay hanging down over their blue eyes, and
hay stuck over their clothes.

"Here we are!" cried Freddie. "Did you was lookin' for us?"

"I should say we did was!" cried Bert, laughing, now, at Freddie's queer
way of speaking, for, though the little fireman usually spoke quite
properly, he sometimes went wrong.

"Where have you been?" asked Nan. "And how did you get out?"

"We crawled out from under the hay when it fell on us," explained
Flossie. "Then Freddie says let's play hide and coop and we climbed up
the little ladder and went up in the haymow and then we slid out of the
little window and got outside the barn and then we just hid an' waited
to see what you'd do." By this time Flossie was out of breath, having
said all this without pause.

"But you didn't come after us," said Freddie, "and so we came to see
where you were. And we fooled you, didn't we? We fooled you bad."

"I should say you did!" cried Bert. "We were digging the hay away. I
thought you'd be away down underneath."

"We were," went on Flossie. "But we wiggled out, an' you didn't see us
wiggle."

"No," agreed Nan, "we didn't see you. But, oh, I'm so glad you are all
right!" she cried, and she hugged Flossie in her arms. "You aren't hurt,
are you?"

"No, but I was tickled," said Flossie. "The hay did tickle me in my
nose, and I wanted to sneeze."

"But I wouldn't let her!" explained Freddie. "I held my hand over her
nose so she couldn't sneeze."

"I tried hard so I wouldn't," said Flossie, "and Freddie helped me. It
feels awful funny not to sneeze when you want to. It tickles!"

"And the hay tickled me," went on Freddie. "It's ticklin' me now.
There's some down my back," and he wiggled and twisted as he stood in
the middle of the barn floor. Snap, the big dog, put his head to one
side, and cocked up his ears, looking at the two smaller twins as if
asking what it was all about, and what the digging in the hay was all
for.

"Well, it's mighty lucky laik dat it wasn't no wuss!" exclaimed fat
Dinah, with a sigh of relief. "I suah was clean skairt out ob mah seben
senses when yo' come runnin' into mah kitchen, Nan, an' says as how
Flossie an' Freddie was buried under de hay!"

"And they were!" said Nan. "I saw the hay go down all over them."

"So did I!" added Bert.

"But we wiggled out and hid so we could fool you!" laughed Freddie.
"Didn't you see us crawl out?"

"No," answered Bert, "I didn't. If I had I wouldn't have dug so hard."

"Ouch! Something tickles me awful!" complained Freddie, twisting around
as though he wanted to work his way out of his clothes. "Maybe there's a
hay-bug down my back!" he went on.

"Good land of massy!" cried Dinah, catching him up in her arms. "Yo'
come right in de house wif me, honey lamb, an' ole Dinah'll undress yo'
an' git at de bug--if dey is one!"

"I guess we've had enough fun in the barn," said Nan. "I don't want to
play here any more."

"I guess we'll have to put back the hay we knocked down," said Bert.
That was one of the Bobbsey rules--to put things back the way they had
been at first, after their play was done.

"Yes, we must put the hay up in the mow again," agreed Nan. "Daddy
wouldn't like to have us leave it on the floor. I'll help you, Bert,
'cause I helped knock it down."

Dinah led the two younger twins off to the kitchen, with a promise of a
molasses cookie each and a further promise to Freddie that she would
take out of his clothes whatever it was tickling his back--a hay-bug or
some of the dried wisps of grass.

Bert and Nan had not long been working at stacking the hay back in place
before Sam came in. He had heard what had happened from Dinah, his wife,
and he said, most kindly:

"Run along an' play, Bert an' Nan! I'll put back de hay fo' yo' all.
'Tain't much, an' it won't take me long."

"Thank you, Sam!" said Bert. "It's more fun playing outdoors to-day than
stacking hay in a barn."

"Are you very sure you don't mind doing it, Sam?" asked Nan, for she
wanted to "play fair."

"Oh, I don't mind!" exclaimed the good-natured Sam. "Hop along!"

"Didn't you ever like to play outdoors, Sam?" questioned Bert, as he and
Nan started to leave the barn.

"Suah I did," answered Sam. "When I was a youngster like you I loved to
go fishin' and swimmin' in the ole hole down by the crick."

"Oh, Sam, did you like to swim?" went on the Bobbsey boy quickly.

"I suah did, Bert. Down in our pa'ts I was considered the bestes'
swimmer there."

"Some day I'm going to see you, Sam," declared Bert. "Maybe you could
teach me some new strokes."

"I doan know about that, Bert. You see, I ain't quite so limber as what
I used to be when I was your age or jest a little older. Now you jest
hop along, both of you, and enjoy yourselves."

So Nan and Bert went out to find some other way of having fun. They
wanted to have all the good times they could, as school would soon begin
again.

"But we'll have a vacation at Thanksgiving and Christmas and New
Year's," said Nan, as she and her brother talked it over.

"Thanksgiving's a long way off," said Bert, with a sigh.

The two children were walking along the side path toward the front yard
when suddenly Snap, their dog, gave a savage growl. It was the kind of
growl he never gave unless he happened to be angry, and Bert knew, right
away, something must be wrong.

"What is it, Snap? A tramp?" asked the boy, looking around. Often Snap
would growl this way at tramps who might happen to come into the yard.
Now there may be good tramps, as well as bad ones, but Snap never
stopped to find out which was which. He just growled, and if that didn't
scare away the tramp then Snap ran at him. And no tramp ever stood after
that. He just ran away.

But now neither Bert nor Nan could see any tramp, either in the yard or
in the street in front of the house. Snap, though, kept on growling deep
down in his throat, and then, suddenly, the children saw what the matter
was. A big dog was digging a hole under the fence to get into the
Bobbsey yard. The gate was closed, and though the dog might have jumped
the fence, he didn't. He was digging a hole underneath. And Snap saw
him. That's why Snap growled.

"Oh, Bert! Look!" cried Nan.

As she spoke the dog managed to get through the hole he had dug, and
into the Bobbsey yard he popped. But he did not stay there long. Before
he could run toward Bert and Nan, if, indeed, he had that notion, Snap
had leaped toward the unwelcome visitor.

Snap growled and barked in such a brave, bold way that the other dog
gave one long howl, and then back through the hole he wiggled his way,
faster than he had come in. But fast as he wiggled out, he was not quick
enough, for Snap nipped the end of the big dog's tail and there was
another howl.

"Good boy!" cried Bert to his dog, as Snap came back to him, wagging his
tail, having first made sure, however, that the strange dog was running
down the street. "Good, old Snap!"

And Snap wagged his tail harder than ever, for he liked to be told he
had been good and had done something worth while.

"I wonder what that dog wanted?" asked Nan.

"I don't know," answered Bert. "He was a strange one. But he didn't stay
long!"

"Not with our Snap around!" laughed Nan.

The two older Bobbsey twins were wondering what they could do next to
have a good time, when they heard their mother's voice calling to them
from the side porch. She had come back from a little visit to a lady
down the street, and had heard all about the accident to Flossie and
Freddie.

"Ho, Nan! Ho, Bert! I want you!" called Mrs. Bobbsey.

"I guess she's going to scold us for making the hay slide on Flossie and
Freddie," said Bert, rather anxiously.

"Well, we couldn't help it," replied his sister. "We didn't know it was
so slippery. Yes, Mother; we're coming!" she answered, as Mrs. Bobbsey
called again.

But, to the relief of Nan and Bert, their mother did not scold them. She
just said:

"You must be a little more careful when you're playing where Flossie and
Freddie are. They are younger than you, and don't so well know how to
look out for themselves. You must look out for them. But now I want you
to go down to daddy's office."

"What do you want us to do?" asked Nan.

"Here is a letter that he ought to have right away," went on Mrs.
Bobbsey. "It came to the house by mistake. It should have gone to
daddy's lumber office, but the postman left it while I was out, and
Dinah was out in the barn with you children, so she could not tell him
to carry it on down town. So I wish you'd take it to daddy. He has been
expecting it for some time. It's about some business, and I don't want
to open the letter and telephone what's in it. But if you two will just
run down with it--"

"Of course we will!" cried Bert. "It'll be fun!"

"And may we stay a little while?" asked Nan.

"Yes, if you don't bother daddy. Here is the letter."

A little later Nan and Bert were in their father's office. The clerks
knew the children and smiled at them, and the stenographer, who wrote
Mr. Bobbsey's letters on the clicking typewriter machine, took the twins
through her room into their father's private office.

As the door opened, Bert and Nan saw a strange man talking to Mr.
Bobbsey. But what interested them more than this was the sight of two
children--a boy and a girl about their own age--in their father's
private office. The boy and girl were sitting on chairs, looking at the
very same lumber books--those with pictures of big woods in them--that
Nan and Bert often looked at themselves.

Mr. Bobbsey glanced up as the door opened. He saw his two older twins,
and, smiling at them, said:

"Come in, Nan and Bert. I want you to meet these Washington children!"



 CHAPTER IV

MISS POMPRET'S CHINA

Bert and Nan looked at one another in some surprise as they stood in the
door of their father's private office. What did he mean by saying that
they were to come in and meet the "Washington children?" Who were the
"Washington children?"

Nan and Bert were soon to know, for their father spoke again.

"Come on in. These are two of my twins, Mr. Martin," he added to the
gentleman who was sitting near his desk. The two "Washington children,"
looked up from the lumber books they had been reading. No, I am wrong,
they had not been reading them--only looking at the pictures.

"Two of your twins?" repeated Mr. Martin, with a smile. "Do you mean to
say you have more twins at home?"

"Oh, yes, another set. Smaller than these. I wish you would see Flossie
and Freddie. Come here, Bert and Nan. This is my friend, Mr. Martin," he
continued, "and these are his children, Billy and Nell. They live in
Washington, D.C."

So that was what Mr. Bobbsey meant. At first, Nan said afterward, she
had a little notion that her father might have meant the boy and girl
were the children of General George Washington. But a moment's thought
told Nan that this could not be. General Washington's children,
supposing him to have had any, would have been grown up into old men and
women and would have passed away long ago. But Billy and Nell Martin
lived in Washington, District of Columbia (which is what the letters
D.C. stand for) and, Bert and Nan knew, Washington was the capital, or
chief city, of the United States.

"Mr. Martin came in to see me on business," explained Daddy Bobbsey. "He
is traveling for a lumber firm, and on this trip he brought his boy and
girl with him."

"They aren't twins, though," said Mr. Martin with a nod at Nan and Bert.

"I think it's lovely to be a twin!" said Nell, with a smile at Nan.
"Don't you have lots of fun?"

"Yes, we do," Nan said.

"I should think you could have fun in this lumberyard," remarked Billy
Martin. "I'd like to live near it."

"Yes, we play in it," said Bert; and now that the "ice had been broken,"
as the grown folks say, the four children began to feel better
acquainted.

"Did you come down for anything special?" asked Mr. Bobbsey of Bert.

"Yes, Daddy. Here's a letter mother gave us for you," the boy answered.

"Oh, this is the one I have been expecting," said Mr. Bobbsey to Mr.
Martin. "Now we can talk business. Bert and Nan, don't you want to take
Billy and Nell out in the yard and show them the lake? But don't fall
in, and don't climb on the lumber," he added.

"Oh, I'd love to look at the lake!" cried Nell.

"And I like to see big piles of lumber," said her brother Billy.

"The children will be all right," said Mr. Bobbsey, in answer to a look
from Mr. Martin. "My older twins often play about the lumberyard, and
they'll see that Billy and Nell come to no harm."

So while the two men talked over lumber matters, Bert and Nan showed
Billy and Nell the sights of their father's lumberyard, and took the
Washington children down to Lake Metoka, where the blue waters sparkled
in the sun.

"Oh, this is lovely!" exclaimed Nell. "It's nicer than Washington!"

"Don't you have a lake there?" asked Bert.

"No; but we have the Potomac River," answered Billy. "That's nice, but
not as nice as this lake. Now let's go and look at the big piles of
lumber."

"Yes, let's," echoed Nell.

The children tossed some chips into the lake, pretending they were
boats, and then they walked around the yard to where long boards and
planks were stacked into great piles, waiting to be taken away on boats
or wagons.

Bert asked one of the workmen if they could play with some of the
boards, and, receiving permission to do so, they had fun making
something they called a house, and then on a see-saw.

"Oh, I always did love to see-saw!" said the little girl from
Washington. "We don't get much of a chance to play that way where I come
from."

"We have see-saw rides lots of times down here," answered Nan.

"Well, that's Because your father owns a lumberyard, and you can get
plenty of boards to use for a see-saw," said Henry.

For an hour or more Bert and Nan entertained the Washington children in
the lumberyard, and then, as it was getting close to dinner time, Nan
told Bert they had better go back to their father's office.

They found Mr. Martin about to leave. And then Mr. Bobbsey thought of
something.

"Look here, Henry!" he exclaimed to his friend, "there's no need of your
going back to that hotel. Come out to the house--you and the children--
and have dinner with me. I want you and your boy and girl to meet
Flossie and Freddie, and I want you to meet Mrs. Bobbsey."

"Well, I'd like to," said Mr. Martin slowly, while the eyes of Nell and
Billy glowed in delight. "But, perhaps it might bother your wife."

"Oh, no!" laughed Mr. Bobbsey. "She likes company. I'll telephone out
that we're coming, and Dinah, that's our cook, will be delighted to get
up something extra. They'll be glad to see you. Come out to the house,
all of you, and make me a nice visit. Can't you stay a day or so?"

Eagerly Nan and Bert waited for the answer, for they liked the
Washington children very much.

"Oh, no, we can't stay later than this evening," said Mr. Martin. "I've
got other business to look after. But I'll come out to dinner with you."

"Oh, we'll have lots of fun!" whispered Nan to Nell. "You'll just love
Flossie--she's so cute!"

"I'll show you my dog Snap," said Bert to Billy. "You ought to have seen
him scare a strange dog just before we came down here."

"I like dogs," said Billy. "We could have one in Washington if we had a
barn to keep him in."

"We've got a barn," went on Bert. "You ought to have seen what happened
there this morning to Flossie and Freddie," and then he told about the
little twins having been hidden under the hay.

Mr. Bobbsey's automobile was in the lumberyard, and in this the trip was
quickly made to the home of the four twins, after Mrs. Bobbsey had been
told, by telephone, that company was coming

Nell and Billy were glad to see Flossie and Freddie, and the six
children had fun playing around the house and barn with Snoop and Snap.

Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey wanted Mr. Martin to stay two or three days with
his children, but the Washington lumberman said it could not be done
this time.

"I'm on a business trip," he said, "and I can't spend as much time in
visiting and pleasure as I'd like, though I am trying to give Billy and
Nell a good time. This is the first time I have ever taken them on a
trip with me."

"And we've had such a lovely time!" exclaimed Nell.

"Packs of fun!" added her brother.

"I'm sorry we can't stay longer," went on Mr. Martin. "You folk must
come to Washington some day."

"Yes, I expect to," said Mr. Bobbsey. "I've been counting on going there
some day on some business matters."

"Well, when you come be sure to bring the children," said the father of
Nell and Billy. "I think they would enjoy seeing the White House, the
big Capitol building, the Congressional Library, Washington's home at
Mt. Vernon and places like that."

"Could we see the Washington Monument?" asked Nan. She remembered
looking at a picture of that in her geography.

"Oh, yes, I'd show you that, too," said Mr. Martin.

"And could we see the Potomac River?" Bert wanted to know.

"Surely!" laughed Billy's father. "I'll show you all the sights of
Washington if you'll come and pay me a visit--all you Bobbsey twins!" he
added.

"I wish we could go!" sighed Nan.

"Perhaps you can," said her father.

"Have you got any hay in Wash'ton?" asked Freddie, suddenly, and every
one else laughed except himself and Flossie.

"Oh, I guess I could find enough hay for you and your little sister to
hide under," answered Mr. Martin with a laugh, for he had heard the
story of what had happened in the barn.

A little later Mr. Martin and his boy and girl had to leave. They said
"good-bye," and while the father of the Washington children again asked
Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey to come to visit him at his home, Nell and Billy
whispered to Nan and Bert:

"Be sure and come, and bring Flossie and Freddie with you!"

"We will!" promised Nan, but neither she nor Bert guessed what a queer
little adventure they were soon to have in Washington.

A few days later school opened, and the Bobbsey twins had to go back to
their class-rooms. At first they did not like it, after the long, joyous
vacation on the deep, blue sea, but their teachers were kind, and
finally the twins began to feel that, after all, school was not such a
bad place.

Thanksgiving Day came, bringing a little vacation period, and after
church in the morning, the Bobbsey twins went home to eat roast turkey
and cranberry sauce. Then they went out to play with some of their boy
and girl friends, having lots of fun in the barn and yard.

"But don't slide any more hay down on Flossie and Freddie!" begged Mrs.
Bobbsey.

"We won't!" promised Bert and Nan, and they kept their word.

It was about a week after Thanksgiving, and Bert and Nan were on their
way home from school one day, when, as they passed a red brick house on
the street next to theirs, they saw, standing on the porch, a pleasant-
faced, elderly lady who was looking up and down the avenue.

"That's Miss Pompret," said Nan to Bert. "I heard mother say she was
very rich."

"Is she?" asked Bert. "She looks kind of funny."

"That's 'cause she isn't married," returned Nan. "Some folks call her an
old maid, but I don't think she's very old, even if her hair is white.
Her face looks nice."

"Yes, but she looks kind of worried now," said Bert. "That's the way
mother looks when she's worried."

They were in front of the house now, and could see Miss Pompret quite
plainly. Certainly the elderly lady did look as though something
troubled her.

"Good afternoon, Miss Pompret!" called Nan, as she was about to pass by.
Bert took off his cap and bowed.

"Oh, you're half of the Bobbsey twins, aren't you?" asked Miss Pompret,
with a smile. "I often see you go past. I only wish you were a little
bigger."

"Bigger? Why?" asked Bert, in some surprise.

"Why, then," explained Miss Pompret, "you might take this letter to the
post-office for me. It's very important, and I want it to go out on this
mail, but I can't go to the post-office myself. If you Bobbsey twins
were bigger I should ask you to take it. Tell me, is the other set of
twins larger than you two?"

"No'm; they're smaller," explained Nan. "Flossie and Freddie are lots
littler than we are."

"But we're big enough to take the letter to the post-office for you,
Miss Pompret," said Bert. He had often heard his father and mother speak
of this neighbor, and the kindnesses she had done.

"Are you sure you are big enough to go to the post-office for me?" asked
Miss Pompret.

"We often go for daddy and mother," said Nan.

"Well, then, if you think your mother wouldn't mind, I would like, very
much, to have you go," said Miss Pompret. "The letter is very important,
but I can not take it myself, as I have company, and I have no one, just
now, who can leave. I thought I might see some large boy on the street,
but--"

"I'm big enough!" exclaimed Bert.

"Yes, I believe you are!" agreed the elderly lady, looking at him
through her glasses. "Well, I shall be very thankful to you and your
sister if you will mail the letter for me. And, on your way back, stop
and let me know that you dropped it in the post-office all right."

"We will!" promised Bert, and Nan nodded her head in agreement with him.
Miss Pompret handed over the letter, which was in a large envelope. Nan
and Bert were soon at the post-office with it.

The white-haired lady was waiting for them on the porch as they came
back along the street.

"Won't you come in, just for a minute?" she asked, smiling kindly at
them. "My maid has just baked a chocolate cake, and I don't believe your
mother would mind if you each had a piece."

"Oh, no'm--she wouldn't mind at all!" said Bert quickly.

"We like chocolate cake," said Nan, "but we didn't go to the post-office
for that!"

"Bless your heart, child, I know you didn't!" laughed their new friend.
"Please come in!"

The chocolate cake was all Bert and Nan hoped it would be, and besides
that Miss Pompret set out on the table for them each a glass of milk.
They looked around the beautiful but old-fashioned room, noting the dark
mahogany furniture, the cut glass on the side-board, and, over in one
corner, a glass cupboard, through the clear doors of which could be seen
some china dishes.

Miss Pompret saw Nan looking at this set of china, and the elderly lady
smiled as she said:

"Isn't it beautiful?"

"Yes," said Nan, softly. "I love pretty dishes."

"And these are my greatest treasure," said Miss Pompret. "I am very
proud of them. They have been in my family over a hundred years. But
there is a sad story about it--a very sad story about the old Pompret
china." And the lady's face clouded.

"Did somebody break it?" asked Bert. Once he had broken a plate of which
his mother was very proud, and he remembered how sad she felt.

"No, my china wasn't broken," said Miss Pompret. "In fact, there is a
sort of mystery about it."

"Oh, please tell me!" begged Nan. "I like nice dishes and I like
stories."

She and Bert looked at the closet of choice china dishes. Children
though they were, they could see that the plates, cups, saucers and
other dishes were not like the kind set on their table every day.

What could Miss Pompret mean about a "mystery" connected with her set of
china?



 CHAPTER V

"WHAT A LOT OF MONEY!"

Bert and Nan sat up very straight on the chairs in Miss Pompret's dining
room, and looked first at her and then at the china closet with its
shiny, glass doors. Miss Pompret sat up very straight, too, in her
chair, and she, also, looked first from Nan and Bert to the wonderful
china, which seemed made partly of egg shells, so fine it was and
pretty.

Miss Pompret's dining room was one in which it seemed every one had to
sit up straight, and in which every chair had to be in just the right
place, where the table legs must keep very straight, too, and where not
even a corner of a rug dared to be turned up. In fact it was a very
straight, old-fashioned but very beautiful dining room, and Miss Pompret
herself was an old-fashioned but beautiful lady.

"Now if you will sit very still, and not move, I'll bring out some
pieces of my china set and show them to you," said Miss Pompret. "You
were so kind as to take the letter to the post-office for me when I
could not go myself, that I feel I ought to reward you to some way."

"The chocolate cake was enough," said Nan.

"Yes, it was awful good!" sighed Bert.

"Mother told you not to say 'awful,'" interposed Ben's sister.

"Oh, well, I mean it was terribly nice!" exclaimed the boy.

"I'm glad you liked it," went on Miss Pompret with a smile. "But I must
not keep you too long, or your mother will be wondering what has become
of you. But I thought you, Nan, would be interested in seeing beautiful
china. You'll have a home of your own, some day, and nothing is nicer in
a nice home than beautiful dishes."

"I know that!" cried Nan. "My mamma has some very beautiful dishes, and
once in a great while she lets me look them over. Sometimes, too, we
have them on the table--when it's some special occasion like a birthday
or visitors."

"I don't much like to see the real nice dishes on a table," remarked
Bert. "I'm always afraid that I'll break one of them, and then I know my
mother would feel pretty bad over it."

"You must be careful, my boy. You can't handle nice china as you can
your baseball or your football," said Miss Pompret, with a smile.

"Well, I guess they couldn't treat dishes like baseballs and footballs!"
cried Nan. "Just think of throwing a sugar bowl up into the air or
hitting it with a bat, or kicking a teapot all around the lots!"

"That certainly wouldn't be very nice," said Miss Pompret.

She went over to the closet, unlocked the glass doors, and set some of
the rare pieces out on the lace cover of the dining room table. Bert and
Nan saw that Miss Pompret handled each piece as though it might be
crushed, even in her delicate hands, which were almost as white and thin
as a piece of china.

"This is the wonderful Pompret tableware," went on the old lady. "It has
been in my family over a hundred years. My great-grandfather had it, and
now it has come to me. I have had it a number of years, and I think more
of it than anything else I have. Of course, if I had any little children
I would care for them more than for these dishes," went on Miss Pompret.
"But I'm a lonely old lady, and you neighborhood children are the only
ones I have," and she smiled rather wistfully at Nan and Bert.

Carefully dish after dish was taken from the closet and set out for the
Bobbsey twins to look at. They did not venture to so much as touch one.
The china seemed too easily broken for that.

"I should think you'd have to be very careful when you washed those
dishes," remarked Nan, as she saw how light glowed through the side of
one of the thin cups.

"Oh, I am," answered Miss Pompret. "No one ever washes this set but me.
My maid is very careful, but I would not allow her to touch a single
piece. I don't use it very often. Only when some old and dear friends
come to see me is the Pompret china used. And then I am sorry to say, I
can not use the whole set."

"Why not?" asked Bert. "Are you afraid they'll break it?"

"Oh no," and Miss Pompret smiled. "I'm not afraid of that. But you see I
haven't the whole set, so I can't show it all. One of the sorrows of my
life is that part of my beautiful set of china is missing."

"There's a lot of it, though," added Bert, as he saw a number of shelves
covered with the rare plates, cups and saucers.

"Yes, but the sugar bowl and cream pitcher are missing," went on Miss
Pompret, with a shake of her white head. "They were beautiful. But,
alas! they are missing." And she sighed deeply.

"Where are they?" asked Nan.

"Ah, that's the mystery I am going to tell you about," said Miss
Pompret. "It isn't a very big story, and I won't keep you long. It isn't
often I get a chance to tell it, so you must forgive an old lady for
keeping you from your play," and again she smiled, in rather a sad
fashion, at Nan and Bert.

"Oh, we like it here!" exclaimed Nan quickly.

"It's lots of fun!" added Bert. "I like to hear about a mystery."

"Well," began Miss Pompret, "as I told you, this set of china has been
in our family over a hundred years. It was made in England, and each
piece has the mark of the man who made it. See, this is what I mean."

She turned over one of the cups and showed the Bobbsey twins where, on
the bottom, there was the stamp, in blue, of some animal in a circle of
gold.

"That is the mark of the Waredon factory, where this china was made,"
went on Miss Pompret. "Only china made by Mr. Waredon can have this mark
on it."

"It looks like our dog Snap," said Bert.

"Oh, no!" laughed Miss Pompret. "That is supposed to be the British
lion. Mr. Waredon took that as a trade-mark, and at the top of the
golden circle, with the blue lion inside, you can see the letter 'J'
while at the bottom is the letter 'W.' They stand for the name Jonathan
Waredon, in whose English factory the china was made. Each piece has
this mark on it, and no other make of china in the world can be
rightfully marked like that.

"Well, now about the mystery. Some years ago, before you children were
born, I lived in another city. I had the china set there with me, and
then it was complete. I had the cream pitcher and the sugar bowl. One
day a ragged man came to the house. He was very ragged and poor. I
suppose you would call him a tramp.

"The cook I then had felt sorry for him, and let him come into the
kitchen to have something to eat. As it happened, part of my rare china
set was on a table in the same room. I was getting ready to wash it
myself, as I would let no one else touch it.

"Well, when I came out to wash my beautiful dishes the sugar bowl and
cream pitcher of the set were gone. They had been on the table when the
tramp was eating the lunch the cook gave him, but now they could not be
found. The cook and I looked all over for them--we searched the house,
in fact, but never found them."

"Who took them?" asked Bert, eagerly.

"Well, my dear boy, I have never found out. The cook always said the
tramp put the sugar bowl and cream pitcher in his pocket when her back
was turned to get him a cup of coffee. At any rate, when he was gone the
two pieces were gone also, and while I do not want to think badly of any
one, I have come to believe that the tramp took my rare dishes."

"Didn't you ever see him again?" asked Nan.

"No, my dear, never, as far as I know."

"And did you never find the dishes?" Bert wanted to know.

"Never. I advertised for them. I inquired if any boys in the
neighborhood might have slipped in and taken them for a joke, but I
never found them. To this day," went on Miss Pompret, "I have never
again set eyes on my cream pitcher and sugar bowl. They disappeared as
completely and suddenly as though they had fallen down a hole in the
earth. The tramp may have taken them; but what would he do with just two
pieces? They were too frail for him to use. A man like that would want
heavy dishes. Perhaps he knew how valuable they were and perhaps he
intended asking a reward for bringing them back. But I never heard from
him.

"So that is why my rare set of Pompret china is not complete. The two
pieces are missing and I would give a hundred dollars this minute if I
could get them back!"

"A--a hundred dollars!" exclaimed Bert.

"Yes, my boy. If some one would get me that sugar bowl and pitcher, with
the mark of the lion in a golden circle, and the initials 'J' at the top
and 'W' at the bottom, I would willingly pay one hundred dollars," said
Miss Pompret.

"A--a whole hundred dollars!" gasped Bert. "What a lot of money!"



 CHAPTER VI

WONDERFUL NEWS

Miss Alicia Pompret began putting back in the glass-doored closet the
pieces of rare china that had the blue lion in a circle of gold and the
initials "J.W." on the bottom of each piece. Nan and Bert watched her,
and saw how carefully her white hands took up each plate and cup.

"A hundred dollars!" murmured Bert again. "I'd like to have all that
money. I'd buy--er--I'd buy a goat!"

"A goat!" exclaimed Miss Pompret.

"Yes," went on Bert. "Freddie nearly thought one once, when we went to
the big city, but mother wouldn't let him keep it. Now we're back home;
and if I had a hundred dollars I'd buy a goat."

"Well, if you can find my sugar bowl and pitcher I'll be glad to pay you
a hundred dollars," said Miss Pompret with a smile at Bert. "But I don't
know that I'd like a goat," she added.

"Do you really mean you'd pay a hundred dollars for two china dishes?"
asked Nan, her eyes big with wonder.

"Yes, my dear," said Miss Pompret. "Of course if they were just two
ordinary dishes, such as these," and she pointed to some on a side
table, "they would not be worth a hundred dollars. But I need just those
two pieces--the pitcher and sugar bowl--to make my rare set of china
complete again. So if you children should happen to come across them,
bring them to me and I'll pay you a hundred dollars. But, of course,"
she added, "they must be the pieces that match my set--they must have
the lion mark on the underside. However," she concluded with a sigh, "I
don't suppose you'll ever find them. The tramp must have broken them
many long years ago. I'll never see them again."

"Did you know the tramp's name?" asked Bert.

"Bless you, of course not!" laughed Miss Pompret. "Tramps hardly ever
tell their names, and when they do, they don't give the right one. No,
I'm sure I'll never see my beautiful dishes again. Sometimes I dream
that I shall, and I am disappointed when I awaken. But now I mustn't
keep you children any longer. I've told you my little mystery story, and
I hope you liked it."

"Yes, we did, very much," answered Nan "Only it's too bad!"

"You aren't sure the tramp took the dishes, are you?" asked Bert.

"No; and that is where the mystery comes in," said Miss Pompret.
"Perhaps he didn't, and, maybe, in some unexpected way, I'll find them
again. I hope I do, or that some one does, and I'll pay the hundred
dollars to whoever does."

"My, that's a lot of money!" murmured Bert again, when he and Nan were
once more on their way home, having said good-bye to Miss Pompret. "I
wish we could find those dishes."

"So do I," agreed Nan. "But don't call 'em dishes, Bert."

"What are they?" her brother wanted to know.

"Why, they're rare china. When I grow up I'm going to have a set just
like Miss Pompret's."

"With the dog on the bottom?"

"Tisn't a DOG, it's a LION!" exclaimed Nan.

"Well, it looks like our dog Snap," declared Bert.

They ran on home to find their mother out at the gate looking up and
down the street for them.

"Are you children just getting home from school?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.
"Were you kept in for doing something wrong?"

"Oh, no'm!" exclaimed Nan. "We went to see Miss Pompret."

"And she's going to give us a hundred dollars if we find two of her
dishes!" exclaimed Bert.

"My! What's all this?" asked his mother, laughing.

"'Tisn't dishes! It's rare china," said Nan, and then, between them, she
and Bert told the story of the little favor they had done for Miss
Pompret, and how she had invited them in, given them cake and milk, and
told them the mystery story.

"Well, you had quite a visit," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "Miss Pompret is a
dear lady, rather queer, perhaps, but very kind and a good neighbor. I
am glad you did her a favor. I have heard, before, about her china, and
knew she had some other rare and old-fashioned things in her house. I
have been there once or twice. Now I want you to go to the store for me.
Sam is away and Dinah needs some things for supper."

"I want to go to the store, too!" exclaimed Freddie, who came around the
corner of the house just then, with his face and hands covered with mud.

"Oh, my dear child! what have you been doing?" cried his mother.

"Oh, just makin' pies," answered Freddie, rubbing one cheek with a grimy
hand. "I made the pies and Flossie put 'em in the oven to bake. We made
an oven out of some bricks. But we didn't really eat the pies," he
added, "'cause they were only mud."

"You look as though you had tried to eat them," laughed Nan. "Come,
Freddie, I'll wash you clean."

"No, I want to go to the store!" he cried.

"So do I!" chimed in the voice of Flossie, as she, too, marched around
the corner of the house, dirtier, if possible, than her little twin
brother. "If Freddie goes to the store, I want to go with him!" Flossie
cried.

"All right," answered Bert. "You go and wash Flossie and Freddie, Nan,
and I'll get the express wagon and we'll pull them to the store with us.
Then we can put the groceries in the wagon and bring them back that
way."

"That will be nice," put in Mrs. Bobbsey. "I'll go and see just what
Dinah wants. Run along with Nan, Flossie and Freddie, and let her wash
you nice and clean."

This just suited the smaller twins, and soon they were being made, by
Nan's use of soap and water in the bath room, to look a little less like
mud pies. While Bert got out the express wagon, Snap, the big dog, saw
his little master, and jumped about, barking in joy.

"I don't care if that is a lion on the back of Miss Pompret's dishes,"
murmured Bert, as he put a piece of carpet in the wagon for Flossie and
Freddie to sit on, "it looks just like you, Snap. And I wonder if I
could ever find that milk pitcher and sugar bowl and get that hundred
dollars. I don't guess I could, but I'd like to awful much. No, I
mustn't say 'awful,' but I'd like to a terrible lot. A hundred dollars
is a pack of money!"

Down the street Nan and Bert pulled Flossie and Freddie in the little
express wagon, with Snap running on ahead and barking in delight. This
was the best part of the day for him--when the children came home from
school. Flossie and Freddie came first, and then Nan and Bert, and then
the fun started.

"Now don't run too fast!" exclaimed Flossie, as the express wagon began
to bounce over the uneven sidewalk.

"Oh, yes, let's go real fast!" cried Freddie. "Let's go as fast as the
fire engines go."

"We can't run as fast as that, Freddie," declared Nan, who was almost
out of breath. "We'll just run regular."

And then she and Bert pulled the younger twins around for a little ride
in the express wagon before they did the errand on which they had been
sent.

"I had a letter from Mr. Martin to-day," said Mr. Bobbsey at the supper
table that evening. "He asked to be remembered to you," he said to Mrs.
Bobbsey. "And Billy and Nell sent their love to you children."

"They got safely back to Washington, did they?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Yes," her husband answered. "And they said they had had a very nice
visit here. They are anxious to have us come to Washington to see them."

"Can we go?" asked Nan.

"Well, perhaps, some day," said her father.

"I'd like to go now," murmured Bert. "Maybe we might see that tramp in
Washington, and get back Miss Pompret's dishes."

"Rare china," muttered Nan, half under her breath.

"What tramp is that, and what about Miss Pompret's dishes?" asked Daddy
Bobbsey, as he took his cup of tea from Dinah.

Then he had to hear the story of that afternoon's visit of Nan and Bert.

"Oh, I guess Miss Pompret will never see her two china pieces again,"
said Mr. Bobbsey. "If the tramp took them he must have sold them, if he
didn't smash them. So don't think of that hundred dollars, Bert and
Nan."

"But couldn't we go to Washington, anyhow?" Bert wanted to know.

"Well, not right away, I'm afraid," his father answered. "You have to go
to school, you know."

But a few days after that something happened. About eleven o'clock in
the morning Bert, Nan, Flossie and Freddie came trooping home. Into the
house they burst with shouts of laughter.

"What's the matter? What is it? Has anything happened?" cried Mrs.
Bobbsey. "Why are you home from school at such a time of day?"

"There isn't any school," explained Nan.

"No school?" questioned her mother.

"And there won't be any for a month, I guess!" added Bert. "Hurray!"

"What do you mean?" asked his surprised mother. "No school for a month?"

"No, Mother," added Nan "The steam boiler is broken and they can't heat
our room. It got so cold the teacher sent us home."

"An' we came home, too'" added Flossie. "We couldn't stay in our school
'cause our fingers were so cold!"

"Was any one hurt when the boiler burst?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"No," Bert said. "It didn't exactly burst very hard, I guess."

But Mrs. Bobbsey wanted to know just what the trouble was, so she called
up the principal of the school on the telephone, and from him learned
that the heating boiler of the school had broken, not exactly burst, and
that it could no longer heat the rooms.

"It will probably be a month before we can get a new boiler, and until
then there will be no more school," he said. "The children will have
another vacation."

"A vacation so near Christmas," murmured Mrs. Bobbsey. "I wonder what I
can do with my twins?"

Just then the telephone rang, and Mrs. Bobbsey listened. It was Mr.
Bobbsey telephoning. He had heard of some accident at the school, and he
called up his house, from the lumberyard, to make sure his little fat
fairy and fireman, as well as Nan and Bert, were all right.

"Yes, they're home safe," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "But there will be no
school for a month."

"Good!" exclaimed Daddy Bobbsey. "That will just suit me and the
children, too. I'll be home in a little while, and I have some wonderful
news for them!"

"Oh, I wonder what it can be!" exclaimed Nan, when her mother told her
what Daddy Bobbsey had said.



 CHAPTER VII

ON A TRIP

The Bobbsey twins could hardly wait for their daddy to come home after
their mother had told them what he said over the telephone.

"Tell me again, Mother, just what he told you!" begged Nan.

"Well, he said he was just as glad as you children were, that there was
to be no more school for a month," answered Mrs. Bobbsey. "Though, of
course, he was sorry that the steam boiler had broken. And then he said
he had some wonderful news to tell us all."

"Oh, I know what it is!" cried Bert.

"What?" asked Nan.

"He's found the tramp that took Miss Pompret's dishes," went on Bert,
"and he's got them back--daddy has--and he's going to get the hundred
dollars! That's it!"

"Oh, I hardly think so," said Mrs. Bobbsey, with a smile. "I don't
believe daddy has caught any tramp."

"They do sometimes sleep in the lumberyard," remarked Bert.

"Yes, I know," agreed his mother. "But, even if daddy had caught a
tramp, it would hardly be the same man who took Miss Pompret's rare
pieces of china--the pitcher and sugar bowl. And if it had been anything
like that, daddy would have told me over the telephone."

"But what could the wonderful news be?" asked Nan.

"Something too long to talk about until he gets home, I think," answered
Mother Bobbsey. "Have patience, daddy will soon be here!"

But of course the Bobbsey twins could not be patient any more than you
could if you expected something unusual. They looked at the clock, they
ran to the door several times to look down the street to see if their
father was coming, and, at last, when Nan had said for about the tenth
time: "I wonder what it is!" a step sounded on the front porch.

"There's daddy now!" cried Bert.

Eight feet rushed to the front door, and Mr. Bobbsey was almost
overwhelmed by the four twins leaping at him at once.

"What is it?" cried Bert.

"Tell us the wonderful news!" begged Nan.

"Have you got another dog for us?" Flossie wanted to know.

"Did you bring me a new toy fire engine?" cried Freddie.

"Maybe it's a goat!" exclaimed Flossie.

"Now wait a minute! Wait a minute!" laughed Mr. Bobbsey, as he kissed
each one in turn. "Sit down and I'll tell you all about it."

He led them into the library, and sat down on a couch, taking Flossie
and Freddie up on his knees, while Bert and Nan sat close on either
side.

"Now first let me hear all about what happened at school to-day," said
Mr. Bobbsey, who had come home to dinner.

"Oh, no!" laughed Nan. "We want to hear the wonderful news first!"

"Oh, all right!" laughed her father. "Well, then, how would you all like
to go off on a trip?"

"A trip?" cried Bert. "A real trip? To Florida?"

"Well, hardly there again so soon," replied his father.

"Do you mean a trip to some city?" asked Nan. "In a steamboat?" cried
Freddie. "I want to go on a boat!"

"Yes, I think perhaps we can go on a boat," said Mr. Bobbsey.

"And in a train, too!" exclaimed Flossie. "I want to go on a train!"

"And I suppose, if we take this trip, we'll have to go on a train,
also," and Mr. Bobbsey looked over the heads of the children and smiled
at his wife who stood in the doorway.

"But you haven't told us yet where we are going," objected Nan.

"Is it to New York?" Bert wanted to know.

"Part of it is," his father replied.

"Oh, is it two trips?" Nan asked.

"Well, not exactly," answered Mr. Bobbsey. "You might say it has two
parts to it, like a puzzle. The first part is to go on a trip to New
York, and from there we'll go on a trip to--I'll let you see if you can
guess. Come on, Bert, your turn first."

"To Uncle William's!" guessed Bert.

"No," answered his father. "Your turn, Nan."

"To Uncle Daniel's at Meadow Brook."

"No," and her father smiled at her.

"I know!" cried Freddie. "We're goin' on the houseboat."

"Wrong!" said Mr. Bobbsey. "Now what does my little fat fairy have to
say?"

"Are we going swimming?" asked Flossie, who loved to splash in the
water.

"Hardly!" laughed Daddy Bobbsey. "It's too cold. Well, none of you has
guessed right, so I'll tell you. We're going to Washington to visit the
Martin children who were here a while ago."

"Oh, to Washington!" cried Nan. "How nice!"

"And shall we see Billy and Nell?" Bert wanted to know.

"Yes," his father answered, "that's what we'll do. I had a letter from
Mr. Martin the other day, inviting us all to come to his house to pay
him a visit," he went on. "I didn't know just when I could go, but to-
day I got another letter from another man in Washington, saying he
wanted to see me about some lumber business. I may have to stay a week
or two, so I thought I would take the whole family with me, and make a
regular visit of it."

"Will you take us all?" asked Freddie.

"Yes."

"And Snap and Snoop an' an'--" began Flossie.

"Well, hardly the dog and the cat," explained her father. "Just mother,
you four twins and I will go to Washington."

"When can we start?" Nan asked.

"As soon as your mother can get you ready," replied Mr. Bobbsey.

"I'm ready now," announced Freddie.

"And shall we stop in New York?" Bert demanded.

"Yes, for a day or so. And now what do you think of my news?" asked Mr.
Bobbsey.

"It's just--wonderful!" cried Nan. "Oh, we'll have such fun with Nell
and Billy!"

"And I want to see if I can drop a ball off Washington Monument," added
Bert.

"Oh, you hadn't better try that," his father cautioned him. "You might
hit some one. Well, then, it's all settled, and we'll go on the trip.
How about it, Mother?" and he smiled at his wife.

"I think it will be very nice to go," she answered. "I like Mr. Martin
and his children very much, and I'm sure we'll like Mrs. Martin too.
It's fortunate that we can all go--that the children will not lose any
schooling. For if all the classes stop, and the school is closed, they
will all start evenly again when the boiler is fixed. So run along now,
my twins, and get ready for lunch. Daddy and I have lots to talk about."

And so did the Bobbsey twins, as you can easily imagine.

If I told you all the things that happened in the next few days there
would be but little else in this book except the story of getting ready
for the journey. And as the trip itself is what you want to hear about,
and especially what happened on it, I'll skip the getting ready and go
right on with the story.

Trunks and valises were packed, Dinah and Sam were told what to do while
the Bobbseys were away, and the children reminded the colored cook and
her husband to be sure to feed Snap and Snoop plenty of things the dog
and cat liked.

"Oh, I'll look after dem animiles all right, honey lamb!" said fat Dinah
to Freddie. "I won't let 'em starve!"

"And maybe I can get another dog in Washington," said Freddie.

"And maybe I can find a cat!" added Flossie.

"Fo' de land sakes! doan brung any mo' catses an' dogses around heah,"
begged Dinah.

At last everything was in readiness. Mr. Bobbsey had written to Mr.
Martin, telling of the coming of the Bobbsey twins to Washington, after
a short stay in New York. The children said good-bye to Dinah and Sam,
as well as to Snap and Snoop, and then one day they were taken to the
railroad station in the automobile.

"All aboard!" cried the conductor, as the Bobbseys scrambled into the
coach of the train that was to take them to New York. "All aboard!"

"Oh, isn't this fun?" cried Nan, as she settled herself in a seat with
Bert.

"Great!" he agreed. "I wonder what will happen before we get back."

And it was going to be something very odd, I can tell you that much.



 CHAPTER VIII

IN NEW YORK

The Bobbsey twins had been to so many places, and had so often ridden in
railroad trains, that this first part of their trip--journeying in the
steam cars--was nothing new to them. They were quite like old travelers;
at least Nan and Bert were. For Flossie and Freddie there was always
sure to be something new and strange on such a long railroad trip.

The two older twins had picked out a nice seat in the center of the car,
and were comfortably settled, Bert kindly letting Nan sit next to the
window.

"You may sit here after a while," Nan said to Bert. "We'll take turns."

"That will be nice," replied Bert.

But Flossie and Freddie were not so easily pleased. Each of the smaller
twins wanted to sit next to the window, and their father and mother knew
that soon the little snub noses would be pressed close against the
glass, and that the bright eyes would see everything that flashed by as
the tram speeded on.

But the trouble was that there were not enough seats for Flossie and
Freddie each to have one, and, for a moment, it looked as though there
would be a storm, Freddie slipped into the only whole vacant seat and
took his place next the window.

"Oh, I want to sit there!" cried Flossie. "Mother, make Freddie give me
that place! Please do!"

"No! I was first!" exclaimed the little boy, and this was true enough.

"I want to look out the window and see the cows!" went on Flossie, and
her voice sounded as though she might cry at any moment. "I want to see
the cows!"

"And I want to see the horses," declared Freddie. "If I'm going to be a
fireman I've got to look at horses, haven't I?" he asked his father.

"Cows are better than horses!" half-sobbed Flossie. "Mother, make
Freddie let me sit where I can look out!"

"Children! Children! This isn't at all nice!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey.
"What shall I do?" she asked her husband in a low voice, for several of
the passengers were looking at Flossie and Freddie, whose voices were
rather loud.

"I'll let Flossie have my place," offered Nan. "I don't mind sitting in
the outside seat. Here, Flossie, come over here and sit with Bert, and
I'll sit with Freddie."

"Thank you, very much, Nan," said her mother in a low voice. "You are a
good girl. I'm sure I don't know what makes Flossie and Freddie act so.
They are usually pretty good on such a journey as this."

But Nan did not have to give up her place at the window, for a gentleman
in the seat across the aisle arose and said to Mr. Bobbsey with a smile:

"Let your little girl take my seat near the window. I'm going into the
smoking car, and I get off at the next station. I know how I liked to
sit near a window, where I could see the horses and cows, when I was a
little boy."

"Oh, thank you!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey. "That is very kind of you."

So the change was made. Flossie had a seat near one window, and Freddie
near another, and Mr. Bobbsey sat with his "little fireman," while Mrs.
Bobbsey took the other half of the seat with the "little fat fairy." Nan
and Bert were together, and so there was peace at last. On rushed the
train taking the Bobbsey twins to New York; and from there they were to
go to Washington, where a strange adventure awaited them.

Nothing very much happened during the first part of the journey. Of
course, Flossie and Freddie wanted many drinks of water, as they always
did, and for a time they kept Bert busy going to the end of the car to
fill the drinking cup. But as it was winter and the weather was not
warm, the little twins did not want quite as much water as they would
have wanted had the traveling been done on a hot day in summer. And at
last Flossie and Freddie seemed to have had enough. They sat looking out
of the window and speaking now and then of the many things they saw.

"I counted ten horses," announced Freddie after a while. "They were
mostly on the road. I didn't see many horses in the fields."

"No, not very many horses are put out to graze in the fields in the
winter, except perhaps on an extra warm day when there isn't any snow,"
said Mr. Bobbsey.

"And I saw two-sixteen cows!" exclaimed Flossie. "I saw them in a
barnyard. Two-sixteen cows."

"There aren't so many cows as that; is there, Daddy?" asked Freddie.

"Well, perhaps not quite," agreed Mr. Bobbsey with a smile. "But Flossie
saw a few cows, for I noticed them myself."

Then the smaller twins tried to count the telegraph poles and the trees
that flashed past, and soon this made them rather drowsy. Flossie leaned
back against her mother, and was soon sound asleep, while Freddie
cuddled up in Daddy Bobbsey's arms and, in a little while, he, also, was
in by-low land.

Bert and Nan took turns sitting next to the window, until the train boy
came through with some magazines, and then the older twins were each
allowed to buy one, and this kept them busy, looking at the pictures and
reading the stories.

It was a rather long trip from Lakeport to New York, and it was evening
when the train arrived in the big city. It was quite dark, and the
smaller twins, at least, were tired and sleepy. But they roused up when
they saw the crowds in the big station, and noticed the bright lights.

"I'm hungry, too!" exclaimed Freddie. "I want some supper. Oh, dear, I
wish Dinah was here!"

"So do I!" added Flossie. "I guess my cat Snoop is having a good supper
now."

"And I guess my dog Snap is, too!" went on Freddie. "Why can't we have
supper?" he asked of his father, and several of the passengers, hurrying
through the big station, turned to laugh at the chubby little fellow,
who spoke very loud.

"We'll soon have supper, little fireman," said Mr. Bobbsey. "We might
have eaten on the train, but I thought it best to wait until we reached
our hotel, where we shall stay all night."

"How long are we going to be in New York?" asked Nan.

"Two or three days," her father replied. "I have some business to look
after here. We may stay three days."

"That'll be fun!" exclaimed Bert. "There's a lot of things I want to
see, and we didn't have time when we were here before."

The twins had been in New York before, as those of you know who have
read the book called "The Bobbsey Twins In a Great City."

The hotel was soon reached, and, after being washed and freshened up in
the bathroom of their apartment, the Bobbsey twins and their father and
mother were ready to go down to supper. And not all the bright lights,
nor the music which played all during the meal, could stop Flossie and
Freddie from eating, nor Bert and Nan, either. The twins were very
hungry.

The next day Mrs. Bobbsey took Nan and Flossie shopping with her, while
Mr. Bobbsey took Bert and Freddie down town with him as the lumber
merchant had to see some men on business, and he knew the two boys could
wait in the different offices while he talked with his men friends.

"We will meet you in the Woolworth Building," said Mr. Bobbsey to his
wife. "You bring Flossie and Nan there, and after we go up in the high
tower we'll have lunch, and then go to the Bronx Park to see the
animals."

"Oh, that will be fun!" cried Freddie. "I want to see a bear--two
bears!"

"And I want to see ten--fifteen monkeys!" cried Flossie.

"Well, I hope you all get your wishes!" laughed Mother Bobbsey.

In one of the downtown offices where he had to stop to see a man, Mr.
Bobbsey was kept rather a long time talking business, and Freddie and
Bert got tired, or at least Freddie did. Bert was so interested in
looking out of the high window at the crowds in the streets below, that
he did not much care how long his father stayed. But Freddie wandered
about the outer office, looking at the typewriter which a pretty girl
was working so fast that, Bert said afterward, you could hardly see her
fingers fly over the keys. The girl was too busy to pay much attention
to what Freddie did until, all of a sudden, she looked down at the floor
and exclaimed:

"Oh, it's raining in here! Or else a water pipe has burst!" She pointed
to a little puddle of water that had formed under her desk, while
another stream was running over the office floor.

"Why, it isn't raining!" declared Bert, for the sun was shining outside.
"It can't be!"

"Then where did the water come from?" asked the girl.

"I--I guess I made it come!" confessed Freddie, walking out of a corner.
"I got a drink from the water tank, but now I can't shut off the handle,
and the water's comin' out as fast as anything!"

"Oh, my!" cried the girl, jumping up with a laugh, "I must shut it off
before we have a flood here!"

"Freddie! what made you do it?" asked Bert.

"I couldn't help being thirsty, could I?" asked the little boy. "And it
wasn't my fault the handle got stuck! I didn't know so much water would
come out!"

And I suppose it really wasn't his fault. The girl soon shut oft the
water at the faucet, and a janitor mopped up the puddle on the floor, so
that when Mr. Bobbsey came out with his friend from the inner office,
everything was all right again. And the business man only laughed when
he heard what Freddie had done.

"Now we'll go to the Woolworth Building," said Mr. Bobbsey to Freddie
and Bert, as they went out on Broadway. "I think mother and the girls
will be there waiting for us, as I stayed talking business longer than I
meant to."

And, surely enough, Mrs. Bobbsey, Nan, and Flossie were waiting in the
lobby of the big Woolworth Building when Mr. Bobbsey came up with the
two boys. This building is the tallest one in the world used for
business, and from the top of the golden tower one can look for miles
and miles, across New York Bay, up toward the Bronx, over to Brooklyn
and can see towns in New Jersey.

"We'll go up in the tower and have a view," said Mr. Bobbsey, "and then
we'll get lunch and go to the Bronx, where the animals are."

They entered one of the many elevators, with a number of other persons
who also wanted to go to the Woolworth tower, and, in a moment, the
sliding doors were closed.

"Oh!" suddenly exclaimed Nan.

And Flossie, Freddie and Bert all said the same thing, while Mrs.
Bobbsey clasped her husband's arm and looked rather queer.

"What's the matter?" asked her husband.

"Why, we're going up so fast!" exclaimed the children's mother. "It
makes me feel queer!"

"This is an express elevator," said Mr. Bobbsey. "There are so many
floors in this tall building that if an elevator went slowly, and
stopped at each one, it would take too long to get to the top. So they
have some express elevators, that start at the bottom floor, and don't
stop until they get to floor thirty, or some such number as that."

"Are there thirty floors to this building?" asked Bert, as the elevator
car, like a big cage in a tunnel standing on end, rushed up.

"Yes, and more," his father answered.

"I like to ride fast," said Freddie, "I wish we had an elevator like
this at home."

They had to take another, and smaller elevator, that did not go so fast,
to get to the very top of the tower, and from there the view was so
wonderful that it almost took away the breath of the Bobbsey twins.

"My, this is high up!" exclaimed Bert, as he looked over the edge of the
railing, and down at the people in the streets below, who seemed like
ants crawling around.

"Well, I guess we'd better be going now," said Mr. Bobbsey, after a bit.
"Come, children! Nan--Bert--Flossie--Why, where is Freddie?" he asked,
looking around.

"Isn't he here?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, her face turning white.

"I don't see him," went on Mr. Bobbsey. "He must have gone inside." But
Freddie was not there, nor was he anywhere on the outside platform that
surrounded the topmost peak of the tall building.

"Oh, where is he? What has happened to Freddie?" cried his mother. "If
he has fallen! Freddie!"



 CHAPTER IX

WASHINGTON AT LAST

The startled cries of Mrs. Bobbsey alarmed a number of other women on
the tower platform, and some one asked:

"Did your little boy fall off?"

"I don't know what happened to him!" said Mrs. Bobbsey, who was now
almost crying. "He was here a moment ago, and now he's gone!"

"He couldn't have fallen off!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey. "Some one would
have seen him. I think he must have gone down by himself in the little
elevator. I'll ask the man."

The elevator, just then, was at the bottom of the tower, but it was soon
on its way up, and Mrs. Bobbsey fairly rushed at the man as he opened
the door.

"Where is my little boy? Oh, have you seen my little boy?" she cried.

"Well, I don't know, lady," answered the elevator man. "What sort of
little boy was he?"

"He has blue eyes and light hair and--"

"Let me explain," Mr. Bobbsey spoke quietly. "My little boy, Freddie,
was out on the tower platform with us looking at the view, a few minutes
ago, and now we can't find him. We thought perhaps he slipped in here by
himself and rode down with you."

"Well, he might have slipped into my elevator when I wasn't looking,"
answered the man. "I took two or three little boys down on the last
load, but I didn't notice any one in particular. Better get in and ride
to the ground floor. Maybe the superintendent or the head elevator man
can tell you better than I. Get in and ride down with me."

"Oh, yes, and please hurry!" begged Mrs. Bobbsey. "Oh, what can have
happened to Freddie?"

"I think you'll find him all right," said the elevator man. "No accident
has happened or I'd have heard of it."

"Yes; don't worry!" advised Mr. Bobbsey.

But Mrs. Bobbsey could not help worrying, and Nan, Bert and Flossie were
very much frightened. They were almost crying. Even though the Bobbseys
got in an express elevator after getting out of the small, slower one,
it could not go down fast enough to suit Freddie's mother. When the
ground floor was reached she was the first to rush out.

One look around the big corridor of the Woolworth Building showed Mrs.
Bobbsey that something had happened over near one of the elevators.
There was a crowd there, and, for a moment, she was very much
frightened. But the next second she saw Freddie himself, with a crowd of
men around him, and they were all laughing.

"Oh, Freddie! where did you go and what have you been doing?" cried his
frightened mother as she caught him up in her arms.

"I've been having rides in the elevator," announced the small boy. "And
it went as fast as anything! I rode up and down lots of times!"

"Yes, that's what he did," said the elevator man, with a laugh. "I
didn't pay much attention to him at first, but when I saw that he was
staying in my car trip after trip, I asked him at what floor he wanted
to get out. He said he didn't want to get out at all--that he liked me,
and liked to stay in and ride!"

And at this the crowd laughed again.

"And is that what you have been doing, Freddie--riding up and down in
the elevator?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"Yes, and I liked it!" exclaimed Freddie. "I wished Flossie was with
me."

"I'm here now!" said the "little fat fairy," laughing. "I can ride with
you now, Freddie."

"No! There has been enough of riding," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "And you gave
me a bad fright, Freddie. Why did you wander away?"

"'Cause I liked an elevator ride better than staying up so high where
the wind blew," explained the little fellow.

And when they asked him more about it he said he had just slipped away
from them while they were on the tower platform, gone back into the room
and ridden down in the elevator with the other passengers. No one
realized that Freddie was traveling all by himself, the elevator man
thinking the blue-eyed and golden-haired boy was with a lady who had two
other children by the hands.

Freddie rode to the ground floor, and then he just stayed in the express
elevator, riding up and down and having a great time, until the second
elevator man began to question him.

"Well, don't ever do it again," said Mr. Bobbsey, and Freddie promised
that he would not.

After this there was a lunch, and then they all went up to Bronx Park,
traveling in the subway, or the underground railway, which seems strange
to so many visitors to New York. But the Bobbsey twins had traveled that
way before, so they did not think it very odd.

"It's just like a big, long tunnel," said Bert, and so the subway is.

The Bronx Park is not such a nice place to visit in winter as it is in
summer, but the children enjoyed it, and they spent some time in the
elephant house, watching the big animals. There was also a hippopotamus
there, and oh! what a big mouth he had. The keeper went in between the
bars of the hippo's cage, with a pail full of bran mash, and cried:

"Open your mouth, boy!"

"Oh, look!" cried Bert.

And, as they looked, the hippopotamus opened his great, big red jaws as
wide as he could, and the man just turned the whole pail full of soft
bran into the hippo's mouth!

"Oh, what a big bite!" cried Freddie, and every one laughed.

"Does he always eat that way?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey of the keeper.

"Well, I generally feed him that way when there are visitors here," was
the answer. "The children like to see the big red mouth open wide. And
here's something else he does."

After the hippo, which is a short name for hippopotamus, had swallowed
the pail full of bran mash, the keeper took up a loaf of bread from a
box which seemed to have enough loaves in it for a small bakery, and
cried: "Open again, old fellow!"

Wide open went the big mouth, and right into it the man tossed a whole
loaf of bread. And the hippo closed his jaws and began chewing the whole
loaf of bread as though it were Only a single bite.

"Oh my!" cried Freddie and Flossie, and Freddie added: "If he came to a
party you'd have to make an awful lot of sandwiches!"

"I should say so!" laughed the keeper. "One sandwich would hardly fill
his hollow tooth, if he had one."

The children spent some little time in the Bronx Park, and enjoyed every
moment. They liked to watch the funny monkeys, and see the buffaloes,
which stayed outdoors even though it was quite cold.

The Bobbsey twins spent four days in New York, and every day was a
delight to them. They had many other little adventures, but none quite
so "scary" as the one where Freddie slipped away to ride in the
elevator.

Finally, Mr. Bobbsey's business was finished, and one evening he said:

"To-morrow we go to Washington."

"Hurray!" exclaimed Bert. "Then I can see Billy Martin."

"And I can see Nell. I like her very much," added Nan.

"And I'm going to see the big monument!" cried Freddie.

Early the next morning the Bobbsey family took a train at the big
Pennsylvania Station to go to Washington. Nothing very strange happened
on that trip except that a lady in the same car where the twins rode had
a beautiful little white dog, and Flossie and Freddie made friends with
it at once, and had lots of fun playing with the animal.

"Washington! Washington!" called the trainman, after a ride of about
five hours. "All out for Washington!"

"Here at last, and I am glad of it," sighed Mrs. Bobbsey. "I shall be
glad to have supper at the hotel and get to bed. I am tired!"

But the children did not seem to be tired. They had enjoyed every moment
of the trip. In an automobile they rode to their hotel, and soon were in
their rooms, for Mr. Bobbsey had engaged three with a nice bath. He had
decided it would be best to stay at a hotel rather than at the Martins'
house, because there were so many Bobbseys; but they expected to visit
their friends very often.

It was evening when the Bobbseys arrived in Washington, and too late to
go sight-seeing. But on the way to the hotel in the automobile they had
passed the Capitol, with the wonderful lights showing on the dome,
making it look as though it had taken a bath in moon-beams.

"Oh, it's just lovely here!" exclaimed Nan, with a happy little sigh as
they went down to supper, or "dinner" as it is generally called, even
though it is eaten at night.

"Scrumptious!" agreed Bert.

The Bobbsey family had a little table all to themselves at one side of
the room, and a waiter came up to serve them, Mr. Bobbsey giving the
order.

Nan and Bert and Flossie and Freddie looked about. It was not the first
time they had stopped at a big hotel, but there was always something new
and strange and interesting to be seen.

Bert, who had been gazing about the room, began to look at the dishes,
knives and forks the waiter was putting on the table. Suddenly the dark-
haired boy took hold of the sugar bowl and turned it over, spilling out
all the lumps.

"Why Bert! you shouldn't do that," exclaimed his father.

"I want to see what's on the bottom of this bowl," Bert said. "It looks
just like the one Miss Pompret lost, and if it's the same I'll get a
hundred dollars! Oh, look, it is the same! Nan, I've found her lost
sugar bowl!" cried Bert.



 CHAPTER X

LOST

Several persons, dining at different tables, looked over to the one
where the Bobbseys were. They smiled as they heard Bert's excited voice
and saw him with the empty, overturned sugar bowl in his hand.

"Yes, this is the very one Miss Pompret lost!" Bert went on. "If we can
only find the milk pitcher now we'll have both pieces and we can get the
reward. Look at the pitcher, Nan, and see if it's got the dog--I mean
the lion--on as this has."

"Don't dare turn over the milk!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, as Nan reached for
the pitcher. "Spilling the sugar was bad enough. Bert, how could you?"

"But, Mother, that's the only way I could tell if it was Miss
Pompret's!" said the boy, while Flossie and Freddie looked curiously at
the heap of square lumps of sugar where Bert had emptied them in the
middle of the table.

"Let me see that bowl, Bert," said Mr. Bobbsey a bit sternly. "I think
you are making a big mistake. This isn't at all like the kind of china
Miss Pompret has. Hers is much finer and thinner."

"But this has got a lion on the bottom, and it's in a circle just like
the lion on Miss Pompret's dishes!" said Bert, as he passed the bowl to
his father.

"Are the letters there--the letters 'J.W.'?" Nan asked eagerly.

"I don't see them," said Bert. "But the lion is there. Maybe the letters
rubbed off, or maybe the tramp scratched 'em off."

"No, Bert," and Mr. Bobbsey shook his head, "this sugar bowl has a lion
marked on the bottom, it is true, but it isn't the same kind that is on
Miss Pompret's fine china. This tableware is made in Trenton, New
Jersey, and it is new--it isn't as old as that Miss Pompret showed you.
Now please pick up the sugar, and don't act so quickly again."

"Well, it looked just like her sugar bowl," said Bert, as he began
putting the square lumps back where they belonged. A smiling waiter saw
what had happened, and came up with a sort of silver shovel, finishing
what Bert had started to do.

"Wouldn't it have been great if we had really found her milk pitcher and
sugar bowl?" asked Nan. "If we had the hundred dollars we could buy lots
of things in Washington."

"Don't count on it," advised Mrs. Bobbsey. "You will probably never see
or hear of Miss Pompret's missing china. But I'm glad Bert overturned
the sugar bowl and not the milk pitcher searching for the lion mark."

"Oh, I wouldn't upset the milk'" exclaimed Bert with a laugh. "I knew
the sugar wouldn't hurt the tablecloth."

So that incident passed, much to the amusement of the other hotel
guests, and, really, no great harm was done, for the sugar was easily
put back in the bowl. Then dinner was served, and for a time the Bobbsey
twins did not talk very much. They were too busy with their knives,
forks and spoons.

Bert wanted to go out and take a look at the Capitol by night, to see
the searchlights that were arranged to cast their glow up on the dome
from the outside. Nan, also, said she would like to take a little walk,
and as Mrs. Bobbsey was tired she said she would stay in with Flossie
and Freddie.

So it was arranged, and Mr. Bobbsey took the two older children out of
the hotel. It was still early evening, and the streets were filled with
persons, some on foot, some in carriages, and many in automobiles.

It was not far from the hotel where the Bobbseys were staying to the
Capitol, and soon Bert and Nan, with their father, were standing in
front of the beautiful structure, with its long flight of broad steps
leading up to the main floor.

"It's just like the picture in my geography!" exclaimed Nan, as she
stood looking at it.

"But the picture in your book isn't lighted up," objected Bert.

"Well, no," admitted Nan.

"The lights have not been in place very long," explained Mr. Bobbsey.
"Very likely the picture in Nan's book was made before some one thought
of putting search lamps on the dome."

"Could we go inside?" Bert wanted to know. "I'd like to see where the
President lives."

"He doesn't live in the Capitol," explained Nan. "He lives in the White
House; doesn't he Daddy? Our history class had to learn that."

"Yes, the White House is the home of the President," said Mr. Bobbsey.
"But we could go inside the Capitol for a few minutes I guess. The
senators and congressmen are having a night session."

"What for?" asked Nan. "Do they have to work at night?"

"Sometimes."

"They don't work," declared Bert. "They just talk. I know, 'cause I
heard Mr. Perkins say so down in our post-office at home one day. He
said all the senators and congressmen did was talk and talk and talk!"

"Well, they do talk a lot!" laughed Bert's father. "But that is one of
the ways in which they work. Now we'll go inside for a little while."

In spite of the fact that it was night the Capitol was a busy place.
Later Mr. Bobbsey learned that the senators and congressmen were meeting
at night in order to finish a lot of work so they could the sooner end
the session--"adjourn," as it is called.

Bert and Nan walked around the tiled corridors. They saw men hurrying
here and there, messenger boys rushing to and fro, and many visitors
like themselves.

The children looked at the pictures and statues of the great men who had
had a part in the making of United States history, but, naturally, Nan
and Bert did not care very much for this.

"It isn't any fun!" exclaimed Bert. "Can't we go in and hear 'em talk
and talk and talk, like Mr. Perkins said they did?"

"We'll go in and hear the senators and congressmen debate, or talk, as
you call it, some other time," said Mr. Bobbsey. "We mustn't stay too
late now on account of having left mother and Freddie and Flossie at the
hotel. I think you've seen enough for the first evening."

So, after another little trip about the corridors, Bert and Nan followed
their father outside and down the flight of broad steps.

"Say, this would be a great place to slide down with a sled if there was
any ice or snow!" exclaimed Bert.

"They wouldn't let him, would they, Daddy?" asked Nan.

"Hardly," answered her father.

"Well, I can have fun some other way," Bert said. "I wish I could find
Miss Pompret's dishes and get the hundred dollars."

"So do I!" sighed Nan.

But their father shook his head and told them not to hope or think too
much about such a slim chance as that.

Flossie and Freddie were in bed and asleep when Mr. Bobbsey and Bert and
Nan reached the hotel again, and, after a little talk with their mother,
telling her what they had seen, the two older Bobbsey twins "turned in,"
as Bert called it, having used this expression when camping on Blueberry
Island, and taking the voyage on the deep, blue sea.

Because they were rather tired from their trip, none of the Bobbseys
arose very early the next morning.

"It's a real treat to me to be able to lie in bed one morning as long as
I like," said Mrs. Bobbsey, with a happy sigh as Flossie crept in with
her. "And I don't have to think whether or not Dinah will have breakfast
on time. I'm having as much fun out of this trip as the children are,"
she told her husband.

"I am glad you are, my dear," he said. "I'll be able to go around with
you a little to-day, but after that, for about a week, I shall be quite
busy with Mr. Martin. But Mrs. Martin and Nell and Billy will go around
with you ant the children."

"When are we going to see Billy and Nell?" asked Bert, at the breakfast
table.

"To-day," answered his father. "I telephoned Mr. Martin last night that
we had arrived, and they expect us to lunch there to-day. But first I
thought I'd take the children into the Congressional Library building.
It is very wonderful and beautiful."

And it certainly was, as the children saw a little later, when their
father led them up the broad steps. The library building was across a
sort of park, or plaza, from the Capitol.

"We will just look around a little here, and then go on to Mr.
Martin's," said Mr. Bobbsey. "It takes longer than an hour to see all
the beautiful and wonderful pictures and statues here."

Mrs. Bobbsey was very much interested in the library, but I can not say
as much for Flossie and Freddie, though Nan and Bert liked it. But the
two smaller Bobbsey twins were anxious to get outdoors and "go
somewhere."

"Well, we'll go now," said Mr. Bobbsey, when he and his wife had spent
some little lime admiring the decorations. "Come, Freddie. Where's
Flossie?" he asked, as he looked around and did not see his "little fat
fairy."'

"She was here a little while ago," replied Nan. "I saw her with
Freddie."

"Where did Flossie go, Freddie-boy?" asked his mother.

"Up there!" and the little chap pointed to a broad flight of stone
steps.

"Oh, she has wandered away," said Mrs. Bobbsey.

"I'll run up and get her!" offered Mr. Bobbsey. Up the stairs he
hurried, but he came back in a little while with a queer look on his
face. "I can't find her," he said.

"Oh, Flossie's lost!" cried Freddie. "Oh, maybe she falled down stairs
and got lost!"



 Chapter XI

The President

Really it was nothing new for one of the Bobbsey twins to become lost--
especially the younger set, Flossie and Freddie. Some years before, when
they were younger, it had often happened to Nan and Bert, but they were
now old enough, and large enough, to look after themselves pretty well.
But Flossie or Freddie, and sometimes both of them, were often missing,
especially when the family went to some new place where there were
strange objects to see, as was now the case in the Congressional
Library.

"Where do you suppose Flossie could have gone?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, as
she glanced around the big rotunda in which they stood with some other
visitors who had come to the city of Washington.

"I'll have to ask some of the men who are in charge of this building,"
replied Daddy Bobbsey. "Are you sure you saw Flossie go up those stairs,
Freddie?" he asked the little fireman.

"Well, she maybe went up, or she maybe went down," answered the boy. "I
was lookin' at the pishures on the wall, and Flossie was by me. And
then--well, she wasn't by me," he added, as if that explained it all.
"But I saw a little girl go up the stairs and I thought maybe it was
Flossie."

"But why didn't you tell mother, dear?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey. "If you had
called to me when you saw Flossie going away I could have brought her
back before she got lost. Why didn't you tell me that Flossie was going
away?"

"'Cause," answered Freddie.

"Because why?" his father wanted to know.

"'Cause I thought maybe Flossie wanted to slide down a banister of the
stairs and maybe you wouldn't let her, and I wanted to see if she could
slide down and then I could slide down too!"

"Well, that's a funny excuse!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey. "I don't believe
Flossie would slide down any banister here. But she has certainly
wandered away, and we'll have to find her. You stay here with the
children, so I'll know where to find you," Mr. Bobbsey said to his wife.
"I'll go to look for Flossie."

"I want to come!" exclaimed Nan.

"No, you had better stay with mother," her father told her. "But I will
take Bert along. He can take a message for me in case I have to send
one. Come along!" he called to Nan's brother.

"All right, Daddy," answered Bert.

Up the big stone stairs went Daddy Bobbsey and Bert. Mrs. Bobbsey, with
a worried look on her face, remained in the big rotunda with Nan and
Freddie. The two children were worried too.

"Do you s'pose Flossie is hurt?" asked Nan.

"Oh, no, I don't believe so," and Mrs. Bobbsey tried to speak easily.
"She has just gone into some room, or down some long hall, and lost her
way, I think. You see there are so many rooms and halls in this building
that it would be easy for even daddy or me to be lost. But your father
will soon find Flossie and bring her back to us."

"But if they don't find her, Mamma?"

"Oh, they'll be sure to do that, Nan. There is nobody around this
building who would hurt our little Flossie."

"What an awful big building it is," remarked Nan. "And just think of the
thousands and thousands of books! Why, I didn't know there were so many
books in the whole world! Mamma, do you suppose any of the people down
here read all these books?"

"Hardly, Nan. They wouldn't have time enough to do that."

And now we shall see what happens to Mr. Bobbsey and Bert. Flossie's
father decided to try upstairs first, as Freddie seemed to think that
was the way his little sister had gone.

"Of course, he isn't very sure about it," said Mr. Bobbsey to Bert; "but
we may as well start one way as the other. If she isn't upstairs she
must be down. Now we'll look around and ask questions."

They did this, inquiring of every one they met whether a little blue-
eyed and flaxen-haired child had been seen wandering about. Some whom
Mr. Bobbsey questioned were visitors, like himself, and others were men
who worked in the big library. But, for a time, one and all gave the
same answer; they had not seen Flossie.

Along the halls and into the different rooms went Mr. Bobbsey and Bert.
But no Flossie could they find until, at last, they approached a very
large room where a man with very white hair sat at a desk. The door of
this room was open, and there were many books in cases around the walls.

"Excuse me," said Mr. Bobbsey to the elderly gentleman who looked up
with a smile as Flossie's father and Bert entered the room. "Excuse me
for disturbing you; but have you seen anything of a little girl--"

"Did she have blue eyes?" asked the old man.

"Yes!" eagerly answered Mr. Bobbsey.

"And did she have light hair?"

"Oh, yes! Have you seen her?"

Softly the man arose from his desk and tiptoed over to a folding screen.
He moved this to one side, and there, on a leather couch and covered by
an office coat, was Flossie Bobbsey, fast asleep.

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed Bert.

"Hush!" said the old man softly. "Don't awaken her. When she arouses
I'll tell you how she came in here. It's quite a joke!"

"You stay here, Bert," said Mr. Bobbsey to his son, "and I'll go and get
your mother, Nan and Freddie. I want them to see how cute Flossie looks.
They'll be glad to know we have found her."

So while Bert sat in a chair in the old man's office Mr. Bobbsey hurried
to tell his wife and the others the good news. And soon Mrs. Bobbsey and
the rest of the children were peeping at Flossie as she lay asleep.

And then, suddenly, as they were all looking down at her, the little
girl opened her eyes. She saw her mother and father; she saw Nan and
Bert and Freddie; and then she looked at the kind old man with the white
hair.

"Did you find a story book for me?" were the first words Flossie said.

"Well, I'm afraid not, my dear," was the old man's answer. "We don't
have story books for little girls up here, though there may be some
downstairs."

"Is that what she came in here for--a story book?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"I believe it was," answered the old man, with a smile. "I was busy at
my desk when I heard the patter of little feet and a little girl's voice
asking me for a story book. I looked around, and there stood your little
one. I guessed, at once, that she must have wandered away from some
visitors in the library, so I gave her a cake I happened to have in my
lunch box, and got her to lie down on the sofa, as I saw she was tired.
Then she fell asleep, and I covered her up and put the screen around
her. I knew some one would come for her."

"Thank you, so much!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey. "But, Flossie, how did you
happen to come up here?"

"Oh, I wanted a story book," explained the little girl, as she sat up.
"We have story books in our library, an' there ought to be story books
here. I looked in this room an' I saw a lot of books, so I did ask for
one with a story in it. I like a story about pigs an' bears an'--an'
everything!" finished Flossie.

"Well, I wish I had that kind of story book for you, but I haven't!"
laughed the old man.

"All my books are very dull, indeed, for children, though when you grow
up you may like to read them," and he waved his hand at the many books
in the room.

So Flossie was lost and found again. The old man was one of the
librarians, and he had taken good care of the little girl until her
family came for her. After thanking him, Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey led their
twins downstairs and Mr. Bobbsey said:

"Well, I think we have seen enough of the library for a time. We had
better go and see the Martins."

"Oh, yes!" cried Bert. "Billy said he'd take me to see the President."

"And I want to go, too!" added Nan.

"We'll see!" half promised her mother.

In an automobile the Bobbsey family rode to where the Martin family
lived. And you can well believe that Billy and Nell were glad to see the
Bobbsey twins once more. Mrs. Martin welcomed Mrs. Bobbsey, and soon
there was a happy reunion. Mr. Martin was at his office, and Mr. Bobbsey
said he would go down there to see him.

"Then couldn't we go out and see the President while mother stays here
and visits with Mrs. Martin?" asked Nan. "Nell and Billy will go with
us."

"I think they might go," said Mrs. Martin. "Billy and Nell know their
way to the White House very well, as they often go. It isn't far from
here."

"Well, I suppose they may go," said Mrs. Bobbsey slowly.

"And I want to go, too!" exclaimed Freddie. "I want to see the dent."

"It isn't a DENT--it's PRESIDENT--the head of the United States!"
explained Bert. "Our teacher told us about him, and she said if ever I
came to Washington I ought to see the President."

"I want to see him too," cried Flossie.

"Let all the children go!" said Mrs. Martin. "I'll send one of my maids
to walk along with them to make sure that they keep together. It is a
nice day, and they may catch a glimpse of the President. He often goes
for a drive from the White House around Washington about this time."

"Well, I suppose it will be a little treat for them," said Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Oh, goodie!" shouted Freddie.

So, a little later, the Bobbsey twins, with Nell and Billy Martin and
one of the Martin maids, were walking toward the White House.

"There it is!" exclaimed Billy to Bert, as they turned the corner and
came within view of the Executive Mansion, as it is often called.

"Oh, it IS white!" cried Nan.

"Just like the pictures!" added Bert.

"It's got a big iron fence around," observed Freddie. "Is that so the
President can't get out?"

"No, I guess it's so no unwanted people can get in," answered Nell.

The children and the maid walked down the street and looked through the
iron fence into the big grounds, green even now though it was early
winter. And in the midst of a great lawn stood the White House--the home
of the President of the United States.

Suddenly two big iron gates were swung open. Several policemen began
walking toward them from the lawn and some from the street outside.

"What's the matter?" asked Bert. "Is there a fire?"

"The President is coming out in his carriage," said Billy. "If we stand
here we can see him! Look! Here comes the President!"



 CHAPTER XII

WASHINGTON MONUMENT

Down the White House driveway rolled the carriage, drawn by the prancing
horses. It was coming toward the iron gate near which, on the sidewalk,
stood the Bobbsey twins, with their new friends, Billy and Nell Martin.

On the front seat of the carriage, which was an open one, in spite of
the fact that the day was cool, though not very cold, sat two men. One
drove the horses and the other sat up very straight and still.

"I should think he'd have an automobile," remarked Bert.

"He has," answered Billy. "He has an auto--two of 'em, I guess. But lots
of times he rides around Washington in a carriage just as he's doing
now."

"That's right," chimed in Nell. "Sometimes we see the President and his
wife in a carriage, like now, and sometimes in a big auto."

By this time the carriage, containing the President of the United
States, was passing through the gate. A crowd of curious persons, who
had seen what was going on, as had the Bobbsey twins, came hurrying up
to catch a glimpse of the head of the nation. The police officers and
the men from the White House ground kept the crowd from coming too close
to the President's carriage.

The Chief Executive, as he is often called, saw the crowd of people
waiting to watch him pass. Some of the ladies in the crowd waved their
hands, and others their handkerchiefs, while the men raised their hats.

Billy put his hand to his cap, saluting as the soldiers do, and Bert,
seeing this, did the same thing. Nell and Nan, being girls, were not, of
course, expected to salute. As for Flossie and Freddie they were too
small to do anything but just stare with all their eyes.

As the President's carriage drove along he smiled, bowed, and raised his
hat to those who stood there to greet him. The President's wife also
smiled and bowed. And then something in the eager faces of the Bobbsey
twins and their friends, Nell and Billy, attracted the notice of the
President's wife.

She smiled at the eager, happy-looking children, waved her hand to them,
and spoke to her husband. He turned to look at the Bobbseys and their
friends, and he waved his hand, He seemed to like to have the children
watching him.

And then Flossie, with a quick little motion kissed the tips of her
chubby, rosy fingers and fluttered them eagerly toward the President's
wife.

"I threw her a kiss!" exclaimed Flossie with a laugh.

"I'm gin' to throw one too," exclaimed Freddie. And he did.

The President's wife saw what the little Bobbsey twins had done, and, as
quick as a flash, she kissed her hand back to Flossie and Freddie.

"Oh, isn't that sweet!" exclaimed a woman in the throng, and when,
afterward, Nan told her mother what had happened, Mrs. Bobbsey said that
when Flossie and Freddie grew up they would long remember their first
sight of a President of the United States.

"Well, I guess that's all we can see now," remarked Billy, as the
President's carriage rolled off down the street and the crowd that had
gathered at the White House gate began moving on. The gates were closed,
the policemen and guards turned away, and now the Bobbsey twins and
their friends were ready for something else.

"Where do you want to go?" asked Billy of Bert.

"Oh, I don't know. 'Most anywhere, I guess."

"Could we go to see the Washington Monument?" asked Nan. "I've always
wanted to see that, ever since I saw the picture of it in one of daddy's
books at home."

"I don't believe we'd better go out there alone," said Nell. "It's quite
a way from here. We'd better have our mothers or our fathers with us.
But we can walk along the streets, and go in the big market, I guess."

"Let's do that!" agreed Billy. "There's heaps of good things to eat in
the market," he added to Bert. "It makes you hungry to go through it."

"Then I don't want to go!" laughed Bert. "I'm hungry now."

"I know where we can get some nice hot chocolate," said Nell. "It's in a
drug store, and mother lets Billy and me go there sometimes when we have
enough money from our allowance."

"Oh, I'm going to treat!" cried Bert. "I have fifty cents, and mother
said I could spend it any way I pleased. Come on and we'll have
chocolate. It's my treat!"

"We may go, Mayn't we, Jane?" asked Nell, of the maid who had
accompanied them.

"Oh, yes," was the smiling answer. "If you go to Parson's it will be all
right."

And a little later six smiling, happy children, and a rosy, smiling maid
were seated before a soda counter sipping sweet chocolate, and eating
crisp crackers.

After that Billy and Nell took the Bobbsey twins to the market, which is
really quite a wonderful place in Washington, and where, as Billy said,
it really makes one hungry to see the many good things spread about and
displayed on the stands.

"I think we've been gone long enough now," said the maid at last. "We
had better go back."

So, after looking around a little longer at the part of the market where
flowers were sold and where old negro women sold queer roots, barks, and
herbs, the Bobbsey twins and their friends started slowly back toward
the Martin house.

On the way they passed a store where china and glass dishes were sold,
and there were many cups, saucers and plates in one of the windows.

"Wait a minute!" cried Bert, as Billy was about to pass on. "I want to
look here!"

"What for?" Billy asked. "You don't need any dishes!"

"I want to see if Miss Pompret's sugar bowl and cream pitcher are here,"
Bert answered. "If Nan or I can find them we'll get a lot of money, and
I could spend my part while I was here."

"Why Bert Bobbsey!" cried Nan, "you couldn't find Miss Pompret's things
here--in a store like this. They only sell new china, and hers would be
secondhand!"

"I know it," admitted Bert. "But there might be a sugar bowl and pitcher
just like hers here, even if they were new."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Nan. "There couldn't be any dishes like Miss
Pompret's. She said there wasn't another set in this whole country."

"Well, I don't see 'em here, anyhow!" exclaimed Bert, after he had
looked over the china in the window. "I guess her things will never be
found."

"No, I guess not," agreed Billy, to whom, and his sister, Nan told the
story of the reward of one hundred dollars offered by Miss Pompret for
the return of her wonderful sugar bowl and cream pitcher, while Bert was
looking at the window display.

"Well, did you have a good time?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, when her twins
came trooping back.

"Yes. And we saw the President!" cried Nan.

And then they told all about it.

The Bobbseys spent the rest of the day visiting their friends, the
Martins, and returned to their hotel in the evening. They planned to
have other pleasure going about the city to see the sights the next day
and the day following.

"Could we ever go into the house where the President lives?" asked Nan
of her father that night.

"Yes, we can visit the White House or, rather, one room in it," said Mr.
Bobbsey. "What they call the 'East Room' is the one in which visitors
are allowed. Perhaps we may go there tomorrow, if Mr. Martin and I can
finish some business we are working on."

After breakfast the next morning the Bobbsey twins were glad to hear
their father say that he would take them to the White House; and, a
little later, in company with other visitors, they were allowed to enter
the home of the President, and walk about the big room on the east side
of the White House.

"I'm going to sit down on one of the chairs," said Nan. "Maybe it will
be one that the President once sat on."

"Very likely it will be," laughed Mrs. Bobbsey, as Nan picked out a
place into which she "wiggled." From the chair she smiled at her
brothers and sister, and they, too, took turns sitting in the same
chair.

Bert found a pin on the thick green carpet in the room. The carpet was
almost as thick and green as the moss in the woods, and how Bert ever
saw the tiny pin I don't know. But he had very sharp eyes.

"What are you going to do with it?" asked his father.

"Just keep it," the boy answered. "Maybe it's a pin the President's wife
once used in her clothes."

"Oh, you think it's a souvenir!" laughed Mrs. Bobbsey, as Bert stuck the
pin in the edge of his coat. And for a long time he kept that common,
ordinary pin, and he used to show it to his boy friends, and tell them
where he found it.

"The White House President's pin," he used to call it.

"And now," said Mr. Bobbsey, as they came from the White House, "I think
we'll have time to see the Monument before lunch."

"That's good!" exclaimed Nan. "And shall we go up inside it?"

"I think so," her father replied.

Washington Monument, as a good many of you know, is not a solid shaft of
stone. It is built of great granite blocks, as a building is built, and
is, in fact, a building, for it has several little rooms in the base;
rooms where men can stay who watch the big pointed shaft of stone, and
other rooms where are kept the engines that run the elevator.

The bottom part of Washington Monument is square, and on one side is a
doorway. Above the base the shaft itself stretches up over five hundred
feet in height, and the top part is pointed, like the pyramids of the
desert. The monument shaft is hollow, and there is a stairway inside,
winding around the elevator shaft. Some people walk up the stairs to get
to the top of the monument, where they can look out of small windows
over the city of Washington and the Potomac River. But most persons
prefer to go up and down in the elevator, though it is slow and, if
there are many visitors they have to await their turns.

If the Bobbseys had walked up inside the monument they would have seen
the stones contributed by the different states and territories. Each
state sent on a certain kind of stone when the monument was being built,
and these stones are built into the great shaft.

As it happened, there was not a very large crowd visiting the monument
the day the Bobbseys were there, so they did not have long to wait for
their turn in the elevator.

"This isn't fast like the Woolworth Building elevators were," remarked
Bert as they felt themselves being hoisted up.

"No," agreed his father. "But this does very well. This is not a
business building, and there is no special hurry in getting to the top."

But at last they reached the end of their journey and stepped out of the
elevator cage into a little room. There were windows on the sides, and
from there the children could look out.

"It's awful high up," said Nan, as she peeped out.

"Not as high as the Woolworth Building," stated Bert, who had jotted
down the figures in a little book he carried.

Flossie and Freddie had gone around to the other side of the elevator
shaft with their mother, to look from the windows nearest the river,
and, a moment later, Mr. Bobbsey, Nan and Bert heard a cry of:

"Oh, Flossie! Flossie! Look out! There it goes!"



 CHAPTER XIII

A STRAY CAT

MR. BOBBSEY, who was standing near Bert and Nan, turned quickly as he
heard his wife call and ran around to her side.

"What's the matter?" he called. "Has Flossie fallen?"

But one look was enough to show him that the two little Bobbsey twins
and their mother were all right. But Flossie was without her hat, and
she had been wearing a pretty one with little pink roses on it.

"What happened?" asked Mr. Bobbsey, while one of the men who stay inside
the Monument at the top, to see that no accidents happen, came around to
inquire if he could be of any help.

"It's Flossie's hat," explained Mrs. Bobbsey. "She was taking it off, as
she said the rubber band hurt her, when a puff of wind came along---"
"And it just blowed my hat right away!" cried Flossie. "It just blowed
it right out of my hand, and it went out of the window, my hat did! And
now I haven't any more hat, and I'll--I'll--an'--an'--"

Flossie burst into tears.

"Never mind, little fat fairy!" her father comforted her, as he put his
arms around her. "Daddy will get you another hat."

"But I want that one!" sobbed Flossie. "It has such pretty roses on it,
an' I liked 'em, even if they didn't smell!"

"I guess the little girl's hat will be all right when you get down on
the ground," said the monument man. "Many people lose their hats up
here, and unless it's a man's stiff one, or unless it's raining or
snowing, little harm comes to them. I guess your little girl's hat just
fluttered to the ground like a bird, and you can pick it up again"

"Do you think so?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey.

"Oh, you'll get her hat back again, ma'am, I'm sure," the man said.
"There's lots of boys and young men who stay around the monument, hoping
for a chance to earn a stray dime or so by showing visitors around or
carrying something. One of them probably saw the hat flutter out of the
window, and somebody will pick it up."

"Well, let's go down and see," suggested Mr. Bobbsey. "I think we have
had all the view we want."

"Don't cry, Flossie," whispered Nan consolingly, as she took her little
sister by the hand. "We'll get your hat back again."

"And the roses, too?" Flossie asked.

"Yes, the roses and everything," her mother told her.

"If I were a big, grown-up fireman, I could climb down and get Flossie's
hat," said Freddie. "That's what firemans do. They climb up and down big
places and get things--and people," the little boy added after a moment
of thought.

"Well, I don't want my little fireman climbing down Washington
Monument," said Mr. Bobbsey. "It's safer to go down in the elevator."

And, a little later, the Bobbsey twins and their father and mother were
back on the ground again. Once outside the big stone shaft, they saw a
boy come running up with Flossie's hat in his hand.

"Oh, look! Look!" cried the little girl. "There it is! There it is!"

"Is this your hat?" the small boy wanted to know. "I saw it blow out of
the window, and I chased it and chased it. I was afraid maybe it would
blow into the river."

"It was very nice of you," said Mr. Bobbsey, and he gave the boy twenty-
five cents, which pleased that small chap very much.

Flossie's hat was a little dusty, but the pink roses were not soiled,
and soon she was wearing it again. Then, smiling and happy, she was
ready to go with the others to the next sight-seeing place.

"Where now?" asked Bert, as they started away from the little hill on
which the Monument stands.

"I think we'll go to the Smithsonian Museum," said his father. "There
are a few things I want to see, though you children may not be very much
interested. Then I want to take your mother to the art gallery and after
that--well, we'll see what happens next," and he smiled at the Bobbsey
twins.

"I know it will be something nice!" exclaimed Nan.

"I hope it's something good to eat!" murmured Bert. "I'm hungry!"

"I'd like to see a fire!" cried Freddie. "Do they ever have fires in
Washington, Daddy?"

"Oh, yes, big ones, sometimes. But we really don't want to see any,
because a fire means danger and trouble for people."

"And wettings, too," put in Flossie. "Sometimes when Freddie plays fire
he gets me wet."

"Well, I'm goin' to be a fireman when I grow up," declared Freddie. "And
I wish I had my little fire engine now, 'cause I don't like it not to
have any fun."

"We'll have some fun this afternoon," his father promised him.

Just as Mr. Bobbsey had expected, the children were not much amused in
the art gallery or the museum. But Mrs. Bobbsey liked these places, and,
after all, as Nan said, they wanted their mother to have a good time on
this Washington trip.

After lunch they went again to call on the Martins, as Mr. Bobbsey had
to see the father of Billy and Nell on business.

"And where are we going to have some fun?" Bert asked, as they journeyed
away from their hotel toward the Martin house.

"You'll see," his father promised. The children tried to guess what it
might be, but they could not be sure of anything.

It did not take Mr. Bobbsey long to get through with his business with
Mr. Martin and then the father of the twins said to Mrs. Martin:

"Can you let Billy and Nell come with us on a little trip?"

"To be sure. But where are you going?" Mrs. Martin replied.

"I thought we'd take one of the big sight-seeing autos and ride about
the city, and perhaps outside a little way," said Mr. Bobbsey. "Nell and
Billy can tell us the best way to go"

"Oh, yes! I can do that'" cried Billy. "I often take rides that way with
my uncle when he comes to Washington. Come on, Nell! We'll get ready."

"May we really go?" asked Nell, of her mother.

"Yes, indeed!" was the answer.

So, a little later, the Bobbsey twins, with Billy and Nell and Mr. and
Mrs. Bobbsey, were on one of the big automobiles. It was not too cold to
ride outside, as they were all bundled up warm.

Through the different parts of the city the sight-seeing car went, a man
on it telling the persons aboard about the different places of interest
as they were passed. In a little while the machine rumbled out into the
quieter streets, where the houses were rather far apart.

Then the automobile came to a stop, and some one asked:

"What's so wonderful to see here?"

"Nothing," the driver of the car answered. "But I have to get some water
for the radiator. We won't be here very long. Those who want to, can get
out and walk around."

"Yes, I'll be glad to stretch by legs," said one man with a laugh. He
was sitting next to Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey, and they began talking to him.
Nan and Bert were talking to Billy and Nell, and, for the time being, no
one paid much attention to Flossie and Freddie, who were in a rear seat.

Suddenly Flossie called to her little brother;

"Oh, look! There's a cat! It's just like our Snoop!"

Freddie looked to where Flossie pointed with her chubby finger.

"No, that isn't like our Snoop," said the little boy, shaking his head.

"Yes, 'tis too!" declared his sister. "I'm going to get down and look at
it. I like a cat, and I didn't see one close by for a long time."

"Neither did I," agreed Freddie. "If that one isn't like our Snoop, it's
a nice cat, anyhow."

The cat, which seemed to be a stray one, was walking toward the car, its
tail held high in the air "like a fishing pole."

Flossie and Freddie were in the rear seat, as I have said, and no one
seemed to be paying any attention to them. Their father and mother were
busy talking to the man who had gotten down to "stretch his legs," and
Nan and Bert, with Billy and Nell, were busy talking.

"Let's get down," proposed Flossie.

"All right," agreed Freddie.

In another moment the two smaller Bobbsey twins had left their seat,
climbed down the rear steps of the sight-seeing automobile, and were
running toward the stray cat, which seemed to wait for them to come and
pet it.





CHAPTER XIV

STRAY CHILDREN

"Nice pussy! Come and let me rub you!" said Freddie softly, as he held
out his hand toward the stray cat.

"Yes, come here, Snoop!" added Flossie, as she walked along with her
brother.

"'Tisn't Snoop, and you mustn't call him that name," ordered Freddie.

"Well, he looks like Snoop," declared Flossie.

"But if that isn't his name he won't like to be called by it, no more
than if I called you Susie when your name's Flossie," went on the little
boy.

"Do you s'pose cats know their names?" asked Flossie.

"Course they do!" exclaimed her brother. "Don't our Snoop know his name
when I call him, same as our dog Snap does?"

"Oh, well, but our cat is a very, very, smart cat!"

"Maybe this one is, too," Freddie said. "Anyhow, we'll just call him
'Puss' or 'Kittie,' and he'll like that, 'cause that's a name for any
cat."

"That's so," agreed Flossie.

So calling to the stray cat in their soft, little voices, and holding
out their hands to pet the animal, Flossie and Freddie walked farther
away from the sight-seeing car, and soon they were petting the cat that,
indeed, did look a bit like Snoop.

They stroked the soft back of the cat, rubbed its ears, and the animal
rubbed up against their legs and purred. Then, suddenly, the cat heard a
dog barking somewhere, and ran down toward the side entrance of a large,
handsome house.

"Oh, come on!" cried Freddie to his sister, as he saw the cat running
away. "Maybe there's some little cats back here, and we could get one to
take home with us! Come on, Flossie!"

Flossie was willing enough to go, and in a moment they were in the rear
yard of one of the big houses, and out of sight from the street where
the auto stood, while the man was putting water in the radiator.

The cat, once over its fright about the barking dog, seemed quieter now,
and let the two little Bobbsey twins pet it again. Freddie saw a little
box-like house in one corner of the yard and cried:

"I'm going to look here, Flossie! Maybe there's kittens in it!"

"Oh, let me see!" exclaimed the little girl. Forgetting, for a time, the
stray cat they had started to pet, she and her brother ran over to the
little box-like house.

"Better look out!" exclaimed Flossie, as they drew near.

"Why?" asked Freddie.

"'Cause maybe there's a strange dog in that box."

"If there was a dog in this yard I guess this cat wouldn't have come in
here," replied Freddie. "The cat ran when the other dog barked, and
there can't be a dog here, else the cat wouldn't come in."

"I wonder what's there?" murmured Flossie.

"We'll soon find out," her brother said, as he bent over the little
house, which was made of some boxes nailed together. There was a tiny
window, with a piece of glass in it, and a small door.

Freddie began to open the little door, and he was not very much afraid,
for now the cat was purring and rubbing around his legs, and the little
boy felt sure that there could be no dog, or anything else scary, in the
box-house, or else the cat would not have come so close.

"Maybe there isn't anything in there," suggested Flossie.

"Oh, there's got to be SOMETHING!" declared Freddie. "It's a place for
chickens, maybe."

"It's too little for chickens," said Flossie.

"Well, maybe it's a place for----"

That is as far as Freddie got in his talk, for, just then, a voice
called from somewhere behind the children:

"Hi there! What do you want?"

"Oh!"

Freddie and Flossie both called out in surprise as they turned. They
saw, standing on the back steps of the big house, a boy about as big as
Bert.

"We came in after this cat," said Freddie, and he pointed to the stray
pussy that was rubbing against his legs.

"Is it your cat?" the boy wanted to know.

Flossie shook her head.

"We just followed after him," she said. "He was out on the street, and
we saw him, and we got down to rub him, and he heard a dog bark, and he
ran in here, and we ran after him."

"Oh, I see," and the boy on the back steps smiled in a friendly way. "So
it isn't your cat."

"No," answered Freddie, "Is it yours?"

The boy shook his head.

"I never saw the cat before," he answered. "It's a nice one, though, and
maybe I'll keep it if you don't want it."

"Oh, we don't want it!" Freddie said quickly. "We have a cat of our own
at home. His name is Snoop."

"And we have a dog, too," added Flossie. "But his name is Snap. And we
have Dinah and Sam. Only they aren't a cat or a dog," she went on.
"Dinah is our cook and Sam's her husband."

"Where do you live?" the boy asked.

"Oh, away off," explained Freddie. "We live in Lakeport, and we go to
school."

"Only now there isn't any school," went on Flossie. "We can't have a
fire 'cause something broke, and we came to Washington."

"Have you come here to live?" the strange boy questioned.

"No, only to visit," explained Freddie. "My father has to see Mr.
Martin. Do you know Mr. Martin?"

The strange boy shook his head.

"I guess he doesn't live around here," he remarked. "I've lived here all
my life; but there's nobody named Martin on this block. Where did you
come from?"

"Offen the auto," explained Freddie. "We were riding on the auto with
Billy Martin and Nell, and our father and mother and Nan and Bert and---
-"

"Say, there are a lot of you!" cried the boy with a laugh.

"It was a big auto," explained Flossie. "But the man had to stop and
give it some water, so we got down to pet the cat. It's a nice cat."

"Yes, it's a nice cat all right," agreed the strange boy, and he came
down the steps and began to rub the animal. "I like cats," he went on to
the children. "What's your names?"

"Flossie and Freddie Bobbsey," answered Freddie. "What's yours?"

"Tom Walker," was the answer. "I guess I know where you came from. It's
one of those big, sight-seeing autos. They often go through this street,
but I never saw one stop before. You'd better look to see that it
doesn't go off and leave you."

"Oh, the man said we could get down," returned Freddie. "And one man is
going to stretch his legs. I'd like to see a man stretch his legs." he
went on. "I wonder how far he can stretch them?"

"Not very far, I guess," remarked Tom Walker. "But I'm glad to see you,
anyhow. I've been sick, and I had to stay home from school, but I'm
better now, and I'm going back to-morrow. But I haven't had any one to
play with, and I'm glad you came in--you and the cat."

"'Tisn't our cat!" Flossie hastily explained.

"Oh, I know!" agreed the boy. "But he came in with you."

"We thought maybe there were kittens in that box," and Freddie pointed
to the one he had been about to open.

"Oh, that was the place where I used to keep my rabbits," said Tom. "I
haven't any now, but maybe I'll get some more; so I left the little
house in the yard. I like rabbits."

"So do I!" declared Freddie.

"And their nose goes sniff-snuff so funny!" laughed Flossie. "Rabbits
eat a lot of cabbage," she said. "If I had something to eat now I would
like it."

"Say, I can get some cookies!" cried Tom. "Wait, I'll go in the house
after some. You wait here!"

"We'll wait!" said Freddie.

Into the house bounded Tom, and to the cook in the kitchen he called:

"Oh, please give me some cookies. There's a stray cat in our yard and
some stray children, and I want to give 'em something to eat, and----"

"My goodness, boy, how you do rattle on!" cried the cook. "What do you
mean about stray cats and stray children?"



 CHAPTER XV

"WHERE ARE THEY?"

Freddie and Flossie walked slowly up the yard, away from the empty
rabbit house, and stood at the foot of the back steps up which Tom
Walker had hurried to ask the cook for something to eat for the "stray
children." The little Bobbsey twins had not heard what the cook said to
Tom after he had asked for something to eat. But the cook repeated her
question.

"What do you mean by stray cats and stray children?"

"There are the stray children out in the yard now," answered Tom. "They
strayed away from some place, just as that dog I kept for a while once
did. There was a stray cat, too, but I don't see it now."

"Stray children, is it?" cried the jolly cook. "Oh, look at the little
darlin's!" she exclaimed, as she saw the small Bobbsey twins standing
out in the yard, waiting for Tom to come back. Freddie and Flossie
certainly did look very sweet and pretty with their new winter coats and
caps on, though it was not very cold. It was not as cold in Washington
as in Lakeport.

"Do you think he'll bring us anything to eat?" asked Freddie of Flossie,
as they stood there waiting.

"I hope he does," the little girl answered. "I'm hungry."

"So'm I!" Freddie admitted. "I guess that cat was, too. Where did he
go?"

The cat answered himself, as though he knew he was being talked about.
He came out from under the back steps, rubbed up against Flossie's fat,
chubby legs with a mew and a purr, and then, seeing a place where the
sun shone nice and warm on the steps, the cat curled up there and began
to wash its face, using its paws as all cats do.

"Please, Sarah, can't I have something to eat for the stray children,
and maybe for the cat?" again asked Tom of the cook.

"Oh, I dunno!" she answered. "Sure an' you're a bother! Your mother's
out and I don't know what to do. These must be lost children, and, most
likely, their father or mother's lookin' all over for 'em now. But I'd
better bring 'em in an' keep 'em safe here, rather than let 'em wander
about the streets. How did they come into our yard, do you think, Tom?"

"They just walked in, after the stray cat. They were on one of the big
automobiles, and it stopped, so they got off. I told 'em maybe their
folks would be looking for them," went on Tom, who was older than
Flossie and Freddie. "But they seem to think it's all right."

"Well, they're lost, as sure as anything," declared the cook. "But it's
best to keep 'em here until their folks can come after 'em. I'll give
you something for them to eat, Tom, and then you must look after 'em, as
I'm too busy, getting ready for the party your mother is going to have
this night."

The kind cook soon got ready a plate of cookies and some glasses of milk
for Flossie and Freddie. And, as Tom began to feel hungry himself when
he saw something being made ready for his new little friends, a place
was set for him, also, on a side table in the dining room.

"Call 'em in, now!" said the cook. "Everything is ready. And is the cat
there?"

"Yes," answered Tom, as he looked out and saw the pussy curled up in the
sun on the steps. "It's there."

"Well, I think I'll give it some milk," said the cook.

So, a little later, Flossie and Freddie, the stray children--for that is
what they were--sat down to a nice little lunch in a strange, house. Tom
Walker sat down with them, and the stray cat had a saucer of milk in the
kitchen.

"I looked out in the street," said the cook, as she came back to get
Freddie another glass of milk, "but I don't see any automobile there.
Did you really ride here in an auto?"

"Oh, yes," answered Freddie. "And the man on it all the time talked
through a red horn, but I didn't know what he said."

"That was the man speaking through a megaphone so everybody on the
sight-seeing auto would know what they were looking at as they rode
along," said Tom. "They often pass through here, though I haven't seen
any to-day."

"But what to do about you children I don't know," said the cook, when
Flossie and Freddie had eaten as much as they wanted. "If you did come
here on an auto it's gone now, and there isn't a sign of it. I think you
must have come two or three streets away from the car before you turned
in here."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Freddie. "When we got down off the auto we saw the
cat and we came in after it. The auto was right out in front."

"Well, it isn't there now," said the cook. "I guess it must have gone
away and taken your folks with it. Maybe they're looking for you. But I
guess you'll have to stay here until they come to find you. You're too
small to be allowed to go about alone."

"We like it here," said Flossie, settling back comfortably in her chair.
"We can stay as long as you want us to."

"And we can stay to supper if you ask us," went on Freddie. "Course
mother wouldn't let us ask for an invitation, but if you WANT to ask us
to stay we can't help it."

"'Specially if you have cake," added Flossie, smoothing out her dress.

"Yes, 'specially cake!" agreed Freddie.

"Oh my!" laughed the cook. "Sure an' you're very funny! But I like you.
And I only wish I knew where your folks were. But the best I can do is
to keep you here until they come. They must know about where they lost
you. Come, Tom, take the stray children out and amuse them. Your
mother'll be home pretty soon."

If Tom's mother had been at home she would have at once telephoned and
told the police that she had two lost--or stray--children at her house,
so that in case Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey inquired, as they did, they would
know that the tots were all right.

But Mrs. Walker was not at home, and the cook did the best she could.
She made sure the children were safe and comfortable while they were
with her.

And, after they had eaten, Tom got out some of his toys, and he and
Flossie and Freddie had a good time playing about the house and in the
yard. The stray cat wandered away while Flossie and Freddie were eating
their little lunch, and the Bobbsey twins did not see him again.

Now while Flossie and Freddie were having a pretty good time, eating
cookies and drinking milk, there was much excitement on the big sight-
seeing car where Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey, Nan, Bert, and the other, still
had their seats.

For some little time after the car had stopped to allow the man to put
water in the radiator, neither Mr. nor Mrs. Bobbsey missed their smaller
twins. They were busy talking, and Bert and Nan were looking about and
having a good time, talking to Billy and Nell Martin.

At last, however, the auto man called:

"Everything is all right! Get on board!"

That meant he was going to start off again, and it was not until then
that Mrs. Bobbsey thought to look around to see if Flossie and Freddie
were all right. And, of course, she did not see them.

"Flossie! Freddie! Where are you?" called Mrs. Bobbsey.

There was no answer, and the seat which the two smaller children had
been in on the big bus, was empty.

"Oh, Daddy!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, "Flossie and Freddie have gone."

"Gone? Gone where?" Mr. Bobbsey asked,

"That's it--I can't say," answered Mrs. Bobbsey. "The last I saw of them
was when the auto stopped."

"I saw the two little tots climb down off the rear steps of the car,"
said the man who had wanted to "stretch his legs." "They seemed to be
going after something," he added.

"It was a cat," said the woman next to the big man who had last spoken.
"I saw the children get down and go toward a stray cat and then I got to
thinking of something else."

"Oh, if it was a cat you might know it!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey with a
laugh." I guess they're all right. They can't have gone far. Probably
they are on the other side of the street, looking at some bedraggled
kitten." But a look up and down the street did not show Flossie and
Freddie. By this time the auto was all ready to start off again.

"But we can't go without Flossie and Freddie!" cried Nan.

"I should say not!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey. "Oh, where are they? Where
can my darlings have gone? What has happened?"



 CHAPTER XVI

THE FIRE BELL

Mrs. Bobbsey's cries of alarm, of course, excited all the other
passengers who had got back on the sight-seeing auto, ready to start off
again. They had had a little rest while the water was being put into the
radiator, and the man had "stretched his legs" all he wanted to, it
seemed.

"The children can't be far away," said Mr. Bobbsey. "They were here only
a moment ago. Even if they have wandered off, which is probably what
they have done, they can't be far."

"They're all right," the man who drove the car assured Mr. Bobbsey. "I
didn't see 'em go away, of course, as I was busy, but I'm sure nothing
has happened."

"But what shall we do?" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, and tears came into her
eyes. "It does seem as if more things have happened to Flossie and
Freddie since we started on this trip than ever before."

"Oh, they'll be all right," declared Mr. Bobbsey. "I'll look around.
Perhaps they may have gone into one of these houses."

"Did you look under the seats?" asked Bert.

"Under the seats!" exclaimed Billy. "What good would that do? Your
brother and sister couldn't be under there!"

"Pooh, you don't know much about Flossie and Freddie!" answered Bert.
"They can be in more places than you can think of; can't they, Nan?"

"Yes, they do get into queer places sometimes. But they aren't under my
seat," and Nan looked, to make sure.

"Nor mine," added Nell, as she looked also.

Some of the other passengers on the auto did the same thing. Mr. Bobbsey
really thought it might be possible that Freddie and Flossie, for some
queer reason, might have crawled under one of the seats when the big
machine stopped for water. But the children were not there.

"Oh, what shall we do?" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey.

"They'll be all right," her husband answered. "They can't be far away."

"That's right ma'am," said a fat, jolly-looking man.

"Some of you go and inquire in the houses near here," suggested the man
who drove the auto. "And I'll go and telephone back to the office, and
see if they're there."

"But how could they be at your automobile office?" Mrs. Bobbsey wanted
to know.

"It might easily happen," replied the man. "We run a number of these big
machines. One of them may have passed out this way while I was stopping
here for water, and perhaps none of us notice it, and the children may
have climbed on and gone on that car, thinking it was this one."

"They couldn't get on if the auto didn't stop," said Billy.

"Well, maybe it stopped," returned the driver. "Perhaps it passed up the
next street. The children may have gone down there and gotten on.
Whatever has happened, your little ones are all right, ma'am; I'm sure
of that."

"I wish I could be!" sighed Mrs. Bobbsey.

Several men volunteered to help Mr. Bobbsey look for the missing twins,
and they went to the doors of nearby houses and rang the bells. But to
all the answer was the same. Flossie and Freddie had not been seen.

And the reason for this was that the small Bobbsey twins, in following
the stray cat, had turned a corner and gone down another street, and
were on the block next the one where the auto stood. That was the reason
the Walker cook, looking out in front, could see no machine, and why it
was that none of those who helped Mr. Bobbsey look for the missing
children could find them.

"Well, this is certainly queer!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey, when at none of
the houses was there any word of Flossie and Freddie.

"But what are we to do?" cried his wife.

"I think we'd better notify the police," said Mr. Bobbsey. "That will be
the surest way."

"Yes, I think it will," agreed the auto man. "I telephoned to the
office, but they said no lost children had been turned in. Get aboard,
every one, and I'll drive to the nearest police station."

Away started the big auto, leaving Flossie and Freddie behind in the
home of Tom Walker on the next street. And though Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey,
with Nan and Bert and Billy and Nell were much worried, Flossie and
Freddie themselves, were having a good time.

For they were playing with Tom, who showed them his toys, and he told
them about the rabbits he used to keep.

"I have had as many as six big ones at a time," Tom said. "And I had one
pair that had the finest red eyes you ever saw."

"Red eyes!" cried Flossie. "What funny rabbits they must have been!"

"Oh, I know some rabbits have red eyes," declared Freddie. "But not very
many. Bert said so."

"I don't believe I'd like to have red eyes," answered his twin sister.
"Everybody'd think I'd been crying."

"They're not red that way," explained Tom. "They just have the color red
in them; just as some people have black eyes, blue eyes, and brown eyes-
-like that."

"Oh! Say, I heard Nan say once that a girl in her room at school had one
black eye and one grey eye. Wasn't that funny?"

"It certainly was," answered Tom. And then he showed the little Bobbsey
twins a number of picture books and a locomotive which went around a
little track.

Freddie and Flossie were having such a good time that they never thought
their father and mother might be worried about them.

But, after a while, Mrs. Walker came home. You can well imagine how
surprised she was when she found the two lost, strayed children in her
house.

"And so they got off one of the sight-seeing autos, did they?" cried
Tom's mother. "Oh, my dears! I'm glad you're here, of course, and glad
you had a good time with Tom. But your mother and father will be much
frightened! I must telephone to the police at once."

"We'll not be arrested, shall we?" asked Freddie anxiously.

"No, indeed, my dear! Of course not! But your parents have probably
already telephoned the police, who must be looking for you. I'll let
them know I have you safe."

"Why, course we're safe!" cried Flossie.

So Mrs. Walker telephoned. And, just as she guessed, the police were
already preparing to start out to hunt for the missing children. But as
soon as they got Mrs. Walker's message everything was all right.

"They're found!" cried Mr. Bobbsey to his wife, when a police officer
telephoned to the hotel to let the father of the small Bobbsey twins
know that the children were safe. "They're all right!"

"Where were they?" asked his wife,

"All the while they were right around the corner and just in the next
street from where our auto was standing."

"Oh, dear me!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey, "what a relief"

"I should say so!" agreed Mrs. Martin, who had gone to the hotel, where
her friends were staying, to do what she could to help them.

"I'll get a taxicab and bring them straight here," said Mr. Bobbsey.

A little later Flossie and Freddie were back "home" again. That is, if
you call a hotel "home," and it was, for the time, to the traveling
Bobbseys.

"What made you do it?" asked Flossie's mother, when the story had been
told. "What made you go after the stray cat?"

"It was such a nice cat!" said the little girl,

"And we wanted to see if it was like our Snoop," added Freddie.

"Well, don't do such a thing again!" ordered Mr. Bobbsey.

"No, we won't!" promised Freddie.

"No, but they'll do something worse," said Bert in a low voice to his
friend Billy, who had also come to the hotel.

So the little excitement was over, and soon the Bobbsey twins were in
bed. Not, however, before Nan had asked her father:

"Where are you going to take us to-morrow?"

"To Mount Vernon, I think," was his answer.

"Oh, where Washington used to live!" remarked Bert.

"Where--" But right there Freddie went to sleep.

"Yes, and where he is buried," added Nan.

And then she, too, fell asleep. And she dreamed that Flossie and Freddie
were lost again, and that she started out to find them riding on the
back of a big cat while Bert rode on a dog, like Snap.

"And I was so glad when I woke up and, found it was only a dream," said
Nan, telling Nell about it afterward.

There are two ways of going to Mount Vernon from the city of Washington.
Mount Vernon is down on the Potomac River, and one may travel to it by
means of a small steamer, which makes excursion trips, or one can get
there in a trolley car.

"I think we'll go down by boat and come back by trolley," said Mr.
Bobbsey. "In that way we can see more."

"I'd rather go on the boat all the while," said Freddie. "Maybe I could
be a fireman on the boat."

"Oh, I think they have all the firemen they; need," laughed his father.

"Is Mount Vernon an old place?" asked Nan. as they were getting ready to
leave their hotel after breakfast.

"Quite old, yes," her father answered.

"And do they have old-fashioned things there, like spinning wheels, and
old guns and things like those in Washington's headquarters that we went
to once?" Nan went on.

"Why, yes, perhaps they do," her father said. "Why do you ask?"

"Oh, I was just thinking," went on Nan, "that if they had a lot of old-
fashioned things there they might have Miss Pompret's sugar bowl and
cream pitcher, and we could get 'em for her."

"How could we?" asked Bert. "If they were there they'd belong to
Washington, wouldn't they, Daddy?"

"Well, I suppose all the things in the house once belonged to him or his
friends," said Mr. Bobbsey. "But I don't imagine those two missing
pieces of Miss Pompret's set will be at Mount Vernon, Nan."

"No, I don't s'pose so," sighed the little girl. "But, oh, I would like
to find 'em!"

"And get the hundred dollars reward!" added Bert.

"Don't think too much of that," advised their mother. "Of course it
would be nice to find Miss Pompret's dishes, and do her a favor, but I
think it is out of the question after all these years that they have
been lost."

The weather was colder than on the day before, when Flossie and Freddie
had been lost, and the sun shone fitfully from behind clouds.

"I think we are going to have a snow storm," said Mr. Bobbsey, on their
way to take the boat for Mt. Vernon.

"Oh, goodie!" cried Flossie. "I hope it snows a lot!"

"So do I!" added Freddie. "Could we send home for our sled if there's
lots of snow, Daddy?" he asked.

"I hardly think it would be worth while," said his father. "We are not
going to be here much more than a week longer. And it would be quite a
lot of work to get your sleds here and send them home again. I think
you'll get all the coasting and skating you want when we get back to
Lakeport."

"Anyway, we're having a nice time while we're here," said Nan, with a
happy little sigh.

"It's fun when Freddie and Flossie don't get lost," added Bert. "I'm
going to keep watch of 'em this time."

"I'll help," added Nan. "Oh, here are Billy and Nell!" she called,
waving her hand to their new friends. The Martin children were to go to
Mount Vernon with the Bobbsey twins, and they now met them near the
place from which the boat started.

"All aboard!" cried Freddie, as they went on the small steamer that was
to take them to Mount Vernon. "All aboard. I'm the fireman!"

"There aren't any fires to put out," said, Nell, teasing the small chap
a little.

"Yes, there is--a fire in the boiler, and it makes steam," said Freddie,
who had often looked in the engine room of steamers. "But I'm not that
kind of fireman. I put out fires. I'm going to be a real fireman when I
grow up," he added.

Soon they were comfortably seated on board the boat, which after a bit
moved out into the Potomac. Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey were talking together.
Nan, Bert, Billy and Nell were watching another boat which was passing,
and Flossie was near them. But Freddie had slipped away, in spite of
what Bert had said about going to keep a watchful eye on his small
brother.

Suddenly, when the steamer was well out in the river, there was the loud
clanging of a bell, and a voice cried:

"Fire! Fire! Fire!"

At once every one on the boat jumped up. The women looked frightened,
while the men seemed uncertain what to do.

"Clang! Clang! Clang!" rang the fire alarm bell.



 CHAPTER XVII

FREDDIE'S REAL ALARM

"I hope nothing has happened--that the boat isn't on fire," said Mrs.
Bobbsey to her husband. "That would be terrible!"

"I hardly think that is it," he said. "There may be a small fire,
somewhere on the boat, but, even if there is, they have a way of putting
it out. I'll go and see what it is. You stay with the children."

But just then, after another clanging of the bell, some one was heard to
laugh--the ringing, hearty laugh of a man.

"There!" exclaimed Mr. Bobbsey, "I guess everything is all right. They
wouldn't be laughing if there was any danger."

"Let's go to the fire!" cried Bert. "I want to see it!"

"So do I!" chimed in his new chum, Billy, eagerly.

"Oh, can't we see it; whatever it is?" begged Nan.

"First I'll have to make sure there is a fire," replied Mr. Bobbsey. "I
hope there isn't. But, if there should be a small one, and the firemen
on the boat are putting it out, and if they let us get near enough to
see, and if the smoke isn't too thick--"

"Oh, Daddy! Not so many 'ifs' please!" laughed Nan.

The Bobbseys all laughed at this, as did Nell and Billy.

"Freddie would like to see the fire, if there is one," remarked Nell
Martin.

"Oh, that's so! Where is Freddie?" cried Bert.

Then, for the first time, Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey noticed that the little
blue-eyed and light-haired boy was not with them.

But at that moment around the corner of a deck cabin came a man wearing
a cap with gold braid around the edge. He was smiling and leading by the
hand a little boy. And the little boy was Freddie!

"Oh, there he is!" cried Flossie. "Freddie, where were you?" she asked.
"And did you been to see the fire?"

"Well, I rather guess he did!" exclaimed the man, who was the captain of
the boat. "He Was the whole fire himself!"

"The whole fire?" cried Mr. Bobbsey. "Do you mean to say that my little
boy started a fire?"

"Oh, nothing as bad as that!" said the captain, and he smiled down on
Freddie who smiled up at him in return. "No, all your little boy did was
to ring the fire alarm bell and then call out 'Fire!' But of course that
was enough to start things going, and we had quite a good deal of
excitement for a time. But it's all right now, and I think he won't do
it again."

"Just what did he do?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, as Freddie came over to stand
beside his mother. He looked rather ashamed.

"Well, on the deck, back of the wheel-house, which is the little place
where I or my men stand to steer the boat, there is a fire alarm bell.
It's there for any one to ring who finds the boat on fire, and when the
bell is rung all my firemen hurry to put out the blaze," said the
captain.

"Now this little chap of yours went up and rang that bell, and then he
cried out 'Fire,' as I've told you. Then--well, lots of things happened.
But I couldn't help laughing when I found out it was a false alarm, and
learned just why Freddie, as he tells me his name is, rang the bell."

"And why was that?" asked Mr. Bobbsey, quickly.

Freddie spoke up for himself.

"The bell had a sign on it," said the little fellow, "and it said to
ring it for a fire. I wanted to see a fire, and so I rang the bell and--
and--"

Freddie's lips began to quiver. He was just ready to cry.

"There, there, my little man!" said the captain kindly. "No harm is
done. Don't worry. It's all right," and he patted Freddie on the
shoulder.

"You see it's just as Freddie says," the captain went on. "There is a
large sign painted near the bell which reads: 'Ring this for a fire.' I
suppose it would be better to say; 'Ring the bell in case of fire.' I
believe I'll have it changed to read that way. Anyhow, your little boy
saw the sign over the bell, And on the bell is a rope so low that any
one, even a child, can reach it. So your Freddie just pulled the rope,
clanged the bell, and then he cried 'Fire!' as loudly as he could. Some
one else took up the cry, and, there you are!"

"And so you rang the bell, did you, Freddie, because you wanted to see a
fire?" asked the father of the little fellow.

"Yes," answered Flossie's brother. "I wanted to see how they put out a
fire on a boat, and the bell said for to ring for a fire, and I wanted a
fire, I did; not a big one, just a little one, and so----"

"And so you just naturally rang the bell!" laughed the captain. "Well, I
guess that's partly my fault for having the sign read that way. I'll
have it changed. But your little boy is quite smart to be able to read
so well," he added.

"Oh, I go to school!" said Freddie proudly, "only there isn't any now on
account of--well I guess the boiler got on fire," he added.

"He's a regular little fireman," said Mr. Bobbsey. "He can't read very
much, but one of the first words he learned to spell was 'fire,' and
he's never forgotten it."

The boat was now going on down the river toward Mount Vernon, and the
excitement caused by the false alarm of fire was over.

Of course Freddie had done wrong, though he had not meant to, and
perhaps it was not all his fault. However, his father and mother scolded
him a little, and he promised never to do such a thing again.

I wish I could tell you that the Bobbsey twins were interested in Mount
Vernon, but the truth of the matter is that the two younger ones were so
busy talking about Freddie's fire alarm, and Bert and Nan, with Billy
and Nell, also laughed so much about it, that they did not pay much
attention to the tomb of the great Washington, or anything about the
place where the first President of the United States once had his home.

Of course Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey were interested in the place where the
wonderful man had lived, and they looked about the grounds where he had
once walked, and they visited the house where he had lived. But, really,
the children did not care much for it.

"When are we going back?" asked Freddie several times.

"Don't you like it here?" asked his mother. "Just think of what a
wonderful and beautiful place this is!"

"Well," said Freddie slowly, "I didn't see any fire engines yet."

Mrs. Bobbsey tried not to laugh, but it was hard work.

"I think we'd better go back to Washington," she said to her husband.

"I think so, too," he answered, and back to Washington they went. This
time they rode on a trolley car, and there was no danger of Freddie's
sending in an alarm of fire.

And on the way home something quite wonderful happened. At least it was
wonderful for Freddie.

He was looking out of the window, when suddenly he gave a yell that
startled his father and mother, as well as Nan, Bert, Nell and Flossie,
and that made the other passengers sit up.

"Oh, look! There's a fire engine! There's a fire engine!" cried the
little chap, pointing; and, surely enough, there was one going along the
street. It was bright and shiny, smoke was pouring from it and the
horses were prancing.

The other Bobbsey twins turned to look at it, and Bert said:

"Pooh, that's only coming back from an alarm."

"That's so," agreed Mr. Bobbsey. "The horses are going too slowly to be
running to a fire, Freddie. They must be coming back."

"Well, it's a fire engine, anyhow," said Freddie, and every one had to
agree with him. Freddie watched the shiny engine until it was out of
sight, and then he talked about nothing else but fires on the way home.

Tired, but well satisfied with their trip, the Bobbsey's reached their
hotel, and the Martin children went to their home, promising to meet the
following day and see more Washington sights.

It was about the middle of the night that Mrs. Bobbsey, who slept in the
same room with Flossie and Freddie, felt herself being shaken in bed.
She roused up to see, in the dim light, Freddie standing near her, and
shaking her with his chubby hands.

"What is it, dear?" asked Mrs. Bobbsey, sleepily.

"Fire!" hoarsely whispered Freddie. "The house is on fire, and it's
real, too, this time!"



 CHAPTER XVIII

THE ORIENTAL CHILDREN

At first Mrs. Bobbsey was too sleepy, from having been so quickly
awakened, to really understand what Freddie was saying. She turned over
in bed, so as to get a better look at the small boy, who was in his
night gown, and with his hair all tousled and frowsled from the pillow.
There was no mistake about it--Mrs. Bobbsey was not dreaming. Her little
boy was really standing beside her and shaking her. And once more he
said:

"Wake up, Momsie! There's a real fire! This house is on fire, and we've
got to get out. I can hear the fire engines!"

"Oh, Freddie! you're walking in your sleep again," said his mother as
she sat up, now quite awake--"You have been dreaming, and you're walking
in your sleep!"

Freddie had done this once or twice before, thought not since he had
come to Washington.

"The excitement of going to Mount Vernon, and your ringing of the fire
bell on the boat has made you dream of a fire, Freddie," his mother went
on. "It isn't real. There isn't any fire in this hotel, nor near here.
Go back to sleep."

"But, Momsie, I'm awake now!" cried Freddie. "And the fire is real! I
can see the red light and I can hear the engine puffin'! Look, you can
see the light!"

Freddie pointed to a window near his mother's bed. And, as she looked,
she certainly saw a red, flickering light. And then the heard the
whistle which she knew came from a fire engine. It was not like a
locomotive whistle, and, besides, there were no trains near the hotel!

"Oh, it is a fire!" cried Mrs. Bobbsey. "Freddie, call your father!"

Mr. Bobbsey slept in the next room with Bert, while Nan had a little bed
chamber next to her mother's, on the other side of the bath room.

But there was no need to call Mr. Bobbsey. In his big, warm bath robe he
now came stalking into his wife's room.

"Don't be frightened," he said. "There's a small fire in the building
next to this hotel. But it is almost out, and there is no danger. Stay
right in bed."

"But it's a real fire, isn't it, Daddy?" cried Freddie. "I heard the
engines puffin', and I saw the red light and it woke me up and I comed
in and telled Momsie; and it's a real fire, isn't it?"

"Yes, Freddie, it's a real fire all right," said Mr. Bobbsey. "But don't
talk so loud, nor get excited. You may awaken the people in the other
rooms around us, and there is no need. I was talking to the night clerk
of the hotel over the telephone from my room, and he says there is no
danger. There is a big brick wall between our hotel and the place next
door, which is on fire. The blaze can't get through that."

"Can't I look out the window and see the engines?" Freddie wanted to
know.

"Yes, I guess it would be too bad not to let you see them, as long as
they are here, and it's a real fire," answered Mrs. Bobbsey. "I hope no
one was hurt next door," she added to her husband.

"I think not," he replied. "The fire is only a small one. It is almost
out."

So Freddie had his dearest wish come true in the middle of the night--he
saw some real fire engines puffing away, spouting sparks and smoke, and
pumping water on a real fire. Of course the little boy could not see the
water spurting from the hose, as that was happening inside the burning
building. But Freddie could see some of the firemen at work, and he
could see the engines shining in the light from the fire and the glare
of the electric lamps. So he was satisfied.

Bert and Nan were awakened, and they, too, looked out on the night
scene. They were glad it was not their hotel which was on fire. As for
Flossie, she slept so soundly that she never knew a thing about it until
the next morning. And then when Freddie told her, and talked about it at
the breakfast table, Flossie said:

"I don't care! I think you're real mean, Freddy Bobbsey, to have a fire
all to yourself!"

"Oh, my dear! that isn't nice to say," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "We thought it
better to let you sleep."

"Well, I wish I'd seen the fire," said Flossie. "I like to look at
something that's bright and shiny."

"Then you'll have a chance to see something like that this afternoon,"
said Mr. Bobbsey to his little girl.

"Where?" asked all the Bobbsey twins at once, for when their father
talked this way Nan and Bert were as eager as Flossie and Freddie.

"How would you all like to go to a theater show this afternoon--to a
matinee?" asked Mr. Bobbsey.

"Oh, lovely!" cried Flossie.

"Could Nell and Billy go?" asked Nan, kindly thinking of her little new
friends.

"Yes, we'll take the Martin children," Mr. Bobbsey promised.

"And will there be some red fire in the theater show?" Flossie wanted to
know.

"I think so," said her father. "It is a fairy play, about Cinderella,
and some others like her, and I guess there will be plenty of bright
lights and red fire."

"Will there be a fire engine?" asked Freddie. Of course you might have
known, without my telling you, that it was Freddie who asked that
question, But I thought I'd put his name down to make sure.

"I don't know about there being a fire engine in the play," said Mr.
Bobbsey. "I hardly think there will be one. But the play will be very
nice, I'm sure."

"I think so, too," said Mrs. Bobbsey. "We'll have a fine time."

"Will there be any cowboys or Indians in it?" Bert asked.

"Well, hardly, I think," his father answered. "But if we don't like the
play, after we get there, we can come home," he added, his eyes
twinkling.

"Oh, Daddy!" cried all the Bobbsey twins at once. And then, by the way
their father smiled, they knew he was only joking.

"Oh, we'll stay," laughed Bert.

"Oh, it's snowing!" cried Freddie as they left the breakfast table and
went to sit in the main parlor of the hotel. "It's snowing, and we can
have sleigh rides."

"If it gets deep enough," put in Bert. "I guess it won't be very deep
here, will it, Daddy?"

"Well, sometimes there is quite a bit of snow in Washington," answered
Mr. Bobbsey. "We'll have to wait and see."

"The snow won't keep us from going to show in the theater; will it?"
asked Nan.

"No," her mother said. "Nor to see the show given there," she added,
smiling.

After a visit to the Martins, to tell them of the treat in store, the
tickets were purchased, the Bobbseys had dinner, and, in due time, the
merry little party was at the theater.

They were shown to their seats, and then the children looked around,
waited eagerly for the curtain to go up, while Mr. and Mrs. Bobbsey
talked together. More and more people came in. There were a large number
of children, for it was a play especially for them, though, of course,
lots of "grown-ups" came also.

The musicians entered and took their places on the funny little place
back of a brass rail. Then came the delicious thrills of the squeaking
violins as they were tuned, the tap-tap of the drum, the tinkle of a
piano, and the soft, low notes of a flute.

"Oh, it's going to begin soon," whispered Nell to Nan.

"I hope it's a good show," said Bert to his chum Billy, and trying to
speak as if he went to a matinee every other day at least.

"Oh, they have pretty good shows here," Billy said.

"Look!" suddenly whispered Nan, pointing to a box at their left. "Look
at the Chinese children!"

And, surely enough, into a near-by box came several boys and girls about
the age of the Bobbsey twins, and some almost babies, but they were
dressed in beautiful blue, golden and red silken garments. And with them
came their father, who also wore a silk robe of blue, embroidered with
golden birds.

"Who are they--some of the actors in the play?" asked Bert.

"No, that's the Chinese minister and some of his family, and I guess
some of their friends," explained Billy. "I've seen them before. They
don't often dress up in the same kind of clothes they wear in China, but
they did to-day."

"Oh, aren't they cute!" said Nell to Nan.

"Too lovely for anything!" agreed Nan enthusiastically.

Many eyes were on the box, but the Chinese minister and his beautifully
dressed children did not seem to mind being looked at. The children were
just as much interested in staring about the theater as were the Bobbsey
twins, and the Oriental tots probably thought that the other children
were even more queer than the American boys and girls thought the
Chinese to be.

Having given a good deal of attention to the Chinese children in the
box, the Bobbseys looked around the theater at the other little folk in
the audience.

"Oh, look at the funny fat boy over there!" cried out Freddie in a loud
voice.

"Hush, hush, Freddie!" whispered Nan quickly. "You mustn't talk so loud.
Every one will hear you."

"But he is awful fat, isn't he?" insisted Freddie.

"He isn't any fatter than you'll be if you keep on eating so much,"
remarked Bert.

"Oh, I don't eat any more than I have to," declared the little boy.
"When you are really and truly hungry you can't help eating. Nobody
can!"

"And you're hungry most all the time," said Bert.

"I'm not at all! I'm hungry only when--when--I'm hungry," was Freddie's
reply.

Then the orchestra began to play, and, a little later, the curtain went
up and the fairy play began.

I am not going to tell you about it, because you all know the story of
Cinderella. There she was, sitting among the ashes of the fire-place,
and in came the godmother who made a pumpkin turn into a golden coach,
and did all the other things just like the story.

The play was a little different from the story in some books. In one
scene a bad fairy sets off a lighted fire cracker under the palace of
the princess. And on the stage, when this happened, there was a loud
banging noise, just as Bert and Nan had often heard on the Fourth of
July.

"Bang'!" went the fire cracker.

"Oh!" cried Nell, and she gave a little jump, she was so surprised. And
many other were surprised, too, including the little Oriental children.
And they were so surprised that the smaller ones burst out crying.

"Oh dear! Oh dear!" they cried, in their own language, of course, and
the two smallest hid their faces down in their father's lap and cried
salty tears on his beautiful blue robe. But he didn't seem to mind a
bit.

He patted the heads of the little, sobbing tots, and every one in the
theater looked over toward the box, for the crying of the Chinese
children, who were frightened by the bang of the fire cracker, was very
loud crying indeed.



 CHAPTER XIX

"OH LOOK!"

FOR a time the actors on the stage, taking part in the fairy play, had
to stop. They could not go on because the Chinese children were crying
so hard. And really it was a strange thing to have happen.

Then Cinderella herself--or at least the young lady who was playing that
part--seeing what the matter was, stepped to the front of the stage and
said to the Chinese minister:

"Tell your little children there will be no more shooting. They will not
be frightened again. I am sorry it happened," and she bowed and kissed
her hand to the older boys and girls, in the box. They were not
frightened as were the smaller ones.

"It is all right. They will be themselves again soon. I thank you," said
the Chinese minister, rising and bowing to the actress. He spoke in
English, but with a queer little twist to his words, just as we would
speak queerly if we tried to talk Chinese.

Then the sobbing of the frightened children gradually ceased, and the
play went on. But the Bobbsey twins were almost as much interested in
the queer, beautifully dressed foreign children in the box as they were
in the play itself. Indeed Flossie and Freddie looked from the stage to
the box and from the box back to the stage again so often that their
mother said they would have stiff necks. However, they didn't have,
which only goes to show that children's necks can stand a great deal of
twisting and turning without getting tired.

So the play went on, and very pretty it was. Cinderella tried on the
glass slipper. It fitted perfectly, and everything came out all right,
and she and the prince lived happily forever after.

"Is that all?" asked Flossie, when the curtain went down for the last
time, and the people began getting up to leave.

"That's all," her mother told her. "Didn't you like it?"

"Oh, yes, it was nice," said Flossie. "But they didn't have as much red
fire as I wanted to see."

"And they didn't have a single fire engine!" sighed Freddie.

"Too bad!" laughed Bert. "We'll look for a show for you, Freddie, where
they have nothing but fire engines!"

But, after all, even without quite enough red fire and not a fire engine
on the stage, the play was enjoyed by the Bobbsey twins and their little
friends, the Martin children.

"Where are we going?' asked Nan, as they came out of the theater and Mr.
Bobbsey led the children toward a big automobile that stood at the curb.

"We are going to the Martins for the evening," answered Daddy Bobbsey.
"Mr. Martin sent down his auto for us, so we don't have to go out in the
storm."

"It was very kind of him," added Mrs. Bobbsey.

"I like the snow!" cried Freddie. "I'm going to make a snow fort, to-
morrow, and a snow man."

"And I'm going to make a little snow doll!" declared Flossie.

"Wait until you see if there's snow enough," advised Bert.

"Will there be much, do you think?" Nan inquired of Nell.

"Well, we don't often have a very heavy fall of snow here," was the
answer, "though it sometimes happens. It's snowing hard now."

And so it was, And the weather was getting cold, too, almost as cold as
back in Lakeport. But the Bobbseys were used to it. Their eyes were
shining and their cheeks were red. Flossie and Freddie tried to catch
the drifting snow flakes dancing down from the sky. But there was quite
a crowd on the side-walk coming out of the theater, and every one seemed
to get in the way of the little Bobbsey twins, so they did not have much
luck catching the white crystals.

Into the big, closed auto they piled, and soon they were rolling along
the snow-covered streets of Washington toward the home of Nell and Billy
Martin. Mr. and Mrs. Martin would be waiting at their house to greet the
Bobbseys. It was dark, now, and the lighted lamps made the snow sparkle
like a million diamonds.

"Oh, it's just lovely!" sighed Nan, as she leaned back against the
cushions and peered from the window.

"It looks just like a fairy play out there," and Nell pointed to the
glittering snow.

"It looks like--like one of those funny Christmas cards that twinkle
so!" declared Freddie.

"Oh, it will soon be Christmas, won't it?" exclaimed Flossie, who sat on
her mother's lap. "I wonder what I'll get!"

"I want something, too!" cried Freddie. "Oh, won't it be nice at
Christmas!"

"Yes, it will soon be here--much sooner than we think," said Mr.
Bobbsey.

"Shall we go home for Christmas?" Nan asked.

"Oh, yes," her father told her. "My business here is nearly finished,
and we'll go back to Lakeport next week."

"Aren't we going to buy anything to take home--souvenirs I mean?" added
Bert. "I promised to bring Sam something."

"And I want to take Dinah a present!" declared Nan.

"Yes, we must do a little shopping for things like that," said Mrs.
Bobbsey. "You children will have a chance next week."

And they talked of that, and the things they would buy, until the
automobile stopped at the Martin house, when they all went inside.

After supper, or dinner as it is more often called, the children had fun
playing games and looking at picture books, while the older folk talked
among themselves. Mr. and Mrs. Martin were quite interested in hearing
of how the Chinese children cried when the fire cracker went off.

"I have never seen any of the ambassadors or the ministers from the
Oriental countries wear their native dress," said Mr. Martin. "But there
is no reason why they shouldn't."

"No," said Mr. Bobbsey, "there isn't. If we went to a foreign country we
would want to wear the clothes we had always worn at home, and we
wouldn't like to be stared at for doing it, either."

The evening passed pleasantly, but at last Mrs. Bobbsey noticed that
Flossie and Freddie were getting sleepy, so she said they would have to
go back to the hotel and to bed.

"And I hope the fire engines don't wake us up to-night," said Nan. "I
want to sleep."

"I do, too," added her mother. Nothing happened that night, and in the
morning there was enough snow on the ground for the making of a small
snow man, at least, and as many snowballs as the children wanted to
throw at him. Flossie and Freddie were warmly dressed, and allowed to
play out in a little yard in front of the hotel. It was rather a treat
for Washington children to have as much snow as they now had, and many
were out enjoying it.

Flossie and Freddie played as they did at home, and Bert and Nan, with
Nell and Billy Martin, who came over, watched the smaller twins.

"Let's throw snowballs at a target," said Freddie presently. "I'm going
to play I'm a soldier and shoot the cannon."

"You haven't any target, Freddie Bobbsey," declared Flossie.

"Yes, I have, too!" answered her twin brother. "Just look here!"

Freddie had espied a small tin can standing in an areaway not far away.
He ran to get this, and then set it up on a near-by iron railing.

"There's my target!" he exclaimed; and both he and Flossie began to
throw snowballs at it and were in high glee when the can tumbled over.

Thus the fun went on for some time.

After lunch Mrs. Bobbsey said:

"Now, children, if you wish, you may go out and buy some souvenirs. As
long as Nell and Billy are here to go with you, I will not have to go,
since they know their way about the streets near our hotel. I'm going to
give you each a certain sum, and you may spend it in any way you like
for souvenirs to take home to Sam, Dinah and your other friends. Now
start out and have a good time."

The snow had stopped and the sun was shining, which meant that the white
covering would not last long. But it gave a touch of winter to
Washington, and the children liked it.

Down the street went the six children, two by two, the four Bobbsey
twins and Nell and Billy Martin. Flossie and Freddie walked together,
then came Billy and Bert, while Nan walked with Nell.

"Here's a store where they have nice things," said Nell, as they stopped
in front of one, the windows of which held all sorts of light and pretty
articles, from fans and postcards to vases and pocket knives, some with
tiny photographic views of Washington set in the handles.

"Let's go in there and buy something," proposed Bert.

In they trooped, and you may well believe me when I say that the woman
who kept this store had a busy half-hour trying to wait on the four
Bobbsey twins at once. Nell and Billy did not want to buy anything, but
the Bobbseys did.

At last, however, each one had bought something, and then Bert said:

"I know where to go next."

"Where?" asked Nan.

"Around the corner," her brother answered as they came out of the
souvenir shop. "There's a cheaper place there. I looked in the windows
yesterday and saw the prices marked. We haven't got much money left, and
we've got to go to a cheap place for the rest of our things."

"All right," agreed Nan, and Bert led the way. The other store, just as
he said, was only around the corner, and, as he had told his sister, the
windows were filled with many things, some of them marked at prices
which were very low.

Suddenly, as Nan was peering in through the glass, she gave a startled
cry, and, plucking Bert by the sleeve, exclaimed:

"Oh, look!"



 CHAPTER XX

A GREAT BARGAIN

Bert Bobbsey turned to look at his sister Nan. She was staring at
something in the jumble of articles in the second-hand shop window, and
what she saw seemed to excite Nan.

"What is it? What's the matter?" asked Bert, as Nan, once more,
exclaimed:

"Look! Oh, look!"

"Is it a fire?" eagerly asked Freddie, as he wiggled about to get a
better view of the window, since Bert and Nan stood so near it he could
not see very well. "Is it a fire?"

"Oh, you and your fires!" laughed Nell, as she put her hands lovingly on
his shoulders. "Don't you ever think of anything else?"

"Oh, is it a fire?" asked Freddie again.

"No, there isn't any fire," answered Billy, laughing, as his sister Nell
was doing, at Freddie's funny ideas.

"But it's something!" insisted Flossie, who had, by this time, wiggled
herself to a place beside Freddie, and so near the window that she could
flatten her little nose against it.

"What is it you see, Nan?" asked Bert. "If it's more souvenirs I don't
believe we can buy any. My money is 'most gone."

"Oh, but we must get these even if we have to go home for more money!"
exclaimed Nan. "Look, Bert! Right near those old brass candlesticks. See
that sugar bowl and pitcher?"

"I see 'em!" answered Bert.

"Don't you know whose they are?" rapidly whispered Nan. "Look at the way
they're painted? And see! On the bottom of the sugar bowl is a blue
lion! I can't see the letters 'J. W.' but they must be there. Oh, Bert!
don't you know what this means? Can't you see? Those are Miss Pompret's
missing dishes that she told us she'd give a hundred dollars to get
back! And oh, Bert! we've got to go in there and buy that sugar bowl and
cream pitcher, and we can take 'em back to Miss Pompret at Lakeport, and
she'll give us a hundred dollars, and--and--"

But Nan was so excited and out of breath that she could not say another
word. She could just manage to hold Bert's sleeve and point at the
window of the second-hand shop.

At last Bert "woke up," as he said afterward. His eyes opened wider, and
he stared with all his might at what Nan was pointing toward. There,
surely enough, among some old candlesticks, a pair of andirons, a
bellows for blowing a fire, was a sugar bowl and cream pitcher. And it
needed only a glance to make Bert feel sure that the two pieces of china
were decorated just as were Miss Pompret's.

But there was something more than this. The sugar bowl was turned over
so that the bottom part was toward the street. And on the bottom,
plainly to be seen, was a circle of gold. Inside the circle was a
picture of some animal in blue, and Nan, at least, felt sure it was a
blue lion. As she had said, no letters could be seen, but they might be
there.

"Don't you see, Bert?" asked Nan, as her brother waited several seconds
before speaking. "Don't you see that those are Miss Pompret's dishes?"

"Well," admitted the Bobbsey lad, "they look like 'em."

"They surely are!" declared Nan. "Oh, I'm so excited! Let's go right in
and buy them. Then we'll get a hundred dollars!"

She darted away from Bert's side, and was about to move toward the door
of the shop when Billy caught her by the coat sleeve.

"Wait a minute, Nan," he said.

"What for?" she asked.

"Until Bert and I talk this over," went on Billy, who, though he was not
much older than Nan, seemed to be, perhaps because he had lived in a
large city all his life. "You don't want to rush in and buy those dishes
so quick."

"Why not?" demanded Nan. "If I don't get 'em somebody else may, and you
know Miss Pompret offered a reward of a hundred dollars. These are the
two pieces missing from her set. Her set is 'broken' as she calls it, if
she doesn't have this sugar bowl and pitcher."

"Yes, I remember your telling me about Miss Pompret's reward," said
Billy. "But you'd better go a bit slow."

"Maybe somebody else'll buy 'em!" exclaimed Nan.

"Oh, I don't believe they will," said Nell, "This is a quiet street, and
this shop doesn't do much business. We only come here once in a while
because some things are cheaper. We never bought any second-hand
things."

"There's nobody coming down the street now," observed Bert, who was
beginning to agree with Billy in the matter. "If we see any one going in
that we think will buy the dishes, we can hurry in ahead of 'em. We'll
stand here and talk a minute. What is it you want to say, Billy?"

"Well, it's like this," went on the Washington boy. "I know these
second-hand men. If they think you want a thing they'll charge you a lot
of money for it. But if they think you don't want it very much they will
let you have it cheap. I know, 'cause a fellow and I wanted to get a
baseball glove in here one day. It was a second-hand one, but good. The
fellow I was with knew just how to do it.

"He went in, and asked the price of a lot of things, and said they were
all too high. Then he asked the price of the glove, just as if he didn't
care much whether he got it or not. The man said it was a dollar, but
when Jimmie--the boy who was with me--said he only had eighty cents, the
man let him have the glove for that."

"Oh, I see what you mean!" cried Nan. "You mean we must try to get a
bargain."

"Yes," said Billy. "Otherwise, if you go in and want to buy those dishes
first thing, the man may want five dollars for 'em."

"Oh, we haven't that much money!" cried Nan, much surprised.

"That's why I say we must go slow," said Billy. "Now you leave this to
me and Bert."

"I think it would be a good idea," declared Nell.

"All right! I will," agreed Nan. "But, oh, I do hope we can get those
dishes for Miss Pompret."

"And I hope we can get the reward of a hundred dollars," murmured Bert.

"I only hope they're the right dishes," said Billy.

"Oh, I'm sure they are," declared Nan. They have the blue lion on and
everything. And if they have the letters 'J. W.' on, then we'll know for
sure. Let's go in and see."

"We've got to go slow," declared Billy. "Mustn't be too fast. Let Bert
and me go ahead."

"I want to come in, too!" declared Freddie. "I want to buy a whistle. Do
they have whistles in here?"

"I guess so," answered Bert. "It will be a good thing to go in and ask
for, anyhow."

"Sort of excuse for going in," suggested Nell.

"Do they have ice cream cones?" asked Flossie. "I want something to
eat."

"I don't believe they have anything to eat in here," said Nell. "But we
can get that later, Flossie. Now you and Freddie be nice when we go in,
and after we come out I'll get you some ice cream."

"I'll be good!" promised Flossie.

"So'll I," agreed Freddie. "But I want a whistle, and if they have a
little fire engine I want that."

"You don't want much!" laughed Bert.

"Well, let's go in!" suggested Billy.

So, with the two boys in the lead, followed by Nell and Nan and Flossie
and Freddie, the children entered the second-hand and souvenir store.

A bell on the door rang with a loud clang as Billy opened it, and when
the children stepped inside the shop an old man with a black, curly
beard and long black hair that seemed as if it had never been combed,
came out from a back room.

"What you want to buy, little childrens?" he asked. "I got a lot of nice
things, cheap! Very cheap!"

"Well, if you've got something very cheap we might buy it," answered
Billy, with as nearly a grown-up manner as he could assume. "But we
haven't much money."

"Ha! Ha! That's what they all say!" exclaimed the old man. "But
everybody has more money that what I has. I'm very poor. I don't hardly
make a living I sell things so cheap. What you want to buy, little
childrens?"

"Have you got any whistles or fire engines?" burst out Freddie, unable
to wait any longer.

"Whistles? Lots of 'em!" exclaimed the man. "Here is a finest whistle
what ever was. Listen to it!"

He took one from the show case and blew into it. Not a sound came out.

"Ach! I guess that one is damaged," he said. "But I got other ones.
Here! Listen to this!"

The next one blew loud and shrill.

"I want that!" cried Freddie.

"Ten cents!" said the man, holding it out to the little boy.

"What?" cried Billy. "Why, I can buy those whistles for five cents
anywhere in Washington! Ten cents? I guess not!"

"Oh, well, take it for seven cents then," said the man. "What I care if
I die poor. Take it for seven cents!"

"No, sir!" exclaimed Billy firmly. "Five cents is all they cost, and
this is an old one."

"Oh, well. Take it for five then. What I care if you cheats a poor old
man? Such a boy as you are! Take it for five cents!" and he handed the
whistle to Freddie. But before he could take it Nan said, gently:

"I think it would be better for him to have a fresh one from the box.
That is all dusty."

The truth was she did not want Freddie to take a whistle the old man had
blown into.

"Oh, well, I gives you a fresh one," he said, and he took a new and
shining one from the box. Freddie blew it, making a shrill sound.

"What else you want to buy, little childrens?" asked the old man. "I
sell everythings cheap--everythings!"

"Ask how much the dishes are," whispered Nan to Billy. But he shook his
head, and looked around the shop. He looked everywhere but at the window
where the dishes were.

"Any sailboats?" asked Billy, as if that was all he had come in to
inquire about.

"Sailboats?" cried the man. "Sailboats?"

"Yes, toy sailboats."

"No, I haven't got any of them, but I got a nice football. Here I show
you!"

"I don't want a football. You can't play football when the snow is on
the ground!" exclaimed Bert, as the man started toward some shelves on
the other side of the room.

"I want a doll," whispered Flossie. "Just a little doll."

"A doll!" exclaimed the man. "Sure I gots a fine lot of dolls. See!"

Quickly he held out a large one with very blue eyes and hair just like
Flossie's.

"Only a dollar seventy-five," he said. "Very cheap!"

"Oh, that's too much!" exclaimed Nan. "We haven't that much money. She
wants only a little ten-cent doll."

"Oh, well, I have them kinds too!" said the man, in disappointed tones.
"Here you are!"

He held out one that did not appear to be very nice.

"You can get those for five cents in the other stores," whispered Nell.

"Better take it," said her brother. "Then I'll ask about the dishes."

"Yes, we'll take it," agreed Nan.

So Flossie was given her doll, and, even though it might have been only
five cents somewhere else, she liked it just as well.

"What else you wants to buy, childrens?" asked the old man. "I got lots
more things so cheap--oh, so very cheap!"

Billy and Bert strolled over to the window. They looked down in. Nan
crowded to their side. She felt sure, now, that the two pieces of china
were the very ones Miss Pompret wanted. If they could only get that
sugar bowl and pitcher!

"I wish you had a sailboat!" murmured Billy, as if that was all he cared
about. Then, turning to Nan he asked: "Would you like that sugar bowl
and pitcher?"

"Oh, yes, I think I would!" she exclaimed, trying not to make her voice
seem too eager.

"You might have a play party with them," Billy went on. If Miss Pompret
could have heard him then I feel sure she would have fainted, or had
what Dinah would call "a cat in a fit."

"You want those dishes?" asked the old man, as he reached over and
lifted the sugar bowl and pitcher from his window. "Ach! them is a great
bargain. I let you have them cheap. And see, not a chip or a crack on
'em. Good china, too! Very valuable, but they is all I have left. I
sells 'em cheap."

Bert took the sugar bowl and looked closely at it, while Nan took the
pitcher. The children felt sure these were the same pieces that would
fill out Miss Pompret's set.

"Look at the mark on the bottom," whispered Nan to Bert, as the
storekeeper hurried to the other side of the room to rescue a pile of
chairs which Freddie seemed bent on pulling down. "Is the blue lion
there?"

"Yes," answered Bert, "it is."

"And the letters 'J. W.'?"

"Yes," Bert replied. "But, somehow, it doesn't look like the one on Miss
Pompret's plates."

"Oh, I'm sure it's the same one!" insisted Nan. "We've found the missing
pieces, Bert, and we'll get--"

"Hush!" cautioned Billy, for the old man was coming back.

"You want to buy them?" he asked. "I sell cheap. It's a great bargain."

"Where did they come from?" asked Bert.

"Come from? How shoulds I know. Maybe I get 'em at a fire sale, or maybe
all the other dishes in that set get broken, and these all what are
left. Somebody bring 'em in, and I buys 'em, or my wife she buys 'em.
How can I tells so long ago?"

"Oh, well, maybe we might take 'em for the girls to have a play party
with their own set of dishes," went on Billy. "But I wish you had a toy
ship. How much for these dishes--this sugar bowl and pitcher?"

"How much? Oh, I let you have these very cheap. They is worth five
dollars--very rare china--very thin but hard to break. These is a good
bargain--a great bargain. You shall have them for--two dollars!"



 Chapter XXI

Just Suppose

Nan Bobbsey gave gasp, just as if she had fallen into a bath tub full of
cold water. Bert quickly glanced at his friend Billy. Nell had hurried
over to the other side of the room to stop Flossie from pulling a pile
of dusty magazines from a shelf down on top of herself. Billy seemed to
be the only one who was not excited.

"Two dollars?" he repeated. "That's a lot of money." "What? A lot of
money for rich childrens? Ha! Ha! That's only a little moneys!" laughed
the man, rubbing his hands.

"We aren't rich," said Bert. "And I don't believe we have two dollars."
He was pretty sure he and Nan had not that much, at any rate.

"How much you got?" asked the man eagerly. "Maybe I let you have these
dishes cheaper, but they's worth more as two dollars. How much you all
got?"

"How much have you?" asked Billy of Bert. Bert pulled some change from
his pocket. The two boys counted it.

"Eighty-seven cents," announced Bert, when they had counted it twice.

"Oh, that isn't half enough!" cried the old man.

"I have some money," announced Nan, bringing out her little purse.

"How much?" asked the man. That seemed to be all he could think about.

Nan and Nell counted the change. It amounted to thirty-two cents.

"How much is thirty-two and eighty-seven?" asked Nell.

Bert and Billy figured it on a piece of paper.

"A dollar and twenty-nine cents," announced, Bert.

"No, it's only a dollar and nineteen," declared Billy, who was a little
better at figures than was his chum.

"How much?" asked the old man, for the children had done their counting
on the other side of the room, and in whispers.

"A dollar and nineteen cents!" announced Billy.

"Oh, I couldn't let you have these dishes, for that," said the old man,
and he seemed about to take them from the counter where they had been
put, to place them back in the window.

"Wait a minute," said Billy. "These dishes are worth only a dollar, but
I have fifteen cents I can lend you, Bert. That will make a dollar and
thirty-four cents. That's all we have and if you don't want to sell the
dishes for that, we can go and get 'em somewhere else."

Nan was about to gasp out: "Oh!" but a look from Billy stopped her. She
saw what he was trying to do.

"A dollar thirty-four--that's all the moneys you got?" asked the old
man.

"Every cent we're going to give!" declared Billy firmly. "If you'll sell
the play dishes for that all right. If you won't--"

He seemed about to leave.

"Oh, well, what I cares if I die in the poor-house?" asked the old man.
"Here! Take 'em. But I am losing money. Those is valuable dishes. If I
had more I could sell 'em for ten dollars maybe. But as they is all I
got take 'em for a dollar and thirty-four. You couldn't make it a dollar
thirty-five, could you?"

"No," said Bert decidedly, "we couldn't!"

"Oh, dear!" sighed the old man. "Take 'em, then."

"They're awfully dusty," complained Nell, as she looked at the sugar
bowl and pitcher.

"That's 'cause they're so old and valuable, my dear," snarled the old
man. "But my wife she dust them off for you, and I wrap them up, though
I ought to charge you a penny for a sheet of paper. But what I care if I
dies in the poorhouse."

"Are you goin' there soon?" asked Flossie. "We've got a poorhouse at
Lakeport, and it's awful nice."

"Oh, well, little one, maybe I don't go there just yet," said the man
who spoke wrong words sometimes. "Here, Mina!" he called, and a woman,
almost as old as he, came from the back room. "Wipe off the dust. I have
sold the old dishes--the valuable old dishes."

"Ah, such a bargain as they got!" murmured the old woman. "Them is
valuable china. Such a bargains!"

"Where did you get them?" asked Nan, as the dishes were being wrapped
and the old man was counting over the nickels, dimes and pennies of the
children's money.

"Where I get them? Of how should I know? Maybe they come in by somebody
what sell them for money. Maybe we buy them in some old house like
Washington's. It is long ago. We have had them in the shop a long time,
but the older they are the better they get. They is all the better for
being old--a better bargain, my dear!" and the old woman smiled, showing
a mouth from which many teeth were missing.

"Well, come on," said Billy, when the dishes had been wrapped and given
to Bert, who carried them carefully. "But I wish you had some
sailboats," he said to the old man, as if that was all they had come in
to buy.

"I have some next week," answered the old man. "Comes around then and
have a big bargains in a sailsboats."

"Maybe I will," agreed Billy.

Out of the shop walked the Bobbsey twins and their chums, the Martin
children of Washington. And the hearts of Bert and Nan, at least, were
beating quickly with excitement and hope. As for Flossie, she was
holding her doll, and Freddie was blowing his whistle.

"I'm a regular fire engine now," declared Freddie. "Don't you hear how
the engine is blowing the whistle?"

"You'll have everybody looking at you, Freddie Bobbsey!" exclaimed
Flossie. "Nan, do make him stop his noise."

"Oh, let him blow his whistle if he wants to," said Bert. "It isn't
hurting anybody."

"I know what I'm going to do when I get home," said Flossie. "I'm going
to put a brand new dress on this doll, and give her a new hat, too."

"That will be nice," said Nan.

At that moment they had to cross at a street corner which was much
crowded. There was a policeman there to regulate the coming and going of
the people and carriages and automobiles, and when he blew his whistle
the traffic would go up and down one street, and then when he blew his
whistle again it would go up and down the other.

The policeman had just blown on his whistle, and the traffic was going
past the Bobbsey twins when Freddie gave a sudden loud blow. Immediately
some of the carriages and automobiles going in one direction stopped
short and the others commenced to go the other way.

"For gracious sake, Freddie! see what you have done," gasped Bert.

The traffic policeman who stood in the middle of the two streets looked
very much surprised. Then he saw it was Freddie who had blown the
whistle, and he shook his finger at the little boy in warning.

"He wants you to stop," said Nan, and made Freddie put the whistle in
his pocket for the time being.

Then the Bobbseys and their friends hurried on their way.

"I'll give you the fifteen cents as soon as we get back to the hotel,
Billy," said Bert.

"Oh, that's all right," his chum answered. "I'm in no hurry. Do you
think we paid too much for the dishes?"

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Nan. "I'd have given the two dollars if I'd had it.
Why, Miss Pompret will give us a hundred dollars for these two pieces."

"That's fifty dollars apiece!" exclaimed Nell. "It doesn't seem that
they could be worth that."

"Oh, but she wants them to make up her set," said Bert. "Just these two
pieces are missing. I wonder how they came to be in that second-hand
store?"

"Maybe the tramp who took them years ago brought them here and sold
them," suggested Nan. "But I don't suppose we'll ever really find out."

Eager and excited, the Bobbsey twins and their friends walked back
toward the hotel.

"Won't mother and father be surprised when they find we have the Pompret
china?" asked Nan of her brother.

"Yes," he answered, "I guess they will. But, oh, Nan! Just suppose!"

"Suppose what?" she asked, for Bert seemed worried over something.

"Suppose these aren't the right dishes, after all? S'posin' these aren't
the ones Miss Pompret wants?"



 Chapter XXII

Happy Days

Nan Bobbsey was so surprised by what Bert said that she stood still in
the street and looked at her brother. Then she looked at the precious
package he was carrying.

"Bert Bobbsey!" she exclaimed, "these MUST be the same as Miss
Pompret's! Why they have the blue lion on, and the circle of gold, and
the letters 'J. W.' and--and everything!"

"Yes, I saw that, too," agreed Bert. "But still they might not be the
same dishes."

"Oh, dear!" sighed Nan. "And we paid all that money, too!"

"Oh, I guess they must be the same," put in Nell. "Anyhow, you can take
'em to the hotel and ask your mother."

"Yes, mother might know," agreed Nan.

"And if she says those dishes aren't the ones you want, why we can take
'em back and the man will give us our money," said Billy.

"Oh, he'd never do that!" declared Bert.

"Well, we can ask him," went on the Washington lad.

"Maybe the dishes are Miss Pompret's, after all," said Bert. "I was just
s'posin'. And if they aren't, why we can give 'em to Dinah for
souvenirs. I was going to get her something anyhow."

"But they cost a lot of money," objected Nan.

"Well, Dinah is awful good to us," said Bert. "And she'd like these
dishes if they aren't Miss Pompret's."

"But I do hope they are," sighed Nan. "Think of a whole hundred
dollars!"

"It would scare me to get all that money," said Nell. "Oh, I do hope
they are the right sugar bowl and pitcher!"

Back to the hotel hurried the Bobbsey twins. Flossie and Freddie, happy
with their toys--the doll and the whistles--did not care much one way or
the other about the dishes and the reward. But Bert and Nan were very
much excited.

"Well, you've been gone rather a long time buying souvenirs," said Mrs.
Bobbsey, when the twins and the Martin children came in.

"And oh, Mother, we've had the most wonderful time!" burst out Nan.
"We've found Miss Pompret's missing china dishes--the two she has wanted
so long--the ones the tramp took and she's going to give a reward of a
hundred dollars for, you know--and--and--"

"Yes, and I know you're excited!" exclaimed Mrs. Bobbsey. "Now cool down
and tell me all about it."

"And here are the dishes," added Bert, as he set the precious bundle
down on the table. "Look at 'em, Mother, and see if they are the ones
like Miss Pompret's set. You saw her dishes, didn't you?"

"Yes, but I am not sure I would know them again."

"I owe Billy fifteen cents," went on Bert, as he unwrapped the dishes.
"We didn't have money enough. The man wanted two dollars, but Billy got
him down to a dollar and thirty-four cents."

"Billy is quite a little bargainer," said Mrs. Bobbsey, with a smile.
"And now to look at the dishes."

She carefully examined the sugar bowl and cream pitcher. There was no
doubt about the blue lion in the circle of gold being stamped on the
bottom of each piece. There were also the initials "J. W." which might
stand for Jonathan Waredon, the man who made such rare china.

"Well, I should say that these pieces were just like those in Miss
Pompret's set," said Mrs. Bobbsey, after a pause. "But whether they are
exactly the same or not, I can't tell. She would have to look at them
herself."

"I wish we could hurry home and show them to her," sighed Nan.

"So do I," said Bert. "I want to get that hundred dollars."

"Well, we'll be going back to Lakeport in a few days now," said his
mother. "Our stay in Washington is nearly over."

"Oh, dear!" sighed Nell. "I wish you could stay longer."

"So do I," added her brother Billy.

Bert gave Billy back the borrowed fifteen cents, and when Mr. Bobbsey,
having been out on lumber business, came home, he, too, said he thought
the pieces belonged to Miss Pompret's set of rare china.

"But there is only one sure way to tell," the twins' father said. "Miss
Pompret must see them herself."

The few remaining days the Bobbsey twins spent in Washington were filled
with good times. They were nicely entertained by the Martins, and went
on many excursions to places of interest. But, all the while, Bert and
Nan, at least, were thinking of the sugar bowl and pitcher, and the
hundred dollars reward Miss Pompret had promised.

"I do hope we don't have to give the dishes to Dinah for souvenirs,"
said Nan to Bert.

"I hope so, too," he agreed. "Anyhow, I bought Dinah a red handkerchief
with a yellow border and a green center. She likes bright colors."

"I bought her something, too, and for Sam I got something he can hang on
his watch chain," said Nan. "So if we have to give Dinah the dishes,
too, she'll have a lot of souvenirs."

At last the day came when the Bobbseys must leave Washington for
Lakeport. Goodbyes were said to the Martins, and they promised to visit
the Bobbseys at Lakeport some time. Mr. Bobbsey finished his lumber
business, and then with trunks and valises packed and locked, and with
the precious dishes put carefully in the middle of a satchel which Bert
insisted on carrying, the homeward trip was begun.

Not very much happened on it, except that once Bert forgot the valise
with the dishes in it, having left it in a car, but he thought of it in
time and ran back to get it just before the train was about to start
away with it. After that he was more careful.

"Well, honey lambs! I suah is glad to see yo' all back!" cried Dinah, as
she welcomed the Bobbsey twins at their own door. "Come right in, I'se
got lots fo' yo' all to eat! Come in, honey lambs! How am mah little fat
fairy and' mah little fireman?"

"Oh, we're fine, Dinah!" said Freddie, "And I saw a real fire and I
pulled the fire bell on the boat an'--an'--an'--everything!"

"Bress yo' heart, honey lamb! I guess yo' did!" laughed Dinah.

"And I got a little doll and my hat blew off the steeple!" cried
Flossie.

"Lan' sakes! Do tell!" cried Dinah.

"And we found Miss Pompret's dishes!" broke in Nan.

"And we're going to get the hundred dollars reward," added Bert. "'Cept,
of course, if they aren't the right ones you can have 'em for souvenirs,
Dinah."

"Bress yo' heart, honey lamb! Dinah's got all she wants when yo' all
come back. Now I go an' git somethin' to eat!"

The children--at least Nan and Bert--were so eager to have Miss Pompret
see the two dishes that they hardly ate any of the good things Dinah
provided. They wanted to go at once and call on the dear, old-fashioned
lady, but their father and mother made them wait.

At last, however, when they had all rested a bit, Mr. Bobbsey took Nan
and Bert with him and went to call on Miss Pompret. The dishes,
carefully washed by Mrs. Bobbsey, were carried along, wrapped in soft
paper.

"Oh, I am glad to see my little friends again," said Miss Pompret, as
she greeted Nan and Bert. "Did you have a nice time in Washington?"

"Yes'm," answered Bert. "And we brought you--"

"We found your missing sugar bowl and pitcher!" broke in Nan. "Anyhow,
we hope they're yours, and we paid the old man a dollar and thirty-four
cents and--"

"You--you found my sugar bowl and pitcher!" exclaimed Miss Pompret, and
Mr. Bobbsey said, afterward, that she turned a little pale. "Really do
you mean it--after all these years?"

"Well, they look like your dishes," said Mr. Bobbsey. "The children saw
them in a second-hand store window, and went in and bought them. I hope,
for your sake, they are the right pieces."

"I can soon tell," said the old lady. "There is not another set like the
ancient Pompret china in this country. Oh, I am so anxious!"

Her thin, white hands, themselves almost like china, trembled as she
unwrapped the pieces. And then, as she saw them, she gave a cry of joy
and exclaimed:

"Yes! They are the very same! Those are the two pieces missing from my
set! Now it is complete! Oh, how thankful I am that I have the Pompret
china set together again! Oh, thank you, children, thank you!" and she
threw her arms about Nan and kissed her, while she shook hands with
Bert, much to that young boy's relief. He hated being kissed.

"Are you sure these are the two pieces from your set?" asked Mr.
Bobbsey.

"Positive," answered Miss Pompret. "See? Here is the blue lion in the
circle of gold, and initials 'J. W.' There can be no mistake. And now
how did you find them?"

Bert and Nan told, and related how Billy had bargained for the two
pieces. They all wondered how the second-hand man had come by them, but
they never found out.

Miss Pompret carefully placed the sugar bowl and pitcher in the glass-
doored closet with her other pieces. She looked at them for several
seconds. They matched perfectly.

"Now, once more, after many years, my precious set of china is together
again," she murmured.

She went over to a desk and began to write. A little later she handed a
slip of blue paper to Mr. Bobbsey.

"What is this?" he asked.

"A check for one hundred dollars," answered Miss Pompret. "It is the
reward I promised for the finding of my china. I have made the check out
to you, Mr. Bobbsey. You can get the money and give half to Nan and half
to Bert."

Mr. Bobbsey slowly shook his head. Then he handed the blue check back to
Miss Pompret.

"Their mother and I couldn't think of letting the children take the
hundred dollars just for having discovered your dishes, Miss Pompret,"
he said. "I thank you very much, but Nan and Bert would not want it,
themselves," he went on." They really did not earn the money. It was
just good luck; and so, I'm sure, they would rather the money would go
to the Red Cross. Wouldn't you?" he asked Nan and Bert.

For a moment only did they hesitate. Then with a sigh, which she tried
hard to keep back. Nan said:

"Oh, yes. It wouldn't be right to take a hundred dollars just for two
dishes."

"No," agreed Bert, "it wouldn't. Please give the money to the Red
Cross."

Miss Pompret looked from the children to their father, then to the china
in the closet and next at the check in her white, thin hand.

"Very well," said the old lady. "Since you wish it, I'll give the
hundred dollars to the Red Cross; and very glad I am to do it, Mr.
Bobbsey. I would gladly have paid even more to get back my sugar bowl
and pitcher."

"It would hardly be right for the children to have so much money," he
said. "The Red Cross needs it for poor and starving children in other
lands."

"Very well," answered Miss Pompret. "But at least let me give them back
the dollar and thirty-four cents they spent to get the dishes. That was
their own spending money, I presume."

"Yes," said Mr. Bobbsey, "it was. And I don't mind if you give that
back."

So Nan and Bert did not really lose anything, and soon the disappointed
feeling about not getting the reward wore off. They were glad it was to
go to the Red Cross.

And the next morning, when they awakened to find the ground a foot deep
in snow, their joy knew no bounds. They forgot all about rewards, china
dishes, and even Washington.

"Now for some coasting!" cried Bert.

"And snow men!" added Freddie.

"And I'm going to make a snow house for my Washington doll!" cried
Flossie.

"Oh, I love snow!" ejaculated Nan. "It's lovely to have it come so near
Christmas!"

"That's so!" exclaimed Bert. "It soon will be Christmas! Now let's go
out and have some fun in the snow!"

And they did, rolling and tumbling about, making snow men and houses,
and coasting on their sleds.

Miss Pompret wrote Mr. Bobbsey a letter. stating that she had sent a
check for one hundred dollars to the Red Cross in the names of Bert and
Nan Bobbsey.

"That was certainly very nice of her," said Mrs. Bobbsey, when her
husband read this letter to her.

"Well, Miss Pompret is a very nice lady," answered Mr. Bobbsey. "I am
very glad that the children got those missing dishes back for her."

"So am I. She has been greatly worried for years over them."

Slowly the snow flakes drifted down, another storm following the first.
It was the night before Christmas.

"I wonder what we'll get?" murmured Nan as she and Bert went up to their
rooms.

"I hope I get a pair of shoe-hockeys," he said.

"And I want a fur coat," said Nan.

And when Christmas morning dawned, with the sun shining on the new,
sparkling snow, it also shone on the piles of presents for the Bobbsey
twins.

There were a number for each one, and, in a separate place on the table
were two large packages. One was marked for Nan and the other for Bert,
and each bore the words: "From Miss Alicia Pompret, to the little
friends who restored my missing china."

"Oh, mine's a fur coat!" cried Nan, as she opened her package. "A fur
coat and story books!"

"And mine's shoe-hockeys--the best ever!" shouted Bert. "And an air
rifle and books too!"

And so their dreams came true, and it was the happiest Christmas they
ever remembered. And Miss Pompret was happy too.

The End.








Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, David Moynihan, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE BETROTHED




INTRODUCTION--(1832.)


The Tales of the Crusaders was determined upon as the title of the
following series of the Novels, rather by the advice of the few
friends whom, death has now rendered still fewer, than by the
author's own taste. Not but that he saw plainly enough the
interest which might be excited by the very name of the Crusaders,
but he was conscious at the same time that that interest was of a
character which it might be more easy to create than to satisfy,
and that by the mention of so magnificent a subject each reader
might be induced to call up to his imagination a sketch so
extensive and so grand that it might not be in the power of the
author to fill it up, who would thus stand in the predicament of
the dwarf bringing with him a standard to measure his own stature,
and showing himself, therefore, says Sterne, "a dwarf more ways
than one."

It is a fact, if it were worth while to examine it, that the
publisher and author, however much their general interests are the
same, may be said to differ so far as title pages are concerned;
and it is a secret of the tale-telling art, if it could be termed
a secret worth knowing, that a taking-title, as it is called, best
answers the purpose of the bookseller, since it often goes far to
cover his risk, and sells an edition not unfrequently before the
public have well seen it. But the author ought to seek more
permanent fame, and wish that his work, when its leaves are first
cut open, should be at least fairly judged of. Thus many of the
best novelists have been anxious to give their works such titles
as render it out of the reader's power to conjecture their
contents, until they should have an opportunity of reading them.

All this did not prevent the Tales of the Crusaders from being the
title fixed on; and the celebrated year of projects (eighteen
hundred and twenty-five) being the time of publication, an
introduction was prefixed according to the humour of the day.



The first tale of the series was influenced in its structure,
rather by the wish to avoid the general expectations which might
be formed from the title, than to comply with any one of them, and
so disappoint the rest. The story was, therefore, less an incident
belonging to the Crusades, than one which was occasioned by the
singular cast of mind introduced and spread wide by those
memorable undertakings. The confusion among families was not the
least concomitant evil of the extraordinary preponderance of this
superstition. It was no unusual thing for a Crusader, returning
from his long toils of war and pilgrimage, to find his family
augmented by some young off-shoot, of whom the deserted matron
could give no very accurate account, or perhaps to find his
marriage-bed filled, and that, instead of becoming nurse to an old
man, his household dame had preferred being the lady-love of a
young one. Numerous are the stories of this kind told in different
parts of Europe; and the returned knight or baron, according to
his temper, sat down good naturedly contented with the account
which his lady gave of a doubtful matter, or called in blood and
fire to vindicate his honour, which, after all, had been
endangered chiefly by his forsaking his household gods to seek
adventures in Palestine.

Scottish tradition, quoted, I think, in some part of the Border
Minstrelsy, ascribes to the clan of Tweedie, a family once stout
and warlike, a descent which would not have misbecome a hero of
antiquity. A baron, somewhat elderly we may suppose, had wedded a
buxom young lady, and some months after their union he left her to
ply the distaff alone in his old tower, among the mountains of the
county of Peebles, near the sources of the Tweed. He returned
after seven or eight years, no uncommon space for a pilgrimage to
Palestine, and found his family had not been lonely in his
absence, the lady having; been cheered by the arrival of a
stranger, (of whose approach she could give the best account of
any one,) who hung on her skirts, and called her mammy, and was
just such as the baron would have longed to call his son, but that
he could by no means make his age correspond, according to the
doctrine of civilians, with his own departure for Palestine. He
applied to his wife, therefore, for the solution of this dilemma.
The lady, after many floods of tears, which she had reserved for
the occasion, informed the honest gentleman, that, walking one day
alone by the banks of the infant river, a human form arose from a
deep eddy, still known and termed Tweed-pool, who deigned to
inform her that he was the tutelar genius of the stream, and,
_bongre malgre_, became the father of the sturdy fellow,
whose appearance had so much surprised her husband. This story,
however suitable to Pagan times, would have met with full credence
from few of the baron's contemporaries, but the wife was young and
beautiful, the husband old and in his dotage; her family (the
Frazers, it is believed) were powerful and warlike, and the baron
had had fighting enough in the holy wars. The event was, that he
believed, or seemed to believe, the tale, and remained contented
with the child with whom his wife and the Tweed had generously
presented him. The only circumstance which preserved the memory of
the incident was, that the youth retained the name of Tweed, or
Tweedie. The baron, meanwhile, could not, as the old Scotch song
says, "Keep the cradle rowing," and the Tweed apparently thought
one natural son was family enough for a decent Presbyterian lover;
and so little gall had the baron in his composition, that having
bred up the young Tweed as his heir while he lived, he left him in
that capacity when he died, and the son of the river-god founded
the family of Drummelzier and others, from whom have flowed, in
the phrase of the Ettrick Shepherd, "many a brave fellow, and many
a bauld feat."

The tale of the Noble Moringer is somewhat of the same nature--it
exists in a collection of German popular songs, entitled, Sammlung
Deutschen Volkslieder, Berlin, 1807; published by Messrs. Busching
and Von der Hagen. The song is supposed to be extracted from a
manuscript chronicle of Nicholas Thomann, chaplain to St. Leonard
in Wissenhorn, and dated 1533. The ballad, which is popular in
Germany, is supposed from the language, to have been composed in
the fifteenth century. The Noble Moringer, a powerful baron of
Germany, about to set out on a pilgrimage to the land of St.
Thomas, with the geography of which we are not made acquainted,
resolves to commit his castle, dominions, and lady, to the vassal
who should pledge him to keep watch over them till the seven years
of his pilgrimage were accomplished. His chamberlain, an elderly
and a cautious man, declines the trust, observing, that seven
days, instead of seven years, would be the utmost space to which
he would consent to pledge himself for the fidelity of any woman.
The esquire of the Noble Moringer confidently accepts the trust
refused by the chamberlain, and the baron departs on his
pilgrimage. The seven years are now elapsed, all save a single day
and night, when, behold, a vision descends on the noble pilgrim as
he sleeps in the land of the stranger.

  "It was the noble Moringer, within an orchard slept,
  When on the Baron's slumbering sense a boding vision crept,
  And whispered in his ear a voice,'
  'Tis time. Sir Knight, to wake--
  Thy lady and thy heritage another master take.

  "'Thy tower another banner knows, thy steeds another rein,
  And stoop them to another's will, thy gallant vassal train;
  And she, the lady of thy love, so faithful once and fair,
  This night, within thy father's hall, she weds Marstetten's heir.'"

The Moringer starts up and prays to his patron St. Thomas, to
rescue him from the impending shame, which his devotion to his
patron had placed him in danger of incurring. St. Thomas, who must
have felt the justice of the imputation, performs a miracle. The
Moringer's senses were drenched in oblivion, and when he waked he
lay in a well-known spot of his own domain; on his right the
Castle of his fathers, and on his left the mill, which, as usual,
was built not far distant from the Castle.

  "He leaned upon his pilgrim's staff, and to the mill he drew--
  So altered was his goodly form that none their master knew.
  The baron to the miller said, 'Good friend, for charity,
  Tell a poor pilgrim, in your land, what tidings may there be?'

  "The miller answered him again--'He knew of little news,
  Save that the lady of the land did a new bridegroom choose;
  Her husband died in distant land, such is the constant word,
  His death sits heavy on our souls, he was a worthy lord.

  "'Of him I held the little mill, which wins me living free--
  God rest the baron in his grave, he aye was kind to me!
  And when St. Martin's tide comes round, and millers take their toll,
  The priest that prays for Moringer shall have both cope and stole.'"

The baron proceeds to the Castle gate, which is bolted to prevent
intrusion, while the inside of the mansion rung with preparations
for the marriage of the lady. The pilgrim prayed the porter for
entrance, conjuring him by his own sufferings, and for the sake of
the late Moringer; by the orders of his lady, the warder gave him
admittance.

  "Then up the hall paced Moringer, his step was sad and slow;
  It sat full heavy on his heart, none seemed their lord to know.
  He sat him on a lowly bench, oppressed with wo and wrong;
  Short while he sat, but ne'er to him seemed little space so long.

  "Now spent was day, and feasting o'er, and come was evening hour,
  The time was nigh when new made brides retire to nuptial bower,
  'Our Castle's wont,' a bride's man said, 'hath been both firm and long--
  No guest to harbour in our halls till he shall chant a song.'"

When thus called upon, the disguised baron sung the following
melancholy ditty:--

  "'Chill flows the lay of frozen age,' 'twas thus the pilgrim sung,
  'Nor golden mead, nor garment gay, unlocks his heavy tongue.
  Once did I sit, thou bridegroom gay, at board as rich as thine,
  And by my side as fair a bride, with all her charms, was mine.

  "'But time traced furrows on my face, and I grew silver hair'd,
  For locks of brown, and cheeks of youth, she left this brow and beard;
  Once rich, but now a palmer poor, I tread life's latest stage,
  And mingle with your bridal mirth the lay of frozen age.'"

The lady, moved at the doleful recollections which the palmer's
song recalled, sent to him a cup of wine. The palmer, having
exhausted the goblet, returned it, and having first dropped in the
cup his nuptial ring, requested the lady to pledge her venerable
guest.

  "The ring hath caught the lady's eye, she views it close and near,
  Then might you hear her shriek aloud, 'The Moringer is here!'
  Then might you see her start from seat, while tears in torrents fell,
  But if she wept for joy or wo, the ladies best can tell.

  "Full loud she utter'd thanks to Heaven, and every saintly power,
  That had restored the Moringer before the midnight hour;
  And loud she utter'd vow on vow, that never was there bride,
  That had like her preserved her troth, or been so sorely tried.

  "'Yes, here I claim the praise,' she said, 'to constant matrons due,
  Who keep the troth, that they have plight, so stedfastly and true;
  For count the term howe'er you will, so that you count aright,
  Seven twelvemonths and a day are out when bells toll twelve to-night.'

   "It was Marstetten then rose up, his falchion there he drew,
   He kneeled before The Moringer, and down his weapon threw;
   'My oath and knightly faith are broke,' these were the words he said;
   'Then take, my liege, thy vassal's sword, and take thy vassal's head.

   "The noble Moringer, he smiled, and then aloud did say,
   'He gathers wisdom that hath roamed seven twelvemonths and a day,
   My daughter now hath fifteen years, fame speaks her sweet and fair;
   I give her for the bride you lose, and name her for my heir.

   "'The young bridegroom hath youthful bride, the old bridegroom the old,
   Whose faith were kept till term and tide so punctually were told.
   But blessings on the warder kind that oped my castle gate,
   For had I come at morrow tide, I came a day too late.'"

There is also, in the rich field of German romance, another
edition of this story, which has been converted by M. Tieck (whose
labours of that kind have been so remarkable) into the subject of
one of his romantic dramas. It is, however, unnecessary to detail
it, as the present author adopted his idea of the tale chiefly
from the edition preserved in the mansion of Haighhall, of old the
mansion-house of the family of Braidshaigh, now possessed by their
descendants on the female side, the Earls of Balcarras. The story
greatly resembles that of the Noble Moringer, only there is no
miracle of St. Thomas to shock the belief of good Protestants. I
am permitted, by my noble friends, the lord and lady of Haighhall,
to print the following extract from the family genealogy.

   Sir William Bradshaghe 2d
   Sone to Sr John was a
   great traveller and a
   Souldyer and married
   To
   Mabell daughter and
   Sole heire of Hugh
   Noris de Haghe and
   Blackrode and had issue
   EN. 8. E 2.
   of this Mabel is a story by tradition of undouted
   verity that in Sr William Bradshage's absence
   (being 10 yeares away in the wares) she
   married a welsh kt. Sr William retorninge
   from the wars came in a Palmers habit amongst
   the Poore to haghe. Who when she saw &
   congetringe that that he favoured her former
   husband wept, for which the kt chasticed her
   at wich Sr William went and made him selfe
   Knawne to his Tennants in wch space the kt
   fled, but neare to Newton Parke Sr William overtooke
   him and slue him. The said Dame
   Mabell was enjoyned by her confessor to
   doe Pennances by going onest every week
   barefout and bare legg'd to a Crosse ner Wigan
   from the haghe wilest she lived & is called
   Mabb to this day; & ther monument Lyes
   in wigan Church as you see ther Portrd.
   An: Dom: 1315.

There were many vestiges around Haighhall, both of the Catholic
penances of the Lady Mabel, and the history of this unfortunate
transaction in particular; the whole history was within the memory
of man portrayed upon a glass window in the hall, where
unfortunately it has not been preserved. Mab's Cross is still
extant. An old ruinous building is said to have been the place
where the Lady Mabel was condemned to render penance, by walking
hither from Haighhall barefooted and barelegged for the
performance of her devotions. This relic, to which an anecdote so
curious is annexed, is now unfortunately ruinous. Time and
whitewash, says Mr. Roby, have altogether defaced the effigies of
the knight and lady on the tomb. The particulars are preserved in
Mr. Roby's Traditions of Lancashire, [Footnote: A very elegant
work, 2 vols. 1829. By J. Roby, M.R.S.L.] to which the reader is
referred for further particulars. It does not appear that Sir
William Braidshaigh was irreparably offended against the too hasty
Lady Mabel, although he certainly showed himself of a more fiery
mould than the Scottish and German barons who were heroes of the
former tales. The tradition, which the author knew very early in
life, was told to him by the late Lady Balcarras. He was so much
struck with it, that being at that time profuse of legendary lore,
he inserted it in the shape of a note to Waverley, the first of
his romantic offences. Had he then known, as he now does, the
value of such a story, it is likely that, as directed in the
inimitable receipt for making an epic poem, preserved in the
Guardian, he would have kept it for some future opportunity.

As, however, the tale had not been completely told, and was a very
interesting one, and as it was sufficiently interwoven with the
Crusades, the wars between the Welsh and the Norman lords of the
Marches was selected as a period when all freedoms might be taken
with the strict truth of history without encountering any well
known fact which might render the narrative improbable. Perhaps,
however, the period which vindicates the probability of the tale,
will, with its wars and murders, be best found described in the
following passage of Gryffyth Ap Edwin's wars.

"This prince in conjunction with Algar, Earl of Chester, who had
been banished from England as a traitor, in the reign of Edward
the Confessor, marched into Herefordshire and wasted all that
fertile country with fire and sword, to revenge the death of his
brother Rhees, whose head had been brought to Edward in pursuance
of an order sent by the King on account of the depredations which
he had committed against the English on the borders. To stop these
ravages the Earl of Hereford, who was nephew to Edward, advanced
with an army, not of English alone, but of mercenary Normans and
French, whom he had entertained in his service, against Gryffyth
and Algar. He met them near Hereford, and offered them battle,
which the Welsh monarch, who had won five pitched battles before,
and never had fought without conquering, joyfully accepted. The
earl had commanded his English forces to fight on horseback, in
imitation of the Normans, against their usual custom; but the
Welsh making a furious and desperate charge, that nobleman
himself, and the foreign cavalry led by him, were so daunted at
the view of them, that they shamefully fled without fighting;
which being seen by the English, they also turned their backs on
the enemy, who, having killed or wounded as many of them as they
could come up with in their flight, entered triumphantly into
Hereford, spoiled and fired the city, razed the walls to the
ground, slaughtered some of the citizens, led many of them
captive, and (to use the words of the Welsh Chronicle) left
nothing in the town but blood and ashes. After this exploit they
immediately returned into Wales, undoubtedly from a desire of
securing their prisoners, and the rich plunder they had gained.
The King of England hereupon commanded Earl Harold to collect a
great army from all parts of the kingdom, and assembling them at
Gloucester, advanced from thence to invade the dominions of
Gryffyth in North Wales. He performed his orders, and penetrated
into that country without resistance from the Welsh; Gryffyth and
Algar returning into some parts of South Wales. What were their
reasons for this conduct we are not well informed; nor why Harold
did not pursue his advantage against them; but it appears that he
thought it more advisable at this time to treat with, than subdue,
them; for he left North Wales, and employed himself in rebuilding
the walls of Hereford, while negotiations were carrying on with
Gryffyth which soon after produced the restoration of Algar, and a
peace with that king, not very honourable to England, as he made
no satisfaction for the mischief he had done in the war, nor any
submissions to Edward. Harold must doubtless have had some private
and forcible motives to conclude such a treaty. The very next year the
Welsh monarch, upon what quarrel we, know not, made a new incursion
into England, and killed the Bishop of Hereford, the Sheriff of the county,
and many more of the English, both ecclesiastics and laymen. Edward
was counselled by Harold, and Leofrick, Earl of Mercia, to make
peace with him again; which he again broke; nor could he be
restrained by any means, from these barbarous inroads, before the
year one, thousand and sixty-three; when Edward, whose patience
and pacific disposition had been too much abused, commissioned
Harold to assemble the whole strength of the kingdom, and make war
upon him in his own country till he had subdued or destroyed him.
That general acted so vigorously, and with so much celerity, that
he had like to have surprised him in his palace: but just before
the English forces arrived at his gate, having notice of the
danger that threatened him, and seeing no other means of safety,
he threw himself with a few of his household into one of his ships
which happened at the instant to be ready to sail and put to
sea."--LYTTLETON'S _Hist. of England_, vol. ii. p. 338.

This passage will be found to bear a general resemblance to the
fictitious tale told, in the Romance.

ABBOTSFORD, 1_st June_, 1832.




INTRODUCTION.

MINUTES OF SEDERUNT OF A GENERAL MEETING OF THE SHAREHOLDERS
DESIGNING TO FORM A JOINT-STOCK COMPANY, UNITED FOR THE PURPOSE OF
WRITING AND PUBLISHING THE CLASS OF WORKS CALLED THE WAVERLEY
NOVELS,

HELD IN THE WATERLOO TAVERN, REGENT'S BRIDGE, EDINBURGH, 1_st
June_, 1825.

[The reader must have remarked, that the various editions of the
proceedings at this meeting were given in the public papers with
rather more than usual inaccuracy. The cause of this was no ill-
timed delicacy on the part of the gentlemen of the press to assert
their privilege of universal presence wherever a few are met
together, and to commit to the public prints whatever may then and
there pass of the most private nature. But very unusual and
arbitrary methods were resorted to on the present occasion to
prevent the reporters using a right which is generally conceded to
them by almost all meetings, whether of a political or commercial
description. Our own reporter, indeed, was bold enough to secrete
himself under the Secretary's table, and was not discovered till
the meeting was well-nigh over. We are sorry to say, he suffered
much in person from fists and toes, and two or three principal
pages were torn out of his note-book, which occasions his report
to break off abruptly. We cannot but consider this behaviour as
more particularly illiberal on the part of men who are themselves
a kind of gentlemen of the press; and they ought to consider
themselves as fortunate that the misused reporter has sought no
other vengeance than from the tone of acidity with which he has
seasoned his account of their proceedings.--_Edinburgh
Newspaper_.]

A meeting of the gentlemen and others interested in the celebrated
publications called the Waverley Novels, having been called by
public advertisement, the same was respectably attended by various
literary characters of eminence. And it being in the first place
understood that individuals were to be denominated by the names
assigned to them in the publications in question, the Eidolon, or
image of the author, was unanimously called to the chair, and
Jonathan Oldbuck, Esq. of Monkbarns, was requested to act as
Secretary.

The Preses then addressed the meeting to the following purpose:--

"Gentlemen, I need scarcely remind you, that we have a joint
interest in the valuable property which has accumulated under our
common labours. While the public have been idly engaged in
ascribing to one individual or another the immense mass of various
matter, which the labours of many had accumulated, you, gentlemen,
well know, that every person in this numerous assembly has had his
share in the honours and profits of our common success. It is,
indeed, to me a mystery, how the sharp-sighted could suppose so
huge a mass of sense and nonsense, jest and earnest, humorous and
pathetic, good, bad, and indifferent, amounting to scores of
volumes, could be the work of one hand, when we know the doctrine
so well laid down by the immortal Adam Smith, concerning the
division of labour. Were those who entertained an opinion so
strange, not wise enough to know, that it requires twenty pairs of
hands to make a thing so trifling as a pin--twenty couple of dogs
to kill an animal so insignificant as a fox?--"

"Hout, man!" said a stout countryman, "I have a grew-bitch at home
will worry the best tod in Pomoragrains, before ye could say,
Dumpling."

"Who is that person?" said the Preses, with some warmth, as it
appeared to us.

"A son of Dandy Dinmont's," answered the unabashed rustic. "God,
ye may mind him, I think!--ane o' the best in your aught, I
reckon. And, ye see, I am come into the farm, and maybe something
mair, and a whoen shares in this buik-trade of yours."

"Well, well," replied the Preses, "peace, I pray thee, peace.
Gentlemen, when thus interrupted, I was on the point of
introducing the business of this meeting, being, as is known to
most of you, the discussion of a proposition now on your table,
which I myself had the honour to suggest at last meeting, namely,
that we do apply to the Legislature for an Act of Parliament in
ordinary, to associate us into a corporate body, and give us a
_personi standi in judicio_, with full power to prosecute and
bring to conviction all encroachers upon our exclusive privilege,
in the manner therein to be made and provided. In a letter from
the ingenious Mr. Dousterswivel which I have received---"

Oldbuck, warmly--"I object to that fellow's name being mentioned;
he is a common swindler."

"For shame, Mr. Oldbuck," said the Preses, "to use such terms
respecting the ingenious inventor of the great patent machine
erected at Groningen, where they put in raw hemp at one end, and
take out ruffled shirts at the other, without the aid of hackle or
rippling-comb--loom, shuttle, or weaver--scissors, needle, or
seamstress. He had just completed it, by the addition of a piece
of machinery to perform the work of the laundress; but when it was
exhibited before his honour the burgomaster, it had the
inconvenience of heating the smoothing-irons red-hot; excepting
which, the experiment was entirely satisfactory. He will become as
rich as a Jew."

"Well," added Mr. Oldbuck, "if the scoundrel--"

"Scoundrel, Mr. Oldbuck," said the Preses, "is a most unseemly
expression, and I must call you to order. Mr. Dousterswivel is
only an eccentric genius."

"Pretty much the same in the Greek," muttered Mr. Oldbuck; and
then said aloud, "and if this eccentric genius has work enough in
singeing the Dutchman's linen, what the devil has he to do here?"

"Why, he is of opinion, that at the expense of a little mechanism,
some part of the labour of composing these novels might be saved
by the use of steam." There was a murmur of disapprobation at this
proposal, and the words, "Blown up," and "Bread taken out of our
mouths," and "They might as well construct a steam parson," were
whispered. And it was not without repeated calls to order, that
the Preses obtained an opportunity of resuming his address.

"Order!--Order! Pray, support the chair. Hear, hear, hear the
chair!"

"Gentlemen, it is to be premised, that this mechanical operation
can only apply to those parts of the narrative which are at
present composed out of commonplaces, such as the love-speeches of
the hero, the description of the heroine's person, the moral
observations of all sorts, and the distribution of happiness at
the conclusion of the piece. Mr. Dousterswivel has sent me some
drawings, which go far to show, that by placing the words and
phrases technically employed on these subjects, in a sort of
framework, like that of the Sage of Laputa, and changing them by
such a mechanical process as that by which weavers of damask alter
their patterns, many new and happy combinations cannot fail to
occur, while the author, tired of pumping his own brains, may have
an agreeable relaxation in the use of his fingers."

"I speak for information, Mr. Preses," said the Rev. Mr. Lawrence
Templeton; "but I am inclined to suppose the late publication of
Walladmor to have been the work of Dousterswivel, by the help of
the steam-engine." [Footnote: A Romance, by the Author of
Waverley, having been expected about this time at the great
commercial mart of literature, the Fair of Leipsic, an ingenious
gentleman of Germany, finding that none such appeared, was so kind
as to supply its place with a work, in three volumes, called
Walladmor, to which he prefixed the Christian and surname at full
length. The character of this work is given with tolerable
fairness in the text. ]

"For shame, Mr. Templeton," said the Preses; "there are good
things in Walladmor, I assure you, had the writer known any thing
about the country in which he laid the scene."

"Or had he had the wit, like some of ourselves, to lay the scene
in such a remote or distant country that nobody should be able to
back-speer [Footnote: Scottish for cross-examine him.] him," said
Mr. Oldbuck.

"Why, as to that," said the Preses, "you must consider the thing
was got up for the German market, where folks are no better judges
of Welsh manners than of Welsh crw." [Footnote: The ale of the
ancient British is called crw in their native language.]

"I make it my prayer that this be not found the fault of our own
next venture," said Dr. Dryasdust, pointing to some books which
lay on the table. "I fear the manners expressed in that
'Betrothed' of ours, will scarce meet the approbation of the
Cymmerodion; I could have wished that Llhuyd had been looked into
--that Powel had been consulted--that Lewis's History had been
quoted, the preliminary dissertations particularly, in order to
give due weight to the work."

"Weight!" said Captain Clutterbuck; "by my soul, it is heavy
enough already, Doctor."

"Speak to the chair," said the Preses, rather peevishly.

"To the chair, then, I say it," said Captain Clutterbuck, "that
'The Betrothed' is heavy enough to break down the chair of John of
Gaunt, or Cador-Edris itself. I must add, however, that, in my
poor mind, 'The Talisman' goes more trippingly off." [Footnote:
This was an opinion universally entertained among the friends of
the author.]

"It is not for me to speak," said the worthy minister of Saint
Ronan's Well; "but yet I must say, that being so long engaged upon
the Siege of Ptolemais, my work ought to have been brought out,
humble though it be, before any other upon a similar subject at
least."

"Your Siege, Parson!" said Mr. Oldbuck, with great contempt; "will
you speak of your paltry prose-doings in my presence, whose great
Historical Poem, in twenty books, with notes in proportion, has
been postponed _ad Grcecas Kalendas?_" The Preses, who
appeared to suffer a great deal during this discussion, now spoke
with dignity and determination. "Gentlemen," he said, "this sort
of discussion is highly irregular. There is a question before you,
and to that, gentlemen, I must confine your attention. Priority of
publication, let me remind you, gentlemen, is always referred to
the Committee of Criticism, whose determination on such subjects
is without appeal. I declare I will leave the chair, if any more
extraneous matter be introduced.--And now, gentlemen, that we are
once more in order, I would wish to have some gentleman speak upon
the question, whether, as associated to carry on a joint-stock
trade in fictitious narrative, in prose and verse, we ought not to
be incorporated by Act of Parliament? What say you, gentlemen, to
the proposal? _Vis unita fortior_, is an old and true adage."

"_Societas mater discordiarum_, is a brocard as ancient and
as veritable," said Oldbuck, who seemed determined, on this
occasion, to be pleased with no proposal that was announced by the
chair.

"Come, Monkbarns," said the Preses, in his most coaxing manner,
"you have studied the monastic institutions deeply, and know there
must be a union of persons and talents to do any thing
respectable, and attain a due ascendance over the spirit of the
age. _Tres faciunt collegium_--it takes three monks to make a
convent."

"And nine tailors to make a man," replied Oldbuck, not in the
least softened in his opposition; "a quotation as much to the
purpose as the other."

"Come, come," said the Preses, "you know the Prince of Orange
said to Mr. Seymour, 'Without an association, we are a rope of
sand.'"

"I know," replied Oldbuck, "it would have been as seemly that none
of the old leaven had been displayed on this occasion, though you
be the author of a Jacobite novel. I know nothing of the Prince of
Orange after 1688; but I have heard a good deal of the immortal
William the Third."

"And to the best of my recollection," said Mr. Templeton,
whispering to Oldbuck, "it was Seymour made the remark to the
Prince, not the Princo to Seymour. But this is a specimen of our
friend's accuracy, poor gentleman: He trusts too much to his
memory! of late years--failing fast, sir--breaking up."

"And breaking down, too," said Mr. Oldbuck. "But what can you
expect of a man too fond of his own hasty and flashy compositions,
to take the assistance of men of reading and of solid parts?"

"No whispering--no caballing--no private business, gentlemen,"
said the unfortunate Preses, who reminded us somewhat of a
Highland drover engaged in gathering and keeping in the straight
road his excursive black cattle.

"I have not yet heard," he continued, "a single reasonable
objection to applying for the Act of Parliament, of which the
draught lies on the table. You must be aware that the extremes of
rude and of civilized society are, in these our days, on the point
of approaching to each other. In the patriarchal period, a man is
his own weaver, tailor, butcher, shoemaker, and so forth; and, in
the age of Stock-companies, as the present may be called, an
individual may be said, in one sense, to exercise the same
plurality of trades. In fact, a man who has dipt largely into
these speculations, may combine his own expenditure with the
improvement of his own income, just like the ingenious hydraulic
machine, which, by its very waste, raises its own supplies of
water. Such a person buys his bread from his own Baking Company,
his milk and cheese from his own Dairy Company, takes off a new
coat for the benefit of his own Clothing Company, illuminates his
house to advance his own Gas Establishment, and drinks an
additional bottle of wine for the benefit of the General Wine
Importation Company, of which he is himself a member. Every act,
which would otherwise be one of mere extravagance, is, to such a
person, seasoned with the _odor lucri_, and reconciled to
prudence. Even if the price of the article consumed be
extravagant, and the quality indifferent, the person, who is in a
manner his own customer, is only imposed upon for his own benefit.
Nay, if the Joint-stock Company of Undertakers shall unite with
the Medical Faculty, as proposed by the late facetious Doctor G--,
under the firm of Death and the Doctor, the shareholder might
contrive to secure to his heirs a handsome slice of his own death-
bed and funeral expenses. In short, Stock-Companies are the
fashion of the age, and an Incorporating Act will, I think, be
particularly useful in bringing back the body, over whom I have
the honour to preside, to a spirit of subordination, highly
necessary to success in every enterprise where joint wisdom,
talent, and labour, are to be employed. It is with regret that I
state, that, besides several differences amongst yourselves, I
have not myself for some time been treated with that deference
among you which circumstances entitled me to expect."

"_Hinc illa lachryma_," muttered Mr. Oldbuck.

"But," continued the Chairman, "I see other gentlemen impatient to
deliver their opinions, and I desire to stand in no man's way. I
therefore--my place in this chair forbidding me to originate the
motion--beg some gentleman may move a committee for revising the
draught of the bill now upon the table, and which has been duly
circulated among those having interest, and take the necessary
measures to bring it before the House early next session."

There was a short murmur in the meeting, and at length Mr. Oldbuck
again rose. "It seems, sir," he said, addressing the chair, "that
no one present is willing to make the motion you point at. I am
sorry no more qualified person has taken upon him to show any
reasons in the contrair, and that it has fallen on me, as we
Scotsmen say, to bell-the-cat with you; anent whilk phrase,
Pitscottie hath a pleasant jest of the great Earl of Angus--"

Here a gentleman whispered to the speaker, "Have a care of
Pitscottie" and, Mr. Oldbuck, as if taking the hint, went on.

"But that's neither here nor there--Well, gentlemen, to be short,
I think it unnecessary to enter into the general reasonings whilk
have this day been delivered, as I may say, _ex cathedra_;
nor will I charge our worthy Preses with an attempt to obtain over
us, _per ambages_, and under colour of an Act of Parliament,
a despotic authority, inconsistent with our freedom. But this I
will say, that times are so much changed above stairs, that
whereas last year you might have obtained an act incorporating a
Stock Company for riddling ashes, you will not be able to procure
one this year for gathering pearls. What signifies, then, wasting
the time of the meeting, by inquiring whether or not we ought to
go in at a door which we know to be bolted and barred in our face,
and in the face of all the companies for fire or air, land or
water, which we have of late seen blighted!"

Here there was a general clamour, seemingly of approbation, in
which the words might be distinguished, "Needless to think of it"--
"Money thrown away"--"Lost before the committee," &c. &c. &c. But
above the tumult, the voices of two gentlemen, in different
corners of the room, answered each other clear and loud, like the
blows of the two figures on Saint Dunstan's clock; and although
the Chairman, in much agitation, endeavoured to silence them, his
interruption had only the effect of cutting their words up into
syllables, thus,--

   _First Voice_. "The Lord Chan--"
   _Second Voice_. "The Lord Lau--"
   _Chairman_, (loudly.) "Scandalum magnatum!"
   _First Voice_. "The Lord Chancel--"
   _Second Voice_. "The Lord Lauder--"
   _Chairman_, (_louder yet_.) "Breach of Privilege!"
   _First Voice_. "The Lord Chancellor--"
   _Second Voice_. "My Lord Lauderdale--"
   _Chairman_, (_at the highest pitch of his voice_.)
            "Called before the House!"
   _Both Voices together_. "Will never consent to such a bill."

A general assent seemed to follow this last proposition, which was
propounded with as much emphasis as could be contributed by the
united clappers of the whole meeting, joined to those of the
voices already mentioned.

Several persons present seemed to consider the business of the
meeting as ended, and were beginning to handle their hats and
canes, with a view to departure, when the Chairman, who had thrown
himself back in his chair, with an air of manifest mortification
and displeasure, again drew himself up, and commanded attention.
All stopped, though some shrugged their shoulders, as if under the
predominating influence of a _bore_. But the tenor of his
discourse soon excited anxious attention.

"I perceive, gentlemen," he said, "that you are like the young
birds, who are impatient to leave their mother's nest--take care
your own penfeathers are strong enough to support you; since, as
for my part, I am tired of supporting on my wing such a set of
ungrateful gulls. But it signifies nothing speaking--I will no
longer avail myself of such weak ministers as you--I will discard
you--I will unbeget you, as Sir Anthony Absolute says--I will
leave you and your whole hacked stock in trade--your caverns and
your castles--your modern antiques, and your antiquated moderns--
your confusion of times, manners, and circumstances--your
properties, as player-folk say of scenery and dresses--the whole
of your exhausted expedients, to the fools who choose to deal with
them. I will vindicate my own fame with my own right hand, without
appealing to such halting assistants,

  'Whom I have used for sport, rather than need.'

--I will lay my foundations better than on quicksands--I will rear
my structure of better materials than painted cards; in a word, I
will write HISTORY!"

There was a tumult of surprise, amid which our reporter detected
the following expressions:--"The devil you will!"--"You, my dear
sir, _you?_"--"The old gentleman forgets that he is the
greatest liar since Sir John Mandeville."

"Not the worse historian for that," said Oldbuck, "since history,
you know, is half fiction."

"I'll answer for that half being forthcoming" said the former
speaker; "but for the scantling of truth which is necessary after
all, Lord help us!--Geoffrey of Monmouth will be Lord Clarendon to
him."

As the confusion began to abate, more than one member of the
meeting was seen to touch his forehead significantly, while
Captain Clutterbuck humm'd

  Be by your friends advised,
  Too rash, too hasty, dad,
  Maugre your bolts and wise head,
  The world will think you mad.

"The world, and you, gentlemen, may think what you please," said
the Chairman, elevating his voice; "but I intend to write the most
wonderful book which the world ever read--a book in which every
incident shall be incredible, yet strictly true--a work recalling
recollections with which the ears of this generation once tingled,
and which shall be read by our children with an admiration
approaching to incredulity. Such shall be the LIFE OF NAPOLEON
BONAPARTE by the AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY."

In the general start and exclamation which followed this
annunciation, Mr. Oldbuck dropped his snuff-box; and the Scottish
rappee, which dispersed itself in consequence, had effects upon
the nasal organs of our reporter, ensconced as he was under the
secretary's table, which occasioned his being discovered and
extruded in the illiberal and unhandsome manner we have mentioned,
with threats of farther damage to his nose, ears, and other
portions of his body, on the part especially of Captain
Clutterbuck. Undismayed by these threats, which indeed those of
his profession are accustomed to hold at defiance, our young man
hovered about the door of the tavern, but could only bring us the
farther intelligence, that the meeting had broken up in about a
quarter of an hour after his expulsion, "in much-admired
disorder."




CHAPTER THE FIRST.


   Now in these days were hotte wars upon the Marches of Wales.
   LEWIS'S _History._


The Chronicles, from which this narrative is extracted, assure us,
that during the long period when the Welsh princes maintained
their independence, the year 1187 was peculiarly marked as
favourable to peace betwixt them and their warlike neighbours, the
Lords Marchers, who inhabited those formidable castles on the
frontiers of the ancient British, on the ruins of which the
traveller gazes with wonder. This was the time when Baldwin,
Archbishop of Canterbury, accompanied by the learned Giraldus de
Barri, afterwards Bishop of Saint David's, preached the Crusade
from castle to castle, from town to town; awakened the inmost
valleys of his native Cambria with the call to arms for recovery
of the Holy Sepulchre; and, while he deprecated the feuds and wars
of Christian men against each other, held out to the martial
spirit of the age a general object of ambition, and a scene of
adventure, where the favour of Heaven, as well as earthy renown,
was to reward the successful champions.

Yet the British chieftains, among the thousands whom this spirit-
stirring summons called from their native land to a distant and
perilous expedition, had perhaps the best excuse for declining the
summons. The superior skill of the Anglo-Norman knights, who were
engaged in constant inroads on the Welsh frontier, and who were
frequently detaching from it large portions, which they fortified
with castles, thus making good what they had won, was avenged,
indeed, but not compensated, by the furious inroads of the
British, who, like the billows of a retiring tide, rolled on
successively, with noise, fury, and devastation; but, on each
retreat, yielded ground insensibly to their invaders.

A union among the native princes might have opposed a strong and
permanent barrier to the encroachments of the strangers; but they
were, unhappily, as much at discord among themselves as they were
with the Normans, and were constantly engaged in private war with
each other, of which the common enemy had the sole advantage.

The invitation to the Crusade promised something at least of
novelty to a nation peculiarly ardent in their temper; and it was
accepted by many, regardless of the consequences which must ensue,
to the country which they left defenceless. Even the most
celebrated enemies of the Saxon and Norman race laid aside their
enmity against the invaders of their country, to enrol themselves
under the banners of the Crusade.

Amongst these was reckoned Gwenwyn, (or more properly Gwenwynwen,
though we retain the briefer appellative,) a British prince who
continued exercising a precarious sovereignty over such parts of
Powys-Land as had not been subjugated by the Mortimers, Guarines,
Latimers, FitzAlans, and other Norman nobles, who, under various
pretexts, and sometimes contemning all other save the open avowal
of superior force, had severed and appropriated large portions of
that once extensive and independent principality, which, when
Wales was unhappily divided into three parts on the death of
Roderick Mawr, fell to the lot of his youngest son, Mervyn. The
undaunted resolution and stubborn ferocity of Gwenwyn, descendant
of that prince, had long made him beloved among the "Tall men" or
Champions of Wales; and he was enabled, more by the number of
those who served under him, attracted by his reputation, than by
the natural strength of his dilapidated principality, to retaliate
the encroachments of the English by the most wasteful inroads.

Yet even Gwenwyn on the present occasion seemed to forget his
deeply sworn hatred against his dangerous neighbours. The Torch of
Pengwern (for so Gwenwyn was called, from his frequently laying
the province of Shrewsbury in conflagration) seemed at present to
burn as calmly as a taper in the bower of a lady; and the Wolf of
Plinlimmon, another name with which the bards had graced Gwenwyn,
now slumbered as peacefully as the shepherd's dog on the domestic
hearth.

But it was not alone the eloquence of Baldwin or of Girald which
had lulled into peace a spirit so restless and fierce. It is true,
their exhortations had done more towards it than Gwenwyn's
followers had thought possible. The Archbishop had induced the
British Chief to break bread, and to mingle in silvan sports, with
his nearest, and hitherto one of his most determined enemies, the
old Norman warrior Sir Raymond Berenger, who, sometimes beaten,
sometimes victorious, but never subdued, had, in spite of
Gwenwyn's hottest incursions, maintained his Castle of Garde
Doloureuse, upon the marches of Wales; a place strong by nature,
and well fortified by art, which the Welsh prince had found it
impossible to conquer, either by open force or by stratagem, and
which, remaining with a strong garrison in his rear, often checked
his incursions, by rendering his retreat precarious. On this
account, Gwenwyn of Powys-Land had an hundred times vowed the
death of Raymond Berenger, and the demolition of his castle; but
the policy of the sagacious old warrior, and his long experience
in all warlike practice, were such as, with the aid of his more
powerful countrymen, enabled him to defy the attempts of his fiery
neighbour. If there was a man, therefore, throughout England, whom
Gwenwyn hated more than another, it was Raymond Berenger; and yet
the good Archbishop Baldwin could prevail on the Welsh prince to
meet him as a friend and ally in the cause of the Cross. He even
invited Raymond to the autumn festivities of his Welsh palace,
where the old knight, in all honourable courtesy, feasted and
hunted for more than a week in the dominions of his hereditary
foe.

To requite this hospitality, Raymond invited the Prince of Powys,
with a chosen but limited train, during the ensuing Christmas, to
the Garde Doloureuse, which some antiquaries have endeavoured to
identify with the Castle of Colune, on the river of the same name.
But the length of time, and some geographical difficulties, throw
doubts upon this ingenious conjecture.

As the Welshman crossed the drawbridge, he was observed by his
faithful bard to shudder with involuntary emotion; nor did
Cadwallon, experienced as he was in life, and well acquainted with
the character of his master, make any doubt that he was at that
moment strongly urged by the apparent opportunity, to seize upon
the strong fortress which had been so long the object of his
cupidity, even at the expense of violating his good faith.

Dreading lest the struggle of his master's conscience and his
ambition should terminate unfavourably for his fame, the bard
arrested his attention by whispering in their native language,
that "the teeth which bite hardest are those which are out of
sight;" and Gwenwyn looking around him, became aware that, though,
only unarmed squires and pages appeared in the courtyard, yet the
towers and battlements connecting them were garnished with archers
and men-at-arms.

They proceeded to the banquet, at which Gwenwyn, for the first
time, beheld Eveline Berenger, the sole child of the Norman
castellane, the inheritor of his domains and of his supposed
wealth, aged only sixteen, and the most beautiful damsel upon the
Welsh marches. Many a spear had already been shivered in
maintenance of her charms; and the gallant Hugo de Lacy, Constable
of Chester, one of the most redoubted warriors of the time, had
laid at Eveline's feet the prize which his chivalry had gained in
a great tournament held near that ancient town. Gwenwyn considered
these triumphs as so many additional recommendations to Eveline;
her beauty was incontestable, and she was heiress of the fortress
which he so much longed to possess, and which he began now to
think might be acquired by means more smooth than those with which
he was in the use of working out his will.

Again, the hatred which subsisted between the British and their
Saxon and Norman invaders; his long and ill-extinguished feud with
this very Raymond Berenger; a general recollection that alliances
between the Welsh and English had rarely been happy; and a
consciousness that the measure which he meditated would be
unpopular among his followers, and appear a dereliction of the
systematic principles on which he had hitherto acted, restrained
him from speaking his wishes to Raymond or his daughter. The idea
of the rejection of his suit did not for a moment occur to him; he
was convinced he had but to speak his wishes, and that the
daughter of a Norman, castellane, whose rank or power were not of
the highest order among the nobles of the frontiers, must be
delighted and honoured by a proposal for allying his family with
that of the sovereign of a hundred mountains.

There was indeed another objection, which in later times would
have been of considerable weight--Gwenwyn was already married. But
Brengwain was a childless bride; sovereigns (and among sovereigns
the Welsh prince ranked himself) marry for lineage, and the Pope
was not likely to be scrupulous, where the question was to oblige
a prince who had assumed the Cross with such ready zeal, even
although, in fact, his thoughts had been much more on the Garde
Doloureuse than on Jerusalem. In the meanwhile, if Raymond
Berenger (as was suspected) was not liberal enough in his opinions
to permit Eveline to hold the temporary rank of concubine, which
the manners of Wales warranted Gwenwyn to offer as an interim,
arrangement, he had only to wait for a few months, and sue for a
divorce through the Bishop of Saint David's, or some other
intercessor at the Court of Rome.

Agitating these thoughts in his mind, Gwenwyn prolonged his
residence at the Castle of Berenger, from Christmas till
Twelfthday; and endured the presence of the Norman cavaliers who
resorted to Raymond's festal halls, although, regarding
themselves, in virtue of their rank of knighthood, equal to the
most potent sovereigns, they made small account of the long
descent of the Welsh prince, who, in their eyes, was but the chief
of a semibarbarous province; while he, on his part, considered
them little better than a sort of privileged robbers, and with the
utmost difficulty restrained himself from manifesting his open
hatred, when he beheld them careering in the exercises of
chivalry, the habitual use of which rendered them such formidable
enemies to his country. At length, the term of feasting was ended,
and knight and squire departed from the castle, which once more
assumed the aspect of a solitary and guarded frontier fort.

But the Prince of Powys-Land, while pursuing his sports on his own
mountains and valleys, found that even the abundance of the game,
as well as his release from the society of the Norman chivalry,
who affected to treat him as an equal, profited him nothing so
long as the light and beautiful form of Eveline, on her white
palfrey, was banished from the train of sportsmen. In short, he
hesitated no longer, but took into his confidence his chaplain, an
able and sagacious man, whose pride was flattered by his patron's
communication, and who, besides, saw in the proposed scheme some
contingent advantages for himself and his order. By his counsel,
the proceedings for Gwenwyn's divorce were prosecuted under
favourable auspices, and the unfortunate Brengwain was removed to
a nunnery, which perhaps she found a more cheerful habitation than
the lonely retreat in which she had led a neglected life, ever
since Gwenwyn had despaired of her bed being blessed with issue.
Father Einion also dealt with the chiefs and elders of the land,
and represented to them the advantage which in future wars they
were certain to obtain by the possession of the Garde Doloureuse,
which had for more than a century covered and protected a
considerable tract of country, rendered their advance difficult,
and their retreat perilous, and, in a word, prevented their
carrying their incursions as far as the gates of Shrewsbury. As
for the union with the Saxon damsel, the fetters which it was to
form might not (the good father hinted) be found more permanent
than those which had bound Gwenwyn to her predecessor, Brengwain.

These arguments, mingled with others adapted to the views and
wishes of different individuals, were so prevailing, that the
chaplain in the course of a few weeks was able to report to his
princely patron, that this proposed match would meet with no
opposition from the elders and nobles of his dominions. A golden
bracelet, six ounces in weight, was the instant reward of the
priest's dexterity in negotiation, and he was appointed by Gwenwyn
to commit to paper those proposals, which he doubted not were to
throw the Castle of Garde Doloureuse, notwithstanding its
melancholy name, into an ecstasy of joy. With some difficulty the
chaplain prevailed on his patron to say nothing in this letter
upon his temporary plan of concubinage, which he wisely judged
might be considered as an affront both by Eveline and her father.
The matter of the divorce he represented as almost entirely
settled, and wound up his letter with a moral application, in
which were many allusions to Vashti, Esther, and Ahasuerus.

Having despatched this letter by a swift and trusty messenger, the
British prince opened in all solemnity the feast of Easter, which
had come round during the course of these external and internal
negotiations.

Upon the approaching Holy-tide, to propitiate the minds of his
subjects and vassals, they were invited in large numbers to
partake of a princely festivity at Castell-Coch, or the Red-
Castle, as it was then called, since better known by the name of
Powys-Castle, and in latter times the princely seat of the Duke of
Beaufort. The architectural magnificence of this noble residence
is of a much later period than that of Gwenwyn, whose palace, at
the time we speak of, was a low, long-roofed edifice of red stone,
whence the castle derived its name; while a ditch and palisade
were, in addition to the commanding situation, its most important
defences.




CHAPTER THE SECOND


    In Madoc's tent the clarion sounds,
    With rapid clangor hurried far;
    Each hill and dale the note rebounds,
    But when return the sons of war?
    Thou, born of stern Necessity,
    Dull Peace! the valley yields to thee,
    And owns thy melancholy sway.
     WELSH POEM.


The feasts of the ancient British princes usually exhibited all
the rude splendour and liberal indulgence of mountain hospitality,
and Gwenwyn was, on the present occasion, anxious to purchase
popularity by even an unusual display of profusion; for he was
sensible that the alliance which he meditated might indeed be
tolerated, but could not be approved, by his subjects and
followers.

The following incident, trifling in itself, confirmed his
apprehensions. Passing one evening, when it was become nearly
dark, by the open window of a guard-room, usually occupied by some
few of his most celebrated soldiers, who relieved each other in
watching his palace, he heard Morgan, a man distinguished for
strength, courage, and ferocity, say to the companion with whom he
was sitting by the watch-fire, "Gwenwyn is turned to a priest, or
a woman! When was it before these last months, that a follower of
his was obliged to gnaw the meat from the bone so closely, as I am
now peeling the morsel which I hold in my hand?" [Footnote: It is
said in Highland tradition, that one of the Macdonalds of the
Isles, who had suffered his broadsword to remain sheathed for some
months after his marriage with a beautiful woman, was stirred to a
sudden and furious expedition against the mainland by hearing
conversation to the above purpose among his bodyguard.]

"Wait but awhile," replied his comrade, "till the Norman match be
accomplished; and so small will be the prey we shall then drive
from the Saxon churls, that we may be glad to swallow, like hungry
dogs, the very bones themselves."

Gwenwyn heard no more of their conversation; but this was enough
to alarm his pride as a soldier, and his jealousy as a prince. He
was sensible, that the people over whom he ruled were at once
fickle in their disposition, impatient of long repose, and full of
hatred against their neighbours; and he almost dreaded the
consequences of the inactivity to which a long truce might reduce
them. The risk was now incurred, however; and to display even more
than his wonted splendour and liberality, seemed the best way of
reconciling the wavering affections of his subjects.

A Norman would have despised the barbarous magnificence of an
entertainment, consisting of kine and sheep roasted whole, of
goat's flesh and deer's flesh seethed in the skins of the animals
themselves; for the Normans piqued themselves on the quality
rather than the quantity of their food, and, eating rather
delicately than largely, ridiculed the coarser taste of the
Britons, although the last were in their banquets much more
moderate than were the Saxons; nor would the oceans of _Crw_
and hydromel, which overwhelmed the guests like a deluge, have
made up, in their opinion, for the absence of the more elegant and
costly beverage which they had learnt to love in the south of
Europe. Milk, prepared in various ways, was another material of
the British entertainment, which would not have received their
approbation, although a nutriment which, on ordinary occasions,
often supplied the Avant of all others among the ancient
inhabitants, whose country was rich in flocks and herds, but poor
in agricultural produce.

The banquet was spread in a long low hall, built of rough wood
lined with shingles, having a fire at each end, the smoke of
which, unable to find its way through the imperfect chimneys in
the roof, rolled in cloudy billows above the heads of the
revellers, who sat on low seats, purposely to avoid its stifling
fumes. [Footnote: The Welsh houses, like those of the cognate
tribes in Ireland and in the Highlands of Scotland, were very
imperfectly supplied with chimneys. Hence, in the History of the
Gwydir Family, the striking expression of a Welsh chieftain who,
the house being assaulted and set on fire by his enemies, exhorted
his friends to stand to their defence, saying he had seen as much
smoke in the hall upon a Christmas even.] The mien and appearance
of the company assembled was wild, and, even in their social
hours, almost terrific. Their prince himself had the gigantic port
and fiery eye fitted to sway an unruly people, whose delight was
in the field of battle; and the long mustaches which he and most
of his champions wore, added to the formidable dignity of his
presence. Like most of those present, Gwenwyn was clad in a simple
tunic of white linen cloth, a remnant of the dress which the
Romans had introduced into provincial Britain; and he was
distinguished by the Eudorchawg, or chain of twisted gold links,
with which the Celtic tribes always decorated their chiefs. The
collar, indeed, representing in form the species of links made by
children out of rushes, was common to chieftains of inferior rank,
many of whom bore it in virtue of their birth, or had won it by
military exploits; but a ring of gold, bent around the head,
intermingled with Gwenwyn's hair--for he claimed the rank of one
of three diademed princes of Wales, and his armlets and anklets,
of the same metal, were peculiar to the Prince of Powys, as an
independent sovereign. Two squires of his body, who dedicated
their whole attention to his service, stood at the Prince's back;
and at his feet sat a page, whose duty it was to keep them warm by
chafing and by wrapping them in his mantle. The same right of
sovereignty, which assigned to Gwenwyn his golden crownlet, gave
him a title to the attendance of the foot-bearer, or youth, who
lay on the rushes, and whose duty it was to cherish the Prince's
feet in his lap or bosom. [Footnote: See Madoc for this literal
_foot page's_ office and duties. Mr. Southey's notes inform
us: "The foot-bearer shall hold the feet of the King in his lap,
from the time he reclines at the board till he goes to rest, and
he shall chafe them with a towel; and during all that time shall
watch that no harm befalls the King. He shall eat of the shame
dish from which the King takes his food; he shall light the first
candle before the King." Such are the instructions given for this
part of royal ceremonial in the laws of Howell Dha. It may be
added, that probably upon this Celtic custom was founded one of
those absurd and incredible representations which were propagated
at the time of the French revolution, to stir up the peasants
against their feudal superiors. It was pretended that some feudal
seigneurs asserted their right to kill and disembowel a peasant,
in order to put their own feet within the expiring body, and so
recover them from the chill.]

Notwithstanding the military disposition of the guests, and the
danger arising from the feuds into which they were divided, few of
the feasters wore any defensive armour, except the light goat-skin
buckler, which hung behind each man's seat. On the other hand,
they were well provided with offensive weapons; for the broad,
sharp, short, two-edged sword was another legacy of the Romans.
Most added a wood-knife or poniard; and there were store of
javelins, darts, bows, and arrows, pikes, halberds, Danish axes,
and Welsh hooks and bills; so, in case of ill-blood arising during
the banquet, there was no lack of weapons to work mischief.

But although the form of the feast was somewhat disorderly, and
that the revellers were unrestrained by the stricter rules of
good-breeding which the laws of chivalry imposed, the Easter
banquet of Gwenwyn possessed, in the attendance of twelve eminent
bards, one source of the most exalted pleasure, in a much higher
degree than the proud Normans could themselves boast. The latter,
it is true, had their minstrels, a race of men trained to the
profession of poetry, song, and music; but although those arts
were highly honoured, and the individual professors, when they
attained to eminence, were often richly rewarded, and treated with
distinction, the order of minstrels, as such, was held in low
esteem, being composed chiefly of worthless and dissolute
strollers, by whom the art was assumed, in order to escape from
the necessity of labour, and to have the means of pursuing a
wandering and dissipated course of life. Such, in all times, has
been the censure upon the calling of those who dedicate themselves
to the public amusement; among whom those distinguished by
individual excellence are sometimes raised high in the social
circle, while far the more numerous professors, who only reach
mediocrity, are sunk into the lower scale. But such was not the
case with the order of bards in Wales, who, succeeding to the
dignity of the Druids, under whom they had originally formed a
subordinate fraternity, had many immunities, were held in the
highest reverence and esteem, and exercised much influence with
their countrymen. Their power over the public mind even rivalled
that of the priests themselves, to whom indeed they bore some
resemblance; for they never wore arms, were initiated into their
order by secret and mystic solemnities, and homage was rendered to
their _Awen_, or flow of poetic inspiration, as if it had
been indeed marked with a divine character. Thus possessed of
power and consequence, the bards were not unwilling to exercise
their privileges, and sometimes, in doing so, their manners
frequently savoured of caprice.

This was perhaps the case with Cadwallon, the chief bard of
Gwenwyn, and who, as such, was expected to have poured forth the
tide of song in the banqueting-hall of his prince. But neither the
anxious and breathless expectation of the assembled chiefs and
champions--neither the dead silence which stilled the roaring
hall, when his harp was reverently placed before him by his
attendant--nor even the commands or entreaties of the Prince
himself--could extract from Cadwallon more than a short and
interrupted prelude upon the instrument, the notes of which
arranged themselves into an air inexpressibly mournful, and died
away in silence. The Prince frowned darkly on the bard, who was
himself far too deeply lost in gloomy thought, to offer any
apology, or even to observe his displeasure. Again he touched a
few wild notes, and, raising his looks upward, seemed to be on the
very point of bursting forth into a tide of song similar to those
with which this master of his art was wont to enchant his hearers.
But the effort was in vain--he declared that his right hand was
withered, and pushed the instrument from him.

A murmur went round the company, and Gwenwyn read in their aspects
that they received the unusual silence of Cadwallon on this high
occasion as a bad omen. He called hastily on a young and ambitious
bard, named Caradoc of Menwygent, whose rising fame was likely
soon to vie with the established reputation of Cadwallon, and
summoned him to sing something which might command the applause of
his sovereign and the gratitude of the company. The young man was
ambitious, and understood the arts of a courtier. He commenced a
poem, in which, although under a feigned name, he drew such a
poetic picture of Eveline Berenger, that Gwenwyn was enraptured;
and while all who had seen the beautiful original at once
recognized the resemblance, the eyes of the Prince confessed at
once his passion for the subject, and his admiration of the poet.
The figures of Celtic poetry, in themselves highly imaginative,
were scarce sufficient for the enthusiasm of the ambitious bard,
rising in his tone as he perceived the feelings which he was
exciting. The praises of the Prince mingled with those of the
Norman beauty; and "as a lion," said the poet, "can only be led by
the hand of a chaste and beautiful maiden, so a chief can only
acknowledge the empire of the most virtuous, the most lovely of
her sex. Who asks of the noonday sun, in what quarter of the world
he was born? and who shall ask of such charms as hers, to what
country they owe their birth?"

Enthusiasts in pleasure as in war, and possessed of imaginations
which answered readily to the summons of their poets, the Welsh
chiefs and leaders united in acclamations of applause; and the
song of the bard went farther to render popular the intended
alliance of the Prince, than had all the graver arguments of his
priestly precursor in the same topic.

Gwenwyn himself, in a transport of delight, tore off the golden
bracelets which he wore, to bestow them upon a bard whose song had
produced an effect so desirable; and said, as he looked at the
silent and sullen Cadwallon, "The silent harp was never strung
with golden wires."

"Prince," answered the bard, whose pride was at least equal to
that of Gwenwyn himself, "you pervert the proverb of Taliessin--it
is the flattering harp which never lacked golden strings."

Gwenwyn, turning sternly towards him, was about to make an angry
answer, when the sudden appearance of Jorworth, the messenger whom
he had despatched to Raymond Berenger, arrested his purpose. This
rude envoy entered the hall bare-legged, excepting the sandals of
goat-skin which he wore, and having on his shoulder a cloak of the
same, and a short javelin in his hand. The dust on his garments,
and the flush on his brow, showed with what hasty zeal his errand
had been executed. Gwenwyn demanded of him eagerly, "What news
from Garde Doloureuse, Jorworth ap Jevan?"

"I bear them in my bosom," said the son of Jevan; and, with much
reverence, he delivered to the Prince a packet, bound with silk,
and sealed with the impression of a swan, the ancient cognizance
of the House of Berenger. Himself ignorant of writing or reading,
Gwenwyn, in anxious haste, delivered the letter to Cadwallon, who
usually acted as secretary when the chaplain was not in presence,
as chanced then to be the case. Cadwallon, looking at the letter,
said briefly, "I read no Latin. Ill betide the Norman, who writes
to a Prince of Powys in other language than that of Britain! and
well was the hour, when that noble tongue alone was spoken from
Tintadgel to Cairleoil!"

Gwenwyn only replied to him with an angry glance.

"Where is Father Einion?" said the impatient Prince.

"He assists in the church," replied one of his attendants, "for it
is the feast of Saint--"

"Were it the feast of Saint David," said Gwenwyn, "and were the
pyx between his hands, he must come hither to me instantly!"

One of the chief henchmen sprung off, to command his attendance,
and, in the meantime, Gwenwyn eyed the letter containing the
secret of his fate, but which it required an interpreter to read,
with such eagerness and anxiety, that Caradoc, elated by his
former success, threw in a few notes to divert, if possible, the
tenor of his patron's thoughts during the interval. A light and
lively air, touched by a hand which seemed to hesitate, like the
submissive voice of an inferior, fearing to interrupt his master's
meditations, introduced a stanza or two applicable to the subject.

"And what though thou, O scroll," he said, apostrophizing the
letter, which lay on the table before his master, "dost speak with
the tongue of the stranger? Hath not the cuckoo a harsh note, and
yet she tells us of green buds and springing flowers? What if thy
language be that of the stoled priest, is it not the same which
binds hearts and hands together at the altar? And what though thou
delayest to render up thy treasures, are not all pleasures most
sweet, when enhanced by expectation? What were the chase, if the
deer dropped at our feet the instant he started from the cover--or
what value were there in the love of the maiden, were it yielded
without coy delay?"

The song of the bard was here broken short by the entrance of the
priest, who, hasty in obeying the summons of his impatient master,
had not tarried to lay aside even the stole, which he had worn in
the holy service; and many of the elders thought it was no good
omen, that, so habited, a priest should appear in a festive
assembly, and amid profane minstrelsy.

The priest opened the letter of the Norman Baron, and, struck with
surprise at the contents, lifted his eyes in silence.

"Read it!" exclaimed the fierce Gwenwyn.

"So please you," replied the more prudent chaplain, "a smaller
company were a fitter audience."

"Read it aloud!" repeated the Prince, in a still higher tone;
"there sit none here who respect not the honour of their prince,
or who deserve not his confidence. Read it, I say, aloud! and by
Saint David, if Raymond the Norman hath dared--"

He stopped short, and, reclining on his seat, composed himself to
an attitude of attention; but it was easy for his followers to
fill up the breach in his exclamation which prudence had
recommended.

The voice of the chaplain was low and ill-assured as he read the
following epistle:--

   "Raymond Berenger, the noble Norman Knight, Seneschal
   of the Garde Doloureuse, to Gwenwyn, Prince of Powys,
   (may peace be between them!) sendeth health.

"Your letter, craving the hand of our daughter Eveline Berenger,
was safely delivered to us by your servant, Jorworth ap Jevan, and
we thank you heartily for the good meaning therein expressed to us
and to ours. But, considering within ourselves the difference of
blood and lineage, with the impediments and causes of offence
which have often arisen in like cases, we hold it fitter to match
our daughter among our own people; and this by no case in
disparagement of you, but solely for the weal of you, of
ourselves, and of our mutual dependants, who will be the more safe
from the risk of quarrel betwixt us, that we essay not to draw the
bonds of our intimacy more close than beseemeth. The sheep and the
goats feed together in peace on the same pastures, but they mingle
not in blood, or race, the one with the other. Moreover, our
daughter Eveline hath been sought in marriage by a noble and
potent Lord of the Marches, Hugo de Lacy, the Constable of
Chester, to which most honourable suit we have returned a
favourable answer. It is therefore impossible that we should in
this matter grant to you the boon you seek; nevertheless, you
shall at all times find us, in other matters, willing to pleasure
you; and hereunto we call God, and Our Lady, and Saint Mary
Magdalene of Quatford, to witness; to whose keeping we heartily
recommend you.

"Written by our command, at our Castle of Garde Doloureuse, within
the Marches of Wales, by a reverend priest, Father Aldrovand, a
black monk of the house of Wenlock; and to which we have appended
our seal, upon the eve of the blessed martyr Saint Alphegius, to
whom be honour and glory!"

The voice of Father Einion faltered, and the scroll which he held
in his hand trembled in his grasp, as he arrived at the conclusion
of this epistle; for well he knew that insults more slight than
Gwenwyn would hold the least word it contained, were sure to put
every drop of his British blood into the most vehement commotion.
Nor did it fail to do so. The Prince had gradually drawn himself
up from the posture of repose in which he had prepared to listen
to the epistle; and when it concluded, he sprung on his feet like
a startled lion, spurning from him as he rose the foot-bearer, who
rolled at some distance on the floor. "Priest," he said, "hast
thou read that accursed scroll fairly? for if thou hast added, or
diminished, one word, or one letter, I will have thine eyes so
handled, that thou shalt never read letter more!"

The monk replied, trembling, (for he was well aware that the
sacerdotal character was not uniformly respected among the
irascible Welshmen,) "By the oath of my order, mighty prince, I
have read word for word, and letter for letter."

There was a momentary pause, while the fury of Gwenwyn, at this
unexpected affront, offered to him in the presence of all his
Uckelwyr, (_i.e._ noble chiefs, literally men of high
stature,) seemed too big for utterance, when the silence was
broken by a few notes from the hitherto mute harp of Cadwallon.
The Prince looked round at first with displeasure at the
interruption, for he was himself about to speak; but when he
beheld the bard bending over his harp with an air of inspiration,
and blending together, with unexampled skill, the wildest and most
exalted tones of his art, he himself became an auditor instead of
a speaker, and Cadwallon, not the Prince, seemed to become the
central point of the assembly, on whom all eyes were bent, and to
whom each ear was turned with breathless eagerness, as if his
strains were the responses of an oracle.

"We wed not with the stranger,"--thus burst the song from the lips
of the poet. "Vortigern wedded with the stranger; thence came the
first wo upon Britain, and a sword upon her nobles, and a
thunderbolt upon her palace. We wed not with the enslaved Saxon--
the free and princely stag seeks not for his bride the heifer
whose neck the yoke hath worn. We wed not with the rapacious
Norman--the noble hound scorns to seek a mate from the herd of
ravening wolves. When was it heard that the Cymry, the descendants
of Brute, the true children of the soil of fair Britain, were
plundered, oppressed, bereft of their birthright, and insulted
even in their last retreats?--when, but since they stretched their
hand in friendship to the stranger, and clasped to their bosoms
the daughter of the Saxon? Which of the two is feared?--the empty
water-course of summer, or the channel of the headlong winter
torrent?--A maiden smiles at the summer-shrunk brook while she
crosses it, but a barbed horse and his rider will fear to stem the
wintry flood. Men of Mathravel and Powys, be the dreaded flood of
winter--Gwenwyn, son of Cyverliock!--may thy plume be the topmost
of its waves!"

All thoughts of peace, thoughts which, in themselves, were foreign
to the hearts of the warlike British, passed before the song of
Cadwallon like dust before the whirlwind, and the unanimous shout
of the assembly declared for instant war. The Prince himself spoke
not, but, looking proudly around him, flung abroad his arm, as one
who cheers his followers to the attack.

The priest, had he dared, might have reminded Gwenwyn, that the
Cross which he had assumed on his shoulder, had consecrated his
arm to the Holy War, and precluded his engaging in any civil
strife. But the task was too dangerous for Father Einion's
courage, and he shrunk from the hall to the seclusion of his own
convent. Caradoc, whose brief hour of popularity was past, also
retired, with humbled and dejected looks, and not without a glance
of indignation at his triumphant rival, who had so judiciously
reserved his display of art for the theme of war, that was ever
most popular with the audience.

The chiefs resumed their seats no longer for the purpose of
festivity, but to fix, in the hasty manner customary among these
prompt warriors, where they were to assemble their forces, which,
upon such occasions, comprehended almost all the able-bodied males
of the country,--for all, excepting the priests and the bards,
were soldiers,--and to settle the order of their descent upon the
devoted marches, where they proposed to signalize, by general
ravage, their sense of the insult which their Prince had received,
by the rejection of his suit.




CHAPTER THE THIRD


  The sands are number'd, that make up my life;
  Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
     HENRY VI. ACT. I. SCENE IV.


When Raymond Berenger had despatched his mission to the Prince of
Powys, he was not unsuspicious, though altogether fearless, of the
result. He sent messengers to the several dependants who held
their fiefs by the tenure of _cornage_, and warned them to be
on the alert, that he might receive instant notice of the approach
of the enemy. These vassals, as is well known, occupied the
numerous towers, which, like so many falcon-nests, had been built
on the points most convenient to defend the frontiers, and were
bound to give signal of any incursion of the Welsh, by blowing
their horns; which sounds, answered from tower to tower, and from
station to station, gave the alarm for general defence. But
although Raymond considered these precautions as necessary, from
the fickle and precarious temper of his neighbours, and for
maintaining his own credit as a soldier, he was far from believing
the danger to be imminent; for the preparations of the Welsh;
though on a much more extensive scale than had lately been usual,
were as secret, as their resolution of war had been suddenly
adopted.

It was upon the second morning after the memorable festival of
Castell-Coch, that the tempest broke on the Norman frontier. At
first a single, long, and keen bugle-blast, announced the approach
of the enemy; presently the signals of alarm were echoed from
every castle and tower on the borders of Shropshire, where every
place of habitation was then a fortress. Beacons were lighted upon
crags and eminences, the bells were rung backward in the churches
and towns, while the general and earnest summons to arms announced
an extremity of danger which even the inhabitants of that
unsettled country had not hitherto experienced.

Amid this general alarm, Raymond Berenger, having busied himself
in arranging his few but gallant followers and adherents, and
taken such modes of procuring intelligence of the enemy's strength
and motions as were in his power, at length ascended the watch-
tower of the castle, to observe in person the country around,
already obscured in several places by the clouds of smoke, which
announced the progress and the ravages of the invaders. He was
speedily joined by his favourite squire, to whom the unusual
heaviness of his master's looks was cause of much surprise, for
till now they had ever been blithest at the hour of battle. The
squire held in his hand his master's helmet, for Sir Raymond was
all armed, saving the head.

"Dennis Morolt," said the veteran soldier, "are our vassals and
liegemen all mustered?"

"All, noble sir, but the Flemings, who are not yet come in."

"The lazy hounds, why tarry they?" said Raymond. "Ill policy it is
to plant such sluggish natures in our borders. They are like their
own steers, fitter to tug a plough than for aught that requires
mettle."

"With your favour," said Dennis, "the knaves can do good service
notwithstanding. That Wilkin Flammock of the Green can strike like
the hammers of his own fulling-mill."

"He will fight, I believe, when he cannot help it," said Raymond;
"but he has no stomach for such exercise, and is as slow and as
stubborn as a mule."

"And therefore are his countrymen rightly matched against the
Welsh," replied Dennis Morolt, "that their solid and unyielding
temper may be a fit foil to the fiery and headlong dispositions of
our dangerous neighbours, just as restless waves are best opposed
by steadfast rocks.--Hark, sir, I hear Wilkin Flammock's step
ascending the turret-stair, as deliberately as ever monk mounted
to matins."

Step by step the heavy sound approached, until the form of the
huge and substantial Fleming at length issued from the turret-door
to the platform where they "were conversing. Wilkin Flammock was
cased in bright armour, of unusual weight and thickness, and
cleaned with exceeding care, which marked the neatness of his
nation; but, contrary to the custom of the Normans, entirely
plain, and void of carving, gilding, or any sort of ornament. The
basenet, or steel-cap, had no visor, and left exposed a broad
countenance, with heavy and unpliable features, which announced
the character of his temper and understanding. He carried in his
hand a heavy mace.

"So, Sir Fleming," said the Castellane, "you are in no hurry,
methinks, to repair to the rendezvous."

"So please you," answered the Fleming, "we were compelled to
tarry, that we might load our wains with our bales of cloth and
other property."

"Ha! wains?--how many wains have you brought with you?"

"Six, noble sir," replied Wilkin.

"And how many men?" demanded Raymond Berenger.

"Twelve, valiant sir," answered Flammock.

"Only two men to each baggage-wain? I wonder you would thus
encumber yourself," said Berenger.

"Under your favour, sir, once more," replied Wilkin, "it is only
the value which I and my comrades set upon our goods, that
inclines us to defend them with our bodies; and, had we been
obliged to leave our cloth to the plundering clutches of yonder
vagabonds, I should have seen small policy in stopping here to
give them the opportunity of adding murder to robbery. Gloucester
should have been my first halting-place."

The Norman knight gazed on the Flemish artisan, for such was
Wilkin Flammock, with such a mixture of surprise and contempt, as
excluded indignation. "I have heard much," he said, "but this is
the first time that I have heard one with a beard on his lip
avouch himself a coward."

"Nor do you hear it now," answered Flammock, with the utmost
composure--"I am always ready to fight for life and property; and
my coming to this country, where they are both in constant danger,
shows that I care not much how often I do so. But a sound skin is
better than a slashed one, for all that."

"Well," said Raymond Berenger, "fight after thine own fashion, so
thou wilt but fight stoutly with that long body of thine. We are
like to have need for all that we can do.--Saw you aught of these
rascaille Welsh?--have they Gwenwyn's banner amongst them?"

"I saw it with the white dragon displayed," replied Wilkin; "I
could not but know it, since it was broidered in my own loom."

Raymond looked so grave upon this intelligence, that Dennis
Morolt, unwilling the Fleming should mark it, thought it necessary
to withdraw his attention. "I can tell thee," he said to
Flammock, "that when the Constable of Chester joins us with his
lances, you shall see your handiwork, the dragon, fly faster
homeward than ever flew the shuttle which wove it."

"It must fly before the Constable comes up, Dennis Morolt," said
Berenger, "else it will fly triumphant over all our bodies."

"In the name of God and the Holy Virgin!" said Dennis, "what may
you mean, Sir Knight?--not that we should fight with the Welsh
before the Constable joins us?"--He paused, and then, well
understanding the firm, yet melancholy glance, with which his
master answered the question, he proceeded, with yet more vehement
earnestness--"You cannot mean it--you cannot intend that we shall
quit this castle, which we have so often made good against them,
and contend in the field with two hundred men against thousands?--
Think better of it, my beloved master, and let not the rashness of
your old age blemish that character for wisdom and warlike skill,
which your former life has so nobly won."

"I am not angry with you for blaming my purpose, Dennis," answered
the Norman, "for I know you do it in love to me and mine. But,
Dennis Morolt, this thing must be--we must fight the Welshmen
within these three hours, or the name of Raymond Berenger must be
blotted from the genealogy of his house."

"And so we will--we will fight them, my noble master," said the
esquire; "fear not cold counsel from Dennis Morolt, where battle
is the theme. But we will fight them under the walls of the
castle, with honest Wilkin Flammock and his crossbows on the wall
to protect our flanks, and afford us some balance against the
numerous odds."

"Not so, Dennis," answered his master--"In the open field we must
fight them, or thy master must rank but as a mansworn knight.
Know, that when I feasted yonder wily savage in my halls at
Christmas, and when the wine was flowing fastest around, Gwenwyn
threw out some praises of the fastness and strength of my castle,
in a manner which intimated it was these advantages alone that had
secured me in former wars from defeat and captivity. I spoke in
answer, when I had far better been silent; for what availed my
idle boast, but as a fetter to bind me to a deed next to madness?
If, I said, a prince of the Cymry shall come in hostile fashion
before the Garde Doloureuse, let him pitch his standard down in
yonder plain by the bridge, and, by the word of a good knight, and
the faith of a Christian man, Raymond Berenger will meet him as
willingly, be he many or be he few, as ever Welshman was met
withal."

Dennis was struck speechless when he heard of a promise so rash,
so fatal; but his was not the casuistry which could release his
master from the fetters with which his unwary confidence had bound
him. It was otherwise with Wilkin Flammock. He stared--he almost
laughed, notwithstanding the reverence due to the Castellane, and
his own insensibility to risible emotions. "And is this all?" he
said. "If your honour had pledged yourself to pay one hundred
florins to a Jew or to a Lombard, no doubt you must have kept the
day, or forfeited your pledge; but surely one day is as good as
another to keep a promise for fighting, and that day is best in
which the promiser is strongest. But indeed, after all, what
signifies any promise over a wine flagon?"

"It signifies as much as a promise can do that is given elsewhere.
The promiser," said Berenger, "escapes not the sin of a word-
breaker, because he hath been a drunken braggart."

"For the sin," said Dennis, "sure I am, that rather than you
should do such a deed of dole, the Abbot of Glastonbury would
absolve you for a florin."

"But what shall wipe out the shame?" demanded Berenger--"how shall
I dare to show myself again among press of knights, who have
broken my word of battle pledged, for fear of a Welshman and his
naked savages? No! Dennis Morolt, speak on it no more. Be it for
weal or wo, we fight them to-day, and upon yonder fair field."

"It may be," said Flammock, "that Gwenwyn may have forgotten the
promise, and so fail to appear to claim it in the appointed space;
for, as we heard, your wines of France flooded his Welsh brains
deeply."

"He again alluded to it on the morning after it was made," said
the Castellane--"trust me, he will not forget what will give him
such a chance of removing me from his path for ever."

As he spoke, they observed that large clouds of dust, which had
been seen at different points of the landscape, were drawing down
towards the opposite side of the river, over which an ancient
bridge extended itself to the appointed place of combat. They were
at no loss to conjecture the cause. It was evident that Gwenwyn,
recalling the parties who had been engaged in partial devastation,
was bending with his whole forces towards the bridge and the plain
beyond it.

"Let us rush down and secure the pass," said Dennis Morolt; "we
may debate with them with some equality by the advantage of
defending the bridge. Your word bound you to the plain as to a
field of battle, but it did not oblige you to forego such
advantages as the passage of the bridge would afford. Our men, our
horses, are ready--let our bowmen secure the banks, and my life on
the issue."

"When I promised to meet him in yonder field, I meant," replied
Raymond Berenger, "to give the Welshman the full advantage of
equality of ground. I so meant it--he so understood it; and what
avails keeping my word in the letter, if I break it in the sense?
We move not till the last Welshman has crossed the bridge; and
then--"

"And then," said Dennis, "we move to our death!--May God forgive
our sins!--But--"

"But what?" said Berenger; "something sticks in thy mind that
should have vent."

"My young lady, your daughter the Lady Eveline--"

"I have told her what is to be. She shall remain in the castle,
where I will leave a few chosen veterans, with you, Dennis, to
command them. In twenty-four hours the siege will be relieved, and
we have defended it longer with a slighter garrison. Then to her
aunt, the Abbess of the Benedictine sisters--thou, Dennis, wilt
see her placed there in honour and safety, and my sister will care
for her future provision as her wisdom shall determine." "_I_
leave you at this pinch!" said Dennis Morolt, bursting into tears
--"_I_ shut myself up within walls, when my master rides to
his last of battles!--_I_ become esquire to a lady, even
though it be to the Lady Eveline, when he lies dead under his
shield!--Raymond Berenger, is it for this that I have buckled thy
armour so often?"

The tears gushed from the old warrior's eyes as fast as from those
of a girl who weeps for her lover; and Raymond, taking him kindly
by the hand, said, in a soothing tone, "Do not think, my good old
servant, that, were honour to be won, I would drive thee from my
side. But this is a wild and an inconsiderate deed, to which my
fate or my folly has bound me. I die to save my name from
dishonour; but, alas! I must leave on my memory the charge of
imprudence."

"Let me share your imprudence, my dearest master," said Dennis
Morolt, earnestly--"the poor esquire has no business to be thought
wiser than his master. In many a battle my valour derived some
little fame from partaking in thee deeds which won your renown--
deny me not the right to share in that blame which your temerity
may incur; let them not say, that so rash was his action, even his
old esquire was not permitted to partake in it! I am part of
yourself--it is murder to every man whom you take with you, if you
leave me behind."

"Dennis," said Berenger, "you make me feel yet more bitterly the
folly I have yielded to. I. would grant you the boon you ask, sad
as it is--But my daughter--"

"Sir Knight," said the Fleming, who had listened to this dialogue
with somewhat less than his usual apathy, "it is not my purpose
this day to leave this castle; now, if you could trust my troth to
do what a plain man may for the protection of my Lady Eveline--"

"How, sirrah!" said Raymond; "you do not propose to leave the
castle? Who gives you right to propose or dispose in the case,
until my pleasure is known?"

"I shall be sorry to have words with you, Sir Castellane," said
the imperturbable Fleming;--"but I hold here, in this township,
certain mills, tenements, cloth-yards, and so forth, for which I
am to pay man-service in defending this Castle of the Garde
Doloureuse, and in this I am ready. But if you call on me to march
from hence, leaving the same castle defenceless, and to offer up
my life in a battle which you acknowledge to be desperate, I must
needs say my tenure binds me not to obey thee."

"Base mechanic!" said Morolt, laying his hand on his dagger, and
menacing the Fleming.

But Raymond Berenger interfered with voice and hand--"Harm him
not, Morolt, and blame him not. He hath a sense of duty, though
not after our manner; and he and his knaves will fight best behind
stone walls. They are taught also, these Flemings, by the practice
of their own country, the attack and defence of walled cities and
fortresses, and are especially skilful in working of mangonels and
military engines. There are several of his countrymen in the
castle, besides his own followers. These I propose to leave
behind; and I think they will obey him more readily than any but
thyself--how think'st thou? Thou wouldst not, I know, from a
miscontrued point of honour, or a blind love to me, leave this
important place, and the safety of Eveline, in doubtful hands?"

"Wilkin Flammock is but a Flemish clown, noble sir," answered
Dennis, as much overjoyed as if he had obtained some important
advantage; "but I must needs say he is as stout and true as any
whom you might trust; and, besides, his own shrewdness will teach
him there is more to be gained by defending such a castle as this,
than by yielding it to strangers, who may not be likely to keep
the terms of surrender, however fairly they may offer them."

"It is fixed then," said Raymond Berenger. "Then, Dennis, thou
shalt go with me, and he shall remain behind.--Wilkin Flammock,"
he said, addressing the Fleming solemnly, "I speak not to thee the
language of chivalry, of which thou knowest nothing; but, as thou
art an honest man, and a true Christian, I conjure thee to stand
to the defence of this castle. Let no promise of the enemy draw
thee to any base composition--no threat to any surrender. Relief
must speedily arrive, if you fulfil your trust to me and to my
daughter, Hugo de Lacy will reward you richly--if you fail, he
will punish you severely."

"Sir Knight," said Flammock, "I am pleased you have put your trust
so far in a plain handicraftsman. For the Welsh, I am come from a
land for which we were compelled--yearly compelled--to struggle
with the sea; and they who can deal with the waves in a tempest,
need not fear an undisciplined people in their fury. Your daughter
shall be as dear to me as mine own; and in that faith you may
prick forth--if, indeed, you will not still, like a wiser man,
shut gate, down portcullis, up drawbridge, and let your archers
and my crossbows man the wall, and tell the knaves you are not the
fool that they take you for."

"Good fellow, that must not be," said the Knight. "I hear my
daughter's voice," he added hastily; "I would not again meet her,
again to part from her. To Heaven's keeping I commit thee, honest
Fleming.--Follow me, Dennis Morolt."

The old Castellane descended the stair of the southern tower
hastily, just as his daughter Eveline ascended that of the eastern
turret, to throw herself at his feet once more. She was followed
by the Father Aldrovand, chaplain of her father; by an old and
almost invalid huntsman, whose more active services in the field
and the chase had been for some time chiefly limited to the
superintendence of the Knight's kennels, and the charge especially
of his more favourite hounds; and by Rose Flammock, the daughter
of Wilkin, a blue-eyed Flemish maiden, round, plump, and shy as a
partridge, who had been for some time permitted to keep company
with the high-born Norman damsel, in a doubtful station, betwixt
that of an humble friend and a superior domestic. Eveline rushed
upon the battlements, her hair dishevelled, and her eyes drowned
in tears, and eagerly demanded of the Fleming where her father
was.

Flammock made a clumsy reverence, and attempted some answer; but
his voice seemed to fail him. He turned his back upon Eveline
without ceremony, and totally disregarding the anxious inquiries
of the huntsman and the chaplain, he said hastily to his daughter,
in his own language, "Mad work! mad work! look to the poor maiden,
Roschen--_Der alter Herr ist verruckt_." [Footnote: The old
lord is frantic.]

Without farther speech he descended the stairs, and never paused
till he reached the buttery. Here he called like a lion for the
controller of these regions, by the various names of Kammerer,
Keller-master, and so forth, to which the old Reinold, an ancient
Norman esquire, answered not, until the Netherlander fortunately
recollected his Anglo-Norman title of butler. This, his regular
name of office, was the key to the buttery-hatch, and the old man
instantly appeared, with his gray cassock and high rolled hose, a
ponderous bunch of keys suspended by a silver chain to his broad
leathern girdle, which, in consideration of the emergency of the
time, he had thought it right to balance on the left side with a
huge falchion, which seemed much too weighty for his old arm to
wield.

"What is your will," he said, "Master Flammock? or what are your
commands, since it is my lord's pleasure that they shall be laws
to me for a time?"

"Only a cup of wine, good Meister Keller-master--butler, I mean."

"I am glad you remember the name of mine office," said Reinold,
with some of the petty resentment of a spoiled domestic, who
thinks that a stranger has been irregularly put in command over
him.

"A flagon of Rhenish, if you love me," answered the Fleming, "for
my heart is low and poor within me, and I must needs drink of the
best."

"And drink you shall," said Reinold, "if drink will give you the
courage which perhaps you want."--He descended to the secret
crypts, of which he was the guardian, and returned with a silver
flagon, which might contain about a quart.--"Here is such wine,"
said Reinold, "as thou hast seldom tasted," and was about to pour
it out into a cup.

"Nay, the flagon--the flagon, friend Reinold; I love a deep and
solemn draught when the business is weighty," said Wilkin. He
seized on the flagon accordingly, and drinking a preparatory
mouthful, paused as if to estimate the strength and flavour of the
generous liquor. Apparently he was pleased with both, for he
nodded in approbation to the butler; and, raising the flagon to
his mouth once more, he slowly and gradually brought the bottom of
the vessel parallel with the roof of the apartment, without
suffering one drop of the contents to escape him.

"That hath savour, Herr Keller-master," said he, while he was
recovering his breath by intervals, after so long a suspense of
respiration; "but, may Heaven forgive you for thinking it the best
I have ever tasted! You little know the cellars of Ghent and of
Ypres."

"And I care not for them," said Reinold; "those of gentle Norman
blood hold the wines of Gascony and France, generous, light, and
cordial, worth all the acid potations of the Rhine and the
Neckar."

"All is matter of taste," said the Fleming; "but hark ye--Is there
much of this wine in the cellar?"

"Methought but now it pleased not your dainty palate?" said
Reinold.

"Nay, nay, my friend," said Wilkin, "I said it had savour--I may
have drunk better--but this is right good, where better may not be
had.--Again, how much of it hast thou?"

"The whole butt, man," answered the butler; "I have broached a
fresh piece for you."

"Good," replied Flammock; "get the quart-pot of Christian measure;
heave the cask up into this same buttery, and let each soldier of
this castle be served with such a cup as I have here swallowed. I
feel it hath done me much good--my heart was sinking when I saw
the black smoke arising from mine own fulling-mills yonder. Let
each man, I say, have a full quart-pot--men defend not castles on
thin liquors."

"I must do as you will, good Wilkin Flammock," said the butler;
"but I pray you, remember all men are not alike. That which will
but warm your Flemish hearts, will put wildfire into Norman
brains; and what may only encourage your countrymen to man the
walls, will make ours fly over the battlements."

"Well, you know the conditions of your own countrymen best; serve
out to them what wines and measure you list--only let each Fleming
have a solemn quart of Rhenish.--But what will you do for the
English churls, of whom there are a right many left with us?"

The old butler paused, and rubbed his brow.--"There will be a
strange waste of liquor," he said; "and yet I may not deny that
the emergency may defend the expenditure. But for the English,
they are, as you wot, a mixed breed, having much of your German
sullenness, together with a plentiful touch of the hot blood of
yonder Welsh furies. Light wines stir them not; strong heavy
draughts would madden them. What think you of ale, an
invigorating, strengthening liquor, that warms the heart without
inflaming the brain?"

"Ale!" said the Fleming.--"Hum--ha--is your ale mighty, Sir
Butler?--is it double ale?"

"Do you doubt my skill?" said the butler.--"March and October have
witnessed me ever as they came round, for thirty years, deal with
the best barley in Shropshire.--You shall judge."

He filled, from a large hogshead in the corner of the buttery, the
flagon which the Fleming had just emptied, and which was no sooner
replenished than Wilkin again drained it to the bottom.

"Good ware," he said, "Master Butler, strong stinging ware. The
English churls will fight like devils upon it--let them be
furnished with mighty ale along with their beef and brown bread.
And now, having given you your charge, Master Reinold, it is time
I should look after mine own."

Wilkin Flammock left the buttery, and with a mien and judgment
alike undisturbed by the deep potations in which he had so
recently indulged, undisturbed also by the various rumours
concerning what was passing without doors, he made the round of
the castle and its outworks, mustered the little garrison, and
assigned to each their posts, reserving to his own countrymen the
management of the arblasts, or crossbows, and of the military
engines which were contrived by the proud Normans, and were
incomprehensible to the ignorant English, or, more properly,
Anglo-Saxons, of the period, but which his more adroit countrymen
managed with great address. The jealousies entertained by both the
Normans and English, at being placed under the temporary command
of a Fleming, gradually yielded to the military and mechanical
skill which he displayed, as well as to a sense of the emergency,
which became greater with every moment.




CHAPTER THE FOURTH


  Beside yon brigg out ower yon burn,
  Where the water bickereth bright and sheen,
  Shall many a falling courser spurn,
  And knights shall die in battle keen.
     PROPHECY OF THOMAS THE RHYMER.


The daughter of Raymond Berenger, with the attendants whom we have
mentioned, continued to remain upon the battlements of the Garde
Doloureuse, in spite of the exhortations of the priest that she
would rather await the issue of this terrible interval in the
chapel, and amid the rites of religion. He perceived, at length,
that she was incapable, from grief and fear, of attending to, or
understanding his advice; and, sitting down beside her, while the
huntsman and Rose Flammock stood by, endeavoured to suggest such
comfort as perhaps he scarcely felt himself.

"This is but a sally of your noble father's," he said; "and though
it may seem it is made on great hazard, yet who ever questioned
Sir Raymond Berenger's policy of wars?--He is close and secret in
his purposes. I guess right well he had not marched out as he
proposes, unless he knew that the noble Earl of Arundel, or the
mighty Constable of Chester, were close at hand."

"Think you this assuredly, good father?--Go, Raoul--go, my dearest
Rose--look to the east--see if you cannot descry banners or clouds
of dust.--Listen--listen--hear you no trumpets from that quarter?"

"Alas! my lady," said Raoul, "the thunder of heaven could scarce
be heard amid the howling of yonder Welsh wolves." Eveline turned
as he spoke, and looking towards the bridge, she beheld an
appalling spectacle. The river, whose stream washes on three sides
the base of the proud eminence on which the castle is situated,
curves away from the fortress and its corresponding village on the
west, and the hill sinks downward to an extensive plain, so
extremely level as to indicate its alluvial origin. Lower down, at
the extremity of this plain, where the banks again close on the
river, were situated the manufacturing houses of the stout
Flemings, which were now burning in a bright flame. The bridge, a
high, narrow combination of arches of unequal size, was about half
a mile distant from the castle, in the very centre of the plain.
The river itself ran in a deep rocky channel, was often
unfordable, and at all times difficult of passage, giving
considerable advantage to the defenders of the castle, who had
spent on other occasions many a dear drop of blood to defend the
pass, which Raymond Berenger's fantastic scruples now induced him
to abandon. The Welshmen, seizing the opportunity with the avidity
with which men grasp an unexpected benefit, were fast crowding
over the high and steep arches, while new bands, collecting from
different points upon the farther bank, increased the continued
stream of warriors, who, passing leisurely and uninterrupted,
formed their line of battle on the plain opposite to the castle.

At first Father Aldrovand viewed their motions without anxiety,
nay, with the scornful smile of one who observes an enemy in the
act of falling into the snare spread for them by superior skill.
Raymond Berenger, with his little body of infantry and cavalry,
were drawn up on the easy hill which is betwixt the castle and the
plain, ascending from the former towards the fortress; and it
seemed clear to the Dominican, who had not entirely forgotten in
the cloister his ancient military experience, that it was the
Knight's purpose to attack the disordered enemy when a certain
number had crossed the river, and the others were partly on the
farther side, and partly engaged in the slow and perilous
manoeuvre of effecting their passage. But when large bodies of the
white-mantled Welshmen were permitted without interruption to take
such order on the plain as their habits of fighting recommended,
the monk's countenance, though he still endeavoured to speak
encouragement to the terrified Eveline, assumed a different and an
anxious expression; and his acquired habits of resignation
contended strenuously with his ancient military ardour. "Be
patient," he said, "my daughter, and be of good comfort; thine
eyes shall behold the dismay of yonder barbarous enemy. Let but a
minute elapse, and thou shalt see them scattered like dust.--Saint
George! they will surely cry thy name now, or never!"

The monk's beads passed meanwhile rapidly through his hands, but
many an expression of military impatience mingled itself with his
orisons. He could not conceive the cause why each successive
throng of mountaineers, led under their different banners, and
headed by their respective chieftains, was permitted, without
interruption, to pass the difficult defile, and extend themselves
in battle array on the near side of the bridge, while the English,
or rather Anglo-Norman cavalry, remained stationary, without so
much as laying their lances in rest. There remained, as he
thought, but one hope--one only rational explanation of this
unaccountable inactivity--this voluntary surrender of every
advantage of ground, when that of numbers was so tremendously on
the side of the enemy. Father Aldrovand concluded, that the
succours of the Constable of Chester, and other Lord Marchers,
must be in the immediate vicinity, and that the Welsh were only
permitted to pass the river without opposition, that their retreat
might be the more effectually cut off, and their defeat, with a
deep river in their rear, rendered the more signally calamitous.
But even while he clung to this hope, the monk's heart sunk within
him, as, looking in every direction from which the expected
succours might arrive, he could neither see nor hear the slightest
token which announced their approach. In a frame of mind
approaching more nearly to despair than to hope, the old man
continued alternately to tell his beads, to gaze anxiously around,
and to address some words of consolation in broken phrases to the
young lady, until the general shout of the Welsh, ringing from the
bank of the river to the battlements of the castle, warned him, in
a note of exultation, that the very last of the British had
defiled through the pass, and that their whole formidable array
stood prompt for action upon the hither side of the river.

This thrilling and astounding clamour, to which each Welshman lent
his voice with all the energy of defiance, thirst of battle, and
hope of conquest, was at length answered by the blast of the
Norman trumpets,--the first sign of activity which had been
exhibited on the part of Raymond Berenger. But cheerily as they
rang, the trumpets, in comparison of the shout which they
answered, sounded like the silver whistle of the stout boatswain
amid the howling of the tempest.

At the same moment when the trumpets were blown, Berenger gave
signal to the archers to discharge their arrows, and the men-at-
arms to advance under a hail-storm of shafts, javelins, and
stones, shot, darted, and slung by the Welsh against their steel-
clad assailants.

The veterans of Raymond, on the other hand, stimulated by so many
victorious recollections, confident in the talents of their
accomplished leader, and undismayed even by the desperation of
their circumstances, charged the mass of the Welshmen with their
usual determined valour. It was a gallant sight to see this little
body of cavalry advance to the onset, their plumes floating above
their helmets, their lances in rest, and projecting six feet in
length before the breasts of their coursers; their shields hanging
from their necks, that their left hands might have freedom to
guide their horses; and the whole body rushing on with an equal
front, and a momentum of speed which increased with every second.
Such an onset might have startled naked men, (for such were the
Welsh, in respect of the mail-sheathed Normans,) but it brought no
terrors to the ancient British, who had long made it their boast
that they exposed their bare bosoms and white tunics to the lances
and swords of the men-at-arms, with as much confidence as if they
had been born invulnerable. It was not indeed in their power to
withstand the weight of the first shock, which, breaking their
ranks, densely as they were arranged, carried the barbed horses
into the very centre of their host, and well-nigh up to the fatal
standard, to which Raymond Berenger, bound by his fatal vow, had
that day conceded so much vantage-ground. But they yielded like
the billows, which give way, indeed, to the gallant ship, but only
to assail her sides, and to unite in her wake. With wild and
horrible clamours, they closed their tumultuous ranks around
Berenger and his devoted followers, and a deadly scene of strife
ensued.

The best warriors of Wales had on this occasion joined the
standard of Gwenwyn; the arrows of the men of Gwentland, whose
skill in archery almost equalled that of the Normans themselves,
rattled on the helmets of the men-at-arms; and the spears of the
people of Deheubarth, renowned for the sharpness and temper of
their steel heads, were employed against the cuirasses not without
fatal effect, notwithstanding the protection, which these afforded
to the rider.

It was in vain that the archery belonging to Raymond's little
band, stout yeomen, who, for the most part, held possession by
military tenure, exhausted their quivers on the broad mark
afforded them by the Welsh army. It is probable, that every shaft
carried a Welshman's life on its point; yet, to have afforded
important relief to the cavalry, now closely and inextricably
engaged, the slaughter ought to have been twenty-fold at least.
Meantime, the Welsh, galled by this incessant discharge, answered
it by volleys from their own archers, whose numbers made some
amends for their inferiority, and who were supported by numerous
bodies of darters and slingers. So that the Norman archers, who
had more than once attempted to descend from their position to
operate a diversion in favour of Raymond and his devoted band,
were now so closely engaged in front, as obliged them to abandon
all thoughts of such a movement.

Meanwhile, that chivalrous leader, who from the first had hoped
for no more than an honourable death, laboured with all his power
to render his fate signal, by involving in it that of the Welsh
Prince, the author of the war. He cautiously avoided the
expenditure of his strength by hewing among the British; but, with
the shock of his managed horse, repelled the numbers who pressed
on him, and leaving the plebeians to the swords of his companions,
shouted his war-cry, and made his way towards the fatal standard
of Gwenwyn, beside which, discharging at once the duties of a
skilful leader and a brave soldier, the Prince had stationed
himself. Raymond's experience of the Welsh disposition, subject
equally to the highest flood, and most sudden ebb of passion, gave
him some hope that a successful attack upon this point, followed
by the death or capture of the Prince, and the downfall of his
standard, might even yet strike such a panic, as should change the
fortunes of the day, otherwise so nearly desperate. The veteran,
therefore, animated his comrades to the charge by voice and
example; and, in spite of all opposition, forced his way gradually
onward. But Gwenwyn in person, surrounded by his best and noblest
champions, offered a defence as obstinate as the assault was
intrepid. In vain they were borne to the earth by the barbed
horses, or hewed down by the invulnerable riders. Wounded and
overthrown, the Britons continued their resistance, clung round
the legs of the Norman steeds, and cumbered their advance while
their brethren, thrusting with pikes, proved every joint and
crevice of the plate and mail, or grappling with the men-at-arms,
strove to pull them from their horses by main force, or beat them
down with their bills and Welsh hooks. And wo betide those who
were by these various means dismounted, for the long sharp knives
worn by the Welsh, soon pierced them with a hundred wounds, and
were then only merciful when the first inflicted was deadly.

The combat was at this point, and had raged for more than half an
hour, when Berenger, having forced his horse within two spears'
length of the British standard, he and Gwenwyn were so near to
each other as to exchange tokens of mutual defiance.

"Turn thee, Wolf of Wales," said Berenger, "and abide, if thou
darest, one blow of a good knight's sword! Raymond Berenger spits
at thee and thy banner."

"False Norman churl!" said Gwenwyn, swinging around his head a
mace of prodigious weight, and already clottered with blood, "thy
iron headpiece shall ill protect thy lying tongue, with which I
will this day feed the ravens."

Raymond made no farther answer, but pushed his horse towards the
Prince, who advanced to meet him with equal readiness. But ere
they came within reach of each other's weapons, a Welsh champion,
devoted like the Romans who opposed the elephants of Pyrrhus,
finding that the armour of Raymond's horse resisted the repeated
thrusts of his spear, threw himself under the animal, and stabbed
him in the belly with his long knife. The noble horse reared and
fell, crushing with his weight the Briton who had wounded him; the
helmet of the rider burst its clasps in the fall, and rolled away
from his head, giving to view his noble features and gray hairs.
He made more than one effort to extricate himself from the fallen
horse, but ere he could succeed, received his death-wound from the
hand of Gwenwyn, who hesitated not to strike him down with his
mace while in the act of extricating himself.

During the whole of this bloody day, Dennis Morolt's horse had
kept pace for pace, and his arm blow for blow, with his master's.
It seemed as if two different bodies had been moving under one act
of volition. He husbanded his strength, or put it forth, exactly
as he observed his knight did, and was close by his side, when he
made the last deadly effort. At that fatal moment, when Raymond
Berenger rushed on the chief, the brave squire forced his way up
to the standard, and, grasping it firmly, struggled for possession
of it with a gigantic Briton, to whose care it had been confided,
and who now exerted his utmost strength to defend it. But even
while engaged in this mortal struggle, the eye of Morolt scarcely
left his master; and when he saw him fall, his own force seemed by
sympathy to abandon him, and the British champion had no longer
any trouble in laying him prostrate among the slain.

The victory of the British was now complete. Upon the fall of
their leader, the followers of Raymond Berenger would willingly
have fled or surrendered. But the first was impossible, so closely
had they been enveloped; and in the cruel wars maintained by the
Welsh upon their frontiers, quarter to the vanquished was out of
question. A few of the men-at-arms were lucky enough to
disentangle themselves from the tumult, and, not even attempting
to enter the castle, fled in various directions, to carry their
own fears among the inhabitants of the marches, by announcing the
loss of the battle, and the fate of the far-renowned Raymond
Berenger.

The archers of the fallen leader, as they had never been so deeply
involved in the combat, which had been chiefly maintained by the
cavalry, became now, in their turn, the sole object of the enemy's
attack. But when they saw the multitude come roaring towards them
like a sea, with all its waves, they abandoned the bank which they
had hitherto bravely defended, and began a regular retreat to the
castle in the best order which they could, as the only remaining
means of securing their lives. A few of their lightfooted enemies
attempted to intercept them, during the execution of this prudent
manoeuvre, by outstripping them in their march, and throwing
themselves into the hollow way which led to the castle, to oppose
their retreat. But the coolness of the English archers, accustomed
to extremities of every kind, supported them on the present
occasion. While a part of them, armed with glaives and bills,
dislodged the Welsh from the hollow way, the others, facing in the
opposite direction, and parted into divisions, which alternately
halted and retreated, maintained such a countenance as to check
pursuit, and exchange a severe discharge of missiles with the
Welsh, by which both parties were considerable sufferers.

At length, having left more than two-thirds of their brave
companions behind them, the yeomanry attained the point, which,
being commanded by arrows and engines from the battlements, might
be considered as that of comparative safety. A volley of large
stones, and square-headed bolts of great size and thickness,
effectually stopped the farther progress of the pursuit, and those
who had led it drew back their desultory forces to the plain,
where, with shouts of jubilee and exultation, their countrymen
were employed in securing the plunder of the field; while some,
impelled by hatred and revenge, mangled and mutilated the limbs of
the dead Normans, in a manner unworthy of their national cause and
their own courage. The fearful yells with which this dreadful work
was consummated, while it struck horror into the minds of the
slender garrison of the Garde Doloureuse, inspired them at the
same time with the resolution rather to defend the fortress to the
last extremity, than to submit to the mercy of so vengeful an
enemy. [Footnote: This is by no means exaggerated in the text. A
very honourable testimony was given to their valour by King Henry
II., in a letter to the Greek Emperor, Emanuel Commenus. This
prince having desired that an account might be sent him of all
that was remarkable in the island of Great Britain, Henry, in
answer to that request, was pleased to take notice, among other
particulars, of the extraordinary courage and fierceness of the
Welsh, who were not afraid to fight unarmed with enemies armed at
all points, valiantly shedding their blood in the cause of their
country, and purchasing glory at the expense of their lives.]




CHAPTER THE FIFTH


  That baron he to his castle fled,
  To Barnard Castle then fled he;
  The uttermost walls were eathe to win,
  The Earls have won them speedilie;-
  The uttermost walls were stone and brick;
  But though they won them soon anon,
  Long ere they won the inmost walls,
  For they were hewn in rock of stone.
     PERCY'S RELICS OF ANCIENT POETRY.


The unhappy fate of the battle was soon evident to the anxious
spectators upon the watch-towers of the Garde Doloureuse, which
name the castle that day too well deserved. With difficulty the
confessor mastered his own emotions to control those of the
females on whom he attended, and who were now joined in their
lamentation by many others--women, children, and infirm old men,
the relatives of those whom they saw engaged in this unavailing
contest. These helpless beings had been admitted to the castle for
security's sake, and they had now thronged to the battlements,
from which Father Aldrovand found difficulty in making them
descend, aware that the sight of them on the towers, that should
have appeared lined with armed men, would be an additional
encouragement to the exertions of the assailants. He urged the
Lady Eveline to set an example to this group of helpless, yet
intractable mourners.

Preserving, at least endeavouring to preserve, even in the
extremity of grief, that composure which the manners of the times
enjoined--for chivalry had its stoicism as well as philosophy--
Eveline replied in a voice which she would fain have rendered
firm, and which was tremulous in her despite--"Yes, father, you
say well--here is no longer aught left for maidens to look upon.
Warlike meed and honoured deed sunk when yonder white plume
touched the bloody ground.--Come, maidens, there is no longer
aught left us to see--To mass, to mass--the tourney is over!"

There was wildness in her tone, and when she rose, with the air of
one who would lead out a procession, she staggered, and would have
fallen, but for the support of the confessor. Hastily wrapping her
head in her mantle, as if ashamed of the agony of grief which she
could not restrain, and of which her sobs and the low moaning
sounds that issued from under the folds enveloping her face,
declared the excess, she suffered Father Aldrovand to conduct her
whither he would.

"Our gold," he said, "has changed to brass, our silver to dross,
our wisdom, to folly--it is His will, who confounds the counsels
of the wise, and shortens the arm of the mighty. To the chapel--to
the chapel, Lady Eveline; and instead of vain repining, let us
pray to God and the saints to turn away their displeasure, and to
save the feeble remnant from the jaws of the devouring wolf."

Thus speaking, he half led, half supported Eveline, who was at the
moment almost incapable of thought and action, to the castle-
chapel, where, sinking before the altar, she assumed the attitude
at least of devotion, though her thoughts, despite the pious words
which her tongue faltered out mechanically, were upon the field of
battle, beside the body of her slaughtered parent. The rest of the
mourners imitated their young lady in her devotional posture, and
in the absence of her thoughts. The consciousness that so many of
the garrison had been cut off in Raymond's incautious sally, added
to their sorrows the sense of personal insecurity, which was
exaggerated by the cruelties which were too often exercised by the
enemy, who, in the heat of victory, were accustomed to spare
neither sex nor age.

The monk, however, assumed among them the tone of authority which
his character warranted, rebuked their wailing and ineffectual
complaints, and having, as he thought, brought them to such a
state of mind as better became their condition, he left them to
their private devotions to indulge his own anxious curiosity by
inquiring into the defences of the castle. Upon the outward walls
he found Wilkin Flammock, who, having done the office of a good
and skilful captain in the mode of managing his artillery, and
beating back, as we have already seen, the advanced guard of the
enemy, was now with his own hand measuring out to his little
garrison no stinted allowance of wine.

"Have a care, good Wilkin," said the father, "that thou dost not
exceed in this matter. Wine is, thou knowest, like fire and water,
an excellent servant, but a very bad master."

"It will be long ere it overflow the deep and solid skulls of my
countrymen," said Wilkin Flammock. "Our Flemish courage is like
our Flanders horses--the one needs the spur, and the other must
have a taste of the winepot; but, credit me, father, they are of
an enduring generation, and will not shrink in the washing.--But
indeed, if I were to give the knaves a cup more than enough, it
were not altogether amiss, since they are like to have a platter
the less."

"How do you mean!" cried the monk, starting; "I trust in the
saints the provisions have been cared for?"

"Not so well as in your convent, good father," replied Wilkin,
with the same immoveable stolidity of countenance. "We had kept,
as you know, too jolly a Christmas to have a very fat Easter. Yon
Welsh hounds, who helped to eat up our victuals, are now like to
get into our hold for the lack of them."

"Thou talkest mere folly," answered the monk; "orders were last
evening given by our lord (whose soul God assoilzie!) to fetch in
the necessary supplies from the country around!

"Ay, but the Welsh were too sharp set to permit us to do that at
our ease this morning, which should have been done weeks and
months since. Our lord deceased, if deceased he be, was one of
those who trusted to the edge of the sword, and even so hath come
of it. Commend me to a crossbow and a well-victualled castle, if I
must needs fight at all.--You look pale, my good father, a cup of
wine will revive you."

The monk motioned away from him the untasted cup, which Wilkin
pressed him to with clownish civility. "We have now, indeed," he
said, "no refuge, save in prayer!"

"Most true, good father;" again replied the impassible Fleming;
"pray therefore as much as you will. I will content myself with
fasting, which will come whether I will or no."--At this moment a
horn was heard before the gate.--"Look to the portcullis and the
gate, ye knaves!--What news, Neil Hansen?"

"A messenger from the Welsh tarries at the Mill-hill, just within
shot of the cross-bows; he has a white flag, and demands
admittance."

"Admit him not, upon thy life, till we be prepared for him," said
Wilkin. "Bend the bonny mangonel upon the place, and shoot him if
he dare to stir from the spot where he stands till we get all
prepared to receive him," said Flammock in his native language.
"And, Neil, thou houndsfoot, bestir thyself--let every pike,
lance, and pole in the castle be ranged along the battlements, and
pointed through the shot-holes--cut up some tapestry into the
shape of banners, and show them from the highest towers.--Be ready
when I give a signal, to strike _naker_, [Footnote:
_Naker_,--Drum. ] and blow trumpets, if we have any; if not,
some cow-horns--anything for a noise. And hark ye, Neil Hansen, do
you, and four or five of your fellows, go to the armoury and slip
on coats-of-mail; our Netherlandish corslets do not appal them so
much. Then let the Welsh thief be blindfolded and brought in
amongst us--Do you hold up your heads and keep silence--leave me
to deal with him--only have a care there be no English among us."

The monk, who in his travels had acquired some slight knowledge of
the Flemish language, had well-nigh started when he heard the last
article in Wilkin's instructions to his countryman, but commanded
himself, although a little surprised, both at this suspicious
circumstance, and at the readiness and dexterity with which the
rough-hewn Fleming seemed to adapt his preparations to the rules
of war and of sound policy.

Wilkin, on his part, was not very certain whether the monk had not
heard and understood more of what he said to his countryman, than
what he had intended. As if to lull asleep any suspicion which
Father Aldrovand might entertain, he repeated to him in English
most of the directions which he had given, adding, "Well, good
father, what think you of it?"

"Excellent well," answered the father, "and done as if you had
practised war from the cradle, instead of weaving broad-cloth."

"Nay, spare not your jibes, father," answered Wilkin.--"I know
full well that you English think that Flemings have nought in
their brainpan but sodden beef and cabbage; yet you see there goes
wisdom to weaving of webs."

"Right, Master Wilkin Flammock," answered the father; "but, good
Fleming, wilt thou tell me what answer thou wilt make to the Welsh
Prince's summons?"

"Reverend father, first tell me what the summons will be," replied
the Fleming.

"To surrender this castle upon the instant," answered the monk.
"What will be your reply?"

"My answer will be, Nay--unless upon good composition."

"How, Sir Fleming! dare you mention composition and the castle of
the Garde Doloureuse in one sentence?" said the monk.

"Not if I may do better," answered the Fleming. "But would your
reverence have me dally until the question amongst the garrison
be, whether a plump priest or a fat Fleming will be the better
flesh to furnish their shambles?"

"Pshaw!" replied Father Aldrovand, "thou canst not mean such
folly. Relief must arrive within twenty-four hours at farthest.
Raymond Berenger expected it for certain within such a space."

"Raymond Berenger has been deceived this morning in more matters
than one," answered the Fleming.

"Hark thee, Flanderkin," answered the monk, whose retreat from the
world had not altogether quenched his military habits and
propensities, "I counsel thee to deal uprightly in this matter, as
thou dost regard thine own life; for here are as many English left
alive, notwithstanding the slaughter of to-day, as may well
suffice to fling the Flemish bull-frogs into the castle-ditch,
should they have cause to think thou meanest falsely, in the
keeping of this castle, and the defence of the Lady Eveline."

"Let not your reverence be moved with unnecessary and idle fears,"
replied Wilkin Flammock--"I am castellane in this house, by
command of its lord, and what I hold for the advantage of mine
service, that will I do."

"But I," said the angry monk, "I am the servant of the Pope--the
chaplain of this castle, with power to bind and unloose. I fear me
thou art no true Christian, Wilkin Flammock, but dost lean to the
heresy of the mountaineers. Thou hast refused to take the blessed
cross--thou hast breakfasted, and drunk both ale and wine, ere
thou hast heard mass. Thou art not to be trusted, man, and I will
not trust thee--I demand to be present at the conference betwixt
thee and the Welshman."

"It may not be, good father," said Wilkin, with the same smiling,
heavy countenance, which he maintained on all occasions of life,
however urgent. "It is true, as thou sayest, good father, that I
have mine own reasons for not marching quite so far as the gates
of Jericho at present; and lucky I have such reasons, since I had
not else been here to defend the gate of the Garde Doloureuse. It
is also true that I may have been sometimes obliged to visit my
mills earlier than the chaplain was called by his zeal to the
altar, and that my stomach brooks not working ere I break my fast.
But for this, father, I have paid a mulet even to your worshipful
reverence, and methinks since you are pleased to remember the
confession so exactly, you should not forget the penance and the
absolution."

The monk, in alluding to the secrets of the confessional, had gone
a step beyond what the rules of his order and of the church
permitted. He was baffled by the Fleming's reply, and finding him
unmoved by the charge of heresy, he could only answer, in some
confusion, "You refuse, then, to admit me to the conference with
the Welshman?"

"Reverend father," said Wilkin, "it altogether respecteth secular
matters. If aught of religious tenor should intervene, you shall
be summoned without delay."

"I will be there in spite of thee, thou Flemish ox," muttered the
monk to himself, but in a tone not to be heard by the by-standers;
and so speaking he left the battlements.

Wilkin Flammock, a few minutes afterwards, having first seen that
all was arranged on the battlements, so as to give an imposing
idea of a strength which did not exist, descended to a small
guard-room, betwixt the outer and inner gate, where he was
attended by half-a-dozen of his own people, disguised in the
Norman armour which they had found in the armoury of the castle,--
their strong, tall, and bulky forms, and motionless postures,
causing them to look rather like trophies of some past age, than
living and existing soldiers. Surrounded by these huge and
inanimate figures, in a little vaulted room which almost excluded
daylight, Flammock received the Welsh envoy, who was led in
blindfolded betwixt two Flemings, yet not so carefully watched but
that they permitted him to have a glimpse of the preparations on
the battlements, which had, in fact, been made chiefly for the
purpose of imposing on him. For the same purpose an occasional
clatter of arms was made without; voices were heard as if officers
were going their rounds; and other sounds of active preparation
seemed to announce that a numerous and regular garrison was
preparing to receive an attack.

When the bandage was removed from Jorworth's eyes,--for the same
individual who had formerly brought Gwenwyn's offer of alliance,
now bare his summons of surrender,--he looked haughtily around him
and demanded to whom he was to deliver the commands of his master,
the Gwenwyn, son of Cyvelioc, Prince of Powys.

"His highness," answered Flammock, with his usual smiling
indifference of manner, "must be contented to treat with Wilkin
Flammock of the Fulling-mills, deputed governor of the Garde
Doloureuse."

"Thou deputed governor!" exclaimed Jorworth; "thou?--a Low-country
weaver!--it is impossible. Low as they are, the English Crogan
[Footnote: This is a somewhat contumelious epithet applied by the
Welsh to the English.] cannot have sunk to a point so low, as to
be commanded by _thee!_--these men seem English, to them I
will deliver my message."

"You may if you will," replied Wilkin, "but if they return you any
answer save by signs, you shall call me _schelm_."

"Is this true?" said the Welsh envoy, looking towards the men-at-
arms, as they seemed, by whom Flammock was attended; "are you
really come to this pass? I thought that the mere having been born
on British earth, though the children of spoilers and invaders,
had inspired you with too much pride to brook the yoke of a base
mechanic. Or, if you are not courageous, should you not be
cautious?--Well speaks the proverb, Wo to him that will trust a
stranger! Still mute--still silent?--answer me by word or sign--Do
you really call and acknowledge him as your leader?"

The men in armour with one accord nodded their casques in reply to
Jorworth's question, and then remained motionless as before.

The Welshman, with the acute genius of his country, suspected
there was something in this which he could not entirely
comprehend, but, preparing himself to be upon his guard, he
proceeded as follows: "Be it as it may, I care not who hears the
message of my sovereign, since it brings pardon and mercy to the
inhabitants of this Castell an Carrig, [Footnote: Castle of the
Craig.] which you have called the Garde Doloureuse, to cover the
usurpation of the territory by the change of the name. Upon
surrender of the same to the Prince of Powys, with its
dependencies, and with the arms which it contains, and with the
maiden Eveline Berenger, all within the castle shall depart
unmolested, and have safe-conduct wheresoever they will, to go
beyond the marches of the Cymry."

"And how, if we obey not this summons?" said the imperturbable
Wilkin Flammock.

"Then shall your portion be with Raymond Berenger, your late
leader," replied Jorworth, his eyes, while he was speaking,
glancing with the vindictive ferocity which dictated his answer.
"So many strangers as be here amongst ye, so many bodies to the
ravens, so many heads to the gibbet!--It is long since the kites
have had such a banquet of lurdane Flemings and false Saxons."

"Friend Jorworth," said Wilkin, "if such be thy only message, bear
mine answer back to thy master, That wise men trust not to the
words of others that safety, which they can secure by their own
deeds. We have walls high and strong enough, deep moats, and
plenty of munition, both longbow and arblast. We will keep the
castle, trusting the castle will keep us, till God shall send us
succour."

"Do not peril your lives on such an issue," said the Welsh
emissary, changing his language to the Flemish, which, from
occasional communication with those of that nation in
Pembrokeshire, he spoke fluently, and which he now adopted, as if
to conceal the purport of his discourse from the supposed English
in the apartment. "Hark thee hither," he proceeded, "good Fleming.
Knowest thou not that he in whom is your trust, the Constable De
Lacy, hath bound himself by his vow to engage in no quarrel till
he crosses the sea, and cannot come to your aid without perjury?
He and the other Lords Marchers have drawn their forces far
northward to join the host of Crusaders. What will it avail you to
put us to the toil and trouble of a long siege, when you can hope
no rescue?"

"And what will it avail me more," said Wilkin, answering in his
native language and looking at the Welshman fixedly, yet with a
countenance from which all expression seemed studiously banished,
and which exhibited, upon features otherwise tolerable, a
remarkable compound of dulness and simplicity, "what will it avail
me whether your trouble be great or small?"

"Come, friend Flammock," said the Welshman, "frame not thyself
more unapprehensive than nature hath formed thee. The glen is
dark, but a sunbeam can light the side of it. Thy utmost efforts
cannot prevent the fall of this castle; but thou mayst hasten it,
and the doing so shall avail thee much." Thus speaking, he drew
close up to Wilkin, and sunk his voice to an insinuating whisper,
as he said, "Never did the withdrawing of a bar, or the raising of
a portcullis, bring such vantage to Fleming as they may to thee,
if thou wilt."

"I only know," said Wilkin, "that the drawing the one, and the
dropping the other, have cost me my whole worldly subsistence."

"Fleming, it shall be compensated to thee with an overflowing
measure. The liberality of Gwenwyn is as the summer rain."

"My whole mills and buildings have been this morning burnt to the
earth--"

"Thou shalt have a thousand marks of silver, man, in the place of
thy goods," said the Welshman; but the Fleming continued, without
seeming to hear him, to number up his losses.

"My lands are forayed, twenty kine driven off, and--"

"Threescore shall replace them," interrupted Jorworth, "chosen
from the most bright-skinned of the spoil."

"But my daughter--but the Lady Eveline"--said the Fleming, with
some slight change in his monotonous voice, which seemed to
express doubt and perplexity--"You are cruel conquerors, and--"

"To those who resist us we are fearful," said Jorworth, "but not
to such as shall deserve clemency by surrender. Gwenwyn will
forget the contumelies of Raymond, and raise his daughter to high
honour among the daughters of the Cymry. For thine own child, form
but a wish for her advantage, and it shall be fulfilled to the
uttermost. Now, Fleming, we understand each other."

"I understand thee, at least," said Flammock.

"And I thee, I trust?" said Jorworth, bending his keen, wild blue
eye on the stolid and unexpressive face of the Netherlander, like
an eager student who seeks to discover some hidden and mysterious
meaning in a passage of a classic author, the direct import of
which seems trite and trivial.

"You believe that you understand me," said Wilkin; "but here lies
the difficulty,--which of us shall trust the other?"

"Darest thou ask?" answered Jorworth. "Is it for thee, or such as
thee, to express doubt of the purposes of the Prince of Powys?"

"I know them not, good Jorworth, but through thee; and well I wot
thou art not one who will let thy traffic miscarry for want of aid
from the breath of thy mouth."

"As I am a Christian man," said Jorworth, hurrying asseveration on
asseveration--"by the soul of my father--by the faith of my
mother--by the black rood of--"

"Stop, good Jorworth--thou heapest thine oaths too thickly on each
other, for me to value them to the right estimate," said Flammock;
"that which is so lightly pledged, is sometimes not thought worth
redeeming. Some part of the promised guerdon in hand the whilst,
were worth an hundred oaths."

"Thou suspicious churl, darest thou doubt my word?"

"No--by no means," answered Wilkin;--"nevertheless, I will believe
thy deed more readily."

"To the point, Fleming," said Jorworth--"What wouldst thou have of
me?"

"Let me have some present sight of the money thou didst promise,
and I will think of the rest of thy proposal."

"Base silver-broker!" answered Jorworth, "thinkest thou the Prince
of Powys has as many money-bags, as the merchants of thy land of
sale and barter? He gathers treasures by his conquests, as the
waterspout sucks up water by its strength, but it is to disperse
them among his followers, as the cloudy column restores its
contents to earth and ocean. The silver that I promise thee has
yet to be gathered out of the Saxon chests--nay, the casket of
Berenger himself must be ransacked to make up the tale."

"Methinks I could do that myself, (having full power in the
castle,) and so save you a labour," said the Fleming.

"True," answered Jorworth, "but it would be at the expense of a
cord and a noose, whether the Welsh took the place or the Normans
relieved it--the one would expect their booty entire--the other
their countryman's treasures to be delivered undiminished."

"I may not gainsay that," said the Fleming. "Well, say I were
content to trust you thus far, why not return my cattle, which are
in your own hands, and at your disposal? If you do not pleasure me
in something beforehand, what can I expect of you afterwards?"

"I would pleasure you in a greater matter," answered the equally
suspicious Welshman. "But what would it avail thee to have thy
cattle within the fortress? They can be better cared for on the
plain beneath."

"In faith," replied the Fleming, "thou sayst truth--they will be
but a trouble to us here, where we have so many already provided
for the use of the garrison.--And yet, when I consider it more
closely, we have enough of forage to maintain all we have, and
more. Now, my cattle are of a peculiar stock, brought from the
rich pastures of Flanders, and I desire to have them restored ere
your axes and Welsh hooks be busy with their hides."

"You shall have them this night, hide and horn," said Jorworth;
"it is but a small earnest of a great boon."

"Thanks to your munificence," said the Fleming; "I am a simple-
minded man, and bound my wishes to the recovery of my own
property."

"Thou wilt be ready, then, to deliver the castle?" said Jorworth.

"Of that we will talk farther to-morrow," said Wilkin Flammock;
"if these English and Normans should suspect such a purpose, we
should have wild work--they must be fully dispersed ere I can hold
farther communication on the subject. Meanwhile, I pray thee,
depart suddenly, and as if offended with the tenor of our
discourse."

"Yet would I fain know something more fixed and absolute," said
Jorworth.

"Impossible--impossible," said the Fleming: "see you not yonder
tall fellow begins already to handle his dagger--Go hence in
haste, and angrily--and forget not the cattle."

"I will not forget them," said Jorworth; "but if thou keep not
faith with us--"

So speaking, he left the apartment with a gesture of menace,
partly really directed to Wilkin himself, partly assumed in
consequence of his advice. Flammock replied in English, as if that
all around might understand, what he said,

"Do thy worst, Sir Welshman! I am a true man; I defy the proposals
of rendition, and will hold out this castle to thy shame and thy
master's!--Here--let him be blindfolded once more, and returned in
safety to his attendants without; the next Welshman who appears
before the gate of the Garde Doloureuse, shall be more sharply
received."

The Welshman was blindfolded and withdrawn, when, as Wilkin
Flammock himself left the guardroom, one of the seeming men-at-
arms, who had been present at this interview, said in his ear, in
English, "Thou art a false traitor, Flammock, and shalt die a
traitor's death!"

Startled at this, the Fleming would have questioned the man
farther, but he had disappeared so soon as the words were uttered.
Flammock was disconcerted by this circumstance, which showed him
that his interview with Jorworth had been observed, and its
purpose known or conjectured, by some one who was a stranger to
his confidence, and might thwart his intentions; and he quickly
after learned that this was the case.




CHAPTER THE SIXTH


  Blessed Mary, mother dear,
  To a maiden bend thine ear,
  Virgin undefiled, to thee
  A wretched virgin bends the knee.
    HYMN TO THE VIRGIN.


The daughter of the slaughtered Raymond had descended from the
elevated station whence she had beheld the field of battle, in the
agony of grief natural to a child whose eyes have beheld the death
of an honoured and beloved father. But her station, and the
principles of chivalry in which she had been trained up, did not
permit any prolonged or needless indulgence of inactive sorrow. In
raising the young and beautiful of the female sex to the rank of
princesses, or rather goddesses, the spirit of that singular
system exacted from them, in requital, a tone of character, and a
line of conduct, superior and something contradictory to that of
natural or merely human feeling. Its heroines frequently resembled
portraits shown by an artificial light--strong and luminous, and
which placed in high relief the objects on which it was turned;
but having still something of adventitious splendour, which,
compared with that of the natural day, seemed glaring and
exaggerated.

It was not permitted to the orphan of the Garde Doloureuse, the
daughter of a line of heroes, whose stem was to be found in the
race of Thor, Balder, Odin, and other deified warriors of the
North, whose beauty was the theme of a hundred minstrels, and her
eyes the leading star of half the chivalry of the warlike marches
of Wales, to mourn her sire with the ineffectual tears of a
village maiden. Young as she was, and horrible as was the incident
which she had but that instant witnessed, it was not altogether so
appalling to her as to a maiden whose eye had not been accustomed
to the rough, and often fatal sports of chivalry, and whose
residence had not been among scenes and men where war and death
had been the unceasing theme of every tongue, whose imagination
had not been familiarized with wild and bloody events, or,
finally, who had not been trained up to consider an honourable
"death under shield," as that of a field of battle was termed, as
a more desirable termination to the life of a warrior, than that
lingering and unhonoured fate which comes slowly on, to conclude
the listless and helpless inactivity of prolonged old age.
Eveline, while she wept for her father, felt her bosom glow when
she recollected that he died in the blaze of his fame, and amidst
heaps of his slaughtered enemies; and when she thought of the
exigencies of her own situation, it was with the determination to
defend her own liberty, and to avenge her father's death, by every
means which Heaven had left within her power.

The aids of religion were not forgotten; and according to the
custom of the times, and the doctrines of the Roman church, she
endeavoured to propitiate the favour of Heaven by vows as well as
prayers. In a small crypt, or oratory, adjoining to the chapel,
was hung over an altar-piece, on which a lamp constantly burned, a
small picture of the Virgin Mary, revered as a household and
peculiar deity by the family of Berenger, one of whose ancestors
had brought it from the Holy Land, whither he had gone upon
pilgrimage. It was of the period of the Lower Empire, a Grecian
painting, not unlike those which in Catholic countries are often
imputed to the Evangelist Luke. The crypt in which it was placed
was accounted a shrine of uncommon sanctity--nay, supposed to have
displayed miraculous powers; and Eveline, by the daily garland of
flowers which she offered before the painting, and by the constant
prayers with which they were accompanied, had constituted herself
the peculiar votaress of Our Lady of the Garde Doloureuse, for so
the picture was named.

Now, apart from others, alone, and in secrecy, sinking in the
extremity of her sorrow before the shrine of her patroness, she
besought the protection of kindred purity for the defence of her
freedom and honour, and invoked vengeance on the wild and
treacherous chieftain who had slain her father, and was now
beleaguering her place of strength. Not only did she vow a large
donative in lands to the shrine of the protectress whose aid she
implored; but the oath passed her lips, (even though they
faltered, and though something within her remonstrated against the
vow,) that whatsoever favoured knight Our Lady of the Garde
Doloureuse might employ for her rescue, should obtain from her in
guerdon whatever boon she might honourably grant, were it that of
her virgin hand at the holy altar. Taught as she was to believe,
by the assurances of many a knight, that such a surrender was the
highest boon which Heaven could bestow, she felt as discharging a
debt of gratitude when she placed herself entirely at the disposal
of the pure and blessed patroness in whose aid she confided.
Perhaps there lurked in this devotion some earthly hope of which
she was herself scarce conscious, and which reconciled her to the
indefinite sacrifice thus freely offered. The Virgin, (this
flattering hope might insinuate,) kindest and most benevolent of
patronesses, will use compassionately the power resigned to her,
and _he_ will be the favoured champion of Maria, upon whom
her votaress would most willingly confer favour.

But if there was such a hope, as something selfish will often
mingle with our noblest and purest emotions, it arose unconscious
of Eveline herself, who, in the full assurance of implicit faith,
and fixing on the representative of her adoration, eyes in which
the most earnest supplication, the most humble confidence,
struggled with unbidden tears, was perhaps more beautiful than
when, young as she was, she was selected to bestow the prize of
chivalry in the lists of Chester. It was no wonder that, in such a
moment of high excitation, when prostrated in devotion before a
being of whose power to protect her, and to make her protection
assured by a visible sign, she doubted nothing, the Lady Eveline
conceived she saw with her own eyes the acceptance of her vow. As
she gazed on the picture with an over-strained eye, and an
imagination heated with enthusiasm, the expression seemed to alter
from the hard outline, fashioned by the Greek painter; the eyes
appeared to become animated, and to return with looks of
compassion the suppliant entreaties of the votaress, and the mouth
visibly arranged itself into a smile of inexpressible sweetness.
It even seemed to her that the head made a gentle inclination.

Overpowered by supernatural awe at appearances, of which her faith
permitted her not to question the reality, the Lady Eveline folded
her arms on her bosom, and prostrated her forehead on the
pavement, as the posture most fitting to listen to divine
communication.

But her vision went not so far; there was neither sound nor voice,
and when, after stealing her eyes all around the crypt in which
she knelt, she again raised them to the figure of Our Lady, the
features seemed to be in the form in which the limner had sketched
them, saving that, to Eveline's imagination, they still retained
an august and yet gracious expression, which she had not before
remarked upon the countenance. With awful reverence, almost
amounting to fear, yet comforted, and even elated, with the
visitation she had witnessed, the maiden repeated again and again
the orisons which she thought most grateful to the ear of her
benefactress; and rising at length, retired backwards, as from the
presence of a sovereign, until she attained the outer chapel.

Here one or two females still knelt before the saints which the
walls and niches presented for adoration; but the rest of the
terrified suppliants, too anxious to prolong their devotions, had
dispersed through the castle to learn tidings of their friends,
and to obtain some refreshment, or at least some place of repose
for themselves and their families.

Bowing her head, and muttering an ave to each saint as she passed
his image, (for impending danger makes men observant of the rites
of devotion,) the Lady Eveline had almost reached the door of the
chapel, when a man-at-arms, as he seemed, entered hastily; and,
with a louder voice than suited the holy place, unless when need
was most urgent, demanded the Lady Eveline. Impressed with the
feelings of veneration which the late scene had produced, she was
about to rebuke his military rudeness, when he spoke again, and in
anxious haste, "Daughter, we are betrayed!" and though the form,
and the coat-of-mail which covered it, were those of a soldier,
the voice was that of Father Aldrovand, who, eager and anxious at
the same time, disengaged himself from the mail hood, and showed
his countenance.

"Father," she said, "what means this? Have you forgotten the
confidence in Heaven which you are wont to recommend, that you
bear other arms than your order assigns to you?"

"It may come to that ere long," said Father Aldrovand; "for I was
a soldier ere I was a monk. But now I have donn'd this harness to
discover treachery, not to resist force. Ah! my beloved daughter--
we are dreadfully beset--foemen without--traitors within!--The
false Fleming, Wilkin Flammock, is treating for the surrender of
the castle!"

"Who dares say so?" said a veiled female, who had been kneeling
unnoticed in a sequestered corner of the chapel, but who now
started up and came boldly betwixt Lady Eveline and the monk.

"Go hence, thou saucy minion," said the monk, surprised at this
bold interruption; "this concerns not thee."

"But it _doth_ concern me," said the damsel, throwing back
her veil, and discovering the juvenile countenance of Rose, the
daughter of Wilkin Flammock, her eyes sparkling, and her cheeks
blushing with anger, the vehemence of which made a singular
contrast with the very fair complexion, and almost infantine
features of the speaker, whose whole form and figure was that of a
girl who has scarce emerged from childhood, and indeed whose
general manners were as gentle and bashful as they now seemed
bold, impassioned, and undaunted.--"Doth it not concern me," she
said, "that my father's honest name should be tainted with
treason? Doth it not concern the stream when the fountain is
troubled? It _doth_ concern me, and I will know the author of
the calumny."

"Damsel," said Eveline, "restrain thy useless passion; the good
father, though he cannot intentionally calumniate thy father,
speaks, it may be, from false report."

"As I am an unworthy priest," said the father, "I speak from the
report of my own ears. Upon the oath of my order, myself heard
this Wilkin Flammock chaffering with the Welshman for the
surrender of the Garde Doloureuse. By help of this hauberk and
mail hood, I gained admittance to a conference where he thought
there were no English ears. They spoke Flemish too, but I knew the
jargon of old."

"The Flemish," said the angry maiden, whose headstrong passion led
her to speak first in answer to the last insult offered, "is no
jargon like your piebald English, half Norman, half Saxon, but a
noble Gothic tongue, spoken by the brave warriors who fought
against the Roman Kaisars, when Britain bent the neck to them--and
as for this he has said of Wilkin Flammock," she continued,
collecting her ideas into more order as she went on, "believe it
not, my dearest lady; but, as you value the honour of your own
noble father, confide, as in the Evangelists, in the honesty of
mine!" This she spoke with an imploring tone of voice, mingled
with sobs, as if her heart had been breaking.

Eveline endeavoured to soothe her attendant. "Rose," she said, "in
this evil time suspicions will light on the best men, and
misunderstandings will arise among the best friends.--Let us hear
the good father state what he hath to charge upon your parent.
Fear not but that Wilkin shall be heard in his defence. Thou wert
wont to be quiet and reasonable."

"I am neither quiet nor reasonable on this matter," said Rose,
with redoubled indignation; "and it is ill of you, lady, to listen
to the falsehoods of that reverend mummer, who is neither true
priest nor true soldier. But I will fetch one who shall confront
him either in casque or cowl." So saying, she went hastily out of
the chapel, while the monk, after some pedantic circumlocution,
acquainted the Lady Eveline with what he had overheard betwixt
Jorworth and Wilkin; and proposed to her to draw together the few
English who were in the castle, and take possession of the
innermost square tower; a keep which, as usual in Gothic
fortresses of the Norman period, was situated so as to make
considerable defence, even after the exterior works of the castle,
which it commanded, were in the hand of the enemy.

"Father," said Eveline, still confident in the vision she had
lately witnessed, "this were good counsel in extremity; but
otherwise, it were to create the very evil we fear, by seating our
garrison at odds amongst themselves. I have a strong, and not
unwarranted confidence, good father, in our blessed Lady of the
Garde Doloureuse, that we shall attain at once vengeance on our
barbarous enemies, and escape from our present jeopardy; and I
call you to witness the vow I have made, that to him whom Our Lady
should employ to work us succour, I will refuse nothing, were it
my father's inheritance, or the hand of his daughter."

"_Ave Maria! Ave Regina Coeli!_" said the priest; "on a rock
more sure you could not have founded your trust.--But, daughter,"
he continued after the proper ejaculation had been made, "have you
never heard, even by a hint, that there was a treaty for your hand
betwixt our much honoured lord, of whom we are cruelly bereft,
(may God assoilzie his soul!) and the great house of Lacy?"

"Something I may have heard," said Eveline, dropping her eyes,
while a slight tinge suffused her cheek; "but I refer me to the
disposal of our Lady of Succour and Consolation."

As she spoke, Rose entered the chapel with the same vivacity she
had shown in leaving it, leading by the hand her father, whose
sluggish though firm step, vacant countenance, and heavy
demeanour, formed the strongest contrast to the rapidity of her
motions, and the anxious animation of her address. Her task of
dragging him forward might have reminded the spectator of some of
those ancient monuments, on which a small cherub, singularly
inadequate to the task, is often represented as hoisting upward
towards the empyrean the fleshy bulk of some ponderous tenant of
the tomb, whose disproportioned weight bids fair to render
ineffectual the benevolent and spirited exertions of its
fluttering guide and assistant.

"Roschen--my child--what grieves thee?" said the Netherlander, as
he yielded to his daughter's violence with a smile, which, being
on the countenance of a father, had more of expression and feeling
than those which seemed to have made their constant dwelling upon
his lips.

"Here stands my father," said the impatient maiden; "impeach him
with treason, who can or dare! There stands Wilkin Flammock, son
of Dieterick, the Cramer of Antwerp,--let those accuse him to his
face who slandered him behind his back!"

"Speak, Father Aldrovand," said the Lady Eveline; "we are young in
our lordship, and, alas! the duty hath descended upon us in an
evil hour; yet we will, so may God and Our Lady help us, hear and
judge of your accusation to the utmost of our power."

"This Wilkin Flammock," said the monk, "however bold he hath made
himself in villany, dares not deny that I heard him with my own
ears treat for the surrender of the castle."

"Strike him, father!" said the indignant Rose,--"strike the
disguised mummer! The steel hauberk may be struck, though not the
monk's frock--strike him, or tell him that he lies foully!"

"Peace, Roschen, thou art mad," said her father, angrily; "the
monk hath more truth than sense about him, and I would his ears
had been farther off when he thrust them into what concerned him
not."

Rose's countenance fell when she heard her father bluntly avow the
treasonable communication of which she had thought him incapable--
she dropt the hand by which she had dragged him into the chapel,
and stared on the Lady Eveline, with eyes which seemed starting
from their sockets, and a countenance from which the blood, with
which it was so lately highly coloured, had retreated to garrison
the heart.

Eveline looked upon the culprit with a countenance in which
sweetness and dignity were mingled with sorrow. "Wilkin," she
said, "I could not have believed this. What! on the very day of
thy confiding benefactor's death, canst thou have been tampering
with his murderers, to deliver up the castle, and betray thy
trust!--But I will not upbraid thee--I deprive thee of the trust
reposed in so unworthy a person, and appoint thee to be kept in
ward in the western tower, till God send us relief; when, it may
be, thy daughter's merits shall atone for thy offences, and save
farther punishment.--See that our commands be presently obeyed."

"Yes--yes--yes!" exclaimed Rose, hurrying one word on the other as
fast and vehemently as she could articulate--"Let us go--let us go
to the darkest dungeon--darkness befits us better than light."

The monk, on the other hand, perceiving that the Fleming made no
motion to obey the mandate of arrest, came forward, in a manner
more suiting his ancient profession, and present disguise, than
his spiritual character; and with the words, "I attach thee,
Wilkin Flammock, of acknowledged treason to your liege lady,"
would have laid hand upon him, had not the Fleming stepped back
and warned him off, with a menacing and determined gesture, while
he said,--"Ye are mad!--all of you English are mad when the moon
is full, and my silly girl hath caught the malady.--Lady, your
honoured father gave me a charge, which I propose to execute to
the best for all parties, and you cannot, being a minor, deprive
me of it at your idle pleasure.--Father Aldrovand, a monk makes no
lawful arrests.--Daughter Roschen, hold your peace and dry your
eyes--you are a fool."

"I am, I am," said Rose, drying her eyes and regaining her
elasticity of manner--"I am indeed a fool, and worse than a fool,
for a moment to doubt my father's probity.--Confide in him,
dearest lady; he is wise though he is grave, and kind though he is
plain and homely in his speech. Should he prove false he will fare
the worse! for I will plunge myself from the pinnacle of the
Warder's Tower to the bottom of the moat, and he shall lose his
own daughter for betraying his master's."

"This is all frenzy," said the monk--"Who trusts avowed traitors?
--Here, Normans, English, to the rescue of your liege lady--Bows
and bills--bows and bills!"

"You may spare your throat for your next homily, good father,"
said the Netherlander, "or call in good Flemish, since you
understand it, for to no other language will those within hearing
reply."

He then approached the Lady Eveline with a real or affected air of
clumsy kindness, and something as nearly approaching to courtesy
as his manners and features could assume. He bade her good-night,
and assuring her that he would act for the best, left the chapel.
The monk was about to break forth into revilings, but Eveline,
with more prudence, checked his zeal.

"I cannot," she said, "but hope that this man's intentions are
honest--"

"Now, God's blessing on you, lady, for that very word!" said Rose,
eagerly interrupting her, and kissing her hand.

"But if unhappily they are doubtful," continued Eveline, "it is
not by reproach that we can bring him to a better purpose. Good
father, give an eye to the preparations for resistance, and see
nought omitted that our means furnish for the defence of the
castle."

"Fear nothing, my dearest daughter," said Aldrovand; "there are
still some English hearts amongst us, and we will rather kill and
eat the Flemings themselves, than surrender the castle."

"That were food as dangerous to come by as bear's venison,
father," answered Rose, bitterly, still on fire with the idea that
the monk treated her nation with suspicion and contumely.

On these terms they separated--the women to indulge their fears
and sorrows in private grief, or alleviate them by private
devotion; the monk to try to discover what were the real purposes
of Wilkin Flammock, and to counteract them if possible, should
they seem to indicate treachery. His eye, however, though
sharpened by strong suspicion, saw nothing to strengthen his
fears, excepting that the Fleming had, with considerable military
skill, placed the principal posts of the castle in the charge of
his own countrymen which must make any attempt to dispossess him
of his present authority both difficult and dangerous. The monk at
length retired, summoned by the duties of the evening service, and
with the determination to be stirring with the light the next
morning.




CHAPTER THE SEVENTH


  Oh, sadly shines the morning sun
  On leaguer'd castle wall,
  When bastion, tower, and battlement,
  Seemed nodding to their fall.
      OLD BALLAD.


True to his resolution, and telling his beads as he went, that he
might lose no time, Father Aldrovand began his rounds in the
castle so soon as daylight had touched the top of the eastern
horizon. A natural instinct led him first to those stalls which,
had the fortress been properly victualled for a siege, ought to
have been tenanted by cattle; and great was his delight to see
more than a score of fat kine and bullocks in the place which had
last night been empty! One of them had already been carried to the
shambles, and a Fleming or two, who played butchers on the
occasion, were dividing the carcass for the cook's use. The good
father had well-nigh cried out, a miracle; but, not to be too
precipitate, he limited his transport to a private exclamation in
honour of Our Lady of the Garde Doloureuse.

"Who talks of lack of provender?--who speaks of surrender now?" he
said. "Here is enough to maintain us till Hugo de Lacy arrives,
were he to sail back from Cyprus to our relief. I did purpose to
have fasted this morning, as well to save victuals as on a
religious score; but the blessings of the saints must not be
slighted.--Sir Cook, let me have half a yard or so of broiled beef
presently; bid the pantler send me a manchet, and the butler a cup
of wine. I will take a running breakfast on the western
battlements." [Footnote: Old Henry Jenkins, in his Recollections
of the Abbacies before their dissolution, has preserved the fact
that roast-beef was delivered out to the guests not by weight, but
by measure.]

At this place, which was rather the weakest point of the Garde
Doloureuse, the good father found Wilkin Flammock anxiously
superintending the necessary measures of defence. He greeted him
courteously, congratulated him on the stock of provisions with
which the castle had been supplied during the night, and was
inquiring how they had been so happily introduced through the
Welsh besiegers, when Wilkin took the first occasion to interrupt
him.

"Of all this another time, good father; but I wish at present, and
before other discourse, to consult thee on a matter which presses
my conscience, and moreover deeply concerns my worldly estate."

"Speak on, my excellent son," said the father, conceiving that he
should thus gain the key to Wilkin's real intentions. "Oh, a
tender conscience is a jewel! and he that will not listen when it
saith, 'Pour out thy doubts into the ear of the priest,' shall one
day have his own dolorous outcries choked with fire and brimstone.
Thou wert ever of a tender conscience, son Wilkin, though thou
hast but a rough and borrel bearing."

"Well, then," said Wilkin, "you are to know, good father, that I
have had some dealings with my neighbour, Jan Vanwelt, concerning
my daughter Rose, and that he has paid me certain gilders on
condition I will match her to him."

"Pshaw, pshaw! my good son," said the disappointed confessor,
"this gear can lie over--this is no time for marrying or giving in
marriage, when we are all like to be murdered."

"Nay, but hear me, good father," said the Fleming, "for this point
of conscience concerns the present case more nearly than you wot
of.--You must know I have no will to bestow Rose on this same Jan
Vanwelt, who is old, and of ill conditions; and I would know of
you whether I may, in conscience, refuse him my consent?"

"Truly," said Father Aldrovand, "Rose is a pretty lass, though
somewhat hasty; and I think you may honestly withdraw your
consent, always on paying back the gilders you have received."

"But there lies the pinch, good father," said the Fleming--"the
refunding this money will reduce me to utter poverty. The Welsh
have destroyed my substance; and this handful of money is all, God
help me! on which I must begin the world again."

"Nevertheless, son Wilkin," said Aldrovand, "thou must keep thy
word, or pay the forfeit; for what saith the text? _Quis
habitabit in tabernaculo, quis requiescet in monte sancta?_--
Who shall ascend to the tabernacle, and dwell in the holy
mountain? Is it not answered again, _Qui jurat proximo et non
decipit?_--Go to, my son--break not thy plighted word for a
little filthy lucre--better is an empty stomach and an hungry
heart with a clear conscience, than a fatted ox with iniquity and
wordbreaking.--Sawest thou not our late noble lord, who (may his
soul be happy!) chose rather to die in unequal battle, like a true
knight, than live a perjured man, though he had but spoken a rash
word to a Welshman over a wine flask?"

"Alas! then," said the Fleming, "this is even what I feared! We
must e'en render up the castle, or restore to the Welshman,
Jorworth, the cattle, by means of which I had schemed to victual
and defend it."

"How--wherefore--what dost thou mean?" said the monk, in
astonishment. "I speak to thee of Rose Flammock, and Jan Van-
devil, or whatever you call him, and you reply with talk about
cattle and castles, and I wot not what!"

"So please you, holy father, I did but speak in parables. This
castle was the daughter I had promised to deliver over--the
Welshman is Jan Vanwelt, and the gilders were the cattle he has
sent in, as a part-payment beforehand of my guerdon."

"Parables!" said the monk, colouring with anger at the trick put
on him; "what has a boor like thee to do with parables?--But I
forgive thee--I forgive thee."

"I am therefore to yield the castle to the Welshman, or restore
him his cattle?" said the impenetrable Dutchman.

"Sooner yield thy soul to Satan!" replied the monk.

"I fear it must be the alternative," said the Fleming; "for the
example of thy honourable lord--"

"The example of an honourable fool"--answered the monk; then
presently subjoined, "Our Lady be with her servant!--This Belgic-
brained boor makes me forget what I would say."

"Nay, but the holy text which your reverence cited to me even
now," continued the Fleming.

"Go to," said the monk; "what hast thou to do to presume to think
of texts?--knowest thou not the letter of the Scripture slayeth,
and that it is the exposition which maketh to live?--Art thou not
like one who, coming to a physician, conceals from him half the
symptoms of the disease?--I tell thee, thou foolish Fleming, the
text speaketh but of promises made unto Christians, and there is
in the Rubric a special exception of such as are made to
Welshmen." At this commentary the Fleming grinned so broadly as to
show his whole case of broad strong white teeth. Father Aldrovand
himself grinned in sympathy, and then proceeded to say,--"Come,
come, I see how it is. Thou hast studied some small revenge on me
for doubting of thy truth; and, in verity, I think thou hast taken
it wittily enough. But wherefore didst thou not let me into the
secret from the beginning? I promise thee I had foul suspicions of
thee.

"What!" said the Fleming, "is it possible I could ever think of
involving your reverence in a little matter of deceit? Surely
Heaven hath sent me more grace and manners.--Hark, I hear
Jorworth's horn at the gate."

"He blows like a town swineherd," said Aldrovand, in disdain.

"It is not your reverence's pleasure that I should restore the
cattle unto them, then?" said Flammock.

"Yes, thus far. Prithee, deliver him straightway over the walls
such a tub of boiling water as shall scald the hair from his
goatskin cloak. And, hark thee, do thou, in the first place, try
the temperature of the kettle with thy forefinger, and that shall
be thy penance for the trick thou hast played me."

The Fleming answered this with another broad grin of intelligence,
and they proceeded to the outer gate, to which Jorworth had come
alone. Placing himself at the wicket, which, however, he kept
carefully barred, and speaking through a small opening, contrived
for such purpose, Wilkin Flammock demanded of the Welshman his
business.

"To receive rendition of the castle, agreeable to promise," said
Jorworth.

"Ay? and art thou come on such errand alone?" said Wilkin.

"No, truly," answered Jorworth; "I have some two score of men
concealed among yonder bushes."

"Then thou hadst best lead them away quickly," answered Wilkin,
"before our archers let fly a sheaf of arrows among them."

"How, villain! Dost thou not mean to keep thy promise?" said the
Welshman.

"I gave thee none," said the Fleming; "I promised but to think on
what thou didst say. I have done so, and have communicated with my
ghostly father, who will in no respect hear of my listening to thy
proposal."

"And wilt thou," said Jorworth, "keep the cattle, which I simply
sent into the castle on the faith of our agreement?"

"I will excommunicate and deliver him over to Satan," said the
monk, unable to wait the phlegmatic and lingering answer of the
Fleming, "if he give horn, hoof, or hair of them, to such an
uncircumcised Philistine as thou or thy master."

"It is well, shorn priest," answered Jorworth in great anger. "But
mark me--reckon not on your frock for ransom. When Gwenwyn hath
taken this castle, as it shall not longer shelter such a pair of
faithless traitors, I will have you sewed up each into the carcass
of one of these kine, for which your penitent has forsworn
himself, and lay you where wolf and eagle shall be your only
companions."

"Thou wilt work thy will when it is matched with thy power," said
the sedate Netherlander.

"False Welshman, we defy thee to thy teeth!" answered, in the same
breath, the more irascible monk. "I trust to see hounds gnaw thy
joints ere that day come that ye talk of so proudly."

By way of answer to both, Jorworth drew back his arm with his
levelled javelin, and shaking the shaft till it acquired a
vibratory motion, he hurled it with equal strength and dexterity
right against the aperture in the wicket. It whizzed through the
opening at which it was aimed, and flew (harmlessly, however)
between the heads of the monk and the Fleming; the former of whom
started back, while the latter only said, as he looked at the
javelin, which stood quivering in the door of the guard-room,
"That was well aimed, and happily baulked."

Jorworth, the instant he had flung his dart, hastened to the
ambush which he had prepared, and gave them at once the signal and
the example of a rapid retreat down the hill. Father Aldrovand
would willingly have followed them with a volley of arrows, but
the Fleming observed that ammunition was too precious with them to
be wasted on a few runaways. Perhaps the honest man remembered
that they had come within the danger of such a salutation, in some
measure, on his own assurance. When the noise of the hasty retreat
of Jorworth and his followers had died away, there ensued a dead
silence, well corresponding with the coolness and calmness of that
early hour in the morning.

"This will not last long," said Wilkin to the monk, in a tone of
foreboding seriousness, which found an echo in the good father's
bosom.

"It will not, and it cannot," answered Aldrovand; "and we must
expect a shrewd attack, which I should mind little, but that their
numbers are great, ours few; the extent of the walls considerable,
and the obstinacy of these Welsh fiends almost equal to their
fury. But we will do the best. I will to the Lady Eveline--She
must show herself upon the battlements--She is fairer in feature
than becometh a man of my order to speak of; and she has withal a
breathing of her father's lofty spirit. The look and the word of
such a lady will give a man double strength in the hour of need."

"It may be," said the Fleming; "and I will go see that the good
breakfast which I have appointed be presently served forth; it
will give my Flemings more strength than the sight of the ten
thousand virgins--may their help be with us!--were they all
arranged on a fair field."




CHAPTER THE EIGHTH


  'Twas when ye raised,' mid sap and siege,
  The banner of your rightful liege
  At your she captain's call,
  Who, miracle of womankind,
  Lent mettle to the meanest hind
  That mann'd her castle wall.
     WILLIAM STEWART ROSE.


The morning light was scarce fully spread abroad, when Eveline
Berenger, in compliance with her confessor's advice, commenced her
progress around the walls and battlements of the beleaguered
castle, to confirm, by her personal entreaties, the minds of the
valiant, and to rouse the more timid to hope and to exertion. She
wore a rich collar and bracelets, as ornaments which indicated her
rank--and high descent; and her under tunic, in the manner of the
times, was gathered around her slender waist by a girdle,
embroidered with precious stones, and secured by a large buckle of
gold. From one side of the girdle was suspended a pouch or purse,
splendidly adorned with needle-work, and on the left side it
sustained a small dagger of exquisite workmanship. A dark-coloured
mantle, chosen as emblematic of her clouded fortunes, was flung
loosely around her; and its hood was brought forward, so as to
shadow, but not hide, her beautiful countenance. Her looks had
lost the high and ecstatic expression which had been inspired by
supposed revelation, but they retained a sorrowful and mild, yet
determined character--and, in addressing the soldiers, she used a
mixture of entreaty and command--now throwing herself upon their
protection--now demanding in her aid the just tribute of their
allegiance.

The garrison was divided, as military skill dictated, in groups,
on the points most liable to attack, or from which an assailing
enemy might be best annoyed; and it was this unavoidable
separation of their force into small detachments, which showed to
disadvantage the extent of walls, compared with the number of the
defenders; and though Wilkin Flammock had contrived several means
of concealing this deficiency of force from the enemy, he could
not disguise it from the defenders of the castle, who cast
mournful glances on the length of battlements which were
unoccupied save by sentinels, and then looked out to the fatal
field of battle, loaded with the bodies of those who ought to have
been their comrades in this hour of peril.

The presence of Eveline did much to rouse the garrison from this
state of discouragement. She glided from post to post, from tower
to tower of the old gray fortress, as a gleam of light passes over
a clouded landscape, and touching its various points in
succession, calls them out to beauty and effect. Sorrow and fear
sometimes make sufferers eloquent. She addressed the various
nations who composed her little garrison, each in appropriate
language. To the English, she spoke as children of the soil--to
the Flemings, as men who had become denizens by the right of
hospitality--to the Normans, as descendants of that victorious
race, whose sword had made them the nobles and sovereigns of every
land where its edge had been tried. To them she used the language
of chivalry, by whose rules the meanest of that nation regulated,
or affected to regulate, his actions. The English she reminded of
their good faith and honesty of heart; and to the Flemings she
spoke of the destruction of their property, the fruits of their
honest industry. To all she proposed vengeance for the death of
their leader and his followers--to all she recommended confidence
in God and Our Lady of the Garde Doloureuse; and she ventured to
assure all, of the strong and victorious bands that were already
in march to their relief.

"Will the gallant champions of the cross," she said, "think of
leaving their native land, while the wail of women and of orphans
is in their ears?--it were to convert their pious purpose into
mortal sin, and to derogate from the high fame they have so well
won. Yes--fight but valiantly, and perhaps, before the very sun
that is now slowly rising shall sink in the sea, you will see it
shining on the ranks of Shrewsbury and Chester. When did the
Welshmen wait to hear the clangour of their trumpets, or the
rustling of their silken banners? Fight bravely--fight freely but
awhile!--our castle is strong--our munition ample--your hearts are
good--your arms are powerful--God is nigh to us, and our friends
are not far distant. Fight, then, in the name of all that is good
and holy--fight for yourselves, for your wives, for your children,
and for your property--and oh! fight for an orphan maiden, who
hath no other defenders but what a sense of her sorrows, and the
remembrance of her father, may raise up among you."

Such speeches as these made a powerful impression on the men to
whom they were addressed, already hardened, by habits and
sentiments, against a sense of danger. The chivalrous Normans
swore, on the cross of their swords, they would die to a man ere
they would surrender their posts--the blunter Anglo-Saxons cried,
"Shame on him who would render up such a lamb as Eveline to a
Welsh wolf, while he could make her a bulwark with his body!"--
Even the cold Flemings caught a spark of the enthusiasm with which
the others were animated, and muttered to each other praises of
the young lady's beauty, and short but honest resolves to do the
best they might in her defence.

Rose Flammock, who accompanied her lady with one or two attendants
upon her circuit around the castle, seemed to have relapsed into
her natural character of a shy and timid girl, out of the excited
state into which she had been brought by the suspicions which in
the evening before had attached to her father's character. She
tripped closely but respectfully after Eveline, and listened to
what she said from time to time, with the awe and admiration of a
child listening to its tutor, while only her moistened eye
expressed how far she felt or comprehended the extent of the
danger, or the force of the exhortations. There was, however, a
moment when the youthful maiden's eye became more bright, her step
more confident, her looks more elevated. This was when they
approached the spot where her father, having discharged the duties
of commander of the garrison, was now exercising those of
engineer, and displaying great skill, as well as wonderful
personal strength, in directing and assisting the establishment of
a large mangonel, (a military engine used for casting stones,)
upon a station commanding an exposed postern gate, which led from
the western side of the castle down to the plain; and where a
severe assault was naturally to be expected. The greater part of
his armour lay beside him, but covered with his cassock to screen
it from morning dew; while in his leathern doublet, with arms bare
to the shoulder, and a huge sledge-hammer in his hand, he set an
example to the mechanics who worked under his direction.

In slow and solid natures there is usually a touch of
shamefacedness, and a sensitiveness to the breach of petty
observances. Wilkin Flammock had been unmoved even to
insensibility at the imputation of treason so lately cast upon
him; but he coloured high, and was confused, while, hastily
throwing on his cassock, he endeavoured, to conceal the dishabille
in which he had been surprised by the Lady Eveline. Not so his
daughter. Proud of her father's zeal, her eye gleamed from him to
her mistress with a look of triumph, which seemed to say, "And
this faithful follower is he who was suspected of treachery!"

Eveline's own bosom made her the same reproach; and anxious to
atone for her momentary doubt of his fidelity, she offered for his
acceptance a ring of value; "in small amends," she said, "of a
momentary misconstruction." "It needs not, lady," said Flammock,
with his usual bluntness, "unless I have the freedom to bestow the
gaud on Rose; for I think she was grieved enough at that which
moved me little,--as why should it?"

"Dispose of it as thou wilt," said Eveline; "the stone it bears is
as true as thine own faith."

Here Eveline paused, and looking on the broad expanded plain which
extended between the site of the castle and the river, observed
how silent and still the morning was rising over what had so
lately been a scene of such extensive slaughter.

"It will not be so long," answered Flammock; "we shall have noise
enough, and that nearer to our ears than yesterday."

"Which way lie the enemy?" said Eveline; "methinks I can spy
neither tents nor pavilions."

"They use none, lady," answered Wilkin Flammock. "Heaven has
denied them the grace and knowledge to weave linen enough for such
a purpose--Yonder they lie on both sides of the river, covered
with nought but their white mantles. Would one think that a host
of thieves and cut-throats could look so like the finest object in
nature--a well-spread bleaching-field!--Hark!--hark--the wasps are
beginning to buzz; they will soon be plying their stings."

In fact, there was heard among the Welsh army a low and indistinct
murmur, like that of

  "Bees alarmed and arming in their hives."

Terrified at the hollow menacing sound, which grew louder every
moment, Rose, who had all the irritability of a sensitive
temperament, clung to her father's arm, saying, in a terrified
whisper, "It is like the sound of the sea the night before the
great inundation."

"And it betokens too rough weather for woman to be abroad in,"
said Flammock. "Go to your chamber, Lady Eveline, if it be your
will--and go you too, Roschen--God bless you both--ye do but keep
us idle here."

And, indeed, conscious that she had done all that was incumbent
upon her, and fearful lest the chill which she felt creeping over
her own heart should infect others, Eveline took her vassal's
advice, and withdrew slowly to her own apartment, often casting
back her eye to the place where the Welsh, now drawn out and under
arms, were advancing their ridgy battalions, like the waves of an
approaching tide.

The Prince of Powys had, with considerable military skill, adopted
a plan of attack suitable to the fiery genius of his followers,
and calculated to alarm on every point the feeble garrison.

The three sides of the castle which were defended by the river,
were watched each by a numerous body of the British, with
instructions to confine themselves to the discharge of arrows,
unless they should observe that some favourable opportunity of
close attack should occur. But far the greater part of Gwenwyn's
forces, consisting of three columns of great strength, advanced
along the plain on the western side of the castle, and menaced,
with a desperate assault, the walls, which, in that direction,
were deprived of the defence of the river. The first of these
formidable bodies consisted entirely of archers, who dispersed
themselves in front of the beleaguered place, and took advantage
of every bush and rising ground which could afford them shelter;
and then began to bend their bows and shower their arrows on the
battlements and loop-holes, suffering, however, a great deal more
damage than they were able to inflict, as the garrison returned
their shot in comparative safety, and with more secure and
deliberate aim. [Footnote: The Welsh were excellent bowmen; but,
under favour of Lord Lyttleton, they probably did not use the long
bow, the formidable weapon of the Normans, and afterwards of the
English yeomen. That of the Welsh most likely rather resembled the
bow of the cognate Celtic tribes of Ireland, and of the
Highlanders of Scotland. It was shorter than the Norman long bow,
as being drawn to the breast, not to the ear, more loosely strung,
and the arrow having a heavy iron head; altogether, in short, a
less effective weapon. It appears, from the following anecdote,
that there was a difference between the Welsh arrow and those of
the English.

In 1122, Henry the II., marching into Powys-Land to chastise
Meredith ap Blethyn and certain rebels, in passing a defile, was
struck by an arrow on the breast. Repelled by the excellence of
his breast-plate, the shaft fell to the ground. When the King felt
the blow, and saw the shaft, he swore his usual oath, by the death
of our Lord, that the arrow came not from a Welsh but an English
bow; and, influenced by this belief hastily put an end to the
war.] Under cover, however, of their discharge of arrows, two very
strong bodies of Welsh attempted to carry the outer defences of
the castle by storm. They had axes to destroy the palisades, then
called barriers; faggots to fill up the external ditches; torches
to set fire to aught combustible which they might find; and, above
all, ladders to scale the walls.

These detachments rushed with incredible fury towards the point of
attack, despite a most obstinate defence, and the great loss which
they sustained by missiles of every kind, and continued the
assault for nearly an hour, supplied by reinforcements which more
than recruited their diminished numbers. When they were at last
compelled to retreat, they seemed to adopt a new and yet more
harassing species of attack. A large body assaulted one exposed
point of the fortress with such fury as to draw thither as many of
the besieged as could possibly be spared from other defended
posts, and when there appeared a point less strongly manned than
was adequate to defence, that, in its turn, was furiously assailed
by a separate body of the enemy.

Thus the defenders of the Garde Doloureuse resembled the
embarrassed traveller, engaged in repelling a swarm of hornets,
which, while he brushes them, from one part, fix in swarms upon
another, and drive him to despair by their numbers, and the
boldness and multiplicity of their attacks. The postern being of
course a principal point of attack, Father Aldrovand, whose
anxiety would not permit him to be absent from the walls, and who,
indeed, where decency would permit, took an occasional share in
the active defence of the place, hasted thither, as the point
chiefly in danger.

Here he found the Fleming, like a second Ajax, grim with dust and
blood, working with his own hands the great engine which he had
lately helped to erect, and at the same time giving heedful eye to
all the exigencies around.

"How thinkest thou of this day's work?" said the monk in a
whisper.

"What skills it talking of it, father?" replied Flammock; "thou
art no soldier, and I have no time for words."

"Nay, take thy breath," said the monk, tucking up the sleeves of
his frock; "I will try to help thee the whilst--although, our Lady
pity me, I know nothing of these strange devices--not even the
names. But our rule commands us to labour; there can be no harm
therefore, in turning this winch--or in placing this steel-headed
piece of wood opposite to the chord, (suiting his actions to his
words,) nor see I aught uncanonical in adjusting the lever thus,
or in touching the spring."

The large bolt whizzed through the air as he spoke, and was so
successfully aimed, that it struck down a Welsh chief of eminence,
to which Gwenwyn himself was in the act of giving some important
charge.

"Well driven, _trebuchet_--well flown, _quarrel!_" cried
the monk, unable to contain his delight, and giving in his
triumph, the true technical names to the engine, and the javelin
which it discharged.

"And well aimed, monk," added Wilkin Flammock; "I think thou
knowest more than is in thy breviary."

"Care not thou for that," said the father; "and now that thou
seest I can work an engine, and that the Welsh knaves seem
something low in stomach, what think'st thou of our estate?"

"Well enough--for a bad one--if we may hope for speedy succour;
but men's bodies are of flesh, not of iron, and we may be at last
wearied out by numbers. Only one soldier to four yards of wall, is
a fearful odds; and the villains are aware of it, and keep us to
sharp work."

The renewal of the assault here broke off their conversation, nor
did the active enemy permit them to enjoy much repose until
sunset; for, alarming them with repeated menaces of attack upon
different points, besides making two or three formidable and
furious assaults, they left them scarce time to breathe, or to
take a moment's refreshment. Yet the Welsh paid a severe price for
their temerity; for, while nothing could exceed the bravery with
which their men repeatedly advanced to the attack, those which
were made latest in the day had less of animated desperation than
their first onset; and it is probable, that the sense of having
sustained great loss, and apprehension of its effects on the
spirits of his people, made nightfall, and the interruption of the
contest, as acceptable to Gwenwyn as to the exhausted garrison of
the Garde Doloureuse.

But in the camp or leaguer of the Welsh there was glee and
triumph, for the loss of the past day was forgotten in
recollection of the signal victory which had preceded this siege;
and the dispirited garrison could hear from their walls the laugh
and the song, the sound of harping and gaiety, which triumphed by
anticipation over their surrender.

The sun was for some time sunk, the twilight deepened, and night
closed with a blue and cloudless sky, in which the thousand
spangles that deck the firmament received double brilliancy from
some slight touch of frost, although the paler planet, their
mistress, was but in her first quarter. The necessities of the
garrison were considerably aggravated by that of keeping a very
strong and watchful guard, ill according with the weakness of
their numbers, at a time which appeared favourable to any sudden
nocturnal alarm; and, so urgent was this duty, that those who had
been more slightly wounded on the preceding day, were obliged to
take their share in it, notwithstanding their hurts. The monk and
Fleming, who now perfectly understood each other, went in company
around the walls at midnight, exhorting the warders to be
watchful, and examining with their own eyes the state of the
fortress. It was in the course of these rounds, and as they were
ascending an elevated platform by a range of narrow and uneven
steps, something galling to the monk's tread, that they perceived
on the summit to which they were ascending, instead of the black
corslet of the Flemish sentinel who had been placed there, two
white forms, the appearance of which struck Wilkin Flammock with
more dismay than he had shown during any of the doubtful events of
the preceding day's fight.

"Father," he said, "betake yourself to your tools--_es
spuckt_--there are hobgoblins here."

The good father had not learned as a priest to defy the spiritual
host, whom, as a soldier, he had dreaded more than any mortal
enemy; but he began to recite, with chattering teeth, the exorcism
of the church, _"Conjuro vos omnes, spiritus maligni, magni,
atque parvi,"_--when he was interrupted by the voice of
Eveline, who called out, "Is it you, Father Aldrovand?"

Much lightened at heart by finding they had no ghost to deal with,
Wilkin Flammock and the priest advanced hastily to the platform,
where they found the lady with her faithful Rose, the former with
a half-pike in her hand, like a sentinel on duty.

"How is this, daughter?" said the monk; "how came you here, and
thus armed? and where is the sentinel,--the lazy Flemish hound,
that should have kept the post?"

"May he not be a lazy hound, yet not a Flemish one, father?" said
Rose, who was ever awakened by anything which seemed a reflection
upon her country; "methinks I have heard of such curs of English
breed."

"Go to, Rose, you are too malapert for a young maiden," said her
father. "Once more, where is Peterkin Vorst, who should have kept
this post?"

"Let him not be blamed for my fault," said Eveline, pointing to a
place where the Flemish sentinel lay in the shade of the
battlement fast asleep--"He was overcome with toil--had fought
hard through the day, and when I saw him asleep as I came hither,
like a wandering spirit that cannot take slumber or repose, I
would not disturb the rest which I envied. As he had fought for
me, I might, I thought, watch an hour for him; so I took his
weapon with the purpose of remaining here till some one should
come to relieve him."

"I will relieve the schelm, with a vengeance!" said Wilkin
Flammock, and saluted the slumbering and prostrate warder with two
kicks, which made his corslet clatter. The man started to his feet
in no small alarm, which he would have communicated to the next
sentinels and to the whole garrison, by crying out that the Welsh
were upon the walls, had not the monk covered his broad mouth with
his hand just as the roar was issuing forth.--"Peace, and get thee
down to the under bayley," said he;--"thou deservest death, by all
the policies of war--but, look ye, varlet, and see who has saved
your worthless neck, by watching while you were dreaming of
swine's flesh and beer-pots."

The Fleming, although as yet but half awake, was sufficiently
conscious of his situation, to sneak off without reply, after two
or three awkward congees, as well to Eveline as to those by whom
his repose had been so unceremoniously interrupted.

"He deserves to be tied neck and heel, the houndsfoot," said
Wilkin. "But what would you have, lady? My countrymen cannot live
without rest or sleep." So saying, he gave a yawn so wide, as if
he had proposed to swallow one of the turrets at an angle of the
platform on which he stood, as if it had only garnished a
Christmas pasty.

"True, good Wilkin," said Eveline; "and do you therefore take some
rest, and trust to my watchfulness, at least till the guards are
relieved. I cannot sleep if I would, and I would not if I could."

"Thanks, lady," said Flammock; "and in truth, as this is a
centrical place, and the rounds must pass in an hour at farthest,
I will e'en close my eyes for such a space, for the lids feel as
heavy as flood-gates."

"Oh, father, father!" exclaimed Rose, alive to her sire's
unceremonious neglect of decorum--"think where you are, and in
whose presence!"

"Ay, ay, good Flammock," said the monk, "remember the presence of
a noble Norman maiden is no place for folding of cloaks and
donning of night-caps."

"Let him alone, father," said Eveline, who in another moment might
have smiled at the readiness with which Wilkin Flammock folded
himself in his huge cloak, extended his substantial form on the
stone bench, and gave the most decided tokens of profound repose,
long ere the monk had done speaking.--"Forms and fashions of
respect," she continued, "are for times of ease and nicety;--when
in danger, the soldier's bedchamber is wherever he can find
leisure for an hour's sleep--his eating-hall, wherever he can
obtain food. Sit thou down by Rose and me, good father, and tell
us of some holy lesson which may pass away these hours of
weariness and calamity."

The father obeyed; but however willing to afford consolation, his
ingenuity and theological skill suggested nothing better than a
recitation of the penitentiary psalms, in which task he continued
until fatigue became too powerful for him also, when he committed
the same breach of decorum for which he had upbraided Wilkin
Flammock, and fell fast asleep in the midst of his devotions.




CHAPTER THE NINTH


  "Oh, night of wo," she said, and wept,
  "Oh, night foreboding sorrow!
  "Oh, night of wo," she said and wept,
  "But more I dread the morrow!"
     SIR GILBERT ELLIOT.


The fatigue which had exhausted Flammock and the monk, was unfelt
by the two anxious maidens, who remained with their eyes bent, now
upon the dim landscape, now on the stars by which it was lighted,
as if they could have read there the events which the morrow was
to bring forth. It was a placid and melancholy scene. Tree and
field, and hill and plain, lay before them in doubtful light,
while at greater distance, their eye could with difficulty trace
one or two places where the river, hidden in general by banks and
trees, spread its more expanded bosom to the stars, and the pale
crescent. All was still, excepting the solemn rush of the waters,
and now and then the shrill tinkle of a harp, which, heard from
more than a mile's distance through the midnight silence,
announced that some of the Welshmen still protracted their most
beloved amusement. The wild notes, partially heard, seemed like
the voice of some passing spirit; and, connected as they were with
ideas of fierce and unrelenting hostility, thrilled on Eveline's
ear, as if prophetic of war and wo, captivity and death. The only
other sounds which disturbed the extreme stillness of the night,
were the occasional step of a sentinel upon his post, or the
hooting of the owls, which seemed to wail the approaching downfall
of the moonlight turrets, in which they had established their
ancient habitations.

The calmness of all around seemed to press like a weight on the
bosom of the unhappy Eveline, and brought to her mind a deeper
sense of present grief, and keener apprehension of future horrors,
than had reigned there during the bustle, blood, and confusion of
the preceding day. She rose up--she sat down--she moved to and fro
on the platform--she remained fixed like a statue to a single
spot, as if she were trying by variety of posture to divert her
internal sense of fear and sorrow.

At length, looking at the monk and the Fleming as they slept
soundly under the shade of the battlement, she could no longer
forbear breaking silence. "Men are happy," she said, "my beloved
Rose; their anxious thoughts are either diverted by toilsome
exertion, or drowned in the insensibility which follows it. They
may encounter wounds and death, but it is we who feel in the
spirit a more keen anguish than the body knows, and in the gnawing
sense of present ill and fear of future misery, suffer a living
death, more cruel than that which ends our woes at once."

"Do not be thus downcast, my noble lady," said Rose; "be rather
what you were yesterday, caring for the wounded, for the aged, for
every one but yourself--exposing even your dear life among the
showers of the Welsh arrows, when doing so could give courage to
others; while I--shame on me--could but tremble, sob, and weep,
and needed all the little wit I have to prevent my shouting with
the wild cries of the Welsh, or screaming and groaning with those
of our friends who fell around me."

"Alas! Rose," answered her mistress, "you may at pleasure indulge
your fears to the verge of distraction itself--you have a father
to fight and watch for you. Mine--my kind, noble, and honoured
parent, lies dead on yonder field, and all which remains for me is
to act as may best become his memory. But this moment is at least
mine, to think upon and to mourn for him."

So saying, and overpowered by the long-repressed burst of filial
sorrow, she sunk down on the banquette which ran along the inside
of the embattled parapet of the platform, and murmuring to
herself, "He is gone for ever!" abandoned herself to the extremity
of grief. One hand grasped unconsciously the weapon which she
held, and served, at the same time, to prop her forehead, while
the tears, by which she was now for the first time relieved,
flowed in torrents from her eyes, and her sobs seemed so
convulsive, that Rose almost feared her heart was bursting. Her
affection and sympathy dictated at once the kindest course which
Eveline's condition permitted. Without attempting to control the
torrent of grief in its full current, she gently sat her down
beside the mourner, and possessing herself of the hand which had
sunk motionless by her side, she alternately pressed it to her
lips, her bosom, and her brow--now covered it with kisses, now
bedewed it with tears, and amid these tokens of the most devoted
and humble sympathy, waited a more composed moment to offer her
little stock of consolation in such deep silence and stillness,
that, as the pale light fell upon the two beautiful young women,
it seemed rather to show a group of statuary, the work of some
eminent sculptor, than beings whose eyes still wept, and whose
hearts still throbbed. At a little distance, the gleaming corslet
of the Fleming, and the dark garments of Father Aldrovand, as they
lay prostrate on the stone steps, might represent the bodies of
those for whom the principal figures were mourning.

After a deep agony of many minutes, it seemed that the sorrows of
Eveline were assuming a more composed character; her convulsive
sobs were changed for long, low, profound sighs, and the course of
her tears, though they still flowed, was milder and less violent.
Her kind attendant, availing herself of these gentler symptoms,
tried softly to win the spear from her lady's grasp. "Let me be
sentinel for a while." she said, "my sweet lady--I will at least
scream louder than you, if any danger should approach." She
ventured to kiss her cheek, and throw her arms around Eveline's
neck while she spoke; but a mute caress, which expressed her sense
of the faithful girl's kind intentions to minister if possible to
her repose, was the only answer returned. They remained for many
minutes silent in the same posture,--Eveline, like an upright and
tender poplar,--Rose, who encircled her lady in her arms, like the
woodbine which twines around it.

At length Rose suddenly felt her young mistress shiver in her
embrace, and then Eveline's hand grasped her arm rigidly as she
whispered, "Do you hear nothing?"

"No--nothing but the hooting of the owl," answered Rose,
timorously.

"I heard a distant sound," said Eveline,--"I thought I heard it--
hark, it comes again!--Look from the battlements, Rose, while I
awaken the priest and thy father."

"Dearest lady," said Rose, "I dare not--what can this sound be
that is heard by one only?--You are deceived by the rush of the
river."

"I would not alarm the castle unnecessarily," said Eveline,
pausing, "or even break your father's needful slumbers, by a fancy
of mine--But hark--I hear it again--distinct amidst the
intermitting sounds of the rushing water--a low tremulous sound,
mingled with a tinkling like smiths or armourers at work upon
their anvils."

Rose had by this time sprung up on the banquette, and flinging
back her rich tresses of fair hair, had applied her hand behind
her ear to collect the distant sound. "I hear it," she cried, "and
it increases--Awake them, for Heaven's sake, and without a
moment's delay!"

Eveline accordingly stirred the sleepers with the reversed end of
the lance, and as they started to their feet in haste, she
whispered in a hasty but cautious voice, "To arms--the Welsh are
upon us!" "What--where?" said Wilkin Flammock,--"where be they?"

"Listen, and you will hear them arming," she replied.

"The noise is but in thine own fancy, lady," said the Fleming,
whose organs were of the same heavy character with his form and
his disposition. "I would I had not gone to sleep at all, since I
was to be awakened so soon."

"Nay, but listen, good Flammock-the sound of armour comes from the
north-east."

"The Welsh lie not in that quarter, lady," said Wilkin; "and
besides, they wear no armour."

"I hear it--I hear it!" said Father Aldrovand, who had been
listening for some time. "All praise to St. Benedict!--Our Lady of
the Garde Doloureuse has been gracious to her servants as ever!--
It is the tramp of horses--it is the clash of armour--the chivalry
of the Marches are coming to our relief-Kyrie Eleison!"

"I hear something too," said Flammock,--"something like the hollow
sound of the great sea, when it burst into my neighbour
Klinkerman's warehouse, and rolled his pots and pans against each
other. But it were an evil mistake, father, to take foes for
friends--we were best rouse the people."

"Tush!" said the priest, "talk to me of pots and kettles?--Was I,
squire of the body to Count Stephen Mauleverer for twenty years,
and do I not know the tramp of a war-horse, or the clash of a
mail-coat?--But call the men to the walls at any rate, and have me
the best drawn up at the base-court--we may help them by a sally."

"That will not be rashly undertaken with my consent," murmured the
Fleming; "but to the wall if you will, and 111 good time. But keep
your Normans and English silent, Sir Priest, else their unruly and
noisy joy will awaken the Welsh camp, and prepare them for their
unwelcome visitors."

The monk laid his finger on his lip in sign of obedience, and they
parted in opposite directions, each to rouse the defenders of the
castle, who were soon heard drawing from all quarters to their
posts upon the walls, with hearts in a very different mood from
that in which they had descended from them. The utmost caution
being used to prevent noise, the manning of the walls was
accomplished in silence, and the garrison awaited in, breathless
expectation the success of the forces who were rapidly advancing
to their relief.

The character of the sounds which now loudly awakened the silence
of this eventful night, could no longer be mistaken. They were
distinguishable from the rushing of a mighty river, or from the
muttering sound of distant thunder, by the sharp and angry notes
which the clashing of the rider's arms mingled with the deep bass
of the horses' rapid tread. From the long continuance of the
sounds, their loudness, and the extent of horizon from which they
seemed to come, all in the castle were satisfied that the
approaching relief consisted of several very strong bodies of
horse. [Footnote: Even the sharp and angry clang made by the iron
scabbards of modern cavalry ringing against the steel-tipp'd
saddles and stirrup, betrays their approach from a distance. The
clash of the armour of knights, armed _cap-a-pie_, must have
been much more easily discernible.] At once this mighty sound
ceased, as if the earth on which they trod had either devoured the
armed squadrons or had become incapable of resounding to their
tramp. The defenders of the Garde Doloureuse concluded that their
friends had made a sudden halt, to give their horses breath,
examine the leaguer of the enemy, and settle the order of attack
upon them. The pause, however was but momentary.

The British, so alert at surprising their enemies, were
themselves, on many occasions, liable to surprise. Their men were
undisciplined, and sometimes negligent of the patient duties of
the sentinel; and, besides, their foragers and flying parties, who
scoured the country during the preceding day, had brought back
tidings which had lulled them into fatal security. Their camp had
been therefore carelessly guarded, and confident in the smallness
of the garrison, they had altogether neglected the important
military duty of establishing patrols and outposts at a proper
distance from their main body. Thus the cavalry of the Lords
Marchers, notwithstanding the noise which accompanied their
advance, had approached very near the British camp without
exciting the least alarm. But while they were arranging their
forces into separate columns, in order to commence the assault, a
loud and increasing clamour among the Welsh announced that they
were at length aware of their danger. The shrill and discordant
cries by which they endeavoured to assemble their men, each under
the banner of his chief, resounded from their leaguer. But these
rallying shouts were soon converted into screams, and clamours of
horror and dismay, when the thundering charge of the barbed horses
and heavily armed cavalry of the Anglo-Normans surprised their
undefended camp.

Yet not even under circumstances so adverse did the descendants of
the ancient Britons renounce their defence, or forfeit their old
hereditary privilege, to be called the bravest of mankind. Their
cries of defiance and resistance were heard resounding above the
groans of the wounded, the shouts of the triumphant assailants,
and the universal tumult of the night-battle. It was not until the
morning light began to peep forth, that the slaughter or
dispersion of Gwenwyn's forces was complete, and that the
"earthquake voice of victory" arose in uncontrolled and unmingled
energy of exultation.

Then the besieged, if they could be still so termed, looking from
their towers over the expanded country beneath, witnessed nothing
but one widespread scene of desultory flight and unrelaxed
pursuit. That the Welsh had been permitted to encamp in fancied
security upon the hither side of the river, now rendered their
discomfiture more dreadfully fatal. The single pass by which they
could cross to the other side was soon completely choked by
fugitives, on whose rear raged the swords of the victorious
Normans. Many threw themselves into the river, upon the precarious
chance of gaining the farther side, and, except a few, who were
uncommonly strong, skilful, and active, perished among the rocks
and in the currents; others, more fortunate, escaped by fords,
with which they had accidentally been made acquainted; many
dispersed, or, in small bands, fled in reckless despair towards
the castle, as if the fortress, which had beat them off when
victorious, could be a place of refuge to them in their present
forlorn condition; while others roamed wildly over the plain,
seeking only escape from immediate and instant danger, without
knowing whither they ran.

The Normans, meanwhile, divided into small parties, followed and
slaughtered them at pleasure; while, as a rallying point for the
victors, the banner of Hugo de Lacy streamed from a small mount,
on which Gwenwyn had lately pitched his own, and surrounded by a
competent force, both of infantry and horsemen, which the
experienced Baron permitted on no account to wander far from it.

The rest, as we have already said, followed the chase with shouts
of exultation and of vengeance, ringing around the battlements,
which resounded with the cries, "Ha, Saint Edward!--Ha, Saint
Dennis!--Strike--slay--no quarter to the Welsh wolves--think on
Raymond Berenger!"

The soldiers on the walls joined in these vengeful and victorious
clamours, and discharged several sheaves of arrows upon such
fugitives, as, in their extremity, approached too near the castle.
They would fain have sallied to give more active assistance in the
work of destruction; but the communication being now open with the
Constable of Chester's forces, Wilkin Flammock considered himself
and the garrison to be under the orders of that renowned chief,
and refused to listen to the eager admonitions of Father
Aldrovand, who would, notwithstanding his sacerdotal character,
have willingly himself taken charge of the sally which he
proposed.

At length, the scene of slaughter seemed at an end. The retreat
was blown on many a bugle, and knights halted on the plain to
collect their personal followers, muster them under their proper
pennon, and then march them slowly back to the great standard of
their leader, around which the main body were again to be
assembled, like the clouds which gather around the evening sun--a
fanciful simile, which might yet be drawn farther, in respect of
the level rays of strong lurid light which shot from those dark
battalions, as the beams were flung back from their polished
armour.

The plain was in this manner soon cleared of the horsemen, and
remained occupied only by the dead bodies of the slaughtered
Welshmen. The bands who had followed the pursuit to a greater
distance were also now seen returning, driving before them, or
dragging after them, dejected and unhappy captives, to whom they
had given quarter when their thirst of blood was satiated.

It was then that, desirous to attract the attention of his
liberators, Wilkin Flammock commanded all the banners of the
castle to be displayed, under a general shout of acclamation from
those who had fought under them. It was answered by a universal
cry of joy from De Lacy's army, which rung so wide, as might even
yet have startled such of the Welsh fugitives, as, far distant
from this disastrous field of flight, might have ventured to halt
for a moment's repose.

Presently after this greeting had been exchanged, a single rider
advanced from the Constable's army towards the castle, showing,
even at a distance, an unusual dexterity of horsemanship and grace
of deportment. He arrived at the drawbridge, which was instantly
lowered to receive him, whilst Flammock and the monk (for the
latter, as far as he could, associated himself with the former in
all acts of authority) hastened to receive the envoy of their
liberator. They found him just alighted from the raven-coloured
horse, which was slightly flecked with blood as well as foam, and
still panted with the exertions of the evening; though, answering
to the caressing hand of its youthful rider, he arched his neck,
shook his steel caparison, and snorted to announce his unabated
mettle and unwearied love of combat. The young man's eagle look
bore the same token of unabated vigour, mingled with the signs of
recent exertion. His helmet hanging at his saddle-bow, showed a
gallant countenance, coloured highly, but not inflamed, which
looked out from a rich profusion of short chestnut-curls; and
although his armour was of a massive and simple form, he moved
under it with such elasticity and ease, that it seemed a graceful
attire, not a burden or encumbrance. A furred mantle had not sat
on him with more easy grace than the heavy hauberk, which complied
with every gesture of his noble form. Yet his countenance was so
juvenile, that only the down on the upper lip announced decisively
the approach to manhood. The females, who thronged into the court
to see the first envoy of their deliverers, could not forbear
mixing praises of his beauty with blessings on his valour; and one
comely middle-aged dame, in particular, distinguished by the
tightness with which her scarlet hose sat on a well-shaped leg and
ankle, and by the cleanness of her coif, pressed close up to the
young squire, and, more forward than, the rest, doubled the
crimson hue of his cheek, by crying aloud, that Our Lady of the
Garde Doloureuse had sent them news of their redemption by an
angel from the sanctuary;--a speech which, although Father
Aldrovand shook his head, was received by her companions with such
general acclamation, as greatly embarrassed the young man's
modesty.

"Peace, all of ye!" said Wilkin Flammock--"Know you no respects,
you women, or have you never seen a young gentleman before, that
you hang on him like flies on a honeycomb? Stand back, I say, and
let us hear in peace what are the commands of the noble Lord of
Lacy."

"These," said the young man, "I can only deliver in the presence
of the right noble demoiselle, Eveline Berenger, if I may be
thought worthy of such honour."

"That thou art, noble sir," said the same forward dame, who had
before expressed her admiration so energetically; "I will uphold
thee worthy of her presence, and whatever other grace a lady can
do thee."

"Now, hold thy tongue, with a wanion!" said the monk; while in the
same breath the Fleming exclaimed, "Beware the cucking-stool,
Dame Scant-o'-Grace!" while he conducted the noble youth across
the court. "Let my good horse be cared for," said the cavalier,
as he put the bridle into the hand of a menial; and in doing so
got rid of some part of his female retinue, who began to pat and
praise the steed as much as they had done the rider; and some, in
the enthusiasm of their joy, hardly abstained from kissing the
stirrups and horse furniture.

But Dame Gillian was not so easily diverted from her own point as
were some of her companions. She continued to repeat the word
_cucking-stool_, till the Fleming was out of hearing, and
then became more specific in her objurgation.--"And why
_cucking-stool_, I pray, Sir Wilkin Butterfirkin? You are the
man would stop an English mouth with a Flemish damask napkin, I
trow! Marry quep, my cousin the weaver! And why the cucking-stool,
I pray?--because my young lady is comely, and the young squire is
a man of mettle, reverence to his beard that is to come yet! Have
we not eyes to see, and have we not a mouth and a tongue?"

"In troth, Dame Gillian, they do you wrong who doubt it," said
Eveline's nurse, who stood by; "but I prithee, keep it shut now,
were it but for womanhood."

"How now, mannerly Mrs. Margery?" replied the incorrigible
Gillian; "is your heart so high, because you dandled our young
lady on your knee fifteen years since?--Let me tell you, the cat
will find its way to the cream, though it was brought up on an
abbess's lap."

"Home, housewife--home!" exclaimed her husband, the old huntsman,
who was weary of this public exhibition of his domestic termagant
--"home, or I will give you a taste of my dog lash--Here are both
the confessor and Wilkin Flammock wondering at your impudence."

"Indeed!" replied Gillian; "and are not two fools enough for
wonderment, that you must come with your grave pate to make up the
number three?"

There was a general laugh at the huntsman's expense, under cover
of which he prudently withdrew his spouse, without attempting to
continue the war of tongues, in which she had shown such a decided
superiority. This controversy, so light is the change in human
spirits, especially among the lower class, awakened bursts of idle
mirth among beings, who had so lately been in the jaws of danger,
if not of absolute despair.




CHAPTER THE TENTH


  They bore him barefaced on his bier,
    Six proper youths and tall,
  And many a tear bedew'd his grave
    Within yon kirkyard wall.
    THE FRIAR OF ORDERS GRAY.


While these matters took place in the castle-yard, the young
squire, Damian Lacy, obtained the audience which he had requested
of Eveline Berenger, who received him in the great hall of the
castle, seated beneath the dais, or canopy, and waited upon by
Rose and other female attendants; of whom the first alone was
permitted to use a tabouret or small stool in her presence, so
strict were the Norman maidens of quality in maintaining their
claims to high rank and observance.

The youth was introduced by the confessor and Flammock, as the
spiritual character of the one, and the trust reposed by her late
father in the other, authorized them to be present upon the
occasion. Eveline naturally blushed, as she advanced two steps to
receive the handsome youthful envoy; and her bashfulness seemed
infectious, for it was with some confusion that Damian went
through the ceremony of saluting the hand which she extended
towards him in token of welcome. Eveline was under the necessity
of speaking first.

"We advance as far as our limits will permit us," she said, "to
greet with our thanks the messenger who brings us tidings of
safety. We speak--unless we err--to the noble Damian of Lacy?"

"To the humblest of your servants," answered Damian, falling with
some difficulty into the tone of courtesy which his errand and
character required, "who approaches you on behalf of his noble
uncle, Hugo de Lacy, Constable of Chester."

"Will not our noble deliverer in person honour with his presence
the poor dwelling which he has saved?"

"My noble kinsman," answered Damian, "is now God's soldier, and
bound by a vow not to come beneath a roof until he embark for the
Holy Land. But by my voice he congratulates you on the defeat of
your savage enemies, and sends you these tokens that the comrade
and friend of your noble father hath not left his lamentable death
many hours unavenged." So saying, he drew forth and laid before
Eveline the gold bracelets, the coronet, and the eudorchawg, or
chain of linked gold, which had distinguished the rank of the
Welsh Prince. [Footnote: Eudorchawg, or Gold Chains of the Welsh.
These were the distinguished marks of rank and valour among the
numerous tribes of Celtic extraction. Manlius, the Roman Champion,
gained the name of Torquatus, or he of the chain, on account of an
ornament of this kind, won, in single combat, from a gigantic
Gaul. Aneurin, the Welsh bard, mentions, in his poem on the battle
of Catterath, that no less than three hundred of the British, who
fell there, had their necks wreathed with the Eudorchawg. This
seems to infer that the chain was a badge of distinction, and
valour perhaps, but not of royalty; otherwise there would scarce
have been so many kings present in one battle. This chain has been
found accordingly in Ireland and Wales, and sometimes, though more
rarely, in Scotland. Doubtless it was of too precious materials
not to be usually converted into money by the enemy into whose
hands it fell.]

"Gwenwyn hath then fallen?" said Eveline, a natural shudder
combating with the feelings of gratified vengeance, as she beheld
that the trophies were speckled with blood,--"The slayer of my
father is no more!"

"My kinsman's lance transfixed the Briton as he endeavoured to
rally his flying people--he died grimly on the weapon which had
passed more than a fathom through his body, and exerted his last
strength in a furious but ineffectual blow with his mace." "Heaven
is just," said Eveline; "may his sins be forgiven to the man of
blood, since he hath fallen by a death so bloody!--One question I
would ask you, noble sir. My father's remains----" She paused
unable to proceed. "An hour will place them at your disposal, most
honoured lady," replied the squire, in the tone of sympathy which
the sorrows of so young and so fair an orphan called irresistibly
forth. "Such preparations as time admitted were making even when I
left the host, to transport what was mortal of the noble Berenger
from the field on which we found him amid a monument of slain
which his own sword had raised. My kinsman's vow will not allow
him to pass your portcullis; but, with your permission, I will
represent him, if such be your pleasure, at these honoured
obsequies, having charge to that effect."

"My brave and noble father," said Eveline, making an effort to
restrain her tears, "will be best mourned by the noble and the
brave." She would have continued, but her voice failed her, and
she was obliged to withdraw abruptly, in order to give vent to her
sorrow, and prepare for the funeral rites with such ceremony as
circumstances should permit. Damian bowed to the departing mourner
as reverently as he would have done to a divinity, and taking his
horse, returned to his uncle's host, which had encamped hastily on
the recent field of battle.

The sun was now high, and the whole plain presented the appearance
of a bustle, equally different from the solitude of the early
morning, and from the roar and fury of the subsequent engagement.
The news of Hugo de Lacy's victory every where spread abroad with
all alacrity of triumph, and had induced many of the inhabitants
of the country, who had fled before the fury of the Wolf of
Plinlimmon, to return to their desolate habitations. Numbers also
of the loose and profligate characters which abound in a country
subject to the frequent changes of war, had flocked thither in
quest of spoil, or to gratify a spirit of restless curiosity. The
Jew and the Lombard, despising danger where there was a chance of
gain, might be already seen bartering liquors and wares with the
victorious men-at-arms, for the blood-stained ornaments of gold
lately worn by the defeated British. Others acted as brokers
betwixt the Welsh captives and their captors; and where they could
trust the means and good faith of the former, sometimes became
bound for, or even advanced in ready money, the sums necessary for
their ransom; whilst a more numerous class became themselves the
purchasers of those prisoners who had no immediate means of
settling with their conquerors.

That the spoil thus acquired might not long encumber the soldier,
or blunt his ardour for farther enterprise, the usual means of
dissipating military spoils were already at hand. Courtezans,
mimes, jugglers, minstrels, and tale-tellers of every description,
had accompanied the night-march; and, secure in the military
reputation of the celebrated De Lacy, had rested fearlessly at
some little distance until the battle was fought and won. These
now approached, in many a joyous group, to congratulate the
victors. Close to the parties which they formed for the dance, the
song, or the tale, upon the yet bloody field, the countrymen,
summoned in for the purpose, were opening large trenches for
depositing the dead--leeches were seen tending the wounded--
priests and monks confessing those in extremity--soldiers
transporting from the field the bodies of the more honoured among
the slain--peasants mourning over their trampled crops and
plundered habitations--and widows and orphans searching for the
bodies of husbands and parents, amid the promiscuous carnage of
two combats. Thus wo mingled her wildest notes with those of
jubilee and bacchanal triumph, and the plain of the Garde
Doloureuse formed a singular parallel to the varied maze of human
life, where joy and grief are so strangely mixed, and where the
confines of mirth and pleasure often border on those of sorrow and
of death.

About noon these various noises were at once silenced, and the
attention alike of those who rejoiced or grieved was arrested by
the loud and mournful sound of six trumpets, which, uplifting and
uniting their thrilling tones in a wild and melancholy death-note,
apprised all, that the obsequies of the valiant Raymond Berenger
were about to commence. From a tent, which had been hastily
pitched for the immediate reception of the body, twelve black
monks, the inhabitants of a neighbouring convent, began to file
out in pairs, headed by their abbot, who bore a large cross, and
thundered forth the sublime notes of the Catholic _Miserere me,
Domine_. Then came a chosen body of men-at-arms, trailing their
lances, with their points reversed and pointed to the earth; and
after them the body of the valiant Berenger, wrapped in his own
knightly banner, which, regained from the hands of the Welsh, now
served its noble owner instead of a funeral pall. The most gallant
Knights of the Constable's household (for, like other great nobles
of that period, he had formed it upon a scale which approached to
that of royalty) walked as mourners and supporters of the corpse,
which was borne upon lances; and the Constable of Chester himself,
alone and fully armed, excepting the head, followed as chief
mourner. A chosen body of squires, men-at-arms, and pages of noble
descent, brought up the rear of the procession; while their nakers
and trumpets echoed back, from time to time, the melancholy song
of the monks, by replying in a note as lugubrious as their own.

The course of pleasure was arrested, and even that of sorrow was
for a moment turned from her own griefs, to witness the last
honours bestowed on him, who had been in life the father and
guardian of his people.

The mournful procession traversed slowly the plain which had been
within a few hours the scene of such varied events; and, pausing
before the outer gate of the barricades of the castle, invited, by
a prolonged and solemn flourish, the fortress to receive the
remains of its late gallant defender. The melancholy summons was
answered by the warder's horn--the drawbridge sunk--the portcullis
rose--and Father Aldrovand appeared in the middle of the gateway,
arrayed in his sacerdotal habit, whilst a little way behind him
stood the orphaned damsel, in such weeds of mourning as time
admitted, supported by her attendant Rose, and followed by the
females of the household.

The Constable of Chester paused upon the threshold of the outer
gate, and, pointing to the cross signed in white cloth upon his
left shoulder, with a lowly reverence resigned to his nephew,
Damian, the task of attending the remains of Raymond Berenger to
the chapel within the castle. The soldiers of Hugo de Lacy, most
of whom were bound by the same vow with himself, also halted
without the castle gate, and remained under arms, while the death-
peal of the chapel bell announced from within the progress of the
procession.

It winded on through those narrow entrances, which were skilfully
contrived to interrupt the progress of an enemy, even should he
succeed in forcing the outer gate, and arrived at length in the
great court-yard, where most of the inhabitants of the fortress,
and those who, under recent circumstances, had taken refuge there,
were drawn up, in order to look, for the last time, on their
departed lord. Among these were mingled a few of the motley crowd
from without, whom curiosity, or the expectation of a dole, had
brought to the castle gate, and who, by one argument or another,
had obtained from the warder permission to enter the interior.

The body was here set down before the door of the chapel, the
ancient Gothic front of which formed one side of the court-yard,
until certain prayers were recited by the priests, in which the
crowd around were supposed to join with becoming reverence.

It was during this interval, that a man, whose peaked beard,
embroidered girdle, and high-crowned hat of gray felt, gave him
the air of a Lombard merchant, addressed Margery, the nurse of
Eveline, in a whispering tone, and with a foreign accent.--"I am a
travelling merchant, good sister, and am come hither in quest of
gain--can you tell me whether I can have any custom in this
castle?"

"You are come at an evil time, Sir Stranger--you may yourself see
that this is a place for mourning and not for merchandise."

"Yet mourning times have their own commerce," said the stranger,
approaching still closer to the side of Margery, and lowering his
voice to a tone yet more confidential. "I have sable scarfs of
Persian silk--black bugles, in which a princess might mourn for a
deceased monarch--cyprus, such as the East hath seldom sent forth
--black cloth for mourning hangings--all that may express sorrow
and reverence in fashion and attire; and I know how to be grateful
to those who help me to custom. Come, bethink you, good dame--such
things must be had--I will sell as good ware and as cheap as
another; and a kirtle to yourself, or, at your pleasure, a purse
with five florins, shall be the meed of your kindness."

"I prithee peace, friend," said Margery, "and choose a better time
for vaunting your wares--you neglect both place and season; and if
you be farther importunate, I must speak to those who will show
you the outward side of the castle gate. I marvel the warders
would admit pedlars upon a day such as this--they would drive a
gainful bargain by the bedside of their mother, were she dying, I
trow." So saying, she turned scornfully from him.

While thus angrily rejected on the one side, the merchant felt his
cloak receive an intelligent twitch upon the other, and, looking
round upon the signal, he saw a dame, whose black kerchief was
affectedly disposed, so as to give an appearance of solemnity to a
set of light laughing features, which must have been captivating
when young, since they retained so many good points when at least
forty years had passed over them. She winked to the merchant,
touching at the same time her under lip with her forefinger, to
announce the propriety of silence and secrecy; then gliding from
the crowd, retreated to a small recess formed by a projecting
buttress of the chapel, as if to avoid the pressure likely to take
place at the moment when the bier should be lifted. The merchant
failed not to follow her example, and was soon by her side, when
she did not give him the trouble of opening his affairs, but
commenced the conversation herself.

"I have heard what you said to our Dame Margery--Mannerly Margery,
as I call her--heard as much, at least, as led me to guess the
rest, for I have got an eye in my head, I promise you."

"A pair of them, my pretty dame, and as bright as drops of dew in
a May morning."

"Oh, you say so, because I have been weeping," said the scarlet-
hosed Gillian, for it was even herself who spoke; "and to be sure,
I have good cause, for our lord was always my very good lord, and
would sometimes chuck me under the chin, and call me buxom Gillian
of Croydon--not that the good gentleman was ever uncivil, for he
would thrust a silver twopennies into my hand at the same time.--
Oh! the friend that I have lost!--And I have had anger on his
account too--I have seen old Raoul as sour as vinegar, and fit for
no place but the kennel for a whole day about it; but, as I said
to him, it was not for the like of me, to be affronting our
master, and a great baron, about a chuck under the chin, or a
kiss, or such like."

"No wonder you are so sorry for so kind a master, dame," said the
merchant.

"No wonder, indeed," replied the dame, with a sigh; "and then what
is to become of us?--It is like my young mistress will go to her
aunt--or she will marry one of these Lacys that they talk so much
of--or, at any rate, she will leave the castle; and it's like old
Raoul and I will be turned to grass with the lord's old chargers.
The Lord knows, they may as well hang him up with the old hounds,
for he is both footless and fangless, and fit for nothing on earth
that I know of."

"Your young mistress is that lady in the mourning mantle," said
the merchant, "who so nearly sunk down upon the body just now?"

"In good troth is she, sir--and much cause she has to sink down. I
am sure she will be to seek for such another father."

"I see you are a most discerning woman, gossip Gillian," answered
the merchant; "and yonder youth that supported her is her
bridegroom?"

"Much need she has for some one to support her," said Gillian;
"and so have I for that matter, for what can poor old rusty Raoul
do?"

"But as to your young lady's marriage?" said the merchant.

"No one knows more, than that such a thing was in treaty between
our late lord and the great Constable of Chester, that came to-day
but just in time to prevent the Welsh from cutting all our
throats, and doing the Lord knoweth what mischief beside. But
there is a marriage talked of, that is certain--and most folk
think it must be for this smooth-cheeked boy, Damian, as they call
him; for though the Constable has gotten a beard, which his nephew
hath not, it is something too grizzled for a bridegroom's chin--
Besides, he goes to the Holy Wars--fittest place for all elderly
warriors--I wish he would take Raoul with him.--But what is all
this to what you were saying about your mourning wares even now?--
It is a sad truth, that my poor lord is gone--But what then?--
Well-a-day, you know the good old saw,--

  'Cloth must be wear,
  Eat beef and drink beer,
  Though the dead go to bier.'

And for your merchandising, I am as like to help you with my good
word as Mannerly Margery, provided you bid fair for it; since, if
the lady loves me not so much, I can turn the steward round my
finger."

"Take this in part of your bargain, pretty Mistress Gillian," said
the merchant; "and when my wains come up, I will consider you
amply, if I get good sale by your favourable report.--But how
shall I get into the castle again? for I would wish to consult
you, being a sensible woman, before I come in with my luggage."

"Why," answered the complaisant dame, "if our English be on guard,
you have only to ask for Gillian, and they will open the wicket to
any single man at once; for we English stick all together, were it
but to spite the Normans;--but if a Norman be on duty, you must
ask for old Raoul, and say you come to speak of dogs and hawks for
sale, and I warrant you come to speech of me that way. If the
sentinel be a Fleming, you have but to say you are a merchant, and
he will let you in for the love of trade."

The merchant repeated his thankful acknowledgment, glided from her
side, and mixed among the spectators, leaving her to congratulate
herself on having gained a brace of florins by the indulgence of
her natural talkative humour; for which, on other occasions, she
had sometimes dearly paid.

The ceasing of the heavy toll of the castle bell now gave
intimation that the noble Raymond Berenger had been laid in the
vault with his fathers. That part of the funeral attendants who
had come from the host of De Lacy, now proceeded to the castle
hall, where they partook, but with temperance, of some
refreshments which were offered as a death-meal; and presently
after left the castle, headed by young Damian, in the same slow
and melancholy form in which they had entered. The monks remained
within the castle to sing repeated services for the soul of the
deceased, and for those of his faithful men-at-arms who had fallen
around him, and who had been so much mangled during, and after,
the contest with the Welsh, that it was scarce possible to know
one individual from another; otherwise the body of Dennis Morolt
would have obtained, as his faith well deserved, the honours of a
separate funeral. [Footnote: The Welsh, a fierce and barbarous
people, were often accused of mangling the bodies of their slain
antagonists. Every one must remember Shakspeare's account, how

  -----"the noble Mortimer,
  Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight,
  Against the irregular and wild Glendower--
  Was, by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
  And a thousand of his people butchered;

  Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
  Such beastly, shameless transformation,
  By these Welshwomen done, as may not be,
  Without much shame, retold or spoken of."]




CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.


  ----The funeral baked meats
  Did coldly furnish forth the marriage table.
      HAMLET.


The religious rites which followed the funeral of Raymond
Berenger, endured without interruption for the period of six days;
during which, alms were distributed to the poor, and relief
administered, at the expense of the Lady Eveline, to all those who
had suffered by the late inroad. Death-meals, as they were termed,
were also spread in honour of the deceased; but the lady herself,
and most of her attendants, observed a stern course of vigil,
discipline, and fasts, which appeared to the Normans a more
decorous manner of testifying their respect for the dead, than the
Saxon and Flemish custom of banqueting and drinking inordinately
upon such occasions.

Meanwhile, the Constable De Lacy retained a large body of his men
encamped under the walls of the Garde Doloureuse, for protection
against some new irruption of the Welsh, while with the rest he
took advantage of his victory, and struck terror into the British
by many well-conducted forays, marked with ravages scarcely less
hurtful than their own. Among the enemy, the evils of discord were
added to those of defeat and invasion; for two distant relations
of Gwenwyn contended for the throne he had lately occupied, and on
this, as on many other occasions, the Britons suffered as much
from internal dissension as from the sword of the Normans. A worse
politician, and a less celebrated soldier, than the sagacious and
successful De Lacy, could not have failed, under such
circumstances, to negotiate as he did an advantageous peace,
which, while it deprived Powys of a part of its frontier, and the
command of some important passes, in which it was the Constable's
purpose to build castles, rendered the Garde Doloureuse more
secure than formerly, from any sudden attack on the part of
their fiery and restless neighbours. De Lacy's care also went to
re-establishing those settlers who had fled from their possessions,
and putting the whole lordship, which now descended upon an
unprotected female, into a state of defence as perfect as its
situation on a hostile frontier could possibly permit.

Whilst thus anxiously provident in the affairs of the orphan of
the Garde Doloureuse, De Lacy during the space we have mentioned,
sought not to disturb her filial grief by any personal
intercourse. His nephew, indeed, was despatched by times every
morning to lay before her his uncle's _devoirs,_ in the high-
flown language of the day, and acquaint her with the steps which
he had taken in her affairs. As a meed due to his relative's high
services, Damian was always admitted to see Eveline on such
occasions, and returned charged with her grateful thanks, and her
implicit acquiescence in whatever the Constable proposed for her
consideration.

But when the days of rigid mourning were elapsed, the young de
Lacy stated, on the part of his kinsman, that his treaty with the
Welsh being concluded, and all things in the district arranged as
well as circumstances would permit, the Constable of Chester now
proposed to return into his own territory, in order to resume his
instant preparations for the Holy Land, which the duty of
chastising her enemies had for some days interrupted.

"And will not the noble Constable, before he departs from this
place," said Eveline, with a burst of gratitude which the occasion
well merited, "receive the personal thanks of her that was ready
to perish, when he so valiantly came to her aid?"

"It was even on that point that I was commissioned to speak,"
replied Damian; "but my noble kinsman feels diffident to propose
to you that which he most earnestly desires--the privilege of
speaking to your own ear certain matters of high import, and with
which he judges it fit to intrust no third party."

"Surely," said the maiden, blushing, "there can be nought beyond
the bounds of maidenhood, in my seeing the noble Constable
whenever such is his pleasure."

"But his vow," replied Damian, "binds my kinsman not to come
beneath a roof until he sets sail for Palestine; and in order to
meet him, you must grace him so far as to visit his pavilion;--a
condescension which, as a knight and Norman noble, he can scarcely
ask of a damsel of high degree."

"And is that all?" said Eveline, who, educated in a remote
situation, was a stranger to some of the nice points of etiquette
which the damsels of the time observed in keeping their state
towards the other sex. "Shall I not," she said, "go to render my
thanks to my deliverer, since he cannot come hither to receive
them? Tell the noble Hugo de Lacy, that, next to my gratitude to
Heaven, it is due to him, and to his brave companions in arms. I
will come to his tent as to a holy shrine; and, could such homage
please him, I would come barefooted, were the road strewed with
flints and with thorns."

"My uncle will be equally honoured and delighted with your
resolve," said Damian; "but it will be his study to save you all
unnecessary trouble, and with that view a pavilion shall be
instantly planted before your castle gate, which, if it please you
to grace it with your presence, may be the place for the desired
interview."

Eveline readily acquiesced in what was proposed, as the expedient
agreeable to the Constable, and recommended by Damian; but, in the
simplicity of her heart, she saw no good reason why, under the
guardianship of the latter, she should not instantly, and without
farther form, have traversed the little familiar plain on which,
when a child, she used to chase butterflies and gather king's-
cups, and where of later years she was wont to exercise her
palfrey on this well-known plain, being the only space, and that
of small extent, which separated her from the camp of the
Constable.

The youthful emissary, with whose presence she had now become
familiar, retired to acquaint his kinsman and lord with the
success of his commission; and Eveline experienced the first
sensation of anxiety upon her own account which had agitated her
bosom, since the defeat and death of Gwenwyn gave her permission
to dedicate her thoughts exclusively to grief, for the loss which
she had sustained in the person of her noble father. But now, when
that grief, though not satiated, was blunted by solitary
indulgence--now that she was to appear before the person of whose
fame she had heard so much, of whose powerful protection she had
received such recent proofs, her mind insensibly turned upon the
nature and consequences of that important interview. She had seen
Hugo de Lacy, indeed, at the great tournament at Chester, where
his valour and skill were the theme of every tongue, and she had
received the homage which he rendered her beauty when he assigned
to her the prize, with all the gay flutterings of youthful vanity;
but of his person and figure she had no distinct idea, excepting
that he was a middle-sized man, dressed in peculiarly rich armour,
and that the countenance, which looked out from under the shade of
his raised visor, seemed to her juvenile estimate very nearly as
old as that of her father. This person, of whom she had such
slight recollection, had been the chosen instrument employed by
her tutelar protectress in rescuing her from captivity, and in
avenging the loss of a father, and she was bound by her vow to
consider him as the arbiter of her fate, if indeed he should deem
it worth his while to become so. She wearied her memory with vain
efforts to recollect so much of his features as might give her
some means of guessing at his disposition, and her judgment toiled
in conjecturing what line of conduct he was likely to pursue
towards her.

The great Baron himself seemed to attach to their meeting a degree
of consequence, which was intimated by the formal preparations
which he made for it. Eveline had imagined that he might have
ridden to the gate of the castle in five minutes, and that, if a
pavilion were actually necessary to the decorum of their
interview, a tent could have been transferred from his leaguer to
the castle gate, and pitched there in ten minutes more. But it was
plain that the Constable considered much more form and ceremony as
essential to their meeting; for in about half an hour after Damian
de Lacy had left the castle, not fewer than twenty soldiers and
artificers, under the direction of a pursuivant, whose tabard was
decorated with the armorial bearings of the house of Lacy, were
employed in erecting before the gate of the Garde Doloureuse one
of those splendid pavilions, which were employed at tournaments
and other occasions of public state. It was of purple silk,
valanced with gold embroidery, having the chords of the same rich
materials. The door-way was formed by six lances, the staves of
which were plaited with silver, and the blades composed of the
same precious metal. These were pitched into the ground by
couples, and crossed at the top, so as to form a sort of
succession of arches, which were covered by drapery of sea-green
silk, forming a pleasing contrast with the purple and gold.

The interior of the tent was declared by Dame Gillian and others,
whose curiosity induced them to visit it, to be of a splendour
agreeing with the outside. There were Oriental carpets, and there
were tapestries of Ghent and Bruges mingled in gay profusion,
while the top of the pavilion, covered with sky-blue silk, was
arranged so as to resemble the firmament, and richly studded with
a sun, moon, and stars, composed of solid silver. This gorgeous
pavilion had been made for the use of the celebrated William of
Ypres, who acquired such great wealth as general of the
mercenaries of King Stephen, and was by him created Earl of
Albemarle; but the chance of War had assigned it to De Lacy, after
one of the dreadful engagements, so many of which occurred during
the civil wars betwixt Stephen and the Empress Maude, or Matilda.
The Constable had never before been known to use it; for although
wealthy and powerful, Hugo de Lacy was, on most occasions, plain
and unostentatious; which, to those who knew him, made his present
conduct seem the more remarkable. At the hour of noon he arrived,
nobly mounted, at the gate of the castle, and drawing up a small
body of servants, pages, and equerries, who attended him in their
richest liveries, placed himself at their head, and directed his
nephew to intimate to the Lady of the Garde Doloureuse, that the
humblest of her servants awaited the honour of her presence at the
castle gate.

Among the spectators who witnessed his arrival, there were many
who thought that some part of the state and splendour attached to
his pavilion and his retinue, had been better applied to set forth
the person of the Constable himself, as his attire was simple even
to meanness, and his person by no means of such distinguished
bearing as might altogether dispense with the advantages of dress
and ornament. The opinion became yet more prevalent, when he
descended from horseback, until which time his masterly management
of the noble animal he bestrode, gave a dignity to his person and
figure, which he lost upon dismounting from his steel saddle. In
height, the celebrated Constable scarce attained the middle size,
and his limbs, though strongly built and well knit, were deficient
in grace and ease of movement. His legs were slightly curved
outwards, which gave him advantage as a horseman, but showed
unfavourably when he was upon foot. He halted, though very
slightly, in consequence of one of his legs having been broken by
the fall of a charger, and inartificially set by an inexperienced
surgeon. This, also, was a blemish in his deportment; and though
his broad shoulders, sinewy arms, and expanded chest, betokened
the strength which he often displayed, it was strength of a clumsy
and ungraceful character. His language and gestures were those of
one seldom used to converse with equals, more seldom still with
superiors; short, abrupt, and decisive, almost to the verge of
sternness. In the judgment of those who were habitually acquainted
with the Constable, there was both dignity and kindness in his
keen eye and expanded brow; but such as saw him for the first time
judged less favourably, and pretended to discover a harsh and
passionate expression, although they allowed his countenance to
have, on the whole, a bold and martial character. His age was in
reality not more than five-and-forty, but the fatigues of war and
of climate had added in appearance ten years to that period of
time. By far the plainest dressed man of his train, he wore only a
short Norman mantle, over the close dress of shamois-leather,
which, almost always covered by his armour, was in some places
slightly soiled by its pressure. A brown hat, in which he wore a
sprig of rosemary in memory of his vow, served for his head-gear--
his good sword and dagger hung at a belt made of seal-skin.

Thus accoutred, and at the head of a glittering and gilded band of
retainers, who watched his lightest glance, the Constable of
Chester awaited the arrival of the Lady Eveline Berenger, at the
gate of her castle of Garde Doloureuse.

The trumpets from within announced her presence--the bridge fell,
and, led by Damian de Lacy in his gayest habit, and followed by
her train of females, and menial or vassal attendants, she came
forth in her loveliness from under the massive and antique portal
of her paternal fortress. She was dressed without ornaments of any
kind, and in deep mourning weeds, as best befitted her recent
loss; forming, in this respect, a strong contrast with the rich
attire of her conductor, whose costly dress gleamed with jewels
and embroidery, while their age and personal beauty made them in
every other respect the fair counterpart of each other; a
circumstance which probably gave rise to the delighted murmur and
buzz which passed through the bystanders on their appearance, and
which only respect for the deep mourning of Eveline prevented from
breaking out into shouts of applause.

The instant that the fair foot of Eveline had made a step beyond
the palisades which formed the outward barrier of the castle, the
Constable de Lacy stepped forward to meet her, and, bending his
right knee to the earth, craved pardon for the discourtesy which
his vow had imposed on him, while he expressed his sense of the
honour with which she now graced him, as one for which his life,
devoted to her service, would be an inadequate acknowledgment.

The action and speech, though both in consistence with the
romantic gallantry of the times, embarrassed Eveline; and the
rather that this homage was so publicly rendered. She entreated
the Constable to stand up, and not to add to the confusion of one
who was already sufficiently at a loss how to acquit herself of
the heavy debt of gratitude which she owed him. The Constable
arose accordingly, after saluting her hand, which she extended to
him, and prayed her, since she was so far condescending, to deign
to enter the poor hut he had prepared for her shelter, and to
grant him the honour of the audience he had solicited. Eveline,
without farther answer than a bow, yielded him her hand, and
desiring the rest of her train to remain where they were,
commanded the attendance of Rose Flammock.

"Lady," said the Constable, "the matters of which I am compelled
thus hastily to speak, are of a nature the most private."

"This maiden," replied Eveline, "is my bower-woman, and acquainted
with my most inward thoughts; I beseech you to permit her presence
at our conference."

"It were better otherwise," said Hugo de Lacy, with some
embarrassment; "but your pleasure shall be obeyed."

He led the Lady Eveline into the tent, and entreated her to be
seated on a large pile of cushions, covered with rich Venetian
silk. Rose placed herself behind her mistress, half kneeling upon
the same cushions, and watched the motions of the all-accomplished
soldier and statesman, whom the voice of fame lauded so loudly;
enjoying his embarrassment as a triumph of her sex, and scarcely
of opinion that his shamois doublet and square form accorded with
the splendour of the scene, or the almost angelic beauty of
Eveline, the other actor therein.

"Lady," said the Constable, after some hesitation, "I would
willingly say what it is my lot to tell you, in such terms as
ladies love to listen to, and which surely your excellent beauty
more especially deserves; but I have been too long trained in
camps and councils to express my meaning otherwise than simply and
plainly."

"I shall the more easily understand you, my lord," said Eveline,
trembling, though she scarce knew why.

"My story, then, must be a blunt one. Something there passed
between your honourable father and myself, touching a union of our
houses."--He paused, as if he wished or expected Eveline to say
something, but, as she was silent, he proceeded. "I would to God,
that, as he was at the beginning of this treaty, it had pleased
Heaven he should have conducted and concluded it with his usual
wisdom; but what remedy?--he has gone the path which we must all
tread."

"Your lordship," said Eveline, "has nobly avenged the death of
your noble friend."

"I have but done my devoir, lady, as a good knight, in defence of
an endangered maiden--a Lord Marcher in protection of the
frontier--and a friend in avenging his friend. But to the point.--
Our long and noble line draws near to a close. Of my remote
kinsman, Randal Lacy, I will not speak; for in him I see nothing
that is good or hopeful, nor have we been at one for many years.
My nephew, Damian, gives hopeful promise to be a worthy branch of
our ancient tree--but he is scarce twenty years old, and hath a
long career of adventure and peril to encounter, ere he can
honourably propose to himself the duties of domestic privacy or
matrimonial engagements. His mother also is English, some
abatentent perhaps in the escutcheon of his arms; yet, had ten
years more passed over him with the honours of chivalry, I should
have proposed Damian de Lacy for the happiness to which I at
present myself aspire."

"You--you, my lord!--it is impossible!" said Eveline, endeavouring
at the same time to suppress all that could be offensive in the
surprise which she could not help exhibiting.

"I do not wonder," replied the Constable, calmly,--for the ice
being now broken, he resumed the natural steadiness of his manner
and character,--"that you express surprise at this daring
proposal. I have not perhaps the form that pleases a lady's eye,
and I have forgotten,--that is, if I ever knew them,--the terms
and phrases which please a lady's ear; but, noble Eveline, the
Lady of Hugh de Lacy will be one of the foremost among the
matronage of England."

"It will the better become the individual to whom so high a
dignity is offered," said Eveline, "to consider how far she is
capable of discharging its duties."

"Of that I fear nothing," said De Lacy. "She who hath been so
excellent a daughter, cannot be less estimable in every other
relation in life."

"I do not find that confidence in myself my lord," replied the
embarrassed maiden, "with which you are so willing to load me--And
I--forgive me--must crave time for other inquiries, as well as
those which respect myself."

"Your father, noble lady, had this union warmly at heart. This
scroll, signed with his own hand, will show it." He bent his knee
as he gave the paper. "The wife of De Lacy will have, as the
daughter of Raymond Berenger merits, the rank of a princess; his
widow, the dowry of a queen."

"Mock me not with your knee, my lord, while you plead to me the
paternal commands, which, joined to other circumstances"--she
paused, and sighed deeply--"leave me, perhaps, but little room for
free will!"

Imboldened by this answer, De Lacy, who had hitherto remained on
his knee, rose gently, and assuming a seat beside the Lady
Eveline, continued to press his suit,--not, indeed, in the
language of passion, but of a plain-spoken man, eagerly urging a
proposal on which his happiness depended. The vision of the
miraculous image was, it may be supposed, uppermost in the mind of
Eveline, who, tied down by the solemn vow she had made on that
occasion, felt herself constrained to return evasive answers,
where she might perhaps have given a direct negative, had her own
wishes alone been to decide her reply.

"You cannot," she said, "expect from me, my lord, in this my so
recent orphan state, that I should come to a speedy determination
upon an affair of such deep importance. Give me leisure of your
nobleness for consideration with myself--for consultation with my
friends."

"Alas! fair Eveline," said the Baron, "do not be offended at my
urgency. I cannot long delay setting forward on a distant and
perilous expedition; and the short time left me for soliciting
your favour, must be an apology for my importunity."

"And is it in these circumstances, noble De Lacy, that you would
encumber yourself with family ties?" asked the maiden, timidly.

"I am God's soldier," said the Constable, "and He, in whose cause
I fight in Palestine, will defend my wife in England."

"Hear then my present answer, my lord," said Eveline Berenger,
rising from her seat. "To-morrow I proceed to the Benedictine
nunnery at Gloucester, where resides my honoured father's sister,
who is Abbess of that reverend house. To her guidance I will
commit myself in this matter."

"A fair and maidenly resolution," answered De Lacy, who seemed, on
his part, rather glad that the conference was abridged, "and, as I
trust, not altogether unfavourable to the suit of your humble
suppliant, since the good Lady Abbess hath been long my honoured
friend." He then turned to Rose, who was about to attend her
lady:--"Pretty maiden," he said, offering a chain of gold, "let
this carcanet encircle thy neck, and buy thy good will."

"My good will cannot be purchased, my lord," said Rose, putting
back the gift which he proffered.

"Your fair word, then," said the Constable, again pressing it upon
her.

"Fair words are easily bought," said Rose, still rejecting the
chain, "but they are seldom worth the purchase-money."

"Do you scorn my proffer, damsel?" said De Lacy: "it has graced
the neck of a Norman count."

"Give it to a Norman countess then, my lord," said the damsel; "I
am plain Rose Flammock, the weaver's daughter. I keep my good word
to go with my good will, and a latten chain will become me as well
as beaten gold."

"Peace, Rose," said her lady; "you are over malapert to talk thus
to the Lord Constable.--And you, my lord," she continued, "permit
me now to depart, since you are possessed of my answer to your
present proposal. I regret it had not been of some less delicate
nature, that by granting it at once, and without delay, I might
have shown my sense of your services."

The lady was handed forth by the Constable of Chester, with the
same ceremony which had been observed at their entrance, and she
returned to her own castle, sad and anxious in mind for the event
of this important conference. She gathered closely round her the
great mourning veil, that the alteration of her countenance might
not be observed; and, without pausing to speak even to Father
Aldrovand, she instantly withdrew to the privacy of her own bower.




CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.


  Now all ye ladies of fair Scotland,
    And ladies of England that happy would prove,
  Marry never for houses, nor marry for land,
    Nor marry for nothing but only love.
     FAMILY QUARRELS.


When the Lady Eveline had retired into her own private chamber,
Rose Flammock followed her unbidden, and proffered her assistance
in removing the large veil which she had worn while she was
abroad; but the lady refused her permission, saying, "You are
forward with service, maiden, when it is not required of you."

"You are displeased with me, lady!" said Rose.

"And if I am, I have cause," replied Eveline. "You know my
difficulties--you know what my duty demands; yet, instead of
aiding me to make the sacrifice, you render it more difficult."

"Would I had influence to guide your path!" said Rose; "you should
find it a smooth one--ay, an honest and straight one, to boot."

"How mean you, maiden?" said Eveline.

"I would have you," answered Rose, "recall the encouragement--the
consent, I may almost call it, you have yielded to this proud
baron. He is too great to be loved himself--too haughty to love
you as you deserve. If you wed him, you wed gilded misery, and, it
may be, dishonour as well as discontent."

"Remember, damsel," answered Eveline Berenger, "his services
towards us."

"His services?" answered Rose. "He ventured his life for us;
indeed, but so did every soldier in his host. And am I bound to
wed any ruffling blade among them, because he fought when the
trumpet sounded? I wonder what, is the meaning of their
_devoir_, as they call it, when it shames them not to claim
the highest reward woman can bestow, merely for discharging the
duty of a gentleman, by a distressed creature. A gentleman, said
I?--The coarsest boor in Flanders would hardly expect thanks for
doing the duty of a man by women in such a case."

"But my father's wishes?" said the young lady.

"They had reference, without doubt, to the inclination of your
father's daughter," answered the attendant. "I will not do my late
noble lord--(may God assoilzie him!)--the injustice to suppose he
would have urged aught in this matter which squared not with your
free choice."

"Then my vow--my fatal vow, as I had well nigh called it?" said
Eveline. "May Heaven forgive me my ingratitude to my patroness!"

"Even this shakes me not," said Rose; "I will never believe our
Lady of Mercy would exact such a penalty for her protection, as to
desire me to wed the man I could not love. She smiled, you say,
upon your prayer. Go--lay at her feet these difficulties which
oppress you, and see if she will not smile again. Or seek a
dispensation from your vow--seek it at the expense of the half of
your estate,--seek it at the expense of your whole property. Go a
pilgrimage barefooted to Rome--do any thing but give your hand
where you cannot give your heart."

"You speak warmly, Rose," said Eveline, still sighing as she
spoke.

"Alas! my sweet lady, I have cause. Have I not seen a household
where love was not--where, although there was worth and good will,
and enough of the means of life, all was imbittered by regrets,
which were not only vain, but criminal?"

"Yet, methinks, Rose, a sense of what is due to ourselves and to
others may, if listened to, guide and comfort us under such
feelings even as thou hast described."

"It will save us from sin, lady, but not from sorrow," answered
Rose; "and wherefore should we, with our eyes open, rush into
circumstances where duty must war with inclination?" Why row
against wind and tide, when you may as easily take advantage of
the breeze?"

"Because the voyage of my life lies where winds and currents
oppose me," answered Eveline. "It is my fate, Rose."

"Not unless you make it such by choice," answered Rose. "Oh, could
you but have seen the pale cheek, sunken eye, and dejected bearing
of my poor mother!--I have said too much."

"It was then your mother," said her young lady, "of whose unhappy
wedlock you have spoken?"

"It was--it was," said Rose, bursting into tears. "I have exposed
my own shame to save you from sorrow. Unhappy she was, though most
guiltless--so unhappy, that the breach of the dike, and the
inundation in which she perished, were, but for my sake, to her
welcome as night to the weary labourer. She had a heart like
yours, formed to love and be loved; and it would be doing honour
to yonder proud Baron, to say he had such worth as my father's.--
Yet was she most unhappy. Oh! my sweet lady, be warned, and break
off this ill-omened match!"

Eveline returned the pressure with which the affectionate girl, as
she clung to her hand, enforced her well-meant advice, and then
muttered with a profound sigh,--"Rose, it is too late."

"Never--never," said Rose, looking eagerly round the room. "Where
are those writing materials?--Let me bring Father Aldrovand, and
instruct him of your pleasure--or, stay, the good father hath
himself an eye on the splendours of the world which he thinks he
has abandoned--he will be no safe secretary.--I will go myself to
the Lord Constable--_me_ his rank cannot dazzle, or his
wealth bribe, or his power overawe. I will tell him he doth no
knightly part towards you, to press his contract with your father
in such an hour of helpless sorrow--no pious part, in delaying the
execution of his vows for the purpose of marrying or giving in
marriage--no honest part, to press himself on a maiden whose heart
has not decided in his favour--no wise part, to marry one whom he
must presently abandon, either to solitude, or to the dangers of a
profligate court."

"You have not courage for such an embassy, Rose," said her
mistress, sadly smiling through her tears at her youthful
attendant's zeal.

"Not courage for it!--and wherefore not?--Try me," answered the
Flemish maiden, in return. "I am neither Saracen nor Welshman--his
lance and sword scare me not. I follow not his banner--his voice
of command concerns me not. I could, with your leave, boldly tell
him he is a selfish man, veiling with fair and honourable pretexts
his pursuit of objects which concern his own pride and
gratification, and founding high claims on having rendered the
services which common humanity demanded. And all for what?--
Forsooth the great De Lacy must have an heir to his noble house,
and his fair nephew is not good enough to be his representative,
because his mother was of Anglo-Saxon strain, and the real heir
must be pure unmixed Norman; and for this, Lady Eveline Berenger,
in the first bloom of youth, must be wedded to a man who might be
her father, and who, after leaving her unprotected for years, will
return in such guise as might beseem her grandfather!"

"Since he is thus scrupulous concerning purity of lineage," said
Eveline, "perhaps he may call to mind, what so good a herald as he
is cannot fail to know--that I am of Saxon strain by my father's
mother."

"Oh," replied Rose, "he will forgive that blot in the heiress of
the Garde Doloureuse."

"Fie, Rose," answered her mistress, "thou dost him wrong in taxing
him with avarice."

"Perhaps so," answered Rose; "but he is undeniably ambitious; and
Avarice, I have heard, is Ambition's bastard brother, though
Ambition be sometimes ashamed of the relationship."

"You speak too boldly, damsel," said Eveline; "and, while I
acknowledge your affection, it becomes me to check your mode of
expression."

"Nay, take that tone, and I have done," said Rose.--"To Eveline,
whom I love, and who loves me, I can speak freely--but to the Lady
of the Garde Doloureuse, the proud Norman damsel, (which when you
choose to be you can be,) I can curtsy as low as my station
demands, and speak as little truth as she cares to hear."

"Thou art a wild but a kind girl," said Eveline; "no one who did
not know thee would think that soft and childish exterior covered
such a soul of fire. Thy mother must indeed have been the being of
feeling and passion you paint her; for thy father--nay, nay, never
arm in his defence until he be attacked--I only meant to say, that
his solid sense and sound judgment are his most distinguished
qualities."

"And I would you would avail yourself of them, lady," said Rose.

"In fitting things I will; but he were rather an unmeet counsellor
in that which we now treat of," said Eveline.

"You mistake him," answered Rose Flammock, "and underrate his
value. Sound judgment is like to the graduated measuring-wand,
which, though usually applied only to coarser cloths, will give
with equal truth the dimensions of Indian silk, or of cloth of
gold."

"Well--well--this affair presses not instantly at least," said the
young lady. "Leave me now, Rose, and send Gillian the tirewoman
hither--I have directions to give about the packing and removal of
my wardrobe."

"That Gillian the tirewoman hath been a mighty favourite of late,"
said Rose; "time was when it was otherwise."

"I like her manners as little as thou dost," said Eveline; "but
she is old Raoul's wife--she was a sort of half favourite with my
dear father--who, like other men, was perhaps taken by that very
freedom which we think unseemly in persons of our sex; and then
there is no other woman in the Castle that hath such skill in
empacketing clothes without the risk of their being injured."

"That last reason alone," said Rose, smiling, "is, I admit, an
irresistible pretension to favour, and Dame Gillian shall
presently attend you.--But take my advice, lady--keep her to her
bales and her mails, and let her not prate to you on what concerns
her not."

So saying, Rose left the apartment, and her young lady looked
after her in silence--then murmured to herself--"Rose loves me
truly; but she would willingly be more of the mistress than the
maiden; and then she is somewhat jealous of every other person
that approaches me.--It is strange, that I have not seen Damian de
Lacy since my interview with the Constable. He anticipates, I
suppose, the chance of his finding in me a severe aunt!"

But the domestics, who crowded for orders with reference to her
removal early on the morrow, began now to divert the current of
their lady's thoughts from the consideration of her own particular
situation, which, as the prospect presented nothing pleasant, with
the elastic spirit of youth, she willingly postponed till farther
leisure.




CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH


  Too much rest is rust,
    There's ever cheer in changing;
  We tyne by too much trust,
  So we'll be up and ranging.
     OLD SONG.


Early on the subsequent morning, a gallant company, saddened
indeed by the deep mourning which their principals wore, left the
well-defended Castle of the Garde Doloureuse, which had been so
lately the scene of such remarkable events.

The sun was just beginning to exhale the heavy dews which had
fallen during the night, and to disperse the thin gray mist which
eddied around towers and battlements, when Wilkin Flammock, with
six crossbowmen on horseback, and as many spearmen on foot,
sallied forth from under the Gothic gate-way, and crossed the
sounding drawbridge. After this advanced guard, came four
household servants well mounted, and after them, as many inferior
female attendants, all in mourning. Then rode forth the young Lady
Eveline herself, occupying the centre of the little procession,
and her long black robes formed a striking contrast to the colour
of her milk-white palfrey. Beside her, on a Spanish jennet, the
gift of her affectionate father,--who had procured it at a high
rate, and who would have given half his substance to gratify his
daughter,--sat the girlish form of Rose Flammock, who had so much
of juvenile shyness in her manner, so much of feeling and of
judgment in her thoughts and actions. Dame Margery followed, mixed
in the party escorted by Father Aldrovand, whose company she
chiefly frequented; for Margery affected a little the character of
the devotee, and her influence in the family, as having been
Eveline's nurse, was so great as to render her no improper
companion for the chaplain, when her lady did not require her
attendance on her own person. Then came old Raoul the huntsman,
his wife, and two or three other officers of Raymond Berenger's
household; the steward, with his golden chain, velvet cassock, and
white wand, bringing up the rear, which was closed by a small band
of archers, and four men-at-arms. The guards, and indeed the
greater part of the attendants, were only designed to give the
necessary degree of honour to the young lady's movements, by
accompanying her a short space from the castle, where they were
met by the Constable of Chester, who, with a retinue of thirty
lances, proposed himself to escort Eveline as far as Gloucester,
the place of her destination. Under his protection no danger was
to be apprehended, even if the severe defeat so lately sustained
by the Welsh had not of itself been likely to prevent any attempt,
on the part of those hostile mountaineers, to disturb the safety
of the marches for some time to come. In pursuance of this
arrangement, which permitted the armed part of Eveline's retinue
to return for the protection of the castle, and the restoration of
order in the district around, the Constable awaited her at the
fatal bridge, at the head of the gallant band of selected horsemen
whom he had ordered to attend upon him. The parties halted, as if
to salute each other; but the Constable, observing that Eveline
drew her veil more closely around her, and recollecting the loss
she had so lately sustained on that luckless spot, had the
judgment to confine his greeting to a mute reverence, so low that
the lofty plume which he wore, (for he was now in complete
armour,) mingled with the flowing mane of his gallant horse.
Wilkin Flammock next halted, to ask the lady if she had any
farther commands.

"None, good Wilkin," said Eveline; "but to be, as ever, true and
watchful."

"The properties of a good mastiff," said Flammock. "Some rude
sagacity, and a stout hand instead of a sharp case of teeth, are
all that I can claim to be added to them--I will do my best.--Fare
thee well, Roschen! Thou art going among strangers--forget not the
qualities which made thee loved at home. The saints bless thee--
farewell!"

The steward next approached to take his leave, but in doing so,
had nearly met with a fatal accident. It had been the pleasure of
Raoul, who was in his own disposition cross-grained, and in person
rheumatic, to accommodate himself with an old Arab horse, which
had been kept for the sake of the breed, as lean, and almost as
lame as himself, and with a temper as vicious as that of a fiend.
Betwixt the rider and the horse was a constant misunderstanding,
testified on Raoul's part by oaths, rough checks with the curb,
and severe digging with the spurs, which Mahound (so paganishly
was the horse named) answered by plunging, bounding, and
endeavouring by all expedients to unseat his rider, as well as
striking and lashing out furiously at whatever else approached
him. It was thought by many of the household, that Raoul preferred
this vicious cross-tempered animal upon all occasions when he
travelled in company with his wife, in order to take advantage by
the chance, that amongst the various kicks, plunges, gambades,
lashings out, and other eccentricities of Mahound, his heels might
come in contact with Dame Gillian's ribs. And now, when as the
important steward spurred up his palfrey to kiss his young lady's
hand, and to take his leave, it seemed to the bystanders as if
Raoul so managed his bridle and spur, that Mahound jerked out his
hoofs at the same moment, one of which coming in contact with the
steward's thigh, would have splintered it like a rotten reed, had
the parties been a couple of inches nearer to each other. As it
was, the steward sustained considerable damage; and they that
observed the grin upon Raoul's vinegar countenance entertained
little doubt, that Mahound's heels then and there avenged certain
nods, and winks, and wreathed smiles, which had passed betwixt the
gold-chained functionary and the coquettish tirewoman, since the
party left the castle.

This incident abridged the painful solemnity of parting betwixt
the Lady Eveline and her dependents, and lessened, at the same
time, the formality of her meeting with the Constable, and, as it
were, resigning herself to his protection.

Hugo de Lacy, having commanded six of his men-at-arms to proceed
as an advanced-guard, remained himself to see the steward properly
deposited on a litter, and then, with the rest of his followers,
marched in military fashion about one hundred yards in the rear of
Lady Eveline and her retinue, judiciously forbearing to present
himself to her society while she was engaged in the orisons which
the place where they met naturally suggested, and waiting
patiently until the elasticity of youthful temper should require
some diversion of the gloomy thoughts which the scene inspired.

Guided by this policy, the Constable did not approach the ladies
until the advance of the morning rendered it politeness to remind
them, that a pleasant spot for breaking their fast occurred in the
neighbourhood, where he had ventured to make some preparations for
rest and refreshment. Immediately after the Lady Eveline had
intimated her acceptance of this courtesy, they came in sight of
the spot he alluded to, marked by an ancient oak, which, spreading
its broad branches far and wide, reminded the traveller of that of
Mamre, under which celestial beings accepted the hospitality of
the patriarch. Across two of these huge projecting arms was flung
a piece of rose-coloured sarsanet, as a canopy to keep off the
morning beams, which were already rising high. Cushions of silk,
interchanged with others covered with the furs of animals of the
chase, were arranged round a repast, which a Norman cook had done
his utmost to distinguish, by the superior delicacy of his art,
from the gross meals of the Saxons, and the penurious simplicity
of the Welsh tables. A fountain, which bubbled from under a large
mossy stone at some distance, refreshed the air with its sound,
and the taste with its liquid crystal; while, at the same time, it
formed a cistern for cooling two or three flasks of Gascon wine
and hippocras, which were at that time the necessary
accompaniments of the morning meal.

When Eveline, with Rose, the Confessor, and at some farther
distance her faithful nurse, was seated at this silvan banquet,
the leaves rustling to a gentle breeze, the water bubbling in the
background, the birds twittering around, while the half-heard
sounds of conversation and laughter at a distance announced that
their guard was in the vicinity, she could not avoid making the
Constable some natural compliment on his happy selection of a
place of repose.

"You do me more than justice," replied the Baron; "the spot was
selected by my nephew, who hath a fancy like a minstrel. Myself am
but slow in imagining such devices."

Rose looked full at her mistress, as if she endeavoured to look
into her very inmost soul; but Eveline answered with the utmost
simplicity,--"And wherefore hath not the noble Damian waited to
join us at the entertainment which he hath directed?"

"He prefers riding onward," said the Baron, "with some light-
horsemen; for, notwithstanding there are now no Welsh knaves
stirring, yet the marches are never free from robbers and outlaws;
and though there is nothing to fear for a band like ours, yet you
should not be alarmed even by the approach of danger."

"I have indeed seen but too much of it lately," said Eveline; and
relapsed into the melancholy mood from which the novelty of the
scene had for a moment awakened her.

Meanwhile, the Constable, removing, with the assistance of his
squire, his mailed hood and its steel crest, as well as his
gauntlets, remained in his flexible coat of mail, composed
entirely of rings of steel curiously interwoven, his hands bare,
and his brows covered with a velvet bonnet of a peculiar fashion,
appropriated to the use of knights, and called a _mortier_,
which permitted him both to converse and to eat more easily than
when he wore the full defensive armour. His discourse was plain,
sensible, and manly; and, turning upon the state of the country,
and the precautions to be observed for governing and defending so
disorderly a frontier, it became gradually interesting to Eveline,
one of whose warmest wishes was to be the protectress of her
father's vassals. De Lacy, on his part, seemed much pleased; for,
young as Eveline was, her questions showed intelligence, and her
mode of answering, both apprehension and docility. In short,
familiarity was so far established betwixt them, that in the nest
stage of their journey, the Constable seemed to think his
appropriate place was at the Lady Eveli