 him to go back to Oxford. "I shall be the ruin
of your mind if we go on like this," said she sadly.

"What, leave the field to my rivals? No, thank you."

"What rivals, sir?" asked Julia, drawing up.

"Your mother, your brother, your curates that would come buzzing the
moment I left; your sick people, who bask on your smiles and your sweet
voice till I envy them: Sarah, whom you permit to brush your lovely hair,
the piano you play on, the air you deign to breathe and brighten,
everybody and everything that is near you; they are all my rivals; and
shall I resign you to them, and leave myself desolate? I'm not such a
fool."

She smiled, and could not help feeling it was sweet to be pestered. So
she said with matronly dignity, and the old Julian consistency, "You are
a foolish impetuous boy. You are the plague of my life: and--the sun of
my existence." That passed off charmingly. But presently his evil genius
prompted Alfred to endeavour to soften Mrs. Dodd by letter, and induce
her to consent to his marriage with her daughter. He received her answer
at breakfast-time. It was wonderfully polite and cold; Mrs. Dodd feigned
unmixed surprise at the proposal, and said that insanity being
unfortunately in her own family, and the suspicion of insanity resting on
himself, such a union was not to be thought of; and therefore,
notwithstanding her respect for his many good qualities, she must decline
with thanks the honour he offered her. She inserted a poisoned sting by
way of postscript. "When you succeed in publicly removing the impression
your own relations share with me, and when my husband owes his
restoration to you, instead of his destruction, of course you will
receive a very different answer to your proposal--should you then think
it consistent with your dignity to renew it."

As hostile testators used to leave the disinherited one shilling, not out
of a shilling's worth of kindly feeling, but that he might not be able to
say his name was omitted through inadvertency, so Mrs. Dodd inserted this
postscript merely to clench the nail and tantalise her enemy. It was a
masterpiece of feminine spite.

She would have been wonderstruck could she have seen how Alfred received
her missive.

To be sure he sat in a cold stupor of dejection for a good half hour; but
at the end of that time he lifted up his head, and said quietly, "So be
it. I'll get the trial over, and my sanity established, as soon as
possible: and then I'll hire a yacht and hunt her husband till I find
him."

Having settled this little plan, he looked out for Julia, whose sympathy
he felt in need of after such a stern blow.

She came out much later than usual that day, for to tell the truth, her
mother had detained her to show her Alfred's letter, and her answer.

"Ah, mamma," said poor Julia, "you don't love me as you did once. Poor
Alfred!"

Mrs. Dodd sighed at this reproach, but said she did not deserve it. No
mother in her senses would consent to such a match.

Julia bowed her head submissively and went to her duties. But when Alfred
came to her open-mouthed to complain of her mother's cruelty, she stopped
him at once, and asked him how he could go and write that foolish,
unreasonable letter. Why had he not consulted her first? "You have
subjected yourself to a rebuff," said she angrily, "and one from which I
should have saved you. Is it nothing that mamma out of pity to me
connives at our meeting and spending hours together? Do you think she
does no violence to her own wishes here? and is she to meet with no
return?"

"What, are you against me too?" said poor Alfred.

"No, it is you who are our enemy with your unreasonable impatience."

"I am not so cold-blooded as you are, certainly."

"Humility and penitence would become you better than to retort on me. I
love you both, and pray God on my knees to show me how to do my duty to
both."

"That is it; you are not single-hearted like me. You want to please all
the world, and reconcile the irreconcilable. It won't do: you will have
to choose between your mother and me at last."

"Then of course I shall choose my mother."

"Why?"

"Because she claims my duty as well as my love; because she is bowed down
with sorrow, and needs her daughter just now more than you do; besides,
you are my other self, and we must deny ourselves."

"We have no more right to be unjust to ourselves than to anybody else;
injustice is injustice."

"Alfred, you are a high-minded Heathen, and talk Morality. Morality is a
snare. What I pray to be is a Christian, as your dear sister was, and to
deny myself; and you make it, oh so difficult."

"So I suppose it will end in turning out your heathen and then taking
your curate. Your mother would consent to that directly."

"Alfred," said Julia with dignity, "these words are harsh, and--forgive
me for saying so--they are coarse. Such words would separate us two,
without my mother, if I were to hear many of them; for they take the
bloom off affection, and that mutual reverence, without which no
gentleman and lady could be blessed in holy wedlock."

Alfred was staggered and mortified too: they walked on in silence now.

"Alfred," said Julia at last, "do not think me behind you in affection,
but wiser, for once, and our best friend. I do think we had better see
less of one another for a time, my poor Alfred."

"And why for a time? Why not for ever?"

"If your heart draws no distinction, why not indeed?"

"So be it then: for I will be no woman's slave. There's my hand, Julia:
let us part friends."

"Thank you for that, dear Alfred: may you find some one who can love you
more--than--I do."

The words choked her. But he was stronger, because he was in a passion.
He reproached her bitterly. "If I had been as weak and inconstant as you
are, I might have been out of Drayton House long before I did escape. But
I was faithful to my one love. I have some right to sing 'Aileen Aroon,'
you have none. You are an angel of beauty and goodness; you will go to
Heaven, and I shall go to the devil now for want of you; but then you
have no constancy nor true fidelity: so that has parted us, and now
nothing is left me but to try and hate you."

He turned furiously on his heel.

"God bless you, go where you will," faltered Julia.

He replied with a fierce ejaculation of despair, and dashed away.

Thus temper and misunderstanding triumphed, after so many strange and
bitter trials had failed.

But alas! it is often so.



CHAPTER XLIX.

Both the parted lovers were wretched. Julia never complained, but
drooped, and read the Psalms, and Edward detected her in tears over them.
He questioned her and obtained a lame account; she being far more bent on
screening Alfred than on telling the truth.

Edward called on the other; and found him disconsolate, and reading a
Heathen philosopher for comfort, and finding none. Edward questioned him,
and he was reserved and even sulky. Sir Imperturbable persisted quietly,
and he exploded, and out came his wrongs. Edward replied that he was a
pretty fellow: wanted it all his own way. "Suppose my mother, with her
present feelings, was to take a leaf out of your book, and use all her
power; where would you be then? Come, old fellow, I know what love is,
and one of us _shall_ have the girl he loves, unless any harm should come
to my poor father owing to your blunder--oh, that would put it out of the
question, I feel--but let us hope better. I pulled you out of the fire,
and somehow I seem to like you better than ever after that; let me pull
you out of this mess too."

"Pull away," cried the impetuous youth. "I'll trust you with my life: ay,
with more than my life, with my love; for you are the man for me: reason
is always uppermost with you:

     Give me the man that is not passion's slave,
     And I will wear him in my heart's core, ay----"

"Oh bother that. If you are in earnest, don't mouth, but put on your hat
and come over."

He assented; but in the middle of putting on his coat, made this little
observation: "Now I see how wise the ancients were: yes, friendship is
better than love; calmer, more constant, free from the heats and chills
of that impetuous passion; its pure bosom is ruffled by none of love's
jealousies and irritabilities. Solem e mundo tollunt qui tollunt
amicitiam."

"Oh bother quoting; come and shake hands with Julia." They went over;
Mrs. Dodd was in the city. Edward ushered in Alfred, saying, "Here is the
other Impetuosity;" and sagely retired for a few minutes. When he came
back they were sitting hand in hand, he gazing on her, she inspecting the
carpet. "That is all right," said Edward drily: "now the next thing is,
you must go back to Oxford directly, and read for your first class."

The proposal fell like a blight upon the reconciled lovers. But Edward
gave potent reasons. The delays of law were endless: Alfred's defendant
had already obtained one postponement of the trial on frivolous grounds.
Now the Oxford examination and Doncaster races come on at a fixed date,
by a Law of Nature, and admit of no "postponement swindle." "You mark my
words, you will get your class before you will get your trial, and it
won't hurt you to go into court a first-class man: will it? And then you
won't quarrel by letter, you two; I know. Come, will you do what I tell
you: or is friendship but a name? eh, Mr. Bombast?" He ended with great
though quiet force: "Come, you two, which is better, to part like the
scissors, or part like the thread?"

Similes are no arguments; that is why they convince people so: Alfred
capitulated to the scissors and thread; and only asked with abnormal
humility to be allowed to taste the joys of reconciliation for two days.
The third found him at Oxford; he called on the head of his college to
explain what had prevented his return to Exeter in the October term
twelve months ago, and asked for rooms. Instead of siding with a man of
his own college so cruelly injured, the dignitary was alarmed by the bare
accusation, and said he must consider: insanity was a terrible thing.

"So is false accusation, and so is false imprisonment," said Hardie
bitterly.

"Unquestionably. But I have at present no means of deciding how far those
words apply." In short, he could give no answer; must consult the other
officers, and would convey the result by letter.

Alfred's pride was deeply mortified, not less by a certain cold repugnant
manner than by the words. And there came over his heart a sickening
feeling that he was now in the eyes of men an intellectual leper.

He went to another college directly, and applied to the vice-president,
the vice-president sent him with a letter to the dean; the dean looked
frightened; and told him hesitatingly the college was full; he might put
his name down, and perhaps get in next year. Alfred retired, and learned
from the porter that the college was not full. He sighed deeply, and the
sickening feeling grew on him; an ineradicable stigma seemed upon him,
and Mrs. Dodd was no worse than the rest of the world then; every mother
in England would approve her resolutions. He wandered about the scenes of
his intellectual triumphs: he stood in the great square of the schools, a
place ugly to unprejudiced eyes, but withal somewhat grand and inspiring,
especially to scholars who have fought their keen and bloodless battles
there. He looked at the windows and gilt inscription of the Schola
Metaphysices, in which he had met the scholars of his day and defeated
them for the Ireland. He wandered into the theatre, and eyed the rostrum,
whence he had not mumbled, but recited, his Latin prize poem with more
than one thunder of academic applause: thunder compared with which Drury
Lane's us a mere cracker. These places were unchanged; but he, sad
scholar, wandered among them as if he was a ghost, and all these were
stony phantoms of an intellectual past, never, never to return.

He telegraphed Sampson and Edward to furnish him with certificates that
he had never been insane, but the victim of a foul conspiracy; and, when
he received them, he went with them to St. Margaret's Hall; for he had
bethought him that the new principal was a first-rate man, and had openly
vowed he would raise that "refuge for the oft-times phoughed" to a place
of learning.

Hardie called, sent in his card, and was admitted to the principal's
study. He was about to explain who he was, when the doctor interrupted
him, and told him politely he knew him by reputation. "Tell me rather,"
said he shrewdly, "to what I owe this application from an undergraduate
so distinguished as Mr. Hardie?"

Then Alfred began to quake, and, instead of replying, put a hand suddenly
before his face, and lost courage for one moment.

"Come, Mr. Hardie," said the principal, "don't be disconcerted: a fault
regretted is half atoned; and I am not disposed to be hard on the errors
of youth; I mean where there is merit to balance them."

"Sir," said Alfred sadly, "it is not a fault I have to acknowledge, but a
misfortune."

"Tell me all about it," said Dr. Alder guardedly.

He told it, omitting nothing essential that could touch the heart or
excite the ironical humour of an academician.

Well, 'truth is more wonderful than fiction,'" said the doctor. And I
conclude the readers of this tale are all of the doctor's opinion; so
sweet to the mind is cant.

Alfred offered his certificates.

Now Dr. Alder had been asking himself in what phrases he should decline
this young genius, who was sane now, but of course had been mad, only had
forgotten the circumstance. But the temptation to get an Ireland scholar
into his Hall suddenly overpowered him. The probability that he might get
a first-class in a lucid interval was too enticing; nothing venture,
nothing have. He determined to venture a good deal.

"Mr. Hardie," said he, "this house shall always be open to good morals
and good scholarship while I preside over it, and it shall be open to
them all the more when they come to me dignified, and made sacred, by
'unmerited calamity.'"

Now this fine speech, like Minerva herself, came from the head. Alfred
was overcome by it to tears. At that the doctor's heart was touched, and
even began to fancy it had originated that noble speech.

It was no use doing things by halves; so Dr. Alder gave Alfred a
delightful set of rooms; and made the Hall pleasant to him. He was
rewarded by a growing conviction that he had made an excellent
acquisition. This opinion, however, was anything but universal: and
Alfred finding the men of his own college suspected his sanity, and
passed jokes behind his back, cut them all dead, and confined himself to
his little Hall. There they petted him, and crowed about him, and betted
on him for the schools as freely as if he was a colt the Hall was going
to enter for the Derby.

He read hard, and judiciously, but without his old confidence: he became
anxious and doubtful; he had seen so many first-rate men just miss a
first-class. The brilliant creature analysed all his Aristotelian
treatises, and wrote the synopses clear with marginal references on great
pasteboard cards three feet by two, and so kept the whole subject before
his eye, till he obtained a singular mastery. Same system with the
historians: nor did he disdain the use of coloured inks. Then the
brilliant creature drew lists of all the hard words he encountered in his
reading, especially in the common books, and read these lists till
mastered. The stake was singularly heavy in his case, so he guarded every
crevice.

And at this period he was not so unhappy as he expected. The laborious
days went swiftly, and twice a week at least came a letter from Julia.
Oh, how his grave academic room with oaken panels did brighten, when her
letter lay on the table. It was opened, and seemed written with sunbeams.
No quarrels on paper! Absence made the heart grow fonder. And Edward came
to see him, and over their wine let out a feminine trait in Julia. "When
Hurd calls, she walks out of the room, just as my poor mother does when
you come. That is spite: since you are sent away, nobody else is to
profit by it. Where is her Christianity, eh? and echo answers-- Got a
cigar, old fellow?" And, after puffing in silence awhile, he said
resignedly, "I am an unnatural monster."

"Oh, are you?" said the other serenely; for he was also under the benign
influence.

"Yes," said Edward, "I am your ally, and a mere spy in the camp of those
two ladies. I watch all their moves for your sake."

Alfred forgave him. And thus his whole life was changed, and for nearly
twelve months (for Dr. Alder let him reside in the Hall through the
vacation) he pursued the quiet tenor of a student's life, interrupted at
times by law; but that is another topic.

     WIFE AND NO WIFE.

Mrs. Dodd was visibly shaken by that calamity which made her shrink with
horror from the sight of Alfred Hardie. In the winter she was so unwell
that she gave up her duties with Messrs. Cross and Co. Her connection
with them had been creditable to both parties. I believe I forgot to say
why they trusted her so; well, I must tell it elsewhere. David off her
hands, she was independent, and had lost the motive and the heart for
severe work. She told the partners she could no longer do them justice,
and left them, to their regret. They then advised her to set up as a
milliner, and offered her credit for goods at cash prices up to two
thousand pounds. She thanked them like a sorrowful queen, and went her
way.

In the spring she recovered some spirit and health; but at midsummer a
great and subtle misfortune befell her. Her mind was bent on David night
and day, and used to struggle to evade the laws of space that bind its
grosser companion, and find her lost husband on the sea. She often dreamt
of him, but vaguely. But one fatal night she had a dream as clear as
daylight, and sharp as white pebbles in the sun. She was on a large ship
with guns; she saw men bring a dead sailor up the side; she saw all their
faces, and the dead man's too. It was David. His face was white. A clear
voice said he was to be buried in the deep next morning. She saw the deck
at her feet, the breeches of the guns, so clear, so defined, that, when
she awoke, and found herself in the dark, she thought reality was the
illusion. She told the dream to Julia and Edward. They tried to encourage
her, in vain. "I saw him," she said, "I saw him; it was a vision, not a
dream; my David is dead. Well, then, I shall not be long behind him."

Dr. Sampson ridiculed her dream to her face. But to her children he told
another story. "I am anxious about her," he said, "most anxious. There is
no mortal ill the distempered brain may not cause. Is it not devilish we
can hear nothing of him? She will fret herself into the grave, as sure as
fate, if something does not turn up."

Her children could not console her; they tried, but something hung round
their own hearts, and chilled every effort. In a word, they shared her
fears. How came she to see him on board a ship with guns? In her waking
hours she always said he was on a merchant ship. Was it not one of those
visions, which come to mortals and give them sometimes a peep into Space,
and, far more rarely, a glance into Time?

One day in the autumn, Alfred, being in town on law business, met what
seemed the ghost of Mrs. Dodd in the streets. She saw him not; her eye
was on that ghastly face she had seen in her dreams. It flashed through
his mind that she would not live long to part him and Julia. But he
discouraged the ungenerous thought; almost forgave her repugnance to
himself, and felt it would be worse than useless to ask Julia to leave
her mother, who was leaving her visibly.

But her horror of him was anything but softened; and she used to tell Dr.
Sampson she thought the sight of that man would kill her now. Edward
himself began to hope Alfred would turn his affections elsewhere. The
house in Pembroke Street was truly the house of mourning now; all their
calamities were light compared with this.

     THE DISTRICT VISITOR.

While Julia was writing letters to keep up Alfred's heart, she was very
sad herself Moreover, he had left her for Oxford but a very few days,
when she received an anonymous letter; her first. It was written in a
female hand, and couched in friendly and sympathetic terms. The writer
thought it only fair to warn her that Mr. Alfred Hardie was passionately
fond of a lady in the asylum, and had offered her marriage. If Miss Dodd
wished to be deceived, let her burn this letter and think no more of it;
if not, let her insert this advertisement in the Times: "The whole
Truth.--L. D.," and her correspondent would communicate particulars by
word or writing.

What a barbed and poisoned arrow is to the body, was this letter to
Julia's mind. She sat cold as a stone with this poison in her hand. Then
came an impetuous impulse to send it down to Alfred, and request him to
transfer the other half of his heart to his lady of the asylum. Then she
paused; and remembered how much unjust suspicion had been levelled at him
already. What right had she to insult him? She would try and keep the
letter to herself. As to acting upon it, her good sense speedily
suggested it came from the rival in question, real or supposed. "She
wants to make use of me," said Julia; "it is plain Alfred does not care
much for her; or why does she come to me?" She put the letter in her
desk, and it rankled in her heart. _Hoeret lateri lethalis arundo._ She
trembled at herself; she felt a savage passion had been touched in her.
She prayed day and night against jealousy.

But I must now, to justify my heading, skip some months, and relate a
remarkable incident that befell her in the said character. On the first
of August in this year, a good Christian woman, one of her patients,
asked her to call on Mr. Barkington, that lodged above. "He is a decent
body, miss, and between you and me, I think his complaint is, he don't
get quite enough to eat."

"Barkington!" said Julia, and put her hand to her bosom. She went and
tapped at his door.

"Come in," said a shrillish voice.

She entered, and found a weazened old man seated, mending his own coat.

He rose, and she told him she was a district visitor. He said he had
heard of her; they called her the beautiful lady in that court. This was
news to her, and made her blush. She asked leave to read a chapter to
him; he listened as to some gentle memory of childhood. She prescribed
him a glass of port wine, and dispensed it on the instant. Thus
physicked, her patient became communicative, and chattered on about his
native place--but did not name it--and talked about the people there. Now
our district visitor was, if the truth must be told, a compounder. She
would permit her pupils to talk about earthly affairs, on condition they
would listen to heavenly ones before she went. So she let this old man
run on, and he told her he had been a banker's clerk all his life, and
saved a thousand pounds, and come up to London to make his fortune on the
Stock Exchange; and there he was sometimes a bull, and sometimes a bear,
and whichever he was, certain foxes called brokers and jobbers got the
profit and he the loss. "It's all the same as a gambling-table," said he.
"The jobbers and brokers have got the same odds the bank has at Rouge et
Noir, and the little capitalist like me is doomed beforehand." Then he
told her that there was a crossing-sweeper near the Exchange who came
from his native place, and had started as a speculator, and come down to
that. Only he called it rising, and used to speak with a shudder of when
he dabbled in the funds, and often told him to look sharp, and get a
crossing. And lo! one day when he was cleaned out, and desperate, and
hovering with the other ghosts of little capitalists about the tomb of
their money, he saw his countryman fall flat, and the broom fly out of
his hand. Instantly he made a rush, and so did a wooden-legged sailor;
but he got first to the broom, and began to sweep while others picked up
his countryman, who proved dead as a herring; and he succeeded to his
broom, and it made money by the Exchange, though he never could. Still,
one day he picked up a pocket-book in that neighbourhood, with a lump of
money, which he straightway advertised in--no newspapers. And now, Julia
thought it time to interpose the eighth commandment, the golden rule, and
such branches of learning.

He became a favourite of hers: he had so much to say: she even thought
she had seen his face before: but she could not tell where. She gave him
good books and tracts; and read to him, and ploughed his heart with her
sweet voice, and sowed the good seed in the furrows--seed which, like
wheat or other grain, often seems to fall flat and die, but comes out
green after many days.

One Saturday she invited him to dine with the servants next day. He came
during church time, and went away in the afternoon while she was with her
mother. But she asked Sarah, who proved eager to talk about him. "He was
a rum customer; kept asking questions all dinner time. 'Well,' says I,
'you're good company you are; be you a lawyer; for you examines us; but
you don't tell us nothing.' Ye see, Miss, Jane she is that simple, she
was telling him everything, and about Mr. Alfred's lawsuit with his
father and all."

Julia said that was indiscreet; but after all what did it matter?

"Who knows, Miss?" Sarah replied: "least said is soonest mended. If you
please, Miss, who is he? Where does he bide? Where does he come from?
Does he know Hardies?"

"I should think not. Why?"

"Because I'm much mistaken if he doesn't." Then putting on a stolid look,
she asked, "Does he know your papa?"

"Oh no, Sarah. How should he?"

"There now," said Sarah; "Miss, you are all in the dark about this old
man: I'll tell you something; I took him out of the way of Jane's temper
when she began a dishing up, and I had him into the parlour for a minute;
and in course there he sees the picture of your poor papa hung up. Miss,
if you'll believe me, the moment he claps eyes on that there picture, he
halloes out, and out goes his two hands like this here. 'It's him!' says
he; 'it's him!' and stares at the picture like a stuck pig. Forgot I was
close behind him, I do believe. 'She's _his_ daughter,' says he, in a
whisper, a curious whisper; seemed to come out of his stomack. 'What's
the matter now?' says I, just so. He gave a great start, as if my
speaking had wakened him from a dream, and says he, 'nothing,' as quiet
as a lamb. 'Nothing isn't much,' says I, just so. 'It usedn't to be
anything at all when I was your age,' says he, sneering. But I paid him a
good coin: says I, 'Old man, where you comes from do the folks use to
start and hallo out and cry "It's him! she's his daughter!" and fling
their two arms abroad like a wiumdmill in March, and all for--nothing?'
So at that he changed as white as my smock, and fell all of a tremble.
However, at dinner he perks up, and drew that poor simple Jane out a good
one. But he didn't look towards me much, which I set opposite to watch my
lord."

"Sarah," said Julia, "this is really curious, mysterious; you are a good,
watchful, faithful girl; and, to tell the truth, I sometimes fancy I have
seen Mr. Barkington's face. However, I will solve this little mystery
to-morrow; for I will ask him: thank you, Sarah."

On Monday she called on Mr. Barkington to solve the mystery. But, instead
of solving, her visit thickened it: for Mr. Barkington was gone bag and
baggage. When Edward was told of this business, he thought it remarkable,
and regretted he had not seen the old man.

So do I; for it is my belief Edward would have recognised him.

     DAVID DODD.

The history of a man is the history of his mind. And that is why you have
heard so little of late about the simplest, noblest, and most unfortunate
of all my personages. Insanity is as various as eccentricity. I have
spared the kind-hearted reader some of David's vagaries. However, when we
parted with him, he had settled into that strange phase of lunacy, in
which the distant past seems nearly obliterated, and memory exists, but
revolves in a narrow round of things present: this was accompanied with a
positive illusion, to wit, a fixed idea that he was an able seaman: and,
as usual, what mental power he retained came out strongest in support of
this idea. All this was marked by a bodily agility somewhat more than
natural in a man of his age. Owing to the wind astern, he was enabled to
run into Portsmouth before the steam-tug came up with him: and he did run
into port, not because he feared pursuit, but because he was desperately
hungry; and he had no suicidal tendencies whatever.

He made for a public-house, and called for some bread and cheese and
beer; they were supplied, and then lo! he had no money to pay for them.
"I'll owe you till I come back from sea, my bo," said he coolly. On this
the landlord collared him, and David shook him off into the road, much as
a terrier throws a rat from him; then there was a row, and a naval
officer, who was cruising about for hands, came up and heard it. There
was nothing at all unseamanlike in David's conduct, and the gentleman
took a favourable view of it, and paid the small demand; but not with
unleavened motives. He was the second lieutenant of H. M. frigate
_Vulture;_ she had a bad name, thanks to her last captain, and was short
of hands: he took David aside and asked him would he like to ship on
board the _Vulture._

David said yes, and suggested the foretop. "Oh yes," growled the
lieutenant, "you all want to be there." He then gauged this Jacky Tar's
intellects; asked him _inter alia_ how to send a frigate's foretop
gallant yard down upon deck: and to show how seamanship sticks in the
brain when once it gets there, David actually told him. "You are rather
old," said the lieutenant, "but you are a seaman:" and so took him on
board the _Vulture_ at Spithead, before Green began to search the town in
earnest. Nobody acts his part better than some demented persons do: and
David made a very tolerable sailor notwithstanding his forty-five years:
and the sea did him good within certain limits. Between him and the past
lay some intellectual or cerebral barrier as impenetrable as the great
wall of China; but on the hither side of that wall his faculties
improved. Of course, the crew soon found out the gap in his poor brain,
and called him Soft Billy, and played on him at first. But by degrees he
won their affection; he was so wonderfully sweet-tempered: and besides
his mind being in an abnormal state, he loathed grog, and gave his
allowance to his messmates. One day he showed an unexpected trait; they
were lying becalmed in southern latitudes, and, time hanging heavily,
each wiled it how he might: one fiddled, another wrote to his Polly,
another fished for sharks, another whistled for a wind, scores fell into
the form of meditation without the reality, and one got a piece of yarn
and amused himself killing flies on the bulwark. Now this shocked poor
Billy: he put out his long arm and intercepted a stroke. "What is the
row?" said the operator.

"You mustn't," said Billy solemnly, looking into his face with great
dreamy eyes.

"You be----," said the other, and lent him a tap on the cheek with the
yarn. Billy did not seem to mind this; his skin had little sensibility,
owing to his disorder.

Jack recommenced on his flies, and the bystanders laughed. They always
laughed now at everything Billy said, as Society used to laugh when the
late Theodore Hook asked for the mustard at dinner; and would have
laughed if he had said, "You see me sad, I have just lost my poor
father."

David stood looking on at the slaughter with a helpless puzzled air.

At last he seemed to have an idea, he caught Jack up by the throat and
knee, lifted him with gigantic strength above his head, and was just
going to hurl him shrieking into the sea, when a dozen strong hands
interfered, and saved the man. Then they were going to bind Billy hand
and foot; but he was discovered to be perfectly calm; so they
remonstrated instead, and presently Billy's commander-in-chief, a
ship-boy called Georgie White, shoved in and asked him in a shrill
haughty voice how he dared do that. "My dear," said Billy, with great
humility and placidity, "he was killing God's creatures, no allowance: *
so, ye see, to save their lives, I was _obliged._"

*Nautical phrase, meaning without stint or limit, or niggardly
admeasurement as there is of grog.

At this piece of reasoning, and the simplicity and gentle conviction with
which it was delivered, there was a roar. It subsided, and a doubt arose
whether Billy was altogether in the wrong.

"Well," said one, "I daresay life is sweet to them little creatures, if
they could speak their minds."

"I've known a ship founder in a fair breeze all along of killing 'em,"
said one old salt.

Finally, several sided with Billy, and intimated that "it served the
lubber right for not listening to _reason._" And, indeed, methinks it was
lovely and touching that so divine a ray of goodness and superior reason
should have shot from his heart or from Heaven across that poor benighted
brain.

But it must be owned his mode of showing his humanity was somewhat
excessive and abnormal, and smacked of lunacy. After this, however, the
affection of his messmates was not so contemptuous.

Now the captain of the _Vulture_ was Billy's cousin by marriage. Reginald
Bazalgette. Twenty years ago, when the captain was a boy, they were great
friends: of late Bazalgette had seen less of him; still it seems strange
he did not recognise him in his own ship. But one or two causes
co-operated to prevent that. In the first place, the mind when turned in
one direction is not so sharp in another; and Captain Bazalgette had been
told to look for David in a merchant ship bound for the East Indies. In
the next place, insanity alters the expression of the face wonderfully,
and the captain of a frigate runs his eye over four hundred sailors at
muster, or a hundred at work, not to examine their features, but their
dress and bearing at the one, and their handiness at the other. The worst
piece of luck was that Mrs. Dodd did not know David called himself
William Thompson. So there stood "William Thompson" large as life on the
ship's books, and nobody the wiser. Captain Bazalgette had a warm regard
and affection for Mrs. Dodd, and did all he could. Indeed, he took great
liberties: he stopped and overhauled several merchant ships for the
truant; and, by-the-by, on one occasion William Thompson was one of the
boat's crew that rowed a midshipman from the _Vulture_ alongside a
merchant ship to search for David Dodd. He heard the name and
circumstance mentioned in the boat, but the very name was new to him. He
remembered it, but only from that hour; and told his loving tyrant,
Georgie White, they had been overhauling a merchant ship and looking for
one David Dodd.

It was about Midsummer the _Vulture_ anchored off one of the South Sea
islands, and sent a boat ashore for fruit. Billy and his dearly beloved
little tyrant, Georgie White, were among the crew. Off goes Georgie to
bathe, and Billy sits down on the beach with a loving eye upon him. The
water was calm: but the boy with the heedlessness of youth stayed in it
nearly an hour: he was seized with cramp and screamed to his comrades.
They ran, but they were half a mile from the boat. Billy dashed into the
water and came up with Georgie just as he was sinking for the last time;
the boy gripped him; but by his great strength he disentangled himself
and got Georgie on his shoulders, and swam for the shore. Meantime the
sailors got into the boat, and rowed hastily towards them.

Now Billy was undermost and his head under water at times, and Georgie,
some thought, had helped strangle him by gripping his neck with both
arms. Anyway, by the boy's account, just as they were getting into
shallow water, Billy gave a great shriek and turned over on his back; and
Georgie paddled with his hands, but Billy soon after this sunk like a
dead body while the boat was yet fifty yards off. And Georgie screamed
and pointed to the place, and the boat came up and took Georgie in; and
the water was so clear that the sailors saw Billy lie motionless at the
bottom, and hooked him with a boat hook and drew him up; but his face
came up alongside a deadly white, with staring eyes, and they shuddered
and feared it was too late.

They took him into a house and stripped him, and rubbed him, and wrapped
him in blankets, and put him by the hot fire. But all would not do.

Then, having dried his clothes, they dressed the body again and laid him
in the boat, and cast the Union Jack over him, and rowed slowly and
unwillingly back to the ship, Georgie sobbing and screaming over the
body, and not a dry eye in the boat.

The body was carried up the side, and uncovered, just as Mrs. Dodd saw in
her dream. The surgeon was sent for and examined the body: and then the
grim routine of a man-of-war dealt swiftly with the poor skipper. He was
carried below to be prepared for a sailor's grave. Then the surgeon
walked aft and reported formally to the officer of the watch the death by
drowning of William Thompson. The officer of the watch went instantly to
the captain in his cabin and reported the death. The captain gave the
stereotyped order to bury him at noon next day; and the body was stripped
that night and sewed up in his hammock, with a portion of his clothes and
bedding to conceal the outline of the corpse, and two cannon balls at his
feet; and so the poor skipper was laid out for a watery grave, and
covered by the Union Jack.


I don't know whether any of my amorous young readers are much affected by
the catastrophe I have just related. If not, I will just remind them that
even Edward Dodd was prepared to oppose the marriage of Julia and Alfred,
if any serious ill should befall his father at sea, owing to Alfred's
imprudent interference in rescuing him from Drayton House.




CHAPTER L

     LAW

MINUTE study of my fellow-creatures has revealed to me that there are
many intelligent persons who think that a suit at law commences in court.
This is not so. Many suits are fought and decided by the special
pleaders, and so never come into court; and, as a stiff encounter of this
kind actually took place in Hardie _v._ Hardie, a word of prefatory
explanation may be proper. Suitors come into court only to try an issue:
an issue is a mutual lie direct: and towards this both parties are driven
upon paper by the laws of pleading, which may be thus summed: 1. Every
statement of the adversary must either be contradicted flat, or confessed
and avoided: "avoided" means neutralised by fresh matter. 2. Nothing must
be advanced by plaintiff which does not disclose a ground of action at
law. 3. Nothing advanced by defendant, which, if true, would not be a
defence to the action. These rules exclude in a vast degree the pitiable
defects and vices that mark all the unprofessional arguments one ever
hears; for on a breach of any one of the said rules the other party can
demur; the demurrer is argued before the judges in Banco, and, if
successfully, the faulty plaint or faulty plea is dismissed, and often of
course the cause won or lost thereby, and the country saved the trouble,
and the suitors the expense of trying an issue.

So the writ being served by Plt.'s attorney, and an appearance put in by
Deft.'s, the paper battle began by Alfred Hardie, through his attorney,
serving on Deft.'s attorney "THE DECLARATION." This was drawn by his
junior counsel, Garrow, and ran thus, after specifying the court and the
date:

_Middlesex to wit_ Alfred Hardie by John Compton his attorney sues Thomas
Hardie For that the Deft, assaulted Plt. gave him into custody to a
certain person and caused him to be imprisoned for a long space of time
in a certain place to wit a Lunatic Asylum whereby the Plt. was much
inconvenienced and suffered much anguish and pain in mind and body and
was unable to attend to his affairs and was injured in his credit and
circumstances.

And the Plt. claims L. 5000.

Mr. Compton conveyed a copy of this to Alfred, and said it was a sweet
"declaration." "What," said Alfred, "is that all I have suffered at these
miscreants' hands? Why, it is written with an icicle."

Mr. Compton explained that this was the outline: "Counsel will lay the
colours on in court as thick as you like."

The defendant replied to the above declaration by three pleas.

By statute 8 & 9 Vic., c. 100, s. 105.

1. The Deft. by Joseph Heathfield his attorney  says he is not guilty. 2.
And for a further Plea the Deft, says that before and at the time of the
alleged imprisonment Plt, was a person of unsound mind and incompetent to
take care of himself and a proper person to be taken care of and detained
and it was unfit unsafe improper and dangerous that he should be at large
thereupon the Deft, being the uncle of the Plt. and a proper person to
cause the Plt. to be taken charge of under due care and treatment in that
behalf did cause the Plt. to be so taken charge of and detained under due
care and treatment, &c. &c.

The third plea was the stinger, but too long to cite _verbatim;_ it went
to this tune, that the plaintiff at and before the time &c. had conducted
himself like a person of unsound mind &c. and two certificates that he
was insane had been given by two persons duly authorised under the
statute to sign such certificates, and the defendant had believed and did
_bona fide_ believe these certificates to be true, &c. &c.

The first of these pleas was a mere formal plea, under the statute.

The second raised the very issue at common law the plaintiff wished to
try.

The third made John Compton knit his brows with perplexity. "This is a
very nasty plea," said he to Alfred: "a regular trap. If we join issue on
it we must be defeated; for how can we deny the certificates were in
form; and yet the plaguy thing is not loose enough to be demurred to?
Colls, who drew these pleas for them?"

"Mr. Colvin, sir."

"Make a note to employ him in our next stiff pleading."

Alfred was staggered. He had thought to ride rough-shod over defendant--a
common expectation of plaintiffs; but seldom realised. Lawyers fight
hard. The pleas were taken to Garrow; he said there was but one course,
to demur to No. 3. So the plaintiff "joined issue on all the defendant's
pleas, and as to the last plea the plaintiff said the same was bad in
substance." Defendant rejoined that the same was good in substance, and
thus Hardie _v._ Hardie divided itself into two cases, a question of law
for the judges, and an issue for the mixed tribunal loosely called a
jury. And I need hardly say that should the defendant win either of them
he would gain the cause.

Postponing the history of the legal _question,_ I shall show how Messrs.
Heathfield fought off the _issue,_ and cooled the ardent Alfred and
sickened him of law.

In theory every Englishman has a right to be tried by his peers: but in
fact there are five gentlemen in every court, each of whom has by
precedent the power to refuse him a jury, by simply postponing the trial
term after term, until the death of one of the parties, when the action,
if a personal one, dies too; and, by a singular anomaly of judicial
practice, if a slippery Deft. can't persuade A. or B., judges of the
common law court, to connive at what I venture to call

     THE POSTPONEMENT SWINDLE,

he can actually go to C., D., and B., one after another, with his
rejected application, and the previous refusal of the other judges to
delay and baffle justice goes for little or nothing; so that the
postponing swindler has five to one in his favour.

Messrs. Heathfield began this game unluckily. They applied to a judge in
chambers for a month to plead. Mr. Compton opposed in person, and showed
that this was absurd. The judge allowed them only four days to plead.
Issue being joined, Mr. Compton pushed on for trial, and the cause was
set down for the November term. Towards the end of the term Messrs.
Heathfield applied to one of the puisne judges for a postponement, on the
ground that a principal witness could not attend. Application was
supported by the attorney's affidavit, to the effect that Mr. Speers was
in Boulogne, and had written to him to say that he had met with a railway
accident, and feared he could not possibly come to England in less than a
month. A respectable French doctor confirmed this by certificate. Compton
opposed, but the judge would hardly hear him, and postponed the trial as
a matter of course; this carried it over the sittings into next term.
Alfred groaned, but bore it patiently; not so Dr. Sampson: he raged
against secret tribunals: "See how men deteriorate the moment they get
out of the full light of publeecity. What English judge, sitting in the
light of Shorthand, would admit 'Jack swears that Gill says' for legal
evidence. Speers has sworn to no facks. Heathfield has sworn to no facks
but th' existence of Speer's hearsay. They are a couple o' lyres. I'll
bet ye ten pounds t' a shilling Speers is as well as I'm."

Mr. Compton quietly reminded him there was a direct statement--the French
doctor's certificate.

"A medical certificut!" shrieked Sampson, amazed. "Mai--dearr--sirr, a
medical certificut is just an article o' commerce like an attorney's
conscience. Gimme a guinea and I'll get you sworn sick, diseased,
disabled, or dead this minute, whichever you like best."

"Come, doctor, don't fly off: you said you'd bet ten pounds to a shilling
Speers is not an invalid at all. I say done."

"Done."

"How will you find out?"

"How? Why set the thief-takers on um, to be sure."

He wrote off to the prefect of police at Boulogne, and in four days
received an answer headed "Information in the interest of families." The
prefect informed him there had been no railway accident: but that the
Sieur Speers, English subject, had really hurt his leg getting out of a
railway carriage six weeks ago, and had kept his room some days; but he
had been cured some weeks, and going about his business, and made an
excursion to Paris.

On this Compton offered Sampson the shilling. But he declined to take it.
"The lie was self-evident," said he; "and here's a judge wouldn't see't,
and an attorney couldn't. Been all their lives sifting evidence, too. Oh
the darkness of the profissional mind!"

The next term came. Mr. Compton delivered the briefs and fees, subpoenaed
the witnesses, &c., and Alfred came up with a good heart to get his
stigma removed by twelve honest men in the light of day: but first one
case was taken out of its order and put before him, then another, till
term wore near an end. Then Messrs. Heathfield applied to another judge
of the court for a postponement. Mr. Richard Hardie, plaintiff's father,
a most essential witness, was ill at Clare Court. Medical certificate and
letter herewith.

Compton opposed. Now this judge was a keen and honourable lawyer, with a
lofty hatred of all professional tricks. He heard the two attorneys, and
delivered himself to this effect, only of course in better legal phrase:
"I shall make no order. The defendant has been here before on a doubtful
affidavit. You know, Mr. Heathfield, juries in these cases go by the
plaintiff's evidence, and his conduct under cross-examination. And I
think it would not be just nor humane to keep this plaintiff in suspense,
and _civiliter mortuum,_ any longer. You can take out a commission to
examine Richard Hardie."

To this Mr. Compton nailed him, but the commission took time; and while
it was pending, Mr. Heathfield went to another judge with another
disabled witness: Peggy Black. That naive personage was nursing her
deceased sister's children--in an affidavit: and they had
scarlatina--surgeon's certificate to that effect. Compton opposed, and
pointed out the blot. "You don't want the children in the witness-box,"
said he: "and we are not to be robbed of our trial because one of your
witnesses prefer nursing other people's children to facing the
witness-box."

The judge nodded assent. "I make no order," said he.

Mr. Heathfield went out from his presence and sent a message by telegraph
to Peggy Black. "You must have Scar. yourself, and telegraph the same at
once: certificate by post."

The accommodating maiden telegraphed back that she had unfortunately
taken scarlatina of the children: medical certificate to follow by post.
Four judges out of the five were now awake to the move. But Mr.
Heathfield tinkered the hole in his late affidavit with Peggy's telegram,
and slipped down to Westminster to the chief judge of the court, who had
had no opportunity of watching the growth and dissemination of disease
among Deft.'s, witnesses. Compton fought this time by counsel and with a
powerful affidavit. But luck was against him. The judge had risen to go
home: he listened standing; Compton's counsel was feeble; did not feel
the wrong. How could he? Lawyers fatten by delays of justice, as
physicians do by tardy cure. The postponement was granted.

Alfred cursed them all, and his own folly in believing that an alleged
lunatic would be allowed fair play at Westminster, or anywhere else.
Compton took snuff, and Sampson appealed to the press again. He wrote a
long letter exposing with fearless irony the postponement swindle as it
had been worked in Hardie _v._ Hardie: and wound up with this fiery
peroration:

"This Englishman sues not merely for damages, but to recover lost rights
dearer far than money, of which he says he has been unjustly robbed: his
right to walk in daylight on the soil of his native land without being
seized and tied up for life like a nigger or a dog; his footing in
society; a chance to earn his bread; and a place among mankind: ay, among
mankind; for a lunatic is an animal in the law's eye and society's, and
an alleged lunatic is a lunatic till a jury clears him.

I appeal to you, gentlemen, is not such a suitor sacred in all wise and
good men's minds? Is he not defendant as well as plaintiff? Why, his
stake is enormous compared with the nominal defendant's; and, if I know
right from wrong, to postpone his trial a fourth time would be to insult
Divine justice, and trifle with human misery, and shock the common sense
of nations."

The doctor's pen neither clipped the words nor minced the matter, you
see. Reading this the water came into Alfred's eyes. "Ah, staunch
friend," he said, "how few are like you! To the intellectual dwarfs who
conspire with my oppressors, Hardie _v._ Hardie is but a family squabble.
_Parvis omnia parva._" Mr. Compton read it too; and said from the bottom
of his heart, "Heaven defend us from our friends! This is enough to make
the courts decline to try the case at all."

And, indeed, it did not cure the evil: for next term another _malade
affidavitaire_ was set up. Speers to wit. This gentleman deposed to
having come over on purpose to attend the trial; but having inadvertently
stepped aside as far as Wales, he lay there stricken with a mysterious
malady, and had just strength to forward medical certificate. On this the
judge in spite of remonstrance, adjourned Hardie _v._ Hardie to the
summer term. Summer came, the evil day drew nigh: Mr. Heathfield got the
venue changed from Westminster to London, which was the fifth
postponement. At last the cause came on: the parties and witnesses were
all in court, with two whole days before them to try it in.

Dr. Sampson rushed in furious. "There is some deviltry afloat," said he.
"I was in the House of Commons last night, and there I saw the
defendant's counsel earwigging the judge."

"Nonsense," said Mr. Compton, "such suspicions are ridiculous. Do you
think they can talk of nothing but Hardie _v._ Hardie?"

"Mai--dearr sirr--my son met one of Heathfield's clerks at dinner, and he
let out that the trile was not to come off. Put this and that together
now."

"It will come off," said Mr. Compton, "and in five minutes at farthest."

In less than that time the learned judge came in, and before taking his
seat made this extraordinary speech:

"I hear this cause will take three days to try; and we have only two days
before us. It would be inconvenient to leave it unfinished; and I must
proceed on circuit the day after to-morrow. It must be a remanet: no man
can do more than time allows."

Plaintiff's counsel made a feeble remonstrance; then yielded. And the
crier with sonorous voice called on the case of Bread _v._ Cheese, in
which there were pounds at stake, but no principle. Oh, with what zest
they all went into it; being small men escaping from a great thing to a
small one. Never hopped frogs into a ditch with more alacrity. Alfred
left the court and hid himself, and the scalding tears forced their way
down his cheeks at this heartless proceeding: to let all the witnesses
come into court at a vast expense to the parties: and raise the cup of
justice to the lips of the oppressed, and then pretend he knew a trial
would last more than two days, and so shirk it. "I'd have made that a
reason for sitting till midnight" said poor Alfred, "not for prolonging a
poor injured man's agony four mortal months." He then prayed God
earnestly for this great postponer's death as the only event that could
give him back an Englishman's right of being tried by his peers, and so
went down to Oxford broken-hearted.

As for Sampson he was most indignant, and said a public man had no
business with a private ear: and wanted to appeal to the press again: but
the doughty doctor had a gentle but powerful ruler at home, as fiery
houses are best ruled by a gentle hand. Mrs. Sampson requested him to
write no more, but look round for an M. P. to draw these repeated defeats
of justice to the notice of the House. Now there was a Mr. Bite, who had
taken a prominent and honourable part in lunacy questions; headed
committees and so on: this seemed the man. Dr. Sampson sent him a letter
saying there was a flagrant case of a sane man falsely imprisoned, who
had now been near a year applying for a jury, and juggled out of this
constitutional right by arbitrary and unreasonable postponements: would
Mr. Bite give him (Dr. Sampson) ten minutes and no more, when he would
explain the case and leave documentary evidence behind him for Mr. Bite
to test his statement. The philanthropical M. P. replied promptly in
these exact words:

"Mr. Bite presents his compliments to Dr. Sampson to state that it is
impossible for him to go into his case, nor to give him the time he
requests to do so."

Sampson was a little indignant at the man's insolence; but far more at
having been duped by his public assumption of philanthropy. "The little
pragmatical impostor!" he roared. "With what a sense o' relief th' animal
flings off the mask of humanity when there is no easy eclat to be gained
by putting't on." He sent the philanthropical Bite's revelation of his
private self to Alfred, who returned it with this single remark:
_"Homunculi quanti sunt!_"

Dishonest suitors all try to postpone; but they do not gain unmixed good
thereby. These delays give time for more evidence to come in; and this
slow coming and chance evidence is singularly adverse to the unjust
suitor. Of this came a notable example in October next, and made Richard
Hardie determined to precipitate the trial, and even regret he had not
fought it out long ago.

He had just returned from consulting Messrs. Heathfield, and sat down to
a nice little dinner in his apartments (Sackville Street), when a visitor
was announced; and in came the slouching little figure of Mr. Barkington,
_alias_ Noah Skinner.

     DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND.

Mr. Hardie suppressed a start, and said nothing. Skinner bowed low with a
mixture of his old cringing way, and a certain sly triumphant leer, so
that his body seemed to say one thing, and his face the opposite. Mr.
Hardie eyed him, and saw that his coat was rusty, and his hat napless:
then Mr. Hardie smelt a beggar, and prepared to parry all attempts upon
his purse.

"I hope I see my old master well," said Skinner coaxingly.

"Pretty well in body, Skinner; thank you."

"I had a deal of trouble to find you, sir. But I heard of the great
lawsuit between Mr. Alfred and you, and I knew Mr. Heathfield was your
solicitor; so I watched at his place day after day: and at last you came.
Oh, I was so pleased when I saw your noble figure; but I wouldn't speak
to you in the street for fear of disgracing you. I'm such a poor little
guy to be addressing a gentleman like you."

Now this sounded well on the surface, but below there was a subtle
something Mr. Hardie did not like at all: but he took the cue, and said,
"My poor Skinner, do you think I would turn up my nose at a faithful old
servant like you? Have a glass of wine with me, and tell me how you have
been getting on." He went behind a screen and opened a door, and soon
returned with a decanter, leaving the door open. Now in the next room
sat, unbeknown to Skinner, a young woman with white eyelashes, sewing
buttons on Mr. Hardie's shirts. That astute gentleman gave her
instructions, and important ones too, with a silent gesture; then
reappeared and filled the bumper high to his faithful servant. They drank
one another's healths with great cordiality, real or apparent. Mr. Hardie
then asked Skinner carelessly, if he could do anything for him. Skinner
said, "Well, sir, I am very poor."

"So am I, between you and me," said Mr. Hardie confidentially; "I don't
mind telling you; those confounded Commissioners of Lunacy wrote to
Alfred's trustees, and I have been forced to replace a loan of five
thousand pounds. That Board always sides with the insane. That crippled
me, and drove me to the Exchange: and now what I had left is all invested
in time-bargains. A month settles my fate: a little fortune, or absolute
beggary."

"You'll be lucky, sir, you'll be lucky," said Skinner cheerfully; "you
have such a long head; not like poor little me; the Exchange soon burnt
my wings. Not a shilling left of the thousand pounds, sir, you were so
good as to give me for my faithful services. But you will give me another
chance, sir, I know; I'll take better care this time." Mr. Hardie shook
his head sorrowfully, and said it was impossible. Skinner eyed him
askant, and remarked quietly, and half aside, "Of course, I _could_ go to
the other party: but I shouldn't like to do that. They would come down
handsome."

"What other party?"

"La, sir, what other party? Why Mrs. Dodd's, or Mr. Alfred's; here's the
trial coming on, you know, and of course if they could get me to go on
the box and tell all I know, or half what I know, why the judge and jury
would say locking Mr. Alfred up for mad was a conspiracy."

Mr. Hardie quaked internally: but he hid it grandly, and once more was a
Spartan gnawed beneath his robe by this little fox. "What," said he
sternly, "after all I and mine have done for you and yours, would you be
so base as to go and sell yourself to my enemies?"

"Never, sir," shouted Skinner zealously: then in a whisper, "Not if
you'll make a bid for me."

"How much do you demand?"

"Only another thousand, sir?"

"A thousand pounds!"

"Why, what is that to you, sir? you are rich enough to buy the eighth
commandment out of the tables of ten per cent.: and then the lawsuit,
Hardies _versus_ Hardies!"

"You have spoken plainly at last," said Mr. Hardie grimly. "This is
extorting money by threats. Do you know that nothing is more criminal,
nor more easy to punish? I can take you before a magistrate, and imprison
you on the instant for this attempt. I will, too."

"Try it," said Skinner coolly. "Where's your witness?"

"Behind that screen."

Peggy came forward directly with a pen in her hand. Skinner was
manifestly startled and disconcerted. "I have taken all your words down,
Mr. Skinner," said Peggy softly; then to her master, "Shall I go for a
policeman, sir?"

Mr. Hardie reflected. "Yes," said he sternly: "there's no other course
with such a lump of treachery and ingratitude as this."

Peggy whipped on her bonnet.

"What a hurry you are in," whined Skinner: "a policeman ought to be the
last argument for old friends to run to." Then, fawning spitefully,
"Don't talk of indicting me, sir," said he; "it makes me shiver: why how
will you look when I up and tell them all how Captain Dodd was took with
apoplexy in our office, and how you nailed fourteen thousand pounds off
his senseless body, and forgot to put them down in your balance-sheet, so
they are not whitewashed off like the rest."

"Any witnesses to all this, Skinner?"

"Yes, sir."

"Who?"

"Well; your own conscience _for one,_" said Skinner.

"He is mad, Peggy," said Mr. Hardie, shrugging his shoulders. He then
looked Skinner full in the face, and said, "Nobody was ever seized with
apoplexy in my office. Nobody ever gave me L. 14,000. And if this is the
probable tale with which you come here to break the law and extort money,
leave my house this instant: and if ever you dare to utter this absurd
and malicious slander, you shall lie within four stone walls, and learn
what it is for a shabby vagabond to come without a witness to his back,
and libel a man of property and honour."

Skinner let him run on in this loud triumphant strain till he had quite
done; then put out a brown skinny finger, and poked him lightly in the
ribs, and said quite quietly, and oh, so drily, with a knowing wink--

"I've--got--The Receipt."



CHAPTER LI

MR. HARDIE collapsed as if he had been a man inflated, and that touch had
punctured him. "Ah!" said he. "Ah!" said Skinner, in a mighty different
tone: insolent triumph to wit.

After a pause, Mr. Hardie made an effort and said contemptuously, "The
receipt (if any) was flung into the dusthole and carried away. Do you
think I have forgotten that?"

"Don't you believe it, sir," was the reply. "While you turned your back
and sacked the money, I said to myself, 'Oho, is that the game?' and
nailed the receipt. What a couple of scoundrels we were! I wouldn't have
her know it for all your money. Come, sir, I see its all right; you will
shell out sooner than be posted."

Here Peggy interposed; "Mr. Skinner, be more considerate; my master is
really poor just now."

"That is no reason why I should be insulted and indicted and trampled
under foot," snarled Skinner all in one breath.

"Show me the receipt and take my last shilling, you ungrateful,
vindictive viper," groaned Mr. Hardie.

"Stuff and nonsense, said Skinner. "I'm not a viper; I'm a man of
business. Find me five hundred pounds; and I'll show you the receipt and
keep dark. But I can't afford to give it you for that, of course."

Skinner triumphed, and made the great man apologise, writhing all the
time, and wishing he was a day labourer with Peggy to wife, and fourteen
honest shillings a week for his income. Having eaten humble pie, he
agreed to meet Skinner next Wednesday at midnight, alone, under a certain
lamp on the North Kensington Road: the interval (four days) he required
to raise money upon his scrip. Skinner bowed himself out, fawning
triumphantly. Mr. Hardie stood in the middle of the room motionless,
scowling darkly. Peggy looked at him, and saw some dark and sinister
resolve forming in his mind: she divined it, as such women can divine.
She laid her hand on his arm, and said softly, "Richard, it's not worth
_that._" He started to find his soul read through his body so clearly. He
trembled.

But it was only for a moment. "His blood be on his own head," he snarled.
"This is not my seeking. He shall learn what it is to drive Richard
Hardie to despair."

"No, no," implored Peggy; "there are other countries beside this: why not
gather all you have, and cross the water? I'll follow you to the world's
end, Richard."

"Mind your own business," said he fiercely.

She made no reply, but went softly and sat down again, and sewed the
buttons on his shirts. Mr. Hardie wrote to Messrs. Heathfield to get
Hardie _v._ Hardie tried as soon as possible.

Meantime came a mental phenomenon: gliding down Sackville Street,
victorious Skinner suddenly stopped, and clenched his hands; and his face
writhed as if he had received a death-wound. In that instant Remorse had
struck him like lightning; and, perhaps, whence comes the lightning. The
sweet face and voice that had smiled on him, and cared for his body, and
cared for his soul, came to his mind, and knocked at his heart and
conscience. He went home miserable with an inward conflict; and it lasted
him all the four days; sometimes Remorse got the better, sometimes
Avarice. He came to the interview still undecided what he should do. But,
meantime, he had gone to a lawyer and made his will, leaving his little
all to Julia Dodd: a bad sign this; looked like compounding with his
awakened conscience.

It was a dark and gusty night. Very few people were about. Skinner waited
a little while, and shivered, for his avarice had postponed the purchase
of a greatcoat until Christmas Day. At last, when the coast seemed clear,
Mr. Hardie emerged from a side street. Skinner put his hand to his bosom.

They met. Mr. Hardie said quietly, "I must ask you, just for form, to
show me you have the Receipt."

"Of course, sir; but not so near, please: no snatching, if I know it."

"You are wonderfully suspicious," said Mr. Hardie, trying to smile.

Skinner looked, and saw by the lamplight he was deadly pale. "Keep your
distance a moment, sir," said he, and, on Mr. Hardie's complying, took
the Receipt out, and held it under the lamp.

Instantly Mr. Hardie drew a life-preserver, and sprang on him with a
savage curse--and uttered a shriek of dismay, for he was met by the long
shiny barrel of a horse-pistol, that Skinner drew from his bosom, and
levelled full in the haggard face that came at him. Mr. Hardie recoiled,
crying, "No! no! for Heaven's sake!"

"What!" cried Skinner, stepping forward and hissing, "do you think I'm
such a fool as to meet a thief unarmed? Come, cash up, or I'll blow you
to atoms."

"No, no, no!" said Mr. Hardie piteously, retreating as Skinner marched on
him with long extended pistol. "Skinner," he stammered, "th-this is n-not
b-b-business."

"Cash up, then; that's business. Fling the five hundred pounds down, and
walk away. Mind it is loaded with two bullets; I'll make a double entry
on your great treacherous carcass."

"It's no use trying to deceive such a man as you," said Mr. Hardie,
playing on his vanity. "I could not get the money before Saturday, and so
I listened to the dictates of despair. Forgive me."

"Then come again Saturday night. Come alone, and I shall bring a man to
see I'm not murdered. And look here, sir, if you don't come to the hour
and do the right thing without any more of these unbusiness-like tricks,
by Heaven, I'll smash you before noon on Monday."

"I'll come."

"I'll blow you to Mr. Alfred and Miss Dodd."

"I'll come, I tell you."

"I'll post you for a thief on every brick in the Exchange."

"Have mercy, Skinner. Have pity on the wretched man whose bread you have
eaten. I tell you I'll come."

"Well, mind you do, then, cash and all," said Skinner sulkily, but not
quite proof against the reminiscences those humble words awakened.

Each walked backwards a good dozen steps, and then they took different
roads, Skinner taking good care not to be tracked home. He went up the
high stairs to the hole in the roof he occupied, and lighted a rushlight.
He had half a mind to kindle a fire, he felt so chilly; but he had
blocked up the vent, partly to keep out the cold, partly to shun the
temptation of burning fuel. However, he stopped the keyhole with paper,
and also the sides of the window, till he had shut the wintry air all
out. Still, what with the cold and what with the reaction after so great
an excitement, his feeble body began to shiver desperately. He thought at
last he would light a foot-warmer he had just purchased for old iron at a
broker's; _that_ would only spend a halfpenneyworth of charcoal. No, he
wouldn't; he would look at his money; that would cheer him. He unripped a
certain part of his straw mattress and took out a bag of gold. He spread
three hundred sovereigns on the floor and put the candle down among them.
They sparkled; they were all new ones, and he rubbed them with an old
toothbrush and whiting every week. "That's better than any fire," he
said, "they warm the heart. For one thing, they are my own: at all
events, I did not steal them, nor take them of a thief for a bribe to
keep dark and defraud honest folk." Then remorse gripped him: he asked
himself what he was going to do. "To rob an angel," was the answer. "The
fourteen thousand pounds is all hers, and I could give it her in a
moment. Curse him, he would have killed me for it."

Then he pottered about and took out his will. "Ah," said he, "that is all
right so far. But what is a paltry three hundred when I help do her out
of fourteen thousand? Villain!" Then, to ease his conscience, he took a
slip of paper and wrote on it a short account of the Receipt, and how he
came by it, and lo: as if an unseen power had guided his hand, he added,
"Miss Dodd lives at 66, Pembroke Street, and I am going to take it to her
as soon as I am well of my cold." Whether this preceded an unconscious
resolve which had worked on him secretly for some time, or whether it
awakened such a resolve, I hardly know: but certain it is, that having
written it, he now thought seriously of doing it; and, the more seriously
he entertained the thought, the more good it seemed to do him. He got
"The Sinner's Friend" and another good book she had lent him, and read a
bit: then, finding his feet frozen, he lighted his chafer and blew it
well, and put it under his feet and read. The good words began to reach
his heart more and more: so did the thought of Julia's goodness. The
chafer warmed his feet and legs. "Ay," said he, "men don't want fires;
warm the feet and the body warms itself." He took out "The Receipt" and
held it in his hand, and eyed it greedily, and asked himself could he
really part with it. He thought he could--to Julia. Still holding it
tight in his left hand, he read on the good but solemn words that seemed
to loosen his grasp upon that ill-gotten paper. "How good it was of her,"
he thought, "to come day after day and feed a poor little fellow like
him, body and soul. She asked nothing back. She didn't know he could make
her any return. Bless her! bless her!" he screamed. "Oh, how cruel I have
been to her, and she so kind to me. She would never let me want, if I
took her fourteen thousand pounds. Like enough give me a thousand, and
help me save my poor soul, that I shall damn if I meet him again. I won't
go his way again. Lead us not into temptation. I repent. Lord have mercy
on me a miserable sinner." And tears bedewed those wizened cheeks, tears
of penitence, sincere, at least for the time.

A sleepy languor now came over him, and the good book fell from his hand;
but his resolution remained unshaken. By-and-by waking up from a sort of
heavy dose, he took, as it were, a last look at the receipt, and
murmured, "My head, how heavy it feels." But presently he roused himself,
full of his penitent resolution, and murmured again brokenly,
"I'll---take it to---Pembroke Street to---morrow: to---mor---row."



CHAPTER LII

MR. HARDIE raised the money on his scrip, and at great inconvenience, for
he was holding on five hundred thousand pounds' worth of old Turkish
Bonds over an unfavourable settling day, and wanted every shilling to pay
his broker. If they did not rise by next settling day, he was a beggar.
However, being now a desperate gamester, and throwing for his last stake,
he borrowed this sum, and took it within a heavy heart to his appointment
with Skinner. Skinner never came. Mr. Hardie waited till one o'clock. Two
o'clock. No Skinner. Mr. Hardie went home hugging his five hundred
pounds, but very uneasy. Next day he consulted Peggy. She shook her head,
and said it looked very ugly. Skinner had most likely got angrier and
angrier with thinking on the assault. "You will never see him again till
the day of the trial: and then he will go down and bear false witness
against you. Why not leave the country?"

"How can I, simpleton? My money is all locked up in the bargains. No, I'm
tied, tied to the stake; I'll fight to the last: and, if I'm defeated and
disgraced, I'll die, and end it."

Peggy implored him not to talk so. "I've been down to the court," said
she softly, "to see what it is like. There's a great hall; and he must
pass through that to get into the little places where they try 'em. Let
me be in that hall with the five hundred pounds, and I promise you he
shall never appear against you. We will both go; you with the money, I
with my woman's tongue."

He gave her his hand like a shaky monarch, and said she had more wit than
he had.

Mr. Heathfield, who had contrived to postpone Hardie _v._ Hardie six
times in spite of Compton, could not hurry it on now with his
co-operation. It hung fire from some cause or another a good fortnight:
and in this fortnight Hardie senior endured the tortures of suspense.
Skinner made no sign. At last, there stood upon the paper for next day, a
short case of disputed contract, and Hardie _v._ Hardie.

Now, this day, I must premise, was to settle the whole lawsuit: for while
trial of the issue was being postponed and postponed, the legal question
had been argued and disposed of. The very Queen's counsel, unfavourable
to the suit, was briefed with Garrow's views, and delivered them in court
with more skill, clearness, and effect than Garrow ever could; then sat
down, and whispered over rather contemptuously to Mr. Compton, "That is
your argument, I think."

"And admirably put," whispered the attorney, in reply.

"Well; now hear Saunders knock it to pieces."

Instead of that, it was Serjeant Saunders that got maltreated: first one
judge had a peck at him: then another: till they left him scarce a
feather to fly with; and, when Alfred's counsel rose to reply, the judges
stopped him, and the chief of the court, Alfred's postponing enemy,
delivered his judgment after this fashion:

"We are all of opinion that this plea is bad in law. By the common law of
England no person can be imprisoned as a lunatic unless actually insane
at the time. It has been held so for centuries, and down to the last
case. And wisely: for it would be most dangerous to the liberty of the
subject, if a man could be imprisoned without remedy unless he could
prove _mala fides_ in the breast of the party incarcerating him. As for
the statute, it does not mend the matter, but rather the reverse; for it
expressly protects duly authorised persons acting under the order and
certificates, and this must be construed to except from the protection of
the statute the person making the order."

The three puisne judges concurred and gave similar reasons. One of them
said that if A. imprisoned B. for a _felon,_ and B. sued him, it was no
defence to say that B., in his opinion, had imitated felony. They cited
Elliot _v._ Allen, Anderdon _v._ Burrows, and Lord Mansfield's judgment
in a very old case, the name of which I have unfortunately forgotten.

Judgment was entered for the plaintiff; and the defendant's ingenious
plea struck off the record; and Hardie _v._ Hardie became the leading
case. But in law one party often wins the skirmish and the other the
battle. The grand fight, as I have already said, was to be to-day.

But the high hopes and ardour with which the young lovers had once come
into court were now worn out by the postponement swindle, and the adverse
events delay had brought on them. Alfred was not there: he was being
examined in the schools; and had plumply refused to leave a tribunal that
named its day and kept it--for Westminster, until his counsel should have
actually opened the case. He did not believe trial by jury would ever be
allowed him. Julia was there, but sad and comparatively listless. One of
those strange vague reports, which often herald more circumstantial
accounts, had come home, whispering darkly that her father was dead, and
buried on an island in the South Sea. She had kept this report from her
mother, contrary to Edward's wish: but she implored him to restrain his
fatal openness. In one thing both these sorely tried young people agreed,
that there could be no marriage with Alfred now. But here again Julia
entreated her brother not to be candid; not to tell Alfred this at
present. "Oh do not go and dispirit him just now," she said, "or he will
do something rash. No, he must and shall get his first-class, and win his
trial; and then you know any lady will be too proud to marry him, and,
when he is married and happy, you can tell him I did all I could for him,
and hunted up the witnesses, and was his loving friend, though I could
not--be--his--wife."

She could not say this without crying; but she said it for all that, and
meant it too.

Besides helping Mr. Compton to get up the evidence, this true and earnest
friend and lover had attended the court day after day, to watch how
things were done, and, womanlike, to see what _pleased_ and what
_displeased_ the court.

The witnesses subpoenaed on either side in Hardie _v._ Hardie began to
arrive at ten o'clock, and a tall stately man paraded Westminster Hall,
to see if Skinner came with them. All other anxieties had merged in this:
for the counsel had assured him if nothing unexpected turned up, Thomas
Hardie would have a verdict, or if not, the damages would be nominal.

At last the court crier cried, with a loud voice, "Hardie _v._ Hardie."
Julia's eyes roved very anxiously for Alfred, and up rose Mr. Garrow, and
stated to the court the substance of the declaration: "To this," he said,
"three pleas have been pleaded: first, the plea of not guilty, which is a
formal plea; also another plea, which has been demurred to, and struck
off the record; and, lastly, that at the time of the alleged imprisonment
the plaintiff was of unsound mind, and a fit person to be confined; which
is the issue now to be tried."

Mr. Garrow then sat down, very tired of this preliminary work, and
wondering when he should have the luck to conduct such a case as Hardie
_v._ Hardie; and leaned forward to be ready to prompt his senior, a
portly counsel, whom Mr. Compton had retained because he was great at
addressing juries, and no point of law could now arise in the Case.

Colt, Q. C., rose like a tower, knowing very little of the facts, and
seeming to know everything. He had a prodigious business, and was rather
indolent, and often skimmed his brief at home, and then mastered it in
court--if he got time. Now, it is a good general's policy to open a
plaintiffs case warily, and reserve your rhetoric for the reply; and Mr.
Colt always took this line when his manifold engagements compelled him,
as in Hardie _v._ Hardie, to teach his case first and learn it
afterwards. I will only add, that in the course of his opening he was on
the edge of seven distinct blunders; but Garrow watched him and always
shot a whisper like a bullet just in time. Colt took it, and glided away
from incipient error imperceptibly, and with a tact you can have no
conception of. The jury did not detect the creaking of this machinery;
Serjeant Saunders did, and grinned satirically; so did poor Julia, and
her cheeks burned and her eyes flashed indignant fire. And horror of
horrors, Alfred did not appear.

Mr. Colt's opening may be thus condensed: The plaintiff was a young
gentleman of great promise and distinction, on whom, as usual in these
cases of false imprisonment, money was settled. He was a distinguished
student at Eton and Oxford, and no doubt was ever expressed of his sanity
till he proposed to marry, and take his money out of his trustees hands
by a marriage settlement. On this his father, who up to that time had
managed his funds as principal trustee, showed him great personal
hostility for some time, and looked out for a tool: that tool he soon
found in his brother, the defendant, a person who, it would be proved,
had actually not seen the plaintiff for a year and a half, yet, with
great recklessness and inhumanity, had signed away his liberty and his
happiness behind his back. Then tools of another kind--the kind that
anybody can buy, a couple of doctors-- were, as usual, easily found to
sign the certificates. One of these doctors had never seen him but for
five minutes, and signed in manifest collusion with the other. They
decoyed this poor young gentleman away on his wedding morning-- on his
wedding morning, gentlemen, mark that--and consigned him to the worst of
all dungeons. What he suffered there he must himself relate to you; for
we, who have the happiness to walk abroad in the air of reason and
liberty, are little able to realise the agony of mind endured by a sane
man confined among the insane. What we undertake is to prove his sanity
up to the very hour of his incarceration; and also that he was quite sane
at the time when a brutal attempt to recapture him by violence was made
under the defendant's order, and defeated by his own remarkable
intelligence and courage. Along with the facts the true reason why he was
imprisoned will probably come out. But I am not bound to prove sinister
motives. It is for the defendant to prove, if he can, that he had lawful
motives for a lawless act; and that he exercised due precaution, and did
not lend himself recklessly to the dark designs of others. If he succeed
in this, that may go in mitigation of damages, though it cannot affect
the verdict. _Our_ principal object is the verdict, which will remove the
foul aspersion cast on my injured client, and restore him to society. And
to this verdict we are entitled, unless the other side can prove the
plaintiff was insane. Call Alfred Hardie.

And with this he sat down.

An official called Alfred Hardie very loud; he made no reply. Julia rose
from her seat with dismay painted on her countenance. Compton's,
Garrow's, and Colt's heads clashed together.

Mr. Colt jumped up again, and said, "My Lud, I was not aware the
gentleman they accuse of insanity is just being examined for high honours
in the University of Oxford." Aside to Compton, "And if he doesn't come
you may give them the verdict."

"Well," said the judge, "of course he will be here before you close your
case."

On this the three heads clashed again, and Serjeant Saunders, for the
defendant, popped up and said with great politeness, and affectation of
sympathy, "My Lud, I can quite understand my learned friend's hesitation
to produce his, principal witness."

"You understand nothing about the matter," said Colt cavalierly. "Call
Mr. Harrington."

Mr. Harrington was Alfred's tutor at Eton, and deposed to his sanity
there; he was not cross-examined. After him they went on step by step
with a fresh witness for every six months, till they brought him close to
the date of his incarceration; then they put in one of Julia's witnesses,
Peterson, who swore Alfred had talked to him like a sane person that very
morning; and repeated what had passed. Cross-examination only elicited
that he and Alfred were no longer good friends, which rather strengthened
the evidence. Then Giles and Hannah, now man and wife, were called, and
swore he was sane all the time he was at Silverton House. Mr. Saunders
diminished the effect by eliciting that they had left on bad terms with
Mr. Baker, and that Alfred had given them money since. But this was half
cured on re-examination, by being set down to gratitude on Alfred's part.
And now the judge went to luncheon; and in came a telegraphic message to
say Alfred was in the fast train coming up. This was good news and bad.
They had hoped he would drop in before. They were approaching that period
of the case, when not to call the plaintiff must produce a vile
impression. The judge--out of good nature, I suspect--was longer at
luncheon than usual, and every minute was so much gained to Mr. Compton
and Julia, who were in a miserable state of anxiety. Yet it was equalled
by Richard Hardie's, who never entered the court but paced the hall the
livelong day to intercept Noah Skinner. And, when I tell you that Julia
had consulted Mr. Green, and that he had instantly pronounced Mr.
Barkington to be a man from Barkington who knew the truth about the
fourteen thousand pounds, and that the said Green and his myrmidons were
hunting Mr. Barkington like beagles, you will see that R. Hardie's was no
vain terror. At last the judge returned, and Mr. Colt was obliged to put
in his reserves; so called Dr. Sampson. Instantly a very dull trial
became an amusing one; the scorn with which he treated the opinion of Dr.
Wycherley and Mr. Speers, and medical certificates in general, was so
droll coming from a doctor, and so racily expressed, that the court was
convulsed. Also in cross-examination by Saunders he sparred away in such
gallant style with that accomplished advocate that it was mighty
refreshing. The judge put in a few intelligent questions after counsel
had done, and surprised all the doctors in court with these words: "I am
aware, sir, that you were the main instrument in putting down
bloodletting in this country."

What made Sampson's evidence particularly strong was that he had seen the
plaintiff the evening before his imprisonment.

At this moment three men, all of them known to the reader, entered the
court; one was our old acquaintance Fullalove, another was of course
Vespasian; and the third was the missing plaintiff.

A buzz announced his arrival; and expectation rose high. Mr. Colt called
him with admirably feigned nonchalance; he stepped into the box, and
there was a murmur of surprise and admiration at his bright countenance
and manly bearing.

Of course to give his evidence would be to write "Hard Cash" over again.
It is enough to say that his examination in chief lasted all that day,
and an hour of the next.

Colt took him into the asylum, and made him say what he had suffered
there to swell the damages. The main points his examination in chief
established were his sanity during his whole life, the money settled on
him, the means the doctors took to irritate him, and then sign him
excited, the subserviency of his uncle to his father, the double motive
his father had in getting him imprisoned; the business of the L. 14,000.

When Colt sat down at eleven o'clock on the second day, the jury looked
indignant, and the judge looked very grave, and the case very black.

Mr. Saunders electrified his attorney by saying, "My advice is, don't
cross-examine him."

Heathfield implored him not to take so strange a course.

On this Saunders shrugged his shoulders, rose, and cross-examined Alfred
about the vision of one Captain Dodd he had seen, and about his
suspicions of his father. "Had not Richard Hardie always been a kind and
liberal father?" To this he assented. "Had he not sacrificed a large
fortune to his creditors?" Plaintiff believed so. "On reflection, then,
did not plaintiff think he must have been under an illusion?" No; he had
gone by direct evidence.

Confining himself sagaciously to this one question, and exerting all his
skill and pertinacity, Saunders succeeded in convincing the court that
the Hard Cash was a myth: a pure chimera. The defendant's case looked up;
for there are many intelligent madmen with a single illusion.

The re-examination was of course very short, but telling; for Alfred
swore that Miss Julia Dodd had helped him to carry home the phantom of
her father, and that Miss Dodd had a letter from her father to say that
he was about to sail with the other phantom, the L. 14,000.

Here Mr. Saunders interposed, and said that evidence was inadmissible.
Let him call Miss Dodd.

_Colt._--How do you know I'm not going to call her?

_The Judge._-- If you are, it is superfluous; if not, it is inadmissible.

Mr. Compton cast an inquiring glance up at a certain gallery. A beautiful
girl bowed her head in reply, with a warm blush and such a flash of her
eye, and Mr. Colt said, "As my learned friend was afraid to cross-examine
the plaintiff on any point but this, and as I mean to respond to his
challenge, and call Miss Dodd, I will not trouble the plaintiff any
further."

Through the whole ordeal Alfred showed a certain flavour of Eton and
Oxford that won all hearts. His replies were frank and honest, and under
cross-examination he was no more to be irritated than if Saunders had
been Harrow bowling at him, or the Robin sparring with him. The serjeant,
who was a gentleman, indicated some little regret at the possible
annoyance he was causing him. Alfred replied with a grand air of good
fellowship, "Do not think so poorly of me as to suppose I feel aggrieved
because you are an able advocate and do your duty to your client, sir."

_The Judge._--That is very handsomely said. I am afraid you have got an
awkward customer, in a case of this kind, Brother Saunders.

_Serjt. S._--It is not for want of brains he is mad, my lord.

_Alfred._--That is a comfort, any way. (Laughter.)

When counsel had done with him, the judge used his right, and put several
shrewd and unusual questions to him: asked him to define insanity. He
said he could only do it by examples: and he abridged several intelligent
madmen, their words and ways; and contrasted them with the five or six
sane people he had fallen in with in asylums; showing his lordship
plainly that _he_ could tell any insane person whatever from a sane one,
and _vice versa._ This was the most remarkable part of the trial, to see
this shrewd old judge extracting from a real observer and logical thinker
those positive indicia of sanity and insanity, which exist, but which no
lawyer has ever yet been able to extract from any psychological physician
in the witness-box. At last, he was relieved, and sat sucking an orange
among the spectators; for they had parched his throat amongst them, I
promise you.

Julia Dodd entered the box, and a sunbeam seemed to fill the court. She
knew what to do: her left hand was gloved, but her white right hand bare.
She kissed the book, and gave her evidence in her clear, mellow, melting
voice; gave it reverently and modestly, for to her the court was a
church. She said how long she had been acquainted with Alfred, and how
his father was adverse, and her mother had thought it was because they
did not pass for rich, and had told her they were rich, and with this she
produced David's letter, and she also swore to having met Alfred and
others carrying her father in a swoon from his father's very door. She
deposed to Alfred's sanity on her wedding eve, and on the day his
recapture was attempted.

Saunders, against his own judgment, was instructed to cross-examine her;
and, without meaning it, he put a question which gave her deep distress.
"Are you now engaged to the plaintiff?" She looked timidly round, and saw
Alfred, and hesitated. The serjeant pressed her politely, but firmly.

"Must I reply to that?" she said piteously.

"If you please."

"Then, no. Another misfortune has now separated him and me for ever."

"What is that, pray?"

"My father is said to have died at sea: and my mother thinks _he_ is to
blame."

_The judge to Saunders._--What on earth has this to do with Hardie
against Hardie?

_Saunders._--You are warmly interested in the plaintiff's success?

_Julia._--Oh yes, sir.

_Colt_ (aside to Garrow).--The fool is putting his foot into it: there's
not a jury in England that would give a verdict to part two interesting
young lovers.

_Saunders._--You are attached to him?

_Julia._--Ah, that I do.

This burst, intended for poor Alfred, not the court, baffled
cross-examination and grammar and everything else. Saunders was wise and
generous, and said no more.

Colt cast a glance of triumph, and declined to re-examine. He always let
well alone. The judge, however, evinced a desire to trace the fourteen
thousand pounds from Calcutta; but Julia could not help him: that
mysterious sum had been announced by letter as about to sail, and then no
more was heard about it till Alfred accused his father of having it. All
endeavours to fill this hiatus failed. However, Julia, observing that in
courts material objects affect the mind most, had provided herself with
all the _pieces de conviction_ she could find, and she produced her
father's empty pocket-book, and said, when he was brought home senseless,
this was in his breast-pocket.

"Hand it up to me," said the judge. He examined it, and said it had been
in the water.

"Captain Dodd was wrecked off the French coast," suggested Mr. Saunders.

"My learned friend had better go into the witness-box, if he means to
give evidence," said Mr. Colt.

"You are very much afraid of a very little truth," retorted Saunders.

The judge stopped this sham rencontre, by asking the witness whether her
father had been wrecked. She said "Yes."

"And that is how the money was lost," persisted Saunders.

"Possibly," said the judge.

"I'm darned if it was," said Joshua Fullalove composedly.

Instantly, all heads were turned in amazement at this audacious
interruption to the soporific decorum of an English court. The
transatlantic citizen received this battery of eyes with complete
imperturbability.

"Si-lence!" roared the crier, awaking from a nap, with an instinct that
something unusual had happened. But the shrewd old judge had caught the
sincerity with which the words were uttered, and put on his spectacles to
examine the speaker.

"Are you for the plaintiff or the defendant?"

"I don't know either of 'em from Adam, my lord. But I know Captain Dodd's
pocket-book by the bullet-hole."

"Indeed! You had better call this witness, Mr. Colt."

Your lordship must excuse me; I am quite content with my evidence," said
the wary advocate.

"Well then, I shall call him as _amicus curiae;_ and the defendant's
counsel can cross-examine him."

Fullalove went into the box, was sworn, identified the pocket-book, and
swore he had seen fourteen thousand pounds in it on two occasions. With
very little prompting, he told the sea-fight, and the Indian darkie's
attempt to steal the money, and pointed out Vespasian as the rival darkie
who had baffled the attempt. Then he told the shipwreck to an audience
now breathless--and imagine the astonished interest with which Julia and
Edward listened to this stranger telling them the new strange story of
their own father!--and lastly, the attempt of the two French wreckers and
assassins, and how it had been baffled. And so the mythical cash was
tracked to Boulogne.

The judge then put this question, "Did Captain Dodd tell you what he
intended to do with it?"

_Fullalove_ (reverently).--I think, my lord, he said he was going to give
it to his wife. (Sharply.) Well, what is it, old hoss? What are you
making mugs at me for? Don't you know it's clean against law to telegraph
a citizen in the witness-box?

_The Judge._--This won't do; this won't do.

_The Crier._--Silence in the court.

"Do you hyar now what his lordship says?" said Fullalove, with ready
tact. "If you know anything more, come up hyar and swear it like an
enlightened citizen; do you think I am going to swear for tew?" With this
Vespasian and Fullalove proceeded to change places amidst roars of
laughter at the cool off-hand way this pair arranged forensicalities; but
Serjeant Saunders requested Fullalove to stay where he was. "Pray sir,"
said he slowly, "who retained you for a witness in this cause?"

Fullalove looked puzzled.

"Of course somebody asked you to drop in here so very accidentally: come
now, who was it?"

"I'm God Almighty's witness dropped from the clouds, I cal'late."

"Come, sir, no prevarication. How came you here just at the nick of
time?"

"Counsellor, when I'm treated polite, I'm ile; but rile me, and I'm
thunder stuffed with pison: don't you raise my dander, and I'll tell you.
I have undertaken to educate this yar darkie,"--here he stretched out a
long arm, and laid his hand on Vespasian's woolly pate--"and I'm bound to
raise him to the Eu-ropean model." (Laughter.) " So I said to him, coming
over Westminster Bridge, 'Now there's a store hyar where they sell a very
extraordinary Fixin; and it's called Justice; they sell it tarnation
dear; _but_ prime. So I make tracks for the very court where I got the
prime article three years ago, against a varmint that was breaking the
seventh and eighth commandments over me, adulterating my patent and then
stealing it. Blast him!" (A roar of laughter.) "And coming along I said
this old country's got some good pints after all, old hoss. One is
they'll sell you justice dear, _but_ prime in these yar courts, if you
were born at Kamschatkee; and the other is, hyar darkies are free as air,
disenthralled by the univarsal genius of British liberty; and then I
pitched Counsellor Curran's bunkum into this darkie, and he sucked it in
like mother's milk, and in we came on tiptoe, and the first thing we
heard was a freeborn Briton treated wus than ever a nigger in Old
Kentuck, decoyed away from his gal, shoved into a darned madhouse--the
darbies clapped on him----"

"We don't want your comments on the case, sir."

"No, nor any other free and enlightened citizen's, I reckon. Wal,
Vespasian and me sat like mice in a snowdrift, and hid our feelings out
of good manners, being strangers, till his lordship got e-tarnally fixed
about the Captain's pocket-book. Vesp., says I, this hurts my feelings
powerful. Says I, this hyar lord did the right thing about my patent: he
summed up just: and now he is in an everlasting fix himself: one good
turn deserves another, I'll get him out of this fix, any way." Here the
witness was interrupted with a roar of laughter that shook the court.
Even the judge leaned back and chuckled, genially though quietly. And
right sorrowful was every Briton there when Saunders closed abruptly the
cross-examination of Joshua Fullalove.

His lordship then said he wished to ask Vespasian a question.

Saunders lost patience. " What, another _amicus curiae,_ my lud! This is
unprecedented."

"Excuse my curiosity, Brother Saunders," said the judge ironically. "I
wish to trace this L. 14,000 as far as possible. Have you any particular
objection to the truth on this head of evidence?"

"No, my lud, I never urge objections when I can't enforce them."

"Then you are a wise man." (To Vespasian, after he had been sworn), "Pray
did Captain Dodd tell you what he intended to do with this money?"

"Is, massa judge, massa captan told dis child he got a branker in some
place in de old country, called Barkinton. And he said dis branker bery
good branker, much sartiner not to break dan the brank of England. (A
howl.) De captan said he take de money to dis yer branker, and den hab no
more trouble wid it. Den it off my stomach, de captan say, and dis child
heerd him. Yah!"

The plaintiff's case being apparently concluded, the judge retired for a
few minutes.

In the buzz that followed, a note was handed to Mr. Compton; _"Skinner!_
On a hot scent. Sure to find him to-day.--_N.B._ He is wanted by another
party. There is something curious a-foot."

Compton wrote on a slip, "For Heaven's sake, bring him directly. In half
an hour it will be too late."

Green hurried out and nearly ran against Mr. Richard Hardie, who was
moodily pacing Westminster Hall at the climax of his own anxiety. To him
all turned on Skinner. Five minutes passed, ten, fifteen, twenty: all the
plaintiff's party had their eyes on the door; but Green did not return;
and the judge did. Then to gain a few minutes more, Mr. Colt, instructed
by Compton, rose and said with great solemnity, "We are about to call our
last witness: the living have testified to my client's sanity, and now we
shall read you the testimony of the dead."

_Saunders._--That I object to, of course.

_Colt._--Does my learned friend mean to say he objects at random?

_Saunders._--Nothing of the kind. I object on the law of evidence--a
matter on which my learned friend seems to be under a hallucination as
complete as his client's about that L. 14,000.

     _Colt._--There's none ever feared
              That the truth should he heard
              But they whom the truth would indict.

_Saunders._--A court of justice is not the place for old songs; and new
law.

_Colt._--Really, my learned friend is the objective case incarnate. (To
Compton.--I can't keep this nonsense up for ever. Is Skinner come?) He
has a Mania for objection, and with your lordship's permission I'll buy a
couple of doctors and lock him up in an asylum as he leaves the court
this afternoon. (Laughter.)

_The judge._--A very good plan: then you'll no longer feel the weight of
his abilities. I conclude, Mr. Colt, you intend to call a witness who
will swear to the deceased person's hand-writing and that it was written
in the knowledge Death was at hand.

_Colt._--Certainly, my lord. I can call Miss Julia Dodd.

_Saunders._--That I need not take the trouble of objecting to.

_The judge_ (with some surprise).--No, Mr. Colt. That will never do. You
have examined her, and re-examined her.

I need hardly say Mr. Colt knew very well he could not call Julia Dodd.
But he was fighting for seconds now, to get in Skinner. "Call Edward
Dodd."

Edward was sworn, and asked if he knew the late Jane Hardie.

"I knew her well," said he.

"Is that her handwriting?"

"It is."

"Where was it written?"

"In my mother's house at Barkington."

"Under what circumstances?"

"She was dying--of a blow given her by a maniac called Maxley."

"Maxley!" said the judge to counsel. "I remember the Queen _v._ Maxley. I
tried him myself at the assizes: it was for striking a young lady with a
bludgeon, of which she died. Maxley was powerfully defended; and it was
proved that his wife had died, and he had been driven mad for a time, by
her father's bank breaking. The jury _would_ bring in a verdict that was
no verdict at all; as I took the liberty to tell them at the time. The
judges dismissed it, and Maxley was eventually discharged."

_Colt._--No doubt that was the case, my lord. To the witness.--Did Jane
Hardie know she was dying?

"Oh yes, sir. She told us all so."

"To whom did she give this letter?"

"To my sister."

"Oh, to your sister? To Miss Julia Dodd?"

"Yes, sir. But not for herself. It was to give to Alfred Hardie."

"Can you read the letter? It is rather faintly written. It is written in
pencil, my lord."

"I _could_ read it, sir; but I hope you will excuse me. She that wrote it
was very, very dear to me."

The young man's full voice faltered as he uttered these words, and he
turned his lion-like eyes soft and imploring on the judge. That venerable
and shrewd old man, learned in human nature as well as in law,
comprehended in a moment, and said kindly, "You misunderstand him.
Witnesses do not read letters _out_ in court. Let the letter be handed up
to me." This was fortunate, for the court cuckoo, who intones most
letters, would have read all the sense and pathos out of this, with his
monotonous sing-song.

The judge read it carefully to himself with his glasses, and told the
jury it seemed a genuine document: then the crier cried "Silence in the
court," and his lordship turned towards the jury and read the letter
slowly and solemnly:


_"DEAR, DEAR BROTHER,--Your poor little Jane lies dying, suddenly but not
painfully, and my last earthly thoughts are for my darling brother. Some
wicked person has said you are insane. I deny this with my dying breath
and my dying hand. You came to me the night before the wedding that was
to be, and talked to me most calmly, rationally and kindly; so that I
could not resist your reasons, and went to your wedding, which, till
then, I did not intend. Show these words to your slanderers when I am no
more. But oh! Alfred, even this is of little moment compared with the
world to come. By all our affection, grant me one request. Battered,
wounded, dying in my prime, what would be my condition but for the
Saviour, whom I have loved, and with whom I hope soon to be. He smoothes
the bed of death for me, He lights the dark valley; I rejoice to die and
be with Him. Oh, turn to Him, dear brother, without one hour's delay, and
then how short will be this parting. This is your dying sister's one
request, who loves you dearly._"


With the exception of Julia's sobs, not a sound was heard as the judge
read it. Many eyes were wet: and the judge himself was visibly affected,
and pressed his handkerchief a moment to his eyes. "These are the words
of a Christian woman, gentlemen," he said. And there was silence. A
girl's hand seemed to have risen from the grave to defend her brother and
rend the veil from falsehood.

Mr. Colt, out of pure tact, subdued his voice to the key of the sentiment
thus awakened, and said impressively, "Gentlemen of the jury, that is our
case:" and so sat down.


CHAPTER LIII

SERGEANT SAUNDERS thought it prudent to let the emotion subside before
opening the defendant's case: so he disarranged his papers, and then
rearranged them as before: and, during this, a person employed by Richard
Hardie went out and told him this last untoward piece of evidence. He
winced: but all was overbalanced by this, that Skinner had not come to
bear witness for the Plaintiff.

Sergeant Saunders rose with perfect dignity and confidence,. and
delivered a masterly address. In less than ten minutes the whole affair
took another colour under that plausible tongue. The tactician began by
declaring that the plaintiff was perfectly sane, and his convalescence
was a matter of such joy to the defendant, that not even the cruel
misinterpretation of facts and motives, to which his amiable client had
been exposed, could rob him of that sacred delight "Our case, gentlemen,
is, that the plaintiff is sane, and that he owes his sanity to those
prompt, wise, and benevolent measures, which we took eighteen months ago,
at an unhappy crisis of his mind, to preserve his understanding and his
property. Yes, his property, gentlemen; that property which in a paroxysm
of mania, he was going to throw away, as I shall show you by an
unanswerable document. He comes here to slander us and mulet us out of
five thousand pounds; but I shall show you he is already ten thousand
pounds the richer for that act of ours, for which he debits us five
thousand pounds instead of crediting us twice the sum. Gentlemen, I
cannot, like my learned friend, call witnesses from the clouds, from the
United States, and from the grave; for it has not occurred to my client
strong in the sense of his kindly and honourable intentions, to engage
gentlemen from foreign parts, with woolly locks and nasal twangs, to drop
in accidentally, and eke out the fatal gaps in evidence. The class of
testimony we stand upon is less romantic; it does not seduce the
imagination nor play upon the passions; but it is of a much higher
character in sober men's eyes, especially in a court of law. I rely, not
on witnesses dropped from the clouds, and the stars, and the stripes--to
order; nor even on the prejudiced statements of friends and sweethearts,
who always swear from the heart rather than from the head and the
conscience; but on the calm testimony of indifferent men, and on written
documents furnished by the plaintiff', and on contemporaneous entries in
the books of the asylum, which entries formally describe the plaintiff's
acts, and were put down at the time--at the time, gentlemen--with no idea
of a trial at law to come, but in compliance with the very proper
provisions of a wise and salutary Act. I shall also lay before you the
evidence of the medical witnesses who signed the certificates, men of
probity and honour, and who have made these subtle maladies of the mind
the special study of their whole life. I shall also call the family
doctor, who has known the plaintiff and his ailments, bodily and mental,
for many years, and communicated his suspicions to one of the first
psychological physicians of the age, declining, with a modesty which we,
who know less of insanity than he does, would do well to
imitate--declining, I say, to pronounce a positive opinion unfavourable
to the plaintiff, till he should have compared notes with this learned
man, and profited by his vast experience.

In this strain he continued for a good hour, until the defendants case
seemed to be a thing of granite. His oration ended, he called a string of
witnesses: every one of whom bore the learned counsel out by his evidence
in chief.

But here came the grand distinction between the defendants case and the
plaintiff's. Cross-examination had hardly shaken the plaintiff's
witnesses: it literally dissolved the defendant's. Osmond was called, and
proved Alfred's headaches and pallor, and his own suspicions. But then
Colt forced him to admit that many young people had headaches without
going mad, and were pale when thwarted in love, without going mad: and
that as to the L. 14,000 and the phantom, he _knew_ nothing; but had
taken all that for granted on Mr. Richard Hardie's word.

Dr. Wycherley deposed to Alfred's being insane and abnormally irritable,
and under a pecuniary illusion, as stated in his certificate: and to his
own vast experience. But the fire of cross-examination melted all his
polysyllables into guesswork and hearsay. It melted out of him that he, a
stranger, had intruded on the young man's privacy, and had burst into a
most delicate topic, his disagreement with his father, and so had himself
created the very irritation he had set down to madness. He also had to
admit that he knew nothing about the L. 14,000 or the phantom, but had
taken for granted the young man's own father, who consulted him, was not
telling him a deliberate and wicked falsehood.

_Colt._--In short, sir, you were retained to make the man out insane,
just as my learned friend there is retained.

_Wycherley._--I think, sir, it would not be consistent with the dignity
of my profession to notice that comparison.

_Colt._--I leave defendant's counsel to thank you for that. Come, never
mind _dignity;_ let us have a little _truth._ Is it consistent with your
dignity to tell us whether the keepers of private asylums pay you a
commission for all the patients you consign to durance vile by your
certificates?

Dr. Wycherley fenced with this question, but the remorseless Colt only
kept him longer under torture, and dragged out of him that he received
fifteen per cent. from the asylum keepers for every patient he wrote
insane; and that he had an income of eight hundred pounds a year from
that source alone. This, of course, was the very thing to prejudice a
jury against the defence: and Colt's art was to keep to their level.

Speers, cross-examined, failed to conceal that he was a mere tool of
Wycherley's, and had signed in manifest collusion, adhering to the letter
of the statute, but violating its spirit for certainly, the Act never
intended by "separate examination," that two doctors should come into the
passage, and walk into the room alternately, then reunite, and do the
signing as agreed before they ever saw the patient. As to the illusion
about the fourteen thousand pounds, Speers owned that the plaintiff had
not uttered a word about the subject, but had peremptorily declined it.
He had to confess, too, that he had taken for granted Dr. Wycherley was
correctly informed about the said illusion.

"In short," said the judge, interposing, "Dr. Wycherley took the very
thing for granted which it was his duty to ascertain; and you, sir, not
to be behind Dr. Wycherley, took the thing for granted at second hand."
And when Speers had left the box, he said to Serjeant Saunders, "If this
case is to be defended seriously, you had better call Mr. Richard Hardie
without further delay."

"It is my wish, my lud; but I am sorry to say he is in the country very
ill; and I have no hope of seeing him here before to-morrow."

"Oh, well; so that you _do_ call him. I shall not lay hearsay before the
jury: hearsay gathered from Mr. Richard Hardie--whom you will call in
person if the reports he has circulated have any basis whatever in
truth."

Mr. Saunders said coolly, "Mr. Richard Hardie is not the defendant," and
flowed on; nor would any but a lawyer have suspected what a terrible stab
the judge had given him so quietly.

The surgeon of Silverton House was then sworn, and produced the case
book; and there stood the entries which had been so fatal to Alfred with
the visiting justices. Suicide, homicide, self-starvation. But the
plaintiff got to Mr. Colt with a piece of paper, on which he had written
his view of all this, and cross-examination dissolved the suicide and
homicide into a spirited attempt to escape and resist a false
imprisonment As for the self-starvation, Colt elicited that Alfred had
eaten at six o'clock though not at two. "And pray, sir," said he,
contemptuously, to the witness, "do you never stir out of a madhouse? Do
you imagine that gentlemen in their senses dine at two o'clock in the
nineteenth century?"

"No. I don't say that."

"What _do_ you say, then? Is forcible imprisonment of a bridegroom in a
madhouse the thing to give a _gentleman_ a _factitious_ appetite at
_your_ barbarous dinner-hour?"

In a word, Colt was rough with this witness, and nearly smashed him.
Saunders fought gallantly on, and put in Lawyer Crawford with his draft
of the insane deed, as he called it, by which the erotic monomaniac
Alfred divested himself of all his money in favour of the Dodds. There
was no dissolving this deed away; and Crawford swore he had entreated the
plaintiff not to insist on his drawing so unheard-of a document; but
opposition or question seemed to irritate his client, so that he had
complied, and the deed was to have been signed on the wedding-day.

All the lawyers present thought this looked really mad. Fancy a man
signing away his property to his wife's relatives!! The court, which had
already sat long beyond the usual time, broke up, leaving the defendant
with this advantage. Alfred Hardie and his friends made a little knot in
the hall outside, and talked excitedly over the incidents of the trial.
Mr. Compton introduced Fullalove and Vespasian. They all shook hands with
them, and thanked them warmly for the timely and most unexpected aid. But
Green and a myrmidon broke in upon their conversation. "I am down on Mr.
Barkington _alias_ Noah Skinner. It isn't very far from here, if you will
follow me." Green was as excited as a foxhound when Pug has begun to
trail his brush: the more so that another client of his wanted Noah
Skinner; and so the detective was doing a double stroke of business. He
led the way; it was dry, and they all went in pairs after him into the
back slums of Westminster; and a pretty part that is.

Now as they went along Alfred hung behind with Julia, and asked her what
on earth she meant by swearing that it was all over between her and him.
"Why your last letter was full of love, dearest; what could you be
thinking of to say that?"

She shook her head sadly, and revealed to him with many prayers for
forgiveness that she had been playing a part of late: that she had
concealed her father's death from him, and the fatal barrier interposed.

"I was afraid you would be disheartened, and lose your first class and
perhaps your trial. But you are safe now, dear Alfred; I am sure the
judge sees through them; for I have studied him for you. I know his face
by heart, and all his looks and what they mean. My Alfred will be cleared
of this wicked slander, and happy with some one----Ah!"

"Yes, I mean to be happy with some one," said Alfred. "I am not one of
your self-sacrificing angels; thank Heaven! Your shall not sacrifice us
to your mother's injustice nor to the caprices of fate. We have one
another; but you would immolate me for the pleasure of immolating
yourself. Don't provoke me too far, or I'll carry you off by force. I
swear it, by Him who made us both."

"Dearest, how wildly you talk." And with this Julia hung her head, and
had a guilty thrill. She could not help thinking that eccentric little
measure would relieve her of the sin of disobedience.

After making known to her his desperate resolution, Alfred was silent,
and they went sadly side by side; so dear, so near, yet always some
infernal thing or other coming between them. They reached a passage in a
miserable street. At the mouth stood two of Green's men, planted there to
follow Skinner should he go out: but they reported all quiet. "Bring the
old gentleman up," said Green. "I appointed him six o'clock, and it's on
the stroke." He then descended the passage, and striking a light led the
way up a high stair. Skinner lived on the fifth story. Green tapped at
his door. "Mr. Barkington."

No reply.

"Mr. Barkington, I've brought you some money."

No reply.

"Perhaps he is not at home," said Mr. Compton.

"Oh, yes, sir, I sent a sharp boy up, and he picked the paper out of the
keyhole and saw him sitting reading."

He then applied his own eye to the keyhole. "I see something black," said
he, "I think he suspects."

While he hesitated, they became conscious of a pungent vapour stealing
through the now open keyhole.

"Hallo!" said Green, "what is this?"

Fullalove observed coolly that Mr. Skinner's lungs must he peculiarly
made if he could breathe in that atmosphere. "If you want to see him
alive, let me open the door."

"There's something amiss here," said Green gravely.

At that Fullalove whipped out a tool no bigger than a nutcracker, forced
the edge in, and sent the door flying open. The room or den was full of
an acrid vapour, and close to them sat he they sought motionless.

"Keep the lady back," cried Green, and threw the vivid light of his
bull's eye on a strange, grotesque, and ghastly scene. The floor was
covered with bright sovereigns that glittered in the lamp-light. On the
table was an open book, and a candle quite burnt down: the grease had run
into a circle.

And, as was that grease to the expired light, so was the thing that sat
there in human form to the Noah Skinner they had come to seek. Dead this
many a day of charcoal fumes, but preserved from decomposition by those
very fumes, sat Noah Skinner, dried into bones and leather waiting for
them with his own Hard Cash, and with theirs; for, creeping awestruck
round that mummified figure seated dead on his pool of sovereigns, they
soon noticed in his left hand a paper: it was discoloured by the vapour,
and part hid by the dead thumb; but thus much shone out clear and
amazing, that it was a banker's receipt to David Dodd, Esq., for L.
14,010, drawn at Barkington, and signed for Richard Hardie by Noah
Skinner. Julia had drawn back, and was hiding her face; but soon
curiosity struggled with awe in the others: they peeped at the Receipt:
they touched the weird figure. Its yellow skin sounded like a drum, and
its joints creaked like a puppets. At last Compton suggested that Edward
Dodd ought to secure that valuable document. "No no," said Edward: "it is
too like robbing the dead."

"Then I will," said Compton.

But he found the dead thumb and finger would not part with the Receipt;
then, as a trifle turns the scale, he hesitated in turn: and all but
Julia stood motionless round the body that held the Receipt, the soul of
the lost Cash, and still, as in life, seemed loth to part with it.

Then Fullalove came beside the arm-chair, and said with simple dignity,
"I'm a man from foreign parts; I have no interest here but justice: and
justice I'll dew." He took the dead arm, and the joint creaked: he
applied the same lever to the bone and parchment hand he had to the door:
it creaked too, but more faintly, and opened and let out this:--


No. 17. BARKINGTON, Nov. 10, 1847.

_Received of_ DAVID DODD, Esq., _the sum of Fourteen Thousand and Ten
Pounds Twelve Shillings and Six Pence,

to account on demand

_For_ RICHARD HARDIE,

NOAH SKINNER.

L. 14,010: 12: 6.


A stately foot came up the stair, but no one heard it. All were absorbed
in the strange weird sight, and this great stroke of fate; or of
Providence.

"This is yours, I reckon," said Fullalove, and handed the receipt to
Edward. "No, no!" said Compton. "See: I've just found a will, bequeathing
all he has in the world, with his blessing, to Miss Julia Dodd. These
sovereigns are yours, then. But above all, the paper: as your legal
adviser, I insist on your taking it immediately. Possession is nine
points. However, it is actually yours, in virtue of this bequest."

A solemn passionless voice seemed to fall on them from the clouds,

"No; it is Mine."


MY story must now return on board the _Vulture._ Just before noon, the
bell the half hours are struck on was tolled to collect the ship's
company; and soon the gangways and booms were crowded, and even the yards
were manned with sailors, collected to see their shipmate committed to
the deep. Next came the lieutenants and midshipmen and stood reverently
on the deck: the body was brought and placed on a grating. Then all heads
being uncovered below and aloft, the chaplain read the solemn service of
the dead.

Many tears were shied by the rough sailors, the more so that to most of
them, though not to the officers, it was now known that poor Billy had
not always been before the mast, but had seen better days, and commanded
vessels, and saved lives; and now he had lost his own.

The service is the same as ashore, with this exception: that the words
"We commit his body to the ground, ashes to ashes, dust to dust," &c.,
are altered at sea, thus: "We commit his body to the deep, to be turned
into corruption, looking for the resurrection of the body, when the sea
shall give up her dead; and the life of the world to come." At these
words the body is allowed to glide off the grating into the sea. The
chaplain's solemn voice drew near those very words, and the tears of pity
fell faster; and Georgie White, an affectionate boy, sobbed violently,
and shivered beforehand at the sullen plunge that he knew would soon
come, and then he should see no more poor Billy who had given his life
for his.

At this moment the captain came flying on deck, and jumping on to a gun,
cried sharply, "Avast! Haul that body aboard."

The sharp voice of command cut across the solemn words and tones in the
most startling way. The chaplain closed his book with a look of amazement
and indignation: the sailors stared, and for the first time did not obey
an order. To be sure it was one they had never heard before. Then the
captain got angry, and repeated his command louder, and the body was
almost jerked in board.

"Carry him to my cabin; and uncover his face."

By this time nothing could surprise Jackey Tar. Four sailors executed the
order promptly.

"Bosen, pipe to duty."

While the men were dispersing to their several stations, Captain
Bazalgette apologised to the chaplain, and explained to him and to the
officers. But I give his explanation in my own words. Finding the ship
quiet, the purser went to the captain down below, and asked him coolly
what entry he should make in the ship's books about this William
Thompson, who was no more William Thompson than he was. "What do you
mean?" said the captain. Then the purser told him that Thompson's
messmates, in preparing him last night for interment, had found a little
bag round his neck, and inside it, a medal of the Humane Society, and a
slip of paper written on in a lady's hand; then they had sent for him;
and he had seen at once that this was a mysterious case: this lady spoke
of him as her husband, and skipper of a merchant vessel.

What is that?" roared the captain, who hitherto had listened with scarce
half an ear.

Skipper of a merchant vessel, sir, as sure as you command her majesty's
frigate _Vulture:_ and then we found his shirt marked with the same name
as the lady's."

"What was the lady's name?"

"Lucy Dodd; and David Dodd is on the shirt."

"Why didn't you tell me this before?" cried the captain.

"Didn't know it till last night."

"Why it is twelve o'clock. They are burying him."

"Yes, sir."

"Lucy would never forgive me," cried the captain. And to the purser's
utter amazement he clapped on his cocked hat, and flew out of the cabin
on the errand I have described.

He now returned to the cabin and looked: a glance was enough: there lay
the kindly face that had been his friend man and boy.

He hid his own with his hands, and moaned. He cursed his own blindness
and stupidity in not recognising that face among a thousand. In this he
was unjust to himself. David had never looked _himself_ till now.

He sent for the surgeon, and told him the whole sad story: and asked him
what could be done. His poor cousin Lucy had more than once expressed her
horror of interment at sea. "It is very hot," said he; "but surely you
must know some way of keeping him till we land in New Zealand: curse
these flies; how they bite!"

The surgeon's eyes sparkled; he happened to be an enthusiast in the art
of embalming. "Keep him to New Zealand?" said he contemptuously, "I'll
embalm him so that he shall go to England looking just as he does now--
by-the-by, I never saw a drowned man keep his colour so well before--ay,
and two thousand years after that, if you don't mind the expense."

"The expense! I don't care, if it cost me a year's pay. I think of
nothing but repairing my blunder as far as I can."

The surgeon was delighted. Standing over his subject, who lay on the
captain's table, he told that officer how he should proceed. "I have all
the syringes," he said; "a capital collection. I shall inject the veins
with care and patience; then I shall remove the brain and the viscera,
and provided I'm not stinted in arsenic and spices----"

"I give you carte blanche on the purser: make your preparations, and send
for him. Don't tell me how you do it; but do it. I must write and tell
poor Lucy I have got him, and am bringing him home to her--dead."

The surgeon was gone about a quarter of an hour; he then returned with
two men to remove the body, and found the captain still writing his
letter, very sorrowful: but now and then slapping his face or leg with a
hearty curse as the flies stung him.

The surgeon beckoned the men in softly, and pointed to the body for them
to carry it out.

Now, as he pointed, his eye, following his finger, fell on something that
struck that experienced eye as incredible: he uttered an exclamation of
astonishment so loud that the captain looked up directly from his letter;
and saw him standing with his finger pointing at the corpse, and his eyes
staring astonishment "What now?" said the captain, and rose from his seat

"Look! look! look!"

The captain came and looked, and said he saw nothing at all.

"The fly; the fly!" cried the surgeon.

"Yes, I see one of them has been biting him; for there's a little blood
trickling. Poor fellow."

"A dead man can't bleed from the small veins in his skin," said the man
of art. "He is alive, captain, he is alive, as sure as we stand here, and
God's above. That little insect was wiser than us; he is alive."

"Jackson, don't trifle with me, or I'll hang you at the yard-arm. God
bless you, Jackson. Is it really possible? Run some of you, get a mirror:
I have heard that is a test"

"Mirror be hanged. Doctor Fly knows his business."

All was now flutter and bustle: and various attempts were made to
resuscitate David, but all in vain. At last the surgeon had an idea.
"This man was never drowned at all" said he: "I am sure of it. This is
catalepsy. He may lie this way for a week. But dead he is not. I'll try
the douche." David was then by his orders stripped and carried to a place
where they could turn a watercock on him from a height: and the surgeon
had soon the happiness of pointing out to the captain a slight blush on
David's skin in parts, caused by the falling water. All doubts ceased
with this: the only fear was lest they should shake out the trembling
life by rough usage. They laid him on his stomach, and with a bellows and
pipe so acted on the lungs, that at last a genuine sigh issued from the
patient's breast. Then they put him in a warm bed, and applied
stimulants; and by slow degrees the eyelids began to wink, the eyes to
look more mellow, the respiration to strengthen, the heart to beat:
"Patience, now," said the surgeon, "patience, and lots of air."

Patience was rewarded. Just four hours after the first treatment, a
voice, faint but calm and genial, issued from the bed on their astonished
ears, "Good morning to you all."

They kept very quiet. In about five minutes more the voice broke out
again, calm and sonorous--

"Where is my money--my fourteen thousand pounds?"


These words set them all looking at one another: and very much puzzled
the surgeon: they were delivered with such sobriety and conviction.
"Captain," he whispered, "ask him. if he knows you."

"David," said the captain kindly, "do you know me?" David looked at him
earnestly, and his old kindly smile broke out, "Know ye, ye clog," said
he, "why, you are my cousin Reginald. And how came you into this
thundering bank? I hope you have got no money here. 'Ware land sharks!"

"We are not in a bank, David; we are on board my ship."

"The deuce we are. But where's my money?"

"Oh, we'll talk about that by-and-by."

The surgeon stepped forward, and said soothingly, "You have been very
ill, sir. You have had a fit."

"I believe you are right," said David thoughtfully.

"Will you allow me to examine your eye?"

"Certainly, doctor."

The surgeon examined David's eye with his thumb and finger and then
looked into it to see how the pupil dilated and contracted.

He rubbed his hands after this examination; "More good news, captain!"
then lowering his voice, _"Your friend is as sane as I am._"

The surgeon was right. A shock had brought back the reason a shock had
taken away. But how or why I know no more than the child unborn. The
surgeon wrote a learned paper, and explained the whole most ingeniously.
I don't believe one word of his explanation, and can't better it; so
confine myself to the phenomena. Being now sane, the boundary wall of his
memory was shifted. He remembered his whole life up to his demanding his
cash back of Richard Hardie; and there his reawakened mind stopped dead
short. Being asked if he knew William Thompson, he said, "Yes, perfectly.
He was a foretopman on board the _Agra,_ and rather a smart hand. The
ship was aground and breaking up: he went out to sea on a piano: but we
cut the hawser as he drifted under, and he got safe ashore." David's
recovered reason rejected with contempt as an idle dream all that had
happened while that reason was in defect The last phenomena I have to
record were bodily: one was noted by Mr. Georgie White in these terms:
"Billy's eyes used to be like a seal's: but, now he is a great gentleman,
they are like yours and mine." The other was more singular: with his
recovered reason came his first grey hair, and in one fortnight it was
all as white as snow.

He remained a fortnight on board the _Vulture,_ beloved by high and low.
He walked the quarter-deck in the dress of a private gentleman, but
looking like an admiral. The sailors touched their hats to him with a
strange mixture of veneration and jocoseness. They called him among
themselves Commodore Billy. He was supplied with funds by Reginald, and
put on board a merchant ship bound for England. He landed, amid went
straight to Barkington. There he heard his family were in London. He came
back to London, and sought them. A friend told him of Green; he went to
him, and of course Green saw directly who he was. But able men don't cut
business short. He gravely accepted David's commission to find him Mrs.
Dodd. Finding him so confident, David asked him if he thought he could
find Richard Hardie or his clerk, Noah Skinner; both of whom had levanted
from Barkington. Green, who was on a hot scent as to Skinner, demurely
accepted both commissions; and appointed David to meet him at a certain
place at six. He came; he found Green's man, who took him upstairs, and
there was that excited group determining the ownership of his receipt.

Now to David that receipt was a thing of yesterday. "It is mine," said
he. They all turned to look at this man, with sober passionless voice,
and hair of snow. A keen cry from Julia's heart made every heart there
quiver, and in a moment she was clinging and sobbing on her father's
neck. Edward could only get his hand and press and kiss it. Instinct told
them Heaven had given them their father back, mind and all.

Ere the joy and the emotion had calmed themselves, Alfred Hardie slipped
out and ran like a deer to Pembroke Street.

Those who were so strangely reunited could not part for a long time, even
to go down the stairs one by one.

David was the first to recover his composure: indeed, great tranquillity
of spirit had ever since his cure been a remarkable characteristic of
this man's nature. His passing mania seemed to have burnt out all his
impetuosity, leaving him singularly sober, calm, and self-governed.

Mr. Compton took the money, and the will, and promised the Executrix,
Skinner should be decently interred and all his debts paid out of the
estate. He would look in at 66 by-and-by.

And now a happy party wended their way towards Pembroke Street.

But Alfred was beforehand with them: he went boldly up the stairs, and
actually surprised Mrs. Dodd and Sampson together.

At sight of him she rose, made him a low curtsey, and beat a retreat. He
whipped to the door, and set his back against it. "No," said he saucily.

She drew up majestically, and the colour mounted in her pale face. "What,
sir, would you detain me by force?"

"And no mistake," said the audacious boy. "How else can I detain you when
you hate me so?" She began to peep into his sparkling eyes to see the
reason of this strange conduct

"C'way from the door, ye vagabin," said Sampson.

"No, no, my friend," said Mrs. Dodd, trembling, and still peering into
his sparkling eyes. "Mr. Alfred Hardie is a gentleman, at all events: he
would not take such a liberty with me, unless he had some excuse for it."

"You are wonderfully shrewd, mamma," said Alfred admiringly. "The excuse
is, I don't hate you as you hate me; and I am very happy."

"Why do you call me mamma to-day? Oh, doctor, he calls me mamma."

"Th' audacious vagabin."

"No, no, I cannot think he would call me that unless he had some good
news for us both?"

"What good news can he have, except that his trile is goin' well, and you
don't care for that"

"Oh, how can you say so? I care for all that concerns him: he would not
come here to insult my misery with his happiness. He is noble, he is
generous, with all his faults. How dare you call me mamma, sir! Call it
me again, my dear child; because then I shall _know_ you are come to save
my heart from breaking." And with this, the truth must be told, the
stately Mrs. Dodd did fawn upon Alfred with palms outstretched and
piteous eyes, and certain cajoling arts of her sex.

"Give me a kiss then, mamma," said the impudent boy, "and I _will_ tell
you a little bit of good news."

She bowed her stately head directly, and paid the required tribute with
servile humility and readiness.

"Well then," said Alfred, and was just going to tell her all, but caught
sight of Sampson making the most expressive pantomime to him to be
cautious. "Well," said he, "I have seen a sailor."

"Ah!"

"And he is sure Mr. Dodd is alive."

Mrs. Dodd lifted her hands to heaven, but could not speak. "In fact,"
said Alfred, hesitating (for he was a wretched hand at a fib), "he saw
him not a fortnight ago on board ship. But that is not all, mamma, the
sailor says he has his reason."

Mrs. Dodd sank on her knees, and said no word to man, but many to the
Giver of all good. When she arose, she said to Alfred, "Bring this sailor
to me. I must speak with him directly."

Alfred coloured. "I don't know where to find him just now."

"Oh, indeed," said Mrs. Dodd quietly: and this excited her suspicion; and
from that moment the cunning creature lay in wait for Master Alfred. She
plied him with questions, and he got more and more puzzled how to sustain
his story. At last, by way of bursting out of his own net, he said, "But
I am sorry to say his hair has turned white. But perhaps you won't mind
that."

"And he hadn't a grey hair."

"It is not grey, like the doctor's: it is as white as the driven snow."

Mrs. Dodd sighed; then suddenly turning on Alfred, asked him, "Did the
sailor tell you that?"

He hesitated a moment and was lost.

"You have seen him," she screamed; "he is in London: he is in the house.
I feel him near me:" and she went into something very like hysterics.
Alfred was alarmed, and whispered the truth. The doctor sent him off to
meet them, and recommended caution; her nerves were in such a state a
violent shock, even of happiness, might kill her.

Thus warned, Julia came into the room alone, and while Dr. Sampson was
inculcating self-restraint for her own sake, she listened with a superior
smile, and took quite a different line. "Mamma," said she, "he is in the
town; but I dare not bring him here till you are composed: his reason is
restored; but his nerves are not so strong as they were. Now, if you
agitate yourself, you will agitate him, and will do him a serious
mischief."

This crafty speech produced an incredible effect on Mrs. Dodd. It calmed
her directly: or rather her great love gave her strength to be calm. "I
will not be such a wretch," she said. "See: I am composed, quite
composed. Bring me my darling, and you shall see how good I will be:
there now, Julia, see how calm I am, quite calm. What, have I borne so
much misery, with Heaven's help, and do you think I cannot bear this
great happiness for my dear darling's sake?"

On this they proposed she should retire to her room, and they would go
for David.

"Think over the meeting, dear, dear mamma," said Julia, "and then you
will behave well for his sake, who was lost to us and is found."

Husband and wife met alone in Mrs. Dodd's room. No eye, even of the
children, ventured to witness a scene so strange, so sacred. We may try
and imagine that meeting; but few of us can conceive it by the light of
our narrow experience. Yet one or two there may be--the world is wide,
and the adventures and emotions of our race are many.

One by one all were had up to that sacred room to talk to the happy pair.
They found David seated calmly at his wife's feet, her soft hand laid on
his white hair, lest he should leave her again: and they told him all the
sorrow behind them; and he, genial and kindly as ever, told them all the
happiness before them. He spoke like the master of the house, the father
of the family, the friend of them all.

But with all his goodness he was sternly resolved to have his L. 14,000
out of Richard Hardie. He had an interview with Mr. Compton that very
night, and the lawyer wrote a letter to Mr. Hardie, saying nothing about
the death of Skinner, but notifying that his client, Captain Dodd, had
recovered from Noah Skinner the receipt No. 17 for L. 14,010 12s. 6d, and
he was instructed to sue for it unless repaid immediately. He added
Captain Dodd was mercifully restored, and remembered distinctly every
particular of the transaction.


They all thought in their innocence that Hardie _v._ Hardie was now at an
end. Captain Dodd could prove Alfred's _soi-disant_ illusion to be the
simple truth. But Compton thought that this evidence had come too late.
"What, may we not get up and say here is papa, and it is all true?" cried
Julia indignant.

"No, Miss Dodd; our case is closed. And take my advice: don't subject
your father to the agitation of a trial. We can do without him."

Well then, they would all go as spectators, and pray that justice might
prevail.

They did go: and all sat together to hear a matter puzzled over, which
had David come one day earlier he would have set at rest for ever.

Dick Absolom was put in to prove that Alfred had put two sovereigns on
the stumps for him to bowl if he could; and after him the defendant, Mr.
Thomas Hardie, a mild, benevolent, weak gentleman, was put into the box,
and swore the boy's father had come to him with story after story of the
plaintiff's madness, and the trouble it would get him into, and so he had
done for the best. His simplicity was manifest, and Saunders worked it
ably. When Colt got hold of him, and badgered him, he showed something
more than simplicity. He stuttered, he contradicted himself, he
perspired, he all but wept

_Colt._--Are you sure you had no spite against him?

_Deft._--No.

_Colt._--You are not sure, eh?

This candid interpretation of his words knocked the defendant stupid. He
made no reply, but looked utterly flabbergasted.

_Colt._--Did he not provoke you? Did he not call you an idiot.

_Deft._--He might.

_Colt._ (satirically).--Of course he might. (Laughter.) But did he?

_Deft._ (plucking up a little spirit).--No. He called me SOFT TOMMY.

This revelation, and the singular appropriateness of the nickname, were
so highly relished by an intelligent audience, that it was a long time
before the trial could go on for roars. The plaintiff's ringing laugh was
heard among the rest.

The cross-examination proceeded in this style till the defendant began to
drivel at the mouth a little. At last, after a struggle, he said, with a
piteous whine, that he could not help it: he hated signing his name; some
mischief always came of it; but this time he had no option.

"No option?" said Colt. "What do you mean?"

And with one or two more turns of the screw, out came this astounding
revelation:

"Richard said if I didn't put Taff in one, _he_ would put _me_ in one."

_The Judge._--In one what?

_Deft._ (weeping).--In one madhouse, my lord.

A peal followed this announcement, and Colt sat down grinning. Saunders
rose smiling. "I am much obliged to the learned counsel for making my
case," said he: "I need not prolong the sufferings of the innocent. You
can go down, Mr. Hardie."

_The Judge._--Have you any defence to this action?

"Certainly, my lord."

"Do you call Richard Hardie?"

"No, my lord."

"Then had you not better confine yourself to the question of damages?"

The sturdy Saunders would not take the hint; he replied upon the whole
case, and fought hard for a verdict. The line he took was bold; he
described Richard Hardie as a man who had acquired a complete power over
his weaker brother: and had not only persuaded him by statements, but
even compelled him by threats, to do what he believed would be the
salvation of his nephew. "Will you imitate the learned counsel's cruelty?
Will you strike a child?" In short, he made a powerful appeal to their
pity, while pretending to address their judgments.

Then Colt rose like a tower, and assuming the verdict as certain, asked
the jury for heavy damages. He contrasted powerfully the defendant's
paltry claim to pity with the anguish the plaintiff had undergone. He
drew the wedding party, the insult to the bride, the despair of the
kidnapped bridegroom; he lashed the whole gang of conspirators concerned
in the crime, regretted that they could only make one of all these
villains smart, but hinted that Richard and Thomas Hardie were in one
boat, and that heavy damages inflicted on Thomas would find the darker
culprit out. He rapped out Mr. Cowper's lines on liberty, and they were
new to the jury, though probably not to you; he warned the jury that all
our liberties depended on them. "In vain," said he, "have we beheaded one
tyrant, and banished another, to secure those liberties, if men are to be
allowed to send away their own flesh and blood into the worst of all
prisons for life and not smart for it, in those lamentably few cases in
which the law finds them out and lays hold of them." But it would task my
abilities to the utmost, and occupy more time than is left me, to do
anything like justice to the fluent fiery eloquence of Colt, Q. C., when
he got a great chance like this. _Tonat, fulgurat, et rapidis eloquentiae
fluctibus cuncia proruit et proturbat._ Bursts of applause, that neither
crier nor judge could suppress, bore witness to the deep indignation
Britons feel when their hard-earned liberties are tampered with by power
or fraud, in defiance of law; and, when he sat down, the jury were ready
to fly out at him with L. 5000 in hand.

Then rose the passionless voice of "justice according to law." I wish I
could give the very words. The following is the effect as _I_ understood
it. Lawyers, forgive my deficiencies.

"This is an important, but not a difficult case. The plaintiff sues the
defendant under _the law of England_ for falsely imprisoning him in a
madhouse. The imprisonment is admitted, and the sufferings of the
plaintiff not disputed. The question is, whether he was insane at the
time of the act? Now, I must tell you, that in a case of this kind, it
lies upon the defendant to prove the plaintiff's insanity, rather than on
the plaintiff to prove his own sanity. Has the defendant overcome this
difficulty? Illusion is the best proof of insanity; and a serious
endeavour was certainly made to fasten an illusion on the plaintiff about
a sum of L. 14,000. But the proof was weak, and went partly on an
assumption that all error is hallucination; this is illusory, and would,
if acted on, set one half the kingdom imprisoning the other half; and
after all, they did not demonstrate that the plaintiff was _in error._
They advanced no _undeniable proof_ that Mr. Richard Hardie has not
embezzled this L. 14,000. I don't say it was proved on the other hand
that he did embezzle that sum. Richard Hardie sueing Alfred Hardie for
libel on this evidence might possibly obtain a verdict; for then the
burden of proof would lie on Alfred Hardie; but here it lies on those who
say he is insane. The fact appears to be that the plaintiff imbibed a
reasonable suspicion of his own father's integrity; it was a suspicion
founded on evidence, imperfect, indeed, but of a sound character as far
as it went. There had been a letter from Captain Dodd to his family,
announcing his return with L. 14,000 upon him, and, while as yet unaware
of this letter, the plaintiff heard David Dodd accuse Richard Hardie of
possessing improperly L. 14,000, the identical sum. At least, he swears
to this, and as Richard Hardie was not called to contradict him, you are
at liberty to suppose that Richard Hardie had some difficulty in
contradicting him on oath. Here, then, true or false, was a rational
suspicion, and every man has a right to a rational suspicion of his
neighbour, and even to utter it within due limits; and, if he overstep
those, the party slandered has his legal remedy; but if he omits his
legal remedy, and makes an attempt of doubtful legality not to confute,
but to stifle, the voice of reasonable suspicion, shrewd men will suspect
all the more. But then comes a distinct and respectable kind of evidence
for the defendant; he urges that the plaintiff was going to sign away his
property to his wife's relations. Now, this was proved, and a draft of
the deed put in and sworn to. This taken singly has a very extraordinary
look. Still, you must consider the plaintiff's reasonable suspicion that
money belonging to the Dodds had passed irregularly to the Hardies, and
then the wonder is diminished. Young and noble minds have in every age
done generous, self-denying, and delicate acts. The older we get, the
less likely we are to be incarcerated for a crime of this character; but
we are not to imprison youth and chivalry merely because we have outgrown
them. To go from particulars to generals, the defendant, on whom the
proof lies, has advanced hearsay and conjecture, and not put their
originators into the box. The plaintiff, on whom the proof does not lie,
has advanced abundant evidence that he was sane at the time of his
incarceration: this was proved to demonstration by friends, strangers,
and by himself." Here the judge analysed the testimony of several of the
plaintiff's witnesses.

"As to the parties themselves, it is curious how they impersonated, so to
speak, their respective lines of argument. The representative of evidence
and sound reasoning, though accused of insanity, was precise, frank,
rational and dignified in the witness-box; and I think you must have
noticed his good temper. The party, who relied on hearsay and conjecture,
was as feeble as they are; he was almost imbecile, as you observed; and,
looking at both parties, it really seems monstrous that the plaintiff
should be the one confined as a lunatic, and the defendant allowed to run
wild and lock up his intellectual superiors. If he means to lock them
_all_ up, even you and I are hardly safe. (Laughter.) The only serious
question, I apprehend, is on what basis the damages ought to be assessed.
The plaintiffs counsel has made a powerful appeal to your passions, and
calls for vengeance. Now I must tell you, you have no right to make
yourselves ministers of vengeance, nor even to punish the defendant, in a
suit of the kind: still less ought you to strike the defendant harder
than you otherwise would--in the vague hope of punishing indirectly the
true mover of the defendant and the other puppets. I must warn you
against that suggestion of the learned counsel's. If the plaintiff wants
vengeance, the criminal law offers it. He comes here, not for vengeance,
but for compensation, and restoration to that society which he is every
way fitted to adorn. More than this--and all our sympathies--it is not
for us to give him. But then the defendant's counsel went too far the
other way. His client, he says, is next door to an idiot, and so,
forsooth, his purse must be spared entirely. This is all very well if it
could be done without ignoring the plaintiff and his just claim to
compensation. Why, if the defendant, instead of being weak-minded, were
an idiot or a lunatic, it would protect him from punishment as a felon,
but not from damages in a suit. A sane man is not to be falsely
imprisoned by a lunatic without full compensation from the lunatic or his
estate: _a fortiori,_ he is not to be so imprisoned by a mere fool
without just compensation. Supposing your verdict, then, to be for the
plaintiff, I think vindictive damages would be unfair, on this feeble
defendant, who has acted recklessly, but under an error, and without
malice, or bad faith. On the other hand, nominal or even unsubstantial
damages would be unjust to the plaintiff; and perhaps leave in some minds
a doubt that I think you do not yourselves entertain, as to the
plaintiff's perfect sanity during the whole period of his life."

As soon as his lordship had ended, the foreman of the jury said their
minds were quite made up long ago.

"Si-lence in the court."

"We find for the plaintiff, with damages three thousand pounds."

The verdict was received with some surprise by the judge, and all the
lawyers except Mr. Colt, and by the people with acclamation; in the midst
of which Mr. Colt announced that the plaintiff had just gained his first
class at Oxford. "I wish him joy," said the judge.


CHAPTER LIV

THE verdict was a thunder-clap to Richard Hardie: he had promised Thomas
to bear him blameless. The Old Turks, into which he had bought at 72,
were down to 71, and that implied a loss of five thousand pounds. On the
top of all this came Mr. Compton's letter neatly copied by Colls: Richard
Hardie was doubly and trebly ruined.

Then in his despair and hate he determined to baffle them all, ay, and
sting the hearts of some of them once more.

He would give Peggy his last shilling; write a line to Alfred, another to
Julia, assuring them he had no money, and they had killed him. And with
that leave them both the solemn curse of a dying father, and then kill
himself.

Not to be interrupted in his plan, he temporised with Mr. Compton; wrote
that, if the Receipt was really signed by his agent, of course the loss
must fall on him; it was a large sum, but he would sell out and do his
best, in ten days from date. With this he went and bought a pistol, and
at several chemist's shops a little essential oil of almonds: his plan
was to take the poison, and, if it killed without pain, well and good;
but if it tortured him, then he would blow his brains out at once.

He soon arranged his worldly affairs, and next day gave Peggy his L. 500,
and told her she had better keep it for fear he should be arrested. He
sent her on an errand to the other part of the town: then with his poison
and the pistol before him on the table, wrote a brief but emphatic curse
for his son and Julia; and a line to Peggy to thank her for her fidelity
to one so much older than herself, and to advise her to take a
tobacconist's shop with his money. When he had done all this, he poured
out the fragrant poison and tasted it.

Ere he could drink it, one of those quidnunes, who are always
interrupting a gentleman when he has important business on hand, came
running in with all manner of small intelligence. Mr. Hardie put down the
glass, and gave him short, sullen answers, in hopes he would then go away
and let him proceed to business. And at last his visitor did rise and go.
Mr. Hardie sat down with a sigh of relief to his fragrant beverage.

Doesn't the door open, and this bore poke in his head: "Oh I forgot to
tell you; the Old Turks are going up today, like a shot." And with this
he slammed the door again, and was off.

At this the cup began to tremble in the resolute wretch's hand. The Old
Turks going up! He poured the poison back into the phial, and put it and
the pistol and all the letters carefully into his pocket, and took a cab
to the City.

The report was true; there was an extraordinary movement in the Old
Turks. The Sultan was about to pay a portion of this loan, being at six
per cent.; this had transpired, and at four o'clock the Turks were quoted
at 73. Mr. Hardie returned a gainer of L. 5000 instead of a loser. He
locked up the means of death for the present.

And now an ordinary man would have sold out, and got clear of the fatal
trap: but this was not an ordinary man: he would not sell a share that
day. In the afternoon they rose to 74. He came home, unloaded his pistol,
and made himself some brandy-and-water, and with a grim smile, flavoured
it with a few drops of the poison--that was a delicious tumbler. The
Turks went up, up, up, to 82. Then he sold out, and cleared L. 49,000,
and all in about ten days.

With this revived the habits of his youth; no more cheating: nothing
could excuse that but the dread of poverty. He went to his appointment
with Mr. Compton; asked to see the Receipt; said "Yes; that was his form,
and Skinner's handwriting; he had never personally received one farthing
of the money; Skinner had clearly embezzled it: but that did not matter;
of course, Captain Dodd must not lose his money. Send your bill of costs
in Hardie _v._ Hardie to me, Mr. Compton," said he, "they shall not be
taxed: you have lost enough by me already."

There was an air of dignity and good faith about the man that half
imposed even on Compton. And when Mr. Hardie drew out the notes and said,
"I should be grateful if you would forgive me the interest; but for a
great piece of good fortune on the Stock Exchange, I could never have
paid the whole principal," he said warmly, "the interest should never be
demanded through him."

He called in Colls, delivered up the Receipt, and received the L. 14,010,
12s. 6d. from Mr. Hardie.


O immortal Cash! You, like your great inventor, have then a kind of
spirit as well as a body; and on this, not on your grosser part, depends
your personal identity. So long as that survives, your body may be
recalled to its lawful owner from Heaven knows where.

Mr. Compton rushed to Pembroke Street, and put this hard, hard Cash in
David Dodd's hands once more.


Love and Constancy had triumphed: and Julia and Alfred were to be married
and go down to Albion Villa to prepare it for the whole party: tenants no
more: Alfred had bought it. The Commissioners of Lunacy had protected his
L. 20,000 zealously from the first: and his trustees had now paid the
money over.

Alfred consulted by Mrs. Dodd, whose pet of pets he now was, as to the
guests to be asked to the wedding breakfast, suggested "None but the
tried friends of our adversity."

"What an excellent idea!" said Mrs. Dodd naively.

Dr. Sampson being duly invited asked if he should bring his Emulsion.

This proposal puzzled all but Mrs. Dodd. She was found laughing heartily
in a corner without any sound of laughter. Being detected and pointed out
by Julia, she said, with a little crow, "He means his wife. Yes,
certainly, bring your Emulcent"--pretending he had used that more elegant
word--"and then they will all see how well you can behave."

Accordingly he brought a lady, who was absurdly pretty to be the mother
of several grown young ladies and gentlemen, and two shades more quiet
and placid than Mrs. Dodd. She quietly had her chair placed by Dr.
Sampson's, and, whenever he got racy, she put a hand gently on his
shoulder, and by some mesmeric effect it moderated him as Neptune did the
waves in the AEneid. She was such a mistress of this mesmeric art, that
she carried on a perfect conversation with her other neighbour, yet
modulated her lion lord with a touch of that composing hand, in a
parenthetical manner, and even while looking another way.

This hand, soft as down, yet irresistible, suppressed the great art of
healing, vital chronometry, the wrongs of inventors, the collusions of
medicine, the Mad Ox, and all but drawing-room topics, at the very first
symptom, and only just allowed the doctor to be the life and soul of the
party.

Julia and Mrs. Dodd had a good cry at parting. Of course Alfred consoled
them: reminded them it was only for a week, and carried off his lovely
prize, who in the carriage soon dried her eyes upon his shoulder.

Then she applied to her new lord and master for information. "They _say_
that you and me are one, now," said she interrogatively.

He told her triumphantly it was so.

"At that rate you are Julius and I am Elfrida," said she.

"That is a bargain," said he, and sealed it on the sweet lips that were
murmuring Heaven so near him.

In this sore-tried and now happy pair the ardour of possession lasted
long, and was succeeded by the sober but full felicity of conjugal love
and high esteem combined. They were so young and elastic, that past
sorrows seemed but to give one zest more to the great draught of
happiness they now drank day by day. They all lived together at Albion
Villa, thanks to Alfred. He was by nature combative, and his warlike soul
was roused at the current theory that you cannot be happy under the same
roof with your wife's mother. "That is cant," said he to Mrs. Dodd; "let
us, you and I, trample on it hand in hand."

"My child," said poor Mrs. Dodd sorrowfully, "I am a poor hand at
trampling; and everybody says a mother-in-law in the house bores a young
gentleman sadly."

"If a young gentleman can't live happy with you, mamma," said he, kissing
her, "he is a little snob, that is all, and not fit to live at all.
_Delenda est Cantilena!_ That means 'Down with Cant!'"

They did live together: and behold eleven French plays, with their
thirty-three English adaptations, confuted to the end of time.

Creatures so high-bred as Mrs. Dodd never fidget one. There is a repose
about them; they are balm to all those they love, and blister to none.
Item, no stranger could tell by Mrs. Dodd's manner whether Edward or
Alfred was her own son.

Oh, you happy little villa! you were as like Paradise as any mortal
dwelling can be. A day came, however, when your walls could no longer
hold all the happy inmates. Julia presented Alfred with a lovely boy;
enter nurses, and the villa showed symptoms of bursting. Two months more,
and Alfred and his wife and boy overflowed into the next villa. It was
but twenty yards off; and there was a double reason for the migration. As
often happens after a long separation Heaven bestowed on Captain and Mrs.
Dodd another infant to play about their knees at present, and help them
grow younger instead of older: for tender parents begin life again with
their children.

The boys were nearly of a size, though the nephew was a month or two
older than his uncle, a relationship that was early impressed on their
young minds, and caused those who heard their prattle many a hearty
laugh.

"Mrs. Dodd," said a lady, "I couldn't tell by your manner which is yours
and which is your daughter's."

"Why they are both mine," said Mrs. Dodd piteously, and opening her eyes
with gentle astonishment.

As years rolled on Dr. Sampson made many converts at home and abroad. The
foreign ones acknowledged their obligations. The leading London
physicians managed more skilfully; they came into his ideas, and bit by
bit reversed their whole practice, and, twenty years after, Sampson began
to strengthen the invalid at once, instead of first prostrating him, and
so causing either long sickness or sudden death. But, with all this, they
disowned their forerunner, and still called him a quack while adopting
his quackery. This dishonesty led them into difficulties. To hide that
their whole practice in medicine was reversed on _better information,_
they went from shuffle to shuffle, till at last they reached this climax
of fatuity and egotism--THE TYPE OF DISEASE IS CHANGED.


     Natura mutatur, non nos mutamur.

O, mutable Nature and immutable doctors!

O, unstable Omniscience, and infallible Nescience!

The former may err; the latter never--in its own opinion.

At this rate, draining the weak of their life blood was the right thing
in Cervantes' day: and when he observed that it killed men like sheep,
and said so under the head of Sangrado, he was confounding his own age
with an age to come three hundred years later, in which coming age
depletion was _going_ to be wrong.

Moliere--in lashing the whole scholastic system of lancet, purge, and
blister as one of slaughter--committed the same error: mistook his
century for one to come.

And Sampson, thirty years ago, sang the same tune, and mistook his
inflammatory generation for the cool generation as yet unborn. In short,
it is the characteristic of a certain blunder called genius to see things
too far in advance. The surest way to avoid this is not to see them at
all; but go blindly by the cant of the hour. _Race moutonuiere va!_

Sampson was indignant at finding that these gentry, after denouncing him
for years as a quack, were pilfering his system, yet still reviling him.
He went in a towering passion, and hashed them by tongue and pen: told
them they were his subtractors now as well as detractors, asked them how
it happened that in countries where there is no Sampson the type of
disease remains unchanged, depletion is the practice, and death the
result, as it was in every age?

No man, however stout, can help being deeply wounded when he sees his
ideas stolen, yet their author and publisher disowned. Many men's hearts
have been broken by this: but I doubt whether they were really great men.

Don't tell me Lilliput ever really kills Brobdignag. Except, of course,
when Brobdignag takes medical advice of Lilliput.

Dr. Sampson had three shields against subtraction, detraction, and all
the wrongs inventors endure: to wit, a choleric temper, a keen sense of
humour, and a good wife. He storms and rages at his detracting pupils;
but ends with roars of laughter at their impudence. I am told he still
hopes to meet with justice some day, and to give justice a chance, he
goes to bed at ten, for, says he--

    "Jinny us, jinny us,
     Take care of your carcass,"

and explains that no genius ever lived to ninety without being
appreciated.

"If Chatterton and Keats had attended to this, they would have been all
right. If James Watt had died at fifty he would have been all wrong; for
at fifty he was a failure! so was the painter Etty, the English Tishin."
And then he accumulates examples.

His last distich bearing on Hard Cash is worth recording. "Miss Julee,"
said he, "y' are goen to maerry int' a strange family--

     Where th' ijjit puts the jinnyus
     In-til a madhus,"

which, like most of the droll things this man said, was true: for Soft
Tommy and Alfred were the two intellectual extremes of the whole tribe of
Hardies.

Mrs. Archbold, disappointed both in love and revenge, posed her
understanding, and soothed her mind, with Frank Beverley and opium. This
soon made the former deep in love with her, and his intellect grew by
contact with hers. But one day news came from Australia that her husband
was dead. Now, perhaps I shall surprise the reader, if I tell him that
this Edith Archbold began her wedded life a good, confiding, loving,
faithful woman. Yet so it was: the unutterable blackguard she had
married, he it was who laboured to spoil her character, and succeeded at
last, and drove her, unwilling at first, to other men. The news of his
death was like a shower-bath; it roused her. She took counsel with
herself, and hope revived in her strong head and miserable heart. She
told Frank, and watched him like a hawk. He instantly fell on his knees,
and implored her to marry him directly. She gave him her hand and turned
away, and shed the most womanly tear that had blessed her for years. "I
am not mad, you know," said poor Frank; "I am only a bit of a muff." To
make a long story short, she exerted all her intelligence, and with her
help Frank took measures towards superseding his Commission of Lunacy.
Now, in such a case, the Lord Chancellor always examines the patient in
person. What was the consequence? Instead of the vicarious old Wolf, who
had been devouring him at third and fourth hand, Frank had two interviews
with the Chancellor himself: a learned, grave, upright gentleman, who
questioned him kindly and shrewdly and finding him to be a young man of
small intellectual grasp, but not the least idiotic or mad, superseded
his commission in defiance of his greedy kinsfolk, and handed him his
property. He married Edith Archbold, and she made him as happy as the day
was long. For the first year or two she treated his adoration with
good-natured contempt; but, as years rolled on, she became more loving,
and he more knowing! They are now a happy pair, and all between her first
honest love, and this her last, seems to her a dream.

So you see a female rake can be ameliorated by a loving husband, as well
as a male rake by a loving wife.

It sounds absurd, and will offend my female readers and their unchristian
prejudices, but that black-browed jade is like to be one of the best
wives and mothers in England. But then, mind you, she had always--Brains.


I do not exactly know why Horace puts together those two epithets, "just"
and "tenacious of purpose." Perhaps he had observed they go together. To
be honest, I am not clear whether this is so on the grand scale. But
certainly the two features did meet remarkably in one of my
characters--Alfred Hardie. The day the bank broke, he had said he would
pay the creditors. He now set to work to do it by degrees. He got the
names and addresses, lived on half his income, and paid half away to
those creditors: he even asked Julia to try and find Maxley out, and do
something for him. "But don't let me see him," said he, trembling, "for I
could not answer for myself." Maxley was known to be cranky, but
harmless, and wandering about the country. Julia wrote to Mr. Green about
him:

Alfred's was an uphill game; but fortune favours the obstinate as well as
the bold. One day, about four years after his marriage with Julia, being
in London, he found a stately figure at the corner of a street, holding
out his hand for alms, too dignified to ask it except by that mute and
touching gesture.

It was his father.

Then, as truly noble natures must forgive the fallen, Alfred was touched
to the heart, and thought of the days of his childhood, before temptation
came. "Father," said he, "have you come to this?"

"Yes, Alfred," said Richard composedly: "I undertook too many
speculations, especially in land and houses; they seemed profitable at
first, too; but now I am entirely hampered: if you would but relieve me
of them, and give me a guinea a week to live on, I would forgive all your
disobedient conduct."

Alfred bit his lip, had a wrestle with the old Adam; and said gently,
"Come home with me, sir."

He took him to Barkington, bag and baggage; and his good Christian wife
received the old man with delight; she had prayed day and night for this
reconciliation. Finding his son so warm, and being himself as cool,
Richard Hardie entrapped Alfred into an agreement, to board and lodge
him, and pay him a guinea every Saturday at noon; in return for this
Alfred was to manage Richard's property, and pocket the profits, if any.
Alfred assented: the old man chuckled at his son's simplicity, and made
him sign a formal agreement to that effect.

This done he used so sit brooding and miserable nearly all the week till
guinea time came; and then brightened up a bit. One day Alfred sent for
an accountant to look after his father's papers, and see if matters were
really desperate.

The accountant was not long at work, and told Alfred the accounts were
perfectly clear, and kept in the most, admirable order. "The cash balance
is L. 60,000," said he, "and many of the rents are due. It is an agent
you want, not an accountant."

"What are you talking about? A balance of L. 60,000?" Alfred was
stupefied.

The accountant, however, soon convinced him by the figures it was so.

Alfred went with the good news to his father.

His father went into a passion. "That is one side of the account, ye
fool," said he; "think of the rates, the taxes, the outgoings. You want
to go from your bargain, and turn me on the world; but I have got you in
black and white, tight, tight."

Then Alfred saw the truth, and wondered at his past obtuseness.

His father was a monomaniac.

He consulted Sampson, and Sampson told him to increase the old man's
comforts on the sly, and pay him his guinea a week. "It's all you can do
for him."

Then Alfred employed an agent, and received a large income from his
father's land and houses, and another from his consols. The old gentleman
had purchased westward of Hyde Park Square, and had bought with excellent
judgment till his mind gave way. Alfred never spent a farthing of it on
himself: but he took some for his father's creditors. "All justice is
good," said he, "even wild justice." Some of these unhappy creditors he
found in the workhouse; the Misses Lunley that survived were there, alas!
He paid them their four thousand pounds, and restored them to society.
The name of Hardie began to rise again from the dust.

Now, while Richard Hardie sat brooding and miserable, expecting utter
ruin, and only brightening up on guinea day, Julia had a protege with
equally false views but more cheerful ones. It was an old man with a
silver beard, and a machine with which he stamped leather into round
pieces of silver, in his opinion. Nothing could have shaken that notion
out of his mind. Julia confirmed it. She let it be known that she would
always cash five pieces of round leather from Mr. Matthews' mint per day,
and ten on Friday, when working men are poorest.

She contrived this with diabolical, no, angelical cunning, to save the
old man from ridicule, and to do his soul much good. All souls were dear
to her. What was the consequence? He went about with his mint, and
relieved poor people, and gratified his mania at the same time. His face
began to beam with benevolence and innocent self-satisfaction. On Richard
Hardie's all was cordage: and deep gloom sat on his ever-knitted brow.

Of these two men which was the rich man; he who had nothing, yet thought
he possessed enough for himself and his neighbours: or he who rolled in
wealth, but writhed under imaginary poverty?

One reflection more. Do not look to see Providence dash the cup of
prosperity from every dishonest hand; or you will often be disappointed.
Yet this, if you look closer, you shall often see: such a man holds the
glittering cup tight, and nectar to the brim; but into that cup a shadowy
hand squeezes some subtle ingredient, which turns that nectar to
wormwood.

Richard Hardie died, his end being hastened by fear of poverty coming
like an armed man, and his guinea a week going. Matthews met with an
accident, and, being impervious to pain, but subject to death, was laid
beside his poor mistress in St. Anne's churchyard. Julia buried him, and
had a headstone put to his grave; and, when this was done, she took her
husband to see it. On that stone was fresh carved the true name of the
deceased, James Maxley.

"I have done what you told me," said Julia, her sweet voice trembling a
little. Even she did not quite know how her husband would take it, or
bear it.

"I _know it,_" said Alfred softly. "I saw who your Matthews was; but I
could not speak of him, even to you." He looked at the grave in silence.

Julia's arms were round his neck in a moment, and her wet cheek consoling
his.

"You have done right, my good Christian wife. I wish I was like you. My
poor little Jenny!"

Richard Hardie's papers were found in perfect order; and among them an
old will leaving L. 14,000 to Edward Dodd.

On this being announced to Edward, he suggested that it was a fraud:
Alfred had been at him for a long time with offers of money, and failing
there, and being a fine impetuous fellow, had lost his temper and forged
a will, in his, Edward's, favour.

This scandalous defence broke down. The document was indisputable, and
the magic sum was forced down Master Edward's throat, nilly willy. Thus
rose the Hard Cash a second time from the grave.

All this enabled the tenacious Alfred to carry out a deeply-cherished
design. Hardie's late bank had been made into a shop; but it belonged to
Mrs. Dodd. He bought it of her, and set up the bank again, with Edward as
managing partner. This just suited Edward, who sadly wanted employment.
Hardie & Co. rose again, and soon wiped out the late disgraceful episode,
and looked on to the past centuries of honour and good credit. No
creditor of Richard Hardie was left unpaid. Alfred went in for politics;
stood for Barkington, was defeated by seventeen: took it as a matter of
course; told his friends he had never succeeded in anything at first; nor
been beaten in the end; stood again, and became M. P. for Barkington,
whence to dislodge him I pity any one who tries.

For a long time Mrs. Dodd was nervous, and used to wake with a start at
night, and put out her hand to make sure David was not lost again. But
this wore off.

For years the anniversary of that fatal day, when he was brought home on
the stretcher, came back to them all as a day of gloom. But that wore
off.

Sometimes the happiness of her family seemed incredible to her,
remembering what they had all gone through. At first, their troubles were
too terrible and recent to be discussed. But even that wore off, and they
could talk of it all; and things bitter at the time became pleasant to
remember.

One midsummer day they had all dined together rather early at Albion
Villa, and sat on the lawn, with Mrs. Dodd's boy and Julia's boy and girl
playing about these ladies' knees. Now after a little silence, Mrs. Dodd,
who had been thinking quietly of many things, spoke to them all, and
said: "If my children and I had not been bosom-friends, we never should
have survived that terrible time we have passed through, my dears. Make
friends of your children, my child."

"Ah, that I will!" said Julia; and caught up the nearest brat and kissed
it impetuously: for Wifehood and Maternity had not un-Julia'd her.

"It wasn't only our being friends, mamma," said Edward; "it was our
sticking together so."

In looking back on the story now ended, I incline to Mrs. Dodd's
conclusion. Almost my first word was that she and her children were
bosom-friends; and my last is to congratulate them that it was so. Think
of their various trials and temptations, and imagine what would have
become of them if family love and unity had not abounded. Their little
house was built on the sure foundation of true family affection: and so
the winds of adversity descended, and the floods came, and burst upon
that house, but could not prevail against it; it was founded on a rock.







Etext prepared by Dagny, dagnyj@hotmail.com
and John Bickers, jbickers@ihug.co.nz

PREPARER'S NOTE

  This text is one of the items included in Voyages and Travels:
  Ancient and Modern and was prepared from a 1910 edition,
  published by P F Collier & Son Company, New York.





Sir Humphrey Gilbert's Voyage to Newfoundland

by Edward Hayes




                          INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Sir Humphrey Gilbert, the founder of the first English colony in North
America, was born about 1539, the son of a Devonshire gentleman, whose
widow afterward married the father of Sir Walter Raleigh. He was
educated at Eton and Oxford, served under Sir Philip Sidney's father
in Ireland, and fought for the Netherlands against Spain. After his
return he composed a pamphlet urging the search for a northwest
passage to Cathay, which led to Frobisher's license for his
explorations to that end.

In 1578 Gilbert obtained from Queen Elizabeth the charter he had long
sought, to plant a colony in North America. His first attempt failed,
and cost him his whole fortune; but, after further service in Ireland,
he sailed again in 1583 for Newfoundland. In the August of that year
he took possession of the harbor of St. John and founded his colony,
but on the return voyage he went down with his ship in a storm south
of the Azores.

The following narrative is an account of this last voyage of
Gilbert's, told by Edward Hayes, commander of "The Golden Hind," the
only one to reach England of the three ships which set out from
Newfoundland with Gilbert.

The settlement at St. John was viewed by its promoter as merely the
beginning of a scheme for ousting Spain from America in favor of
England. The plan did not progress as he hoped; but after long delays,
and under far other impulses than Gilbert ever thought of, much of his
dream was realized.





            SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT'S VOYAGE TO NEWFOUNDLAND



  A report of the Voyage and success thereof, attempted in the year
  of our Lord 1583, by Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Knight, with other
  gentlemen assisting him in that action, intended to discover and
  to plant Christian inhabitants in place convenient, upon those
  large and ample countries extended northward from the Cape of
  Florida, lying under very temperate climes, esteemed fertile and
  rich in minerals, yet not in the actual possession of any
  Christian prince. Written by Mr. Edward Hayes, gentleman, and
  principal actor in the same voyage,[*] who alone continued unto
  the end, and, by God's special assistance, returned home with his
  retinue safe and entire.

[*] Hayes was captain and owner of the /Golden Hind/, Gilbert's Rear-
    Admiral.

Many voyages have been pretended, yet hitherto never any thoroughly
accomplished by our nation, of exact discovery into the bowels of
those main, ample, and vast countries extended infinitely into the
north from thirty degrees, or rather from twenty-five degrees, of
septentrional latitude, neither hath a right way been taken of
planting a Christian habitation and regiment (government) upon the
same, as well may appear both by the little we yet do actually possess
therein, and by our ignorance of the riches and secrets within those
lands, which unto this day we know chiefly by the travel and report of
other nations, and most of the French, who albeit they cannot
challenge such right and interest unto the said countries as we,
neither these many years have had opportunity nor means so great to
discover and to plant, being vexed with the calamities of intestine
wars, as we have had by the inestimable benefit of our long and happy
peace, yet have they both ways performed more, and had long since
attained a sure possession and settled government of many provinces in
those northerly parts of /America/, if their many attempts into those
foreign and remote lands had not been impeached by their garboils at
home.

The first discovery of these coasts, never heard of before, was well
begun by John Cabot the father and Sebastian his son, an Englishman
born, who were the first finders out of all that great tract of land
stretching from the Cape of Florida, into those islands which we now
call the Newfoundland; all which they brought and annexed unto the
crown of England. Since when, if with like diligence the search of
inland countries had been followed, as the discovery upon the coast
and outparts thereof was performed by those two men, no doubt her
Majesty's territories and revenue had been mightily enlarged and
advanced by this day; and, which is more, the seed of Christian
religion had been sowed amongst those pagans, which by this time might
have brought forth a most plentiful harvest and copious congregation
of Christians; which must be the chief intent of such as shall make
any attempt that way; or else whatsoever is builded upon other
foundation shall never obtain happy success nor continuance.

And although we cannot precisely judge (which only belongeth to God)
what have been the humours of men stirred up to great attempts of
discovering and planting in those remote countries, yet the events do
shew that either God's cause hath not been chiefly preferred by them,
or else God hath not permitted so abundant grace as the light of His
word and knowledge of Him to be yet revealed unto those infidels
before the appointed time. But most assuredly, the only cause of
religion hitherto hath kept back, and will also bring forward at the
time assigned by God, an effectual and complete discovery and
possession by Christians both of those ample countries and the riches
within them hitherto concealed; whereof, notwithstanding, God in His
wisdom hath permitted to be revealed from time to time a certain
obscure and misty knowledge, by little and little to allure the minds
of men that way, which else will be dull enough in the zeal of His
cause, and thereby to prepare us unto a readiness for the execution of
His will, against the due time ordained of calling those pagans unto
Christianity.

In the meanwhile it behoveth every man of great calling, in whom is
any instinct of inclination unto this attempt, to examine his own
motions, which, if the same proceed of ambition or avarice, he may
assure himself it cometh not of God, and therefore cannot have
confidence of God's protection and assistance against the violence
(else irresistible) both of sea and infinite perils upon the land;
whom God yet may use as an instrument to further His cause and glory
some way, but not to build upon so bad a foundation. Otherwise, if his
motives be derived from a virtuous and heroical mind, preferring
chiefly the honour of God, compassion of poor infidels captived by the
devil, tyrannizing in most wonderful and dreadful manner over their
bodies and souls; advancement of his honest and well-disposed
countrymen, willing to accompany him in such honourable actions;
relief of sundry people within this realm distressed; all these be
honourable purposes, imitating the nature of the munificent God,
wherewith He is well pleased, who will assist such an actor beyond
expectation of many. And the same, who feeleth this inclination in
himself, by all likelihood may hope or rather confidently repose in
the preordinance of God, that in this last age of the world (or likely
never) the time is complete of receiving also these gentiles into His
mercy, and that God will raise Him an instrument to effect the same;
it seeming probable by event of precedent attempts made by the
Spaniards and French sundry times, that the countries lying north of
Florida God hath reserved the same to be reduced into Christian
civility by the English nation. For not long after that Christopher
Columbus had discovered the islands and continent of the West Indies
for Spain, John and Sebastian Cabot made discovery also of the rest
from Florida northwards to the behoof of England.

And whensoever afterwards the Spaniards, very prosperous in all their
southern discoveries, did attempt anything into Florida and those
regions inclining towards the north, they proved most unhappy, and
were at length discouraged utterly by the hard and lamentable success
of many both religious and valiant in arms, endeavouring to bring
those northerly regions also under the Spanish jurisdiction, as if God
had prescribed limits unto the Spanish nation which they might not
exceed; as by their own gests recorded may be aptly gathered.

The French, as they can pretend less title unto these northern parts
than the Spaniard, by how much the Spaniard made the first discovery
of the same continent so far northward as unto Florida, and the French
did but review that before discovered by the English nation, usurping
upon our right, and imposing names upon countries, rivers, bays,
capes, or headlands as if they had been the first finders of those
coasts; which injury we offered not unto the Spaniards, but left off
to discover when we approached the Spanish limits; even so God hath
not hitherto permitted them to establish a possession permanent upon
another's right, notwithstanding their manifold attempts, in which the
issue hath been no less tragical than that of the Spaniards, as by
their own reports is extant.

Then, seeing the English nation only hath right unto these countries
of America from the Cape of Florida northward by the privilege of
first discovery, unto which Cabot was authorised by regal authority,
and set forth by the expense of our late famous King Henry the
Seventh; which right also seemeth strongly defended on our behalf by
the powerful hand of Almighty God withstanding the enterprises of
other nations; it may greatly encourage us upon so just ground, as is
our right, and upon so sacred an intent, as to plant religion (our
right and intent being meet foundations for the same), to prosecute
effectually the full possession of those so ample and pleasant
countries appertaining unto the crown of England; the same, as is to
be conjectured by infallible arguments of the world's end approaching,
being now arrived unto the time of God prescribed of their vocation,
if ever their calling unto the knowledge of God may be expected. Which
also is very probable by the revolution and course of God's word and
religion, which from the beginning hath moved from the east towards,
and at last unto, the west, where it is like to end, unless the same
begin again where it did in the east, which were to expect a like
world again. But we are assured of the contrary by the prophecy of
Christ, whereby we gather that after His word preached throughout the
world shall be the end. And as the Gospel when it descended westward
began in the south, and afterward begun in the south countries of
America, no less hope may be gathered that it will also spread into
the north.

These considerations may help to suppress all dreads rising of hard
events in attempts made this way by other nations, as also of the
heavy success and issue in the late enterprise made by a worthy
gentleman our countryman, Sir Humfrey Gilbert, Knight, who was the
first of our nations that carried people to erect an habitation and
government in those northerly countries of America. About which albeit
he had consumed much substance, and lost his life at last, his people
also perishing for the most part: yet the mystery thereof we must
leave unto God, and judge charitably both of the cause, which was just
in all pretence, and of the person, who was very zealous in
prosecuting the same, deserving honourable remembrance for his good
mind and expense of life in so virtuous an enterprise. Whereby
nevertheless, lest any man should be dismayed by example of other
folks' calamity, and misdeem that God doth resist all attempts
intended that way, I thought good, so far as myself was an eye-
witness, to deliver the circumstance and manner of our proceedings in
that action; in which the gentleman was so unfortunately encumbered
with wants, and worse matched with many ill-disposed people, that his
rare judgment and regiment premeditated for those affairs was
subjected to tolerate abuses, and in sundry extremities to hold on a
course more to uphold credit than likely in his own conceit happily to
succeed.

The issue of such actions, being always miserable, not guided by God,
who abhorreth confusion and disorder, hath left this for admonition,
being the first attempt by our nation to plant, unto such as shall
take the same cause in hand hereafter, not to be discouraged from it;
but to make men well advised how they handle His so high and excellent
matters, as the carriage is of His word into those very mighty and
vast countries. An action doubtless not to be intermeddled with base
purposes, as many have made the same but a colour to shadow actions
otherwise scarce justifiable; which doth excite God's heavy judgments
in the end, to the terrifying of weak minds from the cause, without
pondering His just proceedings; and doth also incense foreign princes
against our attempts, how just soever, who cannot but deem the sequel
very dangerous unto their state (if in those parts we should grow to
strength), seeing the very beginnings are entered with spoil.

And with this admonition denounced upon zeal towards God's cause, also
towards those in whom appeareth disposition honourable unto this
action of planting Christian people and religion in those remote and
barbarous nations of America (unto whom I wish all happiness), I will
now proceed to make relations briefly, yet particularly, of our voyage
undertaken with Sir Humfrey Gilbert, begun, continued, and ended
adversely.

When first Sir Humfrey Gilbert undertook the western discovery of
America, and had procured from her Majesty a very large commission to
inhabit and possess at his choice all remote and heathen lands not in
the actual possession of any Christian prince, the same commission
exemplified with many privileges, such as in his discretion he might
demand, very many gentlemen of good estimation drew unto him, to
associate him in so commendable an enterprise, so that the preparation
was expected to grow unto a puissant fleet, able to encounter a king's
power by sea. Nevertheless, amongst a multitude of voluntary men,
their dispositions were diverse, which bred a jar, and made a division
in the end, to the confusion of that attempt even before the same was
begun. And when the shipping was in a manner prepared, and men ready
upon the coast to go aboard, at that time some brake consort, and
followed courses degenerating from the voyage before pretended. Others
failed of their promises contracted, and the greater number were
dispersed, leaving the General with few of his assured friends, with
whom he adventured to sea; where, having tasted of no less misfortune,
he was shortly driven to retire home with the loss of a tall ship and,
more to his grief, of a valiant gentleman, Miles Morgan.

Having buried, only in a preparation, a great mass of substance,
whereby his estate was impaired, his mind yet not dismayed, he
continued his former designment, and purposed to revive this
enterprise, good occasion serving. Upon which determination standing
long without means to satisfy his desire, at last he granted certain
assignments out of his commission to sundry persons of mean ability,
desiring the privilege of his grant, to plant and fortify in the north
parts of America about the river of Canada; to whom if God gave good
success in the north parts (where then no matter of moment was
expected), the same, he thought, would greatly advance the hope of the
south, and be a furtherance unto his determination that way. And the
worst that might happen in that course might be excused, without
prejudice unto him, by the former supposition that those north regions
were of no regard. But chiefly, a possession taken in any parcel of
those heathen countries, by virtue of his grant, did invest him of
territories extending every way 200 leagues; which induced Sir Humfrey
Gilbert to make those assignments, desiring greatly their expedition,
because his commission did expire after six years, if in that space he
had not gotten actual possession.

Time went away without anything done by his assigns; insomuch that at
last he must resolve himself to take a voyage in person, for more
assurance to keep his patent in force, which then almost was expired
or within two years. In furtherance of his determination, amongst
others, Sir George Peckham, Knight, shewed himself very zealous to the
action, greatly aiding him both by his advice and in the charge. Other
gentlemen to their ability joined unto him, resolving to adventure
their substance and lives in the same cause. Who beginning their
preparation from that time, both of shipping, munition, victual, men,
and things requisite, some of them continued the charge two years
complete without intermission. Such were the difficulties and cross
accidents opposing these proceedings, which took not end in less than
two years; many of which circumstances I will omit.

The last place of our assembly, before we left the coast of England,
was in Cawset Bay, near unto Plymouth, then resolved to put unto the
sea with shipping and provision such as we had, before our store yet
remaining, but chiefly the time and season of the year, were too far
spent. Nevertheless, it seemed first very doubtful by what way to
shape our course, and to begin our intended discovery, either from the
south northward or from the north southward. The first, that is,
beginning south, without all controversy was the likeliest, wherein we
were assured to have commodity of the current which from the Cape of
Florida setteth northward, and would have furthered greatly our
navigation, discovering from the foresaid cape along towards Cape
Breton, and all those lands lying to the north. Also, the year being
far spent, and arrived to the month of June, we were not to spend time
in northerly courses, where we should be surprised with timely winter,
but to covet the south, which we had space enough then to have
attained, and there might with less detriment have wintered that
season, being more mild and short in the south than in the north,
where winter is both long and rigorous. These and other like reasons
alleged in favour of the southern course first to be taken, to the
contrary was inferred that forasmuch as both our victuals and many
other needful provisions were diminished and left insufficient for so
long a voyage and for the wintering of so many men, we ought to shape
a course most likely to minister supply; and that was to take the
Newfoundland in our way, which was but 700 leagues from our English
coast. Where being usually at that time of the year, and until the
fine of August, a multitude of ships repairing thither for fish, we
should be relieved abundantly with many necessaries, which, after the
fishing ended, they might well spare and freely impart unto us. Not
staying long upon that Newland coast, we might proceed southward, and
follow still the sun, until we arrived at places more temperate to our
content.

By which reasons we were the rather induced to follow this northerly
course, obeying unto necessity, which must be supplied. Otherwise, we
doubted that sudden approach of winter, bringing with it continual fog
and thick mists, tempest and rage of weather, also contrariety of
currents descending from the Cape of Florida unto Cape Breton and Cape
Race, would fall out to be great and irresistible impediments unto our
further proceeding for that year, and compel us to winter in those
north and cold regions. Wherefore, suppressing all objections to the
contrary, we resolved to begin our course northward, and to follow,
directly as we might, the trade way unto Newfoundland; from whence,
after our refreshing and reparation of wants, we intended without
delay, by God's permission, to proceed into the south, not omitting
any river or bay which in all that large tract of land appeared to our
view worthy of search. Immediately we agreed upon the manner of our
course and orders to be observed in our voyage; which were delivered
in writing, unto the captains and masters of every ship a copy, in
manner following.

Every ship had delivered two bullets or scrolls, the one sealed up in
wax, the other left open; in both which were included several
watchwords. That open, serving upon our own coast or the coast of
Ireland; the other sealed, was promised on all hands not to be broken
up until we should be clear of the Irish coast; which from thenceforth
did serve until we arrived and met all together in such harbours of
the Newfoundland as were agreed for our rendezvous. The said
watchwords being requisite to know our consorts whensoever by night,
either by fortune of weather, our fleet dispersed should come together
again; or one should hail another; or if by ill watch and steerage one
ship should chance to fall aboard of another in the dark.

The reason of the bullet sealed was to keep secret that watchword
while we were upon our own coast, lest any of the company stealing
from the fleet might bewray the same; which known to an enemy, he
might board us by night without mistrust, having our own watchword.


Orders agreed upon by the Captains and Masters to be observed by the
fleet of Sir Humfrey Gilbert.

  First, The Admiral to carry his flag by day, and his light by
  night.

  2. Item, if the Admiral shall shorten his sail by night, then to
  shew two lights until he be answered again by every ship shewing
  one light for a short time.

  3. Item, if the Admiral after his shortening of sail, as
  aforesaid, shall make more sail again; then he to shew three
  lights one above another.

  4. Item, if the Admiral shall happen to hull in the night, then to
  make a wavering light over his other light, wavering the light
  upon a pole.

  5. Item, if the fleet should happen to be scattered by weather, or
  other mishap, then so soon as one shall descry another, to hoise
  both topsails twice, if the weather will serve, and to strike them
  twice again; but if the weather serve not, then to hoise the
  maintopsail twice, and forthwith to strike it twice again.

  6. Item, if it shall happen a great fog to fall, then presently
  every ship to bear up with the Admiral, if there be wind; but if
  it be a calm, then every ship to hull, and so to lie at hull till
  it clear. And if the fog do continue long, then the Admiral to
  shoot off two pieces every evening, and every ship to answer it
  with one shot; and every man bearing to the ship that is to
  leeward so near as he may.

  7. Item, every master to give charge unto the watch to look out
  well, for laying aboard one of another in the night, and in fogs.

  8. Item, every evening every ship to hail the Admiral, and so to
  fall astern him, sailing through the ocean; and being on the
  coast, every ship to hail him both morning and evening.

  9. Item, if any ship be in danger in any way, by leak or
  otherwise, then she to shoot off a piece, and presently to bring
  out one light; whereupon every man to bear towards her, answering
  her with one light for a short time, and so to put it out again;
  thereby to give knowledge that they have seen her token.

  10. Item, whensoever the Admiral shall hang out her ensign in the
  main shrouds, then every man to come aboard her as a token of
  counsel.

  11. Item, if there happen any storm or contrary wind to the fleet
  after the discovery, whereby they are separated; then every ship
  to repair unto their last good port, there to meet again.

OUR COURSE /agreed upon/.

  The course first to be taken for the discovery is to bear directly
  to Cape Race, the most southerly cape of Newfoundland; and there
  to harbour ourselves either in Rogneux or Fermous, being the first
  places appointed for our rendezvous, and the next harbours unto
  the northward of Cape Race: and therefore every ship separated
  from the fleet to repair to that place so fast as God shall
  permit, whether you shall fall to the southward or to the
  northward of it, and there to stay for the meeting of the whole
  fleet the space of ten days; and when you shall depart, to leave
  marks.

  Beginning our course from Scilly, the nearest is by west-south-
  west (if the wind serve) until such time as we have brought
  ourselves in the latitude of 43 or 44 degrees, because the ocean
  is subject much to southerly winds in June and July. Then to take
  traverse from 45 to 47 degrees of latitude, if we be enforced by
  contrary winds; and not to go to the northward of the height of 47
  degrees of septentrional latitude by no means, if God shall not
  enforce the contrary; but to do your endeavour to keep in the
  height of 46 degrees, so near as you can possibly, because Cape
  Race lieth about that height.

NOTE.

  If by contrary winds we be driven back upon the coast of England,
  then to repair unto Scilly for a place of our assembly or meeting.
  If we be driven back by contrary winds that we cannot pass the
  coast of Ireland, then the place of our assembly to be at Bere
  haven or Baltimore haven. If we shall not happen to meet at Cape
  Race, then the place of rendezvous to be at Cape Breton, or the
  nearest harbour unto the westward of Cape Breton. If by means of
  other shipping we may not safely stay there, then to rest at the
  very next safe port to the westward; every ship leaving their
  marks behind them for the more certainty of the after comers to
  know where to find them. The marks that every man ought to leave
  in such a case, were of the General's private device written by
  himself, sealed also in close wax, and delivered unto every ship
  one scroll, which was not to be opened until occasion required,
  whereby every man was certified what to leave for instruction of
  after comers; that every of us coming into any harbour or river
  might know who had been there, or whether any were still there up
  higher into the river, or departed, and which way.


Orders thus determined, and promises mutually given to be observed,
every man withdrew himself unto his charge; the anchors being already
weighed, and our ships under sail, having a soft gale of wind, we
began our voyage upon Tuesday, the 11 day of June, in the year of our
Lord 1583, having in our fleet (at our departure from Cawset Bay)
these ships, whose names and burthens, with the names of the captains
and masters of them, I have also inserted, as followeth:--1. The
/Delight/, alias the /George/, of burthen 120 tons, was Admiral; in
which went the General, and William Winter, captain in her and part
owner, and Richard Clarke, master. 2. The bark /Raleigh/, set forth by
Master Walter Raleigh, of the burthen of 200 tons, was then Vice-
Admiral; in which went Master Butler, captain, and Robert Davis, of
Bristol, master. 3. The /Golden Hind/, of burthen 40 tons, was then
Rear-Admiral; in which went Edward Hayes, captain and owner, and
William Cox, of Limehouse, master. 4. The /Swallow/, of burthen 40
tons; in her was captain Maurice Browne. 5. The /Squirrel/, of burthen
10 tons; in which went captain William Andrews, and one Cade, master.
We were in number in all about 260 men; among whom we had of every
faculty good choice, as shipwrights, masons, carpenters, smiths, and
such like, requisite to such an action; also mineral men and refiners.
Besides, for solace of our people, and allurement of the savages, we
were provided of music in good variety; not omitting the least toys,
as morris-dancers, hobby-horse, and May-like conceits to delight the
savage people, whom we intended to win by all fair means possible. And
to that end we were indifferently furnished of all petty haberdashery
wares to barter with those simple people.

In this manner we set forward, departing (as hath been said) out of
Cawset Bay the 11 day of June, being Tuesday, the weather and wind
fair and good all day; but a great storm of thunder and wind fell the
same night. Thursday following, when we hailed one another in the
evening, according to the order before specified, they signified unto
us out of the Vice-Admiral, that both the captain, and very many of
the men, were fallen sick. And about midnight the Vice-Admiral forsook
us, notwithstanding we had the wind east, fair and good. But it was
after credibly reported that they were infected with a contagious
sickness, and arrived greatly distressed at Plymouth; the reason I
could never understand. Sure I am, no cost was spared by their owner,
Master Raleigh, in setting them forth; therefore I leave it unto God.
By this time we were in 48 degrees of latitude, not a little grieved
with the loss of the most puissant ship in our fleet; after whose
departure the /Golden Hind/ succeeded in the place of Vice-Admiral,
and removed her flag from the mizen into the foretop. From Saturday,
the 15 of June, until the 28, which was upon a Friday, we never had
fair day without fog or rain, and winds bad, much to the west-north-
west, whereby we were driven southward unto 41 degrees scarce.

About this time of the year the winds are commonly west towards the
Newfoundland, keeping ordinarily within two points of west to the
south or to the north; whereby the course thither falleth out to be
long and tedious after June, which in March, April, and May, hath been
performed out of England in 22 days and less. We had wind always so
scant from the west-north-west, and from west-south-west again, that
our traverse was great, running south unto 41 degrees almost, and
afterwards north into 51 degrees. Also we were encumbered with much
fog and mists in manner palpable, in which we could not keep so well
together, but were discovered, losing the company of the /Swallow/ and
the /Squirrel/ upon the 20 day of July, whom we met again at several
places upon the Newfoundland coast the 3 of August, as shall be
declared in place convenient. Saturday, the 27 July, we might descry,
not far from us, as it were mountains of ice driven upon the sea,
being then in 50 degrees, which were carried southward to the weather
of us; whereby may be conjectured that some current doth set that way
from the north.

Before we came to Newfoundland, about 50 leagues on this side, we pass
the bank, which are high grounds rising within the sea and under
water, yet deep enough and without danger, being commonly not less
than 25 and 30 fathom water upon them; the same, as it were some vein
of mountains within the sea, do run along and form the Newfoundland,
beginning northward about 52 or 53 degrees of latitude, and do extend
into the south infinitely. The breadth of this bank is somewhere more,
and somewhere less; but we found the same about ten leagues over,
having sounded both on this side thereof, and the other toward
Newfoundland, but found no ground with almost 200 fathom of line, both
before and after we had passed the bank. The Portugals, and French
chiefly, have a notable trade of fishing upon this bank, where are
sometimes an hundred or more sails of ships, who commonly begin the
fishing in April, and have ended by July. That fish is large, always
wet, having no land near to dry, and is called cod fish. During the
time of fishing, a man shall know without sounding when he is upon the
bank, by the incredible multitude of sea-fowl hovering over the same,
to prey upon the offals and garbage of fish thrown out by fishermen,
and floating upon the sea.

Upon Tuesday, the 11 of June we forsook the coast of England. So again
on Tuesday, the 30 of July, seven weeks after, we got sight of land,
being immediately embayed in the Grand Bay, or some other great bay;
the certainty whereof we could not judge, so great haze and fog did
hang upon the coast, as neither we might discern the land well, nor
take the sun's height. But by our best computation we were then in the
51 degrees of latitude. Forsaking this bay and uncomfortable coast
(nothing appearing unto us but hideous rocks and mountains, bare of
trees, and void of any green herb) we followed the coast to the
south, with weather fair and clear. We had sight of an island named
Penguin, of a fowl there breeding in abundance almost incredible,
which cannot fly, their wings not able to carry their body, being very
large (not much less than a goose) and exceeding fat, which the
Frenchmen use to take without difficulty upon that island, and to
barrel them up with salt. But for lingering of time, we had made us
there the like provision.

Trending this coast, we came to the island called Baccalaos, being not
past two leagues from the main; to the north thereof lieth Cape St.
Francis, five leagues distant from Baccalaos, between which goeth in a
great bay, by the vulgar sort called the Bay of Conception. Here we
met with the /Swallow/ again, whom we had lost in the fog, and all her
men altered into other apparel; whereof it seemed their store was so
amended, that for joy and congratulation of our meeting, they spared
not to cast up into the air and overboard their caps and hats in good
plenty. The captain, albeit himself was very honest and religious, yet
was he not appointed of men to his humour and desert; who for the most
part were such as had been by us surprised upon the narrow seas of
England, being pirates, and had taken at that instant certain
Frenchmen laden, one bark with wines, and another with salt. Both
which we rescued, and took the man-of-war with all her men, which was
the same ship now called the /Swallow/; following still their kind so
oft as, being separated from the General, they found opportunity to
rob and spoil. And because God's justice did follow the same company,
even to destruction, and to the overthrow also of the captain (though
not consenting to their misdemeanour) I will not conceal anything that
maketh to the manifestation and approbation of His judgments, for
examples of others; persuaded that God more sharply took revenge upon
them, and hath tolerated longer as great outrage in others, by how
much these went under protection of His cause and religion, which was
then pretended.

Therefore upon further enquiry it was known how this company met with
a bark returning home after the fishing with his freight; and because
the men in the /Swallow/ were very near scanted of victuals, and
chiefly of apparel, doubtful withal where or when to find and meet
with their Admiral, they besought the captain that they might go
aboard this /Newlander/, only to borrow what might be spared, the
rather because the same was bound homeward. Leave given, not without
charge to deal favourably, they came aboard the fisherman, whom they
rifled of tackle, sails, cables, victuals, and the men of their
apparel; not sparing by torture, winding cords about their heads, to
draw out else what they thought good. This done with expedition, like
men skilful in such mischief, as they took their cockboat to go aboard
their own ship, it was overwhelmed in the sea, and certain of these
men there drowned; the rest were preserved even by those silly souls
whom they had before spoiled, who saved and delivered them aboard the
/Swallow/. What became afterwards of the poor /Newlander/, perhaps
destitute of sails and furniture sufficient to carry them home,
whither they had not less to run than 700 leagues, God alone knoweth;
who took vengeance not long after of the rest that escaped at this
instant, to reveal the fact, and justify to the world God's judgments
indicted upon them, as shall be declared in place convenient.

Thus after we had met with the /Swallow/, we held on our course
southward, until we came against the harbour called St. John, about
five leagues from the former Cape of St. Francis, where before the
entrance into the harbour, we found also the frigate or /Squirrel/
lying at anchor; whom the English merchants, that were and always be
Admirals by turns interchangeably over the fleets of fishermen within
the same harbour, would not permit to enter into the harbour. Glad of
so happy meeting, both of the /Swallow/ and frigate in one day, being
Saturday, the third of August, we made ready our fights, and prepared
to enter the harbour, any resistance to the contrary notwithstanding,
there being within of all nations to the number of 36 sails. But first
the General despatched a boat to give them knowledge of his coming for
no ill intent, having commission from her Majesty for his voyage he
had in hand; and immediately we followed with a slack gale, and in the
very entrance, which is but narrow, not above two butts' length, the
Admiral fell upon a rock on the larboard side by great oversight, in
that the weather was fair, the rock much above water fast by the
shore, where neither went any sea-gate. But we found such readiness in
the English merchants to help us in that danger, that without delay
there were brought a number of boats, which towed off the ship, and
cleared her of danger.

Having taken place convenient in the road, we let fall anchors, the
captains and masters repairing aboard our Admiral; whither also came
immediately the masters and owners of the fishing fleet of Englishmen,
to understand the General's intent and cause of our arrival there.
They were all satisfied when the General had shewed his commission and
purpose to take possession of those lands to the behalf of the crown
of England, and the advancement of the Christian religion in those
paganish regions, requiring but their lawful aid for repairing of his
fleet, and supply of some necessaries, so far as conveniently might be
afforded him, both out of that and other harbours adjoining. In lieu
whereof he made offer to gratify them with any favour and privilege,
which upon their better advice they should demand, the like being not
to be obtained hereafter for greater price. So craving expedition of
his demand, minding to proceed further south without long detention in
those parts, he dismissed them, after promise given of their best
endeavour to satisfy speedily his so reasonable request. The merchants
with their masters departed, they caused forthwith to be discharged
all the great ordnance of their fleet in token of our welcome.

It was further determined that every ship of our fleet should deliver
unto the merchants and masters of that harbour a note of all their
wants: which done, the ships, as well English as strangers, were taxed
at an easy rate to make supply. And besides, commissioners were
appointed, part of our own company and part of theirs, to go into
other harbours adjoining (for our English merchants command all there)
to levy our provision: whereunto the Portugals, above other nations,
did most willingly and liberally contribute. In so much as we were
presented, above our allowance, with wines, marmalades, most fine rusk
or biscuit, sweet oils, and sundry delicacies. Also we wanted not of
fresh salmons, trouts, lobsters, and other fresh fish brought daily
unto us. Moreover as the manner is in their fishing, every week to
choose their Admiral anew, or rather they succeed in orderly course,
and have weekly their Admiral's feast solemnized: even so the General,
captains, and masters of our fleet were continually invited and
feasted. To grow short in our abundance at home the entertainment had
been delightful; but after our wants and tedious passage through the
ocean, it seemed more acceptable and of greater contentation, by how
much the same was unexpected in that desolate corner of the world;
where, at other times of the year, wild beasts and birds have only the
fruition of all those countries, which now seemed a place very
populous and much frequented.

The next morning being Sunday, and the fourth of August, the General
and his company were brought on land by English merchants, who shewed
unto us their accustomed walks unto a place they call the Garden. But
nothing appeared more than nature itself without art: who confusedly
hath brought forth roses abundantly, wild, but odoriferous, and to
sense very comfortable. Also the like plenty of raspberries, which do
grow in every place.

Monday following, the General had his tent set up; who, being
accompanied with his own followers, summoned the merchants and
masters, both English and strangers, to be present at his taking
possession of those countries. Before whom openly was read, and
interpreted unto the strangers, his commission: by virtue whereof he
took possession in the same harbour of St. John, and 200 leagues every
way, invested the Queen's Majesty with the title and dignity thereof,
had delivered unto him, after the custom of England, a rod, and a turf
of the same soil, entering possession also for him, his heirs and
assigns for ever; and signified unto all men, that from that time
forward, they should take the same land as a territory appertaining to
the Queen of England, and himself authorised under her Majesty to
possess and enjoy it, and to ordain laws for the government thereof,
agreeable, so near as conveniently might be, unto the laws of England,
under which all people coming thither hereafter, either to inhabit, or
by way of traffic, should be subjected and governed. And especially at
the same time for a beginning, he proposed and delivered three laws to
be in force immediately. That is to say the first for religion, which
in public exercise should be according to the Church of England. The
second, for maintenance of her Majesty's right and possession of those
territories, against which if any thing were attempted prejudicial,
the party or parties offending should be adjudged and executed as in
case of high treason, according to the laws of England. The third, if
any person should utter words sounding to the dishonour of her
Majesty, he should lose his ears, and have his ship and goods
confiscate.

These contents published, obedience was promised by general voice and
consent of the multitude, as well of Englishmen as strangers, praying
for continuance of this possession and government begun; after this,
the assembly was dismissed. And afterwards were erected not far from
that place the arms of England engraven in lead, and infixed upon a
pillar of wood. Yet further and actually to establish this possession
taken in the right of her Majesty, and to the behoof of Sir Humfrey
Gilbert, knight, his heirs and assigns for ever, the General granted
in fee-farm divers parcels of land lying by the water-side, both in
this harbour of St. John, and elsewhere, which was to the owners a
great commodity, being thereby assured, by their proper inheritance,
of grounds convenient to dress and to dry their fish; whereof many
times before they did fail, being prevented by them that came first
into the harbour. For which grounds they did covenant to pay a certain
rent and service unto Sir Humfrey Gilbert, his heirs or assigns for
ever, and yearly to maintain possession of the same, by themselves or
their assigns.

Now remained only to take in provision granted, according as every
ship was taxed, which did fish upon the coast adjoining. In the
meanwhile, the General appointed men unto their charge: some to repair
and trim the ships, others to attend in gathering together our supply
and provisions: others to search the commodities and singularities of
the country, to be found by sea or land, and to make relation unto the
General what either themselves could know by their own travail and
experience, or by good intelligence of Englishmen or strangers, who
had longest frequented the same coast. Also some observed the
elevation of the pole, and drew plots of the country exactly graded.
And by that I could gather by each man's several relation, I have
drawn a brief description of the Newfoundland, with the commodities by
sea or land already made, and such also as are in possibility and
great likelihood to be made. Nevertheless the cards and plots that
were drawn, with the due gradation of the harbours, bays, and capes,
did perish with the Admiral: wherefore in the description following, I
must omit the particulars of such things.

That which we do call the Newfoundland, and the Frenchmen /Baccalaos/,
is an island, or rather, after the opinion of some, it consisteth of
sundry islands and broken lands, situate in the north regions of
America, upon the gulf and entrance of a great river called St.
Lawrence in Canada; into the which, navigation may be made both on the
south and north side of this island. The land lieth south and north,
containing in length between 300 and 400 miles, accounting from Cape
Race, which is in 46 degrees 25 minutes, unto the Grand Bay in 52
degrees, of septentrional latitude. The land round about hath very
many goodly bays and harbours, safe roads for ships, the like not to
be found in any part of the known world.

The common opinion that is had of intemperature and extreme cold that
should be in this country, as of some part it may be verified, namely
the north, where I grant it is more cold than in countries of Europe,
which are under the same elevation: even so it cannot stand with
reason and nature of the clime, that the south parts should be so
intemperate as the bruit hath gone. For as the same do lie under the
climes of Bretagne, Anjou, Poictou in France, between 46 and 49
degrees, so can they not so much differ from the temperature of those
countries: unless upon the out-coast lying open unto the ocean and
sharp winds, it must indeed be subject to more cold than further
within the land, where the mountains are interposed as walls and
bulwarks, to defend and to resist the asperity and rigour of the sea
and weather. Some hold opinion that the Newfoundland might be the more
subject to cold, by how much it lieth high and near unto the middle
region. I grant that not in Newfoundland alone, but in Germany, Italy
and Afric, even under the equinoctial line, the mountains are extreme
cold, and seldom uncovered of snow, in their culm and highest tops,
which cometh to pass by the same reason that they are extended towards
the middle region: yet in the countries lying beneath them, it is
found quite contrary. Even so, all hills having their descents, the
valleys also and low grounds must be likewise hot or temperate, as the
clime doth give in Newfoundland: though I am of opinion that the sun's
reflection is much cooled, and cannot be so forcible in Newfoundland,
nor generally throughout America, as in Europe or Afric: by how much
the sun in his diurnal course from east to west, passeth over, for the
most part, dry land and sandy countries, before he arriveth at the
west of Europe or Afric, whereby his motion increaseth heat, with
little or no qualification by moist vapours. Whereas, on the contrary,
he passeth from Europe and Afric unto American over the ocean, from
whence he draweth and carrieth with him abundance of moist vapours,
which do qualify and enfeeble greatly the sun's reverberation upon
this country chiefly of Newfoundland, being so much to the northward.
Nevertheless, as I said before, the cold cannot be so intolerable
under the latitude of 46, 47, and 48, especial within land, that it
should be unhabitable, as some do suppose, seeing also there are very
many people more to the north by a great deal. And in these south
parts there be certain beasts, ounces or leopards, and birds in like
manner, which in the summer we have seen, not heard of in countries of
extreme and vehement coldness. Besides, as in the months of June,
July, August and September, the heat is somewhat more than in England
at those seasons: so men remaining upon the south parts near unto Cape
Race, until after holland-tide (All-hallow-tide--November 1), have not
found the cold so extreme, nor much differing from the temperature of
England. Those which have arrived there after November and December
have found the snow exceeding deep, whereat no marvel, considering the
ground upon the coast is rough and uneven, and the snow is driven into
the places most declining, as the like is to be seen with us. The like
depth of snow happily shall not be found within land upon the plainer
countries, which also are defended by the mountains, breaking off the
violence of winds and weather. But admitting extraordinary cold in
those south parts, above that with us here, it cannot be so great as
in Swedeland, much less in Moscovia or Russia: yet are the same
countries very populous, and the rigour of cold is dispensed with by
the commodity of stoves, warm clothing, meats and drinks: all of which
need not be wanting in the Newfoundland, if we had intent there to
inhabit.

In the south parts we found no inhabitants, which by all likelihood
have abandoned those coasts, the same being so much frequented by
Christians; but in the north are savages altogether harmless. Touching
the commodities of this country, serving either for sustentation of
inhabitants or for maintenance of traffic, there are and may be made
divers; so that it seemeth that nature hath recompensed that only
defect and incommodity of some sharp cold, by many benefits; namely,
with incredible quantity, and no less variety, of kinds of fish in the
sea and fresh waters, as trouts, salmons, and other fish to us
unknown; also cod, which alone draweth many nations thither, and is
become the most famous fishing of the world; abundance of whales, for
which also is a very great trade in the bays of Placentia and the
Grand Bay, where is made train oil of the whale; herring, the largest
that have been heard of, and exceeding the Marstrand herring of
Norway; but hitherto was never benefit taken of the herring fishing.
There are sundry other fish very delicate, namely, the bonito,
lobsters, turbot, with others infinite not sought after; oysters
having pearl but not orient in colour; I took it, by reason they were
not gathered in season.

Concerning the inland commodities, as well to be drawn from this land,
as from the exceeding large countries adjoining, there is nothing
which our east and northerly countries of Europe do yield, but the
like also may be made in them as plentifully, by time and industry;
namely, resin, pitch, tar, soap-ashes, deal-board, masts for ships,
hides, furs, flax, hemp, corn, cables, cordage, linen cloth, metals,
and many more. All which the countries will afford, and the soil is
apt to yield. The trees for the most in those south parts are fir-
trees, pine, and cypress, all yielding gum and turpentine. Cherry
trees bearing fruit no bigger than a small pease. Also pear-trees, but
fruitless. Other trees of some sort to us unknown. The soil along the
coast is not deep of earth, bringing forth abundantly peasen small,
yet good feeding for cattle. Roses passing sweet, like unto our musk
roses in form; raspises; a berry which we call whorts, good and
wholesome to eat. The grass and herb doth fat sheep in very short
space, proved by English merchants which have carried sheep thither
for fresh victual and had them raised exceeding fat in less than three
weeks. Peasen which our countrymen have sown in the time of May, have
come up fair, and been gathered in the beginning of August, of which
our General had a present acceptable for the rareness, being the first
fruits coming up by art and industry in that desolate and dishabited
land. Lakes or pools of fresh water, both on the tops of mountains and
in the valleys; in which are said to be muscles not unlike to have
pearl, which I had put in trial, if by mischance falling unto me I had
not been letted from that and other good experiments I was minded to
make. Fowl both of water and land in great plenty and diversity. All
kind of green fowl; others as big as bustards, yet not the same. A
great white fowl called of some a gaunt. Upon the land divers sort of
hawks, as falcons, and others by report. Partridges most plentiful,
larger than ours, grey and white of colour, and rough-footed like
doves, which our men after one flight did kill with cudgels, they were
so fat and unable to fly. Birds, some like blackbirds, linnets, canary
birds, and other very small. Beasts of sundry kinds; red deer,
buffles, or a beast as it seemeth by the tract and foot very large, in
manner of an ox. Bears, ounces or leopards, some greater and some
lesser; wolves, foxes, which to the northward a little farther are
black, whose fur is esteemed in some countries of Europe very rich.
Otters, beavers, marterns; and in the opinion of most men that saw it,
the General had brought unto him a sable alive, which he sent unto his
brother, Sir John Gilbert, Knight, of Devonshire, but it was never
delivered, as after I understood. We could not observe the hundredth
part of creatures in those unhabited lands; but these mentioned may
induce us to glorify the magnificent God, who hath super-abundantly
replenished the earth with creatures serving for the use of man,
though man hath not used the fifth part of the same, which the more
doth aggravate the fault and foolish sloth in many of our nations,
choosing rather to live indirectly, and very miserably to live and die
within this realm pestered with inhabitants, then to adventure as
becometh men, to obtain an habitation in those remote lands, in which
nature very prodigally doth minister unto men's endeavours, and for
art to work upon. For besides these already recounted and infinite
more, the mountains generally make shew of mineral substance; iron
very common, lead, and somewhere copper. I will not aver of richer
metals; albeit by the circumstances following, more than hope may be
conceived thereof.

For amongst other charges given to enquire out the singularities of
this country, the General was most curious in the search of metals,
commanding the mineral-man and refiner especially to be diligent. The
same was a Saxon born, honest, and religious, named Daniel. Who after
search brought at first some sort of ore, seeming rather to be iron
than other metal. The next time he found ore, which with no small show
of contentment he delivered unto the General, using protestation that
if silver were the thing which might satisfy the General and his
followers, there it was, advising him to seek no further; the peril
whereof he undertook upon his life (as dear unto him as the crown of
England unto her Majesty, that I may use his own words) if it fell not
out accordingly.

Myself at this instant liker to die than to live, by a mischance,
could not follow this confident opinion of our refiner to my own
satisfaction; but afterward demanding our General's opinion therein,
and to have some part of the ore, he replied, /Content yourself, I
have seen enough; and were it but to satisfy my private humour, I
would proceed no further. The promise unto my friends, and necessity
to bring also the south countries within compass of my patent near
expired, as we have already done these north parts, do only persuade
me further. And touching the ore, I have sent it aboard, whereof I
would have no speech to be made so long as we remain within harbour;
here being both Portugals, Biscayans, and Frenchmen, not far off, from
whom must be kept any bruit or muttering of such matter. When we are
at sea, proof shall be made; if it be our desire, we may return the
sooner hither again./ Whose answer I judged reasonable, and contenting
me well; wherewith I will conclude this narration and description of
the Newfoundland, and proceed to the rest of our voyage, which ended
tragically.

While the better sort of us were seriously occupied in repairing our
wants, and contriving of matters for the commodity of our voyage,
others of another sort and disposition were plotting of mischief; some
casting to steal away our shipping by night, watching opportunity by
the General's and captains' lying on the shore; whose conspiracies
discovered, they were prevented. Others drew together in company, and
carried away out of the harbours adjoining a ship laden with fish,
setting the poor men on shore. A great many more of our people stole
into the woods to hide themselves, attending time and means to return
home by such shipping as daily departed from the coast. Some were sick
of fluxes, and many dead; and in brief, by one means or other our
company was diminished, and many by the General licensed to return
home. Insomuch as after we had reviewed our people, resolved to see an
end of our voyage, we grew scant of men to furnish all our shipping;
it seemed good thereof unto the General to leave the /Swallow/ with
such provision as might be spared for transporting home the sick
people.

The captain of the /Delight/ or Admiral, returned into England, in
whose stead was appointed captain Maurice Browne, before the captain
of the /Swallow/; who also brought with him into the /Delight/ all his
men of the /Swallow/, which before have been noted of outrage
perpetrated and committed upon fishermen there met at sea.

The General made choice to go in his frigate the /Squirrel/, whereof
the captain also was amongst them that returned into England; the same
frigate being most convenient to discover upon the coast, and to
search into every harbour or creek, which a great ship could not do.
Therefore the frigate was prepared with her nettings and fights, and
overcharged with bases and such small ordnance, more to give a show,
than with judgment to foresee unto the safety of her and the men,
which afterward was an occasion also of their overthrow.

Now having made ready our shipping, that is to say, the /Delight/, the
/Golden Hind/, and the /Squirrel/, we put aboard our provision, which
was wines, bread or rusk, fish wet and dry, sweet oils, besides many
other, as marmalades, figs, limons barrelled, and such like. Also we
had other necessary provision for trimming our ships, nets and lines
to fish withal, boats or pinnaces fit for discovery. In brief, we were
supplied of our wants commodiously, as if we had been in a country or
some city populous and plentiful of all things.

We departed from this harbour of St. John's upon Tuesday, the 20 of
August, which we found by exact observation to be in 47 degrees 40
minutes; and the next day by night we were at Cape Race, 25 leagues
from the same harborough. This cape lieth south-south-west from St.
John's; it is a low land, being off from the cape about half a league;
within the sea riseth up a rock against the point of the cape, which
thereby is easily known. It is in latitude 46 degrees 25 minutes.
Under this cape we were becalmed a small time, during which we laid
out hooks and lines to take cod, and drew in less than two hours fish
so large and in such abundance, that many days after we fed upon no
other provision. From hence we shaped our course unto the island of
Sablon, if conveniently it would so fall out, also directly to Cape
Breton.

Sablon lieth to the seaward of Cape Breton about 25 leagues, whither
we were determined to go upon intelligence we had of a Portugal,
during our abode in St. John's, who was himself present when the
Portugals, above thirty years past, did put into the same island both
neat and swine to breed, which were since exceedingly multiplied. This
seemed unto us very happy tidings, to have in an island lying so near
unto the main, which we intended to plant upon, such store of cattle,
whereby we might at all times conveniently be relieved of victual, and
served of store for breed.

In this course we trended along the coast, which from Cape Race
stretcheth into the north-west, making a bay which some called
Trepassa. Then it goeth out again towards the west, and maketh a
point, which with Cape Race lieth in manner east and west. But this
point inclineth to the north, to the west of which goeth in the Bay of
Placentia. We sent men on land to take view of the soil along this
coast, whereof they made good report, and some of them had will to be
planted there. They saw pease growing in great abundance everywhere.

The distance between Cape Race and Cape Breton is 87 leagues; in which
navigation we spent eight days, having many times the wind indifferent
good, yet could we never attain sight of any land all that time,
seeing we were hindered by the current. At last we fell into such
flats and dangers that hardly any of us escaped; where nevertheless we
lost our Admiral (the /Delight/) with all the men and provisions, not
knowing certainly the place. Yet for inducing men of skill to make
conjecture, by our course and way we held from Cape Race thither, that
thereby the flats and dangers may be inserted in sea cards, for
warning to others that may follow the same course hereafter, I have
set down the best reckonings that were kept by expert men, William
Cox, Master of the /Hind/, and John Paul, his mate, both of Limehouse.
. . . Our course we held in clearing us of these flats was east-south-
east, and south-east, and south, fourteen leagues, with a marvellous
scant wind.

Upon Tuesday, the 27 of August, toward the evening, our General caused
them in his frigate to sound, who found white sand at 35 fathom, being
then in latitude about 44 degrees. Wednesday, toward night, the wind
came south, and we bare with the land all that night, west-north-west,
contrary to the mind of Master Cox; nevertheless we followed the
Admiral, deprived of power to prevent a mischief, which by no
contradiction could be brought to hold another course, alleging they
could not make the ship to work better, nor to lie otherways. The
evening was fair and pleasant, yet not without token of storm to
ensue, and most part of this Wednesday night, like the swan that
singeth before her death, they in the Admiral, or /Delight/, continued
in sounding of trumpets, with drums and fifes; also winding the
cornets and hautboys, and in the end of their jollity, left with the
battle and ringing of doleful knells. Towards the evening also we
caught in the /Golden Hind/ a very mighty porpoise with harping iron,
having first stricken divers of them, and brought away part of their
flesh sticking upon the iron, but could recover only that one. These
also, passing through the ocean in herds, did portend storm. I omit to
recite frivolous report by them in the frigate, of strange voices the
same night, which scared some from the helm.

Thursday, the 29 of August, the wind rose, and blew vehemently at
south and by east, bringing withal rain and thick mist, so that we
could not see a cable length before us; and betimes in the morning we
were altogether run and folded in amongst flats and sands, amongst
which we found shoal and deep in every three or four ships' length,
after we began to sound; but first we were upon them unawares, until
Master Cox looking out, discerned, in his judgment, white cliffs,
crying /Land!/ withal; though we could not afterward descry any land,
it being very likely the breaking of the sea white, which seemed to be
white cliffs, through the haze and thick weather.

Immediately tokens were given unto the /Delight/, to cast about to
seaward, which, being the greater ship, and of burthen 120 tons, was
yet foremost upon the breach, keeping so ill watch, that they knew not
the danger, before they felt the same, too late to recover it; for
presently the Admiral struck aground, and has soon after her stern and
hinder parts beaten in pieces; whereupon the rest (that is to say, the
frigate, in which was the General, and the /Golden Hind/) cast about
east-south-east, bearing to the south, even for our lives, into the
wind's eye, because that way carried us to the seaward. Making out
from this danger, we sounded one while seven fathom, then five fathom,
then four fathom and less, again deeper, immediately four fathom then
but three fathom, the sea going mightily and high. At last we
recovered, God be thanked, in some despair, to sea room enough.

In this distress, we had vigilant eye unto the Admiral, whom we saw
cast away, without power to give the men succour, neither could we
espy any of the men that leaped overboard to save themselves, either
in the same pinnace, or cock, or upon rafters, and such like means
presenting themselves to men in those extremities, for we desired to
save the men by every possible means. But all in vain, sith God had
determined their ruin; yet all that day, and part of the next, we beat
up and down as near unto the wrack as was possible for us, looking out
if by good hap we might espy any of them.

This was a heavy and grievous event, to lose at one blow our chief
ship freighted with great provision, gathered together with much
travail, care, long time, and difficulty; but more was the loss of our
men, which perished to the number almost of a hundred souls. Amongst
whom was drowned a learned man, a Hungarian (Stephen Parmenius), born
in the city of Buda, called thereof Budoeus, who, of piety and zeal to
good attempts, adventured in this action, minding to record in the
Latin tongue the gests and things worthy of remembrance, happening in
this discovery, to the honour of our nations, the same being adorned
with the eloquent style of this orator and rare poet of our time.

Here also perished our Saxon refiner and discoverer of inestimable
riches, as it was left amongst some of us in undoubted hope. No less
heavy was the loss of the captain, Maurice Browne, a virtuous, honest,
and discreet gentleman, overseen only in liberty given late before to
men that ought to have been restrained, who showed himself a man
resolved, and never unprepared for death, as by his last act of this
tragedy appeared, by report of them that escaped this wrack
miraculously, as shall be hereafter declared. For when all hope was
past of recovering the ship, and that men began to give over, and to
save themselves, the captain was advised before to shift also for his
life, by the pinnace at the stern of the ship; but refusing that
counsel, he would not give example with the first to leave the ship,
but used all means to exhort his people not to despair, nor so to
leave off their labour, choosing rather to die than to incur infamy by
forsaking his charge, which then might be thought to have perished
through his default, showing an ill precedent unto his men, by leaving
the ship first himself. With this mind he mounted upon the highest
deck, where he attended imminent death, and unavoidable; how long, I
leave it to God, who withdraweth not his comfort from his servants at
such times.

In the mean season, certain, to the number of fourteen persons, leaped
into a small pinnace, the bigness of a Thames barge, which was made in
the Newfoundland, cut off the rope wherewith it was towed, and
committed themselves to God's mercy, amidst the storm, and rage of sea
and winds, destitute of food, not so much as a drop of fresh water.
The boat seeming overcharged in foul weather with company, Edward
Headly, a valiant soldier, and well reputed of his company, preferring
the greater to the lesser, thought better that some of them perished
than all, made this motion, to cast lots, and them to be thrown
overboard upon whom the lots fell, thereby to lighten the boat, which
otherways seemed impossible to live, and offered himself with the
first, content to take his adventure gladly: which nevertheless
Richard Clarke, that was master of the Admiral, and one of this
number, refused, advising to abide God's pleasure, who was able to
save all, as well as a few. The boat was carried before the wind,
continuing six days and nights in the ocean, and arrived at last with
the men, alive, but weak, upon the Newfoundland, saving that the
foresaid Headly, who had been late sick, and another called of us
Brazil, of his travel into those countries, died by the way, famished,
and less able to hold out than those of better health. . . . Thus whom
God delivered from drowning, he appointed to be famished; who doth
give limits to man's times, and ordaineth the manner and circumstance
of dying: whom, again, he will preserve, neither sea nor famine can
confound. For those that arrived upon the Newfoundland were brought
into France by certain Frenchmen, then being upon the coast.

After this heavy chance, we continued in beating the sea up and down,
expecting when the weather would clear up that we might yet bear in
with the land, which we judged not far off either the continent or
some island. For we many times, and in sundry places found ground at
50, 45, 40 fathoms, and less. The ground coming upon our lead, being
sometime cozy sand and other while a broad shell, with a little sand
about it.

Our people lost courage daily after this ill success, the weather
continuing thick and blustering, with increase of cold, winter drawing
on, which took from them all hope of amendment, settling an assurance
of worse weather to grow upon us every day. The leeside of us lay full
of flats and dangers, inevitable if the wind blew hard at south. Some
again doubted we were ingulfed in the Bay of St. Lawrence, the coast
full of dangers, and unto us unknown. But above all, provision waxed
scant, and hope of supply was gone with the loss of our Admiral. Those
in the frigate were already pinched with spare allowance, and want of
clothes chiefly: thereupon they besought the General to return to
England before they all perished. And to them of the /Golden Hind/
they made signs of distress, pointing to their mouths, and to their
clothes thin and ragged: then immediately they also of the /Golden
Hind/ grew to be of the same opinion and desire to return home.

The former reasons having also moved the General to have compassion of
his poor men, in whom he saw no want of good will, but of means fit to
perform the action they came for, he resolved upon retire: and calling
the captain and master of the /Hind/, he yielded them many reasons,
enforcing this unexpected return, withal protesting himself greatly
satisfied with that he had seen and knew already, reiterating these
words: /Be content, we have seen enough, and take no care of expense
past: I will set you forth royally the next spring, if God send us
safe home. Therefore I pray you let us no longer strive here, where we
fight against the elements./ Omitting circumstance, how unwillingly
the captain and master of the /Hind/ condescended to this motion, his
own company can testify; yet comforted with the General's promise of a
speedy return at spring, and induced by other apparent reasons,
proving an impossibility to accomplish the action at that time, it was
concluded on all hands to retire.

So upon Saturday in the afternoon, the 31 of August, we changed our
course, and returned back for England. At which very instant, even in
winding about, there passed along between us and towards the land
which we now forsook a very lion to our seeming, in shape, hair, and
colour, not swimming after the manner of a beast by moving of his
feet, but rather sliding upon the water with his whole body excepting
the legs, in sight, neither yet diving under, and again rising above
the water, as the manner is of whales, dolphins, tunnies, porpoises,
and all other fish: but confidently showing himself above water
without hiding: notwithstanding, we presented ourselves in open view
and gesture to amaze him, as all creatures will be commonly at a
sudden gaze and sight of men. Thus he passed along turning his head to
and fro, yawing and gaping wide, with ugly demonstration of long
teeth, and glaring eyes; and to bid us a farewell, coming right
against the /Hind/, he sent forth a horrible voice, roaring or
bellowing as doth a lion, which spectacle we all beheld so far as we
were able to discern the same, as men prone to wonder at every strange
thing, as this doubtless was, to see a lion in the ocean sea, or fish
in shape of a lion. What opinion others had thereof, and chiefly the
General himself, I forbear to deliver: but he took it for /bonum
omen/, rejoicing that he was in war against such an enemy, if it were
the devil. The wind was large for England at our return, but very
high, and the sea rough, insomuch as the frigate, wherein the General
went, was almost swallowed up.

Monday in the afternoon we passed in sight of Cape Race, having made
as much way in little more than two days and nights back again, as
before we had done in eight days from Cape Race unto the place where
our ship perished. Which hindrance thitherward, and speed back again,
is to be imputed unto the swift current, as well as to the winds,
which we had more large in our return. This Monday the General came
aboard the /Hind/, to have the surgeon of the /Hind/ to dress his
foot, which he hurt by treading upon a nail: at which time we
comforted each other with hope of hard success to be all past, and of
the good to come. So agreeing to carry out lights always by night,
that we might keep together, he departed into his frigate, being by no
means to be entreated to tarry in the /Hind/, which had been more for
his security. Immediately after followed a sharp storm, which we over
passed for that time, praised be God.

The weather fair, the General came aboard the /Hind/ again, to make
merry together with the captain, master, and company, which was the
last meeting, and continued there from morning until night. During
which time there passed sundry discourses touching affairs past and to
come, lamenting greatly the loss of his great ship, more of the men,
but most of all his books and notes, and what else I know not, for
which he was out of measure grieved, the same doubtless being some
matter of more importance than his books, which I could not draw from
him: yet by circumstance I gathered the same to be the ore which
Daniel the Saxon had brought unto him in the Newfoundland. Whatsoever
it was, the remembrance touched him so deep as, not able to contain
himself, he beat his boy in great rage, even at the same time, so long
after the miscarrying of the great ship, because upon a fair day, when
we were becalmed upon the coast of the Newfoundland near unto Cape
Race, he sent his boy aboard the Admiral to fetch certain things:
amongst which, this being chief, was yet forgotten and left behind.
After which time he could never conveniently send again aboard the
great ship, much less he doubted her ruin so near at hand.

Herein my opinion was better confirmed diversely, and by sundry
conjectures, which maketh me have the greater hope of this rich mine.
For whereas the General had never before good conceit of these north
parts of the world, now his mind was wholly fixed upon the
Newfoundland. And as before he refused not to grant assignments
liberally to them that required the same into these north parts, now
he became contrarily affected, refusing to make any so large grants,
especially of St. John's, which certain English merchants made suit
for, offering to employ their money and travail upon the same yet
neither by their own suit, nor of others of his own company, whom he
seemed willing to pleasure, it could be obtained. Also laying down his
determination in the spring following for disposing of his voyage then
to be re-attempted: he assigned the captain and master of the /Golden
Hind/ unto the south discovery, and reserved unto himself the north,
affirming that this voyage had won his heart from the south, and that
he was now become a northern man altogether.

Last, being demanded what means he had, at his arrival in England, to
compass the charges of so great preparation as he intended to make the
next spring, having determined upon two fleets, one for the south,
another for the north; /Leave that to me/, he replied, /I will ask a
penny of no man. I will bring good tiding unto her Majesty, who will
be so gracious to lend me 10,000 pounds/, willing us therefore to be
of good cheer; for /he did thank God/, he said, /with all his heart
for that he had seen, the same being enough for us all, and that we
needed not to seek any further/. And these last words he would often
repeat, with demonstration of great fervency of mind, being himself
very confident and settled in belief of inestimable good by this
voyage; which the greater number of his followers nevertheless
mistrusted altogether, not being made partakers of those secrets,
which the General kept unto himself. Yet all of them that are living
may be witnesses of his words and protestations, which sparingly I
have delivered.

Leaving the issue of this good hope unto God, who knoweth the truth
only, and can at His good pleasure bring the same to light, I will
hasten to the end of this tragedy, which must be knit up in the person
of our General. And as it was God's ordinance upon him, even so the
vehement persuasion and entreaty of his friends could nothing avail to
divert him of a wilful resolution of going through in his frigate;
which was overcharged upon the decks with fights, nettings, and small
artillery, too cumbersome for so small a boat that was to pass through
the ocean sea at that season of the year, when by course we might
expect much storm of foul weather. Whereof, indeed, we had enough.

But when he was entreated by the captain, master, and other his well-
willers of the /Hind/ not to venture in the frigate, this was his
answer: /I will not forsake my little company going homeward, with
whom I have passed so many storms and perils./ And in very truth he
was urged to be so over hard by hard reports given of him that he was
afraid of the sea; albeit this was rather rashness than advised
resolution, to prefer the wind of a vain report to the weight of his
own life. Seeing he would not bend to reason, he had provision out of
the/Hind/, such as was wanting aboard his frigate. And so we committed
him to God's protection, and set him aboard his pinnace, we being more
than 300 leagues onward of our way home.

By that time we had brought the Islands of Azores south of us; yet we
then keeping much to the north, until we had got into the height and
elevation of England, we met with very foul weather and terrible seas,
breaking short and high, pyramid-wise. The reason whereof seemed to
proceed either of hilly grounds high and low within the sea, as we see
hills and vales upon the land, upon which the seas do mount and fall,
or else the cause proceedeth of diversity of winds, shifting often in
sundry points, all which having power to move the great ocean, which
again is not presently settled, so many seas do encounter together, as
there had been diversity of winds. Howsoever it cometh to pass, men
which all their lifetime had occupied the sea never saw more
outrageous seas, we had also upon our mainyard an apparition of a
little fire by night, which seamen do call Castor and Pollux. But we
had only one, which they take an evil sign of more tempest; the same
is usual in storms.

Monday, the 9 of September, in the afternoon, the frigate was near
cast away, oppressed by waves, yet at that time recovered; and giving
forth signs of joy, the General, sitting abaft with a book in his
hand, cried out to us in the /Hind/, so oft as we did approach within
hearing, /We are as near to heaven by sea as by land!/ Reiterating the
same speech, well beseeming a soldier, resolute in Jesus Christ, as I
can testify he was.

The same Monday night, about twelve of the clock, or not long after,
the frigate being ahead of us in the /Golden Hind/, suddenly her
lights were out, whereof as it were in a moment we lost the sight, and
withal our watch cried /the General was cast away/, which was too
true. For in that moment the frigate was devoured and swallowed up of
the sea. Yet still we looked out all that night, and ever after until
we arrived upon the coast of England; omitting no small sail at sea,
unto which we gave not the tokens between us agreed upon to have
perfect knowledge of each other, if we should at any time be
separated.

In great torment of weather and peril of drowning it pleased God to
send safe home the /Golden Hind/, which arrived in Falmouth the 22 of
September, being Sunday, not without as great danger escaped in a flaw
coming from the south-east, with such thick mist that we could not
discern land to put in right with the haven. From Falmouth we went to
Dartmouth, and lay there at anchor before the Range, while the captain
went aland to enquire if there had been any news of the frigate,
which, sailing well, might happily have been before us; also to
certify Sir John Gilbert, brother unto the General, of our hard
success, whom the captain desired, while his men were yet aboard him,
and were witnesses of all occurrences in that voyage, it might please
him to take the examination of every person particularly, in discharge
of his and their faithful endeavour. Sir John Gilbert refused so to
do, holding himself satisfied with report made by the captain, and not
altogether despairing of his brother's safety, offered friendship and
courtesy to the captain and his company, requiring to have his bark
brought into the harbour; in furtherance whereof a boat was sent to
help to tow her in.

Nevertheless, when the captain returned aboard his ship, he found his
men bent to depart every man to his home; and then the wind serving to
proceed higher upon the coast, they demanded money to carry them home,
some to London, others to Harwich, and elsewhere, if the barque should
be carried into Dartmouth and they discharged so far from home, or
else to take benefit of the wind, then serving to draw nearer home,
which should be a less charge unto the captain, and great ease unto
the men, having else far to go. Reason accompanied with necessity
persuaded the captain, who sent his lawful excuse and cause of this
sudden departure unto Sir John Gilbert, by the boat of Dartmouth, and
from thence the /Golden Hind/ departed and took harbour at Weymouth.
All the men tired with the tediousness of so unprofitable a voyage to
their seeming, in which their long expense of time, much toil and
labour, hard diet, and continual hazard of life was unrecompensed;
their captain nevertheless by his great charges impaired greatly
thereby, yet comforted in the goodness of God, and His undoubted
providence following him in all that voyage, as it doth always those
at other times whosoever have confidence in Him alone. Yet have we
more near feeling and perseverance of His powerful hand and protection
when God doth bring us together with others into one same peril, in
which He leaveth them and delivereth us, making us thereby the
beholders, but not partakers, of their ruin. Even so, amongst very
many difficulties, discontentments, mutinies, conspiracies,
sicknesses, mortality, spoilings, and wracks by sea, which were
afflictions more than in so small a fleet or so short a time may be
supposed, albeit true in every particularity, as partly by the former
relation may be collected, and some I suppressed with silence for
their sakes living, it pleased God to support this company, of which
only one man died of a malady inveterate, and long infested, the rest
kept together in reasonable contentment and concord, beginning,
continuing, and ending the voyage, which none else did accomplish,
either not pleased with the action, or impatient of wants, or
prevented by death.

Thus have I delivered the contents of the enterprise and last action
of Sir Humfrey Gilbert, Knight, faithfully, for so much as I thought
meet to be published; wherein may always appear, though he be
extinguished, some sparks of his virtues, be remaining firm and
resolute in a purpose by all pretence honest and godly, as was this,
to discover, possess, and to reduce unto the service of God and
Christian piety those remote and heathen countries of America not
actually possessed by Christians, and most rightly appertaining unto
the crown of England, unto the which as his zeal deserveth high
commendation, even so he may justly be taxed of temerity, and
presumption rather, in two respects. First, when yet there was only
probability, not a certain and determinate place of habitation
selected, neither any demonstration if commodity there /in esse/, to
induce his followers; nevertheless, he both was too prodigal of his
own patrimony and too careless of other men's expenses to employ both
his and their substance upon a ground imagined good. The which
falling, very like his associates were promised, and made it their
best reckoning, to be salved some other way, which pleased not God to
prosper in his first and great preparation. Secondly, when by his
former preparation he was enfeebled of ability and credit to perform
his designments, as it were impatient to abide in expectation better
opportunity, and means which God might raise, he thrust himself again
into the action, for which he was not fit, presuming the cause
pretended on God's behalf would carry him to the desired end. Into
which having thus made re-entry, he could not yield again to withdraw,
though he saw no encouragement to proceed; lest his credit, foiled in
his first attempt, in a second should utterly be disgraced. Between
extremities he made a right adventure, putting all to God and good
fortune; and, which was worst, refused not to entertain every person
and means whatsoever, to furnish out this expedition, the success
whereof hath been declared.

But such is the infinite bounty of God, who from every evil deriveth
good. For besides that fruit may grow in time of our travelling into
those north-west lands, the crosses, turmoils, and afflictions, both
in the preparation and execution of this voyage, did correct the
intemperate humours which before we noted to be in this gentleman, and
made unsavoury and less delightful his other manifold virtues. Then as
he was refined, and made nearer drawing unto the image of God so it
pleased the Divine will to resume him unto Himself, whither both his
and every other high and noble mind have always aspired.









Title: The Hispanic Nations of the New World, A Chronicle of our
Southern Neighbors

Author: William R. Shepherd

THIS BOOK, VOLUME 50 IN THE CHRONICLES OF AMERICA SERIES, ALLEN
JOHNSON, EDITOR, WAS DONATED TO PROJECT GUTENBERG BY THE JAMES J.
KELLY LIBRARY OF ST. GREGORY'S UNIVERSITY; THANKS TO ALEV AKMAN.

Scanned by Dianne Bean. Proofed by Joseph Buersmeyer.


THE HISPANIC NATIONS OF THE NEW WORLD, A CHRONICLE OF OUR
SOUTHERN NEIGHBORS

BY WILLIAM R. SHEPHERD

NEW HAVEN: YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS
TORONTO: GLASGOW, BROOK & CO.
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

1919


CONTENTS

I. THE HERITAGE FROM SPAIN AND PORTUGAL

II. "OUR OLD KING OR NONE"

III. "INDEPENDENCE OR DEATH"

IV. PLOUGHING THE SEA

V. THE AGE OF THE DICTATORS

VI. PERIL FROM ABROAD

VII. GREATER STATES AND LESSER

VIII. "ON THE MARGIN OF INTERNATIONAL LIFE"

IX. THE REPUBLICS OF SOUTH AMERICA

X. MEXICO IN REVOLUTION

XI. THE REPUBLICS OF THE CARIBBEAN

XII. PAN-AMERICANISM AND THE GREAT WAR

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE



THE HISPANIC NATIONS OF THE NEW WORLD

CHAPTER I. THE HERITAGE FROM SPAIN AND PORTUGAL

At the time of the American Revolution most of the New World
still belonged to Spain and Portugal, whose captains and
conquerors had been the first to come to its shores. Spain had
the lion's share, but Portugal held Brazil, in itself a vast land
of unsuspected resources. No empire mankind had ever yet known
rivaled in size the illimitable domains of Spain and Portugal in
the New World; and none displayed such remarkable contrasts in
land and people. Boundless plains and forests, swamps and
deserts, mighty mountain chains, torrential streams and majestic
rivers, marked the surface of the country. This vast territory
stretched from the temperate prairies west of the Mississippi
down to the steaming lowlands of Central America, then up through
tablelands in the southern continent to high plateaus, miles
above sea level, where the sun blazed and the cold, dry air was
hard to breathe, and then higher still to the lofty peaks of the
Andes, clad in eternal snow or pouring fire and smoke from their
summits in the clouds, and thence to the lower temperate valleys,
grassy pampas, and undulating hills of the far south.

Scattered over these vast colonial domains in the Western World
were somewhere between 12,000,000 and 19,000,000 people subject
to Spain, and perhaps 3,000,000, to Portugal; the great majority
of them were Indians and negroes, the latter predominating in the
lands bordering on the Caribbean Sea and along the shores of
Brazil. Possibly one-fourth of the inhabitants came of European
stock, including not only Spaniards and their descendants but
also the folk who spoke English in the Floridas and French in
Louisiana.

During the centuries which had elapsed since the entry of the
Spaniards and Portuguese into these regions an extraordinary
fusion of races had taken place. White, red, and black had
mingled to such an extent that the bulk of the settled population
became half-caste. Only in the more temperate regions of the far
north and south, where the aborigines were comparatively few or
had disappeared altogether, did the whites remain racially
distinct. Socially the Indian and the negro counted for little.
They constituted the laboring class on whom all the burdens fell
and for whom advantages in the body politic were scant. Legally
the Indian under Spanish rule stood on a footing of equality with
his white fellows, and many a gifted native came to be reckoned a
force in the community, though his social position remained a
subordinate one. Most of the negroes were slaves and were more
kindly treated by the Spaniards than by the Portuguese.

Though divided among themselves, the Europeans were everywhere
politically dominant. The Spaniard was always an individualist.
Besides, he often brought from the Old World petty provincial
traditions which were intensified in the New. The inhabitants of
towns, many of which had been founded quite independently of one
another, knew little about their remote neighbors and often were
quite willing to convert their ignorance into prejudice: The
dweller in the uplands and the resident on the coast were wont to
view each other with disfavor. The one was thought heavy and
stupid, the other frivolous and lazy. Native Spaniards regarded
the Creoles, or American born, as persons who had degenerated
more or less by their contact with the aborigines and the
wilderness. For their part, the Creoles looked upon the Spaniards
as upstarts and intruders, whose sole claim to consideration lay
in the privileges dispensed them by the home government. In
testimony of this attitude they coined for their oversea kindred
numerous nicknames which were more expressive than complimentary.
While the Creoles held most of the wealth and of the lower
offices, the Spaniards enjoyed the perquisites and emoluments of
the higher posts.

Though objects of disdain to both these masters, the Indians
generally preferred the Spaniard to the Creole. The Spaniard
represented a distant authority interested in the welfare of its
humbler subjects and came less into actual daily contact with the
natives. While it would hardly be correct to say that the
Spaniard was viewed as a protector and the Creole as an
oppressor, yet the aborigines unconsciously made some such hazy
distinction if indeed they did not view all Europeans with
suspicion and dislike. In Brazil the relation of classes was much
the same, except that here the native element was much less
conspicuous as a social factor.

These distinctions were all the more accentuated by the absence
both of other European peoples and of a definite middle class of
any race. Everywhere in the areas tenanted originally by
Spaniards and Portuguese the European of alien stock was
unwelcome, even though he obtained a grudging permission from the
home governments to remain a colonist. In Brazil, owing to the
close commercial connections between Great Britain and Portugal,
foreigners were not so rigidly excluded as in Spanish America.
The Spaniard was unwilling that lands so rich in natural
treasures should be thrown open to exploitation by others, even
if the newcomer professed the Catholic faith. The heretic was
denied admission as a matter of course. Had the foreigner been
allowed to enter, the risk of such exploitation doubtless would
have been increased, but a middle class might have arisen to weld
the the discordant factions into a society which had common
desires and aspirations. With the development of commerce and
industry, with the growth of activities which bring men into
touch with each other in everyday affairs, something like a
solidarity of sentiment might have been awakened. In its absence
the only bond among the dominant whites was their sense of
superiority to the colored masses beneath them.

Manual labor and trade had never attracted the Spaniards and the
Portuguese. The army, the church, and the law were the three
callings that offered the greatest opportunity for distinction.
Agriculture, grazing, and mining they did not disdain, provided
that superintendence and not actual work was the main requisite.
The economic organization which the Spaniards and Portuguese
established in America was naturally a more or less faithful
reproduction of that to which they had been accustomed at home.
Agriculture and grazing became the chief occupations. Domestic
animals and many kinds of plants brought from Europe throve
wonderfully in their new home. Huge estates were the rule; small
farms, the exception. On the ranches and plantations vast droves
of cattle, sheep, and horses were raised, as well as immense
crops. Mining, once so much in vogue, had become an occupation of
secondary importance.

On their estates the planter, the ranchman, and the mine owner
lived like feudal overlords, waited upon by Indian and negro
peasants who also tilled the fields, tended the droves, and dug
the earth for precious metals and stones. Originally the natives
had been forced to work under conditions approximating actual
servitude, but gradually the harsher features of this system had
given way to a mode of service closely resembling peonage. Paid a
pitifully small wage, provided with a hut of reeds or sundried
mud and a tiny patch of soil on which to grow a few hills of the
corn and beans that were his usual nourishment, the ordinary
Indian or half-caste laborer was scarcely more than a beast of
burden, a creature in whom civic virtues of a high order were not
likely to develop. If he betook himself to the town his possible
usefulness lessened in proportion as he fell into drunken or
dissolute habits, or lapsed into a state of lazy and vacuous
dreaminess, enlivened only by chatter or the rolling of a
cigarette. On the other hand, when employed in a capacity where
native talent might be tested, he often revealed a power of
action which, if properly guided, could be turned to excellent
account. As a cowboy, for example, he became a capital horseman,
brave, alert, skillful, and daring.

Commerce with Portugal and Spain was long confined to yearly
fairs and occasional trading fleets that plied between fixed
points. But when liberal decrees threw open numerous ports in the
mother countries to traffic and the several colonies were given
also the privilege of exchanging their products among themselves,
the volume of exports and imports increased and gave an impetus
to activity which brought a notable release from the torpor and
vegetation characterizing earlier days. Yet, even so,
communication was difficult and irregular. By sea the distances
were great and the vessels slow. Overland the natural obstacles
to transportation were so numerous and the methods of conveyance
so cumbersome and expensive that the people of one province were
practically strangers to their neighbors.

Matters of the mind and of the soul were under the guardianship
of the Church. More than merely a spiritual mentor, it controlled
education and determined in large measure the course of
intellectual life. Possessed of vast wealth in lands and
revenues, its monasteries and priories, its hospitals and
asylums, its residences of ecclesiastics, were the finest
buildings in every community, adorned with the masterpieces of
sculptors and painters. A village might boast of only a few
squalid huts, yet there in the "plaza," or central square, loomed
up a massively imposing edifice of worship, its towers pointing
heavenward, the sign and symbol of triumphant power.

The Church, in fact, was the greatest civilizing agency that
Spain and Portugal had at their disposal. It inculcated a
reverence for the monarch and his ministers and fostered a
deep-rooted sentiment of conservatism which made disloyalty and
innovation almost sacrilegious. In the Spanish colonies in
particular the Church not only protected the natives against the
rapacity of many a white master but taught them the rudiments of
the Christian faith, as well as useful arts and trades. In remote
places, secluded so far as possible from contact with Europeans,
missionary pioneers gathered together groups of neophytes whom
they rendered docile and industrious, it is true, but whom they
often deprived of initiative and selfreliance and kept illiterate
and superstitious.

Education was reserved commonly for members of the ruling class.
As imparted in the universities and schools, it savored strongly
of medievalism. Though some attention was devoted to the natural
sciences, experimental methods were not encouraged and found no
place in lectures and textbooks. Books, periodicals, and other
publications came under ecclesiastical inspection, and a vigilant
censorship determined what was fit for the public to read.

Supreme over all the colonial domains was the government of their
majesties, the monarchs of Spain and Portugal. A ministry and a
council managed the affairs of the inhabitants of America and
guarded their destinies in accordance with the theories of
enlightened despotism then prevailing in Europe. The Spanish
dominions were divided into viceroyalties and subdivided into
captaincies general, presidencies, and intendancies. Associated
with the high officials who ruled them were audiencias, or
boards, which were at once judicial and administrative. Below
these individuals and bodies were a host of lesser functionaries
who, like their superiors, held their posts by appointment. In
Brazil the governor general bore the title of viceroy and carried
on the administration assisted by provincial captains, supreme
courts, and local officers.

This control was by no means so autocratic as it might seem.
Portugal had too many interests elsewhere, and was too feeble
besides, to keep tight rein over a territory so vast and a
population so much inclined as the Brazilian to form itself into
provincial units, jealous of the central authority. Spain, on its
part, had always practised the good old Roman rule of "divide and
govern." Its policy was to hold the balance among officials,
civil and ecclesiastical, and inhabitants, white and colored. It
knew how strongly individualistic the Spaniard was and realized
the full force of the adage, "I obey, but I do not fulfill! "
Legislatures and other agencies of government directly
representative of the people did not exist in Spanish or
Portuguese America. The Spanish cabildo, or town council,
however, afforded an opportunity for the expression of the
popular will and often proved intractable. Its membership was
appointive, elective, hereditary, and even purchasable, but the
form did not affect the substance. The Spanish Americans had an
instinct for politics. "Here all men govern," declared one of the
viceroys; "the people have more part in political discussions
than in any other provinces in the world; a council of war sits
in every house."



CHAPTER II. "OUR OLD KING OR NONE"

The movement which led eventually to the emancipation of the
colonies differed from the local uprisings which occurred in
various parts of South America during the eighteenth century.
Either the arbitrary conduct of individual governors or excessive
taxation had caused the earlier revolts. To the final revolution
foreign nations and foreign ideas gave the necessary impulse. A
few members of the intellectual class had read in secret the
writings of French and English philosophers. Othershad traveled
abroad and came home to whisper to their countrymen what they had
seen and heard in lands more progressive than Spain and Portugal.
The commercial relations, both licit and illicit, which Great
Britain had maintained with several of the colonies had served to
diffuse among them some notions of what went on in the busy world
outside.

By gaining its independence, the United States had set a
practical example of what might be done elsewhere in America.
Translated into French, the Declaration of Independence was read
and commented upon by enthusiasts who dreamed of the possibility
of applying its principles in their own lands. More powerful
still were the ideas liberated by the French Revolution and
Napoleon. Borne across the ocean, the doctrines of "Liberty,
Fraternity, Equality "stirred the ardent-minded to thoughts of
action, though the Spanish and Portuguese Americans who schemed
and plotted were the merest handful. The seed they planted was
slow to germinate among peoples who had been taught to regard
things foreign as outlandish and heretical. Many years therefore
elapsed before the ideas of the few became the convictions of the
masses, for the conservatism and loyalty of the common people
were unbelieveably steadfast.

Not Spanish and Portuguese America, but Santo Domingo, an island
which had been under French rule since 1795 and which was
tenanted chiefly by ignorant and brutalized negro slaves, was the
scene of the first effectual assertion of independence in the
lands originally colonized by Spain. Rising in revolt against
their masters, the negroes had won complete control under their
remarkable commander, Toussaint L'Ouverture, when Napoleon
Bonaparte, then First Consul, decided to restore the old regime.
But the huge expedition which was sent to reduce the island ended
in absolute failure. After a ruthless racial warfare,
characterized by ferocity on both sides, the French retired. In
1804 the negro leaders proclaimed the independence of the island
as the "Republic of Haiti," under a President who, appreciative
of the example just set by Napoleon, informed his followers that
he too had assumed the august title of "Emperor"! His immediate
successor in African royalty was the notorious Henri Christophe,
who gathered about him a nobility garish in color and taste--
including their sable lordships, the "Duke of Marmalade" and the
"Count of Lemonade"; and who built the palace of "Sans Souci" and
the countryseats of "Queen's Delight" and "King's Beautiful
View," about which cluster tales of barbaric pleasure that rival
the grim legends clinging to the parapets and enshrouding the
dungeons of his mountain fortress of "La Ferriere." None of these
black or mulatto potentates, however, could expel French
authority from the eastern part of Santo Domingo. That task was
taken in hand by the inhabitants themselves, and in 1809 they
succeeded in restoring the control of Spain. Meanwhile events
which had been occurring in South America prepared the way for
the movement that was ultimately to banish the flags of both
Spain and Portugal from the continents of the New World. As the
one country had fallen more or less tinder the influence of
France, so the other had become practically dependent upon Great
Britain. Interested in the expansion of its commerce and viewing
the outlying possessions of peoples who submitted to French
guidance as legitimate objects for seizure, Great Britain in 1797
wrested Trinidad from the feeble grip of Spain and thus acquired
a strategic position very near South America itself. Haiti,
Trinidad, and Jamaica, in fact, all became Centers of
revolutionary agitation and havens of refuge for. Spanish
American radicals in the troublous years to follow.

Foremost among the early conspirators was the Venezuelan,
Francisco de Miranda, known to his fellow Americans of Spanish
stock as the "Precursor." Napoleon once remarked of him: "He is a
Don Quixote, with this difference--he is not crazy . . . . The
man has sacred fire in his soul." An officer in the armies of
Spain and of revolutionary France and later a resident of London,
Miranda devoted thirty years of his adventurous life to the cause
of independence for his countrymen. With officials of the British
Government he labored long and zealously, eliciting from them
vague promises of armed support and some financial aid. It was in
London, also, that he organized a group of sympathizers into the
secret society called the "Grand Lodge of America." With it, or
with its branches in France and Spain, many of the leaders of the
subsequent revolution came to be identified.

In 1806, availing himself of the negligence of the United States
and having the connivance of the British authorities in Trinidad,
Miranda headed two expeditions to the coast of Venezuela. He had
hoped that his appearance would be the signal for a general
uprising; instead, he was treated with indifference. His
countrymen seemed to regard him as a tool of Great Britain, and
no one felt disposed to accept the blessings of liberty under
that guise. Humiliated, but not despairing, Miranda returned to
London to await a happier day.

Two British expeditions which attempted to conquer the region
about the Rio de la Plata in 1806 and 1807 were also frustrated
by this same stubborn loyalty. When the Spanish viceroy fled, the
inhabitants themselves rallied to the defense of the country and
drove out the invaders. Thereupon the people of Buenos Aires,
assembled in cabildo abierto, or town meeting, deposed the
viceroy and chose their victorious leader in his stead until a
successor could be regularly appointed.

Then, in 1808, fell the blow which was to shatter the bonds
uniting Spain to its continental dominions in America. The
discord and corruption which prevailed in that unfortunate
country afforded Napoleon an opportunity to oust its feeble king
and his incompetent son, Ferdinand, and to place Joseph Bonaparte
on the throne. But the master of Europe underestimated the
fighting ability of Spaniards. Instead of humbly complying with
his mandate, they rose in arms against the usurper and created a
central junta, or revolutionary committee, to govern in the name
of Ferdinand VII, as their rightful ruler.

The news of this French aggression aroused in the colonies a
spirit of resistance as vehement as that in the mother country.
Both Spaniards and Creoles repudiated the "intruder king."
Believing, as did their comrades oversea, that Ferdinand was a
helpless victim in the hands of Napoleon, they recognized the
revolutionary government and sent great sums of money to Spain to
aid in the struggle against the French. Envoys from Joseph
Bonaparte seeking an acknowledgment of his rule were angrily
rejected and were forced to leave.

The situation on both sides of the ocean was now an extraordinary
one. Just as the junta in Spain had no legal right to govern, so
the officials in the colonies, holding their posts by appointment
from a deposed king, had no legal authority, and the people would
not allow them to accept new commissions from a usurper. The
Church, too, detesting Napoleon as the heir of a revolution that
had undermined the Catholic faith and regarding him as a godless
despot who had made the Pope a captive, refused to recognize the
French pretender. Until Ferdinand VII could be restored to his
throne, therefore, the colonists had to choose whether they would
carry on the administration under the guidance of the
self-constituted authorities in Spain, or should themselves
create similar organizations in each of the colonies to take
charge of affairs. The former course was favored by the official
element and its supporters among the conservative classes, the
latter by the liberals, who felt that they had as much right as
the people of the mother country to choose the form of government
best suited to their interests.

Each party viewed the other with distrust. Opposition to the more
democratic procedure, it was felt, could mean nothing less than
secret submission to the pretensions of Joseph Bonaparte; whereas
the establishment in America of any organizations like those in
Spain surely indicated a spirit of disloyalty toward Ferdinand
VII himself. Under circumstances like these, when the junta and
its successor, the council of regency, refused to make
substantial concessions to the colonies, both parties were
inevitably drifting toward independence. In the phrase of Manuel
Belgrano, one of the great leaders in the viceroyalty of La
Plata, "our old King or none" became the watchword that gradually
shaped the thoughts of Spanish Americans.

When, therefore, in 1810, the news came that the French army had
overrun Spain, democratic ideas so long cherished in secret and
propagated so industriously by Miranda and his followers at last
found expression in a series of uprisings in the four
viceroyalties of La Plata, Peru, New Granada, and New Spain. But
in each of these viceroyalties the revolution ran a different
course. Sometimes it was the capital city that led off; sometimes
a provincial town; sometimes a group of individuals in the
country districts. Among the actual participants in the various
movements very little harmony was to be found. Here a particular
leader claimed obedience; there a board of self-chosen
magistrates held sway; elsewhere a town or province refused to
acknowledge the central authority. To add to these complications,
in 1812, a revolutionary Cortes, or legislative body, assembled
at Cadiz, adopted for Spain and its dominions a constitution
providing for direct representation of the colonies in oversea
administration. Since arrangements of this sort contented many of
the Spanish Americans who had protested against existing abuses,
they were quite unwilling to press their grievances further.
Given all these evidences of division in activity and counsel,
one does not find it difficult to foresee the outcome.

On May 25, 1810, popular agitation at Buenos Aires forced the
Spanish viceroy of La Plata to resign. The central authority was
thereupon vested in an elected junta that was to govern in the
name of Ferdinand VII. Opposition broke out immediately. The
northern and eastern parts of the viceroyalty showed themselves
quite unwilling to obey these upstarts. Meantime, urged on by
radicals who revived the Jacobin doctrines of revolutionary
France, the junta strove to suppress in rigorous fashion any
symptoms of disaffection; but it could do nothing to stem the
tide of separation in the rest of the viceroyalty--in Charcas
(Bolivia), Paraguay, and the Banda Oriental, or East Bank, of the
Uruguay.

At Buenos Aires acute difference of opinion--about the extent to
which the movement should be carried and about the permanent form
of government to be adopted as well as the method of establishing
it--produced a series of political commotions little short of
anarchy. Triumvirates followed the junta into power; supreme
directors alternated with triumvirates; and constituent asmblies
came and went. Under one authority or another the name of the
viceroyalty was changed to "United Provinces of La Plata River";
a seal, a flag ,and a coat of arms were chosen; and numerous
features of the Spanish regime were abolished, including titles
of nobility, the Inquisition, the slave trade, and restrictions
on the press. But so chaotic were the conditions within and so
disastrous the campaigns without, that eventually commissioners
were sent to Europe, bearing instructions to seek a king for the
distracted country.

When Charcas fell under the control of the viceroy of Peru,
Paraguay set up a regime for itself. At Asuncion, the capital, a
revolutionary outbreak in 1811 replaced the Spanish intendant by
a triumvirate, of which the most prominent member was Dr. Jose
Gaspar Rodriguez de Francia. A lawyer by profession, familiar
with the history of Rome, an admirer of France and Napoleon, a
misanthrope and a recluse, possessing a blind faith in himself
and actuated by a sense of implacable hatred for all who might
venture to thwart his will, this extraordinary personage speedily
made himself master of the country. A population composed chiefly
of Indians, docile in temperament and submissive for many years
to the paternal rule of Jesuit missionaries, could not fail to
become pliant instruments in his hands. At his direction,
therefore, Paraguay declared itself independent of both Spain and
La Plata. This done, an obedient Congress elected Francia consul
of the republic and later invested him with the title of
dictator. In the Banda Oriental two distinct movements appeared.
Montevideo, the capital, long a center of royalist sympathies and
for some years hostile to the revolutionary government in Buenos
Aires, was reunited with La Plata in 1814. Elsewhere the people
of the province followed the fortunes of Jose Gervasio Artigas,
an able and valiant cavalry officer, who roamed through it at
will, bidding defiance to any authority not his own. Most of the
former viceroyalty of La Plata had thus, to all intents and
purposes, thrown off the yoke of Spain.

Chile was the only other province that for a while gave promise
of similar action. Here again it was the capital city that took
the lead. On receipt of the news of the occurrences at Buenos
Aires in May, 1810, the people of Santiago forced the captain
general to resign and, on the 18th of September, replaced him by
a junta of their own choosing. But neither this body, nor its
successors, nor even the Congress that assembled the following
year, could establish a permanent and effective government.
Nowhere in Spanish America, perhaps, did the lower classes count
for so little, and the upper class for so much, as in Chile.
Though the great landholders were disposed to favor a reasonable
amount of local autonomy for the country, they refused to heed
the demands of the radicals for complete independence and the
establishwent of a republic. Accordingly, in proportion as their
opponents resorted to measures of compulsion, the gentry
gradually withdrew their support and offered little resistance
when troops dispatched by the viceroy of Peru restored the
Spanish regime in 1814. The irreconcilable among the patriots
fled over the Andes to the western part of La Plata, where they
found hospitable refuge.

But of all the Spanish dominions in South America none witnessed
so desperate a struggle for emancipation as the viceroyalty of
New Granada. Learning of the catastrophe that had befallen the
mother country, the leading citizens of Caracas, acting in
conjunction with the cabildo, deposed the captain general on
April 19, 1810, and created a junta in his stead. The example was
quickly followed by most of the smaller divisions of the
province. Then when Miranda returned from England to head the
revolutionary movement, a Congress, on July 5, 1811, declared
Venezuela independent of Spain. Carried away, also, by the
enthusiasm of the moment, and forgetful of the utter
unpreparedness of the country, the Congress promulgated a federal
constitution modeled on that of the United States, which set
forth all the approved doctrines of the rights of man.

Neither Miranda nor his youthful coadjutor, Simon Bolivar, soon
to become famous in the annals of Spanish American history,
approved of this plunge into democracy. Ardent as their
patriotism was, they knew that the country needed centralized
control and not experiments in confederation or theoretical
liberty. They speedily found out, also, that they could not count
on the support of the people at large. Then, almost as if Nature
herself disapproved of the whole proceeding, a frightful
earthquake in the following year shook many a Venezuelan town
into ruins. Everywhere the royalists took heart. Dissensions
broke out between Miranda and his subordinates. Betrayed into the
hands of his enemies, the old warrior himself was sent away to
die in a Spanish dungeon. And so the "earthquake" republic
collapsed.

But the rigorous measures adopted by the royalists to sustain
their triumph enabled Bolivar to renew the struggle in 1813. He
entered upon a campaign which was signalized by acts of barbarity
on both sides. His declaration of "war to the death" was answered
in kind. Wholesale slaughter of prisoners, indiscriminate
pillage, and wanton destruction of property spread terror and
desolation throughout the country. Acclaimed "Liberator of
Venezuela" and made dictator by the people of Caracas, Bolivar
strove in vain to overcome the half-savage llaneros, or cowboys
of the plains, who despised the innovating aristocrats of the
capital. Though he won a few victories, he did not make the cause
of independence popular, and, realizing his failure, he retired
into New Granada.

In this region an astounding series of revolutions and
counter-revolutions had taken place. Unmindful of pleas for
cooperation, the Creole leaders in town and district, from 1810
onward, seized control of affairs in a fashion that betokened a
speedy disintegration of the country. Though the viceroy was
deposed and a general Congress was summoned to meet at the
capital, Bogota, efforts at centralization encountered opposition
in every quarter. Only the royalists managed to preserve a
semblance of unity. Separate republics sprang into being and in
1813 declared their independence of Spain. Presidents and
congresses were pitted against one another. Towns fought among
themselves. Even parishes demanded local autonomy. For a while
the services of Bolivar were invoked to force rebellious areas
into obedience to the principle of confederation, but with scant
result. Unable to agree with his fellow officers and displaying
traits of moral weakness which at this time as on previous
occasions showed that he had not yet risen to a full sense of
responsibility, the Liberator renounced the task and fled to
Jamaica.

The scene now shifts northward to the viceroyalty of New Spain.
Unlike the struggles already described, the uprisings that began
in 1810 in central Mexico were substantially revolts of Indians
and half-castes against white domination. On the 16th of
September, a crowd of natives rose under the leadership of Miguel
Hidalgo, a parish priest of the village of Dolores. Bearing on
their banners the slogan, "Long live Ferdinand VII and down with
bad government, " the undisciplined crowd, soon to number tens of
thousands, aroused such terror by their behavior that the whites
were compelled to unite in self-defense. It mattered not whether
Hidalgo hoped to establish a republic or simply to secure for his
followers relief from oppression: in either case the whites could
expect only Indian domination. Before the trained forces of the
whites a horde of natives, so ignorant of modern warfare that
some of them tried to stop cannon balls by clapping their straw
hats over the mouths of the guns, could not stand their ground.
Hidalgo was captured and shot, but he was succeeded by Jose Maria
Morelos, also a priest. Reviving the old Aztec name for central
Mexico, he summoned a "Congress of Anahuac," which in 1813
asserted that dependence on the throne of Spain was "forever
broken and dissolved." Abler and more humane than Hidalgo, he set
up a revolutionary government that the authorities of Mexico
failed for a while to suppress.

In 1814, therefore, Spain still held the bulk of its dominions.
Trinidad, to be sure, had been lost to Great Britain, and both
Louisiana and West Florida to the United States. Royalist
control, furthermore, had ceased in parts of the viceroyalties of
La Plata and New Granada. To regain Trinidad and Louisiana was
hopeless: but a wise policy conciliation or an overwheming
display of armed force might yet restore Spanish rule where it
had been merely suspended.

Very different was the course of events in Brazil. Strangely
enough, the first impulse toward independence was given by the
Portuguese royal family. Terrified by the prospective invasion of
the country by a French army, late in 1807 the Prince Regent, the
royal family, and a host of Portuguese nobles and commoners took
passage on British vessels and sailed to Rio de Janeiro. Brazil
thereupon became the seat of royal government and immediately
assumed an importance which it could never have attained as a
mere dependency. Acting under the advice of the British minister,
the Prince Regent threw open the ports of the colony to the ships
of all nations friendly to Portugal, gave his sanction to a
variety of reforms beneficial to commerce and industry, and even
permitted a printing press to be set up, though only for official
purposes. From all these benevolent activities Brazil derived
great advantages. On the other hand, the Prince Regent's aversion
to popular education or anything that might savor of democracy
and the greed of his followers for place and distinction
alienated his colonial subjects. They could not fail to contrast
autocracy in Brazil with the liberal ideas that had made headway
elsewhere in Spanish America. As a consequence a spirit of unrest
arose which boded ill for the maintenance of Portuguese rule.



CHAPTER III  "INDEPNDENCE OR DEATH"

The restoration of Ferdinand VII to his throne in 1814 encouraged
the liberals of Spain, no less than the loyalists of Spanish
America, to hope that the "old King" would now grant a new
dispensation. Freedom of commerce and a fair measure of popular
representation in government, it was believed, would compensate
both the mother country for the suffering which it had undergone
during the Peninsular War and the colonies for the trials to
which loyalty had been subjected. But Ferdinand VII was a typical
Bourbon. Nothing less than an absolute reestablishment of the
earlier regime would satisfy him. On both sides of the Atlantic,
therefore, the liberals were forced into opposition to the crown,
although they were so far apart that they could not cooperate
with each other. Independence was to be the fortune of the
Spanish Americans, and a continuance of despotism, for a while,
the lot of the Spaniards.

As the region of the viceroyalty of La Plata had been the first
to cast off the authority of the home government, so it was the
first to complete its separation from Spain. Despite the fact
that disorder was rampant everywhere and that most of the local
districts could not or would not send deputies, a congress that
assembled at Tucuman voted on July 9, 1816, to declare the
"United Provinces in South America" independent. Comprehensive
though the expression was, it applied only to the central part of
the former viceroyalty, and even there it was little more than an
aspiration. Mistrust of the authorities at Buenos Aires,
insistence upon provincial autonomy, failure to agree upon a
particular kind of republican government, and a lingering
inclination to monarchy made progress toward national unity
impossible. In 1819, to be sure, a constitution was adopted,
providing for a centralized government, but in the country at
large it encountered too much resistance from those who favored a
federal government to become effective.

In the Banda Oriental, over most of which Artigas and his
horsemen held sway, chaotic conditions invited aggression from
the direction of Brazil. This East Bank of the Uruguay had long
been disputed territory between Spain and Portugal; and now its
definite acquisition by the latter seemed an easy undertaking.
Instead, however, the task turned out to be a truly formidable
one. Montevideo, feebly defended by the forces of the Government
at Buenos Aires, soon capitulated, but four years elapsed before
the rest of the country could be subdued. Artigas fled to
Paraguay, where he fell into the clutches of Francia, never to
escape. In 1821 the Banda Oriental was annexed to Brazil as the
Cisplatine Province.

Over Paraguay that grim and somber potentate, known as "The
Supreme One"--El Supremo--presided with iron hand. In 1817
Francia set up a despotism unique in the annals of South America.
Fearful lest contact with the outer world might weaken his
tenacious grip upon his subjects, whom he terrorized into
obedience, he barred approach to the country and suffered no one
to leave it. He organized and drilled an army obedient to his
will.. When he went forth by day, attended by an escort of
cavalry, the doors and windows of houses had to be kept closed
and no one was allowed on the streets. Night he spent till a late
hour in reading and study, changing his bedroom frequently to
avoid assassination. Religious functions that might disturb the
public peace he forbade. Compelling the bishop of Asuncion to
resign on account of senile debility, Francia himself assumed the
episcopal office. Even intermarriage among the old colonial
families he prohibited, so as to reduce all to a common social
level. He attained his object. Paraguay became a quiet state,
whatever might be said of its neighbors!

Elsewhere in southern Spanish America a brilliant feat of arms
brought to the fore its most distinguished soldier. This was Jose
de San Martin of La Plata. Like Miranda, he had been an officer
in the Spanish army and had returned to his native land an ardent
apostle of independence. Quick to realize the fact that, so long
as Chile remained under royalist control, the possibility of an
attack from that quarter was a constant menace to the safety of
the newly constituted republic, he conceived the bold plan of
organizing near the western frontier an army--composed partly of
Chilean refugees and partly of his own countrymen--with which he
proposed to cross the Andes and meet the enemy on his own ground.
Among these fugitives was the able and valiant Bernardo
O'Higgins, son of an Irish officer who had been viceroy of Peru.
Cooperating with O'Higgins, San Martin fixed his headquarters at
Mendoza and began to gather and train the four thousand men whom
he judged needful for the enterprise.

By January, 1817, the "Army of the Andes" was ready. To cross the
mountains meant to transport men, horses, artillery, and stores
to an altitude of thirteen thousand feet, where the Uspallata
Pass afforded an outlet to Chilean soil. This pass was nearly a
mile higher than the Great St. Bernard in the Alps, the crossing
of which gave Napoleon Bonaparte such renown. On the 12th of
February the hosts of San Martin hurled themselves upon the
royalists entrenched on the slopes of Chacabuco and routed them
utterly. The battle proved decisive not of the fortunes of Chile
alone but of those of all Spanish South America. As a viceroy of
Peru later confessed, "it marked the moment when the cause of
Spain in the Indies began to recede."

Named supreme director by the people of Santiago, O'Higgins
fought vigorously though ineffectually to drive out the royalists
who, reinforced from Peru, held the region south of the capital.
That he failed did not deter him from having a vote taken under
military auspices, on the strength of which, on February 12,
1818, he declared Chile an independent nation, the date of the
proclamation being changed to the 1st of January, so as to make
the inauguration of the new era coincident with the entry of the
new year. San Martin, meanwhile, had been collecting
reinforcements with which to strike the final blow. On the 5th of
April, the Battle of Maipo gave him the victory he desired.
Except for a few isolated points to the southward, the power of
Spain had fallen.

Until the fall of Napoleon in 1815 it had been the native
loyalists who had supported the cause of the mother country in
the Spanish dominions. Henceforth, free from the menace of the
European dictator, Spain could look to her affairs in America,
and during the next three years dispatched twenty-five thousand
men to bring the eolonies to obedience. These soldiers began
their task in the northern part of South America, and there they
ended it--in failure. To this failure the defection of native
royalists contributed, for they were alienated not so much by the
presence of the Spanish troops as by the often merciless severity
that marked their conduct. The atrocities may have been provoked
by the behavior of their opponents; but, be this as it may, the
patriots gained recruits after each victory.

A Spanish army of more than ten thousand, under the command of
Pablo Morillo, arrived in Venezuela in April, 1815. He found the
province relatively tranquil and even disposed to welcome the
full restoration of royal government. Leaving a garrison
sufficient for the purpose of military occupation, Morillo sailed
for Cartagena, the key to New Granada. Besieged by land and sea,
the inhabitants of the town maintained for upwards of three
months a resistance which, in its heroism, privation, and
sacrifice, recalled the memorable defense of Saragossa in the
mother country against the French seven years before. With
Cartagena taken, regulars and loyalists united to stamp out the
rebellion elsewhere. At Bogoth, in particular, the new Spanish
viceroy installed by Morillo waged a savage war on all suspected
of aiding the patriot cause. He did not spare even women, and one
of his victims was a young heroine, Policarpa Salavarrieta by
name. Though for her execution three thousand soldiers were
detailed, the girl was unterrified by her doom and was earnestly
beseeching the loyalists among them to turn their arms against
the enemies of their country when a volley stretched her lifeless
on the ground.

Meanwhile Bolivar had been fitting out, in Haiti and in the Dutch
island of Curacao, an expedition to take up anew the work of
freeing Venezuela. Hardly had the Liberator landed in May, 1816,
when dissensions with his fellow officers frustrated any prospect
of success. Indeed they obliged him to seek refuge once more in
Haiti. Eventually, however, most of the patriot leaders became
convinced that, if they were to entertain a hope of success, they
must entrust their fortunes to Bolivar as supreme commander.
Their chances of success were increased furthermore by the
support of the llaneros who had been won over to the cause of
independence. Under their redoubtable chieftain, Jose Antonio
Paez, these fierce and ruthless horsemen performed many a feat of
valor in the campaigns which followed.

Once again on Venezuelan soil, Bolivar determined to transfer his
operations to the eastern part of the country, which seemed to
offer better strategic advantages than the region about Caracas.
But even here the jealousy of his officers, the insubordination
of the free lances, the stubborn resistance of the loyalists--
upheld by the wealthy and conservative classes and the able
generalship of Morillo, who had returned from New Granada--made
the situation of the Liberator all through 1817 and 1818
extremely precarious. Happily for his fading fortunes, his hands
were strengthened from abroad. The United States had recognized
the belligerency of several of the revolutionary governments in
South America and had sent diplomatic agents to them. Great
Britain had blocked every attempt of Ferdinand VII to obtain help
from the Holy Alliance in reconquering his dominions. And
Ferdinand had contributed to his own undoing by failing to heed
the urgent requests of Morillo for reinforcements to fill his
dwindling ranks. More decisive still were the services of some
five thousand British, Irish, French, and German volunteers, who
were often the mainstay of Bolivar and his lieutenants during the
later phases of the struggle, both in Venezuela and elsewhere.

For some time the Liberator had been evolving a plan of attack
upon the royalists in New Granada, similar to the offensive
campaign which San Martin had conducted in Chile. More than that,
he had conceived the idea, once independence had been attained,
of uniting the western part of the viceroyalty with Venezuela
into a single republic. The latter plan he laid down before a
Congress which assembled at Angostura in February, 1819, and
which promptly chose him President of the republic and vested him
with the powers of dictator. In June, at the head of 2100 men, he
started on his perilous journey over the Andes.

Up through the passes and across bleak plateaus the little army
struggled till it reached the banks of the rivulet of Boyaca, in
the very heart of New Granada. Here, on the 7th of August,
Bolivar inflicted on the royalist forces a tremendous defeat that
gave the deathblow to the domination of Spain in northern South
America. On his triumphal return to Angostura, the Congress
signalized the victory by declaring the whole of the viceroyalty
an independent state under the name of the "Republic of Colombia"
and chose the Liberator as its provisional President. Two years
later, a fundamental law it had adopted was ratified with certain
changes by another Congress assembled at Rosario de Cucuta, and
Bolivar was made permanent President.

Southward of Colombia lay the viceroyalty of Peru, the oldest,
richest, and most conservative of the larger Spanish dominions on
the continent. Intact, except for the loss of Chile, it had found
territorial compensation by stretching its power over the
provinces of Quito and Charcas, the one wrenched off from the
former New Granada, the other torn away from what had been La
Plata. Predominantly royalist in sentiment, it was like a huge
wedge thrust in between the two independent areas. By thus
cutting off the patriots of the north from their comrades in the
south, it threatened both with destruction of their liberty.

Again fortune intervened from abroad, this time directly from
Spain itself. Ferdinand VII, who had gathered an army of twenty
thousand men at Cadiz, was ready to deliver a crushing blow at
the colonies when in January, 1890, a mutiny among the troops and
revolution throughout the country entirely frustrated the plan.
But although that reactionary monarch was compelled to accept the
Constitution of 1819, the Spanish liberals were unwilling to
concede to their fellows in America anything more substantial
than representation in the Cortes. Independence they would not
tolerate. On the other hand, the example of the mother country in
arms against its King in the name of liberty could not fail to
give heart to the cause of liberation in the provinces oversea
and to hasten its achievement.

The first important efforts to profit by this situation were made
by the patriots in Chile. Both San Martin and O'Higgins had
perceived that the only effective way to eliminate the Peruvian
wedge was to gain control of its approaches by sea. The Chileans
had already won some success in this direction when the fiery and
imperious Scotch sailor, Thomas Cochrane, Earl of Dundonald,
appeared on the scene and offered to organize a navy. At length a
squadron was put under his command. With upwards of four thousand
troops in charge of San Martin the expedition set sail for Peru
late in August, 1820.

While Cochrane busied himself in destroying the Spanish blockade,
his comrade in arms marched up to the very gates of Lima, the
capital, and everywhere aroused enthusiasm for emancipation. When
negotiations, which had been begun by the viceroy and continued
by a special commissioner from Spain, failed to swerve the
patriot leader from his demand for a recognition of independence,
the royalists decided to evacuate the town and to withdraw into
the mountainous region of the interior. San Martin, thereupon,
entered the capital at the head of his army of liberation and
summoned the inhabitants to a town meeting at which they might
determine for themselves what action should be taken. The result
was easily foreseen. On July 28, 1821, Peru was declared
independent, and a few days later San Martin was invested with
supreme command under the title of "Protector."

But the triumph of the new Protector did not last long. For some
reason he failed to understand that the withdrawal of the
royalists from the neighborhood of the coast was merely a
strategic retreat that made the occupation of the capital a more
or less empty performance. This blunder and a variety of other
mishaps proved destined to blight his military career.
Unfortunate in the choice of his subordinates and unable to
retain their confidence; accused of irresolution and even of
cowardice; abandoned by Cochrane, who sailed off to Chile and
left the army stranded; incapable of restraining his soldiers
from indulgence in the pleasures of Lima; now severe, now lax in
an administration that alienated the sympathies of the
influential class, San Martin was indeed an unhappy figure. It
soon became clear that he must abandon all hope of ever
conquering the citadel of Spanish power in South America unless
he could prevail upon Bolivar to help him.

A junction of the forces of the two great leaders was perfectly
feasible, after the last important foothold of the Spaniards on
the coast of Venezuela had been broken by the Battle of Carabobo,
on July 24, 1821. Whether such a union would be made, however,
depended upon two things: the ultimate disposition of the
province of Quito, lying between Colombia and Peru, and the
attitude which Bolivar and San Martin themselves should assume
toward each other. A revolution of the previous year at the
seaport town of Guayaquil in that province had installed an
independent government which besought the Liberator to sustain
its existence. Prompt to avail himself of so auspicious an
opportunity of uniting this former division of the viceroyalty of
New Granada to his republic of Colombia, Bolivar appointed
Antonio Jose de Sucre, his ablest lieutenant and probably the
most efficient of all Spanish American soldiers of the time, to
assume charge of the campaign. On his arrival at Guayaquil, this
officer found the inhabitants at odds among themselves. Some,
hearkening to the pleas of an agent of San Martin, favored union
with Peru; others, yielding to the arguments of a representative
of Bolivar, urged annexation to Colombia; still others regarded
absolute independence as most desirable. Under these
circumstances Sucre for a while made little headway against the
royalists concentrated in the mountainous parts of the country
despite the partial support he received from troops which were
sent by the southern commander. At length, on May 24, 1822,
scaling the flanks of the volcano of Pichincha, near the capital
town of Quito itself, he delivered the blow for freedom. Here
Bolivar, who had fought his way overland amid tremendous
difficulties, joined him and started for Guayaquil, where he and
San Martin were to hold their memorable interview.

No characters in Spanish American history have called forth so
much controversy about their respective merits and demerits as
these two heroes of independence--Bolivar and San Martin. Even
now it seems quite impossible to obtain from the admirers of
either an opinion that does full justice to both; and foreigners
who venture to pass judgment are almost certain to provoke
criticism from one set of partisans or the other. Both Bolivar
and San Martin were sons of country gentlemen, aristocratic by
lineage and devoted to the cause of independence. Bolivar was
alert, dauntless, brilliant, impetuous, vehemently patriotic, and
yet often capricious, domineering, vain, ostentatious, and
disdainful of moral considerations--a masterful man, fertile in
intellect, fluent in speech and with pen, an inspiring leader and
one born to command in state and army. Quite as earnest, equally
courageous, and upholding in private life a higher standard of
morals, San Martin was relatively calm, cautious, almost taciturn
in manner, and slower in thought and action. He was primarily a
soldier, fitted to organize and conduct expeditions, rather than,
a man endowed with that supreme confidence in himself which
brings enthusiasm, affection, and loyalty in its train.

When San Martin arrived at Guayaquil, late in July, 1822, his
hope of annexing the province of Quito to Peru was rudely
shattered by the news that Bolivar had already declared it a part
of Colombia. Though it was outwardly cordial and even effusive,
the meeting of the two men held out no prospect of accord. In an
interchange of views which lasted but a few hours, mutual
suspicion, jealousy, and resentment prevented their reaching an
effective understanding. The Protector, it would seem, thought
the Liberator actuated by a boundless ambition that would not
endure resistance. Bolivar fancied San Martin a crafty schemer
plotting for his own advancement. They failed to agree on the
three fundamental points essential to their further cooperation.
Bolivar declined to give up the province of Quito. He refused
also to send an army into Peru unless he could command it in
person, and then he declined to undertake the expedition on the
ground that as President of Colombia he ought not to leave the
territory of the republic. Divining this pretext, San Martin
offered to serve under his orders--a feint that Bolivar parried
by protesting that he would not hear of any such self-denial on
the part of a brother officer.

Above all, the two men differed about the political form to be
adopted for the new independent states. Both of them realized
that anything like genuine democracies was quite impossible of
attainment for many years to come, and that strong
administrations would be needful to tide the Spanish Americans
over from the political inexperience of colonial days and the
disorders of revolution to intelligent self-government, which
could come only after a practical acquaintance with public
concerns on a large scale. San Martin believed that a limited
monarchy was the best form of government under the circumstances.
Bolivar held fast to the idea of a centralized or unitary
republic, in which actual power should be exercised by a life
president and an hereditary senate until the people, represented
in a lower house, should have gained a sufficient amount of
political experience.

When San Martin returned to Lima he found affairs in a worse
state than ever. The tyrannical conduct of the officer he had
left in charge had provoked an uprising that made his position
insupportable. Conscious that his mission had come to an end and
certain that, unless he gave way, a collision with Bolivar was
inevitable, San Martin resolved to sacrifice himself lest harm
befall the common cause in which both had done such yeoman
service. Accordingly he resigned his power into the hands of a
constituent congress and left the country. But when he found that
no happier fortune awaited him in Chile and in his own native
land, San Martin decided to abandon Spanish America forever and
go into selfimposed exile. Broken in health and spirit, he took
up his residence in France, a recipient of bounty from a Spaniard
who had once been his comrade in arms.

Meanwhile in the Mexican part of the viceroyalty of New Spain the
cry of independence raised by Morelos and his bands of Indian
followers had been stifled by the capture and execution of the
leader. But the cause of independence was not dead even if its
achievement was to be entrusted to other hands. Eager to emulate
the example of their brethren in South America, small parties of
Spaniards and Creoles fought to overturn the despotic rule of
Ferdinand VII, only to encounter defeat from the royalists. Then
came the Revolution of 1820 in the mother country. Forthwith
demands were heard for a recognition of the liberal regime.
Fearful of being displaced from power, the viceroy with the
support of the clergy and aristocracy ordered Agustin de
Iturbide, a Creole officer who had been an active royalist, to
quell an insurrection in the southern part of the country.

The choice of this soldier was unfortunate. Personally ambitious
and cherishing in secret the thought of independence, Iturbide,
faithless to his trust, entered into negotiations with the
insurgents which culminated February 24, 1821, in what was called
the "Plan of Iguala." It contained three main provisions, or
"guarantees," as they were termed: the maintenance of the
Catholic religion to the exclusion of all others; the
establishment of a constitutional monarchy separate from Spain
and ruled by Ferdinand himself, or, if he declined the honor, by
some other European prince; and the union of Mexicans and
Spaniards without distinction of caste or privilege. A temporary
government also, in the form of a junta presided over  by the
viceroy, was to be created; and provision was made for the
organization of an "Army of the Three Guarantees."

Despite opposition from the royalists, the plan won increasing
favor. Powerless to thwart it and inclined besides to a policy of
conciliation, the new viceroy, Juan O'Donoju, agreed to ratify it
on condition--in obedience to a suggestion from Iturbide--that
the parties concerned should be at liberty, if they desired, to
choose any one as emperor, whether he were of a reigning family
or not. Thereupon, on the 28th of September, the provisional
government installed at the city of Mexico announced the
consummation of an "enterprise rendered eternally memorable,
which a genius beyond all admiration and eulogy, love and glory
of his country, began at Iguala, prosecuted and carried into
effect, overcoming obstacles almost insuparable"--and declared
the independence of a "Mexican Empire." The act was followed by
the appointment of a regency to govern until the accession of
Ferdinand VII, or some other personage, to the imperial throne.
Of this body Iturbide assumed the presidency, which carried with
it the powers of commander in chief and a salary of 120,000
pesos, paid from the day on which the Plan of Iguala was signed.
O'Donoju contented himself with membership on the board and a
salary of one-twelfth that amount, until his speedy demise
removed from the scene the last of the Spanish viceroys in North
America.

One step more was needed. Learning that the Cortes in Spain had
rejected the entire scheme, Iturbide allowed his soldiers to
acclaim him emperor, and an unwilling Congress saw itself obliged
to ratify the choice. On July 21, 1822, the destinies of the
country were committed to the charge of Agustin the First.

As in the area of Mexico proper, so in the Central American part
of the viceroyalty of New Spain, the Spanish Revolution of 1820
had unexpected results. Here in the five little provinces
composing the captaincy general of Guatemala there was much
unrest, but nothing of a serious nature occurred until after news
had been brought of the Plan of Iguala and its immediate outcome.
Thereupon a popular assembly met at the capital town of
Guatemala, and on September 15, 1821, declared the country an
independent state. This radical act accomplished, the patriot
leaders were unable to proceed further. Demands for the
establishment of a federation, for a recognition of local
autonomy, for annexation to Mexico, were all heard, and none,
except the last, was answered. While the "Imperialists" and
"Republicans" were arguing it out, a message from Emperor Agustin
announced that he would not allow the new state to remain
independent. On submission of the matter to a vote of the
cabildos, most of them approved reunion with the northern
neighbor. Salvador alone among the provinces held out until
troops from Mexico overcame its resistance.

On the continents of America, Spain had now lost nearly all its
its possessions. In 1822 the United States had already acquired
East Florida on its own account, led off in recognizing the
independence of the several republics. Only in Peru and Charcas
the royalists still battled on behalf of the mother country. In
the West Indies, Santo Domingo followed the lead of its sister
colonies on the mainland by asserting in 1821 its independence;
but its brief independent life was snuffed out by the negroes of
Haiti, once more a republic, who spread their control over the
entire island. Cuba also felt the impulse of the times. But,
apart from the agitation of secret societies like the "Rays and
Suns of Bolivar," which was soon checked, the colony remained
tranquil.

In Portuguese America the knowledge of what had occurred
throughout the Spanish dominions could not fail to awaken a
desire for independence. The Prince Regent was well aware of the
discontent of the Brazilians, but he thought to allay it by
substantial concessions. In 1815 he proceeded to elevate the
colony to substantial equality with the mother country by joining
them under the title of "United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil, and
the Algarves." The next year the Prince Regent himself became
King under the name of John IV. The flame of discontent,
nevertheless, continued to smolder. Republican outbreaks, though
quelled without much difficulty, recurred. Even the reforms which
had been instituted by John himself while Regent, and which had
assured freer communication with the world at large, only
emphasized more and more the absurdity of permitting a feeble
little land like Portugal to retain its hold upon a region so
extensive and valuable as Brazil.

The events of 1820 in Portugal hastened the movement toward
independence. Fired by the success of their Spanish comrades, the
Portuguese liberals forthwith rose in revolt, demanded the
establishment of a limited monarchy, and insisted that the King
return to his people. In similar fashion, also, they drew up a
constitution which provided for the representation of Brazil by
deputies in a future Cortes. Beyond this they would concede no
special privileges to the colony. Indeed their idea seems to have
been that, with the King once more in Lisbon, their own liberties
would be secure and those of Brazil would be reduced to what were
befitting a mere dependency. Yielding to the inevitable, the King
decided to return to Portugal, leaving the young Crown Prince to
act as Regent in the colony. A critical moment for the little
country and its big dominion oversea had indubitably arrived.
John understood the trend of the times, for on the eve of his
departure he said to his son: "Pedro, if Brazil is to separate
itself from Portugal, as seems likely, you take the crown
yourself before any one else gets it!"

Pedro was liberal in sentiment, popular among the Brazilians, and
well-disposed toward the aspirations of the country for a larger
measure of freedom, and yet not blind to the interests of the
dynasty of Braganza. He readily listened to the urgent pleas of
the leaders of the separatist party against obeying the
repressive mandaes of the Cortes. Laws which abolished the
central government of the colony and made the various provinces
individually subject to Portugal he declined to notice. With
equal promptness he refused to heed an order bidding him return
to Portugal immediately. To a delegation of prominent Brazilians
he said emphatically: "For the good of all and the general
welfare of the nation, I shall stay." More than that, in May,
1822, he accepted from the municipality of Rio de Janeiro the
title of "Perpetual and Constitutional Defender of Brazil, " and
in a series of proclamations urged the people of the country to
begin the great work of emancipation by forcibly resisting, if
needful, any attempt at coercion.

Pedro now believed the moment had come to take the final step.
While on a journey through the province of Sao Paulo, he was
overtaken on the 7th of September, near a little stream called
the Ypiranga, by messengers with dispatches from Portugal.
Finding that the Cortes had annulled his acts and declared his
ministers guilty of treason, Pedro forthwith proclaimed Brazil an
independent state. The "cry of Ypiranga" was echoed with
tremendous enthusiasm throughout the country. When Pedro appeared
in the theater at Rio de Janeiro, a few days later, wearing on
his arm a ribbon on which were inscribed the words "Independence
or Death," he was given a tumultuous ovation. On the first day of
December the youthful monarch assumed the title of Emperor, and
Brazil thereupon took its place among the nations of America.



CHAPTER IV. PLOUGHING THE SEA

When the La Plata Congress at Tucuman took the decisive action
that severed the bond with Spain, it uttered a prophecy for all
Spanish America. To quote its language: "Vast and fertile
regions, climates benign and varied, abundant means of
subsistence, treasures of gold and silver . . . and fine
productions of every sort will attract to our continent
innumerable thousands of immigrants, to whom we shall open a safe
place of refuge and extend a beneficent protection." More hopeful
still were the words of a spokesman for another independent
country: "United, neither the empire of the Assyrians, the Medes
or the Persians, the Macedonian or the Roman Empire, can ever be
compared with this colossal republic."

Very different was the vision of Bolivar. While a refugee in
Jamaica he wrote: "We are a little human species; we possess a
world apart . . . new in almost all the arts and sciences, and
yet old, after a fashion, in the uses of civil society. . . .
Neither Indians nor Europeans, we are a species that lies midway
. . . . Is it conceivable that a people recently freed of its
chains can launch itself into the sphere of liberty without
shattering its wings, like Icarus, and plunging into the abyss?
Such a prodigy is inconceivable, never beheld." Toward the close
of his career he declared: "The majority are mestizos, mulattoes,
Indians, and negroes. An ignorant people is a blunt instrument
for its own destruction. To it liberty means license, patriotism
means disloyalty, and justice means vengeance." "Independence,"
he exclaimed, "is the only good we have achieved, at the cost of
everything else."

Whether the abounding confidence of the prophecy or the anxious
doubt of the vision would come true, only the future could tell.
In 1822, at all events, optimism was the watchword and the total
exclusion of Spain from South America the goal of Bolivar and his
lieutenants, as they started southward to complete the work of
emancipation which had been begun by San Martin.

The patriots of Peru, indeed, had fallen into straits so
desperate that an appeal to the Liberator offered the only hope
of salvation. While the royalists under their able and vigilant
leader, Jose Canterac, continued to strengthen their grasp upon
the interior of the country and to uphold the power of the
viceroy, the President chosen by the Congress had been driven by
the enemy from Lima. A number of the legislators in wrath
thereupon declared the President deposed. Not to be outdone, that
functionary on his part declared the Congress dissolved. The
malcontents immediately proceeded to elect a new chief
magistrate, thus bringing two Presidents into the field and
inaugurating a spectacle destined to become all too common in the
subsequent annals of Spanish America.

When Bolivar arrived at Callao, the seaport of Lima, in
September, 1823, he acted with prompt vigor. He expelled one
President, converted the other into a passive instrument of his
will, declined to promulgate a constitution that the Congress had
prepared, and, after obtaining from that body an appointment to
supreme command, dissolved the Congress without further ado.
Unfortunately none of these radical measures had any perceptible
effect upon the military situation. Though Bolivar gathered
together an army made up of Colombians, Peruvians, and remnants
of San Martin's force, many months elapsed before he could
venture upon a serious campaign. Then events in Spain played into
his hands. The reaction that had followed the restoration of
Ferdinand VII to absolute power crossed the ocean and split the
royalists into opposing factions. Quick to seize the chance thus
afforded, Bolivar marched over the Andes to the plain of Junin.
There, on August 6, 1824, he repelled an onslaught by Canterac
and drove that leader back in headlong flight. Believing,
however, that the position he held was too perilous to risk an
offensive, he entrusted the military command to Sucre and
returned to headquarters.

The royalists had now come to realize that only a supreme effort
could save them. They must overwhelm Sucre before reinforcements
could reach him, and to this end an army of upwards of ten
thousand was assembled. On the 9th of December it encountered
Sucre and his six thousand soldiers in the valley of Ayacucho, or
"Corner of Death," where the patriot general had entrenched his
army with admirable skill. The result was a total defeat for the
royalists--the Waterloo of Spain in South America. The battle
thus won by ragged and hungry soldiers--whose countersign the
night before had been "bread and cheese"--threw off the yoke of
the mother country forever. The viceroy fell wounded into their
hands and Canterac surrendered. On receipt of the glorious news,
the people of Lima greeted Bolivar with wild enthusiasm. A
Congress prolonged his dictatorship amid adulations that bordered
on the grotesque.

Eastward of Peru in the vast mountainous region of Charcas, on
the very heights of South America, the royalists still found a
refuge. In January, 1825, a patriot general at the town of La Paz
undertook on his own responsibility to declare the entire
province independent, alike of Spain, Peru, and the United
Provinces of La Plata. This action was too precipitous, not to
say presumptuous, to suit Bolivar and Sucre. The better to
control the situation, the former went up to La Paz and the
latter to Chuquisaca, the capital, where a Congress was to
assemble for the purpose of imparting a more orderly turn to
affairs. Under the direction of the "Marshal of Ayacucho," as
Sucre was now called, the Congress issued on the 6th of August a
formal declaration of independence. In honor of the Liberator it
christened the new republic "Bolivar"--later Latinized into
"Bolivia"--and conferred upon him the presidency so long as he
might choose to remain. In November, 1896, a new Congress which
had been summoned to draft a constitution accepted, with slight
modifications, an instrument that the Liberator himself had
prepared. That body also renamed the capital "Sucre" and chose
the hero of Ayacucho as President of the republic.

Now, the Liberator thought, was the opportune moment to impose
upon his territorial namesake a constitution embodying his ideas
of a stable government which would give Spanish Americans
eventually the political experience they needed. Providing for an
autocracy represented by a life President, it ran the gamut of
aristocracy and democracy, all the way from "censors" for life,
who were to watch over the due enforcement of the laws, down to
senators and "tribunes" chosen by electors, who in turn were to
be named by a select citizenry. Whenever actually present in the
territory of the republic, the Liberator was to enjoy supreme
command, in case he wished to exercise it.

In 1826 Simon Bolivar stood at the zenith of his glory and power.
No adherents of the Spanish regime were left in South America to
menace the freedom of its independent states. In January a
resistance kept up for nine years by a handful of royalists
lodged on the remote island of Chiloe, off the southern coast of
Chile, had been broken, and the garrison at the fortress of
Callao had laid down its arms after a valiant struggle. Among
Spanish Americans no one was comparable to the marvelous man who
had founded three great republics stretching from the Caribbean
Sea to the Tropic of Capricorn. Hailed as the "Liberator" and the
"Terror of Despots," he was also acclaimed by the people as the
"Redeemer, the First-Born Son of the New World!" National
destinies were committed to his charge, and equestrian statues
were erected in his honor. In the popular imagination he was
ranked with Napoleon as a peerless conqueror, and with Washington
as the father of his country. That megalomania should have seized
the mind of the Liberator under circumstances like these is not
strange.

Ever a zealous advocate of large states, Bolivar was an equally
ardent partisan of confederation. As president of three
republics--of Colombia actually, and of its satellites, Peru and
Bolivia, through his lieutenants--he could afford now to carry
out the plan that he had long since cherished of assembling at
the town of Panama, on Colombian soil, an "august congress"
representative of the independent countries of America. Here, on
the isthmus created by nature to join the continents, the nations
created by men should foregather and proclaim fraternal accord.
Presenting to the autocratic governments of Europe a solid front
of resistance to their pretensions as well as a visible symbol of
unity in sentiment, such a Congress by meeting periodically would
also promote friendship among the republics of the western
hemisphere and supply a convenient means of settling their
disputes.

At this time the United States was regarded by its sister
republics with all the affection which gratitude for services
rendered to the cause of emancipation could evoke. Was it not
itself a republic, its people a democracy, its development
astounding, and its future radiant with hope? The pronouncement
of President Monroe, in 1823, protesting against interference on
the part of European powers with the liberties of independent
America, afforded the clearest possible proof that the great
northern republic was a natural protector, guide, and friend
whose advice and cooperation ought to be invoked. The United
States was accordingly asked to take part in the assembly--not to
concert military measures, but simply to join its fellows to the
southward in a solemn proclamation of the Monroe Doctrine by
America at large and to discuss means of suppressing the slave
trade.

The Congress that met at Panama, in June, 1826, afforded scant
encouragement to Bolivar's roseate hope of interAmerican
solidarity. Whether because of the difficulties of travel, or
because of internal dissensions, or because of the suspicion that
the megalomania of the Liberator had awakened in Spanish America,
only the four continental countries nearest the isthmus--Mexico,
Central America, Colombia, and Peru--were represented. The
delegates, nevertheless, signed a compact of "perpetual union,
league, and confederation," provided for mutual assistance to be
rendered by the several nations in time of war, and arranged to
have the Areopagus of the Americas transferred to Mexico. None of
the acts of this Congress was ratified by the republics
concerned, except the agreement for union, which was adopted by
Colombia.

Disheartening to Bolivar as this spectacle was, it proved merely
the first of a series of calamities which were to overshadow the
later years of the Liberator. His grandiose political structure
began to crumble, for it was built on the shifting sands of a
fickle popularity. The more he urged a general acceptance of the
principles of his autocratic constitution, the surer were his
followers that he coveted royal honors. In December he imposed
his instrument upon Peru. Then he learned that a meeting in
Venezuela, presided over by Paez, had declared itself in favor of
separation from Colombia. Hardly had he left Peru to check this
movement when an uprising at Lima deposed his representative and
led to the summons of a Congress which, in June, 1827, restored
the former constitution and chose a new President. In Quito,
also, the government of the unstable dictator was overthrown.

Alarmed by symptoms of disaffection which also appeared in the
western part of the republic, Bolivar hurried to Bogota. There in
the hope of removing the growing antagonism, he offered his
"irrevocable" resignation, as he had done on more than one
occasion before. Though the malcontents declined to accept his
withdrawal from office, they insisted upon his calling a
constitutional convention. Meeting at Ocana, in April, 1828, that
body proceeded to abolish the life tenure of the presidency, to
limit the powers of the executive, and to increase those of the
legislature. Bolivar managed to quell the opposition in
dictatorial fashion; but his prestige had by this time fallen so
low that an attempt was made to assassinate him. The severity
with which he punished the conspirators served only to diminish
still more the popular confidence which he had once enjoyed. Even
in Bolivia his star of destiny had set. An outbreak of Colombian
troops at the capital forced the faithful Sucre to resign and
leave the country. The constitution was then modified to meet the
demand for a less autocratic government, and a new chief
magistrate was installed.

Desperately the Liberator strove to ward off the impending
collapse. Tkough he recovered possession of the division of
Quito, a year of warfare failed to win back Peru, and he was
compelled to renounce all pretense of governing it. Feeble in
body and distracted in mind, he condemned bitterly the
machinations of his enemies. "There is no good faith in
Colombia," he exclaimed, "neither among men nor among nations.
Treaties are paper; constitutions, books; elections, combats;
liberty, anarchy, and life itself a torment."

But the hardest blow was yet to fall. Late in December, 1829, an
assembly at Caracas declared Venezuela a separate state. The
great republic was rent in twain, and even what was left soon
split apart. In May, 1830, came the final crash. The Congress at
Bogota drafted a constitution, providing for a separate republic
to bear the old Spanish name of "New Granada," accepted
definitely the resignation of Bolivar, and granted him a pension.
Venezuela, his native land, set up a congress of its own and
demanded that he be exiled. The division of Quito declared itself
independent, under the name of the "Republic of the Equator"
(Ecuador). Everywhere the artificial handiwork of the Liberator
lay in ruins. "America is ungovernable. Those who have served in
the revolution have ploughed the sea, " was his despairing cry.

Stricken to death, the fallen hero retired to an estate near
Santa Marta. Here, like his famous rival, San Martin, in France,
he found hospitality at the hands of a Spaniard. On December 17,
1830, the Liberator gave up his troubled soul.

While Bolivar's great republic was falling apart, the United
Provinces of La Plata had lost practically all semblance of
cohesion. So broad were their notions of liberty that the several
provinces maintained a substantial independence of one another,
while within each province the caudillos, or partisan chieftains,
fought among themselves.

Buenos Aires alone managed to preserve a measure of stability.
This comparative peace was due to the financial and commercial
measures devised by Bernardino Rivadavia, one of the most capable
statesmen of the time, and to the energetic manner in which
disorder was suppressed by Juan Manuel de Rosas, commander of the
gaucho, or cowboy, militia. Thanks also to the former leader, the
provinces were induced in 1826 to join in framing a constitution
of a unitary character, which vested in the administration at
Buenos Aires the power of appointing the local governors and of
controlling foreign affairs. The name of the country was at the
same time changed to that of the "Argentine Confederation"(c)-a
Latin rendering of "La Plata."

No sooner had Rivadavia assumed the presidency under the new
order of things than dissension at home and warfare abroad
threatened to destroy all that he had accomplished. Ignoring the
terms of the constitution, the provinces had already begun to
reject the supremacy of Buenos Aires, when the outbreak of a
struggle with Brazil forced the contending parties for a while to
unite in the face of the common enemy. As before, the object of
international dispute was the region of the Banda Oriental. The
rule of Brazil had not been oppressive, but the people of its
Cisplatine Province, attached by language and sympathy to their
western neighbors, longed nevertheless to be free of foreign
control. In April, 1825, a band of thirty-three refugees arrived
from Buenos Aires and started a revolution which spread
throughout the country. Organizing a provisional government, the
insurgents proclaimed independence of Brazil and incorporation
with the United Provinces of La Plata. As soon as the authorities
at Buenos Aires had approved this action, war was inevitable.
Though the Brazilians were decisively beaten at the Battle of
Ituzaingo, on February 20, 1827, the struggle lasted until August
28, 1828, when mediation by Great Britain led to the conclusion
of a treaty at Rio de Janeiro, by which both Brazil and the
Argentine Confederation recognized the absolute independence of
the disputed province as the republic of Uruguay.

Instead of quieting the discord that prevailed among the
Argentinos, these victories only fomented trouble. The
federalists had ousted Rivadavia and discarded the constitution,
but the federal idea for which they stood had several meanings.
To an inhabitant of Buenos Aires federalism meant domination by
the capital, not only over the province of the same name but over
the other provinces; whereas, to the people of the provinces, and
even to many of federalist faith in the province of Buenos Aires
itself, the term stood for the idea of a loose confederation in
which each provincial governor or chieftain should be practically
supreme in his own district, so long as he could maintain
himself. The Unitaries were opponents of both, except in so far
as their insistence upon a centralized form of government for the
nation would necessarily lead to the location of that government
at Buenos Aires. This peculiar dual contest between the town and
the province of Buenos Aires, and of the other provinces against
either or both, persisted for the next sixty years. In 1829,
however, a prolonged lull set in, when Rosas, the gaucho leader,
having won in company with other caudillos a decisive triumph
over the Unitaries, entered the capital and took supreme command.

In Chile the course of events had assumed quite a different
aspect. Here, in 1818, a species of constitution had been adopted
by popular vote in a manner that appeared to show remarkable
unanimity, for the books in which the "ayes" and "noes" were to
be recorded contained no entries in the negative! What the
records really prove is that O'Higgins, the Supreme Director,
enjoyed the confidence of the ruling class. In exercise of the
autocratic power entrusted to him, he now proceeded to introduce
a variety of administrative reforms of signal advantage to the
moral and material welfare of the country. But as the danger of
conquest from any quarter lessened, the demand for a more
democratic organization grew louder, until in 1822 it became so
persistent that O'Higgins called a convention to draft a new
fundamental law. But its provisions suited neither himself nor
his opponents. Thereupon, realizing that his views of the
political capacity of the people resembled those of Bolivar and
were no longer applicable, and that his reforms had aroused too
much hostility, the Supreme Director resigned his post and
retired to Peru. Thus another hero of emancipation had met the
ingratitude for which republics are notorious.

Political convulsions in the country followed the abdication of
O'Higgins. Not only had the spirit of the strife between
Unitaries and Federalists been communicated to Chile from the
neighboring republic to the eastward, but two other parties or
factions, divided on still different lines, had arisen. These
were the Conservative and the Liberal, or Bigwigs (pelucones) and
Greenhorns (pipiolos), as the adherents of the one derisively
dubbed the partisans of the other. Although in the ups and downs
of the struggle two constitutions were adopted, neither sufficed
to quiet the agitation. Not until 1830, when the Liberals
sustained an utter defeat on the field of battle, did the country
enter upon a period of quiet progress along conservative lines.
>From that time onward it presented a surprising contrast to its
fellow republics, which were beset with afflictions.

Far to the northward, the Empire of Mexico set up by Iturbide in
1822 was doomed to a speedy fall. "Emperor by divine providence,"
that ambitious adventurer inscribed on his coins, but his
countrymen knew that the bayonets of his soldiers were the actual
mainstay of his pretentious title. Neither his earlier career nor
the size of his following was sufficiently impressive to assure
him popular support if the military prop gave way. His lavish
expenditures, furthermore, and his arbitrary replacement of the
Congress by a docile body which would authorize forced loans at
his command, steadily undermined his position. Apart from the
faults of Iturbide himself, the popular sentiment of a country
bordering immediately upon the United States could not fail to be
colored by the ideas and institutions of its great neighbor. So,
too, the example of what had been accomplished, in form at least,
by their kinsmen elsewhere in America was bound to wield a potent
influence on the minds of the Mexicans. As a result, their desire
for a republic grew stronger from day to day.

Iturbide, in fact, had not enjoyed his exalted rank five months
when Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, a young officer destined later
to become a conspicuous figure in Mexican history, started a
revolt to replace the "Empire" by a republic. Though he failed in
his object, two of Iturbide's generals joined the insurgents in
demanding a restoration of the Congress--an act which, as the
hapless "Emperor" perceived, would amount to his dethronement.
Realizing his impotence, Iturbide summoned the Congress and
announced his abdication. But instead of recognizing this
procedure, that body declared his accession itself null and void;
it agreed, however, to grant him a pension if he would leave the
country and reside in Italy. With this disposition of his person
Iturbide complied; but he soon wearied of exile and persuaded
himself that he would not lack supporters if he tried to regain
his former control in Mexico. This venture he decided to make in
complete ignorance of a decree ordering his summary execution if
he dared to set foot again on Mexican soil. He had hardly landed
in July, 1824, when he was seized and shot.

Since a constituent assembly had declared itself in favor of
establishing a federal form of republic patterned after that of
the United States, the promulgation of a constitution followed on
October 4, 1824, and Guadalupe Victoria, one of the leaders in
the revolt against Iturbide, was chosen President of the United
Mexican States. Though considerable unrest prevailed toward the
close of his term, the new President managed to retain his office
for the allotted four years. In most respects, however, the new
order of things opened auspiciously. In November, 1825, the
surrender of the fortress of San Juan de Ulua, in the harbor of
Vera Cruz, banished the last remnant of Spanish power, and two
years later the suppression of plots for the restoration of
Ferdinand VII, coupled with the expulsion of a large number of
Spaniards, helped to restore calm. There were those even who
dared to hope that the federal system would operate as smoothly
in Mexico as it had done in the United States.

But the political organization of a country so different from its
northern neighbor in population, traditions, and practices, could
not rest merely on a basis of imitation, even more or less
modified. The artificiality of the fabric became apparent enough
as soon as ambitious individuals and groups of malcontents
concerted measures to mold it into a likeness of reality. Two
main political factions soon appeared. For the form they assumed
British and American influences were responsible. Adopting a kind
of Masonic organization, the Conservatives and Centralists called
themselves Escoceses (Scottish-Rite Men), whereas the Radicals
and Federalists took the name of Yorkinos (York-Rite Men).
Whatever their respective slogans and professions of political
faith, they were little more than personal followers of rival
generals or politicians who yearned to occupy the presidential
chair.

Upon the downfall of Iturbide, the malcontents in Central America
bestirred themselves to throw off the Mexican yoke. On July
1,1823, a Congress declared the region an independent republic
under the name of the "United Provinces of Central America." In
November of the next year, following the precedent established in
Mexico, and obedient also to local demand, the new republic
issued a constitution, in accordance with which the five little
divisions of Guatemala, Honduras, Salvador, Nicaragua, and Costa
Rica were to become states of a federal union, each having the
privilege of choosing its own local authorities. Immediately
Federalists and Centralists, Radicals and Conservatives, all
wished, it would seem, to impose their particular viewpoint upon
their fellows. The situation was not unlike that in the Argentine
Confederation. The efforts of Guatemala--the province in which
power had been concentrated under the colonial regime--to assert
supremacy over its fellow states, and their refusal to respect
either the federal bond or one another's rights made civil war
inevitable. The struggle which broke out among Guatemala,
Salvador, and Honduras, lasted until 1829, when Francisco
Morazan, at the head of the "Allied Army, Upholder of the Law,"
entered the capital of the republic and assumed dictatorial
power.

Of all the Hispanic nations, however, Brazil was easily the most
stable. Here the leaders, while clinging to independence, strove
to avoid dangerous innovations in government. Rather than create
a political system for which the country was not prepared, they
established a constitutional monarchy. But Brazil itself was too
vast and its interior too difficult of access to allow it to
become all at once a unit, either in organization or in spirit.
The idea of national solidarity had as yet made scant progress.
The old rivalry which existed between the provinces of the north,
dominated by Bahia or Pernambuco, and those of the south,
controlled by Rio de Janeiro or Sao Paulo, still made itself
felt. What the Empire amounted to, therefore, was an
agglomeration of provinces, held together by the personal
prestige of a young monarch.

Since the mother country still held parts of northern Brazil, the
Emperor entrusted the energetic Cochrane, who had performed such
valiant service for Chile and Peru, with the task of expelling
the foreign soldiery. When this had been accomplished and a
republican outbreak in the same region had been suppressed, the
more difficult task of satisfying all parties by a constitution
had to be undertaken. There were partisans of monarchy and
advocates of republicanism, men of conservative and of liberal
sympathies; disagreements, also, between the Brazilians and the
native Portuguese residents were frequent. So far as possible
Pedro desired to meet popular desires, and yet without imposing
too many limitations on the monarchy itself. But in the assembly
called to draft the constitution the liberal members made a
determined effort to introduce republican forms. Pedro thereupon
dissolved that body and in 1826 promulgated a constitution of his
own.

The popularity of the Emperor thereafter soon began to wane,
partly because of the scandalous character of his private life,
and partly because he declined to observe constitutional
restrictions and chose his ministers at will. His insistent war
in Portugal to uphold the claims of his daughter to the throne
betrayed, or seemed to betray, dynastic ambitions. His inability
to hold Uruguay as a Brazilian province, and his continued
retention of foreign soldiers who had been employed in the
struggle with the Argentine Confederation, for the apparent
purpose of quelling possible insurrections in the future, bred
much discontent. So also did the restraints he laid upon the
press, which had been infected by the liberal movements in
neighboring republics. When he failed to subdue these outbreaks,
his rule became all the more discredited. Thereupon, menaced by a
dangerous uprising at Rio de Janeiro in 1831, he abdicated the
throne in favor of his son, Pedro, then five years of age, and
set sail for Portugal.

Under the influence of Great Britain the small European mother
country had in 1825 recognized the independence of its big
transatlantic dominion; but it was not until 1836 that the Cortes
of Spain authorized the Crown to enter upon negotiations looking
to the same action in regard to the eleven republics which had
sprung out of its colonial domain. Even then many years elapsed
before the mother country acknowledged the independence of them
all.



CHAPTER V. THE AGE OF THE DICTATORS

Independence without liberty and statehood without respect for
law are phrases which sum up the situation in Spanish America
after the failure of Bolivar's "great design." The outcome was a
collection of crude republics, racked by internal dissension and
torn by mutual jealousy--patrias bobas, or "foolish fatherlands,"
as one of their own writers has termed them.

Now that the bond of unity once supplied by Spain had been
broken, the entire region which had been its continental domain
in America dissolved awhile into its elements. The Spanish
language, the traditions and customs of the dominant class, and a
"republican" form of government, were practically the sole ties
which remained. Laws, to be sure, had been enacted, providing for
the immediate or gradual abolition of negro slavery and for an
improvement in the status of the Indian and half-caste; but the
bulk of the inhabitants, as in colonial times, remained outside
of the body politic and social. Though the so-called
"constitutions" might confer upon the colored inhabitants all the
privileges and immunities of citizens if they could read and
write, and even a chance to hold office if they could show
possession of a sufficient income or of a professional title of
some sort, their usual inability to do either made their
privileges illusory. Their only share in public concerns lay in
performing military service at the behest of their superiors.
Even where the language of the constitutions did not exclude the
colored inhabitants directly or indirectly, practical authority
was exercised by dictators who played the autocrat, or by
"liberators" who aimed at the enjoyment of that function
themselves.

Not all the dictators, however, were selfish tyrants, nor all the
liberators mere pretenders. Disturbed conditions bred by twenty
years of warfare, antique methods of industry, a backward
commerce, inadequate means of communication, and a population
ignorant, superstitious, and scant, made a strong ruler more or
less indispensable. Whatever his official designation, the
dictator was the logical successor of the Spanish viceroy or
captain general, but without the sense of responsibility or the
legal restraint of either. These circumstances account for that
curious political phase in the development of the Spanish
American nations--the presidential despotism.

On the other hand, the men who denounced oppression,
unscrupulousness, and venality, and who in rhetorical
pronunciamentos urged the "people" to overthrow the dictators,
were often actuated by motives of patriotism, even though they
based their declarations on assumptions and assertions, rather
than on principles and facts. Not infrequently a liberator of
this sort became "provisional president" until he himself, or
some person of his choice, could be elected "constitutional
president"--two other institutions more or less peculiar to
Spanish America.

In an atmosphere of political theorizing mingled with ambition
for personal advancement, both leaders and followers were
professed devotees of constitutions. No people, it was thought,
could maintain a real republic and be a true democracy if they
did not possess a written constitution. The longer this was, the
more precise its definition of powers and liberties, the more
authentic the republic and the more genuine the democracy was
thought to be. In some countries the notion was carried still
farther by an insistence upon frequent changes in the fundamental
law or in the actual form of government, not so much to meet
imperative needs as to satisfy a zest for experimentation or to
suit the whims of mercurial temperaments. The congresses,
constituent assemblies, and the like, which drew these
instruments, were supposed to be faithful reproductions of
similar bodies abroad and to represent the popular will. In fact,
however, they were substantially colonial cabildos, enlarged into
the semblance of a legislature, intent upon local or personal
concerns, and lacking any national consciousness. In any case the
members were apt to be creatures of a republican despot or else
delegates of politicians or petty factions.

Assuming that the leaders had a fairly clear conception of what
they wanted, even if the mass of their adherents did not, it is
possible to aline the factions or parties somewhat as follows: on
the one hand, the unitary, the military, the clerical, the
conservative, and the moderate; on the other,the federalist, the
civilian, the lay, the liberal, and the radical. Interspersed
among them were the advocates of a presidential or congressional
system like that of the United States, the upholders of a
parliamentary regime like that of European nations, and the
supporters of methods of government of a more experimental kind.
Broadly speaking, the line of cleavage was made by opinions,
concerning the form of government and by convictions regarding
the relations of Church and State. These opinions were mainly a
product of revolutionary experience; these convictions, on the
other hand, were a bequest from colonial times.

The Unitaries wished to have a system of government modeled upon
that of France. They wanted the various provinces made into
administrative districts over which the national authority should
exercise full sway. Their direct opponents, the Federalists,
resembled to some extent the Antifederalists rather than the
party bearing the former title in the earlier history of the
United States; but even here an exact analogy fails. They did not
seek to have the provinces enjoy local self-government or to have
perpetuated the traditions of a sort of municipal home rule
handed down from the colonial cabildos, so much as to secure the
recognition of a number of isolated villages or small towns as
sovereign states--which meant turning them over as fiefs to their
local chieftains. Federalism, therefore, was the Spanish American
expression for a feudalism upheld by military lordlets and their
retainers.

Among the measures of reform introduced by one republic or
another during the revolutionary period, abolition of the
Inquisition had been one of the foremost; otherwise comparatively
little was done to curb the influence of the Church. Indeed the
earlier constitutions regularly contained articles declaring
Roman Catholicism the sole legal faith as well as the religion of
the state, and safeguarding in other respects its prestige in the
community. Here was an institution, wealthy, proud, and
influential, which declined to yield its ancient prerogatives and
privileges and to that end relied upon the support of clericals
and conservatives who disliked innovations of a democratic sort
and viewed askance the entry of immigrants professing an alien
faith. Opposed to the Church stood governments verging on
bankruptcy, desirous of exercising supreme control, and dominated
by individuals eager to put theories of democracy into practice
and to throw open the doors of the republic freely to newcomers
from other lands. In the opinion of these radicals the Church
ought to be deprived both of its property and of its monopoly of
education. The one should be turned over to the nation, to which
it properly belonged, and should be converted into public
utilities; the other should be made absolutely secular, in order
to destroy clerical influence over the youthful mind. In this
program radicals and liberals concurred with varying degrees of
intensity, while the moderates strove to hold the balance between
them and their opponents.

Out of this complex situation civil commotions were bound to
arise. Occasionally these were real wars, but as a rule only
skirmishes or sporadic insurrections occurred. They were called
"revolutions," not because some great principle was actually at
stake but because the term had been popular ever since the
struggle with Spain. As a designation for movements aimed at
securing rotation in office, and hence control of the treasury,
it was appropriate enough! At all events, whether serious or
farcical, the commotions often involved an expenditure in life
and money far beyond the value of the interests affected.
Further, both the prevalent disorder and the centralization of
authority impelled the educated and wellto-do classes to take up
their residence at the seat of government. Not a few of the
uprisings were, in fact, protests on the part of the neglected
folk in the interior of the country against concentration of
population, wealth, intellect, and power in the Spanish American
capitals.

Among the towns of this sort was Buenos Aires. Here, in 1829,
Rosas inaugurated a career of rulership over the Argentine
Confederation, culminating in a despotism that made him the most
extraordinary figure of his time. Originally a stockfarmer and
skilled in all the exercises of the cowboy, he developed an
unusual talent for administration. His keen intelligence, supple
statecraft, inflexibility of purpose, and vigor of action, united
to a shrewd understanding of human follies and passions, gave to
his personality a dominance that awed and to his word of command
a power that humbled. Over his fellow chieftains who held the
provinces in terrorized subjection, he won an ascendancy that
insured compliance with his will. The instincts of the multitude
he flattered by his generous simplicity, while he enlisted the
support of the responsible class by maintaining order in the
countryside. The desire, also, of Buenos Aires to be paramount
over the other provinces had no small share in strengthening his
power.

Relatively honest in money matters, and a stickler for precision
and uniformity, Rosas sought to govern a nation in the
rough-and-ready fashion of the stock farm. A creature of his
environment, no better and no worse than his associates, but only
more capable than they, and absolutely convinced that pitiless
autocracy was the sole means of creating a nation out of chaotic
fragments, this "Robespierre of South America" carried on his
despotic sway, regardless of the fury of opponents and the menace
of foreign intervention.

During the first three years of his control, however, except for
the rigorous suppression of unitary movements and the muzzling of
the press, few signs appeared of the "black night of Argentine
history "which was soon to close down on the land. Realizing that
the auspicious moment had not yet arrived for him to exercise the
limitless power that he thought needful, he declined an offer of
reelection from the provincial legislature, in the hope that,
through a policy of conciliation, his successor might fall a prey
to the designs of the Unitaries. When this happened, he secretly
stirred up the provinces into a renewal of the earlier
disturbances, until the evidence became overwhelming that Rosas
alone could bring peace and progress out of turmoil and
backwardness. Reluctantly the legislature yielded him the power
it knew he wanted. This he would not accept until a "popular"
vote of some 9000 to 4 confirmed the choice. In 1835,
accordingly, he became dictator for the first of four successive
terms of five years.

Then ensued, notably in Buenos Aires itself, a state of affairs
at once grotesque and frightful. Not content with hunting down
and inflicting every possible, outrage upon those suspected of
sympathy with the Unitaries, Rosas forbade them to display the
light blue and white colors of their party device and directed
that red, the sign of Federalism, should be displayed on all
occasions. Pink he would not tolerate as being too attenuated a
shade and altogether too suggestive of political trimming! A band
of his followers, made up of ruffians, and called the Mazorca, or
"Ear of Corn," because of the resemblance of their close
fellowship to its adhering grains, broke into private houses,
destroyed everything light blue within reach, and maltreated the
unfortunate occupants at will. No man was safe also who did not
give his face a leonine aspect by wearing a mustache and
sidewhiskers--emblems, the one of "federalism," and the other of
"independence." To possess a visage bare of these hirsute
adornments or a countenance too efflorescent in that respect was,
under a regime of tonsorial politics, to invite personal
disaster! Nothing apparently was too cringing or servile to show
how submissive the people were to the mastery of Rosas. Private
vengeance and defamation of the innocent did their sinister work
unchecked. Even when his arbitrary treatment of foreigners had
compelled France for a while to institute a blockade of Buenos
Aires, the wily dictator utilized the incident to turn patriotic
resentment to his own advantage.

Meanwhile matters in Uruguay had come to such a pass that Rosas
saw an opportunity to extend his control in that direction also.
Placed between Brazil and the Argentine Confederation and so
often a bone of contention, the little country was hardly free
from the rule of the former state when it came near falling under
the domination of the latter. Only a few years of relative
tranquillity had elapsed when two parties sprang up in Uruguay:
the "Reds" (Colorados) and the "Whites" (Blancos). Of these, the
one was supposed to represent the liberal and the other the
conservative element. In fact, they were the followings of
partisan chieftains, whose struggles for the presidency during
many years to come retarded the advancement of a country to which
nature had been generous.

When Fructuoso Rivera, the President up to 1835, thought of
choosing some one to be elected in constitutional fashion as his
successor, he unwisely singled out Manuel Oribe, one of the
famous "Thirty-three" who had raised the cry of independence a
decade before. But instead of a henchman he found a rival. Both
of them straightway adopted the colors and bid for the support of
one of the local factions; and both appealed to the factions of
the Argentine Confederation for aid, Rivera to the Unitaries and
Oribe to the Federalists. In 1843, Oribe, at the head of an army
of Blancos and Federalists and with the moral support of Rosas,
laid siege to Montevideo. Defended by Colorados, Unitaries, and
numerous foreigners, including Giuseppe Garibaldi, the town held
out valiantly for eight years--a feat that earned for it the
title of the "New Troy." Anxious to stop the slaughter and
destruction that were injuring their nationals, France, Great
Britain, and Brazil offered their mediation; but Rosas would have
none of it. What the antagonists did he cared little, so long as
they enfeebled the country and increased his chances of
dominating it. At length, in 1845, the two European powers
established a blockade of Argentine ports, which was not lifted
until the dictator grudgingly agreed to withdraw his troops from
the neighboring republic.

More than any other single factor, this intervention of France
and Great Britain administered a blow to Rosas from which he
could not recover. The operations of their fleets and the
resistance of Montevideo had lowered the prestige of the dictator
and had raised the hopes of the Unitaries that a last desperate
effort might shake off his hated control. In May, 1851, Justo
Jose de Urquiza, one of his most trusted lieutenants, declared
the independence of his own province and called upon the others
to rise against the tyrant. Enlisting the support of Brazil,
Uruguay, and Paraguay, he assembled a "great army of liberation,"
composed of about twenty-five thousand men, at whose head he
marched to meet the redoubtable Rosas. On February 3,1852, at a
spot near Buenos Aires, the man of might who, like his
contemporary Francia in Paraguay, had held the Argentine
Confederation in thralldom for so many years, went down to final
defeat. Embarking on a British warship he sailed for England,
there to become a quiet country gentleman in a land where gauchos
and dictators were unhonored.

In the meantime Paraguay, spared from such convulsion as racked
its neighbor on the east, dragged on its secluded existence of
backwardness and stagnation. Indians and half-castes vegetated in
ignorance and docility, and the handful of whites quaked in
terror, while the inexorable Francia tightened the reins of
commercial and industrial restriction and erected forts along the
frontiers to keep out the pernicious foreigner. At his death, in
1840, men and women wept at his funeral in fear perchance, as one
historian remarks, lest he come back to life; and the priest who
officiated at the service likened the departed dictator to Caesar
and Augustus!

Paraguay was destined, however, to fall under a despot far worse
than Francia when in 1862 Francisco Solano Lopez became
President. The new ruler was a man of considerable intelligence
and education. While a traveler in Europe he had seen much of its
military organizations, and he had also gained no slight
acquaintance with the vices of its capital cities. This acquired
knowledge he joined to evil propensities until he became a
veritable monster of wickedness. Vain, arrogant, reckless,
absolutely devoid of scruple, swaggering in victory, dogged in
defeat, ferociously cruel at all times, he murdered his brothers
and his best friends; he executed, imprisoned, or banished any
one whom he thought too influential; he tortured his mother and
sisters; and, like the French Terrorists, he impaled his officers
upon the unpleasant dilemma of winning victories or losing their
lives. Even members of the American legation suffered torment at
his hands, and the minister himself barely escaped death.

Over his people, Lopez wielded a marvelous power, compounded of
persuasive eloquence and brute force. If the Paraguayans had
obeyed their earlier masters blindly, they were dumb before this
new despot and deaf to other than his word of command. To them he
was the "Great Father," who talked to them in their own tongue of
Guarani, who was the personification of the nation, the greatest
ruler in the world, the invincible champion who inspired them
with a loathing and contempt for their enemies. Such were the
traits of a man and such the traits of a people who waged for six
years a warfare among the most extraordinary in human annals.

What prompted Lopez to embark on his career of international
madness and prosecute it with the rage of a demon is not entirely
clear. A vision of himself as the Napoleon of southern South
America, who might cause Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay to cringe
before his footstool, while he disposed at will of their
territory and fortunes, doubtless stirred his imagination. So,
too, the thought of his country, wedged in between two huge
neighbors and threatened with suffocation between their
overlapping folds, may well have suggested the wisdom of
conquering overland a highway to the sea. At all events, he
assembled an army of upwards of ninety thousand men, the greatest
military array that Hispanic America had ever seen. Though
admirably drilled and disciplined, they were poorly armed, mostly
with flintlock muskets, and they were also deficient in artillery
except that of antiquated pattern. With this mighty force at his
back, yet knowing that the neighboring countries could eventually
call into the field armies much larger in size equipped with
repeating rifles and supplied with modern artillery, the "Jupiter
of Paraguay" nevertheless made ready to launch his thunderbolt.

The primary object at which he aimed was Uruguay. In this little
state the Colorados, upheld openly or secretly by Brazil and
Argentina, were conducting a "crusade of liberty" against the
Blanco government at Montevideo, which was favored by Paraguay.
Neither of the two great powers wished to see an alliance formed
between Uruguay and Paraguay, lest when united in this manner the
smaller nations might become too strong to tolerate further
intervention in their affairs. For her part, Brazil had motives
for resentment arising out of boundary disputes with Paraguay and
Uruguay, as well as out of the inevitable injury to its nationals
inflicted by the commotions in the latter country; whereas
Argentina cherished grievances against Lopez for the audacity
with which his troops roamed through her provinces and the
impudence with which his vessels, plying on the lower Parana,
ignored the customs regulations. Thus it happened that obscure
civil discords in one little republic exploded into a terrific
international struggle which shook South America to its
foundations.

In 1864, scorning the arts of diplomacy which he did not
apparently understand, Lopez sent down an order for the two big
states to leave the matter of Uruguayan politics to his impartial
adjustment. At both Rio de Janeiro and Buenos Aires a roar of
laughter went up from the press at this notion of an obscure
chieftain of a band of Indians in the tropical backwoods daring
to poise the equilibrium of much more than half a continent on
his insolent hand. But the merriment soon subsided, as Brazilians
and Argentinos came to realize what their peril might be from a
huge army of skilled and valiant soldiers, a veritable horde of
fighting fanatics, drawn up in a compact little land, centrally
located and affording in other respects every kind of strategic
advantage.

When Brazil invaded Uruguay and restored the Colorados to power,
Lopez demanded permission from Argentina to cross its frontier,
for the purpose of assailing his enemy from another quarter. When
the permission was denied, Lopez declared war on Argentina also.
It was in every respect a daring step, but Lopez knew that
Argentina was not so well prepared as his own state for a war of
endurance. Uruguay then entered into an alliance in 1865 with its
two big "protectors." In accordance with its terms, the allies
agreed not to conclude peace until Lopez had been overthrown,
heavy indemnities had been exacted of Paraguay, its
fortifications demolished, its army disbanded, and the country
forced to accept any boundaries that the victors might see fit to
impose.

Into the details of the campaigns in the frightful conflict that
ensued it is not necessary to enter. Although, in 1866, the
allies had assembled an army of some fifty thousand men, Lopez
continued taking the offensive until, as the number and
determination of his adversaries increased, he was compelled to
retreat into his own country. Here he and his Indian legions
levied terrific toll upon the lives of their enemies who pressed
onward, up or down the rivers and through tropical swamps and
forests. Inch by inch he contested their entry upon Paraguayan
soil. When the able-bodied men gave out, old men, boys, women,
and girls fought on with stubborn fury, and died before they
would surrender. The wounded escaped if they could, or, cursing
their captors, tore off their bandages and bled to death. Disease
wrought awful havoc in all the armies engaged; yet the struggle
continued until flesh and blood could endure no more. Flying
before his pursuers into the wilds of the north and frantically
dragging along with him masses of fugitive men, women, and
children, whom he remorselessly shot, or starved to death, or
left to perish of exhaustion, Lopez turned finally at bay, and,
on March 1, 1870, was felled by the lance of a cavalryman. He had
sworn to die for his country and he did, though his country might
perish with him.

No land in modern times has ever reached a point so near
annihilation as Paraguay. Added to the utter ruin of its
industries and the devastation of its fields, dwellings, and
towns, hundreds of thousands of men, women, and children had
perished. Indeed, the horrors that had befallen it might well
have led the allies to ask themselves whether it was worth while
to destroy a country in order to change its rulers. Five years
before Lopez came into power the population of Paraguay had been
reckoned at something between 800,000 and 1,400,000--so
unreliable were census returns in those days. In 1878 it was
estimated at about 230,000, of whom women over fifteen years of
age outnumbered the men nearly four to one. Loose polygamy was
the inevitable consequence, and women became the breadwinners.
Even today in this country the excess of females over males is
very great. All in all, it is not strange that Paraguay should be
called the "Niobe among nations."

Unlike many nations of Spanish America in which a more or less
anticlerical regime was in the ascendant, Ecuador fell under a
sort of theocracy. Here appeared one of the strangest characters
in a story already full of extraordinary personages--Gabriel
Garcia Moreno, who became President of that republic in 1861. In
some respects the counterpart of Francia of Paraguay, in others
both a medieval mystic and an enlightened ruler of modern type,
he was a man of remarkable intellect, constructive ability,
earnest patriotism, and disinterested zeal for orderliness and
progress. On his presidential sash were inscribed the words: "My
Power in the Constitution"; but is real power lay in himself and
in the system which he implanted.

Garcia Moreno had a varied career. He had been a student of
chemistry and other natural sciences. He had spent his youth in
exile in Europe, where he prepared himself for his subsequent
career as a journalist and a university professor. Through it all
he had been an active participant in public affairs. Grim of
countenance, austere in bearing, violent of temper, relentless in
severity, he was a devoted believer in the Roman Catholic faith
and in this Church as the sole effective basis upon which a state
could be founded or social and political regeneration could be
assured. In order to render effective his concept of what a
nation ought to be, Garcia Moreno introduced and upheld in all
rigidity an administration the like of which had been known
hardly anywhere since the Middle Ages. He recalled the Jesuits,
established schools of the "Brothers of the Christian Doctrine,"
and made education a matter wholly under ecclesiastical control.
He forbade heretical worship, called the country the "Republic of
the Sacred Heart," and entered into a concordat with the Pope
under which the Church in Ecuador became more subject to the will
of the supreme pontiff than western Europe had been in the days
of Innocent III.

Liberals in and outside of Ecuador tried feebly to shake off this
masterful theocracy, for the friendship which Garcia Moreno
displayed toward the diplomatic representatives of the Catholic
powers of Europe, notably those of Spain and France, excited the
neighboring republics. Colombia, indeed, sent an army to liberate
the "brother democrats of Ecuador from the rule of Professor
Garcia Moreno," but the mass of the people stood loyally by their
President. For this astounding obedience to an administration
apparently so unrelated to modern ideas, the ecclesiastical
domination was not solely or even chiefly responsible. In more
ways than one Garcia Moreno, the professor President, was a
statesman of vision and deed. He put down brigandage and
lawlessness; reformed the finances; erected hospitals; promoted
education; and encouraged the study of natural science. Even his
salary he gave over to public improvements. His successors in the
presidential office found it impossible to govern the country
without Garcia Moreno. Elected for a third term to carry on his
curious policy of conservatism and reaction blended with modern
advancement, he fell by the hand of an assassin in 1875. But the
system which he had done so much to establish in Ecuador survived
him for many years.

Although Brazil did not escape the evils of insurrection which
retarded the growth of nearly all of its neighbors, none of its
numerous commotions shook the stability of the nation to a
perilous degree. By 1850 all danger of revolution had vanished.
The country began to enter upon a career of peace and progress
under a regime which combined broadly the federal organization of
the United States with the form of a constitutional monarchy.
Brazil enjoyed one of the few enlightened despotisms in South
America. Adopting at the outset the parliamentary system, the
Emperor Pedro II chose his ministers from among the liberals or
conservatives, as one party or the other might possess a majority
in the lower house of the Congress. Though the legislative power
of the nation was enjoyed almost entirely by the planters and
their associates who formed the dominant social class, individual
liberty was fully guaranteed, and even freedom of conscience and
of the press was allowed. Negro slavery, though tolerated, was
not expressly recognized.

Thanks to the political discretion and unusual personal qualities
of "Dom Pedro," his popularity became more and more marked as the
years went on. A patron of science and literature, a scholar
rather than a ruler, a placid and somewhat eccentric philosopher,
careless of the trappings of state, he devoted himself without
stint to the public welfare. Shrewdly divining that the
monarchical system might not survive much longer, he kept his
realm pacified by a policy of conciliation. Pedro II even went so
far as to call himself the best republican in the Empire. He
might have said, with justice perhaps, that he was the best
republican in the whole of Hispanic America. What he really
accomplished was the successful exercise of a paternal autocracy
of kindness and liberality over his subjects.

If more or less permanent dictators and occasional liberators
were the order of the day in most of the Spanish American
republics, intermittent dictators and liberators dashed across
the stage in Mexico from 1829 well beyond the middle of the
century. The other countries could show numerous instances in
which the occupant of the chief magistracy held office to the
close of his constitutional term; but Mexico could not show a
single one! What Mexico furnished, instead, was a kaleidoscopic
spectacle of successive presidents or dictators, an unstable
array of self-styled "generals" without a presidential
succession. There were no fewer than fifty such transient rulers
in thirty-two years, with anywhere from one to six a year, with
even the same incumbent twice in one year, or, in the case of the
repetitious Santa Anna, nine times in twenty years--in spite of
the fact that the constitutional term of office was four years.
This was a record that made the most turbulent South American
states seem, by comparison, lands of methodical regularity in the
choice of their national executive. And as if this instability in
the chief magistracy were not enough, the form of government in
Mexico shifted violently from federal to centralized, and back
again to federal. Mad struggles raged between partisan chieftains
and their bands of Escoceses and Yorkinos, crying out upon the
"President" in power because of his undue influence upon the
choice of a successor, backing their respective candidates if
they lost, and waiting for a chance to oust them if they won.

This tumultuous epoch had scarcely begun when Spain in 1829 made
a final attempt to recover her lost dominion in Mexico. Local
quarrels were straightway dropped for two months until the
invaders had surrendered. Thereupon the great landholders, who
disliked the prevailing Yorkino regime for its democratic
policies and for favoring the abolition of slavery, rallied to
the aid of a "general" who issued a manifesto demanding an
observance of the constitution and the laws! After Santa Anna,
who was playing the role of a Mexican Warwick, had disposed of
this aspirant, he switched blithely over to the Escoceses,
reduced the federal system almost to a nullity, and in 1836
marched away to conquer the revolting Texans. But, instead, they
conquered him and gained their independence, so that his reward
was exile.

Now the Escoceses were free to promulgate a new constitution, to
abolish the federal arrangement altogether, and to replace it by
a strongly centralized government under which the individual
States became mere administrative districts. Hardly had this
radical change been effected when in 1838 war broke out with
France on account of the injuries which its nationals, among whom
were certain pastry cooks, had suffered during the interminable
commotions. Mexico was forced to pay a heavy indemnity; and Santa
Anna, who had returned to fight the invader, was unfortunate
enough to lose a leg in the struggle. This physical deprivation,
however, did not interfere with that doughty hero's zest for
tilting with other unquiet spirits who yearned to assure national
regeneration by continuing to elevate and depose "presidents."

Another swing of the political pendulum had restored the federal
system when again everything was overturned by the disastrous war
with the United States. Once more Santa Anna returned, this time,
however, to joust in vain with the "Yankee despoilers" who were
destined to dismember Mexico and to annex two-thirds of its
territory. Again Santa Anna was banished--to dream of a more
favorable opportunity when he might become the savior of a
country which had fallen into bankruptcy and impotence.

His opportunity came in 1853, when conservatives and clericals
indulged the fatuous hope that he would both sustain their
privileges and lift Mexico out of its sore distress. Either their
memories were short or else distance had cast a halo about his
figure. At all events, he returned from exile and assumed, for
the ninth and last time, a presidency which he intended to be
something more than a mere dictatorship. Scorning the formality
of a Congress, he had himself entitled "Most Serene Highness," as
indicative of his ambition to become a monarch in name as well as
in fact.

Royal or imperial designs had long since brought one military
upstart to grief. They were now to cut Santa Anna's residence in
Mexico similarly short. Eruptions of discontent broke out all
over the country. Unable to make them subside, Santa Anna fell
back upon an expedient which recalls practices elsewhere in
Spanish America. He opened registries in which all citizens might
record "freely" their approval or disapproval of his continuance
in power. Though he obtained the huge majority of affirmative
votes to be expected in such cases, he found that these
pen-and-ink signatures were no more serviceable than his
soldiers. Accordingly the dictator of many a day, fallen from his
former estate of highness, decided to abandon his serenity also,
and in 1854 fled the country--for its good and his own.



CHAPTER VI. PERIL FROM ABROAD

Apart from the spoliation of Mexico by the United States, the
independence of the Hispanic nations had not been menaced for
more than thirty years. Now comes a period in which the plight of
their big northern neighbor, rent in twain by civil war and
powerless to enforce the spirit of the Monroe Doctrine, caused
two of the countries to become subject a while to European
control. One of these was the Dominican Republic.

In 1844 the Spanish-speaking population of the eastern part of
the island of Santo Domingo, writhing under the despotic yoke of
Haiti, had seized a favorable occasion to regain their freedom.
But the magic word "independence" could not give stability to the
new state any more than it had done in the case of its western
foes. The Haitians had lapsed long since into a condition
resembling that of their African forefathers. They reveled in the
barbarities of Voodoo, a sort of snake worship, and they groveled
before "presidents" and "emperors" who rose and fell on the tide
of decaying civilization. The Dominicans unhappily were not much
more progressive. Revolutions alternated with invasions and
counterinvasions and effectually prevented enduring progress.

On several occasions the Dominicans had sought reannexation to
Spain or had craved the protection of France as a defense against
continual menace from their negro enemies and as a relief from
domestic turmoil. But every move in this direction failed because
of a natural reluctance on the part of Spain and France, which
was heightened by a refusal of the United States to permit what
it regarded as a violation of the Monroe Doctrine. In 1861,
however, the outbreak of civil war in the United States appeared
to present a favorable opportunity to obtain protection from
abroad. If the Dominican Republic could not remain independent
anyway, reunion with the old mother country seemed altogether
preferable to reconquest by Haiti. The President, therefore,
entered into negotiations with the Spanish Governor and Captain
General of Cuba, and then issued a proclamation signed by himself
and four of his ministers announcing that by the "free and
spontaneous will" of its citizens, who had conferred upon him the
power to do so, the nation recognized Queen Isabella II as its
lawful sovereign! Practically no protest was made by the
Dominicans against this loss of their independence.

Difficulties which should have been foreseen by Spain were quick
to reveal themselves. It fell to the exPresident, now a colonial
governor and captain general, to appoint a host of officials and,
not unnaturally, he named his own henchmen. By so doing he not
only aroused the animosity of the disappointed but stimlated that
of the otherwise disaffected as well, until both the aggrieved
factions began to plot rebellion. Spain, too, sent over a crowd
of officials who could not adjust themselves to local conditions.
The failure of the mother country to allow the Dominicans
representation in the Spanish Cortes and its readiness to levy
taxes stirred up resentment that soon ended in revolution. Unable
to check this new trouble, and awed by the threatening attitude
of the United States, Spain decided to withdraw in 1865. The
Dominicans thus were left with their independence and a
chance--which they promptly seized--to renew their commotions. So
serious did these disturbances become that in 1869 the President
of the reconstituted republic sought annexation to the United
States but without success. American efforts, on the other hand,
were equally futile to restore peace and order in the troubled
country until many years later.

The intervention of Spain in Santo Domingo and its subsequent
withdrawal could not fail to have disastrous consequences in its
colony of Cuba, the "Pearl of the Antilles" as it was proudly
called. Here abundant crops of sugar and tobacco had brought
wealth and luxury, but not many immigrants because of the havoc
made by epidemics of yellow fever. Nearly a third of the insular
population was still composed of negro slaves, who could hardly
relish the thought that, while the mother country had tolerated
the suppression of the hateful institution in Santo Domingo, she
still maintained it in Cuba. A bureaucracy, also, prone to
corruption owing to the temptations of loose accounting at the
custom house, governed in routinary, if not in arbitrary,
fashion. Under these circumstances dislike for the suspicious and
repressive administration of Spain grew apace, and secret
societies renewed their agitation for its overthrow. The symptoms
of unrest were aggravated by the forced retirement of Spain from
Santo Domingo. If the Dominicans had succeeded so well, it ought
not to be difficult for a prolonged rebellion to wear Spain out
and compel it to abandon Cuba also. At this critical moment news
was brought of a Spanish revolution across the seas.

Just as the plight of Spain in 1808, and again in 1820, had
afforded a favorable opportunity for its colonies on the
continents of America to win their independence, so now in 1868
the tidings that Queen Isabella had been dethroned by a liberal
uprising aroused the Cubans to action under their devoted leader,
Carlos Manuel de Cespedes. The insurrection had not gained much
headway, however, when the provisional government of the mother
country instructed a new Governor and Captain General--whose
name, Dulce (Sweet), had an auspicious sound--to open
negotiations with the insurgents and to hold out the hope of
reforms. But the royalists, now as formerly,would listen to no
compromise. Organizing themselves into bodies of volunteers, they
drove Dulce out. He was succeeded by one Caballero de Rodas
(Knight of Rhodes) who lived up to his name by trying to ride
roughshod over the rebellious Cubans. Thus began the Ten Years'
War--a war of skirmishes and brief encounters, rarely involving a
decisive action, which drenched the soil of Cuba with blood and
laid waste its fields in a fury of destruction.

Among the radicals and liberals who tried to retain a fleeting
control over Mexico after the final departure of Santa Anna was
the first genuine statesman it had ever known in its history as a
republic--Benito Pablo Juarez, an Indian. At twelve years of age
he could not read or write or even speak Spanish. His employer,
however, noted his intelligence and had him educated. Becoming a
lawyer, Juarez entered the political arena and rose to prominence
by dint of natural talent for leadership, an indomitable
perseverance, and a sturdy patriotism. A radical by conviction,
he felt that the salvation of Mexico could never be attained
until clericalism and militarism had been banished from its soil
forever.

Under his influence a provisional government had already begun a
policy of lessening the privileges of the Church, when the
conservative elements, with a cry that religion was being
attacked, rose up in arms again. This movement repressed, a
Congress proceeded in 1857 to issue a liberal constitution which
was destined to last for sixty years. It established the federal
system in a definite fashion, abolished special privileges, both
ecclesiastical and military, and organized the country on sound
bases worthy of a modern nation. Mexico seemed about to enter
upon a rational development. But the newly elected President,
yielding to the importunities of the clergy, abolished the
constitution, dissolved the legislature, and set up a
dictatorship, in spite of the energetic protests of Juarez, who
had been chosen Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, and who, in
accordance with the terms of the temporarily discarded
instrument, was authorized to assume the presidency should that
office fall vacant. The rule of the usurper was short-lived,
however. Various improvised "generals" of conservative stripe put
themselves at the head of a movement to "save country, religion,
and the rights of the army," drove the would-be dictator out, and
restored the old regime.

Juarez now proclaimed himself acting President, as he was legally
entitled to do, and set up his government at Vera Cruz while one
"provisional president" followed another. Throughout this trying
time Juarez defended his position vigorously and rejected every
offer of compromise. In 1859 he promulgated his famous Reform
Laws which nationalized ecclesiastical property, secularized
cemeteries, suppressed religious communities, granted freedom of
worship, and made marriage a civil contract. For Mexico, however,
as for other Spanish American countries, measures of the sort
were far too much in advance of their time to insure a ready
acceptance. Although Juarez obtained a great moral victory when
his government was recognized by the United States, he had to
struggle two years more before he could gain possession of the
capital. Triumphant in 1861, he carried his anticlerical program
to the point of actually expelling the Papal Nuncio and other
ecclesiastics who refused to obey his decrees. By so doing he
leveled the way for the clericals, conservatives, and the
militarists  to invite foreign intervention on behalf of their
desperate cause. But, even if they had not been guilty of
behavior so unpatriotic, the anger of the Pope over the treatment
of his Church, the wrath of Spain over the conduct of Juarez, who
had expelled the Spanish minister for siding with the
ecclesiastics, the desire of Great Britain to collect debts due
to her subjects, and above all the imperialistic ambitions of
Napoleon III, who dreamt of converting the intellectual influence
of France in Hispanic America into a political ascendancy, would
probably have led to European occupation in any event, so long at
least as the United States was slit asunder and incapable of
action.

Some years before, the Mexican Government under the clerical and
militarist regime had made a contract with a Swiss banker who for
a payment of $500,000 had received bonds worth more than fifteen
times the value of the loan. When, therefore, the Mexican
Congress undertook to defer payments on a foreign debt that
included the proceeds of this outrageous contract, the
Governments of France, Great Britain, and Spain decided to
intervene. According to their agreement the three powers were
simply to hold the seaports of Mexico and collect the customs
duties until their pecuniary demands had been satisfied.
Learning, however, that Napoleon III had ulterior designs, Great
Britain and Spain withdrew their forces and left him to proceed
with his scheme of conquest. After capturing Puebla in May, 1863,
a French army numbering some thirty thousand men entered the
capital and installed an assemblage of notables belonging to the
clerical and conservative groups. This body thereupon proclaimed
the establishment of a constitutional monarchy under an emperor.
The title was to be offered to Maximilian, Archduke of Austria.
In case he should not accept, the matter was to be referred to
the "benevolence of his majesty, the Emperor of the French," who
might then select some other Catholic prince.

On his arrival, a year later, the amiable and well-meaning
Maximilian soon discovered that, instead of being an "Emperor,"
he was actually little more than a precarious chief of a faction
sustained by the bayonets of a foreign army. In the northern part
of Mexico, Juarez, Porfirio Diaz,--later to become the most
renowned of presidential autocrats,--and other patriot leaders,
though hunted from place to place, held firmly to their resolve
never to bow to the yoke of the pretender. Nor could Maximilian
be sure of the loyalty of even his supposed adherents. Little by
little the unpleasant conviction intruded itself upon him that he
must either abdicate or crush all resistance in the hope that
eventually time and good will might win over the Mexicans. But do
what they would, his foreign legions could not catch the wary and
stubborn Juarez and his guerrilla lieutenants, who persistently
wore down the forces of their enemies. Then the financial
situation became grave. Still more menacing was the attitude of
the United States now that its civil war was at an end. On May
31, 1866, Maximilian received word that Napoleon III had decided
to withdraw the French troops. He then determined to abdicate,
but he was restrained by the unhappy Empress Carlotta, who
hastened to Europe to plead his cause with Napoleon. Meantime, as
the French troops were withdrawn, Juarez occupied the territory.

Feebly the "Emperor" strove to enlist the favor of his
adversaries by a number of liberal decrees; but their sole result
was his abandonment by many a lukewarm conservative. Inexorably
the patriot armies closed around him until in May, 1867, he was
captured at Queretaro, where he had sought refuge. Denied the
privilege of leaving the country on a promise never to return, he
asked Escobedo, his captor, to treat him as a prisoner of war.
"That's my business," was the grim reply. On the pretext that
Maximilian had refused to recognize the competence of the
military court chosen to try him, Juarez gave the order to shoot
him. On the 19th of June the Austrian archduke paid for a
fleeting glory with his life. Thus failed the second attempt at
erecting an empire in Mexico. For thirty-four years diplomatic
relations between that country and Austria-Hungary were severed.
The clericalmilitary combination had been overthrown, and the
Mexican people had rearmed their independence. As Juarez
declared: "Peace means respect for the rights of others."

Even if foreign dreams of empire in Mexico had vanished so
abruptly, it could hardly be expected that a land torn for many
years by convulsions could become suddenly tranquil. With Diaz
and other aspirants to presidential power, or with chieftains who
aimed at setting up little republics of their own in the several
states, Juarez had to contend for some time before he could
establish a fair amount of order. Under his successor, who also
was a civilian, an era of effective reform began. In 1873
amendments to the constitution declared Church and State
absolutely separate and provided for the abolition of peonage--a
provision which was more honored in, the breach than in the
observance.



CHAPTER VII. GREATER STATES AND LESSER

During the half century that had elapsed since 1826, the nations
of Hispanic America had passed through dark ages. Their evolution
had always been accompanied by growing pains and had at times
been arrested altogether or unduly hastened by harsh injections
of radicalism. It was not an orderly development through gradual
modifications in the social and economic structure, but rather a
fitful progress now assisted and now retarded by the arbitrary
deeds of men of action, good and bad, who had seized power.
Dictators, however, steadily decreased in number and gave place
often to presidential autocrats who were continued in office by
constant reelection and who were imbued with modern ideas. In
1876 these Hispanic nations stood on the threshold of a new era.
Some were destined to advance rapidly beyond it; others, to move
slowly onward; and a few to make little or no progress.

The most remarkable feature in the new era was the rise of four
states--Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and Chile--to a position of
eminence among their fellows. Extent of territory, development of
natural resources, the character of the inhabitants and the
increase of their numbers, and the amount of popular intelligence
and prosperity, all contributed to this end. Each of the four
nations belonged to a fairly well-defined historical and
geographical group in southern North America, and in eastern and
western South America, respectively. In the first group were
Mexico, the republics of Central America, and the island
countries of the Caribbean; in the second, Brazil, Argentina,
Uruguay, and Paraguay; and in the third, Chile, Peru, and
Bolivia. In a fourth group were Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela.

When the President of Mexico proceeded, in 1876, to violate the
constitution by securing his reelection, the people were prepared
by their earlier experiences and by the rule of Juarez to defend
their constitutional rights. A widespread rebellion headed by
Diaz broke out. In the so-called "Plan of Tuxtepec" the
revolutionists declared themselves in favor of the principle of
absolutely no reelection. Meantime the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court handed down a decision that the action of the
Congress in sustaining the President was illegal, since in
reality no elections had been held because of the abstention of
voters and the seizure of the polls by revolutionists or
government forces. "Above the constitution, nothing; above the
constitution, no one," he declared. But as this assumption of a
power of judgment on matters of purely political concern was
equally a violation of the constitution and concealed, besides,
an attempt to make the Chief Justice President, Diaz and his
followers drove both of the pretenders out. Then in 1876 he
managed to bring about his own election instead.

Porfirio Diaz was a soldier who had seen active service in nearly
every important campaign since the war with the United States.
Often himself in revolt against presidents, legal and illegal,
Diaz was vastly more than an ordinary partisan chieftain.
Schooled by a long experience, he had come to appreciate the fact
that what Mexico required for its national development was
freedom from internal disorders and a fair chance for
recuperation. Justice, order, and prosperity, he felt, could be
assured only by imposing upon the country the heavy weight of an
iron hand. Foreign capital must be invested in Mexico and then
protected; immigration must be encouraged, and other material,
moral, and intellectual aid of all sorts must be drawn from
abroad for the upbuilding of the nation.

To effect such a transformation in a land so tormented and
impoverished as Mexico--a country which, within the span of
fifty-five years had lived under two "emperors," and some
thirty-six presidents, nine "provisional presidents," ten
dictators, twelve "regents," and five "supreme
councilors"--required indeed a masterful intelligence and a
masterful authority. Porfirio Diaz possessed and exercised both.
He was, in fact, just the man for the times. An able
administrator, stern and severe but just, rather reserved in
manner and guarded in utterance, shrewd in the selection of
associates, and singularly successful in his dealings with
foreigners, he entered upon a "presidential reign" of thirty-five
years broken by but one intermission of four--which brought
Mexico out upon the highway to new national life.

Under the stable and efficient rulership of Diaz, "plans,"
"pronunciamentos," "revolutions," and similar devices of
professional trouble makers, had short shrift. Whenever an
uprising started, it was promptly quelled, either by a
well-disciplined army or by the rurales, a mounted police made up
to some extent of former bandits to whom the President gave the
choice of police service or of sharp punishment for their crimes.
Order, in fact, was not always maintained, nor was justice always
meted out, by recourse to judges and courts. Instead, a novel
kind of lynch law was invoked. The name it bore was the ley fuga,
or "flight law," in accordance with which malefactors or
political suspects taken by government agents from one locality
to another, on the excuse of securing readier justice, were given
by their captors a pretended chance to escape and were then shot
while they ran! The only difference between this method and
others of the sort employed by Spanish American autocrats to
enforce obedience lay in its purpose. Of Diaz one might say what
Bacon said of King Henry VII: "He drew blood as physicians do, to
save life rather than to spill it." If need be, here and there,
disorder and revolt were stamped out by terrorism; but the
Mexican people did not yield to authority from terror but rather
from a thorough loyalty to the new regime.

Among the numerous measures of material improvement which Diaz
undertook during his first term, the construction of railways was
the most important. The size of the country, its want of
navigable rivers, and its relatively small and widely scattered
population, made imperative the establishment of these means of
communication. Despite the misgivings of many intelligent
Mexicans that the presence of foreign capital would impair local
independence in some way, Diaz laid the foundations of future
national prosperity by granting concessions to the Mexican
Central and National Mexican companies, which soon began
construction. Under his successor a national bank was created;
and when Diaz was again elected he readjusted the existing
foreign debt and boldly contracted new debts abroad.

At the close of his first term, in 1880, a surplus in the
treasury was not so great a novelty as the circumstance
altogether unique in the political annals of Mexico-that Diaz
turned over the presidency in peaceful fashion to his properly
elected successor! He did so reluctantly, to be sure, but he
could not afford just yet to ignore his own avowed principle,
which had been made a part of the constitution shortly after his
accession. Although the confidence he reposed in that successor
was not entirely justified, the immense personal popularity of
Diaz saved the prestige of the new chief magistrate. Under his
administration the constitution was amended in such a way as to
deprive the Chief Justice of the privilege of replacing the
President in case of a vacancy, thus eliminating that official
from politics. After his resumption of office, Diaz had the
fundamental law modified anew, so as to permit the reelection of
a President for one term only! For this change, inconsistent
though it may seem, Diaz was not alone responsible. Circumstances
had changed, and the constitution had to change with them.

Had the "United Provinces of Central America," as they came forth
from under the rule of Spain, seen fit to abstain from following
in the unsteady footsteps of Mexico up to the time of the
accession of Diaz to power, had they done nothing more than
develop their natural wealth and utilize their admirable
geographical situation, they might have become prosperous and
kept their corporate name. As it was, their history for upwards
of forty years had little to record other than a momentary
cohesion and a subsequent lapse into five quarrelsome little
republics--the "Balkan States" of America. Among them Costa Rica
had suffered least from arbitrary management or internal
commotion and showed the greatest signs of advancement.

In Guatemala, however, there had arisen another Diaz, though a
man quite inferior in many respects to his northern counterpart.
When Justo Rufino Barrios became President of that republic in
1873 he was believed to have conservative leanings. Ere long,
however, he astounded his compatriots by showing them that he was
a thoroughgoing radical with methods of action to correspond to
his convictions. Not only did he keep the Jesuits out of the
country but he abolished monastic orders altogether and converted
their buildings to public use. He made marriage a civil contract
and he secularized the burying grounds. Education he encouraged
by engaging the services of foreign instructors, and he brought
about a better observance of the law by the promulgation of new
codes. He also introduced railways and telegraph lines. Since the
manufacture of aniline dyes abroad had diminished the demand for
cochineal, Barrios decided to replace this export by cultivating
coffee. To this end, he distributed seeds among the planters and
furnished financial aid besides, with a promise to inspect the
fields in due season and see what had been accomplished. Finding
that in many cases the seeds had been thrown away and the money
wasted in drink and gambling, he ordered the guilty planters to
be given fifty lashes, with the assurance that on a second
offense he would shoot them on sight. Coffee planting in
Guatemala was pursued thereafter with much alacrity!

Posts in the government service Barrios distributed quite
impartially among Conservatives and Democrats, deserving or
otherwise, for he had them both well under control. At his behest
a permanent constitution was promulgated in 1880. While he
affected to dislike continual reelection, he saw to it
nevertheless that he himself should be the sole candidate who was
likely to win.

Barrios doubtless could have remained President of Guatemala for
the term of his natural life if he had not raised up the ghost of
federation. All the republics of Central America accepted his
invitation in 1876 to send delegates to his capital to discuss
the project. But nothing was accomplished because Barrios and the
President of Salvador were soon at loggerheads. Nine years later,
feeling himself stronger, Barrios again proposed federation. But
the other republics had by this time learned too much of the
methods of the autocrat of Guatemala, even while they admired his
progressive policy, to relish the thought of a federation
dominated by Guatemala and its masterful President. Though he
"persuaded" Honduras to accept the plan, the three other
republics preferred to unite in self-defense, and in the ensuing
struggle the quixotic Barrios was killed. A few years later the
project was revived and the constitution of a "Republic of
Central America" was agreed upon, when war between Guatemala and
Salvador again frustrated its execution.

In Brazil two great movements were by this time under way: the
total abolition of slavery and the establishment of a republic.
Despite the tenacious opposition of many of the planters, from
about the year 1883 the movement for emancipation made great
headway. There was a growing determination on the part of the
majority of the inhabitants to remove the blot that made the
country an object of reproach among the civilized states of the
world. Provinces and towns, one after another, freed the slaves
within their borders. The imperial Government, on its part,
hastened the process by liberating its own slaves and by imposing
upon those still in bondage taxes higher than their market value;
it fixed a price for other slaves; it decreed that the older
slaves should be set free; and it increased the funds already
appropriated to compensate owners of slaves who should be
emancipated. In 1887 the number of slaves had fallen to about
720,000, worth legally about $650 each. A year later came the
final blow, when the Princess Regent assented to a measure which
abolished slavery outright and repealed all former acts relating
to slavery. So radical a proceeding wrought havoc in the
coffee-growing southern provinces in particular, from which the
negroes now freed migrated by tens of thousands to the northern
provinces. Their places, however, were taken by Italians and
other Europeans who came to work the plantations on a cooperative
basis. All through the eighties, in fact, immigrants from Italy
poured into the temperate regions of southern Brazil, to the
number of nearly two hundred thousand, supplementing the many
thousands of Germans who had settled, chiefly in the province of
Rio Grande do Sul, thirty years before.

Apart from the industrial problem thus created by the abolition
of slavery, there seemed to be no serious political or economic
questions before the country. Ever since 1881, when a law
providing for direct elections was passed, the Liberals had been
in full control. The old Dom Pedro, who had endeared himself to
his people, was as much liked and respected as ever. But as he
had grown feeble and almost blind, the heiress to the throne, who
had marked absolutist and clerical tendencies, was disposed to
take advantage of his infirmities.

For many years, on the other hand, doctrines opposed to the
principle of monarchy had been spread in zealous fashion by
members of the military class, notable among whom was Deodoro da
Fonseca. And now some of the planters longed to wreak vengeance
on a ruler who had dared to thwart their will by emancipating the
slaves. Besides this persistent discontent, radical republican
newspapers continually stirred up fresh agitation. Whatever the
personal service rendered by the Emperor to the welfare of the
country, to them he represented a political system which deprived
the provinces of much of their local autonomy and the Brazilian
people at large of self-government.

But the chief reason for the momentous change which was about to
take place was the fact that the constitutional monarchy had
really completed its work as a transitional government. Under
that regime Brazil had reached a condition of stability and had
attained a level of progress which might well enable it to govern
itself. During all this time the influence of the Spanish
American nations had been growing apace. Even if they had fallen
into many a political calamity, they were nevertheless
"republics," and to the South American this word had a magic
sound. Above all, there was the potent suggestion of the success
of the United States of North America, whose extension of its
federal system over a vast territory suggested what Brazil with
its provinces might accomplish in the southern continent. Hence
the vast majority of intelligent Brazilians felt that they had
become self-reliant enough to establish a republic without fear
of lapsing into the unfortunate experiences of the other Hispanic
countries.

In 1889, when provision was made for a speedy abdication of the
Emperor in favor of his daughter, the republican newspapers
declared that a scheme was being concocted to exile the chief
military agitators and to interfere with any effort on the part
of the army to prevent the accession of the new ruler. Thereupon,
on the 15th of November, the radicals at Rio de Janeiro, aided by
the garrison, broke out in open revolt. Proclaiming the
establishment of a federal republic under the name of the "United
States of Brazil," they deposed the imperial ministry, set up a
provisional government with Deodoro da Fonseca at its head,
arranged for the election of a constitutional convention, and
bade Dom Pedro and his family leave the country within
twenty-four hours.

On the 17th of November, before daybreak, the summons was obeyed.
Not a soul appeared to bid the old Emperor farewell as he and his
family boarded the steamer that was to bear them to exile in
Europe. Though seemingly an act of heartlessness and ingratitude,
the precaution was a wise one in that it averted, possible
conflict and bloodshed. For the second time in its history, a
fundamental change had been wrought in the political system of
the nation without a resort to war! The United States of Brazil
accordingly took its place peacefully among its fellow republics
of the New World.

Meanwhile Argentina, the great neighbor of Brazil to the
southwest, had been gaining territory and new resources. Since
the definite adoption of a federal constitution in 1853, this
state had attained to a considerable degree of national
consciousness under the leadership of able presidents such as
Bartolome Mitre, the soldier and historian, and Domingo Faustino
Sarmiento, the publicist and promoter of popular education. One
evidence of this new nationalism was a widespread belief in the
necessity of territorial expansion. Knowing that Chile
entertained designs upon Patagonia, the Argentine Government
forestalled any action by conducting a war of practical
extermination against the Indian tribes of that region and by
adding it to the national domain. The so-called "conquest of the
desert" in the far south of the continent opened to civilization
a vast habitable area of untold economic possibilities.

In the electoral campaign of 1880 the presidential candidates
were Julio Argentino Roca and the Governor of the province of
Buenos Aires. The former, an able officer skilled in both arms
and politics, had on his side the advantage of a reputation won
in the struggle with the Patagonian Indians, the approval of the
national Government, and the support of most of the provinces.
Feeling certain of defeat at the polls, the partisans of the
latter candidate resorted to the timeworn expedient of a revolt.
Though the uprising lasted but twenty days, the diplomatic corps
at the capital proffered its mediation between the contestants,
in order to avoid any further bloodshed. The result was that the
fractious Governor withdrew his candidacy and a radical change
was effected in the relations of Buenos Aires, city and province,
to the country at large. The city, together with its environs,
was converted into a federal district and became solely and
distinctively the national capital. Its public buildings,
railways, and telegraph service, as well as the provincial debt,
were taken over by the general Government. The seat of provincial
authority was transferred to the village of Ensenada, which
thereupon was rechristened La Plata.

A veritable tide of wealth and general prosperity was now rolling
over Argentina. By 1885 its population had risen to upwards of
3,000,000. Immigration increased to a point far beyond the
wildest expectations. In 1889 alone about 300,000 newcomers
arrived and lent their aid in the promotion of industry and
commerce. Fields hitherto uncultivated or given over to grazing
now bore vast crops of wheat, maize, linseed, and sugar. Large
quantities of capital, chiefly from Great Britain, also poured
into the country. As a result, the price of land rose high, and
feverish speculation became the order of the day. Banks and other
institutions of credit were set up, colonizing schemes were
devised, and railways were laid out. To meet the demands of all
these enterprises, the Government borrowed immense sums from
foreign capitalists and issued vast quantities of paper money,
with little regard for its ultimate redemption. Argentina spent
huge sums in prodigal fashion on all sorts of public improvements
in an effort to attract still more capital and immigration, and
thus entered upon a dangerous era of inflation.

Of the near neighbors of Argentina, Uruguay continued along the
tortuous path of alternate disturbance and progress, losing many
of its inhabitants to the greater states beyond, where they
sought relative peace and security; while Paraguay, on the other
hand, enjoyed freedom from civil strife, though weighed down with
a war debt and untold millions in indemnities exacted by
Argentina and Brazil, which it could never hope to pay. In
consequence, this indebtedness was a useful club to brandish over
powerless Paraguay whenever that little country might venture to
question the right of either of its big neighbors to break the
promise they had made of keeping its territory intact. Argentina,
however, consented in 1878 to refer certain claims to the
decision of the President of the United States. When Paraguay won
the arbitration, it showed its gratitude by naming one of its
localities Villa Hayes. As time went on, however, its population
increased and hid many of the scars of war.

On the western side of South America there broke out the struggle
known as the "War of the Pacific" between Chile, on the one side,
and Peru and Bolivia as allies on the other. In Peru unstable and
corrupt governments had contracted foreign loans under conditions
that made their repayment almost impossible and had spent the
proceeds in so reckless and extravagant a fashion as to bring the
country to the verge of bankruptcy. Bolivia, similarly governed,
was still the scene of the orgies and carnivals which had for
some time characterized its unfortunate history. One of its
buffoon "presidents," moreover, had entered into boundary
agreements with both Chile and Brazil, under which the nation
lost several important areas and some of its territory on the
Pacific. The boundaries of Bolivia, indeed, were run almost
everywhere on purely arbitrary lines drawn with scant regard for
the physical features of the country and with many a frontier
question left wholly unsettled. For some years Chilean companies
and speculators, aided by foreign capital mainly British in
origin, had been working deposits of nitrate of soda in the
province of Antofagasta, or "the desert of Atacama," a region
along the coast to the northward belonging to Bolivia, and also
in the provinces of Tacna, Arica, and Tarapaca, still farther to
the northward, belonging to Peru. Because boundary lines were not
altogether clear and because the three countries were all eager
to exploit these deposits, controversies over this debatable
ground were sure to rise. For the privilege of developing
portions of this region, individuals and companies had obtained
concessions from the various governments concerned; elsewhere,
industrial free lances dug away without reference to such
formalities.

It is quite likely that Chile, whose motto was "By Right or by
Might," was prepared to sustain the claims of its citizens by
either alternative. At all events, scenting a prospective
conflict, Chile had devoted much attention to the development of
its naval and military establishment--a state of affairs which
did not escape the observation of its suspicious neighbors.

The policy of Peru was determined partly by personal motives and
partly by reasons of state. In 1873 the President, lacking
sufficient financial and political support to keep himself in
office, resolved upon the risky expedient of arousing popular
passion against Chile, in the hope that he might thereby
replenish the national treasury. Accordingly he proceeded to pick
a quarrel by ordering the deposits in Tarapaca to be expropriated
with scant respect for the concessions made to the Chilean
miners. Realizing, however, the possible consequences of such an
action, he entered into an alliance with Bolivia. This country
thereupon proceeded to levy an increased duty on the exportation
of nitrates from the Atacama region. Chile, already aware of the
hostile combination which had been formed, protested so
vigorously that a year later Bolivia agreed to withdraw the new
regulations and to submit the dispute to arbitration.

Such were the relations of these three states in 1878, when
Bolivia, taking advantage of differences of opinion between Chile
and Argentina regarding the Patagonian region, reimposed its
export duty, canceled the Chilean concessions, and confiscated
the nitrate deposits. Chile then declared war in February, 1879,
and within two months occupied the entire coast of Bolivia up to
the frontiers of Peru. On his part the President of Bolivia was
too much engrossed in the festivities connected with a masquerade
to bother about notifying the people that their land had been
invaded until several days after the event had occurred!

Misfortunes far worse than anything which had fallen to the lot
of its ally now awaited Peru, which first attempted an officious
mediation and then declared war on the 4th of April. Since Peru
and Bolivia together had a population double that of Chile, and
since Peru possessed a much larger army and navy than Chile, the
allies counted confidently on victory. But Peru's army of eight
thousand--having within four hundred as many officers as men,
directed by no fewer than twenty-six generals, and presided over
by a civil government altogether inept--was no match for an army
less than a third of its size to be sure, but well drilled and
commanded, and with a stable, progressive, and efficient
government at its back. The Peruvian forces, lacking any
substantial support from Bolivia, crumpled under the terrific
attacks of their adversaries. Efforts on the part of the United
States to mediate in the struggle were blocked by the dogged
refusal of Chile to abate its demands for annexation. Early in
1881 its army entered Lima in triumph, and the war was over.

For a while the victors treated the Peruvians and their capital
city shamefully. The Chilean soldiers stripped the national
library of its contents, tore up the lamp-posts in the streets,
carried away the benches in the parks, and even shipped off the
local menagerie to Santiago! What they did not remove or destroy
was disposed of by the rabble of Lima itself. But in two years so
utterly chaotic did the conditions in the hapless country become
that Chile at length had to set up a government in order to
conclude a peace. It was not until October 20, 1883, that the
treaty was signed at Lima and ratified later at Ancon. Peru was
forced to cede Tarapaca outright and to agree that Tacna and
Arica should be held by Chile for ten years. At the expiration of
this period the inhabitants of the two provinces were to be
allowed to choose by vote the country to which they would prefer
to belong, and the nation that won the election was to pay the
loser 10,000,000 pesos. In April, 1884, Bolivia, also, entered
into an arrangement with Chile, according to which a portion of
its seacoast should be ceded absolutely and the remainder should
be occupied by Chile until a more definite understanding on the
matter could be reached.

Chile emerged from the war not only triumphant over its northern
rivals but dominant on the west coast of South America. Important
developments in Chilean national policy followed. To maintain its
vantage and to guard against reprisals, the victorious state had
to keep in military readiness on land and sea. It therefore
looked to Prussia for a pattern for its army and to Great Britain
for a model for its navy.

Peru had suffered cruelly from the war. Its territorial losses
deprived it of an opportunity to satisfy its foreign creditors
through a grant of concessions. The public treasury, too, was
empty, and many a private fortune had melted away. Not until a
military hand stronger than its competitors managed to secure a
firm grip on affairs did Peru begin once more its toilsome
journey toward material betterment.

Bolivia, on its part, had emerged from the struggle practically a
landlocked country. Though bereft of access to the sea except by
permission of its neighbors, it had, however, not endured
anything like the calamities of its ally. In 1880 it had adopted
a permanent constitution and it now entered upon a course of slow
and relatively peaceful progress.

In the republics to the northward struggles between clericals and
radicals caused sharp, abrupt alternations in government. In
Ecuador the hostility between clericals and radicals was all the
more bitter because of the rivalry of the two chief towns,
Guayaquil the seaport and Quito the capital, each of which
sheltered a faction. No sooner therefore had Garcia Moreno fallen
than the radicals of Guayaquil rose up against the clericals at
Quito. Once in power, they hunted their enemies down until order
under a dictator could be restored. The military President who
assumed power in 1876 was too radical to suit the clericals and
too clerical to suit the radicals. Accordingly his opponents
decided to make the contest three-cornered by fighting the
dictator and one another. When the President had been forced out,
a conservative took charge until parties of bushwhackers and
mutinous soldiers were able to install a military leader, whose
retention of power was brief. In 1888 another conservative, who
had been absent from the country when elected and who was an
adept in law and diplomacy, managed to win sufficient support
from all three factions to retain office for the constitutional
period.

In Colombia a financial crisis had been approaching ever since
the price of coffee, cocoa, and other Colombian products had
fallen in the European markets. This decrease had caused a
serious diminution in the export trade and had forced gold and
silver practically out of circulation. At the same time the
various "states" were increasing their powers at the expense of
the federal Government, and the country was rent by factions. In
order to give the republic a thoroughly centralized
administration which would restore financial confidence and bring
back the influence of the Church as a social and political
factor, a genuine revolution, which was started in 1876,
eventually put an end to both radicalism and states' rights. At
the outset Rafael Nunez, the unitary and clerical candidate and a
lawyer by profession, was beaten on the field, but at a
subsequent election he obtained the requisite number of votes
and, in 1880, assumed the presidency. That the loser in war
should become the victor in peace showed the futility of
bloodshed in such revolutions.

Not until Nunez came into office again did he feel himself strong
enough to uproot altogether the radicalism and disunion which had
flourished since 1860. Ignoring the national Legislature, he
called a Congress of his own, which in 1886 framed a constitution
that converted the "sovereign states" into "departments," or mere
administrative districts, to be ruled as the national Government
saw fit. Further, the presidential term was lengthened from two
years to six, and the name of the country was changed, finally,
to "Republic of Colombia." Two years later the power of the
Church was strengthened by a concordat with the Pope.

Venezuela on its part had undergone changes no less marked. A
liberal constitution promulgated in 1864 had provided for the
reorganization of the country on a federal basis. The name chosen
for the republic was "United States of Venezuela." More than
that, it had anticipated Mexico and Guatemala in being the first
of the Hispanic nations to witness the establishment of a
presidential autocracy of the continuous and enlightened type.

Antonio Guzman Blanco was the man who imposed upon Venezuela for
about nineteen years a regime of obedience to law, and, to some
extent, of modern ideas of administration such as the country had
never known before. A person of much versatility, he had studied
medicine and law before he became a soldier and a politician.
Later he displayed another kind of versatility by letting
henchmen hold the presidential office while he remained the power
behind the throne. Endowed with a masterful will and a pronounced
taste for minute supervision, he had exactly the ability
necessary to rule Venezuela wisely and well.

Amid considerable opposition he began, in 1870, the first of his
three periods of administration--the Septennium, as it was
termed. The "sovereign" states he governed through "sovereign"
officials of his own selection. He stopped the plundering of
farms and the dragging of laborers off to military service. He
established in Venezuela an excellent monetary system. Great sums
were expended in the erection of public and private buildings and
in the embellishment of Caracas. European capital and immigration
were encouraged to venture into a country hitherto so torn by
chronic disorder as to deprive both labor and property of all
guarantees. Roads, railways, and telegraph lines were
constructed. The ministers of the Church were rendered submissive
to the civil power. Primary education became alike free and
compulsory. As the phrase went, Guzman Blanco "taught Venezuela
to read." At the end of his term of office he went into voluntary
retirement.

In 1879 Guzman Blanco put himself at the head of a movement which
he called a "revolution of replevin"--which meant, presumably,
that he was opposed to presidential "continuism," and in favor of
republican institutions! Although a constitution promulgated in
1881 fixed the chief magistrate's term of office at two years,
the success which Guzman Blanco had attained enabled him to
control affairs for five years--the Quinquennium, as it was
called. Thereupon he procured his appointment to a diplomatic
post in Europe; but the popular demand for his presence was too
strong for him to remain away. In 1886 he was elected by
acclamation. He held office two years more and then, finding that
his influence had waned, he left Venezuela for good. Whatever his
faults in other respects, Guzman Blanco--be it said to his credit
--tried to destroy the pest of periodical revolutions in his
country. Thanks to his vigorous suppression of these uprisings,
some years of at least comparative security were made possible.
More than any other President the nation had ever had, he was
entitled to the distinction of having been a benefactor, if not
altogether a regenerator, of his native land.



CHAPTER VIII. "ON THE MARGIN OF INTERNATIONAL LIFE"

During the period from 1889 to 1907 two incidents revealed the
standing that the republics of Hispanic America had now acquired
in the world at large. In 1889 at Washington, and later in their
own capital cities, they met with the United States in council.
In 1899, and again in 1907, they joined their great northern
neighbor and the nations of Europe and Asia at The Hague for
deliberation on mutual concerns, and they were admitted to an
international fellowship and cooperation far beyond a mere
recognition of their independence and a formal interchange of
diplomats and consuls.

Since attempts of the Hispanic countries themselves to realize
the aims of Bolivar in calling the Congress at Panama had failed,
the United States now undertook to call into existence a sort of
inter-American Congress. Instead of being merely a supporter, the
great republic of the north had resolved to become the director
of the movement for greater solidarity in thought and action. By
linking up the concerns of the Hispanic nations with its own
destinies it would assert not so much its position as guardian of
the Monroe Doctrine as its headship, if not its actual dominance,
in the New World, and would so widen the bounds of its political
and commercial influence - a tendency known as "imperialism."
Such was the way, at least, in which the Hispanic republics came
to view the action of the "Colossus of the North" in inviting
them to participate in an assemblage meeting more or less
periodically and termed officially the "International Conference
of American States," and popularly the "Pan-American Conference."

Whether the mistrust the smaller countries felt at the outset was
lessened in any degree by the attendance of their delegates at
the sessions of this conference remains open to question.
Although these representatives, in common with their colleagues
from the United States, assented to a variety of conventions and
passed a much larger number of resolutions, their acquiescence
seemed due to a desire to gratify their powerful associate,
rather than to a belief in the possible utility of such measures.
The experience of the earlier gatherings had demonstrated that
political issues would have to be excluded from consideration.
Propositions, for example, such as that to extend the basic idea
of the Monroe Doctrine into a sort of self-denying ordinance,
under which all the nations of America should agree to abstain
thereafter from acquiring any part of one another's territory by
conquest, and to adopt, also, the principle of compulsory
arbitration, proved impossible of acceptance. Accordingly, from
that time onward the matters treated by the Conference dealt for
the most part with innocuous, though often praiseworthy, projects
for bringing the United States and its sister republics into
closer commercial, industrial, and intellectual relations.

The gathering itself, on the other hand, became to a large extent
a fiesta, a festive occasion for the display of social amenities.
Much as the Hispanic Americans missed their favorite topic of
politics, they found consolation in entertaining the
distinguished foreign visitors with the genial courtesy and
generous hospitality for which they are famous. As one of their
periodicals later expressed it, since a discussion of politics
was tabooed, it were better to devote the sessions of the
Conference to talking about music and lyric poetry! At all
events, as far as the outcome was concerned, their national
legislatures ratified comparatively few of the conventions.

Among the Hispanic nations of America only Mexico took part in
the First Conference at The Hague. Practically all of them were
represented at the second. The appearance of their delegates at
these august assemblages of the powers of earth was viewed for a
while with mixed feelings. The attitude of the Great Powers
towards them resembled that of parents of the old regime:
children at the international table should be "seen and not
heard." As a matter of fact, the Hispanic Americans were both
seen and heard--especially the latter! They were able to show the
Europeans that, even if they did happen to come from relatively
weak states, they possessed a skillful intelligence, a breadth of
knowledge, a capacity for expression, and a consciousness of
national character, which would not allow them simply to play
"Man Friday" to an international Crusoe. The president of the
second conference, indeed, confessed that they had been a
"revelation" to him.

Hence, as time went on, the progress and possibilities of the
republics of Hispanic America came to be appreciated more and
more by the world at large. Gradually people began to realize
that the countries south of the United States were not merely an
indistinguishable block on the map, to be referred to vaguely as
"Central and South America" or as "Latin America." The reading
public at least knew that these countries were quite different
from one another, both in achievements and in prospects.

Yet the fact remains that, despite their active part in these
American and European conferences, the Hispanic countries of the
New World did not receive the recognition which they felt was
their due. Their national associates in the European gatherings
were disinclined to admit that the possession of independence and
sovereignty entitled them to equal representation on
international council boards. To a greater or less degree,
therefore, they continued to stay in the borderland where no one
either affirmed or denied their individuality. To quote the
phrase of an Hispanic American, they stood "on the margin of
international life." How far they might pass beyond it into the
full privileges of recognition and association on equal terms,
would depend upon the readiness with which they could atone for
the errors or recover from the misfortunes of the past, and upon
their power to attain stability, prosperity, strength, and
responsibility.

Certain of the Hispanic republics, however, were not allowed to
remain alone on their side of "the margin of international life."
Though nothing so extreme as the earlier French intervention took
place, foreign nations were not at all averse to crossing over
the marginal line and teaching them what a failure to comply with
international obligations meant. The period from 1889 to 1907,
therefore, is characterized also by interference on the part of
European powers, and by interposition on the part of the United
States, in the affairs of countries in and around the Caribbean
Sea. Because of the action taken by the United States two more
republics--Cuba and Panama--came into being, thus increasing the
number of political offshoots from Spain in America to eighteen.
Another result of this interposition was the creation of what
were substantially American protectorates. Here the United States
did not deprive the countries concerned of their independence an
d sovereignty, but subjected them to a kind of guardianship or
tutelage, so far as it thought needful to insure stability,
solvency, health, and welfare in general. Foremost in the
northern group of Hispanic nations, Mexico, under the guidance of
Diaz, marched steadily onward. Peace, order, and law; an
increasing population; internal wealth and well-being; a
flourishing industry and commerce; suitable care for things
mental as well as material; the respect and confidence of
foreigners--these were blessings which the country had hitherto
never beheld. The Mexicans, once in anarchy and enmity created by
militarists and clericals, came to know one another in
friendship, and arrived at something like a national
consciousness.

In 1889 there was held the first conference on educational
problems which the republic had ever had. Three years later a
mining code was drawn up which made ownership inviolable on
payment of lawful dues, removed uncertainties of operation, and
stimulated the industry in a remarkable fashion. Far less
beneficial in the long run was a law enacted in 1894. Instead of
granting a legal title to lands held by prescriptive rights
through an occupation of many years, it made such property part
of the public domain, which might be acquired, like a mining
claim, by any one who could secure a grant of it from the
Government. Though hailed at the time as a piece of constructive
legislation, its unfortunate effect was to enable large
landowners who wished to increase their possessions to oust poor
cultivators of the soil from their humble holdings. On the other
hand, under the statesmanlike management of Jose Yves Limantour,
the Minister of Finance, the monetary situation at home and
abroad was strengthened beyond measure, and banking interests
were promoted accordingly. Further, an act abolishing the
alcabala, a vexatious internal revenue tax, gave a great stimulus
to freedom of commerce throughout the country. In order to insure
a continuance of the new regime, the constitution was altered in
three important respects. The amendment of 1890 restored the
original clause of 1857, which permitted indefinite reelection to
the presidency; that of 1896 established a presidential
succession in case of a vacancy, beginning with the Minister of
Foreign Affairs; and that of 1904 lengthened the term of the
chief magistrate from four years to six and created the office of
Vice President.

In Central America two republics, Guatemala and Costa Rica, set
an excellent example both because they were free from internal
commotions and because they refrained from interference in the
affairs of their neighbors. The contrast between these two quiet
little nations, under their lawyer Presidents, and the bellicose
but equally small Nicaragua, Honduras, and Salvador, under their
chieftains, military and juristic, was quite remarkable.
Nevertheless another attempt at confederation was made. In 1895
the ruler of Honduras, declaring that reunion was a "primordial
necessity," invited his fellow potentates of Nicaragua and
Salvador to unite in creating the "Greater Republic of Central
America" and asked Guatemala and Costa Rica to join. Delegates
actually appeared from all five republics, attended fiestas, gave
expression to pious wishes, and went home! Later still, in 1902,
the respective Presidents signed a "convention of peace and
obligatory arbitration" as a means of adjusting perpetual
disagreements about politics and boundaries; but nothing was done
to carry these ideas into effect.

The personage mainly responsible for these failures was Jose
Santos Zelaya, one of the most arrant military lordlets and
meddlers that Central America had produced in a long time. Since
1893 he had been dictator of Nicaragua, a country not only
entangled in continuous wrangles among its towns and factions,
but bowed under an enormous burden of debt created by excessive
emissions of paper money and by the contraction of more or less
scandalous foreign loans. Quite undisturbed by the financial
situation, Zelaya promptly silenced local bickerings and devoted
his energies to altering the constitution for his presidential
benefit and to making trouble for his neighbors. Nor did he
refrain from displays of arbitrary conduct that were sure to
provoke foreign intervention. Great Britain, for example, on two
occasions exacted reparation at the cannon's mouth for ill
treatment of its citizens.

Zelaya waxed wroth at the spectacle of Guatemala, once so active
in revolutionary arts but now quietly minding its own business.
In 1906, therefore, along with parties of Hondurans,
Salvadoreans, and disaffected Guatemalans, he began an invasion
of that country and continued operations with decreasing success
until, the United States and Mexico offering their mediation,
peace was signed aboard an American cruiser. Then, when Costa
Rica invited the other republics to discuss confederation within
its calm frontiers, Zelaya preferred his own particular
occupation to any such procedure. Accordingly, displeased with a
recent boundary decision, he started along with Salvador to fight
Honduras. Once more the United States and Mexico tendered their
good offices, and again a Central American conflict was closed
aboard an American warship. About the only real achievement of
Zelaya was the signing of a treaty by which Great Britain
recognized the complete sovereignty of Nicaragua over the
Mosquito Indians, whose buzzing for a larger amount of freedom
and more tribute had been disturbing unduly the "repose" of that
small nation!

To the eastward the new republic of Cuba was about to be born.
Here a promise of adequate representation in the Spanish Cortes
and of a local legislature had failed to satisfy the aspirations
of many of its inhabitants. The discontent was aggravated by lax
and corrupt methods of administration as well as by financial
difficulties. Swarms of Spanish officials enjoyed large salaries
without performing duties of equivalent value. Not a few of them
had come over to enrich themselves at public expense and under
conditions altogether scandalous. On Cuba, furthermore, was
saddled the debt incurred by the Ten Years' War, while the island
continued to be a lucrative market for Spanish goods without
obtaining from Spain a corresponding advantage for its own
products.

As the insistence upon a removal of these abuses and upon a grant
of genuine self-government became steadily more clamorous, three
political groups appeared. The Constitutional Unionists, or
"Austrianizers," as they were dubbed because of their avowed
loyalty to the royal house of Bourbon-Hapsburg, were made up of
the Spanish and conservative elements and represented the large
economic interests and the Church. The Liberals, or
"Autonomists," desired such reforms in the administration as
would assure the exercise of self-government and yet preserve the
bond with the mother country. On the other hand, the Radicals, or
"Nationalists"--the party of "Cuba Free"--would be satisfied with
nothing short of absolute independence. All these differences of
opinion were sharpened by the activities of a sensational press.

>From about 1890 onward the movement toward independence gathered
tremendous strength, especially when the Cubans found popular
sentiment in the United States so favorable to it. Excitement
rose still higher when the Spanish Government proposed to bestow
a larger measure of autonomy. When, however, the Cortes decided
upon less liberal arrangements, the Autonomists declared that
they had been deceived, and the Nationalists denounced the utter
unreliability of Spanish promises. Even if the concessions had
been generous, the result probably would have been the same, for
by this time the plot to set Cuba free had become so widespread,
both in the island itself and among the refugees in the United
States, that the inevitable struggle could not have been
deferred.

In 1895 the revolution broke out. The whites, headed by Maximo
Gomez, and the negroes and mulattoes by their chieftain, Antonio
Maceo, both of whom had done valiant service in the earlier war,
started upon a campaign of deliberate terrorism. This time they
were resolved to win at any cost. Spurning every offer of
conciliation, they burned, ravaged, and laid waste, spread
desolation along their pathway, and reduced thousands to abject
poverty and want.

Then the Spanish Government came to the conclusion that nothing
but the most rigorous sort of reprisals would check the excesses
of the rebels. In 1896 it commissioned Valeriano Weyler, an
officer who personified ferocity, to put down the rebellion. If
the insurgents had fancied that the conciliatory spirit hitherto
displayed by the Spaniards was due to irresolution or weakness,
they found that these were not the qualities of their new
opponent. Weyler, instead of trying to suppress the rebellion by
hurrying detachments of troops first to one spot and then to
another in pursuit of enemies accustomed to guerrilla tactics,
determined to stamp it out province by province. To this end he
planted his army firmly in one particular area, prohibited the
planting or harvesting of crops there, and ordered the
inhabitants to assemble in camps which they were not permitted to
leave on any pretext whatever. This was his policy of
"reconcentration." Deficient food supply, lack of sanitary
precautions, and absence of moral safeguards made conditions of
life in these camps appalling. Death was a welcome relief.
Reconcentration, combined with executions and deportations, could
have but one result--the "pacification" of Cuba by converting it
into a desert.

Not in the United States alone but in Spain itself the story of
these drastic measures kindled popular indignation to such an
extent that, in 1897, the Government was forced to recall the
ferocious Weyler and to send over a new Governor and Captain
General, with instructions to abandon the worst features of his
predecessor's policy and to establish a complete system of
autonomy in both Cuba and Porto Rico. Feeling assured, however,
that an ally was at hand who would soon make their independence
certain, the Cuban patriots flatly rejected these overtures. In
their expectations they were not mistaken. By its armed
intervention, in the following year the United States acquired
Porto Rico for itself and compelled Spain to withdraw from Cuba.*

* See "The Path of Empire", by Carl Russell Fish (in "The
Chronicles of America").

The island then became a republic, subject only to such
limitations on its freedom of action as its big guardian might
see fit to impose. Not only was Cuba placed under American rule
from 1899 to 1902, but it had to insert in the Constitution of
1901 certain clauses that could not fail to be galling to Cuban
pride. Among them two were of special significance. One imposed
limitations on the financial powers of the Government of the new
nation, and the other authorized the United States, at its
discretion, to intervene in Cuban affairs for the purpose of
maintaining public order. The Cubans, it would seem, had
exchanged a dependence on Spain for a restricted independence
measured by the will of a country infinitely stronger.

Cuba began its life as a republic in 1902, under a government for
which a form both unitary and federal had been provided. Tomas
Estrada Palma, the first President and long the head of the Cuban
junta in the United States, showed himself disposed from the
outset to continue the beneficial reforms in administration which
had been introduced under American rule. Prudent and conciliatory
in temperament, he tried to dispel as best he could the bitter
recollections of the war and to repair its ravages. In this
policy he was upheld by the conservative class, or Moderates.
Their opponents, the Liberals, dominated by men of radical
tendencies, were eager to assert the right, to which they thought
Cuba entitled as an independent sovereign nation, to make
possible mistakes and correct them without having the United
States forever holding the ferule of the schoolmaster over it.
They were well aware, however, that they were not at liberty to
have their country pass through the tempestuous experience which
had been the lot of so many Hispanic republics. They could vent a
natural anger and disappointment, nevertheless, on the President
and his supporters. Rather than continue to be governed by Cubans
not to their liking, they were willing to bring about a renewal
of American rule. In this respect the wishes of the Radicals were
soon gratified. Hardly had Estrada Palma, in 1906, assumed office
for a second time, when parties of malcontents, declaring that he
had secured his reelection by fraudulent means, rose up in arms
and demanded that he annul the vote and hold a fair election. The
President accepted the challenge and waged a futile conflict, and
again the United States intervened. Upon the resignation of
Estrada Palma, an American Governor was again installed, and Cuba
was told in unmistakable fashion that the next intervention might
be permanent.

Less drastic but quite as effectual a method of assuring order
and regularity in administration was the action taken by the
United States in another Caribbean island. A little country like
the Dominican Republic, in which few Presidents managed to retain
their offices for terms fixed by changeable constitutions, could
not resist the temptation to rid itself of a ruler who had held
power for nearly a quarter of a century. After he had been
disposed of by assassination in 1899, the government of his
successor undertook to repudiate a depreciated paper currency by
ordering the customs duties to be paid in specie; and it also
tried to prevent the consul of an aggrieved foreign nation from
attaching certain revenues as security for the payment of the
arrears of an indemnity. Thereupon, in 1905, the President of the
United States entered into an arrangement with the Dominican
Government whereby, in return for a pledge from the former
country to guarantee the territorial integrity of the republic
and an agreement to adjust all of its external obligations of a
pecuniary sort, American officials were to take charge of the
custom house send apportion the receipts from that source in such
a manner as to satisfy domestic needs and pay foreign creditors.*

* See "The Path of Empire", by Carl Russell Fish (in "The
Chronicles of America").



CHAPTER IX. THE REPUBLICS OF SOUTH AMERICA

Even so huge and conservative a country as Brazil could not start
out upon the pathway of republican freedom without some unrest;
but the political experience gained under a regime of limited
monarchy had a steadying effect. Besides, the Revolution of 1889
had been effected by a combination of army officers and civilian
enthusiasts who knew that the provinces were ready for a radical
change in the form of government, but who were wise enough to
make haste slowly. If a motto could mean anything, the adoption
of the positivist device, "Order and Progress," displayed on the
national flag seemed a happy augury.

The constitution promulgated in 1891 set up a federal union
broadly similar to that of the United States, except that the
powers of the general Government were somewhat more restricted.
Qualifications for the suffrage were directly fixed in the
fundamental law itself, but the educational tests imposed
excluded the great bulk of the population from the right to vote.
In the constitution, also, Church and State were declared
absolutely separate, and civil marriage was prescribed.

Well adapted as the constitution was to the particular needs of
Brazil, the Government erected under it had to contend awhile
with political disturbances. Though conflicts occurred between
the president and the Congress, between the federal authority and
the States, and between the civil administration and naval and
military officials, none were so constant, so prolonged, or so
disastrous as in the Spanish American republics. Even when
elected by the connivance of government officials, the chief
magistrate governed in accordance with republican forms.
Presidential power, in fact, was restrained both by the huge size
of the country and by the spirit of local autonomy upheld by the
States.

Ever since the war with Paraguay the financial credit of Brazil
had been impaired. The chronic deficit in the treasury had been
further increased by a serious lowering in the rate of exchange,
which was due to an excessive issue of paper money. In order to
save the nation from bankruptcy Manoel Ferraz de Campos Salles, a
distinguished jurist, was commissioned to effect an adjustment
with the British creditors. As a result of his negotiations a
"funding loan" was obtained, in return for which an equivalent
amount in paper money was to be turned over for cancellation at a
fixed rate of exchange. Under this arrangement depreciation
ceased for awhile and the financial outlook became brighter.

The election of Campos Salles to the presidency in 1898, as a
reward for his success, was accompanied by the rise of definite
political parties. Among them the Radicals or Progressists
favored a policy of centralization under military auspices and
exhibited certain antiforeign tendencies. The Moderates or
Republicans, on the contrary, with Campos Salles as their
candidate, declared for the existing constitution and advocated a
gradual adoption of such reforms as reason and time might
suggest. When the latter party won the election, confidence in
the stability of Brazil returned.

As if Uruguay had not already suffered enough from internal
discords, two more serious conflicts demonstrated once again that
this little country, in which political power had been held
substantially by one party alone since 1865, could not hope for
permanent peace until either the excluded and apparently
irreconcilable party had been finally and utterly crushed, or,
far better still, until the two factions could manage to agree
upon some satisfactory arrangement for rotation in office. The
struggle of 1897 ended in the assassination of the president and
in a division of the republic into two practically separate
areas, one ruled by the Colorados at Montevideo, the other by the
Blancos. A renewal of civil war in 1904 seemed altogether
preferable to an indefinite continuance of this dualism in
government, even at the risk of friction with Argentina, which
was charged with not having observed strict neutrality. This
second struggle came to a close with the death of the insurgent
leader; but it cost the lives of thousands and did irreparable
damage to the commerce and industry of the country.

Uruguay then enjoyed a respite from party upheavals until 1910,
when Jose Batlle, the able, resolute, and radical-minded head of
the Colorados, announced that he would be a candidate for the
presidency. As he had held the office before and had never ceased
to wield a strong personal influence over the administration of
his successor, the Blancos decided that now was the time to
attempt once more to oust their opponents from the control which
they had monopolized for half a century. Accusing the Government
of an unconstitutional centralization of power in the executive,
of preventing free elections, and of crippling the pastoral
industries of the country, they started a revolt, which ran a
brief course. Batlle proved himself equal to the situation and
quickly suppressed the insurrection. Though he did make a wide
use of his authority, the President refrained from indulging in
political persecution and allowed the press all the liberty it
desired in so far as was consistent with the law. It was under
his direction that Uruguay entered upon a remarkable series of
experiments in the nationalization of business enterprises.
Further, more or less at the suggestion of Battle, a new
constitution was ratified by popular vote in 1917. It provided
for a division of the executive power between the President and a
National Council of Administration, forbade the election of
administrative and military officials to the Congress, granted to
that body a considerable increase of power, and enlarged the
facilities for local self-government. In addition, it established
the principle of minority representation and of secrecy of the
ballot, permitted the Congress to extend the right of suffrage to
women, and dissolved the union between Church and State. If the
terms of the new instrument are faithfully observed, the old
struggle between Blancos and Colorados will have been brought
definitely to a close.

Paraguay lapsed after 1898 into the earlier sins of Spanish
America. Upon a comparatively placid presidential regime followed
a series of barrack uprisings or attacks by Congress on the
executive. The constitution became a farce. No longer, to be
sure, an abode of Arcadian seclusion as in colonial times, or a
sort of territorial cobweb from the center of which a spiderlike
Francia hung motionless or darted upon his hapless prey, or even
a battle ground on which fanatical warriors might fight and die
at the behest of a savage Lopez, Paraguay now took on the aspect
of an arena in which petty political gamecocks might try out
their spurs. Happily, the opposing parties spent their energies
in high words and vehement gestures rather than in blows and
bloodshed. The credit of the country sank lower and lower until
its paper money stood at a discount of several hundred per cent
compared with gold.

European bankers had begun to view the financial future of
Argentina also with great alarm. In 1890 the mad careering of
private speculation and public expenditure along the roseate
pathway of limitless credit reached a veritable "crisis of
progress." A frightful panic ensued. Paper money fell to less
than a quarter of its former value in gold. Many a firm became
bankrupt, and many a fortune shriveled. As is usual in such
cases, the Government had to shoulder the blame. A four-day
revolution broke out in Buenos Aires, and the President became
the scapegoat; but the panic went on, nevertheless, until gold
stood at nearly five to one. Most of the banks suspended payment;
the national debt underwent a huge increase; and immigration
practically ceased.

By 1895, however, the country had more or less resumed its normal
condition. A new census showed that the population had risen to
four million, about a sixth of whom resided in the capital. The
importance which agriculture had attained was attested by the
establishment of a separate ministry in the presidential cabinet.
Industry, too, made such rapid strides at this time that
organized labor began to take a hand in politics. The short-lived
"revolution" of 1905, for example, was not primarily the work of
politicians but of strikers organized into a workingmen's
federation. For three months civil guarantees were suspended, and
by a so-called "law of residence," enacted some years before and
now put into effect, the Government was authorized to expel
summarily any foreigner guilty of fomenting strikes or of
disturbing public order in any other fashion.

Political agitation soon assumed a new form. Since the
Autonomist-National party had been in control for thirty years or
more, it seemed to the Civic-Nationalists, now known as
Republicans, to the Autonomists proper, and to various other
factions, that they ought to do something to break the hold of
that powerful organization. Accordingly in 1906 the President,
supported by a coalition of these factions, started what was
termed an "upward-downward revolution"--in other words, a series
of interventions by which local governors and members of
legislatures suspected of Autonomist-National leanings were to be
replaced by individuals who enjoyed the confidence of the
Administration. Pretexts for such action were not hard to find
under the terms of the constitution; but their political
interests suffered so much in the effort that the promoters had
to abandon it.

Owing to persistent obstruction on the part of Congress, which
took the form of a refusal either to sanction his appointments or
to approve the budget, the President suspended the sessions of
that body in 1908 and decreed a continuance of the estimates for
the preceding year. The antagonism between the chief executive
and the legislature became so violent that, if his opponents had
not been split up into factions, civil war might have ensued in
Argentina.

To remedy a situation made worse by the absence-- usual in most
of the Hispanic republics--of a secret ballot and by the refusal
of political malcontents to take part in elections, voting was
made both obligatory and secret in 1911, and the principle of
minority representation was introduced. Legislation of this sort
was designed to check bribery and intimidation and to enable the
radical-minded to do their duty at the polls. Its effect was
shown five years later, when the secret ballot was used
substantially for the first time. The radicals won both the
presidency and a majority in the Congress.

One of the secrets of the prosperity of Argentina, as of Brazil,
in recent years has been its abstention from warlike ventures
beyond its borders and its endeavor to adjust boundary conflicts
by arbitration. Even when its attitude toward its huge neighbor
had become embittered in consequence of a boundary decision
rendered by the President of the United States in 1895, it abated
none of its enthusiasm for the principle of a peaceful settlement
of international disputes. Four years later, in a treaty with
Uruguay, the so-called "Argentine Formula" appeared. To quote its
language: "The contracting parties agree to submit to arbitration
all questions of any nature which may arise between them,
provided they do not affect provisions of the constitution of
either state, and cannot be adjusted by direct negotiation." This
Formula was soon put to the test in a serious dispute with Chile.

In the Treaty of 1881, in partitioning Patagonia, the crest of
the Andes had been assumed to be the true continental watershed
between the Atlantic and the Pacific and hence was made the
boundary line between Argentina and Chile. The entire Atlantic
coast was to belong to Argentina, the Pacific coast to Chile; the
island of Tierra del Fuego was to be divided between them. At the
same time the Strait of Magellan was declared a neutral waterway,
open to the ships of all nations. Ere long, however, it was
ascertained that the crest of the Andes did not actually coincide
with the continental divide. Thereupon Argentina insisted that
the boundary line should be made to run along the crest, while
Chile demanded that it be traced along the watershed. Since the
mountainous area concerned was of little value, the question at
bottom was simply one of power and prestige between rival states.

As the dispute waxed warmer, a noisy press and populace clamored
for war. The Governments of the two nations spent large sums in
increasing their armaments; and Argentina, in imitation of its
western neighbor, made military service compulsory. But, as the
conviction gradually spread that a struggle would leave the
victor as prostrate as the vanquished, wiser counsels prevailed.
In 1899, accordingly, the matter was referred to the King of
Great Britain for decision. Though the award was a compromise,
Chile was the actual gainer in territory.

By their treaties of 1902 both republics declared their intention
to uphold the principle of arbitration and to refrain from
interfering in each other's affairs along their respective
coasts. They also agreed upon a limitation of armaments--the sole
example on record of a realization of the purpose of the First
Hague Conference. To commemorate still further their
international accord, in 1904 they erected on the summit of the
Uspallata Pass, over which San Martin had crossed with his army
of liberation in 1817, a bronze statue of Christ the Redeemer.
There, amid the snow-capped peaks of the giant Andes, one may
read inscribed upon the pedestal: "Sooner shall these mountains
crumble to dust than Argentinos and Chileans break the peace
which at the feet of Christ the Redeemer they have sworn to
maintain!" Nor has the peace been broken.

Though hostilities with Argentina had thus been averted, Chile
had experienced within its own frontiers the most serious
revolution it had known in sixty years. The struggle was not one
of partisan chieftains or political groups but a genuine contest
to determine which of two theories of government should
prevail--the presidential or the parliamentary, a presidential
autocracy with the spread of real democracy or a congressional
oligarchy based on the existing order. The sincerity and public
spirit of both contestants helped to lend dignity to the
conflict.

Jose Manuel Balmaceda, a man of marked ability, who became
President in 1886, had devoted much of his political life to
urging an enlargement of the executive power, a greater freedom
to municipalities in the management of their local affairs, and a
broadening of the suffrage. He had even advocated a separation of
Church and State. Most of these proposals so conservative a land
as Chile was not prepared to accept. Though civil marriage was
authorized and ecclesiastical influence was lessened in other
respects, the Church stood firm. During his administration
Balmaceda introduced many reforms, both material and educational.
He gave a great impetus to the construction of public works,
enhanced the national credit by a favorable conversion of the
public debt, fostered immigration, and devoted especial attention
to the establishment of secondary schools. Excellent as the
administration of Balmaceda had been in other respects, he
nevertheless failed to combine the liberal factions into a party
willing to support the plans of reform which he had steadily
favored. The parliamentary system made Cabinets altogether
unstable, as political groups in the lower house of the Congress
alternately cohered and fell apart. This defect, Balmaceda
thought, should be corrected by making the members of his
official family independent of the legislative branch. The
Council of State, a somewhat anomalous body placed between the
President and Cabinet on the one side and the Congress on the
other, was an additional obstruction to a smooth-running
administration. For it he would substitute a tribunal charged
with the duty of resolving conflicts between the two chief
branches of government. Balmaceda believed, also, that greater
liberty should be given to the press and that existing taxes
should be altered as rarely as possible. On its side, the
Congress felt that the President was trying to establish a
dictatorship and to replace the unitary system by a federal
union, the probable weakness of which would enable him to retain
his power more securely.

Toward the close of his term in January, 1891, when the Liberals
declined to support his candidate for the presidency, Balmaceda,
furious at the opposition which he had encountered, took matters
into his own hands. Since the Congress refused to pass the
appropriation bills, he declared that body dissolved and
proceeded to levy the taxes by decree. To this arbitrary and
altogether unconstitutional performance the Congress retorted by
declaring the President deposed. Civil war broke out forthwith,
and a strange spectacle presented itself. The two chief cities,
Santiago and Valparaiso, and most of the army backed Balmaceda,
whereas the country districts, especially in the north, and
practically all the navy upheld the Congress.

These were, indeed, dark days for Chile. During a struggle of
about eight months the nation suffered more than it had done in
years of warfare with Peru and Bolivia. Though the bulk of the
army stood by Balmaceda, the Congress was able to raise and
organize a much stronger fighting force under a Prussian
drillmaster. The tide of battle turned; Santiago and Valparaiso
capitulated; and the presidential cause was lost. Balmaceda, who
had taken refuge in the Argentina legation, committed suicide.
But the Balmacedists, who were included in a general amnesty,
still maintained themselves as a party to advocate in a peaceful
fashion the principles of their fallen leader.

Chile had its reputation for stability well tested in 1910 when
the executive changed four times without the slightest political
disturbance. According to the constitution, the officer who takes
the place of the President in case of the latter's death or
disability, though vested with full authority, has the title of
Vice President only. It so happened that after the death of the
President two members of the Cabinet in succession held the vice
presidency, and they were followed by the chief magistrate, who
was duly elected and installed at the close of the year. In 1915,
for the first time since their leader had committed suicide, one
of the followers of Balmaceda was chosen President--by a strange
coalition of Liberal-Democrats, or Balmacedists, Conservatives,
and Nationalists, over the candidate of the Radicals, Liberals,
and Democrats. The maintenance of the parliamentary system,
however, continued to produce frequent alterations in the
personnel of the Cabinet.

In its foreign relations, apart from the adjustment reached with
Argentina, Chile managed to settle the difficulties with Bolivia
arising out of the War of the Pacific. By the terms of treaties
concluded in 1895 and 1905, the region tentatively transferred by
the armistice of 1884 was ceded outright to Chile in return for a
seaport and a narrow right of way to it through the former
Peruvian province of Tarapaca. With Peru, Chile was not so
fortunate. Though the tension over the ultimate disposal of the
Tacna and Arica question was somewhat reduced, it was far from
being removed. Chile absolutely refused to submit the matter to
arbitration, on the ground that such a procedure could not
properly be applied to a question arising out of a war that had
taken place so many years before. Chile did not wish to give the
region up, lest by so doing it might expose Tarapaca to a
possible attack from Peru. The investment of large amounts of
foreign capital in the exploitation of the deposits of nitrate of
soda had made that province economically very valuable, and the
export tax levied on the product was the chief source of the
national revenue. These were all potent reasons why Chile wanted
to keep its hold on Tacna and Arica. Besides, possession was nine
points in the law!

On the other hand, the original plan of having the question
decided by a vote of the inhabitants of the provinces concerned
was not carried into effect, partly because both claimants
cherished a conviction that whichever lost the election would
deny its validity, and partly because they could not agree upon
the precise method of holding it. Chile suggested that the
international commission which was selected to take charge of the
plebiscite, and which was composed of a Chilean, a Peruvian, and
a neutral, should be presided over by the Chilean member as
representative of the country actually in possession, whereas
Peru insisted that the neutral should act as chairman. Chile
proposed also that Chileans, Peruvians, and foreigners resident
in the area six months before the date of the elections should
vote, provided that they had the right to do so under the terms
of the constitutions of both states. Peru, on its part, objected
to the length of residence, and wished to limit carefully the
number of Chilean voters, to exclude foreigners altogether from
the election, and to disregard qualifications for the suffrage
which required an ability to read and write. Both countries,
moreover, appeared to have a lurking suspicion that in any event
the other would try to secure a majority at the polls by
supplying a requisite number of voters drawn from their
respective citizenry who were not ordinarily resident in Tacna
and Arica! Unable to overcome the deadlock, Chile and Peru agreed
in 1913 to postpone the settlement for twenty years longer. At
the expiration of this period, when Chile would have held the
provinces for half a century, the question should be finally
adjusted on bases mutually satisfactory. Officially amicable
relations were then restored.

While the political situation in Bolivia remained stable, so much
could not be said of that in Peru and Ecuador. If the troubles in
the former were more or less military, a persistence of the
conflict between clericals and radicals characterized the
commotions in the latter, because of certain liberal provisions
in the Constitution of 1907. Peru, on the other hand, in 1915
guaranteed its people the enjoyment of religious liberty.

Next to the Tacna and Arica question, the dubious boundaries of
Ecuador constituted the most serious international problem in
South America. The so-called Oriente region, lying east of the
Andes and claimed by Peru, Brazil, and Colombia, appeared
differently on different maps, according as one claimant nation
or another set forth its own case. Had all three been satisfied,
nothing would have been left of Ecuador but the strip between the
Andes and the Pacific coast, including the cities of Quito and
Guayaquil. The Ecuadorians, therefore, were bitterly sensitive on
the subject.

Protracted negotiations over the boundaries became alike tedious
and listless. But the moment that the respective diplomats had
agreed upon some knotty point, the Congress of one litigant or
another was almost sure to reject the decision and start the
controversy all over again. Even reference of the matter to the
arbitral judgment of European monarchs produced, so far as
Ecuador and Peru were concerned, riotous attacks upon the
Peruvian legation and consulates, charges and countercharges of
invasion of each other's territory, and the suspension of
diplomatic relations. Though the United States, Argentina, and
Brazil had interposed to ward off an armed conflict between the
two republics and, in 1911, had urged that the dispute be
submitted to the Hague Tribunal, nothing would induce Ecuador to
comply.

Colombia was even more unfortunate than its southern neighbor,
for in addition to political convulsions it suffered financial
disaster and an actual deprivation of territory. Struggles among
factions, official influence at the elections, dictatorships, and
fighting between the departments and the national Government
plunged the country, in 1899, into the worst civil war it had
known for many a day. Paper money, issued in unlimited amounts
and given a forced circulation, made the distress still more
acute. Then came the hardest blow of all. Since 1830 Panama, as
province or state, had tried many times to secede from Colombia.
In 1903 the opportunity it sought became altogether favorable.
The parent nation, just beginning to recover from the disasters
of civil strife, would probably be unable to prevent a new
attempt at withdrawal. The people of Panama, of course, knew how
eager the United States was to acquire the region of the proposed
Canal Zone, since it had failed to win it by negotiation with
Colombia. Accordingly, if they were to start a "revolution," they
had reason to believe that it would not lack support--or at
least, connivance--from that quarter.

On the 3d of November the projected "revolution" occurred, on
schedule time, and the United States recognized the independence
of the "Republic of Panama" three days later! In return for a
guarantee of independence, however, the United States stipulated,
in the convention concluded on the 18th of November, that,
besides authority to enforce sanitary regulations in the Canal
Zone, it should also have the right of intervention to maintain
order in the republic itself. More than once, indeed, after
Panama adopted its constitution in 1904, elections threatened to
become tumultuous; whereupon the United States saw to it that
they passed off quietly.

Having no wish to flout their huge neighbor to the northward, the
Hispanic nations at large hastened to acknowledge the
independence of the new republic, despite the indignation that
prevailed in press and public over what was regarded as an act of
despoilment. In view of the resentful attitude of Colombia and
mindful also of the opinion of many Americans that a gross
injustice had been committed, the United States eventually
offered terms of settlement. It agreed to express regret for the
ill feeling between the two countries which had arisen out of the
Panama incident, provided that such expression were made mutual;
and, as a species of indemnity, it agreed to pay for canal rights
to be acquired in Colombian territory and for the lease of
certain islands as naval stations. But neither the terms nor the
amount of the compensation proved acceptable. Instead, Colombia
urged that the whole matter be referred to the judgment of the
tribunal at The Hague.

Alluding to the use made of the liberties won in the struggle for
emancipation from Spain by the native land of Miranda, Bolivar,
and Sucre, on the part of the country which had been in the
vanguard of the fight for freedom from a foreign yoke, a writer
of Venezuela once declared that it had not elected legally a
single President; had not put democratic ideas or institutions
into practice; had lived wholly under dictatorships; had
neglected public instruction; and had set up a large number of
oppressive commercial monopolies, including the navigation of
rivers, the coastwise trade, the pearl fisheries, and the sale of
tobacco, salt, sugar, liquor, matches, explosives, butter,
grease, cement, shoes, meat, and flour. Exaggerated as the
indictment is and applicable also, though in less degree, to some
of the other backward countries of Hispanic America, it contains
unfortunately a large measure of truth. Indeed, so far as
Venezuela itself is concerned, this critic might have added that
every time a "restorer," "regenerator," or "liberator" succumbed
there, the old craze for federalism again broke out and menaced
the nation with piecemeal destruction. Obedient, furthermore, to
the whims of a presidential despot, Venezuela perpetrated more
outrages on foreigners and created more international friction
after 1899 than any other land in Spanish America had ever done.

While the formidable Guzman Blanco was still alive, the various
Presidents acted cautiously. No sooner had he passed away than
disorder broke out afresh. Since a new dictator thought he needed
a longer term of office and divers other administrative
advantages, a constitution incorporating them was framed and
published in the due and customary manner. This had hardly gone
into operation when, in 1895, a contest arose with Great Britain
about the boundaries between Venezuela and British Guiana. Under
pressure from the United States, however, the matter was referred
to arbitration, and Venezuela came out substantially the loser.

In 1899 there appeared on the scene a personage compared with
whom Zelaya was the merest novice in the art of making trouble.
This was Cipriano Castro, the greatest international nuisance of
the early twentieth century. A rude, arrogant, fearless,
energetic, capricious mountaineer and cattleman, he regarded
foreigners no less than his own countryfolk, it would seem, as
objects for his particular scorn, displeasure, exploitation, or
amusement, as the case might be. He was greatly angered by the
way in which foreigners in dispute with local officials avoided a
resort to Venezuelan courts and--still worse--rejected their
decisions and appealed instead to their diplomatic
representatives for protection. He declared such a procedure to
be an affront to the national dignity. Yet foreigners were
usually correct in arming that judges appointed by an arbitrary
President were little more than figureheads, incapable of
dispensing justice, even were they so inclined.

Jealous not only of his personal prestige but of what he
imagined, or pretended to imagine, were the rights of a small
nation, Castro tried throughout to portray the situation in such
a light as to induce the other Hispanic republics also to view
foreign interference as a dire peril to their own independence
and sovereignty; and he further endeavored to involve the United
States in a struggle with European powers as a means possibly of
testing the efficacy of the Monroe Doctrine or of laying bare
before the world the evil nature of American imperialistic
designs.

By the year 1901, in which Venezuela adopted another
constitution, the revolutionary disturbances had materially
diminished the revenues from the customs. Furthermore Castro's
regulations exacting military service of all males between
fourteen and sixty years of age had filled the prisons to
overflowing. Many foreigners who had suffered in consequence
resorted to measures of self-defense--among them representatives
of certain American and British asphalt companies which were
working concessions granted by Castro's predecessors. Though
familiar with what commonly happens to those who handle pitch,
they had not scrupled to aid some of Castro's enemies. Castro
forthwith imposed on them enormous fines which amounted
practically to a confiscation of their rights.

While the United States and Great Britain were expostulating over
this behavior of the despot, France broke off diplomatic
relations with Venezuela because of Castro's refusal either to
pay or to submit to arbitration certain claims which had
originated in previous revolutions. Germany, aggrieved in similar
fashion, contemplated a seizure of the customs until its demands
for redress were satisfied. And then came Italy with like causes
of complaint. As if these complications were not sufficient,
Venezuela came to blows with Colombia.

As the foreign pressure on Castro steadily increased, Luis Maria
Drago, the Argentine Minister of Foreign Affairs, formulated in
1902 the doctrine with which his name has been associated. It
stated in substance that force should never be employed between
nations for the collection of contractual debts. Encouraged by
this apparent token of support from a sister republic, Castro
defied his array of foreign adversaries more vigorously than
ever, declaring that he might find it needful to invade the
United States, by way of New Orleans, to teach it the lesson it
deserved! But when he attempted, in the following year, to close
the ports of Venezuela as a means of bringing his native
antagonists to terms, Great Britain, Germany, and Italy seized
his warships, blockaded the coast, and bombarded some of his
forts. Thereupon the United States interposed with a suggestion
that the dispute be laid before the Hague Tribunal. Although
Castro yielded, he did not fail to have a clause inserted in a
new "constitution" requiring foreigners who might wish to enter
the republic to show certificates of good character from the
Governments of their respective countries.

These incidents gave much food for thought to Castro as well as
to his soberer compatriots. The European powers had displayed an
apparent willingness to have the United States, if it chose to do
so, assume the role of a New World policeman and financial
guarantor. Were it to assume these duties, backward republics in
the Caribbean and its vicinity were likely to have their affairs,
internal as well as external, supervised by the big nation in
order to ward off European intervention. At this moment, indeed,
the United States was intervening in Panama. The prospect aroused
in many Hispanic countries the fear of a "Yankee peril" greater
even than that emanating from Europe. Instead of being a kindly
and disinterested protector of small neighbors, the "Colossus of
the North" appeared rather to resemble a political and commercial
ogre bent upon swallowing them to satisfy "manifest destiny."

Having succeeded in putting around his head an aureole of local
popularity, Castro in 1905 picked a new set of partially
justified quarrels with the United States, Great Britain, France,
Italy, Colombia, and even with the Netherlands, arising out of
the depredations of revolutionists; but an armed menace from the
United States induced him to desist from his plans. He contented
himself accordingly with issuing a decree of amnesty for all
political offenders except the leaders. When "reelected," he
carried his magnanimity so far as to resign awhile in favor of
the Vice President, stating that, if his retirement were to bring
peace and concord, he would make it permanent. But as he saw to
it that his temporary withdrawal should not have this happy
result, he came back again to his firmer position a few months
later.

Venting his wrath upon the Netherlands because its minister had
reported to his Government an outbreak of cholera at La Guaira,
the chief seaport of Venezuela, the dictator laid an embargo on
Dutch commerce, seized its ships, and denounced the Dutch for
their alleged failure to check filibustering from their islands
off the coast. When the minister protested, Castro expelled him.
Thereupon the Netherlands instituted a blockade of the Venezuelan
ports. What might have happened if Castro had remained much
longer in charge, may be guessed. Toward the close of 1908,
however, he departed for Europe to undergo a course of medical
treatment. Hardly had he left Venezuelan shores when Juan Vicente
Gomez, the able, astute, and vigorous Vice President, managed to
secure his own election to the presidency and an immediate
recognition from foreign states. Under his direction all of the
international tangles of Venezuela were straightened out.

In 1914 the country adopted its eleventh constitution and thereby
lengthened the presidential term to seven years, shortened that
of members of the lower house of the Congress to four, determined
definitely the number of States in the union, altered the
apportionment of their congressional representation, and enlarged
the powers of the federal Government--or, rather, those of its
executive branch! In 1914 Gomez resigned office in favor of the
Vice President, and secured an appointment instead as commander
in chief of the army. This procedure was promptly denounced as a
trick to evade the constitutional prohibition of two consecutive
terms. A year later he was unanimously elected President, though
he never formally took the oath of office.

Whatever may be thought of the political ways and means of this
new Guzmin Blanco to maintain himself as a power behind or on the
presidential throne, Gomez gave Venezuela an administration of a
sort very different from that of his immediate predecessor. He
suppressed various government monopolies, removed other obstacles
to the material advancement of the country, and reduced the
national debt. He did much also to improve the sanitary
conditions at La Guaira, and he promoted education, especially
the teaching of foreign languages.

Gomez nevertheless had to keep a watchful eye on the partisans of
Castro, who broke out in revolt whenever they had an opportunity.
The United States, Great Britain, France, the Netherlands,
Denmark, Cuba, and Colombia eyed the movements of the ex-dictator
nervously, as European powers long ago were wont to do in the
case of a certain Man of Destiny, and barred him out of both
their possessions and Venezuela itself. International patience,
never Job-like, had been too sorely vexed to permit his return.
Nevertheless, after the manner of the ancient persecutor of the
Biblical martyr, Castro did not refrain from going to and fro in
the earth. In fact he still "walketh about" seeking to recover
his hold upon Venezuela!



CHAPTER X. MEXICO IN REVOLUTION

When, in 1910, like several of its sister republics, Mexico
celebrated the centennial anniversary of its independence, the
era of peace and progress inaugurated by Porfirio Diaz seemed
likely to last indefinitely, for he was entering upon his eighth
term as President. Brilliant as his career had been, however, and
greatly as Mexico had prospered under his rigid rule, a sullen
discontent had been brewing. The country that had had but one
continuous President in twenty-six years was destined to have
some fourteen chief magistrates in less than a quarter of that
time, and to surpass all its previous records for rapidity in
presidential succession, by having one executive who is said to
have held office for precisely fifty-six minutes!

It has often been asserted that the reason for the downfall of
Diaz and the lapse of Mexico into the unhappy conditions of a
half century earlier was that he had grown too old to keep a firm
grip on the situation. It has also been declared that his
insistence upon reelection and upon the elevation of his own
personal candidate to the vice presidency, as a successor in case
of his retirement, occasioned his overthrow. The truth of the
matter is that these circumstances were only incidental to his
downfall; the real causes of revolution lay deeprooted in the
history of these twenty-six years. The most significant feature
of the revolt was its civilian character. A widespread public
opinion had been created; a national consciousness had been
awakened which was intolerant of abuses and determined upon their
removal at any cost; and this public opinion and national
consciousness were products of general education, which had
brought to the fore a number of intelligent men eager to
participate in public affairs and yet barred out because of their
unwillingness to support the existing regime.

Some one has remarked, and rightly, that Diaz in his zeal for the
material advancement of Mexico, mistook the tangible wealth of
the country for its welfare. Desirable and even necessary as that
material progress was, it produced only a one-sided prosperity.
Diaz was singularly deaf to the just complaints of the people of
the laboring classes, who, as manufacturing and other industrial
enterprises developed, were resolved to better their conditions.
In the country at large the discontent was still stronger.
Throughout many of the rural districts general advancement had
been retarded because of the holding of huge areas of fertile
land by a comparatively few rich families, who did little to
improve it and were content with small returns from the labor of
throngs of unskilled native cultivators. Wretchedly paid and
housed, and toiling long hours, the workers lived like the serfs
of medieval days or as their own ancestors did in colonial times.
Ignorant, poverty-stricken, liable at any moment to be
dispossessed of the tiny patch of ground on which they raised a
few hills of corn or beans, most of them were naturally a simple,
peaceful folk who, in spite of their misfortunes, might have gone
on indefinitely with their drudgery in a hopeless apathetic
fashion, unless their latent savage instincts happened to be
aroused by drink and the prospect of plunder. On the other hand,
the intelligent among them, knowing that in some of the northern
States of the republic wages were higher and treatment fairer,
felt a sense of wrong which, like that of the laboring class in
the towns, was all the more dangerous because it was not allowed
to find expression.

Diaz thought that what Mexico required above everything else was
the development of industrial efficiency and financial strength,
assured by a maintenance of absolute order. Though disposed to do
justice in individual cases, he would tolerate no class movements
of any kind. Labor unions, strikes, and other efforts at
lightening the burden of the workers he regarded as seditious and
deserving of severe punishment. In order to attract capital from
abroad as the best means of exploiting the vast resources of the
country, he was willing to go to any length, it would seem, in
guaranteeing protection. Small wonder, therefore, that the people
who shared in none of the immediate advantages from that source
should have muttered that Mexico was the "mother of foreigners
and the stepmother of Mexicans." And, since so much of the
capital came from the United States, the antiforeign sentiment
singled Americans out for its particular dislike.

If Diaz appeared unable to appreciate the significance of the
educational and industrial awakening, he was no less oblivious of
the political outcome. He knew, of course, that the Mexican
constitution made impossible demands upon the political capacity
of the people. He was himself mainly of Indian blood and he
believed that he understood the temperament and limitations of
most Mexicans. Knowing how tenaciously they clung to political
notions, he believed that it was safer and wiser to forego, at
least for a time, real popular government and to concentrate
power in the hands of a strong man who could maintain order.

Accordingly, backed by his political adherents, known as
cientificos (doctrinaires), some of whom had acquired a sinister
ascendancy over him, and also by the Church, the landed
proprietors, and the foreign capitalists, Diaz centered the
entire administration more and more in himself. Elections became
mere farces. Not only the federal officials themselves but the
state governors, the members of the state legislatures, and all
others in authority during the later years of his rule owed their
selection primarily to him and held their positions only if
personally loyal to him. Confident of his support and certain
that protests against misgovernment would be regarded by the
President as seditious, many of them abused their power at will.
Notable among them were the local officials, called jefes
politicos, whose control of the police force enabled them to
indulge in practices of intimidation and extortion which
ultimately became unendurable.

Though symptoms of popular wrath against the Diaz regime, or
diazpotism as the Mexicans termed it, were apparent as early as
1908, it was not until January, 1911, that the actual revolution
came. It was headed by Francisco I. Madero, a member of a wealthy
and distinguished family of landed proprietors in one of the
northern States. What the revolutionists demanded in substance
was the retirement of the President, Vice President, and Cabinet;
a return to the principle of no reelection to the chief
magistracy; a guarantee of fair elections at all times; the
choice of capable, honest, and impartial judges, jefes politicos,
and other officials; and, in particular, a series of agrarian and
industrial reforms which would break up the great estates, create
peasant proprietorships, and better the conditions of the working
classes. Disposed at first to treat the insurrection lightly,
Diaz soon found that he had underestimated its strength. Grants
of some of the demands and promises of reform were met with a
dogged insistence upon his own resignation. Then, as the
rebellion spread to the southward, the masterful old man realized
that his thirty-one years of rule were at an end. On the 25th of
May, therefore, he gave up his power and sailed for Europe.

Madero was chosen President five months later, but the revolution
soon passed beyond his control. He was a sincere idealist, if not
something of a visionary, actuated by humane and kindly
sentiments, but he lacked resoluteness and the art of managing
men. He was too prolific, also, of promises which he must have
known he could not keep. Yielding to family influence, he let his
followers get out of hand. Ambitious chieftains and groups of
Radicals blocked and thwarted him at every turn. When he could
find no means of carrying out his program without wholesale
confiscation and the disruption of business interests, he was
accused of abandoning his duty. One officer after another
deserted him and turned rebel. Brigandage and insurrection swept
over the country and threatened to involve it in ugly
complications with the United States and European powers. At
length, in February, 1913, came the blow that put an end to all
of Madero's efforts and aspirations. A military uprising in the
city of Mexico made him prisoner, forced him to resign, and set
up a provisional government under the dictatorship of Victoriano
Huerta, one of his chief lieutenants. Two weeks later both Madero
and the Vice President were assassinated while on their way
supposedly to a place of safety.

Huerta was a rough soldier of Indian origin, possessed of unusual
force of character and strength of will, ruthless, cunning, and
in bearing alternately dignified and vulgar. A cientifico in
political faith, he was disposed to restore the Diaz regime, so
far as an application of shrewdness and force could make it
possible. But from the outset he found an obstacle confronting
him that he could not surmount. Though acknowledged by European
countries and by many of the Hispanic republics, he could not win
recognition from the United States, either as provisional
President or as a candidate for regular election to the office.
Whether personally responsible for the murder of Madero or not,
he was not regarded by the American Government as entitled to
recognition, on the ground that he was not the choice of the
Mexican people. In its refusal to recognize an administration set
up merely by brute force, the United States was upheld by
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Cuba. The elimination of Huerta
became the chief feature for a while of its Mexican policy.

Meanwhile the followers of Madero and the pronounced Radicals had
found a new northern leader in the person of Venustiano Carranza.
They called themselves Constitutionalists, as indicative of their
purpose to reestablish the constitution and to choose a successor
to Madero in a constitutional manner. What they really desired
was those radical changes along social, industrial, and political
lines, which Madero had championed in theory. They sought to
introduce a species of socialistic regime that would provide the
Mexicans with an opportunity for self-regeneration. While Diaz
had believed in economic progress supported by the great landed
proprietors, the moral influence of the Church, and the
application of foreign capital, the Constitutionalists,
personified in Carranza, were convinced that these agencies, if
left free and undisturbed to work their will, would ruin Mexico.
Though not exactly antiforeign in their attitude, they wished to
curb the power of the foreigner; they would accept his aid
whenever desirable for the economic development of the country,
but they would not submit to his virtual control of public
affairs. In any case they would tolerate no interference by the
United States. Compromise with the Huerta regime, therefore, was
impossible. Huerta, the "strong man" of the Diaz type, must go.
On this point, at least, the Constitutionalists were in thorough
agreement with the United States.

A variety of international complications ensued. Both Huertistas
and Carranzistas perpetrated outrages on foreigners, which evoked
sharp protests and threats from the United States and European
powers. While careful not to recognize his opponents officially,
the American Government resorted to all kinds of means to oust
the dictator. An embargo was laid on the export of arms and
munitions; all efforts to procure financial help from abroad were
balked. The power of Huerta was waning perceptibly and that of
the Constitutionalists was increasing when an incident that
occurred in April, 1914, at Tampico brought matters to a climax.
A number of American sailors who had gone ashore to obtain
supplies were arrested and temporarily detained. The United
States demanded that the American flag be saluted as reparation
for the insult. Upon the refusal of Huerta to comply, the United
States sent a naval expedition to occupy Vera Cruz.

Both Carranza and Huerta regarded this move as equivalent to an
act of war. Argentina, Brazil, and Chile then offered their
mediation. But the conference arranged for this purpose at
Niagara Falls, Canada, had before it a task altogether impossible
of accomplishment. Though Carranza was willing to have the
Constitutionalists represented, if the discussion related solely
to the immediate issue between the United States and Huerta, he
declined to extend the scope of the conference so as to admit the
right of the United States to interfere in the internal affairs
of Mexico. The conference accomplished nothing so far as the
immediate issue was concerned. The dictator did not make
reparation for the "affronts and indignities" he had committed;
but his day was over. The advance of the Constitutionalists
southward compelled him in July to abandon the capital and leave
the country. Four months later the American forces were withdrawn
from Vera Cruz. The "A B C" Conference, however barren it was of
direct results, helped to allay suspicions of the United States
in Hispanic America and brought appreciably nearer a "concert of
the western world."

While far from exercising full control throughout Mexico, the
"first chief" of the Constitutionalists was easily the dominant
figure in the situation. At home a ranchman, in public affairs a
statesman of considerable ability, knowing how to insist and yet
how to temporize, Carranza carried on a struggle, both in arms
and in diplomacy, which singled him out as a remarkable
character. Shrewdly aware of the advantageous circumstances
afforded him by the war in Europe, he turned them to account with
a degree of skill that blocked every attempt at defeat or
compromise. No matter how serious the opposition to him in Mexico
itself, how menacing the attitude of the United States, or how
persuasive the conciliatory disposition of Hispanic American
nations, he clung stubbornly and tenaciously to his program.

Even after Huerta had been eliminated, Carranza's position was
not assured, for Francisco, or "Pancho," Villa, a chieftain whose
personal qualities resembled those of the fallen dictator, was
equally determined to eliminate him. For a brief moment, indeed,
peace reigned. Under an alleged agreement between them, a
convention of Constitutionalist officers was to choose a
provisional President, who should be ineligible as a candidate
for the permanent presidency at the regular elections. When
Carranza assumed both of these positions, Villa declared his act
a violation of their understanding and insisted upon his
retirement. Inasmuch as the convention was dominated by Villa,
the "first chief" decided to ignore its election of a provisional
President.

The struggle between the Conventionalists headed by Villa and the
Constitutionalists under Carranza plunged Mexico into worse
discord and misery than ever. Indeed it became a sort of
three-cornered contest. The third party was Emiliano Zapata, an
Indian bandit, nominally a supporter of Villa but actually
favorable to neither of the rivals. Operating near the capital,
he plundered Conventionalists and Constitutionalists with equal
impartiality, and as a diversion occasionally occupied the city
itself. These circumstances gave force to the saying that Mexico
was a "land where peace breaks out once in a while!"

Early in 1915 Carranza proceeded to issue a number of radical
decrees that exasperated foreigners almost beyond endurance.
Rather than resort to extreme measures again, however, the United
States invoked the cooperation of the Hispanic republics and
proposed a conference to devise some solution of the Mexican
problem. To give the proposed conference a wider representation,
it invited not only the "A B C" powers, but Bolivia, Uruguay, and
Guatemala to participate. Meeting at Washington in August, the
mediators encountered the same difficulty which had confronted
their predecessors at Niagara Falls. Though the other chieftains
assented, Carranza, now certain of success, declined to heed any
proposal of conciliation. Characterizing efforts of the kind as
an unwarranted interference in the internal affairs of a sister
nation, he warned the Hispanic republics against setting up so
dangerous a precedent. In reply Argentina stated that the
conference obeyed a "lofty inspiration of Pan-American
solidarity, and, instead of finding any cause for alarm, the
Mexican people should see in it a proof of their friendly
consideration that her fate evokes in us, and calls forth our
good wishes for her pacification and development." However, as
the only apparent escape from more watchful waiting or from armed
intervention on the part of the United States, in October the
seven Governments decided to accept the facts as they stood, and
accordingly recognized Carranza as the de facto ruler of Mexico.

Enraged at this favor shown to his rival, Villa determined
deliberately to provoke American intervention by a murderous raid
on a town in New Mexico in March, 1916. When the United States
dispatched an expedition to avenge the outrage, Carranza
protested energetically against its violation of Mexican
territory and demanded its withdrawal. Several clashes, in fact,
occurred between American soldiers and Carranzistas. Neither the
expedition itself, however, nor diplomatic efforts to find some
method of cooperation which would prevent constant trouble along
the frontier served any useful purpose, since Villa apparently
could not be captured and Carranza refused to yield to diplomatic
persuasion. Carranza then proposed that a joint commission be
appointed to settle these vexed questions. Even this device
proved wholly unsatisfactory. The Mexicans would not concede the
right of the United States to send an armed expedition into their
country at any time, and the Americans refused to accept
limitations on the kind of troops that they might employ or on
the zone of their operations. In January, 1917, the joint
commission was dissolved and the American soldiers were
withdrawn. Again the "first chief" had won!

On the 5th of February a convention assembled at Queretaro
promulgated a constitution embodying substantially all of the
radical program that Carranza had anticipated in his decrees.
Besides providing for an elaborate improvement in the condition
of the laboring classes and for such a division of great estates
as might satisfy their particular needs, the new constitution
imposed drastic restrictions upon foreigners and religious
bodies. Under its terms, foreigners could not acquire industrial
concessions unless they waived their treaty rights and consented
to regard themselves for the purpose as Mexican citizens. In all
such cases preference was to be shown Mexicans over foreigners.
Ecclesiastical corporations were forbidden to own real property.
No primary school and no charitable institution could be
conducted by any religious mission or denomination, and religious
publications must refrain from commenting on public affairs. The
presidential term was reduced from six years to four; reelection
was prohibited; and the office of Vice President was abolished.

When, on the 1st of May, Venustiano Carranza was chosen
President, Mexico had its first constitutional executive in four
years. After a cruel and obstinately intolerant struggle that had
occasioned indescribable suffering from disease and starvation,
as well as the usual slaughter and destruction incident to war,
the country began to enjoy once more a measure of peace.
Financial exhaustion, however, had to be overcome before
recuperation was possible. Industrial progress had become almost
paralyzed; vast quantities of depreciated paper money had to be
withdrawn from circulation; and an enormous array of claims for
the loss of foreign life and property had rolled up.



CHAPTER XI. THE REPUBLICS OF THE CARIBBEAN

The course of events in certain of the republics in and around
the Caribbean Sea warned the Hispanic nations that independence
was a relative condition and that it might vary in direct ratio
with nearness to the United States. After 1906 this powerful
northern neighbor showed an unmistakable tendency to extend its
influence in various ways. Here fiscal and police control was
established; there official recognition was withheld from a
President who had secured office by unconstitutional methods.
Nonrecognition promised to be an effective way of maintaining a
regime of law and order, as the United States understood those
terms. Assurances from the United States of the full political
equality of all republics, big or little, in the western
hemisphere did not always carry conviction to Spanish American
ears. The smaller countries in and around the Caribbean Sea, at
least, seemed likely to become virtually American protectorates.

Like their Hispanic neighbor on the north, the little republics
of Central America were also scenes of political disturbance.
None of them except Panama escaped revolutionary uprisings,
though the loss of life and property was insignificant. On the
other hand, in these early years of the century the five
countries north of Panama made substantial progress toward
federation. As a South American writer has expressed it, their
previous efforts in that direction "amid sumptuous festivals,
banquets and other solemn public acts" at which they "intoned in
lyric accents daily hymns for the imperishable reunion of the
isthmian republics," had been as illusory as they were frequent.
Despite the mediation of the United States and Mexico in 1906,
while the latter was still ruled by Diaz, the struggle in which
Nicaragua, Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador had been engaged was
soon renewed between the first two belligerents. Since diplomatic
interposition no longer availed, American marines were landed in
Nicaragua, and the bumptious Zelaya was induced to have his
country meet its neighbors in a conference at Washington. Under
the auspices of the United States and Mexico, in December, 1907,
representatives of the five republics signed a series of
conventions providing for peace and cooperation. An arbitral
court of justice, to be erected in Costa Rica and composed of one
judge from each nation, was to decide all matters of dispute
which could not be adjusted through ordinary diplomatic means.
Here, also, an institute for the training of Central American
teachers was to be established. Annual conferences were to
discuss, and an office in Guatemala was to record, measures
designed to secure uniformity in financial, commercial,
industrial, sanitary, and educational regulations. Honduras, the
storm center of weakness, was to be neutralized. None of the
States was thereafter to recognize in any of them a government
which had been set up in an illegal fashion. A "Constitutional
Act of Central American Fraternity," moreover, was adopted on
behalf of peace, harmony, and progress. Toward a realization of
the several objects of the conference, the Presidents of the five
republics were to invite their colleagues of the United States
and Mexico, whenever needful, to appoint representatives, to
"lend their good offices in a purely friendly way."

Though most of these agencies were promptly put into operation,
the results were not altogether satisfactory. Some discords, to
be sure, were removed by treaties settling boundary questions and
providing for reciprocal trade advantages; but it is doubtful
whether the arrangements devised at Washington would have worked
at all if the United States had not kept the little countries
under a certain amount of observation. What the Central Americans
apparently preferred was to be left alone, some of them to mind
their own business, others to mind their neighbor's affairs.

Of all the Central American countries Honduras was, perhaps, the
one most afflicted with pecuniary misfortunes. In 1909 its
foreign debt, along with arrears of interest unpaid for
thirty-seven years, was estimated at upwards of $110,000,000. Of
this amount a large part consisted of loans obtained from foreign
capitalists, at more or less extortionate rates, for the
construction of a short railway, of which less than half had been
built. That revolutions should be rather chronic in a land where
so much money could be squandered and where the temperaments of
Presidents and ex-Presidents were so bellicose, was natural
enough. When the United States could not induce the warring
rivals to abide by fair elections, it sent a force of marines to
overawe them and gave warning that further disturbances would not
be allowed.

In Nicaragua the conditions were similar. Here Zelaya, restive
under the limitations set by the conference at Washington,
yearned to become the "strong man" of Central America, who would
teach the Yankees to stop their meddling. But his downfall was
imminent. In 1909, as the result of his execution of two American
soldiers of fortune who had taken part in a recent insurrection,
the United States resolved to tolerate Zelaya no longer. Openly
recognizing the insurgents, it forced the dictator out of the
country. Three years later, when a President-elect started to
assume office before the legally appointed time, a force of
American marines at the capital convinced him that such a
procedure was undesirable. The "corrupt and barbarous" conditions
prevailing in Zelaya's time, he was informed, could not be
tolerated. The United States, in fact, notified all parties in
Nicaragua that, under the terms of the Washington conventions, it
had a "moral mandate to exert its influence for the preservation
of the general peace of Central America." Since those agreements
had vested no one with authority to enforce them, such an
interpretation of their language, aimed apparently at all
disturbances, foreign as well as domestic, was rather elastic! At
all events, after 1912, when a new constitution was adopted, the
country became relatively quiet and somewhat progressive.
Whenever a political flurry did take place, American marines were
employed to preserve the peace. Many citizens, therefore,
declined to vote, on the ground that the moral and material
support thus furnished by the great nation to the northward
rendered it futile for them to assume political responsibilities.

Meanwhile negotiations began which were ultimately to make
Nicaragua a fiscal protectorate of the United States. American
officials were chosen to act as financial advisers and collectors
of customs, and favorable arrangements were concluded with
American bankers regarding the monetary situation; but it was not
until 1916 that a treaty covering this situation was ratified.
According to its provisions, in return for a stipulated sum to be
expended under American direction, Nicaragua was to grant to the
United States the exclusive privilege of constructing a canal
through the territory of the republic and to lease to it the Corn
Islands and a part of Fonseca Bay, on the Pacific coast, for use
as naval stations. The prospect of American intervention alarmed
the neighboring republics. Asserting that the treaty infringed
upon their respective boundaries, Costa Rica, and Salvador
brought suit against Nicaragua before the Central American Court.
With the exception of the Nicaraguan representative, the judges
upheld the contention of the plaintiffs that the defendant had no
right to make any such concessions without previous consultation
with Costa Rica, Salvador, and Honduras, since all three alike
were affected by them. The Court observed, however, that it could
not declare the treaty void because the United States, one of the
parties concerned, was not subject to its jurisdiction. Nicaragua
declined to accept the decision; and the United States, the
country responsible for the existence of the Court and presumably
interested in helping to enforce its judgment, allowed it to go
out of existence in 1918 on the expiration of its ten-year term.

The economic situation of Costa Rica brought about a state of
affairs wholly unusual in Central American politics. The
President, Alfredo Gonzalez, wished to reform the system of
taxation so that a fairer share of the public burdens should fall
on the great landholders who, like most of their brethren in the
Hispanic countries, were practically exempt. This project,
coupled with the fact that certain American citizens seeking an
oil concession had undermined the power of the President by
wholesale bribery, induced the Minister of War, in 1917, to start
a revolt against him. Rather than shed the blood of his fellow
citizens for mere personal advantages, Gonzalez sustained the
good reputation of Costa Rica for freedom from civil commotions
by quietly leaving the country and going to the United States to
present his case. In consequence, the American Government
declined to recognize the de facto ruler.

Police and fiscal supervision by the United States has
characterized the recent history of Panama. Not only has a
proposed increase in the customs duties been disallowed, but more
than once the unrest attending presidential elections has
required the calming presence of American officials. As a means
of forestalling outbreaks, particularly in view of the
cosmopolitan population resident on the Isthmus, the republic
enacted a law in 1914 which forbade foreigners to mix in local
politics and authorized the expulsion of naturalized citizens who
attacked the Government through the press or otherwise. With the
approval of the United States, Panama entered into an agreement
with American financiers providing for the creation of a national
bank, one-fourth of the directors of which should be named by the
Government of the republic.

The second period of American rule in Cuba lasted till 1909.
Control of the Government was then formally transferred to Jose
Miguel Gomez, the President who had been chosen by the Liberals
at the elections held in the previous year; but the United States
did not cease to watch over its chief Caribbean ward. A bitter
controversy soon developed in the Cuban Congress over measures to
forbid the further purchase of land by aliens, and to insure that
a certain percentage of the public offices should be held by
colored citizens. Though both projects were defeated, they
revealed a strong antiforeign sentiment and much dissatisfaction
on the part of the negro population. It was clear also that
Gomez, intended to oust all conservatives from office, for an
obedient Congress passed a bill suspending the civil service
rules.

The partisanship of Gomez, and his supporters, together with the
constant interference of military veterans in political affairs,
provoked numerous outbreaks, which led the United States, in
1912, to warn Cuba that it might again be compelled to intervene.
Eventually, when a negro insurrection in the eastern part of the
island menaced the safety of foreigners, American marines were
landed. Another instance of intervention was the objection by the
United States to an employers' liability law that would have
given a monopoly of the insurance business to a Cuban company to
the detriment of American firms.

After the election of Mario Menocal, the Conservative candidate,
to the presidency in 1912, another occasion for intervention
presented itself. An amnesty bill, originally drafted for the
purpose of freeing the colored insurgents and other offenders,
was amended so as to empower the retiring President to grant
pardon before trial to persons whom his successor wished to
prosecute for wholesale corruption in financial transactions.
Before the bill passed, however, notice was sent from Washington
that, since the American Government had the authority to
supervise the finances of the republic, Gomez would better veto
the bill, and this he accordingly did.

A sharp struggle arose when it became known that Menocal would be
a candidate for reelection. The Liberal majority in the Congress
passed a bill requiring that a President who sought to succeed
himself should resign two months before the elections. When
Menocal vetoed this measure, his opponents demanded that the
United States supervise the elections. As the result of the
elections was doubtful, Gomez and his followers resorted in 1917
to the usual insurrection; whereupon the American Government
warned the rebels that it would not recognize their claims if
they won by force. Active aid from that quarter, as well as the
capture of the insurgent leader, caused the movement to collapse
after the electoral college had decided in favor of Menocal.

In the Dominican Republic disturbances were frequent,
notwithstanding the fact that American officials were in charge
of the customhouses and by their presence were expected to exert
a quieting influence. Even the adoption, in 1908, of a new
constitution which provided for the prolongation of the
presidential term to six years and for the abolition of the
office of Vice President--two stabilizing devices quite common in
Hispanic countries where personal ambition is prone to be a
source of political trouble--did not help much to restore order.
The assassination of the President and the persistence of
age-long quarrels with Haiti over boundaries made matters worse.
Thereupon, in 1913, the United States served formal notice on the
rebellious parties that it would not only refuse to recognize any
Government set up by force but would withhold any share in the
receipts from the customs. As this procedure did not prevent a
revolutionary leader from demanding half a million dollars as a
financial sedative for his political nerves and from creating
more trouble when the President failed to dispense it, the heavy
hand of an American naval force administered another kind of
specific, until commissioners from Porto Rico could arrive to
superintend the selection of a new chief magistrate.
Notwithstanding the protest of the Dominican Government, the
"fairest and freest" elections ever known in the country were
held under the direction of those officials--as a "body of
friendly observers"!

However amicable this arrangement seemed, it did not smother the
flames of discord. In 1916, when an American naval commander
suggested that a rebellious Minister of War leave the capital, he
agreed to do so if the "fairest and freest" of chosen Presidents
would resign. Even after both of them had complied with the
suggestions, the individuals who assumed their respective offices
were soon at loggerheads. Accordingly the United States placed
the republic under military rule, until a President could be
elected who might be able to retain his post without too much
"friendly observation" from Washington, and a Minister of War
could be appointed who would refrain from making war on the
President! Then the organization of a new party to combat the
previous inordinate display of personalities in politics created
some hope that the republic would accomplish its own redemption.

Only because of its relation to the wars of emancipation and to
the Dominican Republic, need the negro state of Haiti, occupying
the western part of the Caribbean island, be mentioned in
connection with the story of the Hispanic nations. Suffice it to
say that the fact that their color was different and that they
spoke a variant of French instead of Spanish did not prevent the
inhabitants of this state from offering a far worse spectacle of
political and financial demoralization than did their neighbors
to the eastward. Perpetual commotions and repeated interventions
by American and European naval forces on behalf of the foreign
residents, eventually made it imperative for the United States to
take direct charge of the republic. In 1916, by a convention
which placed the finances under American control, created a
native constabulary under American officers, and imposed a number
of other restraints, the United States converted Haiti into what
is practically a protectorate.



CHAPTER XII. PAN-AMERICANISM AND THE GREAT WAR

While the Hispanic republics were entering upon the second
century of their independent life, the idea of a certain
community of interests between themselves and the United States
began to assume a fairly definite form. Though emphasized by
American statesmen and publicists in particular, the new point of
view was not generally understood or appreciated by the people of
either this country or its fellow nations to the southward. It
seemed, nevertheless, to promise an effective cooperation in
spirit and action between them and came therefore to be called
"Pan-Americanism."

This sentiment of inter-American solidarity sprang from several
sources. The periodical conferences of the United States and its
sister republics gave occasion for an interchange of official
courtesies and expressions of good feeling. Doubtless, also, the
presence of delegates from the Hispanic countries at the
international gatherings at The Hague served to acquaint the
world at large with the stability, strength, wealth, and culture
of their respective lands. Individual Americans took an active
interest in their fellows of Hispanic stock and found their
interest reciprocated. Motives of business or pleasure and a
desire to obtain personal knowledge about one another led to
visits and countervisits that became steadily more frequent.
Societies were created to encourage the friendship and
acquaintance thus formed. Scientific congresses were held and
institutes were founded in which both the United States and
Hispanic America were represented. Books, articles, and newspaper
accounts about one another's countries were published in
increasing volume. Educational institutions devoted a constantly
growing attention to inter-American affairs. Individuals and
commissions were dispatched by the Hispanic nations and the
United States to study one another's conditions and to confer
about matters of mutual concern. Secretaries of State, Ministers
of Foreign Affairs, and other distinguished personages
interchanged visits. Above all, the common dangers and
responsibilities falling upon the Americas at large as a
consequence of the European war seemed likely to bring the
several nations into a harmony of feeling and relationship to
which they had never before attained.

Pan-Americanism, however, was destined to remain largely a
generous ideal. The action of the United States in extending its
direct influence over the small republics in and around the
Caribbean aroused the suspicion and alarm of Hispanic Americans,
who still feared imperialistic designs on the part of that
country now more than ever the Colossus of the North. "The art of
oratory among the Yankees," declared a South American critic, "is
lavish with a fraternal idealism; but strong wills enforce their
imperialistic ambitions." Impassioned speakers and writers
adjured the ghost of Hispanic confederation to rise and confront
the new northern peril. They even advocated an appeal to Great
Britain, Germany, or Japan, and they urged closer economic,
social, and intellectual relations with the countries of Europe.

It was while the United States was thus widening the sphere of
its influence in the Caribbean that the "A B C"
powers--Argentina, Brazil, and Chile--reached an understanding
which was in a sense a measure of self-defense. For some years
cordial relations had existed among these three nations which had
grown so remarkably in strength and prestige. It was felt that by
united action they might set up in the New World the European
principle of a balance of power, assume the leadership in
Hispanic America, and serve in some degree as a counterpoise to
the United States. Nevertheless they were disposed to cooperate
with their northern neighbor in the peaceable adjustment of
conflicts in which other Hispanic countries were concerned,
provided that the mediation carried on by such a "concert of the
western world" did not include actual intervention in the
internal affairs of the countries involved.

With this attitude of the public mind, it is not strange that the
Hispanic republics at large should have been inclined to look
with scant favor upon proposals made by the United States, in
1916, to render the spirit of Pan-Americanism more precise in its
operation. The proposals in substance were these: that all the
nations of America "mutually agree to guarantee the territorial
integrity" of one another; to "maintain a republican form of
government"; to prohibit the "exportation of arms to any but the
legally constituted governments"; and to adopt laws of neutrality
which would make it "impossible to filibustering expeditions to
threaten or carry on revolutions in neighboring republics." These
proposals appear to have received no formal approval beyond what
is signified by the diplomatic expression "in principle."
Considering the disparity in strength, wealth, and prestige
between the northern country and its southern fellows,
suggestions of the sort could be made practicable only by letting
the United States do whatever it might think needful to
accomplish the objects which it sought. Obviously the Hispanic
nations, singly or collectively, would hardly venture to take any
such action within the borders of the United States itself, if,
for example, it failed to maintain what, in their opinion, was "a
republican form of government." A full acceptance of the plan
accordingly would have amounted to a recognition of American
overlordship, and this they were naturally not disposed to admit.

The common perils and duties confronting the Americas as a result
of the Great War, however, made close cooperation between the
Hispanic republics and the United States up to a certain point
indispensable. Toward that transatlantic struggle the attitude of
all the nations of the New World at the outset was substantially
the same. Though strongly sympathetic on the whole with the
"Allies" and notably with France, the southern countries
nevertheless declared their neutrality. More than that, they
tried to convert neutrality into a Pan-American policy, instead
of regarding it as an official attitude to be adopted by the
republics separately. Thus when the conflict overseas began to
injure the rights of neutrals, Argentina and other nations urged
that the countries of the New World jointly agree to declare that
direct maritime commerce between American lands should be
considered as "inter-American coastwise trade," and that the
merchant ships engaged in it, whatever the flag under which they
sailed, should be looked upon as neutral. Though the South
American countries failed to enlist the support of their northern
neighbor in this bold departure from international precedent,
they found some compensation for their disappointment in the
closer commercial and financial relations which they established
with the United States.

Because of the dependence of the Hispanic nations, and especially
those of the southern group, on the intimacy of their economic
ties with the belligerents overseas, they suffered from the
ravages of the struggle more perhaps than other lands outside of
Europe. Negotiations for prospective loans were dropped.
Industries were suspended, work on public improvements was
checked, and commerce brought almost to a standstill. As the
revenues fell off and ready money became scarce, drastic measures
had to be devised to meet the financial strain. For the
protection of credit, bank holidays were declared, stock
exchanges were closed, moratoria were set up in nearly all the
countries, taxes and duties were increased, radical reductions in
expenditure were undertaken, and in a few cases large quantities
of paper money were issued.

With the European market thus wholly or partially cut off, the
Hispanic republics were forced to supply the consequent shortage
with manufactured articles and other goods from the United States
and to send thither their raw materials in exchange. To their
northern neighbor they had to turn also for pecuniary aid. A
Pan-American financial conference was held at Washington in 1915,
and an international high commission was appointed to carry its
recommendations into effect. Gradually most of the Hispanic
countries came to show a favorable trade balance. Then, as the
war drew into its fourth year, several of them even began to
enjoy great prosperity. That Pan-Americanism had not meant much
more than cooperation for economic ends seemed evident when, on
April 6, 1917, the United States declared war on Germany. Instead
of following spontaneously in the wake of their great northern
neighbor, the Hispanic republics were divided by conflicting
currents of opinion and hesitated as to their proper course of
procedure. While a majority of them expressed approval of what
the United States had done, and while Uruguay for its part
asserted that "no American country, which in defense of its own
rights should find itself in a state of war with nations of other
continents, would be treated as a belligerent," Mexico veered
almost to the other extreme by proposing that the republics of
America agree to lay an embargo on the shipment of munitions to
the warring powers.

As a matter of fact, only seven out of the nineteen Hispanic
nations saw fit to imitate the example set by their northern
neighbor and to declare war on Germany. These were Cuba--in view
of its "duty toward the United States," Panama, Guatemala,
Brazil, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. Since the Dominican
Republic at the time was under American military control, it was
not in a position to choose its course. Four countries Ecuador,
Peru, Bolivia, and Uruguay--broke off diplomatic relations with
Germany. The other seven republics--Mexico, Salvador, Colombia,
Venezuela, Chile, Argentina, and Paraguay--continued their formal
neutrality. In spite of a disclosure made by the United States of
insulting and threatening utterances on the part of the German
charge d'affaires in Argentina, which led to popular outbreaks at
the capital and induced the national Congress to declare in favor
of a severance of diplomatic relations with that functionary's
Government, the President of the republic stood firm in his
resolution to maintain neutrality. If Pan-Americanism had ever
involved the idea of political cooperation among the nations of
the New World, it broke down just when it might have served the
greatest of purposes. Even the "A B C" combination itself had
apparently been shattered.

A century and more had now passed since the Spanish and
Portuguese peoples of the New World had achieved their
independence. Eighteen political children of various sizes and
stages of advancement, or backwardness, were born of Spain in
America, and one acknowledged the maternity of Portugal. Big
Brazil has always maintained the happiest relations with the
little mother in Europe, who still watches with pride the growth
of her strapping youngster. Between Spain and her descendants,
however, animosity endured for many years after they had thrown
off the parental yoke. Yet of late, much has been done on both
sides to render the relationship cordial. The graceful act of
Spain in sending the much-beloved Infanta Isabel to represent her
in Argentina and Chile at the celebration of the centennial
anniversary of their cry for independence, and to wish them
Godspeed on their onward journey, was typical of the yearning of
the mother country for her children overseas, despite the lapse
of years and political ties. So, too, her ablest men of intellect
have striven nobly and with marked success to revive among them a
sense of filial affection and gratitude for all that Spain
contributed to mold the mind and heart of her kindred in distant
lands. On their part, the Hispanic Americans have come to a
clearer consciousness of the fact that on the continents of the
New World there are two distinct types of civilization, with all
that each connotes of differences in race, psychology, tradition,
language, and custom--their own, and that represented by the
United States. Appreciative though the southern countries are of
their northern neighbor, they cling nevertheless to their
heritage from Spain and Portugal in whatever seems conducive to
the maintenance of their own ideals of life and thought.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

For anything like a detailed study of the history of the Hispanic
nations of America, obviously one must consult works written in
Spanish and Portuguese. There are many important books, also, in
French and German; but, with few exceptions, the recommendations
for the general reader will be limited to accounts in English.

A very useful outline and guide to recent literature on the
subject is W. W. Pierson, Jr., "A Syllabus of Latin-American
History" (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1917). A brief
introduction to the history and present aspects of Hispanic
American civilization is W. R. Shepherd, "Latin America" (New
York, 1914). The best general accounts of the Spanish and
Portuguese colonial systems will be found in Charles de Lannoy
and Herman van der Linden, "Histoire de L'Expansion Coloniale des
Peuples Europeens: Portugal et Espagne" (Brussels and Paris,
1907), and Kurt Simon, "Spanien and Portugal als See and
Kolonialmdchte" (Hamburg, 1913). For the Spanish colonial regime
alone, E. G. Bourne, "Spain in America" (New York, 1904) is
excellent. The situation in southern South America toward the
close of Spanish rule is well described in Bernard Moses, "South
America on the Eve of Emancipation" (New York, 1908). Among
contemporary accounts of that period, Alexander von Humboldt and
Aime Bonpland, "Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial
Regions of America", 3 vols. (London, 1881); Alexander von
Humboldt, "Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain", 4 vols.
(London,1811-1822); and F. R. J. de Pons, "Travels in South
America", 2 vols. (London, 1807), are authoritative, even if not
always easy to read.

On the wars of independence, see the scholarly treatise by W. S.
Robertson, "Rise of the Spanish-American Republics as Told in the
Lives of their Liberators" (New York, 1918); Bartolome Mitre,
"The Emancipation of South America" (London, 1893)--a condensed
translation of the author's "Historia de San Martin", and wholly
favorable to that patriot; and F. L. Petre, "Simon Bolivar"
(London, 1910)--impartial at the expense of the imagination.
Among the numerous contemporary accounts, the following will be
found serviceable: W. D. Robinson, "Memoirs of the Mexican
Revolution" (Philadelphia, 1890); J. R. Poinsett, "Notes on
Mexico" (London, 1825); H. M. Brackenridge, "Voyage to South
America, 2 vols. (London, 1820); W. B. Stevenson, "Historical and
Descriptive Narrative of Twenty Years' Residence in South
America", 3 vols. (London, 1895); J. Miller, "Memoirs of General
Miller in the Service of the Republic of Peru", 2 vols. (London,
1828); H. L. V. Ducoudray Holstein, "Memoirs of Simon Bolivar", 2
vols. (London, 1830), and John Armitage, "History of Brazil", 2
vols. (London, 1836).

The best books on the history of the republics as a whole since
the attainment of independence, and written from an Hispanic
American viewpoint, are F. Garcia Calderon, "Latin America, its
Rise and Progress" (New York, 1913), and M. de Oliveira Lima,
"The Evolution of Brazil Compared with that of Spanish and
Anglo-Saxon America" (Stanford University, California, 1914). The
countries of Central America are dealt with by W. H. Koebel,
"Central America" (New York, 1917), and of South America by T. C.
Dawson, "The South American Republics", 2 vols. (New York,
1903-1904), and C. E. Akers, "History of South America" (London,
1912), though in a manner that often confuses rather than
enlightens.

Among the histories and descriptions of individual countries,
arranged in alphabetical order, the following are probably the
most useful to the general reader: W. A. Hirst, "Argentina" (New
York, 1910); Paul Walle, "Bolivia" (New York, 1914); Pierre
Denis, "Brazil" (New York, 1911); G. F. S. Elliot, "Chile" (New
York, 1907); P. J. Eder, "Colombia" (New York, 1913); J. B.
Calvo, "The Republic of Costa Rica" (Chicago, 1890); A. G.
Robinson, "Cuba, Old and New" (New York, 1915); Otto Schoenrich,
"Santo Domingo" (New York, 1918); C. R. Enock, "Ecuador" (New
York, 1914); C. R. Enock, "Mexico" (New York, 1909); W. H.
Koebel, "Paraguay" (New York, 1917); C. R. Enock, "Peru" (New
York, 1910); W. H. Koebel, "Uruguay" (New York, 1911), and L. V.
Dalton, "Venezuela" (New York, 1912). Of these, the books by
Robinson and Eder, on Cuba and Colombia, respectively, are the
most readable and reliable.

For additional bibliographical references see "South America" and
the articles on individual countries in "The Encyclopaedia
Britannica", 11th edition, and in Marrion Wilcox and G. E. Rines,
"Encyclopedia of Latin America" (New York, 1917).

Of contemporary or later works descriptive of the life and times
of eminent characters in the history of the Hispanic American
republics since 1830, a few may be taken as representative.
Rosas: J. A. King, "Twenty-four Years in the Argentine Republic"
(London, 1846), and Woodbine Parish, "Buenos Ayres and the
Provinces of the Rio de la Plata" (London, 1850). Francia: J. R.
Rengger, "Reign of Dr. Joseph Gaspard Roderick [!] de Francia in
Paraguay" (London, 1827); J. P. and W. P. Robertson, "Letters on
South America", 3 vols. (London, 1843), and E. L. White, "El
Supremo", a novel (New York, 1916). Santa Anna: Waddy Thompson,
"Recollections of Mexico" (New York, 1846), and F. E. Ingles,
Calderon de la Barca, "Life in Mexico" (London, 1859.). Juarez:
U. R. Burke, "Life of Benito Juarez" (London, 1894). Solano
Lopez: T. J. Hutchinson, "Parana; with Incidents of the
Paraguayan War and South American Recollections" (London, 1868);
George Thompson, "The War in Paraguay" (London, 1869); R. F.
Burton, "Letters from the Battle-fields of Paraguay" (London,
1870), and C. A. Washburn, "The History of Paraguay", 2 vols.
(Boston, 1871). Pedro II: J. C. Fletcher and D. P. Kidder,
"Brazil and the Brazilians" (Boston, 1879), and Frank Bennett,
"Forty Years in Brazil "(London, 1914). Garcia Moreno: Frederick
Hassaurek, "Four Years among Spanish Americans "(New York, 1867).
Guzman Blanco: C. D. Dance, "Recollections of Four Years in
Venezuela" (London, 1876). Diaz: James Creelman, "Diaz, Master of
Mexico" (New York, 1911). Balmaceda: M. H. Hervey, "Dark Days in
Chile" (London, 1891-1890. Carranza: L. Gutierrez de Lara and
Edgcumb Pinchon, "The Mexican People: their Struggle for Freedom"
(New York, 1914).






This etext was produced from the 1882 George Bell and Sons edition by
David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





HELEN OF TROY

by Andrew Lang




"Le joyeulx temps passe souloit estre occasion que je faisoie de
plaisants diz et gracieuses chanconnetes et ballades.  Mais je me
suis mis a faire cette traittie d'affliction contre ma droite nature
. . . et suis content de l'avoir prinse, car mes douleurs me semblent
en estre allegees."--Le Romant de Troilus.

To all old Friends; to all who dwell
   Where Avon dhu and Avon gel
   Down to the western waters flow
Through valleys dear from long ago;
To all who hear the whisper'd spell
Of Ken; and Tweed like music swell
Hard by the Land Debatable,
   Or gleaming Shannon seaward go, -
      To all old Friends!

To all that yet remember well
What secrets Isis had to tell,
   How lazy Cherwell loiter'd slow
   Sweet aisles of blossom'd May below -
Whate'er befall, whate'er befell,
      To ALL old Friends.



BOOK I--THE COMING OF PARIS



Of the coming of Paris to the house of Menelaus, King of Lacedaemon,
and of the tale Paris told concerning his past life.

I.

All day within the palace of the King
   In Lacedaemon, was there revelry,
Since Menelaus with the dawn did spring
   Forth from his carven couch, and, climbing high
   The tower of outlook, gazed along the dry
White road that runs to Pylos through the plain,
   And mark'd thin clouds of dust against the sky,
And gleaming bronze, and robes of purple stain.

II.

Then cried he to his serving men, and all
   Obey'd him, and their labour did not spare,
And women set out tables through the hall,
   Light polish'd tables, with the linen fair.
   And water from the well did others bear,
And the good house-wife busily brought forth
   Meats from her store, and stinted not the rare
Wine from Ismarian vineyards of the North.

III.

The men drave up a heifer from the field
   For sacrifice, and sheath'd her horns with gold;
And strong Boethous the axe did wield
   And smote her; on the fruitful earth she roll'd,
   And they her limbs divided; fold on fold
They laid the fat, and cast upon the fire
   The barley grain.  Such rites were wrought of old
When all was order'd as the Gods desire.

IV.

And now the chariots came beneath the trees
   Hard by the palace portals, in the shade,
And Menelaus knew King Diocles
   Of Pherae, sprung of an unhappy maid
   Whom the great Elian River God betray'd
In the still watches of a summer night,
   When by his deep green water-course she stray'd
And lean'd to pluck his water-lilies white.

V.

Besides King Diocles there sat a man
   Of all men mortal sure the fairest far,
For o'er his purple robe Sidonian
   His yellow hair shone brighter than the star
   Of the long golden locks that bodeth war;
His face was like the sunshine, and his blue
   Glad eyes no sorrow had the spell to mar
Were clear as skies the storm hath thunder'd through.

VI.

Then Menelaus spake unto his folk,
   And eager at his word they ran amain,
And loosed the sweating horses from the yoke,
   And cast before them spelt, and barley grain.
   And lean'd the polish'd car, with golden rein,
Against the shining spaces of the wall;
   And called the sea-rovers who follow'd fain
Within the pillar'd fore-courts of the hall.

VII.

The stranger-prince was follow'd by a band
   Of men, all clad like rovers of the sea,
And brown'd were they as is the desert sand,
   Loud in their mirth, and of their bearing free;
   And gifts they bore, from the deep treasury
And forests of some far-off Eastern lord,
   Vases of gold, and bronze, and ivory,
That might the Pythian fane have over-stored.

VIII.

Now when the King had greeted Diocles
   And him that seem'd his guest, the twain were led
To the dim polish'd baths, where, for their ease,
   Cool water o'er their lustrous limbs was shed;
   With oil anointed was each goodly head
By Asteris and Phylo fair of face;
   Next, like two gods for loveliness, they sped
To Menelaus in the banquet-place.

IX.

There were they seated at the King's right hand,
   And maidens bare them bread, and meat, and wine,
Within that fair hall of the Argive land
   Whose doors and roof with gold and silver shine
   As doth the dwelling-place of Zeus divine.
And Helen came from forth her fragrant bower
   The fairest lady of immortal line,
Like morning, when the rosy dawn doth flower.

X.

Adraste set for her a shining chair,
   Well-wrought of cedar-wood and ivory;
And beautiful Alcippe led the fair,
   The well-beloved child, Hermione, -
   A little maiden of long summers three -
Her star-like head on Helen's breast she laid,
   And peep'd out at the strangers wistfully
As is the wont of children half afraid.

XI.

Now when desire of meat and drink was done,
   And ended was the joy of minstrelsy,
Queen Helen spake, beholding how the sun
   Within the heaven of bronze was riding high:
   "Truly, my friends, methinks the hour is nigh
When men may crave to know what need doth bring
   To Lacedaemon, o'er wet ways and dry,
This prince that bears the sceptre of a king?

XII.

"Yea, or perchance a God is he, for still
   The great Gods wander on our mortal ways,
And watch their altars upon mead or hill
   And taste our sacrifice, and hear our lays,
   And now, perchance, will heed if any prays,
And now will vex us with unkind control,
   But anywise must man live out his days,
For Fate hath given him an enduring soul.

XIII.

"Then tell us, prithee, all that may be told,
   And if thou art a mortal, joy be thine!
And if thou art a God, then rich with gold
   Thine altar in our palace court shall shine,
   With roses garlanded and wet with wine,
And we shall praise thee with unceasing breath;
   Ah, then be gentle as thou art divine,
And bring not on us baneful Love or Death!"

XIV.

Then spake the stranger,--as when to a maid
   A young man speaks, his voice was soft and low, -
"Alas, no God am I; be not afraid,
   For even now the nodding daisies grow
   Whose seed above my grassy cairn shall blow,
When I am nothing but a drift of white
   Dust in a cruse of gold; and nothing know
But darkness, and immeasurable Night.

XV.

"The dawn, or noon, or twilight, draweth near
   When one shall smite me on the bridge of war,
Or with the ruthless sword, or with the spear,
   Or with the bitter arrow flying far.
   But as a man's heart, so his good days are,
That Zeus, the Lord of Thunder, giveth him,
   Wherefore I follow Fortune, like a star,
Whate'er may wait me in the distance dim.

XVI.

"Now all men call me PARIS, Priam's son,
   Who widely rules a peaceful folk and still.
Nay, though ye dwell afar off, there is none
   But hears of Ilios on the windy hill,
   And of the plain that the two rivers fill
With murmuring sweet streams the whole year long,
   And walls the Gods have wrought with wondrous skill
Where cometh never man to do us wrong.

XVII.

"Wherefore I sail'd not here for help in war,
   Though well the Argives in such need can aid.
The force that comes on me is other far;
   One that on all men comes:  I seek the maid
   Whom golden Aphrodite shall persuade
To lay her hand in mine, and follow me,
   To my white halls within the cedar shade
Beyond the waters of the barren sea."

XVIII.

Then at the Goddess' name grew Helen pale,
   Like golden stars that flicker in the dawn,
Or like a child that hears a dreadful tale,
   Or like the roses on a rich man's lawn,
   When now the suns of Summer are withdrawn,
And the loose leaves with a sad wind are stirr'd,
   Till the wet grass is strewn with petals wan, -
So paled the golden Helen at his word.

XIX.

But swift the rose into her cheek return'd
   And for a little moment, like a flame,
The perfect face of Argive Helen burn'd,
   As doth a woman's, when some spoken name
   Brings back to mind some ancient love or shame,
But none save Paris mark'd the thing, who said,
   "My tale no more must weary this fair dame,
With telling why I wander all unwed."

XX.

But Helen, bending on him gracious brows,
   Besought him for the story of his quest,
"For sultry is the summer, that allows
   To mortal men no sweeter boon than rest;
   And surely such a tale as thine is best
To make the dainty-footed hours go by,
   Till sinks the sun in darkness and the West,
And soft stars lead the Night along the sky."

XXI.

Then at the word of Helen Paris spoke,
   "My tale is shorter than a summer day, -
My mother, ere I saw the light, awoke,
   At dawn, in Ilios, shrieking in dismay,
   Who dream'd that 'twixt her feet there fell and lay
A flaming brand, that utterly burn'd down
   To dust of crumbling ashes red and grey,
The coronal of towers and all Troy town.

XXII.

"Then the interpretation of this dream
   My father sought at many priestly hands,
Where the white temple doth in Pytho gleam,
   And at the fane of Ammon in the sands,
   And where the oak tree of Dodona stands
With boughs oracular against the sky, -
   And with one voice the Gods from all the lands,
Cried out, 'The child must die, the child must die.'

XXIII.

"Then was I born to sorrow; and in fear
   The dark priest took me from my sire, and bore
A wailing child through beech and pinewood drear,
   Up to the knees of Ida, and the hoar
   Rocks whence a fountain breaketh evermore,
And leaps with shining waters to the sea,
   Through black and rock-wall'd pools without a shore, -
And there they deem'd they took farewell of me.

XXIV.

"But round my neck they tied a golden ring
   That fell from Ganymedes when he soar'd
High over Ida on the eagle's wing,
   To dwell for ever with the Gods adored,
   To be the cup-bearer beside the board
Of Zeus, and kneel at the eternal throne, -
   A jewel 'twas from old King Tros's hoard,
That ruled in Ilios ages long agone.

XXV.

"And there they left me in that dell untrod, -
   Shepherd nor huntsman ever wanders there,
For dread of Pan, that is a jealous God, -
   Yea, and the ladies of the streams forbear
   The Naiad nymphs, to weave their dances fair,
Or twine their yellow tresses with the shy
   Fronds of forget-me-not and maiden-hair, -
There had the priests appointed me to die.

XXVI.

"But vainly doth a man contend with Fate!
   My father had less pity on his son
Than wild things of the woodland desolate.
   'Tis said that ere the Autumn day was done
   A great she-bear, that in these rocks did wonn,
Beheld a sleeping babe she did convey
   Down to a den beheld not of the sun,
The cavern where her own soft litter lay.

XXVII.

"And therein was I nurtured wondrously,
   So Rumour saith:  I know not of these things,
For mortal men are ever wont to lie,
   Whene'er they speak of sceptre-bearing kings:
   I tell what I was told, for memory brings
No record of those days, that are as deep
   Lost as the lullaby a mother sings
In ears of children that are fallen on sleep.

XXVIII.

"Men say that now five autumn days had pass'd,
   When Agelaus, following a hurt deer,
Trod soft on crackling acorns, and the mast
   That lay beneath the oak and beech-wood sere,
   In dread lest angry Pan were sleeping near,
Then heard a cry from forth a cavern grey,
   And peeping round the fallen rocks in fear,
Beheld where in the wild beast's tracks I lay.

XXIX.

"So Agelaus bore me from the wild,
   Down to his hut; and with his children I
Was nurtured, being, as was deem'd, the child
   Of Hermes, or some mountain deity;
   For these with the wild nymphs are wont to lie
Within the holy caverns, where the bee
   Can scarcely find a darkling path to fly
Through veils of bracken and the ivy-tree.

XXX.

"So with the shepherds on the hills I stray'd,
   And drave the kine to feed where rivers run,
And play'd upon the reed-pipe in the shade,
   And scarcely knew my manhood was begun,
   The pleasant years still passing one by one,
Till I was chiefest of the mountain men,
   And clomb the peaks that take the snow and sun,
And braved the anger'd lion in his den.

XXXI.

"Now in my herd of kine was one more dear
   By far than all the rest, and fairer far;
A milkwhite bull, the captive of my spear,
   And all the wondering shepherds called him STAR:
   And still he led his fellows to the war,
When the lean wolves against the herds came down,
   Then would he charge, and drive their hosts afar
Beyond the pastures to the forests brown.

XXXII.

"Now so it chanced that on an autumn morn,
   King Priam sought a goodly bull to slay
In memory of his child, no sooner born
   Than midst the lonely mountains cast away,
   To die ere scarce he had beheld the day;
And Priam's men came wandering afar
   To that green pool where by the flocks I lay,
And straight they coveted the goodly STAR,

XXXIII.

"And drave him, no word spoken, to the town:
   One man mine arrow lit on, and he fell;
His comrades held me off, and down and down,
   Through golden windings of the autumn dell,
   They spurr'd along the beast that loved me well,
Till red were his white sides; I following,
   Wrath in my heart, their evil deeds to tell
In Ilios, at the footstool of the King.

XXXIV.

"But ere they came to the God-builded wall,
   They spied a meadow by the water-side,
And there the men of Troy were gathered all
   For joust and play; and Priam's sons defied
   All other men in all Maeonia wide
To strive with them in boxing and in speed.
   Victorious with the shepherds had I vied,
So boldly followed to that flowery mead.

XXXV.

"Maeonia, Phrygia, Troia there were met,
   And there the King, child of Laomedon,
Rich prizes for the vanquishers had set,
   Damsels, and robes, and cups that like the sun
   Shone, but the white bull was the chiefest one;
And him the victor in the games should slay
   To Zeus, the King of Gods, when all was done,
And so with sacrifice should crown the day.

XXXVI.

"Now it were over long, methinks, to tell
   The contest of the heady charioteers,
Of them the goal that turn'd, and them that fell.
   But I outran the young men of my years,
   And with the bow did I out-do my peers,
And wrestling; and in boxing, over-bold,
   I strove with Hector of the ashen spears,
Yea, till the deep-voiced Heralds bade us hold.

XXXVII.

"Then Priam hail'd me winner of the day;
   Mine were the maid, the cup, and chiefest prize,
Mine own fair milkwhite bull was mine to slay;
   But then the murmurs wax'd to angry cries,
   And hard men set on me in deadly wise,
My brethren, though they knew it not; I turn'd,
   And fled unto the place of sacrifice,
Where altars to the God of strangers burn'd.

XXXVIII.

"At mine own funeral feast, had I been slain,
   But, fearing Zeus, they halted for a space,
And lo, Apollo's priestess with a train
   Of holy maidens came into that place,
   And far did she outshine the rest in grace,
But in her eyes such dread was frozen then
   As glares eternal from the Gorgon's face
Wherewith Athene quells the ranks of men.

XXXIX.

"She was old Priam's daughter, long ago
   Apollo loved her, and did not deny
His gifts,--the things that are to be to know,
   The tongue of sooth-saying that cannot lie,
   And knowledge gave he of all birds that fly
'Neath heaven; and yet his prayer did she disdain.
   So he his gifts confounded utterly,
And sooth she saith, but evermore in vain.

XL.

"She, when her dark eyes fell on me, did stand
   At gaze a while, with wan lips murmuring,
And then came nigh to me, and took my hand,
   And led me to the footstool of the King,
   And call'd me 'brother,' and drew forth the ring
That men had found upon me in the wild,
   For still I bore it as a precious thing,
The token of a father to his child.

XLI.

"This sign Cassandra show'd to Priam:  straight
   The King wax'd pale, and ask'd what this might be?
And she made answer, 'Sir, and King, thy fate
   That comes to all men born hath come on thee;
   This shepherd is thine own child verily:
How like to thine his shape, his brow, his hands!
   Nay there is none but hath the eyes to see
That here the child long lost to Troia stands.'

XLII.

"Then the King bare me to his lofty hall,
   And there we feasted in much love and mirth,
And Priam to the mountain sent for all
   That knew me, and the manner of my birth:
   And now among the great ones of the earth
In royal robe and state behold me set,
   And one fell thing I fear not; even dearth,
Whate'er the Gods remember or forget.

XLIII.

"My new rich life had grown a common thing,
   The pleasant years still passing one by one,
When deep in Ida was I wandering
   The glare of well-built Ilios to shun,
   In summer, ere the day was wholly done,
When I beheld a goodly prince,--the hair
   To bloom upon his lip had scarce begun, -
The season when the flower of youth is fair.

XLIV.

"Then knew I Hermes by his golden wand
   Wherewith he lulls the eyes of men to sleep;
But, nodding with his brows, he bade me stand,
   And spake, 'To-night thou hast a tryst to keep,
   With Goddesses within the forest deep;
And Paris, lovely things shalt thou behold,
   More fair than they for which men war and weep,
Kingdoms, and fame, and victories, and gold.

XLV.

"'For, lo! to-night within the forest dim
   Do Aphrodite and Athene meet,
And Hera, who to thee shall bare each limb,
   Each grace from golden head to ivory feet,
   And thee, fair shepherd Paris, they entreat
As thou 'mongst men art beauteous, to declare
   Which Queen of Queens immortal is most sweet,
And doth deserve the meed of the most fair.

XLVI.

"'For late between them rose a bitter strife
   In Peleus' halls upon his wedding day,
When Peleus took him an immortal wife,
   And there was bidden all the God's array,
   Save Discord only; yet she brought dismay,
And cast an apple on the bridal board,
   With "Let the fairest bear the prize away"
Deep on its golden rind and gleaming scored.

XLVII.

"'Now in the sudden night, whenas the sun
   In Tethys' silver arms hath slept an hour,
Shalt thou be had into the forest dun,
   And brought unto a dark enchanted bower,
   And there of Goddesses behold the flower
With very beauty burning in the night,
   And these will offer Wisdom, Love, and Power;
Then, Paris, be thou wise, and choose aright!'

XLVIII.

"He spake, and pass'd, and Night without a breath,
   Without a star drew on; and now I heard
The voice that in the springtime wandereth,
   The crying of Dame Hera's shadowy bird;
   And soon the silence of the trees was stirred
By the wise fowl of Pallas; and anigh,
   More sweet than is a girl's first loving word,
The doves of Aphrodite made reply.

XLIX.

"These voices did I follow through the trees,
   Threading the coppice 'neath a starless sky,
When, lo! the very Queen of Goddesses,
   In golden beauty gleaming wondrously,
   Even she that hath the Heaven for canopy,
And in the arms of mighty Zeus doth sleep, -
   And then for dread methought that I must die,
But Hera called me with soft voice and deep:

L.

"'Paris, give me the prize, and thou shalt reign
   O'er many lordly peoples, far and wide,
From them that till the black and crumbling plain,
   Where the sweet waters of Aegyptus glide,
   To those that on the Northern marches ride,
And the Ceteians, and the blameless men
   That round the rising-place of Morn abide,
And all the dwellers in the Asian fen.

LI.

"'And I will love fair Ilios as I love
   Argos and rich Mycenae, that doth hoard
Deep wealth; and I will make thee king above
   A hundred peoples; men shall call thee lord
   In tongues thou know'st not; thou shalt be adored
With sacrifice, as are the Gods divine,
   If only thou wilt speak a little word,
And say the prize of loveliness is mine.'

LII.

"Then, as I doubted, like a sudden flame
   Of silver came Athene, and methought
Beholding her, how stately, as she came,
   That dim wood to a fragrant fane was wrought;
   So pure the warlike maiden seem'd, that nought
But her own voice commanding made me raise
   Mine eyes to see her beauty, who besought
In briefest words the guerdon of all praise.

LIII.

"She spake:  'Nor wealth nor crowns are in my gift;
   But wisdom, but the eyes that glance afar,
But courage, and the spirit that is swift
   To cleave her path through all the waves of war;
   Endurance that the Fates can never mar;
These, and my loving friendship,--these are thine,
   And these shall guide thee, steadfast as a star,
If thou hast eyes to know the prize is mine.'

LIV.

"Last, in a lovely mist of rosy fire,
   Came Aphrodite through the forest glade,
The queen of all delight and all desire,
   More fair than when her naked foot she laid
   On the blind mere's wild wave that sank dismay'd,
What time the sea grew smoother than a lake;
   I was too happy to be sore afraid.
And like a song her voice was when she spake:

LV.

"'Oh Paris, what is power?  Tantalus
   And Sisyphus were kings long time ago,
But now they lie in the Lake Dolorous,
   The hills of hell are noisy with their woe;
   Ay, swift the tides of Empire ebb and flow,
And that is quickly lost was hardly won,
   As Ilios herself o'erwell did know
When high walls help'd not King Laomedon.

LVI.

"'And what are strength and courage? for the child
   Of mighty Zeus, the strong man Herakles,
Knew many days and evil, ere men piled
   The pyre in Oeta, where he got his ease
   In death, where all the ills of brave men cease.
Nay, Love I proffer thee; beyond the brine
   Of all the currents of the Western seas,
The fairest woman in the world is thine!'

LVII.

"She spake, and touched the prize, and all grew dim
   I heard no voice of anger'd Deity,
But round me did the night air swoon and swim,
   And, when I waken'd, lo! the sun was high,
   And in that place accursed did I lie,
Where Agelaus found the naked child;
   Then with swift foot I did arise and fly
Forth from the deeps of that enchanted wild.

LVIII.

"And down I sped to Ilios, down the dell
   Where, years agone, the white bull guided me,
And through green boughs beheld where foam'd and fell
   The merry waters of the Western sea;
   Of Love the sweet birds sang from sky and tree,
And swift I reach'd the haven and the shore,
   And call'd my mariners, and follow'd free
Where Love might lead across the waters hoar.

LIX.

"Three days with fair winds ran we, then we drave
   Before the North that made the long waves swell
Round Malea; but hardly from the wave
   We 'scaped at Pylos, Nestor's citadel;
   And there the son of Neleus loved us well,
And brought us to the high prince, Diocles,
   Who led us hither, and it thus befell
That here, below thy roof, we sit at ease."

LX.

Then all men gave the stranger thanks and praise,
   And Menelaus for red wine bade call;
And the sun fell, and dark were all the ways;
   Then maidens set forth braziers in the hall,
   And heap'd them high with lighted brands withal;
But Helen pass'd, as doth the fading day
   Pass from the world, and softly left them all
Loud o'er their wine amid the twilight grey.

LXI.

So night drew on with rain, nor yet they ceased
   Within the hall to drink the gleaming wine,
And late they pour'd the last cup of the feast,
   To Argus-bane, the Messenger divine;
   And last, 'neath torches tall that smoke and shine,
The maidens strew'd the beds with purple o'er,
   That Diocles and Paris might recline
All night, beneath the echoing corridor.



BOOK II--THE SPELL OF APHRODITE



The coming of Aphrodite, and how she told Helen that she must depart
in company with Paris, but promised withal that Helen, having fallen
into a deep sleep, should awake forgetful of her old life, and
ignorant of her shame, and blameless of those evil deeds that the
Goddess thrust upon her.

I.

Now in the upper chamber o'er the gate
   Lay Menelaus on his carven bed,
And swift and sudden as the stroke of Fate
   A deep sleep fell upon his weary head.
   But the soft-winged God with wand of lead
Came not near Helen; wistful did she lie,
   Till dark should change to grey, and grey to red,
And golden throned Morn sweep o'er the sky.

II.

Slow pass'd the heavy night:  like one who fears
   The step of murder, she lies quivering,
If any cry of the night bird she hears;
   And strains her eyes to mark some dreadful thing,
   If but the curtains of the window swing,
Stirr'd by the breath of night, and still she wept
   As she were not the daughter of a king,
And no strong king, her lord, beside her slept.

III.

Now in that hour, the folk who watch the night,
   Shepherds and fishermen, and they that ply
Strange arts and seek their spells in the star-light,
   Beheld a marvel in the sea and sky,
   For all the waves of all the seas that sigh
Between the straits of Helle and the Nile,
   Flush'd with a flame of silver suddenly,
From soft Cythera to the Cyprian isle.

IV.

And Hesperus, the kindest star of heaven,
   That bringeth all things good, wax'd pale, and straight
There fell a flash of white malignant levin
   Among the gleaming waters desolate;
   The lights of sea and sky did mix and mate
And change to rosy flame, and thence did fly
   The lovely Queen of Love that turns to hate,
Like summer lightnings 'twixt the sea and sky.

V.

And now the bower of Helen fill'd with light,
   And now she knew the thing that she did fear
Was close upon her (for the black of night
   Doth burn like fire, whene'er the Gods are near);
   Then shone like flame each helm and shield and spear
That hung within the chamber of the King,
   But he,--though all the bower as day was clear, -
Slept as they sleep that know no wakening.

VI.

But Helen leap'd from her fair carven bed
   As some tormented thing that fear makes bold,
And on the ground she beat her golden head
   And pray'd with bitter moanings manifold.
   Yet knew that she could never move the cold
Heart of the lovely Goddess, standing there,
   Her feet upon a little cloud, a fold
Of silver cloud about her bosom bare.

VII.

So stood Queen Aphrodite, as she stands
   Unmoved in her bright mansion, when in vain
Some naked maiden stretches helpless hands
   And shifts the magic wheel, and burns the grain,
   And cannot win her lover back again,
Nor her old heart of quiet any more,
   Where moonlight floods the dim Sicilian main,
And the cool wavelets break along the shore.

VIII.

Then Helen ceased from unavailing prayer,
   And rose and faced the Goddess steadily,
Till even the laughter-loving lady fair
   Half shrank before the anger of her eye,
   And Helen cried with an exceeding cry,
"Why does Zeus live, if we indeed must be
   No more than sullen spoils of destiny,
And slaves of an adulteress like thee?

IX.

"What wilt thou with me, mistress of all woe?
   Say, wilt thou bear me to another land
Where thou hast other lovers?  Rise and go
   Where dark the pine trees upon Ida stand,
   For there did one unloose thy girdle band;
Or seek the forest where Adonis bled,
   Or wander, wander on the yellow sand,
Where thy first lover strew'd thy bridal bed.

X.

"Ah, thy first lover! who is first or last
   Of men and gods, unnumber'd and unnamed?
Lover by lover in the race is pass'd,
   Lover by lover, outcast and ashamed.
   Oh, thou of many names, and evil famed!
What wilt thou with me?  What must I endure
   Whose soul, for all thy craft, is never tamed?
Whose heart, for all thy wiles, is ever pure?

XI.

"Behold, my heart is purer than the plume
   Upon the stainless pinions of the swan,
And thou wilt smirch and stain it with the fume
   Of all thy hateful lusts Idalian.
   My name shall be a hissing that a man
Shall smile to speak, and women curse and hate,
   And on my little child shall come a ban,
And all my lofty home be desolate.

XII.

"Is it thy will that like a golden cup
   From lip to lip of heroes I must go,
And be but as a banner lifted up,
   To beckon where the winds of war may blow?
   Have I not seen fair Athens in her woe,
And all her homes aflame from sea to sea,
   When my fierce brothers wrought her overthrow
Because Athenian Theseus carried me -

XIII.

"Me, in my bloomless youth, a maiden child,
   From Artemis' pure altars and her fane,
And bare me, with Pirithous the wild
   To rich Aphidna?  Many a man was slain,
   And wet with blood the fair Athenian plain,
And fired was many a goodly temple then,
   But fire nor blood can purify the stain
Nor make my name reproachless among men."

XIV.

Then Helen ceased, her passion like a flame
   That slays the thing it lives by, blazed and fell,
As faint as waves at dawn, though fierce they came,
   By night to storm some rocky citadel;
   For Aphrodite answer'd,--like a spell
Her voice makes strength of mortals pass away, -
   "Dost thou not know that I have loved thee well,
And never loved thee better than to-day?

XV.

"Behold, thine eyes are wet, thy cheeks are wan,
   Yet art thou born of an immortal sire,
The child of Nemesis and of the Swan;
   Thy veins should run with ichor and with fire.
   Yet this is thy delight and thy desire,
To love a mortal lord, a mortal child,
   To live, unpraised of lute, unhymn'd of lyre,
As any woman pure and undefiled.

XVI.

"Thou art the toy of Gods, an instrument
   Wherewith all mortals shall be plagued or blest,
Even at my pleasure; yea, thou shalt be bent
   This way and that, howe'er it like me best:
   And following thee, as tides the moon, the West
Shall flood the Eastern coasts with waves of war,
   And thy vex'd soul shall scarcely be at rest,
Even in the havens where the deathless are.

XVII.

"The instruments of men are blind and dumb,
   And this one gift I give thee, to be blind
And heedless of the thing that is to come,
   And ignorant of that which is behind;
   Bearing an innocent forgetful mind
In each new fortune till I visit thee
   And stir thy heart, as lightning and the wind
Bear fire and tumult through a sleeping sea.

XVIII.

"Thou shalt forget Hermione; forget
   Thy lord, thy lofty palace, and thy kin;
Thy hand within a stranger's shalt thou set,
   And follow him, nor deem it any sin;
   And many a strange land wand'ring shalt thou win,
And thou shalt come to an unhappy town,
   And twenty long years shalt thou dwell therein,
Before the Argives mar its towery crown.

XIX.

"And of thine end I speak not, but thy name, -
   Thy name which thou lamentest,--that shall be
A song in all men's speech, a tongue of flame
   Between the burning lips of Poesy;
   And the nine daughters of Mnemosyne,
With Prince Apollo, leader of the nine,
   Shall make thee deathless in their minstrelsy!
Yea, for thou shalt outlive the race divine,

XX.

"The race of Gods, for like the sons of men
   We Gods have but our season, and go by;
And Cronos pass'd, and Uranus, and then
   Shall Zeus and all his children utterly
   Pass, and new Gods be born, and reign, and die, -
But thee shall lovers worship evermore
   What Gods soe'er usurp the changeful sky,
Or flit to the irremeable shore.

XXI.

"Now sleep and dream not, sleep the long day through,
   And the brief watches of the summer night,
And then go forth amid the flowers and dew,
   Where the red rose of Dawn outburns the white.
   Then shalt thou learn my mercy and my might
Between the drowsy lily and the rose;
   There shalt thou spell the meaning of delight,
And know such gladness as a Goddess knows!"

XXII.

Then Sleep came floating from the Lemnian isle,
   And over Helen crush'd his poppy crown,
Her soft lids waver'd for a little while,
   Then on her carven bed she laid her down,
   And Sleep, the comforter of king and clown,
Kind Sleep the sweetest, near akin to Death,
   Held her as close as Death doth men that drown,
So close that none might hear her inward breath -

XXIII.

So close no man might tell she was not dead!
   And then the Goddess took her zone,--where lies
All her enchantment, love and lustihead,
   And the glad converse that beguiles the wise,
   And grace the very Gods may not despise,
And sweet Desire that doth the whole world move, -
   And therewith touch'd she Helen's sleeping eyes
And made her lovely as the Queen of Love.

XXIV.

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite went
   To far Idalia, over land and sea,
And scarce the fragrant cedar-branches bent
   Beneath her footsteps, faring daintily;
   And in Idalia the Graces three
Anointed her with oil ambrosial, -
   So to her house in Sidon wended she
To mock the prayers of lovers when they call.

XXV.

And all day long the incense and the smoke
   Lifted, and fell, and soft and slowly roll'd,
And many a hymn and musical awoke
   Between the pillars of her house of gold,
   And rose-crown'd girls, and fair boys linen-stoled,
Did sacrifice her fragrant courts within,
   And in dark chapels wrought rites manifold
The loving favour of the Queen to win.

XXVI.

But Menelaus, waking suddenly,
   Beheld the dawn was white, the day was near,
And rose, and kiss'd fair Helen; no good-bye
   He spake, and never mark'd a fallen tear, -
   Men know not when they part for many a year, -
He grasp'd a bronze-shod lance in either hand,
   And merrily went forth to drive the deer,
With Paris, through the dewy morning land.

XXVII.

So up the steep sides of Taygetus
   They fared, and to the windy hollows came,
While from the streams of deep Oceanus
   The sun arose, and on the fields did flame;
   And through wet glades the huntsmen drave the game,
And with them Paris sway'd an ashen spear,
   Heavy, and long, and shod with bronze to tame
The mountain-dwelling goats and forest deer.

XXVIII.

Now in a copse a mighty boar there lay,
   For through the boughs the wet winds never blew,
Nor lit the bright sun on it with his ray,
   Nor rain might pierce the woven branches through,
   But leaves had fallen deep the lair to strew:
Then questing of the hounds and men's foot-fall
   Aroused the boar, and forth he sprang to view,
With eyes that burn'd, at bay, before them all.

XXIX.

Then Paris was the first to rush on him,
   With spear aloft in his strong hand to smite,
And through the monster pierced the point; and dim
   The flame fell in his eyes, and all his might
   With his last cry went forth; forgetting fight,
Forgetting strength, he fell, and gladly then
   They gather'd round, and dealt with him aright;
Then left his body with the serving men.

XXX.

Now birds were long awake, that with their cry
   Were wont to waken Helen; and the dew
Where fell the sun upon the lawn was dry,
   And all the summer land was glad anew;
   And maidens' footsteps rang the palace through,
And with their footsteps chimed their happy song,
   And one to other cried, "A marvel new
That soft-wing'd Sleep hath held the Queen so long!"

XXXI.

Then Phylo brought the child Hermione,
   And close unto her mother's side she crept,
And o'er her god-like beauty tumbled she,
   Chiding her sweetly that so late she slept,
   And babbling still a merry coil she kept;
But like a woman stiff beneath her shroud
   Lay Helen; till the young child fear'd and wept,
And ran, and to her nurses cried aloud.

XXXII.

Then came the women quickly, and in dread
   Gather'd round Helen, but might naught avail
To wake her; moveless as a maiden dead
   That Artemis hath slain, yet nowise pale,
   She lay; but Aethra did begin the wail,
And all the women with sad voice replied,
   Who deem'd her pass'd unto the poplar vale
Wherein doth dread Persephone abide.

XXXIII.

Ah! slowly pass'd the miserable day
   In the rich house that late was full of pride;
Then the sun fell, and all the paths were grey,
   And Menelaus from the mountain-side
   Came, and through palace doors all open wide
Rang the wild dirge that told him of the thing
   That Helen, that the Queen had strangely died.
Then on his threshold fell he grovelling,

XXXIV.

And cast the dust upon his yellow hair,
   And, but that Paris leap'd and held his hand,
His hunter's knife would he have clutch'd, and there
   Had slain himself, to follow to that land
   Where flit the ghosts of men, a shadowy band
That have no more delight, no more desire,
   When once the flesh hath burn'd down like a brand,
Drench'd by the dark wine on the funeral pyre:

XXXV.

So on the ashen threshold lay the king,
   And all within the house was chill and drear;
The women watchers gather'd in a ring
   About the bed of Helen and her bier;
   And much had they to tell, and much to hear,
Of happy queens and fair, untimely dead, -
   Such joy they took amid their evil cheer, -
While the low thunder muttered overhead.



BOOK III--THE FLIGHT OF HELEN



The flight of Helen and Paris from Lacedaemon, and of what things
befell them in their voyaging, and how they came to Troy.

I.

The grey Dawn's daughter, rosy Morn awoke
   In old Tithonus' arms, and suddenly
Let harness her swift steeds beneath the yoke,
   And drave her shining chariot through the sky.
   Then men might see the flocks of Thunder fly,
All gold and rose, the azure pastures through,
   What time the lark was carolling on high
Above the gardens drench'd with rainy dew.

II.

But Aphrodite sent a slumber deep
   On all in the King's palace, young and old,
And one by one the women fell asleep, -
   Their lamentable tales left half untold, -
   Before the dawn, when folk wax weak and cold,
But Helen waken'd with the shining morn,
   Forgetting quite her sorrows manifold,
And light of heart as was the day new-born.

III.

She had no memory of unhappy things,
   She knew not of the evil days to come,
Forgotten were her ancient wanderings,
   And as Lethaean waters wholly numb
   The sense of spirits in Elysium,
That no remembrance may their bliss alloy,
   Even so the rumour of her days was dumb,
And all her heart was ready for new joy.

IV.

The young day knows not of an elder dawn,
   Joys of old noons, old sorrows of the night,
And so from Helen was the past withdrawn,
   Her lord, her child, her home forgotten quite,
   Lost in the marvel of a new delight:
She was as one who knows he shall not die,
   When earthly colours melt into the bright
Pure splendour of his immortality.

V.

Then Helen rose, and all her body fair
   She bath'd in the spring water, pure and cold,
And with her hand bound up her shining hair
   And clothed her in the raiment that of old
   Athene wrought with marvels manifold,
A bridal gift from an immortal hand,
   And all the front was clasp'd with clasps of gold,
And for the girdle was a golden band.

VI.

Next from her upper chamber silently
   Went Helen, moving like a morning dream.
She did not know the golden roof, the high
   Walls, and the shields that on the pillars gleam,
   Only she heard the murmur of the stream
That waters all the garden's wide expanse,
   This song, and cry of singing birds, did seem
To guide her feet as music guides the dance.

VII.

The music drew her on to the glad air
   From forth the chamber of enchanted death,
And lo! the world was waking everywhere;
   The wind went by, a cool delicious breath,
   Like that which in the gardens wandereth,
The golden gardens of the Hesperides,
   And in its song unheard of things it saith,
The myriad marvels of the fairy seas.

VIII.

So through the courtyard to the garden close
   Went Helen, where she heard the murmuring
Of water 'twixt the lily and the rose;
   For thereby doth a double fountain spring.
   To one stream do the women pitchers bring
By Menelaus' gates, at close of day;
   The other through the close doth shine and sing,
Then to the swift Eurotas fleets away.

IX.

And Helen sat her down upon the grass,
   And pluck'd the little daisies white and red,
And toss'd them where the running waters pass,
   To watch them racing from the fountain-head,
   And whirl'd about where little streams dispread;
And still with merry birds the garden rang,
   And, MARRY, MARRY, in their song they said,
Or so do maids interpret that they sang.

X.

Then stoop'd she down, and watch'd the crystal stream,
   And fishes poising where the waters ran,
And lo! upon the glass a golden gleam,
   And purple as of robes Sidonian,
   Then, sudden turning, she beheld a man,
That knelt beside her; as her own face fair
   Was his, and o'er his shoulders for a span
Fell the bright tresses of his yellow hair.

XI.

Then either look'd on other with amaze
   As each had seen a God; for no long while
They marvell'd, but as in the first of days,
   The first of men and maids did meet and smile,
   And Aphrodite did their hearts beguile,
So hands met hands, lips lips, with no word said
   Were they enchanted 'neath that leafy aisle,
And silently were woo'd, betroth'd, and wed.

XII.

Ah, slowly did their silence wake to words
   That scarce had more of meaning than the song
Pour'd forth of the innumerable birds
   That fill the palace gardens all day long;
   So innocent, so ignorant of wrong,
Was she, so happy each in other's eyes,
   Thus wrought the mighty Goddess that is strong,
Even to make naught the wisdom of the wise.

XIII.

Now in the midst of that enchanted place
   Right gladly had they linger'd all day through,
And fed their love upon each other's face,
   But Aphrodite had a counsel new,
   And silently to Paris' side she drew,
In guise of Aethra, whispering that the day
   Pass'd on, while his ship waited, and his crew
Impatient, in the narrow Gythian bay.

XIV.

For thither had she brought them by her skill;
   But Helen saw her not,--nay, who can see
A Goddess come or go against her will?
   Then Paris whisper'd, "Come, ah, Love, with me!
   Come to a shore beyond the barren sea;
There doth the bridal crown await thy head,
   And there shall all the land be glad of thee!"
Then, like a child, she follow'd where he led.

XV.

For, like a child's her gentle heart was glad.
   So through the courtyard pass'd they to the gate;
And even there, as Aphrodite bade,
   The steeds of Paris and the chariots wait;
   Then to the well-wrought car he led her straight,
And grasped the shining whip and golden rein,
   And swift they drave until the day was late
By clear Eurotas through the fruitful plain.

XVI.

But now within the halls the magic sleep
   Was broken, and men sought them everywhere;
Yet Aphrodite cast a cloud so deep
   About their chariot none might see them there.
   And strangely did they hear the trumpets blare,
And noise of racing wheels; yet saw they nought:
   Then died the sounds upon the distant air,
And safe they won the haven that they sought.

XVII.

Beneath a grassy cliff, beneath the down,
   Where swift Eurotas mingles with the sea,
There climb'd the grey walls of a little town,
   The sleepy waters wash'd it languidly,
   For tempests in that haven might not be.
The isle across the inlet guarded all,
   And the shrill winds that roam the ocean free
Broke and were broken on the rocky wall.

XVIII.

Then Paris did a point of hunting blow,
   Nor yet the sound had died upon the hill
When round the isle they spied a scarlet prow,
   And oars that flash'd into that haven still,
   The oarsmen bending forward with a will,
And swift their black ship to the haven-side
   They brought, and steer'd her in with goodly skill,
And bare on board the strange Achaean bride.

XIX.

Now while the swift ship through the waters clave,
   All happy things that in the waters dwell,
Arose and gamboll'd on the glassy wave,
   And Nereus led them with his sounding shell:
   Yea, the sea-nymphs, their dances weaving well,
In the green water gave them greeting free.
   Ah, long light linger'd, late the darkness fell,
That night, upon the isle of Cranae!

XX.

And Hymen shook his fragrant torch on high,
   Till all its waves of smoke and tongues of flame,
Like clouds of rosy gold fulfill'd the sky;
   And all the Nereids from the waters came,
   Each maiden with a musical sweet name;
Doris, and Doto, and Amphithoe;
   And their shrill bridal song of love and shame
Made music in the silence of the sea.

XXI.

For this was like that night of summer weather,
   When mortal men and maidens without fear,
And forest-nymphs, and forest-gods together,
   Do worship Pan in the long twilight clear.
   And Artemis this one night spares the deer,
And every cave and dell, and every grove
   Is glad with singing soft and happy cheer,
With laughter, and with dalliance, and with love.

* * * * *

XXII.

Now when the golden-throned Dawn arose
   To waken gods and mortals out of sleep,
Queen Aphrodite sent the wind that blows
   From fairy gardens of the Western deep.
   The sails are spread, the oars of Paris leap
Past many a headland, many a haunted fane:
   And, merrily all from isle to isle they sweep
O'er the wet ways across the barren plain.

XXIII.

By many an island fort, and many a haven
   They sped, and many a crowded arsenal:
They saw the loves of Gods and men engraven
   On friezes of Astarte's temple wall.
   They heard that ancient shepherd Proteus call
His flock from forth the green and tumbling lea,
   And saw white Thetis with her maidens all
Sweep up to high Olympus from the sea.

XXIV.

They saw the vain and weary toil of men,
   The ships that win the rich man all he craves;
They pass'd the red-prow'd barks Egyptian,
   And heard afar the moaning of the slaves
   Pent in the dark hot hold beneath the waves;
And scatheless the Sardanian fleets among
   They sail'd; by men that sow the sea with graves,
Bearing black fate to folk of alien tongue.

XXV.

Then all day long a rolling cloud of smoke
   Would hang on the sea-limits, faint and far,
But through the night the beacon-flame upbroke
   From some rich island-town begirt with war;
   And all these things could neither make nor mar
The joy of lovers wandering, but they
   Sped happily, and heedless of the star
That hung o'er their glad haven, far away.

XXVI.

The fisher-sentinel upon the height
   Watch'd them with vacant eyes, and little knew
They bore the fate of Troy; to him the bright
   Plashed waters, with the silver shining through
   When tunny shoals came cruising in the blue,
Was more than Love that doth the world unmake;
   And listless gazed he as the gulls that flew
And shriek'd and chatter'd in the vessel's wake.

XXVII.

So the wind drave them, and the waters bare
   Across the great green plain unharvested,
Till through an after-glow they knew the fair
   Faint rose of snow on distant Ida's head.
   And swifter then the joyous oarsmen sped;
But night was ended, and the waves were fire
   Beneath the fleet feet of a dawning red
Or ere they won the land of their desire.

XXVIII.

Now when the folk about the haven knew
   The scarlet prow of Paris, swift they ran
And the good ship within the haven drew,
   And merrily their welcoming began.
   But none the face of Helen dared to scan;
Their bold eyes fell before they had their fill,
   For all men deem'd her that Idalian
Who loved Anchises on the lonely hill.

XXIX.

But when her sweet smile and her gentleness
   And her kind speech had won them from dismay,
They changed their minds, and 'gan the Gods to bless
   Who brought to Ilios that happy day.
   And all the folk fair Helen must convey,
Crown'd like a bride, and clad with flame-hued pall,
   Through the rich plain, along the water-way
Right to the great gates of the Ilian wall.

XXX.

And through the vines they pass'd, where old and young
   Had no more heed of the glad vintaging,
But all unpluck'd the purple clusters hung,
   Nor more of Linus did the minstrel sing,
   For he and all the folk were following,
Wine-stain'd and garlanded, in merry bands,
   Like men when Dionysus came as king,
And led his revel from the sun-burnt lands,

XXXI.

So from afar the music and the shout
   Roll'd up to Ilios and the Scaean gate,
And at the sound the city folk came out
   And bore sweet Helen--such a fairy weight
   As none might deem the burden of Troy's fate -
Across the threshold of the town, and all
   Flock'd with her, where King Priam sat in state,
Girt by his elders, on the Ilian wall.

XXXII.

No man but knew him by his crown of gold,
   And golden-studded sceptre, and his throne;
Ay, strong he seem'd as those great kings of old,
   Whose image is eternal on the stone
   Won from the dust that once was Babylon;
But kind of mood was he withal, and mild,
   And when his eyes on Argive Helen shone,
He loved her as a father doth a child.

XXXIII.

Round him were set his peers, as Panthous,
   Antenor, and Agenor, hardly grey,
Scarce touch'd as yet with age, nor garrulous
   As are cicalas on a sunny day:
   Such might they be when years had slipp'd away,
And made them over-weak for war or joy,
   Content to watch the Leaguer as it lay
Beside the ships, beneath the walls of Troy.

XXXIV.

Then Paris had an easy tale to tell,
   Which then might win upon men's wond'ring ears,
Who deem'd that Gods with mortals deign to dwell,
   And that the water of the West enspheres
   The happy Isles that know not Death nor tears;
Yea, and though monsters do these islands guard,
   Yet men within their coasts had dwelt for years
Uncounted, with a strange love for reward.

XXXV.

And there had Paris ventured:  so said he, -
   Had known the Sirens' song, and Circe's wile;
And in a cove of that Hesperian sea
   Had found a maiden on a lonely isle;
   A sacrifice, if so men might beguile
The wrath of some beast-god they worshipp'd there,
   But Paris, 'twixt the sea and strait defile,
Had slain the beast, and won the woman fair.

XXXVI.

Then while the happy people cried "Well done,"
   And Priam's heart was melted by the tale -
For Paris was his best-beloved son -
   Came a wild woman, with wet eyes, and pale
   Sad face, men look'd on when she cast her veil,
Not gladly; and none mark'd the thing she said,
   Yet must they hear her long and boding wail
That follow'd still, however fleet they fled.

XXXVII.

She was the priestess of Apollo's fane,
   Cassandra, and the God of prophecy
Spurr'd her to speak and rent her! but in vain
   She toss'd her wasted arms against the sky,
   And brake her golden circlet angrily,
And shriek'd that they had brought within the gate
   Helen, a serpent at their hearts to lie!
Helen, a hell of people, king, and state!

XXXVIII.

But ere the God had left her; ere she fell
   And foam'd among her maidens on the ground,
The air was ringing with a merry swell
   Of flute, and pipe, and every sweetest sound,
   In Aphrodite's fane, and all around
Were roses toss'd beneath the glimmering green
   Of that high roof, and Helen there was crown'd
The Goddess of the Trojans, and their Queen.



BOOK IV--THE DEATH OF CORYTHUS



How Helen was made an outcast by the Trojan women, and how OEnone,
the old love of Paris, sent her son Corythus to him as her messenger,
and how Paris slew him unwittingly; and of the curses of OEnone, and
the coming of the Argive host against Troy.

I.

For long in Troia was there peace and mirth,
   The pleasant hours still passing one by one;
And Helen joy'd at each fresh morning's birth,
   And almost wept at setting of the sun,
   For sorrow that the happy day was done;
Nor dream'd of years when she should hate the light,
   And mourn afresh for every day begun,
Nor fare abroad save shamefully by night.

II.

And Paris was not one to backward cast
   A fearful glance; nor pluck sour fruits of sin,
Half ripe; but seized all pleasures while they last,
   Nor boded evil ere ill days begin.
   Nay, nor lamented much when caught therein,
In each adventure always finding joy,
   And hopeful still through waves of war to win
By strength of Hector, and the star of Troy.

III.

Now as the storms drive white sea-birds afar
   Within green upland glens to seek for rest,
So rumours pale of an approaching war
   Were blown across the islands from the west:
   For Agamemnon summon'd all the best
From towns and tribes he ruled, and gave command
   That free men all should gather at his hest
Through coasts and islets of the Argive land.

IV.

Sidonian merchant-men had seen the fleet
   Black war-galleys that sped from town to town;
Had heard the hammers of the bronze-smiths beat
   The long day through, and when the sun went down;
   And thin, said they, would show the leafy crown
On many a sacred mountain-peak in spring,
   For men had fell'd the pine-trees tall and brown
To fashion them curved ships for seafaring.

V.

And still the rumour grew; for heralds came,
   Old men from Argos, bearing holy boughs,
Demanding great atonement for the shame
   And sore despite done Menelaus' house;
   But homeward soon they turn'd their scarlet prows,
And all their weary voyaging was vain;
   For Troy had bound herself with awful vows
To cleave to Helen till the walls were ta'en.

VI.

And now, like swallows ere the winter weather,
   The women in shrill groups were gathering,
With eager tongues still communing together,
   And many a taunt at Helen would they fling,
   Ay, through her innocence she felt the sting,
And shamed was now her gentle face and sweet,
   For e'en the children evil songs would sing
To mock her as she hasted down the street.

VII.

Also the men who worshipp'd her of old
   As she had been a goddess from above,
Gazed at her now with lustful eyes and bold,
   As she were naught but Paris' light-o'-love;
   And though in truth they still were proud enough,
Of that fair gem in their old city set,
   Yet well she knew that wanton word and scoff
Went round the camp-fire when the warriors met.

VIII.

There came a certain holiday when Troy
   Was wont to send her noble matrons all,
Young wives and old, with clamour and with joy,
   To clothe Athene in her temple hall,
   And robe her in a stately broider'd pall.
But now they drove fair Helen from their train,
   "Better," they scream'd, "to cast her from the wall,
Than mock the Gods with offerings in vain."

IX.

One joy she had, that Paris yet was true,
   Ay, fickle Paris, true unto the end;
And in the court of Ilios were two
   Kind hearts, still eager Helen to defend,
   And help and comfort in all need to lend:-
The gentle Hector with soft speech and mild,
   And the old king that ever was her friend,
And loved her as a father doth his child.

X.

These, though they knew not all, these blamed her not,
   But cast the heavy burden on the God,
Whose wrath, they deem'd, had verily waxed hot
   Against the painful race on earth that trod,
   And in God's hand was Helen but the rod
To scourge a people that, in unknown wise,
   Had vex'd the far Olympian abode
With secret sin or stinted sacrifice.

* * * * * *

XI.

The days grew into months, and months to years,
   And still the Argive army did delay,
Till folk in Troia half forgot their fears,
   And almost as of old were glad and gay;
   And men and maids on Ida dared to stray,
But Helen dwelt within her inmost room,
   And there from dawning to declining day,
Wrought at the patient marvels of her loom.

XII.

Yet even there in peace she might not be:
   There was a nymph, OEnone, in the hills,
The daughter of a River-God was she,
   Of Cebren,--that the mountain silence fills
   With murmur'd music, for the countless rills
Of Ida meet him, dancing to the plain, -
   Her Paris wooed, yet ignorant of ills,
Among the shepherd's huts, nor wooed in vain.

XIII.

Nay, Summer often found them by the fold
   In these glad days, ere Paris was a king,
And oft the Autumn, in his car of gold,
   Had pass'd them, merry at the vintaging:
   And scarce they felt the breath of the white wing
Of Winter, in the cave where they would lie
   On beds of heather by the fire, till Spring
Should crown them with her buds in passing by.

XIV.

For elbow-deep their flowery bed was strown
   With fragrant leaves and with crush'd asphodel,
And sweetly still the shepherd-pipe made moan,
   And many a tale of Love they had to tell, -
   How Daphnis loved the strange, shy maiden well,
And how she loved him not, and how he died,
   And oak-trees moan'd his dirge, and blossoms fell
Like tears from lindens by the water-side!

XV.

But colder, fleeter than the Winter's wing,
   Time pass'd; and Paris changed, and now no more
OEnone heard him on the mountain sing,
   Not now she met him in the forest hoar.
   Nay, but she knew that on an alien shore
An alien love he sought; yet was she strong
   To live, who deem'd that even as of yore
In days to come might Paris love her long.

XVI.

For dark OEnone from her Father drew
   A power beyond all price; the gift to deal
With wounded men, though now the dreadful dew
   Of Death anoint them, and the secret seal
   Of Fate be set on them; these might she heal;
And thus OEnone trusted still to save
   Her lover at the point of death, and steal
His life from Helen, and the amorous grave.

XVII.

And she had borne, though Paris knew it not,
   A child, fair Corythus, to be her shame,
And still she mused, whenas her heart was hot,
   "He hath no child by that Achaean dame:"
   But when her boy unto his manhood came,
Then sorer yet OEnone did repine,
   And bade him "fare to Ilios, and claim
Thy father's love, and all that should be thine!"

XVIII.

Therewith a golden bodkin from her hair
   She drew, and from a green-tress'd birchen tree
She pluck'd a strip of smooth white bark and fair,
   And many signs and woful graved she,
   A message of the evil things to be.
Then deftly closed the birch-bark, fold on fold,
   And bound the tokens well and cunningly,
Three times and four times, with a thread of gold.

XIX.

"Give these to Argive Helen's hand," she cried:
   And so embraced her child, and with no fear
Beheld him leaping down the mountain-side,
   Like a king's son that goes to hunt the deer,
   Clad softly, and in either hand a spear,
With two swift-footed hounds that follow'd him,
   So leap'd he down the grassy slopes and sheer,
And won the precinct of the forest dim.

XX.

He trod that ancient path his sire had trod,
   Far, far below he saw the sea, the town;
He moved as light as an immortal god,
   For mansions in Olympus gliding down.
   He left the shadow of the forest brown,
And through the shallow waters did he cross,
   And stood, ere twilight fell, within the crown
Of towers, the sacred keep of Ilios.

XXI.

Now folk that mark'd him hasting deem'd that he
   Had come to tell the host was on its way,
As one that from the hills had seen the sea
   Beclouded with the Danaan array,
   So straight to Paris' house with no delay
They led him, and did eagerly await
   Within the forecourt, in the twilight grey,
To hear some certain message of their fate.

XXII.

Now Paris was asleep upon his bed
   Tired with a listless day; but all along
The palace chambers Corythus was led,
   And still he heard a music, shrill and strong,
   That seem'd to clamour of an old-world wrong,
And hearts a long time broken; last they came
   To Helen's bower, the fountain of the song
That cried so loud against an ancient shame.

XXIII.

And Helen fared before a mighty loom,
   And sang, and cast her shuttle wrought of gold,
And forth unto the utmost secret room
   The wave of her wild melody was roll'd;
   And still she fashion'd marvels manifold,
Strange shapes of fish and serpent, bear and swan,
   The loves of the immortal Gods of old,
Wherefrom the peoples of the world began.

XXIV.

Now Helen met the stranger graciously
   With gentle speech, and bade set forth a chair
Well wrought of cedar wood and ivory
   That wise Icmalius had fashion'd fair.
   But when young Corythus had drunk the rare
Wine of the princes, and had broken bread,
   Then Helen took the word, and bade declare
His instant tidings; and he spake and said,

XXV.

"Lady and Queen, I have a secret word,
   And bear a token sent to none but thee,
Also I bring message to my Lord
   That spoken to another may not be."
   Then Helen gave a sign unto her three
Bower-maidens, and they went forth from that place,
   Silent they went; and all forebodingly,
They left the man and woman face to face.

XXVI.

Then from his breast the birchen scroll he took
   And gave to Helen; and she read therein:
"Oh thou that on those hidden runes dost look,
   Hast thou forgotten quite thine ancient sin,
   Thy Lord, thy lofty palace, and thy kin,
Even as thy Love forgets the words he spoke
   The strong oath broken one weak heart to win,
The lips that kiss'd him, and the heart that broke?

XXVII.

"Nay, but methinks thou shalt not quite forget
   The curse wherewith I curse thee till I die;
The tears that on the wood-nymph's cheeks are wet,
   Shall burn thy hateful beauty deathlessly,
   Nor shall God raise up seed to thee; but I
Have borne thy love this messenger:  my son,
   Who yet shall make him glad, for Time goes by
And soon shall thine enchantments all be done:

XXVIII.

"Ay, soon 'twixt me and Death must be his choice,
   And little in that hour will Paris care
For thy sweet lips, and for thy singing voice,
   Thine arms of ivory, thy golden hair.
   Nay, me will he embrace, and will not spare,
But bid the folk that hate thee have their joy,
   And give thee to the mountain beasts to tear,
Or burn thy body on a tower of Troy."

XXIX.

Even as she read, by Aphrodite's will
   The cloud roll'd back from Helen's memory:
She saw the city of the rifted hill,
   Fair Lacedaemon, 'neath her mountain high;
   She knew the swift Eurotas running by
To mix his sacred waters with the sea,
   And from the garden close she heard the cry
Of her beloved child, Hermione.

XXX.

Then instantly the horror of her shame
   Fell on her, and she saw the coming years;
Famine, and fire, and plague, and all men's blame,
   The wounds of warriors and the women's fears;
   And through her heart her sorrow smote like spears,
And in her soul she knew the utmost smart
   Of wives left lonely, sires bereaved, the tears
Of maidens desolate, of loves that part.

XXXI.

She drain'd the dregs out of the cup of hate;
   The bitterness of sorrow, shame, and scorn;
Where'er the tongues of mortals curse their fate,
   She saw herself an outcast and forlorn;
   And hating sore the day that she was born,
Down in the dust she cast her golden head,
   There with rent raiment and fair tresses torn,
At feet of Corythus she lay for dead.

XXXII.

But Corythus, beholding her sweet face,
   And her most lovely body lying low,
Had pity on her grief and on her grace,
   Nor heeded now she was his mother's foe,
   But did what might be done to ease her woe,
While, as he thought, with death for life she strove,
   And loosed the necklet round her neck of snow,
As who that saw had deem'd, with hands of love.

XXXIII.

And there was one that saw:  for Paris woke
   Half-deeming and half-dreaming that the van
Of the great Argive host had scared the folk,
   And down the echoing corridor he ran
   To Helen's bower, and there beheld the man
That kneel'd beside his lady lying there:
   No word he spake, but drove his sword a span
Through Corythus' fair neck and cluster'd hair.

XXXIV.

Then fell fair Corythus, as falls the tower
   An earthquake shaketh from a city's crown,
Or as a tall white fragrant lily-flower
   A child hath in the garden trampled down,
   Or as a pine-tree in the forest brown,
Fell'd by the sea-rovers on mountain lands,
   When they to harry foreign folk are boune,
Taking their own lives in their reckless hands.

XXXV.

But still in Paris did his anger burn,
   And still his sword was lifted up to slay,
When, like a lot leap'd forth of Fate's own urn,
   He mark'd the graven tokens where they lay,
   'Mid Helen's hair in golden disarray,
And looking on them, knew what he had done,
   Knew what dire thing had fallen on that day,
Knew how a father's hand had slain a son.

XXXVI.

Then Paris on his face fell grovelling,
   And the night gather'd, and the silence grew
Within the darkened chamber of the king.
   But Helen rose, and a sad breath she drew,
   And her new woes came back to her anew:
Ah, where is he but knows the bitter pain
   To wake from dreams, and find his sorrow true,
And his ill life returned to him again!

XXXVII.

She needed none to tell her whence it fell,
   The thick red rain upon the marble floor:
She knew that in her bower she might not dwell,
   Alone with her own heart for ever more;
   No sacrifice, no spell, no priestly lore
Could banish quite the melancholy ghost
   Of Corythus; a herald sent before
Them that should die for her, a dreadful host.

XXXVIII.

But slowly Paris raised him from the earth,
   And read her face, and knew that she knew all,
No more her eyes, in tenderness or mirth,
   Should answer his, in bower or in hall.
   Nay, Love had fallen when his child did fall,
The stream Love cannot cross ran 'twixt them red;
   No more was Helen his, whate'er befall,
Not though the Goddess drove her to his bed.

XXXIX.

This word he spake, "the Fates are hard on us" -
   Then bade the women do what must be done
To the fair body of dead Corythus.
   And then he hurl'd into the night alone,
   Wailing unto the spirit of his son,
That somewhere in dark mist and sighing wind
   Must dwell, nor yet to Hades had it won,
Nor quite had left the world of men behind.

XL.

But wild OEnone by the mountain-path
   Saw not her son returning to the wold,
And now was she in fear, and now in wrath
   She cried, "He hath forgot the mountain fold,
   And goes in Ilios with a crown of gold:"
But even then she heard men's axes smite
   Against the beeches slim and ash-trees old,
These ancient trees wherein she did delight.

XLI.

Then she arose and silently as Sleep,
   Unseen she follow'd the slow-rolling wain,
Beneath an ashen sky that 'gan to weep,
   Too heavy laden with the latter rain;
   And all the folk of Troy upon the plain
She found, all gather'd round a funeral pyre,
   And thereon lay her son, her darling slain,
The goodly Corythus, her heart's desire!

XLII.

Among the spices and fair robes he lay,
   His arm beneath his head, as though he slept.
For so the Goddess wrought that no decay,
   No loathly thing about his body crept;
   And all the people look'd on him and wept,
And, weeping, Paris lit the pine-wood dry,
   And lo, a rainy wind arose and swept
The flame and fragrance far into the sky.

XLIII.

But when the force of flame was burning low,
   Then did they drench the pyre with ruddy wine,
And the white bones of Corythus bestow
   Within a gold cruse, wrought with many a sign,
   And wrapp'd the cruse about with linen fine
And bare it to the tomb:  when, lo, the wild
   OEnone sprang, with burning eyes divine,
And shriek'd unto the slayer of her child:

XLIV.

"Oh Thou, that like a God art sire and slayer,
   That like a God, dost give and take away!
Methinks that even now I hear the prayer
   Thou shalt beseech me with, some later day;
   When all the world to thy dim eyes grow grey,
And thou shalt crave thy healing at my hand,
   Then gladly will I mock, and say thee nay,
And watch thine hours run down like running sand!

XLV.

"Yea, thou shalt die, and leave thy love behind,
   And little shall she love thy memory!
But, oh ye foolish people, deaf and blind,
   What Death is coming on you from the sea?"
   Then all men turned, and lo, upon the lee
Of Tenedos, beneath the driving rain,
   The countless Argive ships were racing free,
The wind and oarsmen speeding them amain.

XLVI.

Then from the barrow and the burial,
   Back like a bursting torrent all men fled
Back to the city and the sacred wall.
   But Paris stood, and lifted not his head.
   Alone he stood, and brooded o'er the dead,
As broods a lion, when a shaft hath flown,
   And through the strong heart of his mate hath sped,
Then will he face the hunters all alone.

XLVII.

But soon the voice of men on the sea-sand
   Came round him; and he turned, and gazed, and lo!
The Argive ships were dashing on the strand:
   Then stealthily did Paris bend his bow,
   And on the string he laid a shaft of woe,
And drew it to the point, and aim'd it well.
   Singing it sped, and through a shield did go,
And from his barque Protesilaus fell.

XLVIII.

Half gladdened by the omen, through the plain
   Went Paris to the walls and mighty gate,
And little heeded he that arrowy rain
   The Argive bowmen shower'd in helpless hate.
   Nay; not yet feather'd was the shaft of Fate,
His bane, the gift of mighty Heracles
   To Philoctetes, lying desolate,
Within a far off island of the seas.



BOOK V--THE WAR



The war round Troy, and how many brave men fell, and chiefly
Sarpedon, Patroclus, Hector, Memnon, and Achilles.  The coming of the
Amazon, and the wounding of Paris, and his death, and concerning the
good end that OEnone made.

I.

For ten long years the Argive leaguer lay
   Round Priam's folk, and wrought them many woes,
While, as a lion crouch'd above his prey,
   The Trojans yet made head against their foes;
   And as the swift sea-water ebbs and flows
Between the Straits of Helle and the main,
   Even so the tide of battle sank and rose,
And fill'd with waifs of war the Ilian plain.

II.

And horse on horse was driven, as wave on wave;
   Like rain upon the deep the arrows fell,
And like the wind, the war-cry of the brave
   Rang out above the battle's ebb and swell,
   And long the tale of slain, and sad to tell;
Yet seem'd the end scarce nearer than of yore
   When nine years pass'd and still the citadel
Frown'd on the Argive huts beside the shore.

III.

And still the watchers on the city's crown
   Afar from sacred Ilios might spy
The flame from many a fallen subject town
   Flare on the starry verges of the sky,
   And still from rich Maeonia came the cry
Of cities sack'd where'er Achilles led.
   Yet none the more men deem'd the end was nigh
While knightly Hector fought unvanquished.

IV.

But ever as each dawn bore grief afar,
   And further back, wax'd Paris glad and gay,
And on the fringes of the cloud of war
   His arrows, like the lightning, still would play;
   Yet fled he Menelaus on a day,
And there had died, but Aphrodite's power
   Him in a golden cloud did safe convey
Within the walls of Helen's fragrant bower.

V.

But she, in longing for her lord and home,
   And scorn of her wild lover, did withdraw
From all men's eyes:  but in the night would roam
   Till drowsy watchmen of the city saw
   A shadowy shape that chill'd the night with awe,
Treading the battlements; and like a ghost,
   She stretch'd her lovely arms without a flaw,
In shame and longing, to the Argive host.

VI.

But all day long within her bower she wept,
   Still dreaming of the dames renown'd of old,
Whom hate or love of the Immortals swept
   Within the toils of Ate manifold;
   And most she loved the ancient tales that told
How the great Gods, at length to pity stirr'd,
   Changed Niobe upon the mountains cold,
To a cold stone; and Procne to a bird,

VII.

And Myrrha to an incense-breathing tree; -
   "And ah," she murmur'd, "that the Gods were kind,
And bade the Harpies lay their hands on me,
   And bear me with the currents of the wind
   To the dim end of all things, and the blind
Land where the Ocean turneth in his bed:
   Then should I leave mine evil days behind,
And Sleep should fold his wings above my head."

VIII.

And once she heard a Trojan woman bless
   The fair-haired Menelaus, her good lord,
As brave among brave men, not merciless,
   Not swift to slay the captives of his sword,
   Nor wont was he to win the gold abhorr'd
Of them that sell their captives over sea,
   And Helen sighed, and bless'd her for that word,
"Yet will he ne'er be merciful to me!"

IX.

In no wise found she comfort; to abide
   In Ilios was to dwell with shame and fear,
And if unto the Argive host she hied,
   Then should she die by him that was most dear.
   And still the days dragg'd on with bitter cheer,
Till even the great Gods had little joy,
   So fast their children fell beneath the spear,
Below the windy battlements of Troy.

X.

Yet many a prince of south lands, or of east,
   For dark Cassandra's love came trooping in,
And Priam made them merry at the feast,
   And all night long they dream'd of wars to win,
   And with the morning hurl'd into the din,
And cried their lady's name for battle-cry,
   And won no more than this:  for Paris' sin,
By Diomede's or Aias' hand to die.

XI.

But for one hour within the night of woes
   The hope of Troy burn'd steadfast as a star;
When strife among the Argive lords arose,
   And dread Achilles held him from the war;
   Yea, and Apollo from his golden car
And silver bow his shafts of evil sped,
   And all the plain was darken'd, near and far,
With smoke above the pyres of heroes dead.

XII.

And many a time through vapour of that smoke
   The shafts of Troy fell fast; and on the plain
All night the Trojan watch fires burn'd and broke
   Like evil stars athwart a mist of rain.
   And through the arms and blood, and through the slain,
Like wolves among the fragments of the fight,
   Crept spies to slay whoe'er forgat his pain
One hour, and fell on slumber in the night.

XIII.

And once, when wounded chiefs their tents did keep,
   And only Aias might his weapons wield,
Came Hector with his host, and smiting deep,
   Brake bow and spear, brake axe and glaive and shield,
   Bulwark and battlement must rend and yield,
And by the ships he smote the foe and cast
   Fire on the ships; and o'er the stricken field,
The Trojans saw that flame arise at last!

XIV.

But when Achilles saw the soaring flame,
   And knew the ships in peril, suddenly
A change upon his wrathful spirit came,
   Nor will'd he that the Danaans should die:
   But call'd his Myrmidons, and with a cry
They follow'd where, like foam on a sea-wave
   Patroclus' crest was dancing, white and high,
Above the tide that back the Trojans drave.

XV.

But like a rock amid the shifting sands,
   And changing springs, and tumult of the deep,
Sarpedon stood, till 'neath Patroclus' hands,
   Smitten he fell; then Death and gentle Sleep
   Bare him from forth the battle to the steep
Where shines his castle o'er the Lycian dell;
   There hath he burial due, while all folk weep
Around the kindly Prince that loved them well.

XVI.

Not unavenged he fell, nor all alone
   To Hades did his soul indignant fly,
For soon was keen Patroclus overthrown
   By Hector, and the God of archery;
   And Hector stripp'd his shining panoply,
Bright arms Achilles lent:  ah! naked then,
   Forgetful wholly of his chivalry,
Patroclus lay, nor heard the strife of men.

XVII.

Then Hector from the war a little space
   Withdrew, and clad him in Achilles' gear,
And braced the gleaming helmet on his face,
   And donn'd the corslet, and that mighty spear
   He grasped--the lance that makes the boldest fear;
And home his comrades bare his arms of gold,
   Those Priam once had worn, his father dear,
But in his father's arms he waxed not old!

XVIII.

Then round Patroclus' body, like a tide
   That storms the swollen outlet of a stream
When the winds blow, and the rains fall, and wide
   The river runs, and white the breakers gleam, -
   Trojans and Argives battled till the beam
Of Helios was sinking to the wave,
   And now they near'd the ships:  yet few could deem
That arms of Argos might the body save.

XIX.

But even then the tidings sore were borne
   To great Achilles, of Patroclus dead,
And all his goodly raiment hath he torn,
   And cast the dust upon his golden head,
   And many a tear and bitter did he shed.
Ay; there by his own sword had he been slain,
   But swift his Goddess-mother, Thetis, sped
Forth with her lovely sea-nymphs from the main.

XX.

For, as a mother when her young child calls
   Hearkens to that, and hath no other care:
So Thetis, from her green and windless halls
   Rose, at the first word of Achilles' prayer,
   To comfort him, and promise gifts of fair
New armour wrought by an immortal hand;
   Then like a silver cloud she scaled the air,
Where bright the dwellings of Olympus stand.

XXI.

But, as a beacon from a 'leaguer'd town
   Within a sea-girt isle, leaps suddenly,
A cloud by day; but when the sun goes down,
   The tongues of fire flash out, and soar on high,
   To summon warlike men that dwell thereby
And bid them bring a rescue over-seas, -
   So now Athene sent a flame to fly
From brow and temples of Aeacides.

XXII.

Then all unarm'd he sped, and through the throng,
   He pass'd to the dyke's edge, beyond the wall,
Nor leap'd the ranks of fighting men among,
   But shouted clearer than the clarion's call
   When foes on a beleaguer'd city fall.
Three times he cried, and terror fell on these
   That heard him; and the Trojans, one and all,
Fled from that shouting of Aeacides.

XXIII.

Backward the Trojans reel'd in headlong flight,
   Chariots and men, and left their bravest slain;
And the sun fell; hut Troy through all the night
   Watch'd by her fires upon the Ilian plain,
   For Hector did the sacred walls disdain
Of Ilios; nor knew that he should stand
   Ere night return'd, and burial crave in vain,
Unarm'd, forsaken, at Achilles' hand.

XXIV.

But all that night within his chamber high
   Hephaestus made his iron anvils ring;
And, ere the dawn, had wrought a panoply,
   The goodliest ever worn by mortal king.
   This to the Argive camp did Thetis bring,
And when her child had proved it, like the star
   That heralds day, he went forth summoning
The host Achaean to delight of war.

XXV.

And as a mountain torrent leaves its bed,
   And seaward sweeps the toils of men in spate,
Or as a forest-fire, that overhead
   Burns in the boughs, a thing insatiate,
   So raged the fierce Achilles in his hate;
And Xanthus, angry for his Trojans slain,
   Brake forth, while fire and wind made desolate
What war and wave had spared upon the plain.

XXVI.

Now through the fume and vapour of the smoke
   Between the wind's voice and the water's cry,
The battle shouting of the Trojans broke,
   And reached the Ilian walls confusedly,
   But over soon the folk that watch'd might spy
Thin broken bands that fled, avoiding death,
   Yet many a man beneath the spear must die,
Ere by the sacred gateway they drew breath.

XXVII.

And as when fire doth on a forest fall
   And hot winds bear it raging in its flight,
And beechen boughs, and pines are ruin'd all,
   So raged Achilles' anger in that fight;
   And many an empty car, with none to smite
The madden'd horses, o'er the bridge of war
   Was wildly whirled, and many a maid's delight
That day to the red wolves was dearer far.

* * * * *

XXVIII.

Some Muse that loved not Troy hath done thee wrong,
   Homer! who whisper'd thee that Hector fled
Thrice round the sacred walls he kept so long;
   Nay, when he saw his people vanquished
   Alone he stood for Troy; alone he sped
One moment, to the struggle of the spear,
   And, by the Gods deserted, fell and bled,
A warrior stainless of reproach and fear.

XXIX.

Then all the people from the battlement
   Beheld what dreadful things Achilles wrought,
For on the body his revenge he spent,
   The anger of the high Gods heeding nought,
   To whom was Hector dearest, while he fought,
Of all the Trojan men that were their joy,
   But now no more their favour might be bought
By savour of his hecatombs in Troy.

XXX.

So for twelve days rejoiced the Argive host,
   And now Patroclus hath to Hades won,
But Hector naked lay, and still his ghost
   Must wail where waters of Cocytus run;
   Till Priam did what no man born hath done,
Who dared to pass among the Argive bands,
   And clasp'd the knees of him that slew his son,
And kiss'd his awful homicidal hands.

XXXI.

At such a price was Hector's body sent
   To Ilios, where the women wail'd him shrill;
And Helen's sorrow brake into lament
   As bursts a lake the barriers of a hill,
   For lost, lost, lost was that one friend who still
Stood by her with kind speech and gentle heart,
   The sword of war, pure faith, and steadfast will,
That strove to keep all evil things apart.

* * * * *

XXXII.

And so men buried Hector.  But they came,
   The Amazons, from frozen fields afar.
A match for heroes in the dreadful game
   Of spears, the darlings of the God of War,
   Whose coming was to Priam dearer far
Than light to him that is a long while blind,
   When leech's hand hath taen away the bar
That vex'd him, or the healing God is kind;

XXXIII.

And Troy was glad, and with the morning light
   The Amazons went forth to slay and slay;
And wondrously they drave the foe in flight,
   Until the Sun had wander'd half his way;
   But when he stoop'd to twilight and the grey
Hour when men loose the steer beneath the yoke,
   No more Achilles held him from the fray,
But dreadful through the women's ranks he broke.

XXXIV.

Then comes eclipse upon the crescent shield,
   And death on them that bear it, and they fall
One here, one there, about the stricken field,
   As in that art, of Love memorial,
   Which moulders on the holy Carian wall.
Ay, still we see, still love, still pity there
   The warrior-maids, so brave, so god-like tall,
In Time's despite imperishably fair.

XXXV.

But, as a dove that braves a falcon, stood
   Penthesilea, wrath outcasting fear,
Or as a hind, that in the darkling wood
   Withstands a lion for her younglings dear;
   So stood the girl before Achilles' spear;
In vain, for singing from his hand it sped,
   And crash'd through shield and breastplate till the sheer
Cold bronze drank blood, and down the queen fell dead.

XXXVI.

Then from her locks the helm Achilles tore
   And boasted o'er the slain; but lo, the face
Of her thus lying in the dust and gore
   Seem'd lovelier than is the maiden grace
   Of Artemis, when weary from the chase,
She sleepeth in a haunted dell unknown.
   And all the Argives marvell'd for a space,
But most Achilles made a heavy moan:

XXXVII.

And in his heart there came the weary thought
   Of all that was, and all that might have been,
Of all the sorrow that his sword had wrought,
   Of Death that now drew near him:  of the green
   Vales of Larissa, where, with such a queen,
With such a love as now his spear had slain,
   He had been happy, who must wind the skein
Of grievous wars, and ne'er be glad again.

XXXVIII.

Yea, now wax'd Fate half weary of her game,
   And had no care but aye to kill and kill,
And many young kings to the battle came,
   And of that joy they quickly had their fill,
   And last came Memnon:  and the Trojans still
Took heart, like wearied mariners that see
   (Long toss'd on unknown waves at the winds' will)
Through clouds the gleaming crest of Helike.

XXXIX.

For Memnon was the child of the bright Dawn,
   A Goddess wedded to a mortal king,
Who dwells for ever on the shores withdrawn
   That border on the land of sun-rising;
   And he was nurtured nigh the sacred spring
That is the hidden fountain of all seas,
   By them that in the Gods' own garden sing,
The lily-maidens call'd Hesperides.

XL.

But him the child of Thetis in the fight
   Met on a windy winter day, when high
The dust was whirled, and wrapp'd them like the night
   That falleth on the mountains stealthily
   When the floods come, and down their courses dry
The torrents roar, and lightning flasheth far:
   So rang, so shone their harness terribly
Beneath the blinding thunder-cloud of war.

XLI.

Then the Dawn shudder'd on her golden throne,
   And called unto the West Wind, and he blew
And brake the cloud asunder; and alone
   Achilles stood, but Memnon, smitten through,
   Lay beautiful amid the dreadful dew
Of battle, and a deathless heart was fain
   Of tears, to Gods impossible, that drew
From mortal hearts a little of their pain.

XLII..

But now, their leader slain, the Trojans fled,
   And fierce Achilles drove them in his hate,
Avenging still his dear Patroclus dead,
   Nor knew the hour with his own doom was great,
   Nor trembled, standing in the Scaean gate,
Where ancient prophecy foretold his fall;
   Then suddenly there sped the bolt of Fate,
And smote Achilles by the Ilian wall:

XLIII.

From Paris' bow it sped, and even there,
   Even as he grasp'd the skirts of victory,
Achilles fell, nor any man might dare
   From forth the Trojan gateway to draw nigh;
   But, as the woodmen watch a lion die,
Pierced with the hunter's arrow, nor come near
   Till Death hath veil'd his eyelids utterly,
Even so the Trojans held aloof in fear.

XLIV.

But there his fellows on his wondrous shield
   Laid the fair body of Achilles slain,
And sadly bare him through the trampled field,
   And lo! the deathless maidens of the main
   Rose up, with Thetis, from the windy plain,
And round the dead man beautiful they cried,
   Lamenting, and with melancholy strain
The sweet-voiced Muses mournfully replied.

XLV.

Yea, Muses and Sea-maidens sang his dirge,
   And mightily the chant arose and shrill,
And wondrous echoes answer'd from the surge
   Of the grey sea, and from the holy hill
   Of Ida; and the heavy clouds and chill
Were gathering like mourners, sad and slow,
   And Zeus did thunder mightily, and fill
The dells and glades of Ida deep with snow.

XLVI.

Now Paris was not sated with the fame
   And rich reward Troy gave his archery;
But o'er the wine he boasted that the game
   That very night he deem'd to win, or die;
   "For scarce their watch the tempest will defy,"
He said, "and all undream'd of might we go,
   And fall upon the Argives where they lie,
Unseen, unheard, amid the silent snow."

XLVII.

So, flush'd with wine, and clad in raiment white
   Above their mail, the young men follow'd him,
Their guide a fading camp-fire in the night,
   And the sea's moaning in the distance dim.
   And still with eddying snow the air did swim,
And darkly did they wend they knew not where,
   White in that cursed night:  an army grim,
'Wilder'd with wine, and blind with whirling air.

XLVIII.

There was an outcast in the Argive host,
   One Philoctetes; whom Odysseus' wile,
(For, save he help'd, the Leaguer all was lost,)
   Drew from his lair within the Lemnian isle.
   But him the people, as a leper vile,
Hated, and drave to a lone hut afar,
   For wounded sore was he, and many a while
His cries would wake the host foredone with war.

XLIX.

Now Philoctetes was an archer wight;
   But in his quiver had he little store
Of arrows tipp'd with bronze, and feather'd bright;
   Nay, his were blue with mould, and fretted o'er
   With many a spell Melampus wrought of yore,
Singing above his task a song of bane;
   And they were venom'd with the Centaur's gore,
And tipp'd with bones of men a long while slain.

L.

This wretch for very pain might seldom sleep,
   And that night slept not:  in the moaning blast
He deem'd the dead about his hut did creep,
   And silently he rose, and round him cast
   His raiment foul, and from the door he pass'd,
And peer'd into the night, and soothly heard
   A whisper'd voice; then gripp'd his arrows fast
And strung his bow, and cried a bitter word:

LI.

"Art thou a gibbering ghost with war outworn,
   And thy faint life in Hades not begun?
Art thou a man that holdst my grief in scorn,
   And yet dost live, and look upon the sun?
   If man,--methinks thy pleasant days are done,
And thou shalt writhe in torment worse than mine;
   If ghost,--new pain in Hades hast thou won,
And there with double woe shalt surely pine."

LII.

He spake, and drew the string, and sent a shaft
   At venture through the midnight and the snow,
A little while he listen'd, then he laugh'd
   Within himself, a dreadful laugh and low;
   For over well the answer did he know
That midnight gave his message, the sharp cry
   And armour rattling on a fallen foe
That now was learning what it is to die.

LIII.

Then Philoctetes crawl'd into his den
   And hugg'd himself against the bitter cold,
While round their leader came the Trojan men
   And bound his wound, and bare him o'er the wold,
   Back to the lights of Ilios; but the gold
Of Dawn was breaking on the mountains white,
   Or ere they won within the guarded fold,
Long 'wilder'd in the tempest and the night.

LIV.

And through the gate, and through the silent street,
   And houses where men dream'd of war no more,
The bearers wander'd with their weary feet,
   And Paris to his high-roof'd house they bore.
   But vainly leeches on his wound did pore,
And vain was Argive Helen's magic song,
   Ah, vain her healing hands, and all her lore,
To help the life that wrought her endless wrong.

LV.

Slow pass'd the fever'd hours, until the grey
   Cold light was paling, and a sullen glow
Of livid yellow crown'd the dying day,
   And brooded on the wastes of mournful snow.
   Then Paris whisper'd faintly, "I must go
And face that wild wood-maiden of the hill;
   For none but she can win from overthrow
Troy's life, and mine that guards it, if she will."

LVI.

So through the dumb white meadows, deep with snow,
   They bore him on a pallet shrouded white,
And sore they dreaded lest an ambush'd foe
   Should hear him moan, or mark the moving light
   That waved before their footsteps in the night;
And much they joy'd when Ida's knees were won,
   And 'neath the pines upon an upland height,
They watch'd the star that heraldeth the sun.

LVII.

For under woven branches of the pine,
   The soft dry needles like a carpet spread,
And high above the arching boughs did shine
   In frosty fret of silver, that the red
   New dawn fired into gold-work overhead:
Within that vale where Paris oft had been
   With fair OEnone, ere the hills he fled
To be the sinful lover of a Queen.

LVIII.

Not here they found OEnone:  "Nay, not here,"
   Said Paris, faint and low, "shall she be found;
Nay, bear me up the mountain, where the drear
   Winds walk for ever on a haunted ground.
   Methinks I hear her sighing in their sound;
Or some God calls me there, a dying man.
   Perchance my latest journeying is bound
Back where the sorrow of my life began."

LIX.

They reach'd the gateway of that highest glen
   And halted, wond'ring what the end should be;
But Paris whisper'd Helen, while his men
   Fell back:  "Here judged I Gods, here shalt thou see
   What judgment mine old love will pass on me.
But hide thee here; thou soon the end shalt know,
   Whether the Gods at length will set thee free
From that old net they wove so long ago."

LX.

Ah, there with wide snows round her like a pall,
   OEnone crouch'd in sable robes; as still
As Winter brooding o'er the Summer's fall,
   Or Niobe upon her haunted hill,
   A woman changed to stone by grief, where chill
The rain-drops fall like tears, and the wind sighs:
   And Paris deem'd he saw a deadly will
Unmoved in wild OEnone's frozen eyes.

LXI.

"Nay, prayer to her were vain as prayer to Fate,"
   He murmur'd, almost glad that it was so,
Like some sick man that need no longer wait,
   But his pain lulls as Death draws near his woe.
   And Paris beckon'd to his men, and slow
They bore him dying from that fatal place,
   And did not turn again, and did not know
The soft repentance on OEnone's face.

LXII.

But Paris spake to Helen:  "Long ago,
   Dear, we were glad, who never more shall be
Together, where the west winds fainter blow
   Round that Elysian island of the sea,
   Where Zeus from evil days shall set thee free.
Nay, kiss me once, it is a weary while,
   Ten weary years since thou hast smiled on me,
But, Helen, say good-bye, with thine old smile!"

LXIII.

And as the dying sunset through the rain
   Will flush with rosy glow a mountain height,
Even so, at his last smile, a blush again
   Pass'd over Helen's face, so changed and white;
   And through her tears she smiled, his last delight,
The last of pleasant life he knew, for grey
   The veil of darkness gather'd, and the night
Closed o'er his head, and Paris pass'd away.

LXIV.

Then for one hour in Helen's heart re-born,
   Awoke the fatal love that was of old,
Ere she knew all, and the cold cheeks outworn,
   She kiss'd, she kiss'd the hair of wasted gold,
   The hands that ne'er her body should enfold;
Then slow she follow'd where the bearers led,
   Follow'd dead Paris through the frozen wold
Back to the town where all men wish'd her dead.

LXV.

Perchance it was a sin, I know not, this!
   Howe'er it be, she had a woman's heart,
And not without a tear, without a kiss,
   Without some strange new birth of the old smart,
   From her old love of the brief days could part
For ever; though the dead meet, ne'er shall they
   Meet, and be glad by Aphrodite's art,
Whose souls have wander'd each its several way.

* * * * * *

LXVI.

And now was come the day when on a pyre
   Men laid fair Paris, in a broider'd pall,
And fragrant spices cast into the fire,
   And round the flame slew many an Argive thrall.
   When, like a ghost, there came among them all,
A woman, once beheld by them of yore,
   When first through storm and driving rain the tall
Black ships of Argos dash'd upon the shore.

LXVII.

Not now in wrath OEnone came; but fair
   Like a young bride when nigh her bliss she knows,
And in the soft night of her fallen hair
   Shone flowers like stars, more white than Ida's snows,
   And scarce men dared to look on her, of those
The pyre that guarded; suddenly she came,
   And sprang upon the pyre, and shrill arose
Her song of death, like incense through the flame.

LXVIII.

And still the song, and still the flame went up,
   But when the flame wax'd fierce, the singing died;
And soon with red wine from a golden cup
   Priests drench'd the pyre; but no man might divide
   The ashes of the Bridegroom from the Bride.
Nay, they were wedded, and at rest again,
   As in those old days on the mountain-side,
Before the promise of their youth was vain.



BOOK VI--THE SACK OF TROY.  THE RETURN OF HELEN



The sack of Troy, and of how Menelaus would have let stone Helen, but
Aphrodite saved her, and made them at one again, and how they came
home to Lacedaemon, and of their translation to Elysium.

I.

There came a day, when Trojan spies beheld
   How, o'er the Argive leaguer, all the air
Was pure of smoke, no battle-din there swell'd,
   Nor any clarion-call was sounding there!
   Yea, of the serried ships the strand was bare,
And sea and shore were still, as long ago
   When Ilios knew not Helen, and the fair
Sweet face that makes immortal all her woe.

II.

So for a space the watchers on the wall
   Were silent, wond'ring what these things might mean.
But, at the last, sent messengers to call
   Priam, and all the elders, and the lean
   Remnant of goodly chiefs, that once had been
The shield and stay of Ilios, and her joy,
   Nor yet despair'd, but trusted Gods unseen,
And cast their spears, and shed their blood for Troy.

III.

They came, the more part grey, grown early old,
   In war and plague; but with them was the young
Coroebus, that but late had left the fold
   And flocks of sheep Maeonian hills among,
   And valiantly his lot with Priam flung,
For love of a lost cause and a fair face, -
   The eyes that once the God of Pytho sung,
That now look'd darkly to the slaughter-place.

IV.

Now while the elders kept their long debate,
   Coroebus stole unheeded to his band,
And led a handful by a postern gate
   Across the plain, across the barren land
   Where once the happy vines were wont to stand,
And 'mid the clusters once did maidens sing, -
   But now the plain was waste on every hand,
Though here and there a flower would breathe of Spring.

V.

So swift across the trampled battle-field
   Unchallenged still, but wary, did they pass,
By many a broken spear or shatter'd shield
   That in Fate's hour appointed faithless was:
   Only the heron cried from the morass
By Xanthus' side, and ravens, and the grey
   Wolves left their feasting in the tangled grass,
Grudging; and loiter'd, nor fled far away.

VI.

There lurk'd no spears in the high river-banks,
   No ambush by the cairns of men outworn,
But empty stood the huts, in dismal ranks,
   Where men through all these many years had borne
   Fierce summer, and the biting winter's scorn;
And here a sword was left, and there a bow,
   But ruinous seem'd all things and forlorn,
As in some camp forsaken long ago.

VII.

Gorged wolves crept round the altars, and did eat
   The flesh of victims that the priests had slain,
And wild dogs fought above the sacred meat
   Late offer'd to the deathless Gods in vain,
   By men that, for reward of all their pain,
Must haul the ropes, and weary at the oar,
   Or, drowning, clutch at foam amid the main,
Nor win their haven on the Argive shore.

VIII.

Not long the young men marvell'd at the sight,
   But grasping one a sword, and one the spear
Aias, or Tydeus' son, had borne in fight,
   They sped, and fill'd the town with merry cheer,
   For folk were quick the happy news to hear,
And pour'd through all the gates into the plain,
   Rejoicing as they wander'd far and near,
O'er the long Argive toils endured in vain.

IX.

Ah, sweet it was, without the city walls,
   To hear the doves coo, and the finches sing;
Ah, sweet, to twine their true-loves coronals
   Of woven wind-flowers, and each fragrant thing
   That blossoms in the footsteps of the spring;
And sweet, to lie, forgetful of their grief,
   Where violets trail by waters wandering,
And the wild fig-tree putteth forth his leaf!

X.

Now while they wander'd as they would, they found
   A wondrous thing:  a marvel of man's skill,
That stood within a vale of hollow ground,
   And bulk'd scarce smaller than the bitter-hill, -
   The common barrow that the dead men fill
Who died in the long leaguer,--not of earth,
   Was this new portent, but of tree, and still
The Trojans stood, and marvell'd 'mid their mirth.

XI.

Ay, much they wonder'd what this thing might be,
   Shaped like a Horse it was; and many a stain
There show'd upon the mighty beams of tree,
   For some with fire were blacken'd, some with rain
   Were dank and dark amid white planks of plane,
New cut among the trees that now were few
   On wasted Ida; but men gazed in vain,
Nor truth thereof for all their searching knew.

XII.

At length they deem'd it was a sacred thing,
   Vow'd to Poseidon, monarch of the deep,
And that herewith the Argives pray'd the King
   Of wind and wave to lull the seas to sleep;
   So this, they cried, within the sacred keep
Of Troy must rest, memorial of the war;
   And sturdily they haled it up the steep,
And dragg'd the monster to their walls afar.

XIII.

All day they wrought:  and children crown'd with flowers
   Laid light hands on the ropes; old men would ply
Their feeble force; so through the merry hours
   They toil'd, midst laughter and sweet minstrelsy,
   And late they drew the great Horse to the high
Crest of the hill, and wide the tall gates swang;
   But thrice, for all their force, it stood thereby
Unmoved, and thrice like smitten armour rang.

XIV.

Natheless they wrought their will; then altar fires
   The Trojans built, and did the Gods implore
To grant fulfilment of all glad desires.
   But from the cups the wine they might not pour,
   The flesh upon the spits did writhe and roar,
The smoke grew red as blood, and many a limb
   Of victims leap'd upon the temple floor,
Trembling; and groans amid the chapels dim

XV.

Rang low, and from the fair Gods' images
   And from their eyes, dropp'd sweat and many a tear;
The walls with blood were dripping, and on these
   That sacrificed, came horror and great fear;
   The holy laurels to Apollo dear
Beside his temple faded suddenly,
   And wild wolves from the mountains drew anear,
And ravens through the temples seem'd to fly.

XVI.

Yet still the men of Troy were glad at heart,
   And o'er strange meat they revell'd, like folk fey,
Though each would shudder if he glanced apart,
   For round their knees the mists were gather'd grey,
   Like shrouds on men that Hell-ward take their way;
But merrily withal they feasted thus,
   And laugh'd with crooked lips, and oft would say
Some evil-sounding word and ominous.

XVII.

And Hecuba among her children spake,
   "Let each man choose the meat he liketh best,
For bread no more together shall we break.
   Nay, soon from all my labour must I rest,
   But eat ye well, and drink the red wine, lest
Ye blame my house-wifery among men dead."
   And all they took her saying for a jest,
And sweetly did they laugh at that she said.

XVIII.

Then, like a raven on the of night,
   The wild Cassandra flitted far and near,
Still crying, "Gather, gather for the fight,
   And brace the helmet on, and grasp the spear,
   For lo, the legions of the Night are here!"
So shriek'd the dreadful prophetess divine.
   But all men mock'd, and were of merry cheer;
Safe as the Gods they deem'd them, o'er their wine.

XIX.

For now with minstrelsy the air was sweet,
   The soft spring air, and thick with incense smoke;
And bands of happy dancers down the street
   Flew from the flower-crown'd doors, and wheel'd, and broke;
   And loving words the youths and maidens spoke,
For Aphrodite did their hearts beguile,
   As when beneath grey cavern or green oak
The shepherd men and maidens meet and smile.

XX.

No guard they set, for truly to them all
   Did Love and slumber seem exceeding good;
There was no watch by open gate nor wall,
   No sentinel by Pallas' image stood;
   But silence grew, as in an autumn wood
When tempests die, and the vex'd boughs have ease,
   And wind and sunlight fade, and soft the mood
Of sacred twilight falls upon the trees.

XXI.

Then the stars cross'd the zenith, and there came
   On Troy that hour when slumber is most deep,
But any man that watch'd had seen a flame
   Spring from the tall crest of the Trojan keep;
   While from the belly of the Horse did leap
Men arm'd, and to the gates went stealthily,
   While up the rocky way to Ilios creep
The Argives, new return'd across the sea.

XXII.

Now when the silence broke, and in that hour
   When first the dawn of war was blazing red,
There came a light in Helen's fragrant bower,
   As on that evil night before she fled
   From Lacedaemon and her marriage bed;
And Helen in great fear lay still and cold,
   For Aphrodite stood above her head,
And spake in that sweet voice she knew of old:

XXIII.

"Beloved one that dost not love me, wake!
   Helen, the night is over, the dawn is near,
And safely shalt thou fare with me, and take
   Thy way through fire and blood, and have no fear:
   A little hour, and ended is the drear
Tale of thy sorrow and thy wandering.
   Nay, long hast thou to live in happy cheer,
By fair Eurotas, with thy lord, the King."

XXIV.

Then Helen rose, and in a cloud of gold,
   Unseen amid the vapour of the fire,
Did Aphrodite veil her, fold on fold;
   And through the darkness, thronged with faces dire,
   And o'er men's bodies fallen in a mire
Of new spilt blood and wine, the twain did go
   Where Lust and Hate were mingled in desire,
And dreams and death were blended in one woe.

XXV.

Fire and the foe were masters now:  the sky
   Flared like the dawn of that last day of all,
When men for pity to the sea shall cry,
   And vainly on the mountain tops shall call
   To fall and end the horror in their fall;
And through the vapour dreadful things saw they,
   The maidens leaping from the city wall,
The sleeping children murder'd where they lay.

XXVI.

Yea, cries like those that make the hills of Hell
   Ring and re-echo, sounded through the night,
The screams of burning horses, and the yell
   Of young men leaping naked into fight,
   And shrill the women shriek'd, as in their flight
Shriek the wild cranes, when overhead they spy
   Between the dusky cloud-land and the bright
Blue air, an eagle stooping from the sky.

XXVII.

And now the red glare of the burning shone
   On deeds so dire the pure Gods might not bear,
Save Ares only, long to look thereon,
   But with a cloud they darken'd all the air.
   And, even then, within the temple fair
Of chaste Athene, did Cassandra cower,
   And cried aloud an unavailing prayer;
For Aias was the master in that hour.

XXVIII.

Man's lust won what a God's love might not win,
   And heroes trembled, and the temple floor
Shook, when one cry went up into the din,
   And shamed the night to silence; then the roar
   Of war and fire wax'd great as heretofore,
Till each roof fell, and every palace gate
   Was shatter'd, and the King's blood shed; nor more
Remain'd to do, for Troy was desolate.

XXIX.

Then dawn drew near, and changed to clouds of rose
   The dreadful smoke that clung to Ida's head;
But Ilios was ashes, and the foes
   Had left the embers and the plunder'd dead;
   And down the steep they drove the prey, and sped
Back to the swift ships, with a captive train, -
   While Menelaus, slow, with drooping head,
Follow'd, like one lamenting, through the plain.

XXX.

Where death might seem the surest, by the gate
   Of Priam, where the spears raged, and the tall
Towers on the foe were falling, sought he fate
   To look on Helen once, and then to fall,
   Nor see with living eyes the end of all,
What time the host their vengeance should fulfil,
   And cast her from the cliff below the wall,
Or burn her body on the windy hill.

XXXI.

But Helen found he never, where the flame
   Sprang to the roofs, and Helen ne'er he found
Where flock'd the wretched women in their shame
   The helpless altars of the Gods around,
   Nor lurk'd she in deep chambers underground,
Where the priests trembled o'er their hidden gold,
   Nor where the armed feet of foes resound
In shrines to silence consecrate of old.

XXXII.

So wounded to his hut and wearily
   Came Menelaus; and he bow'd his head
Beneath the lintel neither fair nor high;
   And, lo!  Queen Helen lay upon his bed,
   Flush'd like a child in sleep, and rosy-red,
And at his footstep did she wake and smile,
   And spake:  "My lord, how hath thy hunting sped,
Methinks that I have slept a weary while!"

XXXIII.

For Aphrodite made the past unknown
   To Helen, as of old, when in the dew
Of that fair dawn the net was round her thrown:
   Nay, now no memory of Troy brake through
   The mist that veil'd from her sweet eyes and blue
The dreadful days and deeds all over-past,
   And gladly did she greet her lord anew,
And gladly would her arms have round him cast.

XXXIV.

Then leap'd she up in terror, for he stood
   Before her, like a lion of the wild,
His rusted armour all bestain'd with blood,
   His mighty hands with blood of men defiled,
   And strange was all she saw:  the spears, the piled
Raw skins of slaughter'd beasts with many a stain;
   And low he spake, and bitterly he smiled,
"The hunt is ended, and the spoil is ta'en."

XXXV.

No more he spake; for certainly he deem'd
   That Aphrodite brought her to that place,
And that of her loved archer Helen dream'd,
   Of Paris; at that thought the mood of grace
   Died in him, and he hated her fair face,
And bound her hard, not slacking for her tears;
   Then silently departed for a space,
To seek the ruthless counsel of his peers.

XXXVI.

Now all the Kings were feasting in much joy,
   Seated or couch'd upon the carpets fair
That late had strown the palace floors of Troy,
   And lovely Trojan ladies served them there,
   And meat from off the spits young princes bare;
But Menelaus burst among them all,
   Strange, 'mid their revelry, and did not spare,
But bade the Kings a sudden council call.

XXXVII.

To mar their feast the Kings had little will,
   Yet did they as he bade, in grudging wise,
And heralds call'd the host unto the hill
   Heap'd of sharp stones, where ancient Ilus lies.
   And forth the people flock'd, as throng'd as flies
That buzz about the milking-pails in spring,
   When life awakens under April skies,
And birds from dawning into twilight sing.

XXXVIII.

Then Helen through the camp was driven and thrust,
   Till even the Trojan women cried in glee,
"Ah, where is she in whom thou put'st thy trust,
   The Queen of love and laughter, where is she?
   Behold the last gift that she giveth thee,
Thou of the many loves! to die alone,
   And round thy flesh for robes of price to be
The cold close-clinging raiment of sharp stone."

XXXIX.

Ah, slowly through that trodden field and bare
   They pass'd, where scarce the daffodil might spring,
For war had wasted all, but in the air
   High overhead the mounting lark did sing;
   Then all the army gather'd in a ring
Round Helen, round their torment, trapp'd at last,
   And many took up mighty stones to fling
From shards and flints on Ilus' barrow cast.

XL.

Then Menelaus to the people spoke,
   And swift his wing'd words came as whirling snow,
"Oh ye that overlong have borne the yoke,
   Behold the very fountain of your woe!
   For her ye left your dear homes long ago,
On Argive valley or Boeotian plain;
   But now the black ships rot from stern to prow,
Who knows if ye shall see your own again?

XLI.

"Ay, and if home ye win, ye yet may find,
   Ye that the winds waft, and the waters bear
To Argos! ye are quite gone out of mind;
   Your fathers, dear and old, dishonour'd there;
   Your children deem you dead, and will not share
Their lands with you; on mainland or on isle,
   Strange men are wooing now the women fair,
And love doth lightly woman's heart beguile.

XLII.

"These sorrows hath this woman wrought alone:
   So fall upon her straightway that she die,
And clothe her beauty in a cloak of stone!"
   He spake, and truly deem'd to hear her cry
   And see the sharp flints straight and deadly fly;
But each man stood and mused on Helen's face,
   And her undream'd-of beauty, brought so nigh
On that bleak plain, within that ruin'd place.

LXIII.

And as in far off days that were to be,
   The sense of their own sin did men constrain,
That they must leave the sinful woman free
   Who, by their law, had verily been slain,
   So Helen's beauty made their anger vain,
And one by one his gather'd flints let fall;
   And like men shamed they stole across the plain,
Back to the swift ships and their festival.

XLIV.

But Menelaus look'd on her and said,
   "Hath no man then condemn'd thee,--is there none
To shed thy blood for all that thou hast shed,
   To wreak on thee the wrongs that thou hast done.
   Nay, as mine own soul liveth, there is one
That will not set thy barren beauty free,
   But slay thee to Poseidon and the Sun
Before a ship Achaian takes the sea!"

XLV.

Therewith he drew his sharp sword from his thigh
   As one intent to slay her:  but behold,
A sudden marvel shone across the sky!
   A cloud of rosy fire, a flood of gold,
   And Aphrodite came from forth the fold
Of wondrous mist, and sudden at her feet
   Lotus and crocus on the trampled wold
Brake, and the slender hyacinth was sweet.

XLVI.

Then fell the point that never bloodless fell
   When spear bit harness in the battle din,
For Aphrodite spake, and like a spell
   Wrought her sweet voice persuasive, till within
   His heart there lived no memory of sin,
No thirst for vengeance more, but all grew plain,
   And wrath was molten in desire to win
The golden heart of Helen once again.

XLVII.

Then Aphrodite vanish'd as the day
   Passes, and leaves the darkling earth behind;
And overhead the April sky was grey,
   But Helen's arms about her lord were twined,
   And his round her as clingingly and kind,
As when sweet vines and ivy in the spring
   Join their glad leaves, nor tempests may unbind
The woven boughs, so lovingly they cling.

* * * *

XLVIII.

Noon long was over-past, but sacred night
   Beheld them not upon the Ilian shore;
Nay, for about the waning of the light
   Their swift ships wander'd on the waters hoar,
   Nor stay'd they the Olympians to adore,
So eagerly they left that cursed land,
   But many a toil, and tempests great and sore,
Befell them ere they won the Argive strand.

XLIX.

To Cyprus and Phoenicia wandering
   They came, and many a ship, and many a man
They lost, and perish'd many a precious thing
   While bare before the stormy North they ran,
   And further far than when their quest began
From Argos did they seem,--a weary while, -
   Becalm'd in sultry seas Egyptian,
A long day's voyage from the mouths of Nile.

L.

But there the Gods had pity on them, and there
   The ancient Proteus taught them how to flee
From that so distant deep,--the fowls of air
   Scarce in one year can measure out that sea;
   Yet first within Aegyptus must they be,
And hecatombs must offer,--quickly then
   The Gods abated of their jealousy,
Wherewith they scourge the negligence of men.

LI.

And strong and fair the south wind blew, and fleet
   Their voyaging, so merrily they fled
To win that haven where the waters sweet
   Of clear Eurotas with the brine are wed,
   And swift their chariots and their horses sped
To pleasant Lacedaemon, lying low
   Grey in the shade of sunset, but the head
Of tall Taygetus like fire did glow.

LII.

And what but this is sweet:  at last to win
   The fields of home, that change not while we change;
To hear the birds their ancient song begin;
   To wander by the well-loved streams that range
   Where not one pool, one moss-clad stone is strange,
Nor seem we older than long years ago,
   Though now beneath the grey roof of the grange
The children dwell of them we used to know?

LIII.

Came there no trouble in the later days
   To mar the life of Helen, when the old
Crowns and dominions perish'd, and the blaze
   Lit by returning Heraclidae roll'd
   Through every vale and every happy fold
Of all the Argive land?  Nay, peacefully
   Did Menelaus and the Queen behold
The counted years of mortal life go by.

LIV.

"Death ends all tales," but this he endeth not;
   They grew not grey within the valley fair
Of hollow Lacedaemon, but were brought
   To Rhadamanthus of the golden hair,
   Beyond the wide world's end; ah never there
Comes storm nor snow; all grief is left behind,
   And men immortal, in enchanted air,
Breathe the cool current of the Western wind.

LV.

But Helen was a Saint in Heathendom,
   A kinder Aphrodite; without fear
Maidens and lovers to her shrine would come
   In fair Therapnae, by the waters clear
   Of swift Eurotas; gently did she hear
All prayers of love, and not unheeded came
   The broken supplication, and the tear
Of man or maiden overweigh'd with shame.


O'er Helen's shrine the grass is growing green,
   In desolate Therapnae; none the less
Her sweet face now unworshipp'd and unseen
   Abides the symbol of all loveliness,
   Of Beauty ever stainless in the stress
Of warring lusts and fears;--and still divine,
   Still ready with immortal peace to bless
Them that with pure hearts worship at her shrine.



NOTE



[In this story in rhyme of the fortunes of Helen, the theory that she
was an unwilling victim of the Gods has been preferred.  Many of the
descriptions of manners are versified from the Iliad and the Odyssey.
The description of the events after the death of Hector, and the
account of the sack of Troy, is chiefly borrowed from Quintus
Smyrnaeus.]


The character and history of Helen of Troy have been conceived of in
very different ways by poets and mythologists.  In attempting to
trace the chief current of ancient traditions about Helen, we cannot
really get further back than the Homeric poems, the Iliad and
Odyssey.  Philological conjecture may assure us that Helen, like most
of the characters of old romance, is "merely the Dawn," or Light, or
some other bright being carried away by Paris, who represents Night,
or Winter, or the Cloud, or some other power of darkness.  Without
discussing these ideas, it may be said that the Greek poets (at all
events before allegorical explanations of mythology came in, about
five hundred years before Christ) regarded Helen simply as a woman of
wonderful beauty.  Homer was not thinking of the Dawn, or the Cloud
when he described Helen among the Elders on the Ilian walls, or
repeated her lament over the dead body of Hector.  The Homeric poems
are our oldest literary documents about Helen, but it is probable
enough that the poet has modified and purified more ancient
traditions which still survive in various fragments of Greek legend.
In Homer Helen is always the daughter of Zeus.  Isocrates tells us
("Helena," 211 b) that "while many of the demigods were children of
Zeus, he thought the paternity of none of his daughters worth
claiming, save that of Helen only."  In Homer, then, Helen is the
daughter of Zeus, but Homer says nothing of the famous legend which
makes Zeus assume the form of a swan to woo the mother of Helen.
Unhomeric as this myth is, we may regard it as extremely ancient.
Very similar tales of pursuit and metamorphosis, for amatory or other
purposes, among the old legends of Wales, and in the "Arabian
Nights," as well as in the myths of Australians and Red Indians.
Again, the belief that different families of mankind descend from
animals, as from the Swan, or from gods in the shape of animals, is
found in every quarter of the world, and among the rudest races.
Many Australian natives of to-day claim descent, like the royal house
of Sparta, from the Swan.  The Greek myths hesitated as to whether
Nemesis or Leda was the bride of the Swan.  Homer only mentions Leda
among "the wives and daughters of mighty men," whose ghosts Odysseus
beheld in Hades:  "And I saw Leda, the famous bedfellow of Tyndareus,
who bare to Tyndareus two sons, hardy of heart, Castor, tamer of
steeds, and the boxer Polydeuces."  These heroes Helen, in the Iliad
(iii. 238), describes as her mother's sons.  Thus, if Homer has any
distinct view on the subject, he holds that Leda is the mother of
Helen by Zeus, of the Dioscuri by Tyndareus.

Greek ideas as to the character of Helen varied with the various
moods of Greek literature.  Homer's own ideas about his heroine are
probably best expressed in the words with which Priam greets her as
she appears among the assembled elders, who are watching the Argive
heroes from the wall of Troy: --"In nowise, dear child, do I blame
thee; nay, the Gods are to blame, who have roused against me the
woful war of the Achaeans."  Homer, like Priam, throws the guilt of
Helen on the Gods, but it is not very easy to understand exactly what
he means by saying "the Gods are to blame."  In the first place,
Homer avoids the psychological problems in which modern poetry
revels, by attributing almost all changes of the moods of men to
divine inspiration.  Thus when Achilles, in a famous passage of the
first book of the Iliad, puts up his half-drawn sword in the sheath,
and does not slay Agamemnon, Homer assigns his repentance to the
direct influence of Athene.  Again, he says in the Odyssey, about
Clytemnestra, that "she would none of the foul deed;" that is of the
love of Aegisthus, till "the doom of the Gods bound her to her ruin."
So far the same excuse is made for the murderous Clytemnestra as for
the amiable Helen.  Again, Homer is, in the strictest sense, and in
strong contrast to the Greek tragedians and to Virgil, a chivalrous
poet.  It would probably be impossible to find a passage in which he
speaks harshly or censoriously of the conduct of any fair and noble
lady.  The sordid treachery of Eriphyle, who sold her lord for gold,
wins for her the epithet "hateful;" and Achilles, in a moment of
strong grief, applies a term of abhorrence to Helen.  But Homer is
too chivalrous to judge the life of any lady, and only shows the
other side of the chivalrous character--its cruelty to persons not of
noble birth--in describing the "foul death" of the waiting women of
Penelope.  "God forbid that I should take these women's lives by a
clean death," says Telemachus (Odyssey, xxii. 462).  So "about all
their necks nooses were cast that they might die by the death most
pitiful.  And they writhed with their feet for a little space, but
for no long while."  In trying to understand Homer's estimate of
Helen, therefore, we must make allowance for his theory of divine
intervention, and for his chivalrous judgment of ladies.  But there
are two passages in the Iliad which may be taken as indicating
Homer's opinion that Helen was literally a victim, an unwilling
victim, of Aphrodite, and that she was carried away by force a
captive from Lacedaemon.  These passages are in the Iliad, ii. 356,
590.  In the former text Nestor says, "let none be eager to return
home ere he has couched with a Trojan's wife, and AVENGED THE
LONGINGS AND SORROWS OF HELEN"--[Greek text which cannot be
reproduced.]  It is thus that Mr. Gladstone, a notable champion of
Helen's, would render this passage, and the same interpretation was
favoured by the ancient "Separatists" (Chorizontes), who wished to
prove that the Iliad and Odyssey were by different authors; but many
authorities prefer to translate "to avenge our labours and sorrows
for Helen's sake"--"to avenge all that we have endured in the attempt
to win back Helen."  Thus the evidence of this passage is ambiguous.
The fairer way to seek for Homer's real view of Helen is to examine
all the passages in which she occurs.  The result will be something
like this:- Homer sees in Helen a being of the rarest personal charm
and grace of character; a woman who imputes to herself guilt much
greater than the real measure of her offence.  She is ever gentle
except with the Goddess who betrayed her, and the unworthy lover
whose lot she is compelled to share.  Against them her helpless anger
breaks out in flashes of eloquent scorn.  Homer was apparently
acquainted with the myth of Helen's capture by Theseus, a myth
illustrated in the decorations of the coffer of Cypselus.  But we
first see Helen, the cause of the war, when Menelaus and Paris are
about to fight their duel for her sake, in the tenth year of the
Leaguer (Iliad, iii. 121).  Iris is sent to summon Helen to the
walls.  She finds Helen in her chamber, weaving at a mighty loom, and
embroidering on tapestry the adventures of the siege--the battles of
horse-taming Trojans and bronze-clad Achaeans.  The message of Iris
renews in Helen's heart "a sweet desire for her lord and her own
city, and them that begat her;" so, draped in silvery white, Helen
goes with her three maidens to the walls.  There, above the gate,
like some king in the Old Testament, Paris sits among his
counsellors, and they are all amazed at Helen's beauty; "no marvel is
it that Trojans and Achaeans suffer long and weary toils for such a
woman, so wondrous like to the immortal goddesses."  Then Priam,
assuring Helen that he holds her blameless, bids her name to him her
kinsfolk and the other Achaean warriors.  In her reply, Helen
displays that grace of penitence which is certainly not often found
in ancient literature:- "Would that evil death had been my choice,
when I followed thy son, and left my bridal bower and my kin, and my
daughter dear, and the maidens of like age with me."  Agamemnon she
calls, "the husband's brother of me shameless; alas, that such an one
should be."  She names many of the warriors, but misses her brothers
Castor and Polydeuces, "own brothers of mine, one mother bare us.
Either they followed not from pleasant Lacedaemon, or hither they
followed in swift ships, but now they have no heart to go down into
the battle for dread of the shame and many reproaches that are mine."

"So spake she, but already the life-giving earth did cover them,
there in Lacedaemon, in their own dear country."

Menelaus and Paris fought out their duel, the Trojan was discomfited,
but was rescued from death and carried to Helen's bower by Aphrodite.
Then the Goddess came in disguise to seek Helen on the wall, and
force her back into the arms of her defeated lover.  Helen turned on
the Goddess with an abruptness and a force of sarcasm and invective
which seem quite foreign to her gentle nature.  "Wilt thou take me
further yet to some city of Phrygia or pleasant Maeonia, if there any
man is dear to thee . . . Nay, go thyself and sit down by Paris, and
forswear the paths of the Gods, but ever lament for him and cherish
him, till he make thee his wife, yea, or perchance his slave, but to
him will I never go."  But this anger of Helen is soon overcome by
fear, when the Goddess, in turn, waxes wrathful, and Helen is
literally driven by threats--"for the daughter of Zeus was afraid,"--
into the arms of Paris.  Yet even so she taunts her lover with his
cowardice, a cowardice which she never really condones.  In the sixth
book of the Iliad she has been urging him to return to the war.  She
then expresses her penitence to Hector, "would that the fury of the
wind had borne me afar to the mountains, or the wave of the roaring
sea--ere ever these ill deeds were done!"  In this passage too, she
prophesies that her fortunes will be [Greek text] famous in the
songs, good or evil, of men unborn.  In the last book of the Iliad we
meet Helen once more, as she laments over the dead body of Hector.
"'Never, in all the twenty years since I came hither, have I heard
from thee one taunt or one evil word:  nay, but if any other rebuked
me in the halls, any one of my husband's brothers, or of their
sisters, or their wives, or the mother of my husband (but the king
was ever gentle to me as a father), then wouldst thou restrain them
with thy loving kindness and thy gentle speech.'  So spake she;
weeping."

In the Odyssey, Helen is once more in Lacedaemon, the honoured but
still penitent wife of Menelaus.  How they became reconciled (an
extremely difficult point in the story), there is nothing in Homer to
tell us.

Sir John Lubbock has conjectured that in the morals of the heroic age
Helen was not really regarded as guilty.  She was lawfully married,
by "capture," to Paris.  Unfortunately for this theory there is
abundant proof that, in the heroic age, wives were nominally BOUGHT
for so many cattle, or given as a reward for great services.  There
is no sign of marriage by capture, and, again, marriage by capture is
a savage institution which applies to unmarried women, not to women
already wedded, as Helen was to Menelaus.  Perhaps the oldest
evidence we have for opinion about the later relations of Helen and
Menelaus, is derived from Pausanias's (174. AD.) description of the
Chest of Cypselus.  This ancient coffer, a work of the seventh
century, B.C, was still preserved at Olympia, in the time of
Pausanias.  On one of the bands of cedar or of ivory, was represented
(Pausanias, v. 18), "Menelaus with a sword in his hand, rushing on to
kill Helen--clearly at the sacking of Ilios."  How Menelaus passed
from a desire to kill Helen to his absolute complacency in the
Odyssey, Homer does not tell us.  According to a statement attributed
to Stesichorus (635, 554, B.C.?), the army of the Achaeans purposed
to stone Helen, but was overawed and compelled to relent by her
extraordinary beauty:  "when they beheld her, they cast down their
stones on the ground."  It may be conjectured that the reconciliation
followed this futile attempt at punishing a daughter of Zeus.  Homer,
then, leaves us without information about the adventures of Helen,
between the sack of Tiny and the reconciliation with Menelaus.  He
hints that she was married to Deiphobus, after the death of Paris,
and alludes to the tradition that she mimicked the voices of the
wives of the heroes, and so nearly tempted them to leave their ambush
in the wooden horse.  But in the fourth book of the Odyssey, when
Telemachus visits Lacedaemon, he finds Helen the honoured wife of
Menelaus, rich in the marvellous gifts bestowed on her, in her
wanderings from Troy, by the princes of Egypt.

"While yet he pondered these things in his mind and in his heart,
Helen came forth from her fragrant vaulted chamber, like Artemis of
the golden arrows; and with her came Adraste and set for her the
well-wrought chair, and Alcippe bare a rug of soft wool, and Phylo
bare a silver basket which Alcandre gave her, the wife of Polybus,
who dwelt in Thebes of Egypt, where is the chiefest store of wealth
in the houses.  He gave two silver baths to Menelaus, and tripods
twain, and ten talents of gold.  And besides all this, his wife
bestowed on Helen lovely gifts; a golden distaff did she give, and a
silver basket with wheels beneath, and the rims thereof were finished
with gold.  This it was that the handmaid Phylo bare and set beside
her, filled with dressed yarn, and across it was laid a distaff
charged with wool of violet blue.  So Helen sat her down in the
chair, and beneath was a footstool for the feet."

When the host and guests begin to weep the ready tears of the heroic
age over the sorrows of the past, and dread of the dim future, Helen
comforts them with a magical potion.

"Then Helen, daughter of Zeus, turned to new thoughts.  Presently she
cast a drug into the wine whereof they drank, a drug to lull all pain
and anger, and bring forgetfulness of every sorrow.  Whoso should
drink a draught thereof, when it is mingled in the bowl, on that day
he would let no tear fall down his cheeks, not though his mother and
his father died, not though men slew his brother or dear son with the
sword before his face, and his own eyes beheld it.  Medicines of such
virtue and so helpful had the daughter of Zeus, which Polydamna, the
wife of Thon, had given her, a woman of Egypt, where Earth the grain-
giver yields herbs in greatest plenty, many that are healing in the
cup, and many baneful."

So Telemachus was kindly entertained by Helen and Menelaus, and when
he left them it was not without a gift.

"And Helen stood by the coffers wherein were her robes of curious
needlework which she herself had wrought.  Then Helen, the fair lady,
lifted one and brought it out, the widest and most beautifully
embroidered of all, and it shone like a star, and lay far beneath the
rest."

Presently, we read, "Helen of the fair face came up with the robe in
her hands, and spake:  'Lo!  I too give thee this gift, dear child, a
memorial of the hands of Helen, for thy bride to wear upon the day of
thy desire, even of thy marriage.  But meanwhile let it lie with thy
mother in her chamber.  And may joy go with thee to thy well-builded
house, and thine own country.'"

Helen's last words, in Homer, are words of good omen, her prophecy to
Telemachus that Odysseus shall return home after long wanderings, and
take vengeance on the rovers.  We see Helen no more, but Homer does
not leave us in doubt as to her later fortunes.  He quotes the
prophecy which Proteus, the ancient one of the sea, delivered to
Menelaus:-

"But thou, Menelaus, son of Zeus, art not ordained to die and meet
thy fate in Argos, the pasture-land of horses, but the deathless gods
will convey thee to the Elysian plain and the world's end, where is
Rhadamanthus of the fair hair, where life is easiest for men.  No
snow is there, nor yet great storm, nor any rain; but alway ocean
sendeth forth the breeze of the shrill West to blow cool on men:
yea, for thou hast Helen to wife, and thereby they deem thee to be
son of Zeus."

We must believe, with Isocrates, that Helen was translated, with her
lord, to that field of Elysium, "where falls not hail, or rain, or
any snow."  This version of the end of Helen's history we have
adopted, but many other legends were known in Greece.  Pausanias
tells us that, in a battle between the Crotoniats and the Locrians,
one Leonymus charged the empty space in the Locrian line, which was
entrusted to the care of the ghost of Aias.  Leonymus was wounded by
the invisible spear of the hero, and could not be healed of the hurt.
The Delphian oracle bade him seek the Isle of Leuke in the Euxine
Sea, where Aias would appear to him, and heal him.  When Leonymus
returned from Leuke he told how Achilles dwelt there with his ancient
comrades, and how he was now wedded to Helen of Troy.  Yet the local
tradition of Lacedaemon showed the sepulchre of Helen in Therapnae.
According to a Rhodian legend (adopted by the author of the "Epic of
Hades"), Helen was banished from Sparta by the sons of Menelaus, came
wandering to Rhodes, and was there strangled by the servants of the
queen Polyxo, who thus avenged the death of her husband at Troy.  It
is certain, as we learn both from Herodotus (vi. 61) and from
Isocrates, that Helen was worshipped in Therapnae.  In the days of
Ariston the king, a deformed child was daily brought by her nurse to
the shrine of Helen.  And it is said that, as the nurse was leaving
the shrine, a woman appeared unto her, and asked what she bore in her
arms, who said, "she bore a child."  Then the woman said, "show it to
me," which the nurse refused, for the parents of the child had
forbidden that she should be seen of any.  But the woman straitly
commanding that the child should be shown, and the other beholding
her eagerness, at length the nurse showed the child, and the woman
caressed its face and said, "she shall be the fairest woman in
Sparta."  And from that day the fashion of its countenance was
changed, "and the child became the fairest of all the Spartan women."

It is a characteristic of Greek literature that, with the rise of
democracy, the old epic conception of the ancient heroes altered.  We
can scarcely recognize the Odysseus of Homer in the Odysseus of
Sophocles.  The kings are regarded by the tragedians with some of the
distrust and hatred which the unconstitutional tyrants of Athens had
aroused.  Just as the later chansons de geste of France, the poems
written in an age of feudal opposition to central authority, degraded
heroes like Charles, so rhetorical, republican, and sophistical
Greece put its quibbles into the lips of Agamemnon and Helen, and
slandered the stainless and fearless Patroclus and Achilles.

The Helen of Euripides, in the "Troades," is a pettifogging sophist,
who pleads her cause to Menelaus with rhetorical artifice.  In the
"Helena," again, Euripides quite deserts the Homeric traditions, and
adopts the late myths which denied that Helen ever went to Troy.  She
remained in Egypt, and Achaeans and Trojans fought for a mere shadow,
formed by the Gods out of clouds and wind.  In the "Cyclops" of
Euripides, a satirical drama, the cynical giant is allowed to speak
of Helen in a strain of coarse banter.  Perhaps the essay of
Isocrates on Helen may be regarded as a kind of answer to the attacks
of several speakers in the works of the tragedians.  Isocrates
defends Helen simply on the plea of her beauty:  "To Heracles Zeus
gave strength, to Helen beauty, which naturally rules over even
strength itself."  Beauty, he declares, the Gods themselves consider
the noblest thing in the world, as the Goddesses showed when they
contended for the prize of loveliness.  And so marvellous, says
Isocrates, was the beauty of Helen, that for her glory Zeus did not
spare his beloved son, Sarpedon; and Thetis saw Achilles die, and the
Dawn bewailed her Memnon.  "Beauty has raised more mortals to
immortality than all the other virtues together."  And that Helen is
now a Goddess, Isocrates proves by the fact that the sacrifices
offered to her in Therapnae, are such as are given, not to heroes,
but to immortal Gods.

When Rome took up the legends of Greece, she did so in no chivalrous
spirit.  Few poets are less chivalrous than Virgil; no hero has less
of chivalry than his pious and tearful Aeneas.  In the second book of
the Aeneid, the pious one finds Helen hiding in the shrine of Vesta,
and determines to slay "the common curse of Troy and of her own
country."  There is no glory, he admits, in murdering a woman:-


Extinxisse nefas tamen et sumpsisse merentis
Laudabor poenas, animumqne explesse juvabit
Ultricis flammae, et cineres satiasse meorum.


But Venus appears and rescues the unworthy lover of Dido from the
crowning infamy which he contemplates.  Hundreds of years later,
Helen found a worthier poet in Quintus Smyrnaeus, who in a late age
sang the swan-song of Greek epic minstrelsy.  It is thus that (in the
fourth century A.D.) Quintus describes Helen, as she is led with the
captive women of Ilios, to the ships of the Achaeans:- "Now Helen
lamented not, but shame dwelt in her dark eyes, and reddened her
lovely cheeks, . . . while around her the people marvelled as they
beheld the flawless grace and winsome beauty of the woman, and none
dared upbraid her with secret taunt or open rebuke.  Nay, as she had
been a Goddess they beheld her gladly, for dear and desired was she
in their sight.  And as when their own country appeareth to men long
wandering on the sea, and they, being escaped from death and the
deep, gladly put forth their hands to greet their own native place;
even so all the Danaans were glad at the sight of her, and had no
more memory of all their woful toil, and the din of war:  such a
spirit did Cytherea put into their hearts, out of favour to fair
Helen and father Zeus."  Thus Quintus makes amends for the trivial
verses in which Coluthus describes the flight of a frivolous Helen
with an effeminate Paris.

To follow the fortunes of Helen through the middle ages would demand
much space and considerable research.  The poets who read Dares
Phrygius believed, with the scholar of Dr. Faustus, that "Helen of
Greece was the admirablest lady that ever lived."  When English
poetry first found the secret of perfect music, her sweetest numbers
were offered by Marlowe at the shrine of Helen.  The speech of
Faustus is almost too hackneyed to be quoted, and altogether too
beautiful to be omitted:-


Was this the face that launched a thousand ships,
And burnt the topless towers of Ilium!
Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.
Her lips suck forth my soul! see where it flies;
Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again;
Here will I dwell, for heaven is in those lips,
And all is dross that is not Helena.
* * *
Oh thou art fairer than the evening air
Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars.


The loves of Faustus and Helen are readily allegorized into the
passion of the Renaissance for classical beauty, the passion to which
all that is not beauty seemed very dross.  This is the idea of the
second part of "Faust," in which Helen once more became, as she
prophesied in the Iliad, a song in the mouths of later men.  Almost
her latest apparition in English poetry, is in the "Hellenics" of
Landor.  The sweetness of the character of Helen; the tragedy of the
death of Corythus by the hand of his father Paris; and the
omnipotence of beauty and charm which triumph over the wrath of
Menelaus, are the subjects of Landor's verse.  But Helen, as a woman,
has hardly found a nobler praise, in three thousand years, than
Helen, as a child, has received from Mr. Swinburne in "Atalanta in
Calydon."  Meleager is the speaker:-


Even such (for sailing hither I saw far hence,
And where Eurotas hollows his moist rock
Nigh Sparta, with a strenuous-hearted stream)
Even such I saw their sisters; one swan-white,
The little Helen, and less fair than she
Fair Clytemnestra, grave as pasturing fawns
Who feed and fear some arrow; but at whiles,
As one smitten with love or wrung with joy,
She laughs and lightens with her eyes, and then
Weeps; whereat Helen, having laughed, weeps too,
And the other chides her, and she being chid speaks naught,
But cheeks and lips and eyelids kisses her
Laughing, so fare they, as in their bloomless bud
And full of unblown life, the blood of gods.


There is all the irony of Fate in Althaeas' reply


Sweet days befall them and good loves and lords,
Tender and temperate honours of the hearths,
Peace, and a perfect life and blameless bed.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1887 Cassell & Company edition.





THE HUNCHBACK

by James Sheridan Knowles




INTRODUCTION



James Sheridan Knowles was born at Cork in 1784, and died at Torquay
in December, 1862, at the age of 78.  His father was a teacher of
elocution, who compiled a dictionary, and who was related to the
Sheridans.  He moved to London when his son was eight years old, and
there became acquainted with William Hazlitt and Charles Lamb.  The
son, after his school education, obtained a commission in the army,
but gave up everything for the stage, and made his first appearance
at the Crow Street Theatre, in Dublin.  He did not become a great
actor, and when he took to writing plays he did not prove himself a
great poet, but his skill in contriving situations through which a
good actor can make his powers tell upon the public, won the heart
of the great actor of his day, and as Macready's own poet he rose to
fame.

Before Macready had discovered him, Sheridan Knowles lived partly by
teaching elocution at Belfast and Glasgow, partly by practice of
elocution as an actor.  In 1815 he produced at the Belfast Theatre
his first play, Caius Gracchus.  His next play, Virginius was
produced at Glasgow with great success.  Macready, who had, at the
age of seventeen, begun his career as an actor at his father's
theatre in Birmingham, had, on Monday, October 5th, 1819, at the age
of twenty-six, taken the Londoners by storm in the character of
Richard III Covent Garden reopened its closed treasury.  It was
promptly followed by a success in Coriolanus, and Macready's place
was made.  He was at once offered fifty pounds a night for appearing
on one evening a week at Brighton.  It was just after that turn in
Macready's fortunes that a friend at Glasgow recommended to him the
part of Virginius in Sheridan Knowles's play lately produced there.
He agreed unwillingly to look at it, and says that in April, 1820,
the parcel containing the MS. came as he was going out.  He
hesitated, then sat down to read it that he might get a wearisome
job over.  As he read, he says, "The freshness and simplicity of the
dialogue fixed my attention; I read on and on, and was soon absorbed
in the interest of the story and the passion of its scenes, till at
its close I found myself in such a state of excitement that for a
time I was undecided what step to take.  Impulse was in the
ascendant, and snatching up my pen I hurriedly wrote, as my agitated
feelings prompted, a letter to the author, to me then a perfect
stranger."  Bryan Procter (Barry Cornwall) read the play next day
with Macready, and confirmed him in his admiration of it.

Macready at once got it accepted at the theatre, where nothing was
spent on scenery, but there was a good cast, and the enthusiasm of
Macready as stage manager for the occasion half affronted some of
his seniors.  On the 17th of May, 1820, about a month after it came
into Macready's hands, Virginius was produced at Covent Garden,
where, says the actor in his "Reminiscences," "the curtain fell
amidst the most deafening applause of a highly-excited auditory."
Sheridan Knowles's fame, therefore, was made, like that of his
friend Macready, and the friendship between author and actor
continued.  Sheridan Knowles had a kindly simplicity of character,
and the two qualities for which an actor most prizes a dramatist,
skill in providing opportunities for acting that will tell, and
readiness to make any changes that the actor asks for.  The
postscript to his first letter to Macready was, "Make any
alterations you like in any part of the play, and I shall be obliged
to you."  When he brought to the great actor his play of William
Tell--Caius Gracchus had been produced in November, 1823--there were
passages of writing in it that stopped the course of action, and,
says Macready, "Knowles had less of the tenacity of authorship than
most writers," so that there was no difficulty about alterations,
Macready having in a very high degree the tenacity of actorship.
And so, in 1825, Tell became another of Macready's best successes.

Sheridan Knowles continued to write for the stage until 1845, when
he was drawn wholly from the theatre by a religious enthusiasm that
caused him, in 1851, to essay the breaking of a lance with Cardinal
Wiseman on the subject of Transubstantiation.  Sir Robert Peel gave
ease to his latter days by a pension of 200 pounds a year from the
Civil List, which he had honourably earned by a career as dramatist,
in which he sought to appeal only to the higher sense of literature,
and to draw enjoyment from the purest source.  Of his plays time two
comedies {1} here given are all that have kept their place upon the
stage.  As one of the most earnest dramatic writers of the present
century he is entitled to a little corner in our memory.  Worse work
of the past has lasted longer than the plays of Sheridan Knowles are
likely to last through the future.

H. M.



THE HUNCHBACK.



DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
(AS ORIGINALLY PERFORMED AT COVENT GARDEN IN 1832.)



Julia                     Miss F. KEMBLE.
Helen                     Miss TAYLOR.
Master Walter             Mr. J. S. KNOWLES.
Sir Thomas Clifford       Mr. C. KEMBLE.
Lord Tinsel               Mr. WRENCH.
Master Wilford            Mr. J. MASON.
Modus                     Mr. ABBOTT.
Master Heartwell          Mr. EVANS.
Gaylove                   Mr. HENRY.
Fathom                    Mr. MEADOWS.
Thomas                    Mr. BARNES.
Stephen                   Mr. PAYNE.
Williams                  Mr. IRWIN.
Simpson                   Mr. BRADY.
Waiter                    Mr. HEATH.
Holdwell                  Mr. BENDER.
                        { Mr. J. COOPER.
Servants                { Mr. LOLLETT.



ACT I.



SCENE I.--A Tavern.


On one side SIR THOMAS CLIFFORD, at a table, with wine before him;
on the other, MASTER WILFORD, GAYLOVE, HOLDWELL, and SIMPSON,
likewise taking wine.

Wilf.  Your wine, sirs! your wine!  You do not justice to mine host
of the Three Tuns, nor credit to yourselves; I swear the beverage is
good!  It is as palatable poison as you will purchase within a mile
round Ludgate!  Drink, gentlemen; make free.  You know I am a man of
expectations; and hold my money as light as the purse in which I
carry it.

Gay.  We drink, Master Wilford.  Not a man of us has been chased as
yet.

Wilf.  But you fill not fairly, sirs!  Look at my measure!
Wherefore a large glass, if not for a large draught?  Fill, I pray
you, else let us drink out of thimbles!  This will never do for the
friends of the nearest of kin to the wealthiest peer in Britain.

Gay.  We give you joy, Master Wilford, of the prospect of
advancement which has so unexpectedly opened to you.

Wilf.  Unexpectedly indeed!  But yesterday arrived the news that the
Earl's only son and heir had died; and to-day has the Earl himself
been seized with a mortal illness.  His dissolution is looked for
hourly; and I, his cousin in only the third degree, known to him but
to be unnoticed by him--a decayed gentleman's son--glad of the title
and revenues of a scrivener's clerk--am the undoubted successor to
his estates and coronet.

Gay.  Have you been sent for?

Wilf.  No; but I have certified to his agent, Master Walter, the
Hunchback, my existence, and peculiar propinquity; and momentarily
expect 