er, &c.

Mr. Gibson finished reading it; and began to think about it in his
own mind. 'Who would have thought the lad had been so poetical; but,
to be sure, there's a "Shakespeare" in the surgery library: I'll
take it away and put "Johnson's Dictionary" instead. One comfort is
the conviction of her perfect innocence--ignorance, I should rather
say--for it is easy to see it's the first "confession of his love,"
as he calls it. But it's an awful worry--to begin with lovers so
early. Why, she's only just seventeen,--not seventeen, indeed, till
July; not for six weeks yet. Sixteen and three-quarters! Why, she's
quite a baby. To be sure--poor Jeanie was not so old, and how I did
love her! (Mrs. Gibson's name was Mary, so he must have been
referring to someone else.) Then his thoughts wandered back to other
days, though he still held the open note in his hand. By-and-by his
eyes fell upon it again, and his mind came back to bear upon the
present time. 'I'll not be hard upon him. I'll give him a hint; he
is quite sharp enough to take it. Poor laddie! if I send him away,
which would be the wisest course, I do believe, he's got no home to
go to.'

After a little more consideration in the same strain, Mr. Gibson went
and sat down at the writing-table and wrote the following formula:--

~Master Coxe~

('That "master" will touch him to the quick,' said Mr. Gibson to
himself as he wrote the word.)

* Verecundiae *
Fidelitatis Domesticae *
Reticentiae gr.
iij.
M. Capiat hanc dosim ter die in aqua pura.

R. GIBSON, ~Ch.~

Mr. Gibson smiled a little sadly as he re-read his words. 'Poor
Jeanie,' he said aloud. And then he chose out an envelope, enclosed
the fervid love-letter, and the above prescription; sealed it with
his own sharply-cut seal-ring, R. G., in Old-English letters, and
then paused over the address.

'He'll not like ~Master~ Coxe outside; no need to put him to
unnecessary shame.' So the direction on the envelope was--

~Edward Coxe, Esq.~

Then Mr. Gibson applied himself to the professional business which
had brought him home so opportunely and unexpectedly, and afterwards
he went back through the garden to the stables; and just as he had
mounted his horse, he said to the stable-man,--'Oh! by the way,
here's a letter for Mr. Coxe. Don't send it through the women; take
it round yourself to the surgery-door, and do it at once.'

The slight smile upon his face, as he rode out of the gates, died
away as soon as he found himself in the solitude of the lanes. He
slackened his speed, and began to think. It was very awkward, he
considered, to have a motherless girl growing up into womanhood in
the same house with two young men, even if she only met them at
meal-times; and all the intercourse they had with each other was
merely the utterance of such words as, 'May I help you to potatoes?'
or, as Mr. Wynne would persevere in saying, 'May I assist you to
potatoes?'--a form of speech which grated daily more and more upon
Mr. Gibson's cars. Yet Mr. Coxe, the offender in this affair which had
just occurred, had to remain for three years more as a pupil in Mr
Gibson's family. He should be the very last of the race. Still there
were three years to be got over; and if this stupid passionate
calf-love of his lasted, what was to be done? Sooner or later Molly
would become aware of it. The contingencies of the affair were so
excessively disagreeable to contemplate, that Mr. Gibson determined
to dismiss the subject from his mind by a good strong effort. He put
his horse to a gallop, and found that the violent shaking over the
lanes--paved as they were with round stones, which had been
dislocated by the wear and tear of a hundred years--was the very
best thing for the spirits, if not for the bones. He made a long
round that afternoon, and came back to his home imagining that the
worst was over, and that Mr. Coxe would have taken the hint conveyed
in the prescription. All that would be needed was to find a safe
place for the unfortunate Bethia, who had displayed such a daring
aptitude for intrigue. But Mr. Gibson reckoned without his host. It
was the habit of the young men to come in to tea with the family in
the dining-room, to swallow two cups, munch their bread or toast,
and then disappear. This night Mr. Gibson watched their countenances
furtively from under his long eye-lashes, while he tried against his
wont to keep up a ~degage~ manner, and a brisk conversation on
general subjects. He saw that Mr. Wynne was on the point of breaking
out into laughter, and that red-haired, red-faced Mr. Coxe was redder
and fiercer than ever, while his whole aspect and ways betrayed
indignation and anger.

'He will have it, will he?' thought Mr. Gibson to himself; and he
girded up his loins for the battle. He did not follow Molly and Miss
Eyre into the drawing-room as he usually did. He remained where he
was, pretending to read the newspaper, while Bethia, her face
swelled up with crying, and with an aggrieved and offended aspect,
removed the tea-things. Not five minutes after the room was cleared,
came the expected tap at the door. 'May I speak to you, sir?' said
the invisible Mr. Coxe, from outside.

'To be sure. Come in, Mr. Coxe. I was rather wanting to talk to you
about that bill of Corbyn's. Pray sit down.'

'It is about nothing of that kind, sir, that I wanted--that I
wished--No, thank you--I would rather not sit down.' He,
accordingly, stood in offended dignity. 'It is about that letter,
sir--that letter with the insulting prescription, sir.'

'Insulting prescription! I am surprised at such a word being applied
to any prescription of mine--though, to be sure, patients are
sometimes offended at being told the nature of their illnesses; and,
I dare say, they may take offence at the medicines which their cases
require.'

'I did not ask you to prescribe for me.'

'Oh, ho! Then you were the Master Coxe who sent the note through
Bethia! Let me tell you it has cost her her place, and was a very
silly letter into the bargain.'

'It was not the conduct of a gentleman, sir, to intercept it, and to
open it, and to read words never addressed to you, sir.'

'No!' said Mr. Gibson, with a slight twinkle in his eye and a curl on
his lips, not unnoticed by the indignant Mr. Coxe. 'I believe I was
once considered tolerably good-looking, and I dare say I was as
great a coxcomb as any one at twenty; but I don't think that even
then I should quite have believed that all those pretty compliments
were addressed to myself.'

'It was not the conductor a gentleman, sir,' repeated Mr. Coxe,
stammering over his words--he was going on to say something more,
when Mr. Gibson broke in.

'And let me tell you, young man,' replied Mr. Gibson, with a sudden
sternness in his voice, 'that what you have done is only excusable
in consideration of your youth and extreme ignorance of what are
considered the laws of domestic honour. I receive you into my house
as a member of my family--you induce one of my servants--corrupting
her with a bribe, I have no doubt--'

'Indeed, sir! I never gave her a penny.'

'Then you ought to have done. You should always pay those who do
your dirty work.'

'Just now, sir, you called it corrupting with a bribe,' muttered Mr
Coxe.

Mr. Gibson took no notice of this speech, but went on,--'Inducing one
of my servants to risk her place, without offering her the slightest
equivalent, by begging her to convey a letter clandestinely to my
daughter--a mere child.'

'Miss Gibson, sir, is nearly seventeen! I heard you say so only the
other day,' said Mr. Coxe, aged twenty. Again Mr. Gibson ignored the
remark.

'A letter which you were unwilling to have seen by her father, who
had tacitly trusted to your honour, by receiving you as an inmate of
his house. Your father's son--I know Major Coxe well--ought to have
come to me, and have said out openly, "Mr. Gibson, I love--or I fancy
that I love--your daughter; I do not think it right to conceal this
from you, although unable to earn a penny; and with no prospect of
an unassisted livelihood, even for myself, for several years, I
shall not say a word about my feelings--or fancied feelings--to the
very young lady herself." That is what your father's son ought to
have said; if, indeed, a couple of grains of reticent silence would
not have been better still.'

'And if I had said it, sir--perhaps I ought to have said it,' said
poor Mr. Coxe, in a hurry of anxiety, 'what would have been your
answer? Would you have sanctioned my passion, sir?'

'I would have said, most probably--I will not be certain of my exact
words in a suppositious case--that you were a young fool, but not a
dishonourable young fool, and I should have told you not to let your
thoughts run upon a calf-love until you had magnified it into a
passion. And I dare say, to make up for the mortification I should
have given you, I should have prescribed your joining the
Hollingford Cricket Club, and set you at liberty as often as I could
on the Saturday afternoons. As it is, I must write to your father's
agent in London, and ask him to remove you out of my household,
repaying the premium, of course, which will enable you to start
afresh in some other doctor's surgery.'

'It will so grieve my father,' said Mr. Coxe, startled into dismay,
if not repentance.

'I see no other course open. It will give Major Coxe some trouble (I
shall take care that he is at no extra expense), but what I think
will grieve him the most is the betrayal of confidence; for I
trusted you, Edward, like a son of my own!' There was something in
Mr. Gibson's voice when he spoke seriously, especially when he
referred to any feeling of his own--he who so rarely betrayed what
was passing in his heart--that was irresistible to most people: the
change from joking and sarcasm to tender gravity.

Mr. Coxe hung his head a little, and meditated.

'I do love Miss Gibson,' said he at length. 'Who could help it?'

'Mr. Wynne, I hope!' said Mr. Gibson.

'His heart is pre-engaged,' replied Mr. Coxe. 'Mine was free as air
till I saw her.'

'Would it tend to cure your--well! passion, we'll say--if she wore
blue spectacles at meal-times? I observe you dwell much on the
beauty of her eyes.'

'You are ridiculing my feelings, Mr. Gibson. Do you forget that you
yourself were young once?'

'Poor Jeanie' rose before Mr. Gibson's eyes; and he felt a little
rebuked.

'Come, Mr. Coxe, let us see if we can't make a bargain,' said he,
after a minute or so of silence. 'You have done a really wrong
thing, and I hope you are convinced of it in your heart, or that you
will be when the heat of this discussion is over, and you come to
think a little about it. But I won't lose all respect for your
father's son. If you will give me your word that, as long as you
remain a member of my family--pupil, apprentice, what you will--you
won't again try to disclose your passion--you see, I am careful to
take your view of what I should call a mere fancy--by word or
writing, looks or acts, in any manner whatever, to my daughter, or
to talk about your feelings to any one else, you shall remain here.
If you cannot give me your word, I must follow out the course I
named, and write to your father's agent.'

Mr. Coxe stood irresolute.

'Mr. Wynne knows all I feel for Miss Gibson, sir. He and I have no
secrets from each other.'

'Well, I suppose he must represent the reeds. You know the story of
King Midas's barber, who found out that his royal master had the
ears of an ass beneath his hyacinthine curls. So the barber, in
default of a Mr. Wynne, went to the reeds that grew on the shores of
a neighbouring lake, and whispered to them, "King Midas has the ears
of an ass." But he repeated it so often that the reeds learnt the
words, and kept on saying them all the day long, till at the last
the secret was no secret at all. If you keep on telling your tale to
Mr. Wynne, are you sure he won't repeat it in his turn?'

'If I pledge my word as a gentleman, sir, I pledge it for Mr. Wynne
as well.'

'I suppose I must run the risk. But remember how soon a young girl's
name may be breathed upon, and sullied. Molly has no mother, and for
that very reason she ought to move among you all, as unharmed as Una
herself.'

'Mr. Gibson, if you wish it, I'll swear it on the Bible,' cried the
excitable young man.

'Nonsense. As if your word, if it's worth anything, was not enough!
We'll shake hands upon it, if you like.'

Mr. Coxe came forward eagerly, and almost squeezed Mr. Gibson's ring
into his finger.

As he was leaving the room, he said, a little uneasily, 'May I give
Bethia a crown-piece?'

'No, indeed! Leave Bethia to me. I hope you won't say another word
to her while she is here. I shall see that she gets a respectable
place when she goes away.'

Then Mr. Gibson rang for his horse, and went out on the last visits
of the day. He used to reckon that he rode the world around in the
course of the year. There were not many surgeons in the county who
had so wide a range of practice as he; he went to lonely cottages on
the borders of great commons; to farm-houses at the end of narrow
country lanes that led to nowhere else, and were overshadowed by the
elms and beeches overhead. He attended all the gentry within a
circle of fifteen miles round Hollingford; and was the appointed
doctor to the still greater families who went up to London very
February--as the fashion then was--and returned to their acres in
the early weeks of July. He was, of necessity, a great deal from
home, and on this soft and pleasant summer evening he felt the
absence as a great evil. He was startled into discovering that his
little one was growing fast into a woman, and already the passive
object of some of the strong interests that affect a woman's life;
and he--her mother as well as her father--so much away that he could
not guard her as he would have wished. The end of his cogitations
was that ride to Hamley the next morning, when he proposed to allow
his daughter to accept Mrs. Hamley's last invitation--an invitation
that had been declined at the time.

'You may quote against me the proverb, "He that will not when he
may, when he will he shall have nay." And I shall have no reason to
complain,' he had said.

But Mrs. Hamley was only too much charmed with the prospect of having
a young girl for a visitor; one whom it would not be a trouble to
entertain; who might be sent out to ramble in the gardens, or told
to read when the invalid was too much fatigued for conversation; and
yet one whose youth and freshness would bring a charm, like a waft
of sweet summer air, into her lonely shut-up life. Nothing could be
pleasanter, and so Molly's visit to Hamley was easily settled.

'I only wish Osborne and Roger had been at home,' said Mrs. Hamley,
in her slow soft voice. 'She may find it dull being with old people,
like the squire and me, from morning till night. When can she come?
the darling--I am beginning to love her already!'

Mr. Gibson was very glad in his heart that the young men of the house
were out of the way; he did not want his little Molly to be passing
from Scylla to Charybdis; and, as he afterwards scoffed at himself
for thinking, he had got an idea that all young men were wolves in
chase of his one ewe-lamb.

'She knows nothing of the pleasure in store for her,' he replied;
'and I am sure I don't know what feminine preparations she may think
necessary, or how long they may take. You'll remember she is a
little ignoramus, and has had no . . . no training in etiquette; our
ways at home are rather rough for a girl, I'm afraid. But I know I
could not send her into a kinder atmosphere than this.'

When the squire heard from his wife of Mr. Gibson's proposal, he was
as much pleased as she at the prospect of their youthful visitor;
for he was a man of a hearty hospitality, when his pride did not
interfere with its gratification; and he was delighted to think of
his sick wife's having such an agreeable companion in her hours of
loneliness. After a while he said,--'It's as well the lads are at
Cambridge; we might have been having a love-affair if they had been
at home.'

'Well--and if we had?' asked his more romantic wife.

'It would not have done,' said the squire, decidedly. 'Osborne will
have had a first-rate education--as good as any man in the
county--he'll have this property, and he's a Hamley of Hamley; not a
family in the shire is as old as we are, or settled on their ground
so well. Osborne may marry where he likes. If Lord Hollingford had a
daughter, Osborne would have been as good a match as she could have
required. It would never do for him to fall in love with Gibson's
daughter--I should not allow it. So it's as well he's out of the
way.'

'Well! perhaps Osborne had better look higher.'

'"Perhaps!" I say he must.' The squire brought his hand down with a
thump on the table, near him, which made his wife's heart beat hard
for some minutes. 'And as for Roger,' he continued, unconscious of
the flutter he had put her into, 'he'll have to make his own way,
and earn his own bread; and, I'm afraid, he's not getting on very
brilliantly at Cambridge. He must not think of falling in love for
these ten years.'

'Unless he marries a fortune,' said Mrs. Hamley, more by way of
concealing her palpitation than anything else; for she was unworldly
and romantic to a fault.

'No son of mine shall ever marry a wife who is richer than himself,
with my good will,' said the squire again, with emphasis, but
without a thump. 'I don't say but what if Roger is gaining five
hundred a year by the time he's thirty, he shall not choose a wife
with ten thousand pounds down; but I do say, if a boy of mine, with
only two hundred a year--which is all Roger will have from us, and
that not for a long time--goes and marries a woman with fifty
thousand to her portion, I will disown him--it would be just
disgusting.'

'Not if they loved each other, and their whole happiness depended
upon their marrying each other?' put in Mrs. Hamley, mildly.

'Pooh! away with love! Nay, my dear, we loved each other so dearly
we should never have been happy with any one else; but that's a
different thing. People are not like what they were when we were
young. All the love now-a-days is just silly fancy, and sentimental
romance, as far as I can see.'

Mr. Gibson thought that he had settled everything about Molly's going
to Hamley before he spoke to her about it, which he did not do,
until the morning of the day on which Mrs. Hamley expected her. Then
he said,--'By the way, Molly! you are to go to Hamley this
afternoon; Mrs. Hamley wants you to go to her for a week or two, and
it suits me capitally that you should accept her invitation just
now.'

'Go to Hamley! This afternoon! Papa, you've got some odd reasons at
the back of your head--some mystery, or something. Please, tell me
what it is. Go to Hamley for a week or two! Why, I never was from
home before this without you in all my life.'

'Perhaps not. I don't think you ever walked before you put your feet
to the ground. Everything must have a beginning.'

'It has something to do with that letter that was directed to me,
but that you took out of my hands before I could even see the
writing of the direction.' She fixed her grey eyes on her father's
face, as if she meant to pluck out his secret.

He only smiled and said,--'You're a witch, goosey!'

'Then it had! But if it was a note from Mrs. Hamley, why might I not
see it? I have been wondering if you had some plan in your head ever
since that day--Thursday, was it not? You've gone about in a kind of
thoughtful perplexed way, just like a conspirator. Tell me,
papa'--coming up to him, and putting on a beseeching manner--'why
might not I see that note? and why am I to go to Hamley all on a
sudden?'

'Don't you like to go? Would you rather not?' If she had said that
she did not want to go he would have been rather pleased than
otherwise, although it would have put him into a great perplexity;
but he was beginning to dread the parting from her even for so short
a time. However, she replied directly,--

'I don't know--I dare say I shall like it when I have thought a
little more about it. Just now I am so startled by the suddenness of
the affair, I have not considered whether I shall like it or not. I
shan't like going away from you, I know. Why am I to go, papa?'

'There are three old ladies sitting somewhere, I and thinking about
you just at this very minute; one has a distaff in her hands, and is
spinning a thread; she has come to a knot in it, and is puzzled what
to do with it. Her sister has a great pair of scissors in her hands,
and wants--as she always does, when any difficulty arises in the
smoothness of the thread--to cut it off short; but the third, who
has the most head of the three, plans how to undo the knot; and she
it is who has decided that you are to go to Hamley. The others are
quite convinced by her arguments; so, as the Fates have decreed that
this visit is to be paid, there is nothing left for you and me but
to submit.'

'That is all nonsense, papa, and you are only making me more curious
to find out this hidden reason.'

Mr. Gibson changed his tone, and spoke gravely now. 'There is a
reason, Molly, and one which I do not wish to give. When I tell you
this much, I expect you to be an honourable girl, and to try and not
even conjecture what the reason may be,--much less endeavour to put
little discoveries together till very likely you may find out what I
want to conceal.'

'Papa, I won't even think about your reason again. But then I shall
have to plague you with another question. I have had no new gowns
this year, and I have outgrown all my last summer frocks. I have
only three that I can wear at all. Betty was saying only yesterday
that I ought to have some more.'

'That will do that you have got on, won't it? It is a very pretty
colour.'

'Yes; but, papa,' (holding it out as if she was, going to dance)
'it's made of woollen, and so hot and heavy; and every day it will
be getting warmer.'

'I wish girls could dress like boys,' said Mr. Gibson, with a little
impatience. 'How is a man to know when his daughter wants clothes?
and how is he to rig her out when he finds it out, just when she
needs them most and has not got them?'

'Ah, that's the question!' said Molly, in some despair.

'Can't you go to Miss Rose's? Does not she keep ready-made frocks
for girls of your age?'

'Miss Rose! I never had anything from her in my life,' replied
Molly, in some surprise; for Miss Rose was the great dressmaker and
milliner of the little town, and hitherto Betty had made the girl's
frocks.

'Well, but it seems people consider you as a young woman now, and so
I suppose you must run up milliners' bills like the rest of your
kind. Not that you are to get anything anywhere that you can't pay
for down in ready money. Here's a ten-pound note; go to Miss Rose's,
or Miss anybody's, and get what you want at once. The Hamley
carriage is to come for you at two, and anything that is not quite
ready, can easily be sent by their cart on Saturday, when some of
their people always come to market. Nay, don't thank me! I don't
want to have the money spent, and I don't want you to go and leave
me: I shall miss you, I know; it's only hard necessity that drives
me to send you a-visiting, and to throw away ten pounds on your
clothes. There, go away; you're a plague, and I mean to leave off
loving you as fast as I can.'

'Papa!' holding up her finger as in warning, 'you are getting
mysterious again; and though my honourableness is very strong, I
won't promise that it shall not yield to my curiosity if you go on
hinting at untold secrets.'

'Go away and spend your ten pounds. What did I give it you for but
to keep you quiet?'

Miss Rose's ready-made resources and Molly's taste combined, did not
arrive at a very great success. She bought a lilac print, because it
would wash, and would be cool and pleasant for the mornings; and
this Betty could make at home before Saturday. And for high-days and
holidays--by which was understood afternoons and Sundays--Miss Rose
persuaded her to order a gay-coloured, flimsy plaid silk, which she
assured her was quite the latest fashion in London, and which Molly
thought would please her father's Scotch blood. But when he saw the
scrap which she had brought home as a pattern, he cried out that the
plaid belonged to no clan in existence, and that Molly ought to have
known this by instinct. It was too late to change it, however, for
Miss Rose had promised to cut the dress out as soon as Molly had
left her shop.

Mr. Gibson had hung about the town all the morning instead of going
away on his usual distant rides. He passed his daughter once or
twice in the street, but he did not cross over the way when he was
on the opposite side--only gave her a look or a nod, and went on his
way, scolding himself for his weakness in feeling so much pain at
the thought of her absence for a fortnight or so.

'And, after all,' thought he, 'I am only where I was when she comes
back; at least, if that foolish fellow goes on with his imaginary
fancy. She'll have to come back some time, and if he chooses to
imagine himself constant, there's still the devil to pay.' Presently
he began to hum the air out of the 'Beggar's Opera'--

I wonder any man alive
Should ever rear a daughter.


CHAPTER VI


A VISIT TO THE HAMLEYS


Of course the news of Miss Gibson's approaching departure had spread
through the household before the one o'clock dinner-time came; and
Mr. Coxe's dismal countenance was a source of much inward irritation
to Mr. Gibson, who kept giving the youth sharp glances of savage
reproof for his melancholy face, and the want of appetite; which he
trotted out, with a good deal of sad ostentation; all of which was
lost upon Molly, who was too full of her own personal concerns to
have any thought or observation to spare from them, excepting once
or twice when she thought of the many days that must pass over
before she should again sit down to dinner with her father.

When she named this to him after the meal was over, and they were
sitting together in the drawing-room, waiting for the sound of the
wheels of the Hamley carriage, he laughed, and said,--

'I'm coming over to-morrow to see Mrs. Hamley; and I dare say I shall
dine at their lunch; so you won't have to wait long before you've
the treat of seeing the wild beast feed.'

Then they heard the approaching carriage.

'Oh, papa,' said Molly, catching at his hand, 'I do so wish I was
not going, now that the time is come.'

'Nonsense; don't let us have any sentiment. Have you got your keys?
that's more to the purpose.'

Yes; she had got her keys, and her purse; and her little box was put
up on the seat by the coachman; and her father handed her in; the
door was shut, and she drove away in solitary grandeur, looking back
and kissing her hand to her father, who stood at the gate, in spite
of his dislike of sentiment, as long as the carriage could be seen.
Then he turned into the surgery, and found Mr. Coxe had had his
watching too, and had, indeed, remained at the window gazing,
moonstruck, at the empty road, up which the young lady had
disappeared. Mr. Gibson startled him from his reverie by a sharp,
almost venomous, speech about some small neglect of duty a day or
two before. That night Mr. Gibson insisted on passing by the bedside
of a poor girl whose parents were worn-out by many wakeful anxious
nights succeeding to hard working days.

Molly cried a little, but checked her tears as soon as she
remembered how annoyed her father would have been at the sight of
them. It was very pleasant driving quickly along in the luxurious
carriage, through the pretty green lanes, with dog-roses and
honeysuckles so plentiful and rathe in the hedges, that she once or
twice was tempted to ask the coachman to stop till she had gathered
a nosegay. She began to dread the end of her little journey of seven
miles; the only drawback to which was, that her silk was not a true
clan-tartan, and a little uncertainty as to Miss Rose's punctuality,
At length they came to a village; straggling cottages lined the
road, an old church stood on a kind of green, with the public-house
close by it; there was a great tree, with a bench all round the
trunk, midway between the church gates and the little inn. The
wooden stocks were close to the gates. Molly had long passed the
limit of her rides, but she knew this must be the village of Hamley,
and they must be very near to the hall.

They swung in at the gates of the park in a few minutes, and drove
up through meadow-grass, ripening for hay,--it was no grand
aristocratic deer-park this--to the old red-brick hall; not three
hundred yards from the high-road. There had been no footman sent
with the carriage, but a respectable servant stood at the door, even
before they drew up, ready to receive the expected visitor, and take
her into the drawing-room where his mistress lay awaiting her.

Mrs. Hamley rose from her sofa to give Molly a gentle welcome; she
kept the girl's hand in hers after she had finished speaking,
looking into her face, as if studying it, and unconscious of the
faint blush she called up on the otherwise colourless cheeks.

'I think we shall be great friends,' said she, at length. 'I like
your face, and I am always guided by first impressions. Give me a
kiss, my dear.'

It was far easier to be active than passive during this process of
'swearing eternal friendship,' and Molly willingly kissed the sweet
pale face held up to her.

'I meant to have gone and fetched you myself; but the heat oppresses
me, and I did not feel up to the exertion. I hope you had a pleasant
drive?'

'Very,' said Molly, with shy conciseness.

'And now I will take you to your room; I have had you put close to
me; I thought you would like it better, even though it was a smaller
room than the other.'

She rose languidly, and wrapping her light shawl round her yet
elegant figure, led the way upstairs. Molly's bedroom opened out of
Mrs. Hamley's private sitting-room; on the other side of which was
her own bedroom. She showed Molly this easy means of communication,
and then, telling her visitor she would await her in the
sitting-room, she closed the door, and Molly was left at leisure to
make acquaintance with her surroundings.

First of all, she went to the window to see what was to be seen. A
flower-garden right below; a meadow of ripe grass just beyond,
changing colour in long sweeps, as the soft wind blew over it; great
old forest-trees a little on one side; and, beyond them again, to be
seen only by standing very close to the side of the window-sill, or
by putting her head out, if the window was open, the silver shimmer
of a mere, about a quarter of a mile off. On the opposite side to
the trees and the mere, the look-out was bounded by the old walls
and high-peaked roofs of the extensive farm-buildings. The
deliciousness of the early summer silence was only broken by the
song of the birds, and the nearer hum of bees. Listening to these
sounds, which enhanced the exquisite sense of stillness, and
puzzling out objects obscured by distance or shadow, Molly forgot
herself, and was suddenly startled into a sense of the present by a
sound of voices in the next room--some servant or other speaking to
Mrs. Hamley. Molly hurried to unpack her box, and arrange her few
clothes in the pretty old-fashioned chest of drawers, which was to
serve her as dressing-table as well. All the furniture in the room
was as old-fashioned and as well-preserved as it could be. The
chintz curtains were Indian calico of the last century--the colours
almost washed out, but the stuff itself exquisitely clean. There was
a little strip of bedside carpeting, but the wooden flooring, thus
liberally displayed, was of finely-grained oak, so firmly joined,
plank to plank, that no grain of dust could make its way into the
interstices. There were none of the luxuries of modern days; no
writing-table, or sofa, or pier-glass. In one corner of the walls
was a bracket, holding an Indian jar filled with pot-pourri; and
that and the climbing honeysuckle outside the open window scented
the room more exquisitely than any ~toilette~ perfumes. Molly laid
out her white gown (of last year's date and size) upon the bed,
ready for the (to her new) operation of dressing for dinner, and
having arranged her hair and dress, and taken out her company
worsted-work,' she opened the door softly, and saw Mrs. Hamley lying
on the sofa.

'Shall we stay up here, m dear? I think it is pleasanter than down
below; and then I shall not have to come upstairs again at
dressing-time.'

'I shall like it very much,' replied Molly.

'Ah! you've got your sewing, like a good girl,' said Mrs. Hamley.
'Now, I don't sew much. I live alone a great deal. You see, both my
boys are at Cambridge, and the squire is out of doors all day
long--so I have almost forgotten how to sew. I read a great deal. Do
you like reading?'

'It depends upon the kind of book,' said Molly. 'I'm afraid I don't
like "steady reading," as papa calls it.'

'But you like poetry!' said Mrs. Hamley, almost interrupting Molly.
'I was sure you did, from your face. Have you read this last poem of
Mrs. Hemans? Shall I read it aloud to you?'

So she began. Molly was not so much absorbed in listening but that
she could glance round the room. The character of the furniture was
much the same as in her own. Old-fashioned, of handsome material,
and faultlessly clean; the age and the foreign appearance of it gave
an aspect of comfort and picturesqueness to the whole apartment. On
the walls there hung some crayon sketches--portraits. She thought
she could make out that one of them was a likeness of Mrs. Hamley, in
her beautiful youth. And then she became interested in the poem, and
dropped her work, and listened in a manner that was after Mrs
Hamley's own heart. When the reading of the poem was ended, Mrs
Hamley replied to some of Molly's words of admiration, by saying,--

'Ah! I think I must read you some of Osborne's poetry some day;
under seal of secrecy, remember; but I really fancy they are almost
as good as Mrs. Hemans'.'

To be 'nearly as good as Mrs. Hemans' was saying as much to the young
ladies of that day, as saying that poetry is nearly as good as
Tennyson's would be in this. Molly looked up with eager interest.

'Mr. Osborne Hamley? Does your son write poetry?'

'Yes. I really think I may say he is a poet. He is a very brilliant,
clever young man, and he quite hopes to get a fellowship at Trinity.
He says he is sure to be high up among the wranglers, and that he
expects to get one of the Chancellor's medals. That is his
likeness--the one hanging against the wall behind you.'

Molly turned round, and saw one of the crayon sketches--representing
two boys, in the most youthful kind of jackets and trousers, and
falling collars. The elder was sitting down, reading intently. The
younger was standing by him, and evidently trying to call the
attention of the reader off to some object out of doors--out of the
window of the very room in which they were sitting, as Molly
discovered when she began to recognize the articles of furniture
faintly indicated in the picture.

'I like their faces!' said Molly. 'I suppose it is so long ago now,
that I may speak of their likenesses to you as if they were somebody
else; may not I?'

'Certainly,' said Mrs. Hamley, as soon as she understood what Molly
meant. 'Tell me just what you think of them, my dear; it will amuse
me to compare your impressions with what they really are.'

'Oh! but I did not mean to guess at their characters. I could not do
it; and it would be impertinent, if I could. I can only speak about
their faces as I see them in the picture.'

'Well! tell me what you think of them!'

'The eldest--the reading boy--is very beautiful; but I can't quite
make out his face yet, because his head is down, and I can't see the
eyes. That is the Mr. Osborne Hamley who writes poetry?'

'Yes. He is not quite so handsome now; but he was a beautiful boy.
Roger was never to be compared with him.'

'No; he is not handsome. And yet I like his face. I can see his
eyes. They are grave and solemn-looking; but all the rest of his
face is rather merry than otherwise. It looks too steady and sober,
too good a face, to go tempting his brother to leave his lesson.'

'Ah! but it was not a lesson. I remember the painter, Mr. Green, once
saw Osborne reading some poetry, while Roger was trying to persuade
him to come out and have a ride in the hay-cart--that was the
"motive" of the picture, to speak artistically. Roger is not much of
a reader; at least, he doesn't care for poetry, and books of
romance, or sentiment. He is so fond of natural history; and that
takes him, like the squire, a great deal out of doors; and when he
is in, he is always reading scientific books that bear upon his
pursuits. He is a good, steady fellow, though, and gives us great
satisfaction, but he is not likely to have such a brilliant career
as Osborne.'

Molly tried to find out in the picture the characteristics of the
two boys, as they were now explained to her by their mother; and in
questions and answers about the various drawings hung round the room
the time passed away until the dressing-bell rang for the six
o'clock dinner.

Molly was rather dismayed by the offers of the maid whom Mrs. Hamley
had sent to assist her. 'I am afraid they expect me to be very
smart,' she kept thinking to herself. 'If they do, they'll be
disappointed; that's all. But I wish my plaid silk gown had been
ready.'

She looked at herself in the glass with some anxiety, for the first
time in her life. She saw a slight, lean figure, promising to be
tall; a complexion browner than cream-coloured, although in a year
or two it might have that tint; plentiful curly black hair, tied up
in a bunch behind with a rose--coloured ribbon; long, almond-shaped,
soft grey eyes, shaded both above and below by curling black
eye-lashes.

'I don't think I am pretty,' thought Molly, as she turned away from
the glass; 'and yet I am not sure.' She would have been sure, if,
instead of inspecting herself with such solemnity, she had smiled
her own sweet merry smile, and called out the gleam of her teeth,
and the charm of her dimples.

She found her way downstairs into the drawing-room in good time; she
could look about her, and learn how to feel at home in her new
quarters. The room was forty-feet long or so, fitted up with yellow
satin at some distant period; high spindle-legged chairs and
pembroke-tables abounded. The carpet was of the same date as the
curtains, and was threadbare in many places; and in others was
covered with drugget. Stands of plants, great jars of flowers, old
Indian china and cabinets gave the room the pleasant aspect it
certainly had. And to add to it, there were five high, long windows
on one side of the room, all opening to the prettiest bit of
flower-garden in the grounds--or what was considered as
such--brilliant-coloured, geometrically-shaped beds, converging to a
sun-dial in the midst. The squire came in abruptly, and in his
morning dress; he stood at the door, as if surprised at the
white-robed stranger in possession of his hearth. Then, suddenly
remembering himself, but not before Molly had begun to feel very
hot, he said,--

'Why, God bless my soul, I'd quite forgotten you; you're Miss
Gibson, Gibson's daughter, aren't you? Come to pay us a visit? I'm
sure I'm very glad to see you, my dear.'

By this time, they had met in the middle of the room, and he was
shaking Molly's hand with vehement friendliness, intended to make up
for his not knowing her at first.

'I must go and dress, though,' he said, looking at his soiled
gaiters. 'Madam likes it. It's one of her fine London ways, and
she's broken me into it at last. Very good plan, though, and quite
right to make oneself fit for ladies' society. Does your father
dress for dinner, Miss Gibson?' He did not stay to wait for her
answer, but hastened away to perform his ~toilette~.

They dined at a small table in a great large room. There were so few
articles of furniture in it, and the apartment itself was so vast,
that Molly longed for the snugness of the home dining-room; nay, it
is to be feared that, before the stately dinner at Hamley Hall came
to an end, she even regretted the crowded chairs and tables, the
hurry of eating, the quick unformal manner in which everybody seemed
to finish their meal as fast as possible, and to return to the work
they had left. She tried to think that at six o'clock all the
business of the day was ended, and that people might linger if they
chose. She measured the distance from the sideboard to the table
with her eye, and made allowances for the men who had to carry
things backwards and forwards; but, all the same, this dinner
appeared to her a wearisome business, prolonged because the squire
liked it, for Mrs. Hamley seemed tired out. She ate even less than
Molly, and sent for fan and smelling--bottle to amuse herself with,
until at length the table-cloth was cleared away, and the dessert
was put upon a mahogany table, polished like a looking-glass.

The squire had hitherto been too busy to talk, except about the
immediate concerns of the table, and one or two of the greatest
breaks to the usual monotony of his days; a monotony in which he
delighted, but which sometimes became oppressive to his wife. Now,
however, peeling his orange, he turned to Molly,--

'To-morrow you'll have to do this for me Miss Gibson.'

'Shall I? I'll do it to-day, if you like, sir.'

'No; to-day I shall treat you as a visitor, with all proper
ceremony. To-morrow I shall send you errands, and call you by your
Christian name.'

'I shall like that,' said Molly.

'I was wanting to call you something less formal than Miss Gibson,'
said Mrs. Hamley.

'My name is Molly. It is an old-fashioned name, and I was christened
Mary. But papa likes Molly.'

'That's right. Keep to the good old fashions, my dear.'

'Well, I must say I think Mary is prettier than Molly, and quite as
old a name, too,' said Mrs. Hamley.

'I think it was,' said Molly, lowering her voice, and dropping her
eyes, 'because mamma was Mary, and I was called Molly while she
lived.'

'Ah, poor thing,' said the squire, not perceiving his wife's signs
to change the subject, 'I remember how sorry every one was when she
died; no one thought she was delicate, she had such a fresh colour,
till all at once she popped off, as one may say.'

'It must have been a terrible blow to your father,' said Mrs. Hamley,
seeing that Molly did not know what to answer.

'Ay, ay. It came so sudden, so soon after they were married.'

'I thought it was nearly four years,' said Molly.

'And four years is soon--is a short time to a couple who look to
spending their lifetime together. Every one thought Gibson would
have married again.'

'Hush,' said Mrs. Hamley, seeing in Molly's eyes and change of colour
how completely this was a new idea to her. But the squire was not so
easily stopped.

'Well--I'd perhaps better not have said it, but it's the truth; they
did. He's not likely to marry now, so one may say it out. Why, your
father is past forty, isn't he?'

'Forty-three. I don't believe he ever thought of marrying again,'
said Molly, recurring to the idea, as one does to that of danger
which has passed by, without one's being aware of it.

'No! I don't believe he did my dear. He looks to me just like a man
who would be constant to the memory of his wife. You must not mind
what the squire says.'

'Ah! you'd better go away, if you're going to teach Miss Gibson such
treason as that against the master of the house.' Molly went into
the drawing-room with Mrs. Hamley, but her thoughts did not change
with the room. She could not help dwelling on the danger which she
fancied she had escaped, and was astonished at her own stupidity at
never having imagined such a possibility as her father's second
marriage. She felt that she was answering Mrs. Hamley's remarks in a
very unsatisfactory manner.

'There is papa, with the squire!' she suddenly exclaimed. There they
were coming across the flower-garden from the stable-yard, her
father switching his boots with his riding whip, in order to make
them presentable in Mrs. Hamley's drawing-room. He looked so exactly
like his usual self, his home-self, that the seeing him in the flesh
was the most efficacious way of dispelling the phantom fears of a
second wedding, which were beginning to harass his daughter's mind;
and the pleasant conviction that he could not rest till he had come
over to see how she was going on in her new home, stole into her
heart, although he spoke but little to her, and that little was all
in a joking tone. After he had gone away, the squire undertook to
teach her cribbage; and she was happy enough now to give him all her
attention. He kept on prattling while they played; sometimes in
relation to the cards; at others telling her of small occurrences
which he thought might interest her.

'So you don't know my boys, even by sight. I should have thought you
would have done, for they are fond enough of riding into
Hollingford; and I know Roger has often enough been to borrow books
from your father. Roger is a scientific sort of a fellow. Osborne is
clever, like this mother. I should not wonder if he published a book
some day. You're not counting right, Miss Gibson. Why, I could cheat
you as easily as possible.' And so on, till the butler came in with
a solemn look, placed a large prayer-book before his master, who
huddled the cards away in a hurry, as if caught in an incongruous
employment; and then the maids and men trooped in to prayers--the
windows were still open, and the sounds of the solitary corncrake,
and the owl hooting in the trees, mingled with the words spoken.
Then to bed; and so ended the day.

Molly looked out of her chamber window--leaning on the sill, and
snuffing up the night odours of the honeysuckle. The soft velvet
darkness hid everything that was at any distance from her; although
she was as conscious of their presence as if she had seen them.

'I think I shall be very happy here,' was in Molly's thoughts, as
she turned away at length, and began to prepare for bed. Before long
the squire's words, relating to her father's second marriage, came
across her, and spoilt the sweet peace of her final thoughts. 'Who
could he have married?' she asked herself. 'Miss Eyre? Miss
Browning? Miss Phoebe? Miss Goodenough?' One by one, each of these
was rejected for sufficient reasons. Yet the unsatisfied question
rankled in her mind, and darted out of ambush to disturb her dreams.

Mrs. Hamley did not come down to breakfast; and Molly found out,
with a little dismay, that the squire and she were to have it by
themselves. On this first morning he put aside his newspapers--one
an old established Tory journal, with all the local and county news,
which was the most interesting to him; the other the ~Morning
Chronicle~, which he called his dose of bitters, and which called
out many a strong expression and tolerably pungent oath. To-day,
however, he was 'on his manners,' as he afterwards explained to
Molly; and he plunged about, trying to find ground for a
conversation. He could talk of his wife and his sons, his estate,
and his mode of farming; his tenants, and the mismanagement of the
last county election. Molly's interests were her father, Miss Eyre,
her garden and pony; in a fainter degree the Miss Brownings, the
Cumnor Charity School, and the new gown that was to come from Miss
Rose's; into the midst of which the one great question, 'Who was it
that people thought it was possible papa might marry?' kept popping
up into her mouth, like a troublesome Jack-in-the-box. For the
present, however, the lid was snapped down upon the intruder as
often as he showed his head between her teeth. They were very polite
to each other during the meal; and it was not a little tiresome to
both. When it was ended the squire withdrew into his study to read
the untasted newspapers. It was the custom to call the room in which
Squire Hamley kept his coats, boots, and gaiters, his different
sticks and favourite spud, his gun and fishing-rods, the study.
There was a bureau in it, and a three-cornered arm-chair, but no
books were visible. The greater part of them were kept in a large,
musty-smelling room, in an unfrequented part of the house; so
unfrequented that the housemaid often neglected to open the
window-shutters, which looked into a part of the grounds over-grown
with the luxuriant growth of shrubs. Indeed, it was a tradition in
the servants' hall that, in the late squire's time--he who had been
plucked at college--the library windows had been boarded up to avoid
paying the window-tax. And when the 'young gentlemen' were at home
the housemaid, without a single direction to that effect, was
regular in her charge of this room; opened the windows and lighted
fires daily, and dusted the handsomely-bound volumes, which were
really a very fair collection of the standard literature in the
middle of the last century. All the books that had been purchased
since that time were held in small book-cases between each two of
the drawing-room windows, and in Mrs. Hamley's own sitting-room
upstairs. Those in the drawing-room were quite enough to employ
Molly; indeed she was so deep in one of Sir Walter Scott's novels
that she jumped as if she had been shot, when an hour or so after
breakfast the squire came to the gravel-path outside one of the
windows, and called to ask her if she would like to come out of
doors and go about the garden and home-fields with him.

'It must be a little dull for you, my girl, all by yourself, with
nothing but books to look at, in the mornings here; but you see,
madam has a fancy for being quiet in the mornings: she told your
father about it, and so did I, but I felt sorry for you all the
same, when I saw you sitting on the ground all alone in the
drawing-room.'

Molly had been in the very middle of the ~Bride of Lammermoor~, and
would gladly have stayed in-doors to finish it, but she felt the
squire's kindness all the same. They went in and out of
old-fashioned greenhouses, over trim lawns, the squire unlocked the
great walled kitchen-garden, and went about giving directions to
gardeners; and all the time Molly followed him like a little dog,
her mind quite full of 'Ravenswood' and 'Lucy Ashton.' Presently,
every place near the house had been inspected and regulated, and the
squire was more at liberty to give his attention to his companion,
as they passed through the little wood that separated the gardens
from the adjoining fields. Molly, too, plucked away her thoughts
from the seventeenth century; and, somehow or other, that one
question, which had so haunted her before, came out of her lips
before she was aware--a literal impromptu,--

'Who did people think papa would marry? That time--long ago--soon
after mamma died?'

She dropped her voice very soft and low, as she spoke the last
words. The squire turned round upon her, and looked at her face, he
knew not why. It was very grave, a little pale, but her steady eyes
almost commanded some kind of answer.

'Whew,' said he, whistling to gain time; not that he had anything
definite to say, for no one had ever had any reason to join Mr
Gibson's name with any known lady: it was only a loose conjecture
that had been hazarded on the probabilities--a young widower, with a
little girl.

'I never heard of any one--his name was never coupled with any
lady's--'twas only in the nature of things that he should marry
again; he may do it yet, for aught I know, and I don't think it
would be a bad move either. I told him so, the last time but one he
was here.'

'And what did he say?' asked breathless Molly.

'Oh: he only smiled, and said nothing. You shouldn't take up words
so seriously, my dear. Very likely he may never think of marrying
again, and if he did, it would be a very good thing both for him and
for you!'

Molly muttered something, as if to herself, but the squire might
have heard it if he had chosen. As it was, he wisely turned the
current of the conversation.

'Look at that!' he said, as they suddenly came upon the mere, or
large pond. There was a small island in the middle of the glassy
water, on which grew tall trees, dark Scotch firs in the centre,
silvery shimmering willows close to the water's edge. 'We must get
you punted over there, some of these days. I'm not fond of using the
boat at this time of the year, because the young birds are still in
the nests among the reeds and water-plants; but we'll go. There are
coots and grebes.'

'Oh, look, there's a swan!'

'Yes; there are two pair of them here. And in those trees there is
both a rookery and a heronry; the herons ought to be here by now,
for they're off to the sea in August, but I have not seen one yet.
Stay! is not that one--that fellow on a stone, with his long neck
bent down, looking into the water?'

'Yes! I think so. I have never seen a heron, only pictures of them.'

'They and the rooks are always at war, which does not do for such
near neighbours. If both herons leave the nest they are building,
the rooks come and tear it to pieces; and once Roger showed me a
long straggling fellow of a heron, with a flight of rooks after him,
with no friendly purpose in their minds, I'll be bound. Roger knows
a deal of natural history, and finds out queer things sometimes. He
would have been off a dozen times during this walk of ours, if he'd
been here; his eyes are always wandering about, and see twenty
things where I only see one. Why! I have known him bolt into a copse
because he saw something fifteen yards off--some plant, maybe, which
he would tell me was very rare, though I should say I'd seen its
marrow at every turn in the woods; and, if we came upon such a thing
as this,' touching a delicate film of a cobweb upon a leaf with his
stick, as he spoke, 'why, he could tell you what insect or spider
made it, and if it lived in rotten fir-wood, or in a cranny of good
sound timber, or deep down in the ground, or up in the sky, or
anywhere. It is a pity they don't take honours in Natural History at
Cambridge. Roger would be safe enough if they did.'

'Mr. Osborne Hamley is very clever, is he not?' Molly asked, timidly.

'Oh, yes. Osborne's a bit of a genius. His mother looks for great
things from Osborne. I'm rather proud of him myself. He'll get a
Trinity fellowship, if they play him fair. As I was saying at the
magistrates' meeting yesterday, "I've got a son who will make a
noise at Cambridge, or I'm very much mistaken." Now, is it not a
queer quip of Nature,' continued the squire, turning his honest face
towards Molly, as if he was going to impart a new idea to her, 'that
I, a Hamley of Hamley, straight in descent from nobody knows
when--the Heptarchy, they say--What's the date of the Heptarchy?'

'I don't know,' said Molly, startled at being thus appealed to.

'Well! it was some time before King Alfred, because he was the King
of all England, you know; but, as I was saying, here am I, of as
good and as old a descent as any man in England, and I doubt if a
stranger to look at me, would take me for a gentleman, with my red
face, great hands and feet, and thick figure, fourteen stone, and
never less than twelve even when I was a young man;' and there's
Osborne, who takes after his mother, who could not tell her
great-grandfather from Adam, bless her; and Osborne has a girl's
delicate face, and a slight make, and hands and feet as small as a
lady's. He takes after madam's side, who, as I said, can't tell who
was their grandfather. Now, Roger is like me, a Hamley of Hamley,
and no one who sees him in the street will ever think that
red-brown, big-boned, clumsy chap is of gentle blood. Yet all those
Cumnor people, you make such ado of in Hollingford, are mere muck of
yesterday. I was talking to madam the other day about Osborne's
marrying a daughter of Lord Hollingford's--that's to say, if he had
a daughter--he's only got boys, as it happens; but I'm not sure if I
should consent to it. I really am not sure; for you see Osborne will
have had a first-rate education, and his family dates from the
Heptarchy, while I should be glad to know where the Cumnor folk were
in the time of Queen Anne?' He walked on, pondering the question of
whether he could have given his consent to this impossible marriage;
and after some time, and when Molly had quite forgotten the subject
to which he alluded, he broke out with--'No! I am sure I should have
looked higher. So, perhaps, it's as well my Lord Hollingford has
only boys.'

After a while, he thanked Molly for her companionship, with
old-fashioned courtesy; and told her that he thought, by this time,
madam would be up and dressed, and glad to have her young visitor
with her. He pointed out the deep purple house, with its stone
facings, as it was seen at some distance between the trees, and
watched her protectingly on her way along the field-paths.

'That's a nice girl of Gibson's,' quoth he to himself. 'But what a
tight hold the wench got of the notion of his marrying again! One
had need be on one's guard as to what one says before her. To think
of her never having thought of the chance of a step-mother. To be
sure, a step-mother to a girl is a different thing to a second wife
to a man!'


CHAPTER VII


FORESHADOWS OF LOVE PERILS


If Squire Hamley had been unable to tell Molly who had ever been
thought of as her father's second wife, fate was all this time
preparing an answer of a pretty positive kind to her wondering
curiosity. But fate is a cunning hussy, and builds up her plans as
imperceptibly as a bird builds her nest; and with much the same kind
of unconsidered trifles.' The first 'trifle' of an event was the
disturbance which Jenny (Mr. Gibson's cook) chose to make at Bethia's
being dismissed. Bethia was a distant relation and ~protegee~ of
Jenny's, and she chose to say it was Mr. Coxe the tempter who ought
to have 'been sent packing,' not Bethia the tempted, the victim. In
this view there was quite enough plausibility to make Mr. Gibson feel
that he had been rather unjust. He had, however, taken care to
provide Bethia with another situation, to the full as good as that
which she held in his family. Jenny, nevertheless, chose to give
warning; and though Mr. Gibson knew full well from former experience
that her warnings were words, not deeds, he hated the discomfort,
the uncertainty,--the entire disagreeableness of meeting a woman at
any time in his house, who wore a grievance and an injury upon her
face as legibly as Jenny took care to do.

Down into the middle of this small domestic trouble came another,
and one of greater consequence. Miss Eyre had gone with her old
mother, and her orphan nephews and nieces, to the sea-side, during
Molly's absence, which was only intended at first to last for a
fortnight. After about ten days of this time had elapsed, Mr. Gibson
received a beautifully written, beautifully worded, admirably
folded, and most neatly sealed letter from Miss Eyre. Her eldest
nephew had fallen ill of scarlet fever, and there was every
probability that the younger children would be attacked by the same
complaint. It was distressing enough for poor Miss Eyre--this
additional expense, this anxiety--the long detention from home which
the illness involved. But she said not a word of any inconvenience
to herself; she only apologized with humble sincerity for her
inability to return at the appointed time to her charge in Mr
Gibson's family; meekly adding, that perhaps it was as well, for
Molly had never had the scarlet fever, and even if Miss Eyre had
been able to leave the orphan children to return to her employments,
it might not have been a safe or a prudent step.

'To be sure not,' said Mr. Gibson, tearing the letter in two, and
throwing it into the hearth, where he soon saw it burnt to ashes. 'I
wish I'd a five-pound house and not a woman within ten miles of me.
I might have some peace then.' Apparently, he forgot Mr. Coxe's
powers of making mischief; but indeed he might have traced that evil
back to unconscious Molly. The martyr-cook's entrance to take away
the breakfast things, which she announced by a heavy sigh, roused Mr
Gibson from thought to action.

'Molly must stay a little longer at Hamley,' he resolved. 'They've
often asked for her, and now they'll have enough of her, I think.
But I can't have her back here just yet; and so the best I can do
for her is to leave her where she is. Mrs. Hamley seems very fond of
her, and the child is looking happy, and stronger in health. I'll
ride round by Hamley to-day at any rate, and see how the land lies.'

He found Mrs. Hamley lying on a sofa placed under the shadow of the
great cedar-tree on the lawn. Molly was flitting about her,
gardening away under her directions; tying up the long sea-green
stalks of bright budded carnations, snipping off dead roses.

'Oh! here's papa!' she cried out joyfully, as he rode up to the
white paling which separated the trim lawn and trimmer flower-garden
from the rough park-like ground in front of the house.

'Come in--come here--through the drawing-room window,' said Mrs
Hamley, raising herself on her elbow. 'We've got a rose-tree to show
you that Molly has budded all by herself. We are both so proud of
it.'

So Mr. Gibson rode round to the stables, left his horse there, and
made his way through the house to the open-air summer-parlour under
the cedar-tree, where there were chairs, a table, books, and tangled
work. Somehow, he rather disliked asking for Molly to prolong her
visit; so he determined to swallow his bitter first, and then take
the pleasure of the delicious day, the sweet repose, the murmurous,
scented air. Molly stood by him, her hand on his shoulder. He sate
opposite to Mrs. Hamley.

'I have come here to-day to ask for a favour,' he began.

'Granted before you name it. Am not I a bold woman?'

He smiled and bowed, but went straight on with his speech.

'Miss Eyre, who has been Molly's--governess, I suppose I must call
her--for many years, writes to-day to say that one of the little
nephews she took with her to Newport while Molly was staying here,
has caught the scarlet fever.'

'I guess your request. I make it before you do. I beg for dear
little Molly to stay on here. Of course Miss Eyre can't come back to
you; and of course Molly must stay here!'

'Thank you; thank you very much. That was my request.'

Molly's hand stole down to his, and nestled in that firm compact
grasp.

'Papa!--Mrs. Hamley!--I know you'll both understand me--but mayn't I
go home? I am very very happy here; but--oh papa! I think I should
like to be at home with you best.'

An uncomfortable suspicion flashed across his mind. He pulled her
round, and looked straight and piercingly into her innocent face.
Her colour came at his unwonted scrutiny, but her sweet eyes were
filled with wonder, rather than with any feeling which he dreaded to
find. For an instant he had doubted whether young red-headed Mr
Coxe's love might not have called out a response in his daughter s
breast; but he was quite clear now.

'Molly, you're rude to begin with. I don't know how you're to make
your peace with Mrs. Hamley, I'm sure. And in the next place, do you
think you're wiser than I am; or that I don't want you at home, if
all other things were conformable? Stay where you are, and be
thankful.'

Molly knew him well enough to be certain that the prolongation of
her visit at Hamley was quite a decided affair in his mind; and then
she was smitten with a sense of ingratitude. She left her father,
and went to Mrs. Hamley, and bent over and kissed her; but she did
not speak. Mrs. Hamley took hold of her hand, and made room on the
sofa for her.

'I was going to have asked for a longer visit the next time you
came, Mr. Gibson. We are such happy friends, are not we, Molly? and
now that this good little nephew of Miss Eyre's----'

'I wished he was whipped,' said Mr. Gibson.

'--has given us such a capital reason, I shall keep Molly for a real
long visitation. You must come over and see us very often. There's a
room here for you always, you know; and I don't see why you should
not start on your rounds from Hamley every morning, just as well as
from Hollingford.'

'Thank you. If you had not been so kind to my little girl, I might
be tempted to say something rude in answer to your last speech.'

'Pray say it. You won't be easy till you have given it out, I know.'

'Mrs. Hamley has found out from whom I get my rudeness,' said Molly,
triumphantly. 'It's an hereditary quality.'

'I was going to say that proposal of yours that I should sleep at
Hamley was just like a woman's idea--all kindness, and no common
sense. How in the world would my patients find me out, seven miles
from my accustomed place? They'd be sure to send for some other
doctor, and I should be ruined in a month.'

'Could not they send on here? A messenger costs very little.'

'Fancy old Goody Henbury struggling up to my surgery, groaning at
every step, and then being told to just step on seven miles farther!
Or take the other end of society:--I don't think my Lady Cumnor's
smart groom would thank me for having to ride on to Hamley every
time his mistress wants me.'

'Well, well, I submit. I am a woman. Molly, thou art a woman! Go and
order some strawberries and cream for this father of yours. Such
humble offices fall within the province of women. Strawberries and
cream are all kindness and no common sense, for they'll give him a
horrid fit of indigestion.'

'Please speak for yourself, Mrs. Hamley,' said Molly, merrily. 'I
ate--oh, such a great basketful yesterday, and the squire went
himself to the dairy and brought me out a great bowl of cream when
he found me at my busy work. And I'm as well as ever I was, to-day,
and never had a touch of indigestion near me.'

'She's a good girl,' said her father, when she had danced out of
hearing. The words were not quite an inquiry, he was so certain of
his answer. There was a mixture of tenderness and trust in his eyes,
as he awaited the reply, which came in a moment.

'She's a darling! I cannot tell you how fond the squire and I are of
her; both of us. I am so delighted to think she is not to go away
for a long time. The first thing I thought of this morning when I
wakened up, was that she would soon have to return to you, unless I
could persuade you into leaving her with me a little longer. And now
she must stay--oh, two months at least.'

It was quite true that the squire had become very fond of Molly. The
charm of having a young girl dancing and singing inarticulate
ditties about the house and garden, was indescribable in its novelty
to him. And then Molly was. so willing and so wise; ready both to
talk and to listen at the right times. Mrs. Hamley was quite right in
speaking of her husband's fondness for Molly. But either she herself
chose a wrong time for telling him of the prolongation of the girl's
visit, or one of the fits of temper to which he was liable, but
which he generally strove to check in the presence of his wife, was
upon him; at any rate, he received the news in anything but a
gracious frame of mind.

'Stay longer! Did Gibson ask for it?' 'Yes! I don't see what else is
to become of her; Miss Eyre away and all. It's a very awkward
position for a motherless girl like her to be at the head of a
household with two young men in it.'

'That's Gibson's look-out; he should have thought of it before
taking pupils, or apprentices, or whatever he calls them.'

'My dear squire! why, I thought you'd be as glad as I was--as I am
to keep Molly. I asked her to stay for an indefinite time; two
months at least.'

'And to be in the house with Osborne! Roger, too, will be at home.'

By the cloud in the squire's eyes, Mrs. Hamley read his mind.

'Oh, she's not at all the sort of girl young men of their age would
take to, We like her because we see what she really is; but lads of
one or two and twenty want all the accessories of a young woman.'

'Want what?' growled the squire.

'Such things as becoming dress, style of manner. They would not at
their age even see that she is pretty; their ideas of beauty would
include colour.'

'I suppose all that's very clever; but I don't understand it. All I
know is, that it's a very dangerous thing to shut two young men of
one and three and twenty up in a country-house like this, with a
girl of seventeen--choose what her gowns may be like, or her hair,
or her eyes. And I told you particularly I didn't want Osborne, or
either of them, indeed, to be falling in love with her. I'm very
much annoyed.'

Mrs. Hamley's face fell; she became a little pale.

'Shall we make arrangements for their stopping away while she is
here; staying up at Cambridge, or reading with some one? going
abroad for a month or two?'

'No; you've been reckoning this ever so long on their coming home.
I've seen the marks of the weeks on your almanack. I'd sooner speak
to Gibson, and tell him he must take his daughter away, for it's not
convenient to us----'

'My dear Roger! I beg you will do no such thing. It will be so
unkind; it will give the lie to all I said yesterday. Don't, please,
do that. For my sake, don't speak to Mr. Gibson!'

'Well, well, don't put yourself in a flutter,' for he was afraid of
her becoming hysterical; 'I'll speak to Osborne when he comes home,
and tell him how much I should dislike anything of the kind.'

'And Roger is always far too full of his natural history and
comparative anatomy, and messes of that sort, to be thinking of
falling in love with Venus herself, He has not the sentiment and
imagination of Osborne.'

'Ah, you don't know; you never can be sure about a young man! But
with Roger it wouldn't so much signify. He would know he couldn't
marry for years to come.'

All that afternoon the squire tried to steer clear of Molly, to whom
he felt himself to have been an inhospitable traitor. But she was so
perfectly unconscious of his shyness of her, and so merry and sweet
in her behaviour as a welcome guest, never distrusting him for a
moment, however gruff he might be, that by the next morning she had
completely won him round, and they were quite on the old terms
again. At breakfast this very morning, a letter was passed from the
squire to his wife, and back again, without a word as to its
contents; but--

'Fortunate!'

'Yes! very!'

Little did Molly apply these expressions to the piece of news Mrs
Hamley told her in the course of the day; namely, that her son
Osborne had received an invitation to stay with a friend in the
neighbourhood of Cambridge, and perhaps to make a tour on the
Continent with him subsequently; and that, consequently, he would
not accompany his brother when Roger came home.

Molly was very sympathetic.

'Oh, dear! I am so sorry!'

Mrs. Hamley was thankful her husband was not present, Molly spoke the
words so heartily.

'You have been thinking so long of his coming home. I am afraid it
is a great disappointment.'

Mrs. Hamley smiled--relieved.

'Yes! it is a disappointment certainly, but we must think of
Osborne's pleasure. And with his poetical mind, he will write us
such delightful travelling letters. Poor fellow! he must be going
into the examination to-day! Both his father and I feel sure,
though, that he will be a high wrangler.' Only--I should like to
have seen him, my own dear boy. But it is best as it is.'

Molly was a little puzzled by this speech, but soon put it out of
her head. It was a disappointment to her, too, that she should not
see this beautiful, brilliant young man, his mother's hero. From
time to time her maiden fancy had dwelt upon what he would be like;
how the lovely boy of the picture in Mrs. Hamley's dressing-room
would have changed in the ten years that had elapsed since the
likeness was taken; if he would read poetry aloud; if he would even
read his own poetry. However, in the never-ending feminine business
of the day, she soon forgot her own disappointment; it only came
back to her on first wakening the next morning, as a vague something
that was not quite so pleasant as she had anticipated, and then was
banished as a subject of regret. Her days at Hamley were well filled
up with the small duties that would have belonged to a daughter of
the house had there been one. She made breakfast for the lonely
squire, and would willingly have carried up madam's, but that daily
piece of work belonged to the squire, and was jealously guarded by
him. She read the smaller print of the newspapers aloud to him, city
articles, money and corn-markets included. She strolled about the
gardens with him, gathering fresh flowers, meanwhile, to deck the
drawing-room against Mrs. Hamley should come down. She was her
companion when she took her drives in the close carriage; they read
poetry and mild literature together in Mrs. Hamley's sitting-room
upstairs. She was quite clever at cribbage now, and could beat the
squire if she took pains. Besides these things, there were her own
independent ways of employing herself. She used to try to practise a
daily hour on the old grand piano in the solitary drawing-room,
because she had promised Miss Eyre she would do so. And she had
found her way into the library, and used to undo the heavy bars of
the shutters if the housemaid had forgotten this duty, and mount the
ladder, sitting on the steps, for an hour at a time, deep in some
book of the old English classics. The summer days were very short to
this happy girl of seventeen.


CHAPTER VIII


DRIFTING INTO DANGER


On Thursday, the quiet country household was stirred through all its
fibres with the thought of Roger's coming home. Mrs. Hamley had not
seemed quite so well, or quite in such good spirits for two or three
days before; and the squire himself had appeared to be put out
without any visible cause. They had not chosen to tell Molly that
Osborne's name had only appeared very low down in the mathematical
tripos. So all that their visitor knew was that something was out of
tune, and she hoped that Roger's coming home would set it to rights,
for it was beyond the power of her small cares and wiles.

On Thursday, the housemaid apologized to her for some slight
negligence in her bedroom, by saying she had been busy scouring Mr
Roger's rooms. 'Not but what they were as clean as could be
beforehand; but mistress would always have the young gentlemen's
rooms cleaned afresh before they came home. If it had been Mr
Osborne, the whole house would have had to be done; but to be sure
he was the eldest son, so it was but likely.' Molly was amused at
this testimony to the rights of heirship; but somehow she herself
had fallen into the family manner of thinking that nothing was too
great or too good for 'the eldest son.' In his father's eyes,
Osborne was the representative of the ancient house of Hamley of
Hamley, the future owner of the land which had been theirs for a
thousand years. His mother clung to him because they two were cast
in the same mould, both physically and mentally--because he bore her
maiden name. She had indoctrinated Molly with her faith, and, in
spite of her amusement at the housemaid's speech, the girl visitor
would have been as anxious as any one to show her feudal loyalty to
the heir, if indeed it had been he that was coming. After luncheon,
Mrs. Hamley went to rest, in preparation for Roger's return; and
Molly also retired to her own room, feeling that it would be better
for her to remain there until dinner-time, and so to leave the
father and mother to receive their boy in privacy. She took a book
of MS. poems with her; they were all of Osborne Hamley's
composition; and his mother had read some of them aloud to her young
visitor more than once. Molly had asked permission to copy one or
two of those which were her greatest favourites; and this quiet
summer afternoon she took this copying for her employment, sitting
at the pleasant open window, and losing herself in dreamy out-looks
into the gardens and woods, quivering in the noontide heat. The
house was so still, in its silence it might have been the 'moated
grange;' the booming buzz of the blue flies, in the great staircase
window, seemed the loudest noise in-doors. And there was scarcely a
sound out-of-doors but the humming of bees, in the flower-beds below
the window. Distant voices from the far-away fields in which they
were making hay--the scent of which came in sudden wafts distinct
from that of the nearer roses and honey-suckles--these merry piping
voices just made Molly feel the depth of the present silence. She
had left off copying, her hand weary with the unusual exertion of so
much writing, and she was lazily trying to learn one or two of the
poems off by heart.

I asked of the wind, but answer made it none,
Save its accustomed sad and solitary moan--

she kept saying to herself, losing her sense of whatever meaning the
words had ever had, in the repetition which had become mechanical.
Suddenly there was the snap of a shutting gate; wheels cranching on
the dry gravel, horses' feet on the drive; a loud cheerful voice in
the house, coming up through the open windows, the hall, the
passages, the staircase, with unwonted fulness and roundness of
tone. The entrance-hall downstairs was paved with diamonds of black
and white marble; the low wide staircase that went in short flights
around the hall, till you could look down upon the marble floor from
the top story of the house, was uncarpeted--uncovered. The squire
was too proud of his beautifully-joined oaken flooring to cover this
staircase up unnecessarily; not to say a word of the usual state of
want of ready money to expend upon the decorations of his house. So,
through the undraperied hollow square of the hall and staircase
every sound ascended clear and distinct; and Molly heard the
squire's glad 'Hollo! here he is,' and madam's softer, more
plaintive voice; and then the loud, full, strange tone, which she
knew must be Roger's. Then there was an opening and shutting of
doors, and only a distant buzz of talking. Molly began again--

I asked of the wind, but answer made it, none.

And this time she had nearly finished learning the poem, when she
heard Mrs. Hamley come hastily into her sitting-room that adjoined
Molly's bedroom, and burst out into an irrepressible half-hysterical
fit of sobbing. Molly was too young to have any complication of
motives which should prevent her going at once to try and give what
comfort she could. In an instant she was kneeling at Mrs. Hamley's
feet, holding the poor lady's hands, kissing them, murmuring soft
words; which, all unmeaning as they were of aught but sympathy with
the untold grief, did Mrs. Hamley good. She checked herself, smiling
sadly at Molly through the midst of her thick-coming sobs.

'It's only Osborne,' said she, at last. 'Roger has been telling us
about him.'

'What about him?' asked Molly, eagerly.

'I knew on Monday; we had a letter--he said he had not done so well
as we had hoped--as he had hoped himself, poor fellow! He said he
had just passed,--was only low down among the ~junior optimes~, and
not where he had expected, and had led us to expect, But the squire
has never been at college, and does not understand college terms,
and he has been asking Roger all about it, and Roger has been
telling him, and it has made him so angry. But the squire hates
college slang;--he has never been there, you know; and he thought
poor Osborne was taking it too lightly, and he has been asking Roger
about it, and Roger----'

There was a fresh fit of the sobbing crying. Molly burst out,--

'I don't think Mr. Roger should have told; he had no need to begin so
soon about his brother's failure. Why, he hasn't been in the house
an hour!'

'Hush, hush, love!' said Mrs. Hamley. 'Roger is so good. You don't
understand. The squire Would begin and ask questions before Roger
had tasted food--as soon as ever we had got into the dining-room.
And all he said--to me, at any rate--was that Osborne was nervous,
and that if he could only have gone in for the Chancellor's medals,
he would have carried all before him. But Roger said that after
failing like this, he is not very likely to get a fellowship, which
the squire had placed his hopes on. Osborne himself seemed so sure
of it, that the squire can't understand it, and is seriously angry,
and growing more so the more he talks about it. He has kept it in
two or three days, and that never suits him. He is always better
when he is angry about a thing at once, and does not let it smoulder
in his mind. Poor, poor Osborne! I did wish he had been coming
straight home, instead of going to these friends of his; I thought I
could have comforted him. But now I'm glad, for it will be better to
let his father's anger cool first.'

So talking out what was in her heart, Mrs. Hamley became more
composed; and at length she dismissed Molly to dress for dinner,
with a kiss, saying,--

'You're a real blessing to mothers, child! You give one such
pleasant sympathy, both in one's gladness and in one's sorrow; in
one's pride (for I was so proud last week, so confident), and in
one's disappointment. And now your being a fourth at dinner will
keep us off that sore subject; there are times when a stranger in
the household is a wonderful help.'

Molly thought over all that she had heard, as she was dressing and
putting on the terrible, over-smart plaid gown in honour of the new
arrival. Her unconscious fealty to Osborne was not in the least
shaken by his having come to grief at Cambridge. Only she was
indignant--with or without reason--against Roger, who seemed to have
brought the reality of bad news as an offering of first-fruits on
his return home.

She went down into the drawing-room with anything but a welcome to
him in her heart. He was standing by his mother; the squire had not
yet made his appearance. Molly thought that the two were hand in
hand when she first opened the door, but she could not be quite
sure. Mrs. Hamley came a little forwards to meet her, and introduced
her in so fondly intimate a way to her son, that Molly, innocent and
simple, knowing nothing but Hollingford manners, which were anything
but formal, half put out her hand to shake hands with one of whom
she had heard so much--the son of such kind friends. She could only
hope he had not seen the movement, for he made no attempt to respond
to it; only bowed.

He was a tall powerfully-made young man, giving the impression of
strength more than elegance. His face was rather square,
ruddy-coloured (as his father had said), hair and eyes brown--the
latter rather deep-set beneath his thick eyebrows; and he had a
trick of wrinkling up his eyelids when he wanted particularly to
observe anything, which made his eyes look even smaller still at
such times. He had a large mouth, with excessively mobile lips; and
another trick of his was, that when he was amused at anything, he
resisted the impulse to laugh, by a droll manner of twitching and
puckering up his mouth, till at length the sense of humour had its
way, and his features relaxed, and he broke into a broad sunny
smile; his beautiful teeth--his only beautiful feature--breaking out
with a white gleam upon the red-brown countenance. These two tricks
of his--of crumpling up the eyelids, so as to concentrate the power
of sight, which made him look stern and thoughtful; and the odd
twitching of the lips, which was preliminary to a smile, which made
him. look intensely merry--gave the varying expressions of his face
a greater range 'from grave to gay, from lively to severe,' than is
common to most men. To Molly, who was not finely discriminative in
her glances at the stranger this first night, he simply appeared
'heavy-looking, clumsy,' and 'a person she was sure she should never
get on with.' He certainly did not seem to care much what impression
he made upon his mother's visitor. He was at that age when young men
admire a formed beauty more than a face with any amount of future
capability of loveliness, and when they are morbidly conscious of
the difficulty of finding subjects of conversation in talking to
girls in a state of feminine hobbledehoyhood. Besides, his thoughts
were full of other subjects, which he did not intend to allow to
ooze out in words, yet he wanted to prevent any of that heavy
silence which he feared might be impending--with an angry and
displeased father, and a timorous and distressed mother. He only
looked upon Molly as a badly-dressed, and rather awkward girl, with
black hair and an intelligent face, who might help him in the task
he had set himself of keeping up a bright general conversation
during the rest of the evening; might help him--if she would, but
she would not. She thought him unfeeling in his talkativeness; his
constant flow of words upon indifferent subjects was a wonder and a
repulsion to her. How could he go on so cheerfully while his mother
sate there, scarcely eating anything, and doing her best, with ill
success, to swallow down the tears that would keep rising to her
eyes; when his father's heavy brow was deeply clouded, and he
evidently cared nothing--at first at least--for all the chatter his
son poured forth? Had Mr. Roger Hamley no sympathy in him? She would
show that she had, at any rate. So she quite declined the part,
which he had hoped she would have taken, of respondent, and possible
questioner; and his work became more and more like that of a man
walking in a quagmire. Once the squire roused himself to speak to
the butler; he felt the need of outward stimulus--of a better
vintage than usual.

'Bring up a bottle of the Burgundy with the yellow seal.'

He spoke low; he had no spirit to speak in his usual voice. The
butler answered in the same tone. Molly sitting near them, and
silent herself, heard what they said.

'If you please, sir, there are not above six bottles of that seal
left; and it is Mr. Osborne's favourite wine.'

The squire turned round with a growl in his voice.

'Bring up a bottle of the Burgundy with the yellow seal, as I said.'

The butler went away, wondering. 'Mr. Osborne's' likes and dislikes
had been the law of the house in general until now. If he had liked
any particular food or drink, any seat or place, any special degree
of warmth or coolness, his wishes were to be attended to; for he was
the heir, and he was delicate, and he was the clever one of the
family. All the out-of-doors men would have said the same; Mr
Osborne wished a tree cut down, or kept standing, or had
such-and-such a fancy about the game; or had desired something
unusual about the horses; and they had all to attend to it as if it
were law. But to-day the Burgundy with the yellow seal was to be
brought; and it was brought. Molly testified with quiet vehemence of
action; she never took wine, so she need not have been afraid of the
man's pouring it into her glass; but as an open mark of fealty to
the absent Osborne, however little it might be understood, she
placed the palm of her small brown hand over the top of the glass,
and held it there, till the wine had gone round, and Roger and his
father were in full enjoyment of the same.

After dinner, too, the gentlemen lingered long over their dessert,
and Molly heard them laughing; and then she saw them loitering about
in the twilight out-of-doors; Roger hatless, his hands in his
pockets, lounging by his father's side, who was now able to talk in
his usual loud and cheerful way, forgetting Osborne. ~Voe, victis!~

And so in mute opposition on Molly's side, in polite indifference,
scarcely verging on kindliness on his, Roger and she steered clear
of each other. He had many occupations in which he needed no
companionship, even if she had been qualified to give it. The worst
was, that she found he was in the habit of occupying the library,
her favourite retreat, in the mornings before Mrs. Hamley came down.
She opened the half-closed door a day or two after his return home,
and found him busy among books and papers, with which the large
leather-covered table was strewn; and she softly withdrew before he
could turn his head and see her, so as to distinguish her from one
of the housemaids. He rode out every day, sometimes with his father
about the outlying fields, sometimes far away for a good gallop.
Molly would have enjoyed accompanying him on these occasions, for
she was very fond of riding; and there had been some talk of sending
for her habit and grey pony when first she came to Hamley; only the
squire, after some consideration, had said he so rarely did more
than go slowly from one field to another, where his labourers were
at work, that he feared she would find such slow work--ten minutes
riding through heavy land, twenty minutes sitting still on
horseback, listening to the directions he should have to give to his
men--rather dull. Now, when if she had had her pony here she might
have ridden out with Roger, without giving him any trouble--she
would have taken care of that--nobody seemed to think of renewing
the proposal. Altogether it was pleasanter before he came home.

Her father came over pretty frequently; sometimes there were long
unaccountable absences, it was true; when his daughter began to
fidget after him, and to wonder what had become of him. But when he
made his appearance he had always good reasons to give; and the
right she felt that she had to his familiar household tenderness;
the power she possessed of fully understanding the exact value of
both his words and his silence, made these glimpses of intercourse
with him inexpressibly charming. Latterly her burden had always
been, 'When may I come home, papa?' It was not that she was unhappy,
or uncomfortable; she was passionately fond of Mrs. Hamley, she was a
favourite of the squire's, and could not as Yet fully understand why
some people were so much afraid of him; and as for Roger, if he did
not add to her pleasure, he scarcely took away from it. But she
wanted to be at home once more. The reason why she could not tell;
but this she knew full well. Mr. Gibson reasoned with her till she
was weary of being completely convinced that it was right and
necessary for her to stay where she was. And then with an effort she
stopped the cry upon her tongue, for she saw that its repetition
harassed her father.

During this absence of hers Mr. Gibson was drifting into matrimony.
He was partly aware of whither he was going; and partly it was like
the soft floating movement of a dream. He was more passive than
active in the affair; though, if his reason had not fully approved
of the step he was tending to--if he had not believed that a second
marriage was the very best way of cutting the Gordian knot of
domestic difficulties, he could have made an effort without any
great trouble to himself, and extricated himself without pain from
the mesh of circumstances. It happened in this manner:--

Lady Cumnor having married her two eldest daughters, found her
labours as a chaperone to Lady Harriet, the youngest, considerably
lightened by co-operation; and, at length, she had leisure to be an
invalid. She was, however, too energetic to allow herself this
indulgence constantly; only she permitted herself to break down
occasionally after a long course of dinners, late hours, and London
atmosphere: and then, leaving Lady Harriet with either Lady Cuxhaven
or Lady Agnes Manners, she betook herself to the comparative quiet
of the Towers, where she found occupation in doing her benevolence,
which was sadly neglected in the hurly-burly of London. This
particular summer she had broken down earlier than usual, and longed
for the repose of the country. She believed that her state of
health, too, was more serious than previously; but she did not say a
word of this to her husband or daughters; reserving her confidence
for Mr. Gibson's cars. She did not wish to take Lady Harriet away
from the gaieties of town which she was thoroughly enjoying, by any
complaint of hers, which might, after all, be ill-founded; and yet
she did not quite like being without a companion in the three weeks
or a month that might intervene before her family would join her at
the Towers, especially as the annual festivity to the school
visitors was impending; and both the school and the visit of the
ladies connected with it, had rather lost the zest of novelty.

'Thursday, the 19th, Harriet,' said Lady Cumnor meditatively; 'what
do you say to coming down to the Towers on the 18th, and helping me
over that long day; you could stay in the country till Monday, and
have a few days' rest and good air; you would return a great deal
fresher to the remainder of your gaieties. Your father would bring
you down, I know: indeed, he is coming naturally.'

'Oh, mammal' said Lady Harriet, the youngest daughter of the
house--the prettiest, the most indulged; 'I cannot go; there is the
water-party up to Maidenhead on the 20th, I should be so sorry to
miss it: and Mrs. Duncan's ball, and Grisi's concert; please, don't
want me. Besides, I should do no good. I can't make provincial
small-talk; I'm not up in the local politics of Hollingford. I
should be making mischief, I know I should.'

'Very well, my dear,' said Lady Cumnor, sighing, 'I had forgotten
the Maidenhead water-party, or I would not have asked you.'

'What a pity it isn't the Eton holidays, so that you could have had
Hollingford's boys to help you to do the honours, mamma. They are
such affable little prigs. It was the greatest fun to watch them
last year at Sir Edward's, doing the honours of their grandfather's
house to much such a collection of humble admirers as you get
together at the Towers. I shall never forget seeing Edgar gravely
squiring about an old lady in a portentous black bonnet, and giving
her information in the correctest grammar possible.'

'Well, I like those lads,' said Lady Cuxhaven; 'they are on the way
to become true gentlemen. But, mamma, why shouldn't you have Clare
to stay with you? You like her, and she is just the person to save
you the troubles of hospitality to the Hollingford people, and we
should all be so much more comfortable if we knew you had her with
you.'

'Yes, Clare would do very well,' said Lady Cumnor; 'but is not it
her school-time or something? We must not interfere with her school
so as to injure her, for I am afraid she is not doing too well as it
is; and she has been so very unlucky ever since she left us--first
her husband died, and then she lost Lady Davies' situation, and then
Mrs. Maude's, and now Mr. Preston told your father it was all she
could do to pay her way in Ashcombe, though Lord Cumnor lets her
have the house rent-free.'

'I can't think how it is,' said Lady Harriet. 'She's not very wise,
certainly; but she is so useful and agreeable, and has such pleasant
manners. I should have thought any one who wasn't particular about
education would have been charmed to keep her as a governess.'

'What do you mean by not being particular about education? Most
people who keep governesses for their children are supposed to be
particular,' said Lady Cuxhaven.

'Well, they think themselves so, I've no doubt; but I call you
particular, Mary, and I don't think mamma was; but she thought
herself so, I am sure.'

'I can't think what you mean, Harriet,' said Lady Cumnor, a good
deal annoyed at this speech of her clever, heedless, youngest
daughter.

'Oh dear, mamma, you did everything you could think of for us; but
you see you'd ever so many other engrossing interests, and Mary
hardly ever allows her love for her husband to interfere with her
all-absorbing care for the children. You gave us the best of masters
in every department, and Clare to dragonize and keep us up to our
preparation for these masters, as well as ever she could; but then
you know, or rather you didn't know, some of the masters admired our
very pretty governess, and there was a kind of respectable veiled
flirtation going on, which never came to anything, to be sure; and
then you were often so overwhelmed with your business as a great
lady--fashionable and benevolent, and all that sort of thing--that
you used to call Clare away from us at the most critical times of
our lessons, to write your notes, or add up your accounts, and the
consequence is, that I'm about the most ill-informed girl in London.
Only Mary was so capitally trained by good awkward Miss Benson, that
she is always full to overflowing with accurate knowledge, and her
glory is reflected upon me.'

'Do you think what Harriet says is true, Mary?' asked Lady Cumnor,
rather anxiously.

'I was so little with Clare in the schoolroom. I used to read French
with her; she had a beautiful accent, I remember. Both Agnes and
Harriet were very fond of her. I used to be jealous for Miss
Benson's sake, and perhaps--' Lady Cuxhaven paused a minute--'that
made me fancy that she had a way of flattering and indulging
them--not quite conscientious, I used to think. But girls are severe
judges, and certainly she has had an anxious enough life since. I am
always so glad when we can have her, and give her a little pleasure.
The only thing that makes me uneasy now is the way in which she
seems to send her daughter away from her so much; we never can
persuade her to bring Cynthia with her when she comes to see us.'

'Now that I call ill-natured,' said Lady Harriet; 'here is a poor
dear woman trying to earn her livelihood, first as a governess, and
what could she do with her daughter then, but send her to school?
and after that, when Clare is asked to go visiting, and is too
modest to bring her girl with her--besides all the expense of the
journey, and the rigging out--Mary finds fault with her for her
modesty and economy.'

'Well, after all, we are not discussing Clare and her affairs, but
trying to plan for mamma's comfort. I don't see that she can do
better than ask Mrs. Kirkpatrick to come to the Towers--as soon as
her holidays begin, I mean.'

'Here is her last letter,' said Lady Cumnor, who had been searching
for it in her escritoire, while her daughters were talking. Holding
her glasses before her eyes, she began to read, '"My wonted
misfortunes appear to have followed me to Ashcombe"--um, um, um;
that's not it--"Mr. Preston is most kind in sending me fruit and
flowers from the Manor-house, according to dear Lord Cumnor's kind
injunctions." Oh, here it is! "The vacation begins on the 11th,
according to the usual custom of schools in Ashcombe; and I must
then try and obtain some change of air and scene, in order to fit
myself for the resumption of my duties on the 10th of August." You
see, girls, she would be at liberty, if she has not made any other
arrangement for spending her holidays. To-day is the 15th.'

'I'll write to her at once, mamma,' Lady Harriet said. 'Clare and I
are always great friends; I was her confidant in her loves with poor
Mr. Kirkpatrick, and we've kept up our intimacy ever since. I know of
three offers she had besides.'

'I sincerely hope Miss Bowes is not telling her love-affairs to
Grace or Lily. Why, Harriet, you could not have been older than
Grace when Clare was married!' said Lady Cuxhaven in maternal alarm.

'No; but I was well versed in the tender passion, thanks to novels.
Now I dare say you don't admit novels into your school-room, Mary;
so your daughters wouldn't be able to administer discreet sympathy
to their governess in case she was the heroine of a love-affair.'

'My dear Harriet, don't let me hear you talking of love in that way;
it is not pretty. Love is a serious thing.'

'My dear mamma, your exhortations are just eighteen years too late.
I've talked all the freshness off love, and that's the reason I'm
tired of the subject.'

This last speech referred to a recent refusal of lady Harriet's,
which had displeased Lady Cumnor, and rather annoyed my lord; as
they, the parents, could see no objection to the gentleman in
question. Lady Cuxhaven did not want to have the subject brought up,
so she hastened to say,--

'Do ask the poor little daughter to come with her mother to the
Towers; why, she must be seventeen or more; she would really be a
companion to you, mamma, if her mother was unable to come,' said
Lady Cuxhaven.

'I was not ten when Clare married, and I'm nearly nine-and-twenty,'
added Lady Harriet.

'Don't speak of it, Harriet; at any rate you are but
eight-and-twenty now, and you look a great deal younger. There is no
need to be always bringing up your age on every possible occasion.'

'There was need of it now, though. I wanted to make out how old
Cynthia Kirkpatrick was. I think she can't be far from eighteen.'

'She is at school at Boulogne, I know; and so I don't think she can
be as old as that. Clare says something about her in this letter:
"Under these circumstances" (the ill-success of her school), "I
cannot think myself justified in allowing myself the pleasure of
having darling Cynthia at home for the holidays; especially as the
period when the vacation in French schools commences differs from
that common in England; and it might occasion some confusion in my
arrangements if darling Cynthia were to come to Ashcombe, and occupy
my time and thoughts so immediately before the commencement of my
scholastic duties as the 8th of August, on which day her vacation
begins, which is but two days before my holidays end." So, you see,
Clare would be quite at liberty to come to me, and I dare say it
would be a very nice change for her.'

'And Hollingford is busy seeing after his new laboratory at the
Towers, and is constantly backwards and forwards. And Agnes wants to
go there for change of air, as soon as she is strong enough after
her confinement. And even my own dear insatiable "me" will have had
enough of gaiety in two or three weeks, if this hot weather lasts.'

'I think I may be able to come down for a few days too, if you will
let me, mamma; and I'll bring Grace, who is looking rather pale and
weedy; growing too fast, I am afraid. So I hope you won't be dull.'

'My dear,' said Lady Cumnor, drawing herself up, 'I should be
ashamed of feeling dull with my resources; my duties to others and
to myself!'

So the plan in its present shape was told to Lord Cumnor, who highly
approved of it; as he always did of every project of his wife's.
Lady Cumnor's character was perhaps a little too ponderous for him
in reality, but he was always full of admiration for all her words
and deeds, and used to boast of her wisdom, her benevolence, her
power and dignity, in her absence, as if by this means he could
buttress up his own more feeble nature.

'Very good--very good, indeed! Clare to join you at the Towers!
Capital! I could not have planned it better myself! I shall go down
with you on Wednesday in time for the jollification on Thursday. I
always enjoy that day; they are such nice, friendly people, those
good Hollingford ladies. Then I'll have a day with Sheepshanks, and
perhaps I may ride over to Ashcombe and see Preston--Brown Jess can
do it in a day, eighteen miles--to be sure! But there's back again
to the Towers! how much is twice eighteen--thirty?'

'Thirty-six,' said Lady Cumnor, sharply.

'So it is; you're always right, my dear. Preston's a clever, sharp
fellow.'

'I don't like him,' said my lady.

'He takes looking after; but he's a sharp fellow. He's such a
good-looking man, too, I wonder you don't like him.'

'I never think whether a land-agent is handsome or not. They don't
belong to the class of people whose appearance I notice.'

'To be sure not. But he is a handsome fellow; and what should make
you like him is the interest he takes in Clare and her prospects. He
is constantly suggesting something that can be done to her house,
and I know he sends her fruit, and flowers, and game just as
regularly as we should ourselves if we lived at Ashcombe.'

'How old is he?' said Lady Cumnor, with a faint suspicion of motives
in her mind.

'About twenty-seven, I think. Ah! I see what is in your ladyship's
head. No! no! he's too young for that. You must look out for some
middle-aged man, if you want to get poor Clare married; Preston
won't do.'

'I'm not a match-maker, as you might know. I never did it for my own
daughters. I'm not likely to do it for Clare,' said she, leaning
back languidly.

'Well! you might do a worse thing. I'm beginning to think she'll
never get on as a schoolmistress, though why she should not, I'm
sure I don't know; for she's an uncommonly pretty woman for her age,
and her having lived in our family, and your having had her so often
with you, ought to go a good way. I say, my lady, what do you think
of Gibson? He would be just the right age--widower--lives near the
Towers.'

'I told you just now I was no match-maker, my lord. I suppose we had
better go by the old road--the people at those inns know us?'

And so they passed on to speaking about other things than Mrs
Kirkpatrick and her prospects, scholastic or matrimonial.


CHAPTER IX


THE WIDOWER AND THE WIDOW


Mrs. Kirkpatrick was only too happy to accept Lady Cumnor's
invitation. It was what she had been hoping for, but hardly daring
to expect, as she believed that the family were settled in London
for some time to come. The Towers was a pleasant and luxurious house
in which to pass her holidays; and though she was not one to make
deep plans, or to look far ahead, she was quite aware of the
prestige which her being able to say she had been staying with 'dear
Lady Cumnor' at the Towers, was likely to give her and her school in
the eyes of a good many people; so she gladly prepared to join her
ladyship on the 17th. Her wardrobe did not require much arrangement;
if it had done, the poor lady would not have had much money to
appropriate to the purpose. She was very pretty and graceful; and
that goes a great way towards carrying off shabby clothes; and it
was her taste, more than any depth of feeling, that had made her
persevere in wearing all the delicate tints--the violets and
greys--which, with a certain admixture of black, constitute
half-mourning. This style of becoming dress she was supposed to wear
in memory of Mr. Kirkpatrick; in reality because it was both
lady-like and economical. Her beautiful hair was of that rich auburn
that hardly ever turns grey; and partly out of consciousness of its
beauty, and partly because the washing of caps is expensive, she did
not wear anything on her head; her complexion had the vivid tints
that often accompany the kind of hair which has once been red; and
the only injury her skin had received from advancing years was that
the colouring was rather more brilliant than delicate, and varied
less with every passing emotion. She could no longer blush; and at
eighteen she had been very proud of her blushes. Her eyes were soft,
large, and china-blue in colour. they had not much expression or
shadow about them, which was perhaps owing to the flaxen colour of
her eyelashes. Her figure was a little fuller than it used to be,
but her movements were as soft and sinuous as ever. Altogether, she
looked much younger than her age, which was not far short of forty.
She had a very pleasant voice, and read aloud well and distinctly,
which Lady Cumnor liked. Indeed, for some inexplicable reason, she
was a greater; more positive favourite with Lady Cumnor than with
any of the rest of the family, though they all liked her up to a
certain point, and found it agreeably useful to have any one in the
house who was so well acquainted with their ways and habits; so
ready to talk, when a little trickle of conversation was required;
so willing to listen, and to listen with tolerable intelligence, if
the subjects spoken about did not refer to serious solid literature,
or science, or politics, or social economy. About novels and poetry,
travels and gossip, personal details, or anecdotes of any kind, she
always made exactly the remarks which are expected from an agreeable
listener; and she had sense enough to confine herself to those short
expressions of wonder, admiration, and astonishment, which may mean
anything, when more recondite things were talked about.

It was a very pleasant change to a poor unsuccessful schoolmistress
to leave her own house, full of battered and shabby furniture (she
had taken the goodwill and furniture of her predecessor at a
valuation, two or three years before), where the look-out was as
gloomy, and the surrounding as squalid, as is often the case in the
smaller streets of a country town, and to come bowling through the
Towers Park in the luxurious carriage sent to meet her; to alight,
and feel secure that the well-trained servants would see after her
bags and umbrella, and parasol, and cloak, without her loading
herself with all these portable articles, as she had had to do while
following the wheel-barrow containing her luggage in going to the
Ashcombe coach-office that morning; to pass up the deep-piled
carpets of the broad shallow stairs into my lady's own room, cool
and deliciously fresh, even on this sultry day, and fragrant with
great bowls of freshly gathered roses of every shade of colour.
There were two or three new novels lying uncut on the table; the
daily papers, the magazines. Every chair was an easy-chair of some
kind or other; and all covered with French chintz that mimicked the
real flowers in the garden below. She was familiar with the bedroom
called hers, to which she was soon ushered by Lady Cumnor's maid. It
seemed to her far more like home than the dingy place she had left
that morning; it was so natural to her to like dainty draperies and
harmonious colouring, and fine linen and soft raiment. She sate down
on the arm-chair by the bed-side, and wondered over her fate
something in this fashion,--

'One would think it was an easy enough thing to deck a looking-glass
like that with muslin and pink ribbons; and yet how hard it is to
keep it up! People don't know how hard it is till they've tried as I
have. I made my own glass just as pretty when I first went to
Ashcombe; but the muslin got dirty, and the pink ribbons faded, and
it is so difficult to earn money to renew them; and when one has got
the money one hasn't the heart to spend it all at once. One thinks
and one thinks how one can get the most good out of it; and a new
gown, or a day's pleasure, or some hot-house fruit, or some piece of
elegance that can be seen and noticed in one's drawing-room, carries
the day, and good-by to prettily decked looking-glasses. Now here,
money is like the air they breathe. No one ever asks or knows how
much the washing costs, or what pink ribbon is a yard. Ah! it would
be different if they had to earn every penny as I have! They would
have to calculate, like me, how to get the most pleasure out of it.
I wonder if I am to go on all my life toiling and moiling for money?
It's not natural. Marriage is the natural thing; then the husband
has all that kind of dirty work to do, and his wife sits in the
drawing-room like a lady. I did, when poor Kirkpatrick was alive.
Heigho! it's a sad thing to be a widow.'

Then there was the contrast between the dinners which she had to
share with her scholars at Ashcombe--rounds of beef, legs of mutton,
great dishes of potatoes, and large barter-puddings, with the tiny
meal of exquisitely cooked delicacies, sent up on old Chelsea china,
that was served every day to the earl and countess and herself at
the Towers. She dreaded the end of her holidays as much as the most
home-loving of her pupils. But at this time that end was some weeks
off, so Clare shut her eyes to the future, and tried to relish the
present to its fullest extent. A disturbance to the pleasant, even
course of the summer days came in the indisposition of Lady Cumnor.
Her husband had gone back to London, and she and Mrs. Kirkpatrick had
been left to the very even tenor of life, which was according to my
lady's wish just now. In spite of her languor and fatigue, she had
gone through the day when the school visitors came to the Towers, in
full dignity, dictating clearly all that was to be done, what walks
were to be taken, what hothouses to be seen, and when the party were
to return to the 'collation.' She herself remained indoors, with one
or two ladies who had ventured to think that the fatigue or the heat
might be too much for them, and who had therefore declined
accompanying the ladies in charge of Mrs. Kirkpatrick, or those other
favoured few to whom Lord Cumnor was explaining the new buildings in
his farm-yard. 'With the utmost condescension,' as her hearers
afterwards expressed it, Lady Cumnor told them all about her married
daughters' establishments, nurseries, plans for the education of
their children, and manner of passing the day. But the exertion
tired her; and when every one had left, the probability is that she
would have gone to lie down and rest, had not her husband made an
unlucky remark in the kindness of his heart. He came up to her and
put his hand on her shoulder.

'I'm afraid you're sadly tired, my lady?' he said.

She braced her muscles, and drew herself up, saying coldly,--

'When I am tired, Lord Cumnor, I will tell you so.' And her own
fatigue showed itself during the rest of the evening in her sitting
particularly upright, and declining all offers of easy-chairs or
footstools, and refusing the insult of a suggestion that they should
all go to bed earlier. She went on in something of this kind of
manner as long as Lord Cumnor remained at the Towers. Mrs
Kirkpatrick was quite deceived by it, and kept assuring Lord Cumnor
that she had never seen dear Lady Cumnor looking better, or so
strong and well. But he had an affectionate heart, if a blundering
head; and though he could give no reason for his belief, he was
almost certain his wife was not well. Yet he was too much afraid of
her to send for Mr. Gibson without her permission. His last words to
Clare were,--

'It's such a comfort to leave my lady to you; only don't you be
deluded by her ways. She'll not show she's ill till she can't help
it. Consult with Bradley,' (Lady Cumnor's 'own woman,'--she disliked
the new-fangledness of 'lady's-maid,') 'and if I were you, I'd send
and ask Gibson to call--you might make any kind of a pretence,'--and
then the idea he had had in London of the fitness of a match between
the two coming into his head just now, he could not help
adding,--'Get him to come and see you, he's a very agreeable man;
Lord Hollingford says there's no one like him in these parts: and he
might be looking at my lady while he was talking to you, and see if
he thinks her really ill. And let me know what he says about her.'

But Clare was just as great a coward about doing anything for Lady
Cumnor which she had not expressly ordered, as Lord Cumnor himself.
She knew she might fall into such disgrace if she sent for Mr. Gibson
without direct permission, that she might never be asked to stay at
the Towers again; and the life there, monotonous in its smoothness
of luxury as it might be to some, was exactly to her taste. She in
her turn tried to put upon Bradley the duty which Lord Cumnor had
put upon her.

'Mrs. Bradley,' she said one day, 'are you quite comfortable about my
lady's health? Lord Cumnor fancied that she was looking worn and
ill?'

'Indeed, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, I don't think my lady is herself. I can't
persuade myself as she is, though if you was to question me till
night I couldn't tell you why.'

'Don't you think you could make some errand to Hollingford, and see
Mr. Gibson, and ask him to come round this way some day, and make a
call on Lady Cumnor?'

'It would be as much as my place is worth, Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Till my
lady's dying day, if Providence keeps her in her senses, she'll have
everything done her own way, or not at all. There's only Lady
Harriet that can manage her at all, and she not always.'

'Well, then--we must hope that there is nothing the matter with her;
and I dare say there is not. She says there is not, and she ought to
know best herself.'

But a day or two after this conversation took place, Lady Cumnor
startled Mrs. Kirkpatrick, by saying suddenly,--

'Clare, I wish you'd write a note to Mr. Gibson, saying, I should
like to see him this afternoon. I thought he would have called of
himself before now. He ought to have done so, to pay his respects.'

Mr. Gibson had been far too busy in his profession to have time for
mere visits of ceremony, though he knew quite well he was neglecting
what was expected of him. But the district of which he may be said
to have had medical charge was full of a bad kind of low fever,
which took up all his time and thought, and often made him very
thankful that Molly was out of the way in the quiet shades of
Hamley.

His domestic 'raws' had not healed over in the least, though he was
obliged to put the perplexities on one side for the time. The last
drop--the final straw, had been an impromptu visit of Lord
Hollingford's, whom he had met in the town one forenoon. They had
had a good deal to say to each other about some new scientific
discovery, with the details of which Lord Hollingford was well
acquainted, while Mr. Gibson was ignorant and deeply interested. At
length Lord Hollingford said suddenly,--

'Gibson, I wonder if you'd give me some lunch; I've been a good deal
about since my seven-o'clock breakfast, and am getting quite
ravenous.'

Now Mr. Gibson was only too much pleased to show hospitality to one
whom he liked and respected so much as Lord Hollingford, and he
gladly took him home with him to the early family dinner. But it was
just at the time when the cook was sulking at Bethia's
dismissal--and she chose to be unpunctual and careless. There was no
successor to Bethia as yet appointed to wait at the meals. So,
though Mr. Gibson knew well that bread-and-cheese, cold beef, or the
simplest food available, would have been welcome to the hungry lord,
he could not get either these things for luncheon, or even the
family dinner, at anything like the proper time, in spite of all his
ringing, and as much anger as he liked to show, for fear of making
Lord Hollingford uncomfortable. At last dinner was ready, but the
poor host saw the want of nicety--almost the want of cleanliness, in
all its accompaniments--dingy plate, dull-looking glass, a
tablecloth that, if not absolutely dirty, was anything but fresh in
its splashed and rumpled condition, and compared it in his own mind
with the dainty delicacy with which even a loaf of brown bread was
served up at his guest's home. He did not apologize directly, but,
after dinner, just as they were parting, he said,--

'You see a man like me--a widower--with a daughter who cannot always
be at home--has not the regulated household which would enable me to
command the small portions of time I can spend there.'

He made no allusion to the comfortless meal of which they had both
partaken, though it was full in his mind. Nor was it absent from
Lord Hollingford's, as he made reply,--

'True, true. Yet a man like you ought to be free from any thought of
household cares. You ought to have somebody. How old is Miss
Gibson?'

'Seventeen. It's a very awkward age for a motherless girl.'

'Yes; very. I have only boys, but it must be very awkward with a
girl. Excuse me, Gibson, but we're talking like friends. Have you
never thought of marrying again? It would not be like a first
marriage, of course; but if you found a sensible agreeable woman of
thirty or so, I really think you couldn't do better than take her to
manage your home, and so save you either discomfort or worry; and,
besides, she would be able to give your daughter that kind of tender
supervision which, I fancy, all girls of that age require. It's a
delicate subject, but you'll excuse my having spoken frankly.'

Mr. Gibson had thought of this advice several times since it was
given; but it was a case of 'first catch your hare.' Where was the
'sensible and agreeable woman of thirty or so?' Not Miss Browning,
nor Miss Phoebe, nor Miss Goodenough. Among his country patients
there were two classes pretty distinctly marked: farmers, whose
children were unrefined and uneducated; squires, whose daughters
would, indeed think the world was coming to a pretty pass, if they
were to marry a country surgeon.

But the first day on which Mr. Gibson paid his visit to Lady Cumnor,
he began to think it possible that Mrs. Kirkpatrick was his 'hare.'
He rode away with slack rein, thinking over what he knew of her,
more than about the prescriptions he should write, or the way he was
going. He remembered her as a very pretty Miss Clare: the governess
who had the scarlet fever; that was in his wife's days, a long time
ago; he could hardly understand Mrs. Kirkpatrick's youthfulness of
appearance when he thought how long. Then he heard of her marriage
to a curate; and the next day (or so it seemed, he could not
recollect the exact duration of the interval), of his death. He
knew, in some way, that ever since she had been living as a
governess in different families; but that she had always been a
great favourite with the family at the Towers, for whom, quite
independent of their rank, he had a true respect. A year or two ago
he had heard that she had taken the good-will of a school at
Ashcombe; a small town close to another property of Lord Cumnor's,
in the same county. Ashcombe was a larger estate than that near
Hollingford, but the old Manor-house there was not nearly so good a
residence as the Towers; so it was given up to Mr. Preston, the
land-agent, for the Ashcombe property, just as Mr. Sheepshanks was
for that at Hollingford. There were a few rooms at the Manor-house
reserved for the occasional visits of the family, otherwise Mr
Preston, a handsome young bachelor, had it all to himself. Mr. Gibson
knew that Mrs. Kirkpatrick had one child, a daughter, who must be
much about the same age as Molly. Of course she had very little, if
any, property. But he himself had lived carefully, and had a few
thousands well invested; besides which, his professional income was
good, and increasing rather than diminishing every year. By the time
he had arrived at this point in his consideration of the case, he
was at the house of the next patient on his round, and he put away
all thought of matrimony and Mrs. Kirkpatrick for the time. Once
again, in the course of the day, he remembered with a certain
pleasure that Molly had told him some little details connected with
her unlucky detention at the Towers five or six years ago, which had
made him feel at the time as if Mrs. Kirkpatrick had behaved very
kindly to his little girl. So there the matter rested for the
present, as far as he was concerned.

Lady Cumnor was out of health; but not so ill as she had been
fancying herself during all those days when the people about her
dared not send for the doctor. It was a great relief to her to have
Mr. Gibson to decide for her what she was to do; what to eat, drink,
avoid. Such decisions ~ab extra~, are sometimes a wonderful relief
to those whose habit it has been to decide, not only for themselves,
but for every one else; and occasionally the relaxation of the
strain which a character for infallible wisdom brings with it, does
much to restore health. Mrs. Kirkpatrick thought in her secret soul
that she had never found it so easy to get on with Lady Cumnor; and
Bradley and she had never done singing the praises of Mr. Gibson,
'who always managed my lady so beautifully.'

Reports were duly sent up to my lord, but he and her daughters were
strictly forbidden to come down. Lady Cumnor wished to be weak and
languid, and uncertain both in body and mind, without family
observation. It was a condition so different to anything she had
ever been in before, that she was unconsciously afraid of losing her
prestige, if she was seen in it. Sometimes she herself wrote the
daily bulletins; at other times she bade Clare to do it, but she
would always see the letters. Any answers she received from her
daughters she used to read herself, occasionally imparting some of
their contents to 'that good Clare.' But anybody might read my
lord's letters. There was no great fear of family secrets oozing out
in his sprawling lines of affection. But once Mrs. Kirkpatrick came
upon a sentence in a letter from Lord Cumnor, which she was reading
out loud to his wife, that caught her eye before she came to it, and
if she could have skipped it and kept it for private perusal, she
would gladly have done so. My lady was too sharp for her, though. In
her opinion 'Clare was a good creature, but not clever,' the truth
being that she was not always quick at resources, though tolerably
unscrupulous in the use of them.

'Read on. What are you stopping for? There is no bad news, is there,
about Agnes?--Give me the letter.'

Lady Cumnor read, half aloud,--

'"How are Clare and Gibson getting on? You despised my advice to
help on that affair, but I really think a little match-making would
be a very pleasant amusement now that you are shut up in the house;
and I cannot conceive any marriage more suitable."'

'Oh!' said Lady Cumnor, laughing, 'it was awkward for you to come
upon that, Clare: I don't wonder you stopped short. You gave me a
terrible fright, though.'

'Lord Cumnor is so fond of joking,' said Mrs. Kirkpatrick, a little
flurried, yet quite recognizing the truth of his last words,--'I
cannot conceive any marriage more suitable.' She wondered what Lady
Cumnor thought of it. Lord Cumnor wrote as if there was really a
chance. It was not an unpleasant idea; it brought a faint smile out
upon her face, as she sate by Lady Cumnor, while the latter took her
afternoon nap.


CHAPTER X


A CRISIS


Mrs. Kirkpatrick had been reading aloud till Lady Cumnor fell asleep,
the book rested on her knee, just kept from falling by her hold. She
was looking out of the window, not seeing the trees in the park, nor
the glimpses of the hills beyond, but thinking how pleasant it would
be to have a husband once more;--some one who would work while she
sate at her elegant ease in a prettily-furnished drawing-room; and
she was rapidly investing this imaginary bread-winner with the form
and features of the country surgeon, when there was a slight tap at
the door, and almost before she could rise, the object of her
thoughts came in. She felt herself blush, and she was not displeased
at the consciousness. She advanced to meet him, making a sign
towards her sleeping ladyship.

'Very good,' said he, in a low voice, casting a professional eye on
the slumbering figure; 'can I speak to you for a minute or two in
the library?'

'Is he going to offer?' thought she, with a sudden palpitation, and
a conviction of her willingness to accept a man whom an hour before
she had simply looked upon as one of the category of unmarried men
to whom matrimony was possible.

He was only going to make one or two medical inquiries; she found
that out very speedily, and considered the conversation as rather
flat to her, though it might be instructive to him. She was not
aware that he finally made up his mind to propose, during the time
that she was speaking--answering his questions in many words, but he
was accustomed to winnow the chaff from the corn; and her voice was
so soft, her accent so pleasant, that it struck him as particularly
agreeable after the broad country accent he was perpetually hearing.
Then the harmonious colours of her dress, and her slow and graceful
movements, had something of the same soothing effect upon his nerves
that a cat's purring has upon some people's. He began to think that
he should be fortunate if he could win her, for his own sake.
Yesterday he had looked upon her more as a possible stepmother for
Molly; to-day he thought more of her as a wife for himself. The
remembrance of Lord Cumnor's letter gave her a very becoming
consciousness; she wished to attract, and hoped that she was
succeeding. Still they only talked of the countess's state for some
time; then a lucky shower came on. Mr. Gibson did not care a jot for
rain, but just now it gave him an excuse for lingering.

'It is very stormy weather,' said he.

'Yes, very. My daughter writes me word, that for two days last week
the packet could not sail from Boulogne.'

'Miss Kirkpatrick is at Boulogne, is she?'

'Yes, poor girl; she is at school there, trying to perfect herself
in the French language. But, Mr. Gibson, you must not call her Miss
Kirkpatrick. Cynthia remembers you with so much--affection, I may
say. She was your little patient when she had the measles here four
years ago, you know. Pray call her Cynthia; she would be quite hurt
at such a formal name as Miss Kirkpatrick from you.'

'Cynthia seems to me such an out-of-the-way name, only fit for
poetry, not for daily use.'

'It is mine,' said Mrs. Kirkpatrick, in a plaintive tone of reproach.
'I was christened Hyacinth, and her poor father would have called
her after me. I'm sorry you don't like it.'

Mr. Gibson did not know what to say. He was not quite prepared to
plunge into the directly personal style. While he was hesitating,
she went on,--

'Hyacinth Clare! Once upon a time I was quite proud of my pretty
name; and other people thought it pretty, too.'

'I've no doubt--' Mr. Gibson began; and then stopped.

'Perhaps I did wrong in yielding to his wish, to have her called by
such a romantic name. It may excite prejudice against her in some
people; and, poor child! she will have enough to struggle with. A
young daughter is a great charge, Mr. Gibson, especially when there
is only one parent to look after her.'

'You are quite right,' said he, recalled to the remembrance of
Molly; 'though I should have thought that a girl who is so fortunate
as to have a mother could not feel the loss of her father so acutely
as one who is motherless must suffer from her deprivation.'

'You are thinking of your own daughter. It was careless of me to say
what I did. Dear child! how well I remember her sweet little face as
she lay sleeping on my bed. I suppose she is nearly grown-up now.
She must be near my Cynthia's age. How I should like to see her!'

'I hope you will. I should like you to see her. I should like you to
love my poor little Molly,--to love her as your own--' He swallowed
down something that rose in his throat, and was nearly choking him.

'Is he going to offer? ~Is~ he?' she wondered; and she began to
tremble in the suspense before he next spoke.

'Could you love her as your daughter? Will you try? Will you give me
the right of introducing you to her as her future mother; as my
wife?'

There! he had done it--whether it was wise or foolish--he had done
it; but he was aware that the question as to its wisdom came into
his mind the instant that the words were said past recall.

She hid her face in her hands.

'Oh! Mr. Gibson,' she said; and then, a little to his surprise, and a
great deal to her own, she burst into hysterical tears: it was such
a wonderful relief to feel that she need not struggle any more for a
livelihood.

'My dear--my dearest,' said he, trying to soothe her with word and
caress; but, just at the moment, uncertain what name he ought to
use. After her sobbing had abated a little, she said herself, as if
understanding his difficulty,--

'Call me Hyacinth--your own Hyacinth. I can't bear "Clare," it does
so remind me of being a governess, and those days are all past now.'

'Yes; but surely no one can have been more valued, more beloved than
you have been in this family at least.'

'Oh, yes! they have been very good. But still one has always had to
remember one's position.'

'We ought to tell Lady Cumnor,' said he, thinking, perhaps, more of
the various duties which lay before him, in consequence of the step
he had just taken, than of what his future bride was saying.

'You'll tell her, won't you?' said she, looking up in his face with
beseeching eyes. 'I always like other people to tell her things, and
then I can see how she takes them.'

'Certainly! I will do whatever you wish. Shall we go and see if she
is awake now?'

'No! I think not. I had better prepare her. You will come to-morrow,
won't you? and you will tell her then.'

'Yes; that will be best. I ought to tell Molly first. She has the
right to know. I do hope you and she will love each other dearly.'

'Oh, yes! I'm sure we shall. Then you'll come to-morrow and tell
Lady Cumnor? And I'll prepare her.'

'I don't see what preparation is necessary; but you know best, my
dear. When can we arrange for you and Molly to meet?'

Just then a servant came in, and the pair started apart.

'Her ladyship is awake, and wishes to see Mr. Gibson.'

They both followed the man upstairs; Mrs. Kirkpatrick trying hard to
look as if nothing had happened, for she particularly wished 'to
prepare' Lady Cumnor; that is to say, to give her version of Mr
Gibson's extreme urgency, and her own coy unwillingness.

But Lady Cumnor had observant eyes in sickness as well as in health.
She had gone to sleep with the recollection of the passage in her
husband's letter full in her mind, and, perhaps, it gave a direction
to her wakening ideas.

'I'm glad you're not gone, Mr. Gibson. I wanted to tell you----What's
the matter with you both? What have you been saying to Clare? I'm
sure something has happened.'

There was nothing for it, in Mr. Gibson's opinion, but to make a
clean breast of it, and tell her ladyship all. He turned round, and
took hold of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's hand, and said out straight, 'I have
been asking Mrs. Kirkpatrick to be my wife, and to be a mother to my
child; and she has consented. I hardly know how to thank her enough
in words.'

'Umph! I don't see any objection. I dare say you'll be very happy.
I'm very glad of it! Here! shake hands with me, both of you.' Then
laughing a little, she added, 'It does not seem to me that any
exertion has been required on my part.'

Mr. Gibson looked perplexed at these words. Mrs. Kirkpatrick reddened.

'Did she not tell you? Oh, then, I must. It's too good a joke to be
lost, especially as everything has ended so well. When Lord Cumnor's
letter came this morning--this very morning--I gave it to Clare to
read aloud to me, and I saw she suddenly came to a full stop, where
no full stop could be, and I thought it was something about Agnes,
so I took the letter and read--stay! I'll read the sentence to you.
Where's the letter, Clare? Oh! don't trouble yourself, here it is.
"How are Clare and Gibson getting on? You despised my advice to help
on that affair, but I really think a little match-making would be a
very pleasant amusement now that you are shut up in the house; and I
cannot conceive any marriage more suitable." You see, you have my
lord's full approbation. But I must write, and tell him you have
managed your own affairs without any interference of mine. Now we'll
just have a little medical talk, Mr. Gibson, and then you and Clare
shall finish your ~tete-a-tete~.'

They were neither of them quits as desirous of further conversation
together as they had been before the passage out of Lord Cumnor's
letter had been read aloud. Mr. Gibson tried not to think about it,
for he was aware that if he dwelt upon it, he might get to fancy all
sorts of things, as to the conversation which had ended in his
offer. But Lady Cumnor was imperious now, as always.

'Come, no nonsense. I always made my girls go and have
~tete-a-tetes~ with the men who were to be their husbands, whether
they would or no: there's a great deal to be talked over before
every marriage, and you two are certainly old enough to be above
affectation. Go away with you.' So there was nothing for it but for
them to return to the library; Mrs. Kirkpatrick pouting a little, and
Mr. Gibson feeling more like his own cool, sarcastic self, by many
degrees, than he had done when last in that room.

She began, half crying,--

'I cannot tell what poor Kirkpatrick would say if he knew what I
have done. He did so dislike the notion of second marriages, poor
fellow.'

'Let us hope that he does not know, then; or that, if he does know,
he is wiser--I mean, that he sees how second marriages may be most
desirable and expedient in some cases.'

Altogether, this second ~tete-a-tete~, done to command, was not so
satisfactory as the first; and Mr. Gibson was quite alive to the
necessity of proceeding on his round to see his patients before very
much time had elapsed.

'We shall shake down into uniformity before long, I've no doubt,'
said he to himself, as he rode away. 'It's hardly to be expected
that our thoughts should run in the same groove all at once. Nor
should I like it,' he added. 'It would be very flat and stagnant to
have only an echo of one's own opinions from one's wife. Heigho! I
must tell Molly about it: dear little woman, I wonder how she'll
take it! It's done, in a great measure, for her good.' And then he
lost himself in recapitulating Mrs. Kirkpatrick's good qualities, and
the advantages to be gained to his daughter from the step he had
just taken.

It was too late to go round by Hamley that afternoon. The Towers and
the Towers' round lay just in the opposite direction to Hamley. So
it was the next morning before Mr. Gibson arrived at the hall, timing
his visit as well as he could so as to have half-an-hour's private
talk with Molly before Mrs. Hamley came down into the drawing-room.
He thought that his daughter would require sympathy after receiving
the intelligence he had to communicate; and he knew there was no one
more fit to give it than Mrs. Hamley.

It was a brilliantly hot summer's morning; men in their
shirt-sleeves were in the fields getting in the early harvest of
oats; as Mr. Gibson rode slowly along, he could see them over the
tall hedge-rows, and even hear the soothing measured sound of the
fall of the long swathes, as they were mown. The labourers seemed
too hot to talk; the dog, guarding their coats and cans, lay panting
loudly on the other side of the elm, under which Mr. Gibson stopped
for an instant to survey the scene, and gain a little delay before
the interview that he wished was well over. In another minute he had
snapped at himself for his weakness, and put spurs to his horse. He
came up to the hall at a good sharp trot; it was earlier than the
usual time of his visits, and no one was expecting him; all the
stablemen were in the fields, but that signified little to Mr
Gibson; he walked his horse about for five minutes or so before
taking him into the stable, and loosened his girths, examining him
with perhaps unnecessary exactitude. He went into the house by a
private door, and made his way into the drawing-room, half
expecting, however, that Molly would be in the garden. She had been
there, but it was too hot and dazzling now for her to remain out of
doors, and she had come in by the open window of the drawing-room.
Oppressed with the heat, she had fallen asleep in an easy-chair, her
bonnet and open book upon her knee, one arm hanging listlessly down.
She looked very soft, and young, and childlike; and a gush of love
sprang into her father's heart as he gazed at her.

'Molly!' said he, gently, taking the little brown hand that was
hanging down, and holding it in his own. 'Molly!'

She opened her eyes, that for one moment had no recognition in them.
Then the light came brilliantly into them and she sprang up, and
threw her arms round his neck, exclaiming,--

'Oh, papa, my dear, dear papa! What made you come while I was
asleep? I love the pleasure of watching for you.'

Mr. Gibson turned a little paler than he had been before. He still
held her hand, and drew her to a seat by him on a sofa, without
speaking. There was no need; she was chattering away.

'I was up so early! It is so charming to be out here in the fresh
morning air. I think that made me sleepy. But isn't it a gloriously
hot day? I wonder if the Italian skies they talk about can be bluer
than that--that little bit you see just between the oaks--there!'

She pulled her hand away, and used both it and the other to turn her
father's head, so that he should exactly see the very bit she meant.
She was rather struck by his unusual silence.

'Have you heard from Miss Eyre, papa? How are they all? And this
fever that is about? Do you know, papa, I don't think you are
looking well? You want me at home to take care of you. How soon may
I come home?'

'Don't I look well? That must be all your fancy, goosey. I feel
uncommonly well; and I ought to look well, for----I have a piece of
news for you, little woman.' (He felt that he was doing his business
very awkwardly, but he was determined to plunge on.) 'Can you guess
it?'

'How should I?' said she; but her tone was changed, and she was
evidently uneasy, as with the presage of an instinct.

'Why, you see, my love,' said he, again taking her hand, 'that you
are in a very awkward position--a girl growing up in such a family
as mine--young men--which was a piece of confounded stupidity on my
part. And I am obliged to be away so much.'

'But there is Miss Eyre,' said she, sick with the strengthening
indefinite presage of what was to come. 'Dear Miss Eyre, I want
nothing but her and you.'

'Still there are times like the present when Miss Eyre cannot be
with you; her home is not with us; she has other duties. I've been
in great perplexity for some time; but at last I've taken a step
which will, I hope, make us both happier.'

'You're going to be married again,' said she, helping him out, with
a quiet dry voice, and gently drawing her hand out of his.

'Yes. To Mrs. Kirkpatrick--you remember her? They call her Clare at
the Towers. You recollect how kind she was to you that day you were
left there?'

She did not answer. She could not tell what words to use. She was
afraid of saying anything, lest the passion of anger, dislike,
indignation--whatever it was that was boiling up in her
breast--should find vent in cries and screams, or worse, in raging
words that could never be forgotten. It was as if the piece of solid
ground on which she stood had broken from the shore, and she was
drifting out to the infinite sea alone.

Mr. Gibson saw that her silence was unnatural, and half-guessed at
the cause of it. But he knew that she must have time to reconcile
herself to the idea, and still believed that it would be for her
eventual happiness. He had, besides, the relief of feeling that the
secret was told, the confidence made, which he had been dreading for
the last twenty-four hours. He went on recapitulating all the
advantages of the marriage; he knew them off by heart now.

'She's a very suitable age for me. I don't know how old she is
exactly, but she must be nearly forty. I shouldn't have wished to
marry any one younger. She's highly respected by Lord and Lady
Cumnor and their family, which is of itself a character. She has
very agreeable and polished manners--of course, from the circles she
has been thrown into--and you and I, goosey, are apt to be a little
brusque, or so; we must brush up our manners now.'

No remark from her on this little bit of playfulness. He went on,--

'She has been accustomed to housekeeping--economical housekeeping,
too--for of late years she has had a school at Ashcombe, and has
had, of course, to arrange all things for a large family. And last,
but not least, she has a daughter--about your age, Molly--who, of
course, will come and live with us, and be a nice companion--a
sister--for you.'

Still she was silent. At length she said,--

'So I was sent out of the house that all this might be quietly
arranged in my absence?'

Out of the bitterness of her heart she spoke, but she was roused out
of her assumed impassiveness by the effect produced. Her father
started up, and quickly left the room, saying something to
himself--what, she could not hear, though she ran after him,
followed him through dark stone passages, into the glare of the
stable-yard, into the stables--

'Oh, papa, papa--I'm not myself--I don't know what to say about this
hateful--detestable----'

He led his horse out. She did not know if he beard her words. Just
as he mounted, he turned round upon her with a grey grim face,--

'I think it's better for both of us, for me to go away now. We may
say things difficult to forget. We are both much agitated. By
to-morrow we shall be more composed; you will have thought it over,
and have seen that the principal--one great motive, I mean--was your
good. You may tell Mrs. Hamley--I meant to have told her myself. I
will come again to-morrow. Good-by, Molly.'

For many minutes after he had ridden away--long after the sound of
his horse's hoofs on the round stones of the paved lane, beyond the
home-meadows, had died away--Molly stood there, shading her eyes,
and looking at the empty space of air in which his form had last
appeared. Her very breath seemed suspended; only, two or three
times, after long intervals she drew a miserable sigh, which was
caught up into a sob. She turned way at last, but could not go into
the house, could not tell Mrs. Hamley, could not forget how her
father had looked and spoken--and left her.

She went out by a side-door--it was the way by which the gardeners
passed when they took the manure into the garden--and the walk to
which it led was concealed from sight as much as possible by shrubs
and evergreens and over-arching trees. No one would know what became
of her, and, with the ingratitude of misery, she added to herself,
no one would care. Mrs. Hamley had her own husband, her own children,
her close home interests--she was very good and kind, but there was
a bitter grief in Molly's heart, with which the stranger could not
intermeddle. She went quickly on to the bourne which she had fixed
for herself--a seat almost surrounded by the drooping leaves of a
weeping-ash--a seat on the long broad terrace walk on the other side
of the wood, that overlooked the pleasant slope of the meadows
beyond; the walk had probably been made to command this sunny,
peaceful landscape, with trees, and a church spire, two or three
red-tiled roofs of old cottages, and a purple bit of rising ground
in the distance; and at some previous date, when there might have
been a large family of Hamleys residing at the hall, ladies in
hoops, and gentlemen in bag-wigs with swords by their sides, might
have filled up the breadth of the terrace, as they sauntered,
smiling, along. But no one ever cared to saunter there now. It was a
deserted walk. The squire or his sons might cross it in passing to a
little gate that led to the meadow beyond; but no one loitered
there. Molly almost thought that no one knew of the hidden seat
under the ash-tree but herself; for there were not more gardeners
employed upon the grounds than were necessary to keep the
kitchen-gardens and such of the ornamental part as was frequented by
the family, or in sight of the house, in good order.

When she had once got to the seat she broke out with a suppressed
passion of grief; she did not card to analyze the sources of her
tears and sobs--her father was going to be married again--her father
was angry with her; she had done very wrong--he had gone away
displeased; she had lost his love, he was going to be married--away
from her--away from his child--his little daughter--forgetting her
own dear, dear mother. So she thought in a tumultuous kind of way,
sobbing till she was wearied out, and had to gain strength by being
quiet for a time, to break forth into her passion of tears afresh.
She had cast herself on the ground--that natural throne for violent
sorrow--and leant up against the old moss-grown seat; sometimes
burying her face in her hands; sometimes clasping them together, as
if by the tight painful grasp of her fingers she could deaden mental
suffering.

She did not see Roger Hamley returning from the meadows, nor hear
the click of the little white gate. He had been out dredging in
ponds and ditches, and had his wet sling-net, with its imprisoned
treasures of nastiness, over his shoulder. He was coming home to
lunch, having always a fine midday appetite, though he pretended to
despise the meal in theory. But he knew that his mother liked his
companionship then; she depended much upon her luncheon, and was
seldom downstairs and visible to her family much before the time. So
he overcame his theory, for the sake of his mother, and had his
reward in the hearty relish with which he kept her company in
eating.

He did not see Molly as he crossed the terrace-walk on his way
homewards. He had gone about twenty yards on the small wood-path at
right angles to the terrace, when, looking among the grass and wild
plants under the trees, he spied out one which was rare, one which
he had been long wishing to find in flower, and saw it at last, with
those bright keen eyes of his. Down went his net, skilfully twisted
so as to retain its contents, while it lay amid the herbage, and he
himself went with light and well-planted footsteps in search of the
treasure. He was so great a lover of nature that, without any
thought, but habitually, he always avoided treading unnecessarily on
any plant; who knew what long-sought growth or insect might develop
itself in what now appeared but insignificant?

His steps led him in the direction of the ash-tree seat, much less
screened from observation on this side than on the terrace. He
stopped; he saw a light-coloured dress on the ground--somebody
half-lying on the seat, so still just then, he wondered if the
person, whoever it was, had fallen ill or fainted. He paused to
watch. In a minute or two the sobs broke out again--the words. It
was Miss Gibson crying out in a broken voice,--

'Oh, papa, papa! if you would but come back!'

For a minute or two he thought it would be kinder to leave her
believing herself unobserved; he had even made a retrograde step or
two, on tip-toe; but then he heard the miserable sobbing again. It
was farther than his mother could walk, or else, be the sorrow what
it would, she was the natural comforter of this girl, her visitor.
However, whether it was right or wrong, delicate or obtrusive, when
he heard the sad voice talking again, in such tones of uncomforted,
lonely misery, he turned back, and went to the green tent under the
ash-tree. She started up when he came thus close to her; she tried
to check her sobs, and instinctively smoothed her wet tangled hair
back with her hands.

He looked down upon her with grave, kind sympathy, but he did not
know exactly what to say.

'Is it lunch-time?' said she, trying to believe that he did not see
the traces of her tears and the disturbance of her features--that he
had not seen her lying, sobbing her heart out there.

'I don't know. I was going home to lunch. But--you must let me say
it--I couldn't go on when I saw your distress. Has anything
happened?--anything in which I can help you, I mean; for, of course,
I've no right to make the inquiry, if it is any private sorrow, in
which I can be of no use.'

She had exhausted herself so much with crying, that she felt as if
she could neither stand nor walk just yet. She sate down on the
seat, and sighed, and turned so pale, he thought she was going to
faint.

'Wait a moment,' said he, quite unnecessarily, for she could not
have stirred; and he was off like a shot to some spring of water
that he knew of in the wood, and in a minute or two he returned with
careful steps, bringing a little in a broad green leaf, turned into
an impromptu cup. Little as it was, it did her good.

'Thank you!' she said: 'I can walk back now, in a short time. Don't
stop.'

'You must let me,' said he: 'my mother wouldn't like me to leave you
to come home alone, while you are so faint.'

So they remained in silence for a little while; he, breaking off and
examining one or two abnormal leaves of the ash-tree, partly from
the custom of his nature, partly to give her time to recover.

'Papa is going to be married again,' said she, at length.

She could not have said why she told him this; an instant before she
spoke, she had no intention of doing so. He dropped the leaf he held
in his hand, turned round, and looked at her. Her poor wistful eyes
were filling with tears as they met his, with a dumb appeal for
sympathy. Her look was much more eloquent than her words. There was
a momentary pause before he replied, and then it was more because he
felt that he must say something than that he was in any doubt as to
the answer to the question he asked.

'You are sorry for it?'

She did not take her eyes away from his, as her quivering lips
formed the word 'Yes,' though her voice made no sound. He was silent
again now; looking on the ground, kicking softly at a loose pebble
with his foot. His thoughts did not come readily to the surface in
the shape of words; nor was he apt at giving comfort till he saw his
way clear to the real source from which consolation must come. At
last he spoke,--almost as if he was reasoning out the matter with
himself.

'It seems as if there might be cases where--setting the question of
love entirely on one side--it must be almost a duty to find some one
to be a substitute for the mother.... I can believe,' said he, in a
different tone of voice, and looking at Molly afresh, 'that this
step may be greatly for your father's happiness--it may relieve him
from many cares, and may give him a pleasant companion.'

'He had me. You don't know what we were to each other--at least,
what he was to me,' she added, humbly.

'Still he must have thought it for the best, or he wouldn't have
done it. He may have thought it the best for your sake even more
than for his own.'

'That is what he tried to convince me of.'

Roger began kicking the pebble again. He had not got hold of the
right end of the clue. Suddenly he looked up.

'I want to tell you of a girl I know. Her mother died when she was
about sixteen--the eldest of a large family. From that time--all
though the bloom of her youth--she gave herself up to her father
first as his comforter, afterwards as his companion, friend,
secretary--anything you like. He was a man with a great deal of
business on hand, and often came home only to set to afresh to
preparations for the next day's work. Harriet was always there,
ready to help, to talk, or to be silent. It went on for eight or ten
years in this way; and then her father married again,--a woman not
many years older than Harriet herself. Well--they are just the
happiest set of people I know--you wouldn't have thought it likely,
would you?'

She was listening, but she had no heart to say anything. Yet she was
interested in this little story of Harriet--a girl who had been so
much to her father, more than Molly in this early youth of hers
could have been to Mr. Gibson. 'How was it?' she sighed out at last.

'Harriet thought of her father's happiness before she thought of her
own,' Roger answered, with something of severe brevity. Molly needed
the bracing. She began to cry again a little.

'If it were for papa's happiness----'

'He must believe that it is. Whatever you fancy, give him a chance.
He cannot have much comfort, I should think, if he sees you fretting
or pining,--you who have been so much to him, as you say. The lady
herself, too--if Harriet's stepmother had been a selfish woman, and
been always clutching after the gratification of her own wishes; but
she was not: she was as anxious for Harriet to be happy as Harriet
was for her father--and your father's future wife may be another of
the same kind, though such people are rare.'

'I don't think she is, though,' murmured Molly, a waft of
recollection bringing to her mind the details of her day at the
Towers long ago.

Roger did not want to hear Molly's reasons for this doubting speech.
He felt as if he had no right to hear more of Mr. Gibson's family
life, past, present, or to come, than was absolutely necessary for
him, in order that he might comfort and help the crying girl, whom
he had come upon so unexpectedly. And besides, he wanted to go home,
and be with his mother at lunch-time. Yet he could not leave her
alone.

'It is right to hope for the best about everybody, and not to expect
the worst. This sounds like a truism, but it has comforted me before
now, and some day you'll find it useful. One has always to try to
think more of others than of oneself, and it is best not to prejudge
people on the bad side. My sermons aren't long, are they? Have they
given you an appetite for lunch? Sermons always make me hungry, I
know.'

He appeared to be waiting for her to get up and come along with him,
as indeed he was. But he meant her to perceive that he should not
leave her; so she rose up languidly, too languid to say how much she
should prefer being left alone, if he would only go away without
her. She was very weak, and stumbled over the straggling root of a
tree that projected across the path. He, watchful though silent, saw
this stumble, and putting out his hand held her up from falling. He
still held her hand when the occasion was past; this little physical
failure impressed on his heart how young and helpless she was, and
he yearned to her, remembering the passion of sorrow in which he had
found her, and longing to be of some little tender bit of comfort to
her, before they parted--before their ~tete-a-tete~ walk was merged
in the general familiarity of the household life. Yet he did not
know what to say.

'You will have thought me hard,' he burst out at length, as they
were nearing the drawing-room windows and the garden-door. 'I never
can manage to express what I feel, somehow I always fall to
philosophizing, but I am sorry for you. Yes, I am; it's beyond my
power to help you, as far as altering facts goes, but I can feel for
you, in a way which it's best not to talk about, for it can do no
good. Remember how sorry I am for you! I shall often be thinking of
you, though I daresay it's best not to talk about it again.'

She said, 'I know you are sorry,' under her breath, and then she
broke away, and ran indoors, and upstairs to the solitude of her own
room. He went straight to his mother, who was sitting before the
untasted luncheon, as much annoyed by the mysterious unpunctuality
of her visitor as she was capable of being with anything; for she
had heard that Mr. Gibson had been, and was gone, and she could not
discover if he had left any message for her; and her anxiety about
her own health, which some people esteemed hypochondriacal, always
made her particularly craving for the wisdom which might fall from
her doctor's lips.

'Where have you been, Roger? Where is Molly?--Miss Gibson, I mean,'
for she was careful to keep up a barrier of forms between the young
man and young woman who were thrown together in the same household.

'I've been out dredging. (By the way, I left my net on the terrace
walk.) I found Miss Gibson sitting there, crying as if her heart
would break. Her father is going to be married again.'

'Married again! You don't say so.'

'Yes, he is; and she takes it very hardly, poor girl. Mother, I
think if you could send some one to her with a glass of wine, a cup
of tea, or something of that sort--she was very nearly fainting----'

'I'll go to her myself, poor child,' said Mrs. Hamley, rising.

'Indeed you must not,' said he, laying his hand upon her arm. 'We
have kept you waiting already too long; you are looking quite pale.
Hammond can take it,' he continued, ringing the bell. She sate down
again, almost stunned with surprise.

'Whom is he going to marry?'

'I don't know. I didn't ask, and she didn't tell me.'

'That's so like a man. Why, half the character of the affair lies in
the question of whom it is that he is going to marry.'

'I daresay I ought to have asked. But somehow I'm not a good one on
such occasions. I was as sorry as could be for her, and yet I
couldn't tell what to say.'

'What did you say?'

'I gave her the best advice in my power.'

'Advice! you ought to have comforted her. Poor little Molly!'

'I think that if advice is good it's the best comfort.'

'That depends on what you mean by advice. Hush! here she is.'

To their surprise, Molly came in, trying hard to look as usual. She
had bathed her eyes, and arranged her hair; and was making a great
struggle to keep from crying, and to bring her voice into order. She
was unwilling to distress Mrs. Hamley by the sight of pain and
suffering. She did not know that she was following Roger's
injunctions to think more of others than of herself--but so she was.
Mrs. Hamley was not sure if it was wise in her to begin on the piece
of news she had just heard from her son; but she was too full of it
herself to talk of anything else. 'So I hear your father is going to
be married, my dear? May I ask whom it is to?'

'Mrs. Kirkpatrick. I think she was governess a long time ago at the
Countess of Cumnor's. She stays with them a great deal, and they
call her Clare, and I believe they are very fond of her.' Molly
tried to speak of her future stepmother in the most favourable
manner she knew how.

'I think I've heard of her. Then she is not very young? That's as it
should be. A widow too. Has she any family?'

'One girl, I believe. But I know so little about her!'

Molly was very near crying again.

'Never mind, my dear. That will all come in good time. Roger, you've
hardly eaten anything; where are you going?'

'To fetch my dredging-net. It's full of things I don't want to lose.
Besides, I never eat much, as a general thing.' The truth was partly
told, not all. He thought he had better leave the other two alone.
His mother had such sweet power of sympathy, that she would draw the
sting out of the girl's heart, when she had her alone. As soon as he
was gone, Molly lifted up her poor swelled eyes, and, looking at Mrs
Hamley, she said,--'He was so good to me. I mean to try and remember
all he said.'

'I'm glad to hear it, love; very glad. From what he told me, I was
afraid he had been giving you a little lecture. He has a good heart,
but he isn't so tender in his manner as Osborne. Roger is a little
rough sometimes.'

'Then I like roughness. It did me good. It made me feel how
badly--oh, Mrs. Hamley, I did behave so badly to papa this morning.'

She rose up and threw herself into Mrs. Hamley's arms, and sobbed
upon her breast. Her sorrow was not now for the fact that her father
was going to be married again, but for her own ill-behaviour.

If Roger was not tender in words, he was in deeds. Unreasonable and
possibly exaggerated as Molly's grief had appeared to him, it was
real suffering to her; and he took some pains to lighten it, in his
own way, which was characteristic enough. That evening he adjusted
his microscope, and put the treasures he had collected in his
morning's ramble on a little table; and then he asked his mother to
come and admire. Of course Molly came too, and this was what he had
intended. He tried to interest her in his pursuit, cherished her
first little morsel of curiosity, and nursed it into a very proper
desire for further information. Then he brought out books on the
subject, and translated the slightly pompous and technical language
into homely every-day speech. Molly had come down to dinner,
wondering how the long hours till bedtime would ever pass away:
hours during which she must not speak on the one thing that would be
occupying her mind to the exclusion of all others; for she was
afraid that already she had wearied Mrs. Hamley with it during their
afternoon ~tete-a-tete~. But prayers and bedtime came long before
she had expected; she had been refreshed by a new current of
thought, and she was very thankful to Roger. And now there was
to-morrow to come, and a confession of penitence to be made to her
father.

But Mr. Gibson did not want speech or words. He was not fond of
expressions of feeling at any time, and perhaps, too, he felt that
the less said the better on a subject about which it was evident
that his daughter and he were not thoroughly and impulsively in
harmony. He read her repentance in her eyes; he saw how much she had
suffered; and he had a sharp pang at his heart in consequence. But
he stopped her from speaking out her regret at her behaviour the day
before, by a 'There, there, that will do. I know all you want to
say. I know my little, Molly--my silly little goosey--better than
she knows herself. I've brought you an invitation. Lady Cumnor wants
you to go and spend next Thursday at the Towers!'

'Do you wish me to go?' said she, her heart sinking.

'I wish you and Hyacinth to become better acquainted--to learn to
love each other.'

'Hyacinth!' said Molly, entirely bewildered.

'Yes; Hyacinth! It's the silliest name I ever heard of; but it's
hers, and I must call her by it. I can't bear Clare, which is what
my lady and all the family at the Towers call her; and "Mrs
Kirkpatrick" is formal and nonsensical too, as she'll change her
name so soon.'

'When, papa?' asked Molly, feeling as if she were living in a
strange, unknown world.

'Not till after Michaelmas.' And then, continuing on his own
thoughts, he added, 'And the worst is, she's gone and perpetuated
her own affected name by having her daughter called after her.
Cynthia! One thinks of the moon, and the man in the moon with his
bundle of faggots. I'm thankful you're plain Molly, child.'

'How old is she--Cynthia, I mean?'

'Ay, get accustomed to the name. I should think Cynthia Kirkpatrick
was about as old as you are. She's at school in France, picking up
airs and graces. She's to come home for the wedding, so you'll be
able to get acquainted with her then; though, I think, she's to go
back again for another half-year or so.'



CHAPTER XI


MAKING FRIENDSHIP


Mr. Gibson believed that Cynthia Kirkpatrick was to return to England
to be present at her mother's wedding; but Mrs. Kirkpatrick had no
such intention. She was not what is commonly called a woman of
determination; but somehow what she disliked she avoided, and what
she liked she tried to do, or to have. So although in the
conversation, which she had already led to, as to the when and the
how she was to be married, she had listened quietly to Mr. Gibson's
proposal that Molly and Cynthia should be the two bridesmaids, she
had felt how disagreeable it would be to her to have her young
daughter flashing out her beauty by the side of the faded bride, her
mother; and as the further arrangements for the wedding became more
definite, she saw further reasons in her own mind for Cynthia's
remaining quietly at her school at Boulogne.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick had gone to bed that first night of her engagement
to Mr. Gibson, fully anticipating a speedy marriage. She looked to it
as a release from the thraldom of keeping school--keeping an
unprofitable school, with barely enough of pupils to pay for
house-rent and taxes, food, washing, and the requisite masters. She
saw no reason for ever going back to Ashcombe, except to wind up her
affairs, and to pack up her clothes. She hoped that Mr. Gibson's
ardour would be such that he would press on the marriage, and urge
her never to resume her school drudgery, but to relinquish it now
and for ever. She even made up a very pretty, very passionate speech
for him in her own mind; quite sufficiently strong to prevail upon
her, and to overthrow the scruples which she felt that she ought to
have, at telling the parents of her pupils that she did not intend
to resume school, and that they must find another place of education
for their daughters, in the last week but one of the midsummer
holidays.

It was rather like a douche of cold water on Mrs. Kirkpatrick's
plans, when the next morning at breakfast Lady Cumnor began to
decide upon the arrangements and duties of the two middle-aged
lovers.

'Of course you can't give up your school all at once, Clare. The
wedding can't be before Christmas, but that will do very well. We
shall all be down at the Towers; and it will be a nice amusement for
the children to go over to Ashcombe, and see you married.'

'I think--I am afraid--I don't believe Mr. Gibson will like waiting
so long; men are so impatient under these circumstances.'

'Oh, nonsense! Lord Cumnor has recommended you to his tenants, and
I'm sure he wouldn't like them to be put to any inconvenience. Mr
Gibson will see that in a moment. He's a man of sense, or else he
wouldn't be our family doctor. Now, what are you going to do about
your little girl? Have you fixed yet?'

'No. Yesterday there seemed so little time, and when one is agitated
it is so difficult to think of everything. Cynthia is nearly
eighteen, old enough to go out as a governess, if he wishes it, but
I don't think he will. He is so generous and kind.'

'Well! I must give you time to settle some of your affairs to-day.
Don't waste it in sentiment, you're too old for that. Come to a
clear understanding with each other; it will be for your happiness
in the long run.'

So they did come to a clear understanding about one or two things.
To Mrs. Kirkpatrick's dismay, she found that Mr. Gibson had no more
idea than Lady Cumnor of her breaking faith with the parents of her
pupils. Though he really was at a serious loss as to what was to
become of Molly until she could be under the protection of his new
wife at her own home, and though his domestic worries teased him
more and more every day, he was too honourable to think of
persuading Mrs. Kirkpatrick to give up school a week sooner than was
right for his sake. He did not even perceive how easy the task of
persuasion would be; with all her winning wiles she could scarcely
lead him to feel impatience for the wedding to take place at
Michaelmas.

'I can hardly tell you what a comfort and relief it will be to me,
Hyacinth, when you are once my wife--the mistress of my home--poor
little Molly's mother and protector; but I wouldn't interfere with
your previous engagements for the world. It wouldn't be right.'

'Thank you, my own love. How good you are! So many men would think
only of their own wishes and interests! I'm sure the parents of my
dear pupils will admire you--will be quite surprised at your
consideration for their interests.'

'Don't tell them, then. I hate being admired. Why shouldn't you say
it is your wish to keep on your school till they've had time to look
out for another?'

'Because it isn't,' said she, daring all. 'I long to be making you
happy; I want to make your home a place of rest and comfort to you;
and I do so wish to cherish your sweet Molly, as I hope to do, when
I come to be her mother. I can't take virtue to myself which doesn't
belong to me. If I have to speak for myself, I shall say, "Good
people, find a school for your daughters by Michaelmas,--for after
that time I must go and make the happiness of others." I can't bear
to think of your long rides in November--coming home wet at night
with no one to take care of you. Oh! if you leave it to me, I shall
advise the parents to take their daughters away from the care of one
whose heart will be absent. Though I couldn't consent to any time
before Michaelmas--that wouldn't be fair or right, and I'm sure you
wouldn't urge me--you are too good.'

'Well, if you think that they will consider we have acted uprightly
by them, let it be Michaelmas with all my heart. What does Lady
Cumnor say?'

'Oh! I told her I was afraid you wouldn't like waiting, because of
your difficulties with your servants, and because of Molly--it would
be so desirable to enter on the new relationship with her as soon as
possible.'

'To be sure; so it would. Poor child! I'm afraid the intelligence of
my engagement has rather startled her.'

'Cynthia will feel it deeply, too,' said Mrs. Kirkpatrick, unwilling
to let her daughter be behind Mr. Gibson's in sensibility and
affection.

'We will have her over to the wedding! She and Molly shall be
bridesmaids,' said Mr. Gibson, in the unguarded warmth of his heart.

This plan did not quite suit Mrs. Kirkpatrick; but she thought it
best not to oppose it, until she had a presentable excuse to give,
and perhaps also some reason would naturally arise out of future
circumstances; so at this time she only smiled, and softly pressed
the hand she held in hers.

It is a question whether Mrs. Kirkpatrick or Molly wished the most
for the day to be over which they were to spend together at the
Towers. Mrs. Kirkpatrick was rather weary of girls as a class. All
the trials of her life were connected with girls in some way. She
was very young when she first became a governess, and had been
worsted in her struggles with her pupils, in the first place she
ever went to. Her elegance of appearance and manner, and her
accomplishments, more than her character and acquirements, had
rendered it more easy for her than for most to obtain good
'situations;' and she had been absolutely petted in some; but still
she was constantly encountering naughty or stubborn, or
over-conscientious, or severe-judging, or curious and observant
girls. And again, before Cynthia was born, she had longed for a boy,
thinking it possible that if some three or four intervening
relations died, he might come to be a baronet; and instead of a son,
lo and behold it was a daughter! Nevertheless, with all her dislike
to girls in the abstract as 'the plagues of her life' (and her
aversion was not diminished by the fact of her having kept a school
for 'young ladies' at Ashcombe), she really meant to be as kind as
she could be to her new step-daughter, whom she remembered
principally as a black-haired, sleepy child, in whose eyes she had
read admiration of herself. Mrs. Kirkpatrick accepted Mr. Gibson
principally because she was tired of the struggle of earning her own
livelihood; but she liked him personally--nay, she even loved him in
her torpid way, and she intended to be good to his daughter, though
she felt as if it would have been easier for her to have been good
to his son.

Molly was bracing herself up in her way too. 'I will be like
Harriet. I will think of others. I won't think of myself,' she kept
repeating all the way to the Towers. But there was no selfishness in
wishing that the day was come to an end, and that she did very
heartily. Mrs. Hamley sent her thither in the carriage, which was to
wait and bring her back at night. Mrs. Hamley wanted Molly to make a
favourable impression, and she sent for her to come and show herself
before she set out.

'Don't put on your silk gown--your white muslin will look the
nicest, my dear.'

'Not my silk? it is quite new! I had it to come here.'

'Still, I think your white muslin suits you the best.' 'Anything but
that horrid plaid silk' was the thought in Mrs. Hamley's mind; and,
thanks to her, Molly set off for the Towers, looking a little
quaint, it is true, but thoroughly ladylike, if she was
old-fashioned. Her father was to meet her there; but he had been
detained, and she had to face Mrs. Kirkpatrick by herself, the
recollection of her last day of misery at the Towers fresh in her
mind as if it had been yesterday. Mrs. Kirkpatrick was as caressing
as could be. She held Molly's hand in hers, as they sate together in
the library, after the first salutations were over. She kept
stroking it from time to time, and purring out inarticulate sounds
of loving satisfaction, as she gazed in the blushing face.

'What eyes! so like your dear father's! How we shall love each
other--shan't we, darling? For his sake!'

'I'll try,' said Molly, bravely; and then she could not finish her
sentence.

'And you've just got the same beautiful black curling hair!' said
Mrs. Kirkpatrick, softly lifting one of Molly's curls from off her
white temple.

'Papa's hair is growing grey,' said Molly.

'Is it? I never see it. I never shall see it. He will always be to
me the handsomest of men.'

Mr. Gibson was really a very handsome man, and Molly was pleased with
the compliment; but she could not help saying,--

'Still he will grow old, and his hair will grow grey. I think he
will be just as handsome, but it won't be as a young man.'

'Ah! that's just it, love. He'll always be handsome; some people
always are. And he is so fond of you, dear.' Molly's colour flashed
into her face. She did not want an assurance of her own father's
love from this strange woman. She could not help being angry; all
she could do was to keep silent. 'You don't know how he speaks of
you; "his little treasure," as he calls you. I'm almost jealous
sometimes.'

Molly took her hand away, and her heart began to harden; these
speeches were so discordant to her. But she set her teeth together,
and 'tried to be good.'

'We must make him so happy. I'm afraid he has had a great deal to
annoy him at home; but we will do away with all that now. You must
tell me,' seeing the cloud in Molly's eyes, 'what he likes and
dislikes, for of course you will know.'

Molly's face cleared a little; of course she did know. She had not
watched and loved him so long without believing that she understood
him better than any one else; though how he had come to like Mrs
Kirkpatrick enough to wish to marry her, was an unsolved problem
that she unconsciously put aside as inexplicable. Mrs. Kirkpatrick
went on,--'All men have their fancies and antipathies, even the
wisest. I have known some gentlemen annoyed beyond measure by the
merest trifles; leaving a door open, or spilling tea in their
saucers, or a shawl crookedly put on. Why,' continued she, lowering
her voice, 'I know of a house to which Lord Hollingford will never
be asked again because he didn't wipe his shoes on both the mats in
the hall! Now you must tell me what your dear father dislikes most
in these fanciful ways, and I shall take care to avoid it. You must
be my little friend and helper in pleasing him. It will be such a
pleasure to me to attend to his slightest fancies. About my dress,
too--what colours does he like best? I want to do everything in my
power with a view to his approval.'

Molly was gratified by all this, and began to think that really,
after all, perhaps her father had done well for himself; and that if
she could help towards his new happiness, she ought to do it. So she
tried very conscientiously to think over Mr. Gibson's wishes and
ways; to ponder over what annoyed him the most in his household.

'I think,' said she, 'papa isn't particular about many things; but I
think our not having the dinner quite punctual--quite ready for him
when he comes in, fidgets him more than anything. You see, he has
often had a long ride, and there is another long ride to come, and
he has only half-an-hour--sometimes only a quarter--to eat his
dinner in.'

'Thank you, my own love. Punctuality! Yes; it's a great thing in a
household. It's what I've had to enforce with my young ladies at
Ashcombe. No wonder poor dear Mr. Gibson has been displeased at his
dinner not being ready, and he so hard-worked!'

'Papa doesn't care what he has, if it's only ready. He would take
bread-and-cheese, if cook would only send it in instead of dinner.'

'Bread-and-cheese! Does Mr. Gibson eat cheese?'

'Yes; he's very fond of it,' said Molly, innocently. 'I've known him
eat toasted cheese when he has been too tired to fancy anything
else.'

'Oh! but, my dear, we must change all that. I shouldn't like to
think of your father eating cheese; it's such a strong-smelling,
coarse kind of thing. We must get him a cook who can toss him up an
omelette, or something elegant. Cheese is only fit for the kitchen.'

'Papa is very fond of it,' persevered Molly.

'Oh! but we will cure him of that. I couldn't bear the smell of
cheese; and I'm sure he would be sorry to annoy me.'

Molly was silent; it did not do, she found, to be too minute in
telling about her father's likes or dislikes. She had better leave
them for Mrs. Kirkpatrick to find out for herself. It was an awkward
pause; each was trying to find something agreeable to say. Molly
spoke at length. 'Please! I should so like to know something about
Cynthia--your daughter.'

'Yes, call her Cynthia. It's a pretty name, isn't it? Cynthia
Kirkpatrick. Not so pretty, though, as my old name, Hyacinth Clare.
People used to say it suited me so well. I must show you an acrostic
a gentleman--he was a lieutenant in the 53rd--made upon it. Oh! we
shall have a great deal to say to each other, I foresee!'

'But about Cynthia?'

'Oh, yes! about dear Cynthia. What do you want to know, my dear?'

'Papa said she was to live with us! When will she come?'

'Oh, was it not sweet of your kind father? I thought of nothing else
but Cynthia's going out as a governess when she had completed her
education; she has been brought up for it, and has had great
advantages. But good dear Mr. Gibson wouldn't hear of it. He said
yesterday that she must come and live with us when she left school.'

'When will she leave school?'

'She went for two years. I don't think I must let her leave before
next summer. She teaches English as well as learning French. Next
summer she shall come home, and then shan't we be a happy little
quartette?'

'I hope so,' said Molly. 'But she is to come to the wedding, isn't
she?' she went on timidly, now knowing how far Mrs. Kirkpatrick would
like the allusion to her marriage.

'Your father has begged for her to come; but we must think about it
a little more before quite fixing it. The journey is a great
expense!'

'Is she like you? I do so want to see her.'

'She is very handsome, people say. In the bright-coloured
style,--perhaps something like what I was. But I like the
dark-haired foreign kind of beauty best--just now,' touching Molly's
hair, and looking at her with an expression of sentimental
remembrance.

'Does Cynthia--is she very clever and accomplished?' asked Molly, a
little afraid lest the answer should remove Miss Kirkpatrick at too
great a distance from her.

'She ought to be; I've paid ever so much money to have her taught by
the best masters. But you will see her before long, and I'm afraid
we must go now to Lady Cumnor. It has been very charming having you
all to myself, but I know Lady Cumnor will be expecting us now, and
she was very curious to see you,--my future daughter, as she calls
you.'

Molly followed Mrs. Kirkpatrick into the morning-room, where Lady
Cumnor was sitting--a little annoyed, because, having completed her
~toilette~ earlier than usual, Clare had not been aware by instinct
of the fact, and so had not brought Molly Gibson for inspection a
quarter of an hour before. Every small occurrence is an event in the
day of a convalescent invalid, and a little while ago Molly would
have met with patronizing appreciation, where now she had to
encounter criticism. Of Lady Cumnor's character as an individual she
knew nothing; she only knew she was going to see and be seen by a
live countess; nay, more, by '~the~ countess' of Hollingford.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick led her into Lady Cumnor's presence by the hand, and
in presenting her, said,--'My dear little daughter, Lady Cumnor!'

'Now, Clare, don't let me have nonsense. She is not your daughter
yet, and may never be,--I believe that one-third of the engagements
I have heard of, have never come to marriages. Miss Gibson, I am
very glad to see you, for your father's sake; when I know you
better, I hope it will be for your own.'

Molly very heartily hoped that she might never be known any better
by the stern-looking lady who sate so uprightly in the easy chair,
prepared for lounging, and which therefore gave all the more effect
to the stiff attitude. Lady Cumnor luckily took Molly's silence for
acquiescent humility, and went on speaking after a further little
pause of inspection.

'Yes, yes, I like her looks, Clare. You may make something of her.
It will be a great advantage to you, my dear, to have a lady who has
trained up several young people of quality always about you just at
the time when you are growing up. I'll tell you what, Clare!'--a
sudden thought striking her,--'you and she must become better
acquainted--you know nothing of each other at present; you are not
to be married till Christmas, and what could be better than that she
should go back with you to Ashcombe! She would be with you
constantly, and have the advantage of the companionship of your
young people, which would be a good thing for an only child! It's a
capital plan; I'm very glad I thought of it!'

Now it would be difficult to say which of Lady Cumnor's two hearers
was the most dismayed at the idea which had taken possession of her.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick had no fancy for being encumbered with a
step-daughter before her time. If Molly came to be an inmate of her
house, farewell to many little background economies, and a still
more serious farewell to many little indulgences, that were innocent
enough in themselves, but which Mrs. Kirkpatrick's former life had
caused her to look upon as sins to be concealed: the dirty
dog's-eared delightful novel from the Ashcombe circulating library,
the leaves of which she turned over with a pair of scissors. the
lounging-chair which she had for use at her own home, straight and
upright as she sate now in Lady Cumnor's presence; the dainty
morsel, savoury and small, to which she treated herself for her own
solitary supper,--all these and many other similarly pleasant things
would have to be foregone if Molly came to be her pupil,
parlour-boarder, or visitor, as Lady Cumnor was planning. One--two
things Clare was instinctively resolved upon: to be married at
Michaelmas, and not to have Molly at Ashcombe. But she smiled as
sweetly as if the plan proposed was the most charming project in the
world, while all the time her poor brains were beating about in
every bush for the reasons or excuses of which she should make use
at some future time. Molly, however, saved her all this trouble. It
was a question which of the three was the most surprised by the
words which burst out of her lips. She did not mean to speak, but
her heart was very full, and almost before she was aware of her
thought she heard herself saying,--

'I don't think it would be nice at all. I mean, my lady, that I
should dislike it very much; it would be taking me away from papa
just these very few last months. I will like you,' she went on, her
eyes full of tears; and, turning to Mrs. Kirkpatrick, she put her
hand into her future stepmother's with the prettiest and most
trustful action. 'I will try hard to love you, and to do all I can
to make you happy. but you must not take me away from papa just this
very last bit of time that I shall have him.'

Mrs. Kirkpatrick fondled the hand thus placed in hers, and was
grateful to the girl for her outspoken opposition to Lady Cumnor's
plan. Clare was, however, exceedingly unwilling to back up Molly by
any words of her own until Lady Cumnor had spoken and given the cue.
But there was something in Molly's little speech, or in her
straightforward manner, that amused instead of irritating Lady
Cumnor in her present mood. Perhaps she was tired of the silkiness
with which she had been shut up for so many days.

She put up her glasses, and looked at them both before speaking.
Then she said,--'Upon my word, young lady! Why, Clare, you've got
your work before you! Not but what there is a good deal of truth in
what she says. It must be very disagreeable to a girl of her age to
have a stepmother coming in between her father and herself, whatever
may be the advantages to her in the long run.'

Molly almost felt as if she could make a friend of the stiff old
countess, for her clearness of sight as to the plan proposed being a
trial; but she was afraid, in her new-born desire of thinking for
others, of Mrs. Kirkpatrick being hurt. She need not have feared as
far as outward signs went, for the smile was still on that lady's
pretty rosy lips, and the soft fondling of her hand never stopped.
Lady Cumnor was more interested in Molly the more she looked at her;
and her gaze was pretty steady through her gold-rimmed eye-glasses.
She began a sort of catechism; a string of very straightforward
questions, such as any lady under the rank of countess might have
scrupled to ask, but which were not unkindly meant.

'You are sixteen, are you not?'

'No; I am seventeen. My birthday was three weeks ago.'

'Very much the same thing, I should think. Have you ever been to
school?'

'No, never! Miss Eyre has taught me everything I know.'

'Umph! Miss Eyre was your governess, I suppose? I should not have
thought your father could have afforded to keep a governess. But of
course he must know his own affairs best.'

'Certainly, my lady,' replied Molly, a little touchy as to any
reflections on her father's wisdom.

'You say "certainly!" as if it was a matter of course that every one
should know their own affairs best. You are very young, Miss
Gibson--very. You'll know better before you come to my age. And I
suppose you've been taught music, and the use of the globes, and
French, and all the usual accomplishments, since you have had a
governess? I never heard of such nonsense!' she went on, lashing
herself up. 'An only daughter! If there had been half-a-dozen girls,
there might have been some sense in it.'

Molly did not speak but it was by a strong effort that she kept
silence. Mrs. Kirkpatrick fondled her hand more perseveringly than
ever, hoping thus to express a sufficient amount of sympathy to
prevent her from saying anything injudicious. But the caress had
become wearisome to Molly, and only irritated her nerves. She took
her hand out of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's, with a slight manifestation of
impatience.

It was, perhaps, fortunate for the general peace that just at this
moment Mr. Gibson was announced. It is odd enough to see how the
entrance of a person of the opposite sex into an assemblage of
either men or women calms down the little discordances and the
disturbance of mood. It was the case now; at Mr. Gibson's entrance my
lady took off her glasses, and smoothed her brow; Mrs. Kirkpatrick
managed to get up a very becoming blush, and as for Molly, her face
glowed with delight, and the white teeth and pretty dimples came out
like sunlight on a landscape.

Of course, after the first greeting, my lady had to have a private
interview with her doctor; and Molly and her future stepmother
wandered about in the gardens with their arms round each other's
waists, or hand in hand, like the babes in the wood; Mrs. Kirkpatrick
active in such endearments, Molly passive, and feeling within
herself very shy and strange; for she had that particular kind of
shy modesty which makes any one uncomfortable at receiving caresses
from a person towards whom the heart does not go forth with an
impulsive welcome.

Then came the early dinner; Lady Cumnor having hers in the quiet of
her own room, to which she was still a prisoner. Once or twice
during the meal, the idea crossed Molly's mind that her father
disliked his position as a middle-aged lover being made so evident
to the men in waiting as it was by Mrs. Kirkpatrick's affectionate
speeches and innuendos. He tried to banish every tint of pink
sentimentalism from the conversation, and to confine it to matter of
fact; and when Mrs. Kirkpatrick would persevere in dwelling upon such
facts as had a bearing upon the future relationship of the parties,
he insisted upon viewing them in the most matter-of-fact way; and
this continued even after the men had left the room. An old rhyme
Molly had heard Betty use, would keep running in her head and making
her uneasy,--

Two is company,
Three is trumpery.

But where could she go to in that strange house? What ought she to
do? She was roused from this fit of wonder and abstraction by her
father's saying,--'What do you think of this plan of Lady Cumnor's?
She says she was advising you to have Molly as a visitor at Ashcombe
until we are married.'

Mrs. Kirkpatrick's countenance fell. If only Molly would be so good
as to testify again, as she had done before Lady Cumnor! But if the
proposal was made by her father, it would come to his daughter from
a different quarter than it had done from a strange lady, be she
ever so great. Molly did not say anything; she only looked pale, and
wistful, and anxious. Mrs. Kirkpatrick had to speak for herself.

'It would be a charming plan, only--Well! we know why we would
rather not have it, don't we, love? And we won't tell papa, for fear
of making him vain. No! I think I must leave her with you, dear Mr
Gibson, to have you all to herself for these last few weeks.
It would be cruel to take her away.'

'But you know, my dear, I told you of the reason why it does not do
to have Molly at home just at present,' said Mr. Gibson, eagerly. For
the more he knew of his future wife, the more he felt it necessary
to remember that, with all her foibles, she would be able to stand
between Molly and any such adventures as that which had occurred
lately with Mr. Coxe; so that one of the good reasons for the step he
had taken was always present to him, while it had slipped off the
smooth surface of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's mirror-like mind without leaving
any impression. She now recalled it, on seeing Mr. Gibson's anxious
face.

But what were Molly's feelings at these last words of her father's?
She had been sent from home for some reason, kept a secret from her,
but told to this strange woman. Was there to be perfect confidence
between these two, and she to be for ever shut out? Was she, and
what concerned her--though how, she did not know--to be discussed
between them for the future, and she to be kept in the dark? A
bitter pang of jealousy made her heart-sick. She might as well go to
Ashcombe, or anywhere else, now. Thinking more of others' happiness
than of her own was very fine; but did it not mean giving up her
very individuality, quenching all the warm love, the keen desires,
that made her herself? Yet in this deadness lay her only comfort; or
so it seemed. Wandering in such mazes, she hardly knew how the
conversation went on; a third was indeed 'trumpery,' where there was
entire confidence between the two who were company, from which the
other was shut out. She was positively unhappy, and her father did
not appear to see it; he was absorbed with his new plans and his new
wife that was to be. But he did notice it; and was keenly sorry for
his little girl; only he thought that there was a greater chance for
the future harmony of the household, if he did not lead Molly to
define her present feelings by putting them into words. It was his
general plan to repress emotion by not showing the sympathy he felt.
Yet, when he had to leave, he took Molly's hand in his, and held it
there, in such a different manner to that in which Mrs. Kirkpatrick
had done; and his voice softened to his child as he bade her
good-by, and added the words (most unusual to him), 'God bless you,
child!'

Molly had held up all the day bravely; she had not shown anger, or
repugnance, or annoyance, or regret; but when once more by herself
in the Hamley carriage, she burst into a passion of tears, and cried
her fill till she reached the village of Hamley. Then she tried in
vain to smooth her face into smiles, and do away with the other
signs of her grief. She only hoped she could run upstairs to her own
room without notice, and bathe her eyes in cold water before she was
seen. But at the hall-door she was caught by the squire and Roger
coming in from an after-dinner stroll in the garden, and hospitably
anxious to help her to alight. Roger saw the state of things in an
instant, and saying,--

'My mother has been looking for you to come back for this last
hour,' he led the way to the drawing-room. But Mrs. Hamley was not
there; the squire had stopped to speak to the coachman about one of
the horses; they two were alone. Roger said,--

'I am afraid you have had a very trying day. I have thought of you
several times, for I know how awkward these new relations are.'

'Thank you,' said she, her lips trembling, and on the point of
crying again. 'I did try to remember what you said, and to think
more of others, but it is so difficult sometimes; you know it is,
don't you?'

'Yes,' said he, gravely. He was gratified by her simple confession
of having borne his words of advice in mind, and tried to act up to
them. He was but a very young man, and he was honestly flattered;
perhaps this led him on to offer more advice, and this time it was
evidently mingled with sympathy. He did not want to draw out her
confidence, which he felt might very easily be done with such a
simple girl; but he wished to help her by giving her a few of the
principles on which he had learnt to rely. 'It is difficult,' he
went on, 'but by-and-by you will be so much happier for it.'

'No, I shan't!' said Molly, shaking her head. 'It will be very dull
when I shall have killed myself, as it were, and live only in trying
to do, and to be, as other people like. I don't see any end to it. I
might as well never have lived. And as for the happiness you speak
of, I shall never be happy again.'

There was an unconscious depth in what she said, that Roger did not
know how to answer at the moment; it was easier to address himself
to the assertion of the girl of seventeen, that she should never be
happy again.

'Nonsense: perhaps in ten years' time you will be looking back on
this trial as a very light one--who knows?'

'I daresay it seems foolish; perhaps all our earthly trials will
appear foolish to us after a while. perhaps they seem so now to
angels. But we are ourselves, you know, and this is now, not some
time to come, a long, long way off. And we are not angels, to be
comforted by seeing the ends for which everything is sent.'

She had never spoken so long a sentence to him before; and when she
had said it, though she did not take her eyes away from his, as they
stood steadily looking at each other, she blushed a little; she
could not have told why. Nor did he tell himself why a sudden
pleasure came over him as he gazed at her simple expressive
face--and for a moment lost the sense of what she was saying, in the
sensation of pity for her sad earnestness. In an instant more he was
himself again. Only it is pleasant to the wisest, most reasonable
youth of one or two and twenty to find himself looked up to as a
Mentor by a girl of seventeen.

'I know, I understand. Yes: it is ~now~ we have to do with. Don't
let us go into metaphysics.' Molly opened her eyes wide at this. Had
she been talking metaphysics without knowing it? 'One looks forward
to a mass of trials, which will only have to be encountered one by
one, little by little. Oh, here is my mother! she will tell you
better than I can.'

And the ~tete-a-tete~ was merged in a trio. Mrs. Hamley lay down;
she had not been well all day--she had missed Molly, she said,--and
now she wanted to hear of all the adventures that had occurred to
the girl at the Towers. Molly sate on a stool close to the head of
the sofa, and Roger, though at first he took up a book and tried to
read that he might be no restraint, soon found his reading all a
pretence: it was so interesting to listen to Molly's little
narrative, and, besides, if he could give her any help in her time
of need, was it not his duty to make himself acquainted with all the
circumstances of her case?

And so they went on during all the remaining time of Molly's stay at
Hamley. Mrs. Hamley sympathized, and liked to hear details, as the
French say, her sympathy was given ~en detail~, the squire's
~en gros~. He was very sorry for her evident grief, and almost felt
guilty, as if he had had a share in bringing it about, by the
mention he had made of the possibility of Mr. Gibson's marrying
again, when first Molly had come on her visit to them. He said to
his wife more than once,--

''Pon my word, now, I wish I'd never spoken those unlucky words that
first day at dinner. Do you remember how she took them up? It was
like a prophecy of what was to come, now, wasn't it? And she looked
pale from that day, and I don't think she has ever fairly enjoyed
her food since. I must take more care what I say for the future. Not
but what Gibson is doing the very best thing, both for himself and
her, that he can do. I told him so only yesterday. But I'm very
sorry for the little girl, though. I wish I'd never spoken about it,
that I do! but it was like a prophecy, wasn't it?'

Roger tried hard to find out a reasonable and right method of
comfort, for he, too, in his way, was sorry for the girl, who
bravely struggled to be cheerful, in spite of her own private grief,
for his mother's sake. He felt as if high principle and noble
precept ought to perform an immediate work. But they do not, for
there is always the unknown quantity of individual experience and
feeling, which offer a tacit resistance, the amount incalculable by
another, to all good counsel and high decree. But the bond between
the Mentor and his Telemachus strengthened every day. He endeavoured
to lead her out of morbid thought into interest in other than
personal things; and, naturally enough, his own objects of interest
came readiest to hand. She felt that he did her good, she did not
know why or how; but after a talk with him, she always fancied that
she had got the clue to goodness and peace, whatever befell.


CHAPTER XII


PREPARING FOR THE WEDDING


Meanwhile the love-affairs between the middle-aged couple were
prospering well, after a fashion; after the fashion that they liked
best, although it might probably have appeared dull and prosaic to
younger people. Lord Cumnor had come down in great glee at the news
he had heard from his wife at the Towers. He, too, seemed to think
he had taken an active part in bringing about the match by only
speaking about it. His first words on the subject to Lady Cumnor
were,--

'I told you so. Now didn't I say what a good, suitable thing this
affair between Gibson and Clare would be! I don't know when I have
been so much pleased. You may despise the trade of match-maker, my
lady, but I am very proud of it. After this, I shall go on looking
out for suitable cases among the middle-aged people of my
acquaintance. I shan't meddle with young folks, they are so apt to
be fanciful; but I have been so successful in this, that I do think
it is a good encouragement to go on.'

'Go on--with what?' asked Lady Cumnor, drily.

'Oh, planning--You can't deny that I planned this match.'

'I don't think you are likely to do either much good or harm by
planning,' she replied, with cool, good sense.

'It puts it into people's heads, my dear.'

'Yes, if you speak about your plans to them, of course it does. But
in this case you never spoke to either Mr. Gibson, or Clare, did
you?'

All at once the recollection of how Clare had come upon the passage
in Lord Cumnor's letter flashed on his lady, but she did not say
anything about it, but left her husband to flounder about as best he
might.

'No! I never spoke to them; of course not.'

'Then you must be strongly mesmeric, and your will acted upon
theirs, if you are to take credit for any part in the affair,'
continued his pitiless wife.

'I really can't say. It's no use looking back to what I said or did.
I'm very well satisfied with it, and that's enough, and I mean to
show them how much I'm pleased. I shall give Clare something towards
her rigging out, and they shall have a breakfast at Ashcombe
Manor-house. I'll write to Preston about it. When did you say they
were to be married?'

'I think they'd better wait till Christmas, and I have told them so.
It would amuse the children, going over to Ashcombe for the wedding;
and if it's bad weather during the holidays I'm always afraid of
their finding it dull at the Towers. It's very different if it's a
good frost, and they can go out skating and sledging in the park.
But these last two years it has been so wet for them, poor dears!'

'And will the other poor dears be content to wait to make a holiday
for your grandchildren? "To make a Roman holiday." Pope, or somebody
else, had a line of poetry like that. "To make a Roman
holiday,"'--he repeated, pleased with his unusual aptitude at
quotation.

'It's Byron, and it's nothing to do with the subject in hand. I'm
surprised at your lordship's quoting Byron,--he was a very immoral
poet.'

'I saw him take his oaths in the House of Lords,' said Lord Cumnor,
apologetically.

'Well! the less said about him the better,' said Lady Cumnor. 'I
have told Clare that she had better not think of being married
before Christmas; and it won't do for her to give up her school in a
hurry either.'

But Clare did not intend to wait till Christmas; and for this once
she carried her point against the will of the countess, and without
many words, or any open opposition. She had a harder task in setting
aside Mr. Gibson's desire to have Cynthia over for the wedding, even
if she went back to her school at Boulogne directly after the
ceremony. At first she had said that it would be delightful, a
charming plan; only she feared that she must give up her own wishes
to have her child near her at such a time, on account of the expense
of the double journey.

But Mr. Gibson, economical as he was in his habitual expenditure, had
a really generous heart. He had already shown it, in entirely
relinquishing his future wife's life-interest in the very small
property the late Mr. Kirkpatrick had left, in favour of Cynthia;
while he arranged that she should come to his home as a daughter as
soon as she left the school she was at. The life-interest was about
thirty pounds a year. Now he gave Mrs. Kirkpatrick three five-pound
notes, saying that he hoped they would do away with the objections
to Cynthia's coming over to the wedding; and at the time Mrs
Kirkpatrick felt as if they would, and caught the reflection of his
strong wish, and fancied it was her own. If the letter could have
been written and the money sent off that day while the reflected
glow of affection lasted, Cynthia would have been bridesmaid to her
mother. But a hundred little interruptions came in the way of
letter-writing; and by the next day maternal love had diminished;
and the value affixed to the money had increased: money had been so
much needed, so hardly earned in Mrs. Kirkpatrick's life; while the
perhaps necessary separation of mother and child had lessened the
amount of affection the former had to bestow. So she persuaded
herself, afresh, that it would be unwise to disturb Cynthia at her
studies; to interrupt the fulfilment of her duties just after the
~semestre~ had begun afresh; and she wrote a letter to Madame
Lefevre so well imbued with this persuasion, that an answer which
was almost an echo of her words was returned, the sense of which
being conveyed to Mr. Gibson, who was no great French scholar,
settled the vexed question, to his moderate but unfeigned regret.
But the fifteen pounds were not returned. Indeed, not merely that
sum, but a great part of the hundred which Lord Cumnor had given her
for her trousseau, was required to pay off debts at Ashcombe; for
the school had been anything but flourishing since Mrs. Kirkpatrick
had had it. It was really very much to her credit that she preferred
clearing herself from debt to purchasing wedding finery. But it was
one of the few points to be respected in Mrs. Kirkpatrick that she
had always been careful in payment to the shops where she dealt; it
was a little sense of duty cropping out. Whatever other faults might
arise from her superficial and flimsy character, she was always
uneasy till she was out of debt. Yet she had no scruple in
appropriating her future husband's money to her own use, when it was
decided that it was not to be employed as he intended. What new
articles she bought for herself, were all such as would make a show,
and an impression upon the ladies of Hollingford. She argued with
herself that linen, and all underclothing, would never be seen,
while she knew that every gown she had, would give rise to much
discussion and would be counted up in the little town.

So her stock of 'underclothing was very small, and scarcely any of
it new; but it was made of dainty material, and was finely mended up
by her deft fingers, many a night long after her pupils were in bed;
inwardly resolving all the time she sewed, that hereafter some one
else should do her plain-work. Indeed, many a little circumstance of
former subjection to the will of others rose up before her during
these quiet hours, as an endurance or a suffering never to occur
again. So apt are people to look forward to a different kind of life
from that to which they have been accustomed, as being free from
care and trial! She recollected how, one time during this very
summer at the Towers, after she was engaged to Mr. Gibson, when she
had taken above an hour to arrange her hair in some new mode
carefully studied from Mrs. Bradley's fashion-book--after all, when
she came down, looking her very best, as she thought, and ready for
her lover, Lady Cumnor had sent her back again to her room, just as
if she had been a little child, to do her hair over again, and not
to make such a figure of fun of herself! Another time she had been
sent to change her gown for one in her opinion far less becoming,
but which suited Lady Cumnor's taste better. These were little
things; but they were late samples of what in different shapes she
had had to endure for many years; and her liking for Mr. Gibson grew
in proportion to her sense of the evils from which he was going to
serve as a means of escape. After all, that interval of hope and
plain-sewing, intermixed though it was by tuition, was not
disagreeable. Her wedding-dress was secure. Her former pupils at the
Towers were going to present her with that; they were to dress her
from head to foot on the auspicious day. Lord Cumnor, as has been
said, had given her a hundred pounds for her trousseau, and had sent
Mr. Preston a ~carte-blanche~ order for the wedding-breakfast in the
old hall in Ashcombe Manor-house. Lady Cumnor--a little put out by
the marriage not being deferred till her grandchildren's Christmas
holidays--had nevertheless given Mrs. Kirkpatrick an excellent
English-made watch and chain; more clumsy but more serviceable than
the little foreign elegance that had hung at her side so long, and
misled her so often.

Her preparations were thus in a very considerable state of
forwardness, while Mr. Gibson had done nothing as yet towards any new
arrangement or decoration of his house for his intended bride. He
knew he ought to do something. But what? Where to begin, when so
much was out of order, and he had so little time for
superintendence? At length he came to the wise decision of asking
one of the Miss Brownings to take the trouble of preparing all that
was immediately requisite in his house, for old friendship's sake;
and resolved to leave all the more ornamental decorations that he
proposed, to the taste of his future wife. But before making his
request to the Miss Brownings he had to tell them of his engagement,
which had hitherto been kept a secret from the townspeople, who had
set down his frequent visits at the Towers to the score of the
countess's health. He felt how he should have laughed in his sleeve
at any middle-aged widower who came to him with a confession of the
kind he had now to make to the Miss Brownings, and disliked the idea
of the necessary call: but it was to be done, so one evening he went
in 'promiscuous,' as they called it, and told them his story. At the
end of the first chapter--that is to say, at the end of the story of
Mr. Coxe's calf-love, Miss Browning held up her hands in surprise.

'To think of Molly, as I have held in long-clothes, coming to have a
lover! Well, to be sure! Sister Phoebe--' (she was just coming into
the room), 'here's a piece of news! Molly Gibson has got a lover!
One may almost say she's had an offer! Mr. Gibson, may not one?--and
she's but sixteen!'

'Seventeen, sister,' said Miss Phoebe, who piqued herself on knowing
all about dear Mr. Gibson's domestic affairs. 'Seventeen, the 22nd of
last June.'

'Well, have it your own way. Seventeen, if you like to call her so!'
said Miss Browning, impatiently. 'The fact is still the same--she's
got a lover; and it seems to me she was in long-clothes only
yesterday.'

'I'm sure I hope her course of true love will run smooth,' said Miss
Phoebe.

Now Mr. Gibson came in; for his story was not half told, and he did
not want them to run away too far with the idea of Molly's
love-affair.

'Molly knows nothing about it. I haven't even named it to any one
but you two, and to one other friend. I trounced Coxe well, and did
my best to keep his attachment--as he calls it--in bounds. But I was
sadly puzzled what to do about Molly. Miss Eyre was away, and I
couldn't leave them in the house together without any older woman.'

'Oh, Mr. Gibson! why did you not send her to us?' broke in Miss
Browning. 'We would have done anything in our power for you; for
your sake, as well as her poor dear mother's.'

'Thank you. I know you would, but it wouldn't have done to have had
her in Hollingford, just at the time of Coxe's effervescence. He's
better now. His appetite has come back with double force, after the
fasting he thought it right to exhibit. He had three helpings of
blackcurrant dumpling yesterday.'

'I am sure you are most liberal, Mr. Gibson. Three helpings! And, I
daresay, butcher's meat in proportion?'

'Oh! I only named it because, with such very young men, it's
generally see-saw between appetite and love, and I thought the third
helping a very good sign. But still, you know, what has happened
once, may happen again.'

'I don't know. Phoebe had an offer of marriage once--' said Miss
Browning.

'Hush! sister. It might hurt his feelings to have it spoken about.'

'Nonsense, child! It's five-and-twenty years ago; and his eldest
daughter is married herself.'

'I own he has not been constant,' pleaded Miss Phoebe, in her
tender, piping voice. 'All men are not--like you, Mr
Gibson--faithful to the memory of their first love.'

Mr. Gibson winced. Jeanie was his first love; but her name had never
been breathed in Hollingford. His wife--good, pretty, sensible, and
beloved as she had been--was not his second; no, nor his third love.
And now he was come to make a confidence about his second marriage.

'Well, well,' said he; 'at any rate, I thought I must do something
to protect Molly from such affairs while she was so young, and
before I had given my sanction. Miss Eyre's little nephew fell ill
of scarlet fever--'

'Ah! by-the-by, how careless of me not to inquire. How is the poor
little fellow?'

'Worse--better. It doesn't signify to what I've got to say now; the
fact was, Miss Eyre couldn't come back to my house for some time,
and I cannot leave Molly altogether at Hamley.'

'Ah! I see now, why there was that sudden visit to Hamley. Upon my
word, it's quite a romance.'

'I do like hearing of a love-affair,' murmured Miss Phoebe.

'Then if you'll let me get on with my story, you shall hear of
mine,' said Mr. Gibson, quite beyond his patience with their constant
interruptions.

'Yours!' said Miss Phoebe, faintly.

'Bless us and save us!' said Miss Browning, with less sentiment in
her tone; 'what next?'

'My marriage, I hope,' said Mr. Gibson, choosing to take her
expression of intense surprise literally. 'And that's what I came to
speak to you about.'

A little hope darted up in Miss Phoebe's breast. She had often said
to her sister, in the confidence of curling-time (ladies wore curls
in those days), 'that the only man who could ever bring her to think
of matrimony was Mr. Gibson; but that if he ever proposed, she should
feel bound to accept him, for poor dear Mary's sake;' never
explaining what exact style of satisfaction she imagined she should
give to her dead friend by marrying her late husband. Phoebe played
nervously with the strings of her black silk apron. Like the Caliph
in the Eastern story, a whole lifetime of possibilities passed
through her mind in an instant, of which possibilities the question
of questions was, Could she leave her sister? Attend, Phoebe, to the
present moment, and listen to what is being said before you distress
yourself with a perplexity which will never arise.

'Of course it has been an anxious thing for me to decide who I
should ask to be the mistress of my family, the mother of my girl;
but I think I've decided rightly at last. The lady I have chosen--'

'Tell us at once who she is, there's a good man,' said
straightforward Miss Browning.

'Mrs. Kirkpatrick,' said the bridegroom elect.

'What! the governess at the Towers, that the countess makes so much
of?'

'Yes; she is much valued by them--and deservedly so. She keeps a
school now at Ashcombe, and is accustomed to housekeeping. She has
brought up the young ladies at the Towers, and has a daughter of her
own, therefore it is probable she will have a kind, motherly feeling
towards Molly.'

'She's a very elegant-looking woman,' said Miss Phoebe, feeling it
incumbent upon her to say something laudatory, by way of concealing
the thoughts that had just been passing through her mind. 'I've seen
her in the carriage, riding backwards with the countess; a very
pretty woman, I should say.'

'Nonsense, sister,' said Miss Browning. 'What has her elegance or
prettiness to do with the affair? Did you ever know a widower marry
again for such trifles as those? It's always from a sense of duty of
one kind or another--isn't it, Mr. Gibson? They want a housekeeper;
or they want a mother for their children; or they think their last
wife would have liked it.'

Perhaps the thought had passed through the elder sister's mind that
Phoebe might have been chosen for there was a sharp acrimony in her
tone; not unfamiliar to Mr. Gibson, but with which he did not choose
to cope at this present moment.

'You must have it your own way, Miss Browning. Settle my motives for
me. I don't pretend to be quite clear about them myself. But I am
clear in wishing heartily to keep my old friends, and for them to
love my future wife for my sake. I don't know any two women in the
world, except Molly and Mrs. Kirkpatrick, I regard as much as I do
you. Besides, I want to ask you if you will let Molly come and stay
with you till after my marriage?'

'You might have asked us before you asked Madam Hamley,' said Miss
Browning, only half mollified. 'We are your old friends; and we were
her mother's friends, too; though we are not county folk.'

'That's unjust,' said Mr. Gibson. 'And you know it is.'

'I don't know. You are always with Lord Hollingford, when you can
get at him, much more than you ever are with Mr. Goodenough, or Mr
Smith. And you are always going over to Hamley.'

Miss Browning was not one to give in all at once.

'I seek Lord Hollingford as I should seek such a man, whatever his
rank or position might be: usher to a school, carpenter, shoemaker,
if it were possible for them to have had a similar character of mind
developed by similar advantages. Mr. Goodenough is a very clever
attorney, with strong local interests and not a thought beyond.'

'Well, well, don't go on arguing, it always gives me a headache, as
Phoebe knows. I didn't mean what I said, that's enough, isn't it?
I'll retract anything sooner than be reasoned with. Where were we
before you began your arguments?'

'About dear little Molly coming to pay us a visit,' said Miss
Phoebe.

'I should have asked you at first, only Coxe was so rampant with his
love. I didn't know what he might do, or how troublesome he might be
both to Molly and you. But he has cooled down now. Absence has had a
very tranquillizing effect, and I think Molly may be in the same
town with him, without any consequences beyond a few sighs every
time she's brought to his mind by meeting her. And I've got another
favour to ask of you, so you see it would never do for me to argue
with you, Miss Browning, when I ought to be a humble suppliant.
Something must be done to the house to make it all ready for the
future Mrs. Gibson. It wants painting and papering shamefully, and I
should think some new furniture, but I'm sure I don't know what.
Would you be so very kind as to look over the place, and see how far
a hundred pounds will go? The dining-room walls must be painted;
we'll keep the drawing-room paper for her choice, and I've a little
spare money for that room for her to lay out; but all the rest of
the house I'll leave to you, if you'll only be kind enough to help
an old friend.'

This was a commission which exactly gratified Miss Browning's love
of power. The disposal of money involved patronage of tradespeople,
such as she had exercised in her father's lifetime, but had had very
little chance of showing since his death. Her usual good-humour was
quite restored by this proof of confidence in her taste and economy,
while Miss Phoebe's imagination dwelt rather on the pleasure of a
visit from Molly.


CHAPTER XIII


MOLLY GIBSON'S NEW FRIENDS


Time was speeding on; it was now the middle of August,--if anything
was to be done to the house, it must be done at once. Indeed, in
several ways Mr. Gibson's arrangements with Miss Browning had not
been made too soon. The squire had heard that Osborne might probably
return home for a few days before going abroad; and, though the
growing intimacy between Roger and Molly did not alarm him in the
least, yet he was possessed by a very hearty panic lest the heir
might take a fancy to the surgeon's daughter; and he was in such a
fidget for her to leave the house before Osborne came home, that his
wife lived in constant terror lest he should make it too obvious to
their visitor.

Every young girl of seventeen or so, who is at all thoughtful, is
very apt to make a Pope out of the first person who presents to her
a new or larger system of duty than that by which she has been
unconsciously guided hitherto. Such a Pope was Roger to Molly; she
looked to his opinion, to his authority on almost every subject, yet
he had only said one or two things in a terse manner which gave them
the force of precepts--stable guides to her conduct, and had shown
the natural superiority in wisdom and knowledge which is sure to
exist between a highly educated young man of no common intelligence,
and an ignorant girl of seventeen, who yet was well capable of
appreciation. Still, although they were drawn together in this very
pleasant relationship, each was imagining some one very different
for the future owner of their whole heart--their highest and
completest love. Roger looked to find a grand woman, his equal, and
his empress; beautiful in person, serene in wisdom, ready for
counsel, as was Egeria.' Molly's little wavering maiden fancy dwelt
on the unseen Osborne, who was now a troubadour, and now a knight,
such as he wrote about in one of his own poems; some one like
Osborne, perhaps, rather than Osborne himself, for she shrank from
giving a personal form and name to the hero that was to be. The
squire was not unwise in wishing her well out of the house before
Osborne came home, if he was considering her peace of mind. Yet,
when she went away from the hall he missed her constantly; it had
been so pleasant to have her there daily fulfilling all the pretty
offices of a daughter; cheering the meals, so often ~tete-a-tete~
betwixt him and Roger, with her innocent wise questions, her
lively interest in their talk, her merry replies to his banter.

And Roger missed her too. Sometimes her remarks had probed into his
mind, and excited him to the deep thought in which he delighted; at
other times he had felt himself of real help to her in her hours of
need, and in making her take an interest in books, which treated of
higher things than the continual fiction and poetry which she had
hitherto read. He felt something like an affectionate tutor who was
suddenly deprived of his most promising pupil; he wondered how she
would go on without him; whether she would be puzzled and
disheartened by the books he had lent her to read; how she and her
stepmother would get along together? She occupied his thoughts a
good deal those first few days after she left the hall. Mrs. Hamley
regretted her more, and longer than did the other two. She had given
her the place of a daughter in her heart; and now she missed the
sweet feminine companionship, the playful caresses, the
never-ceasing attentions; the very need of sympathy in her sorrows,
that Molly had shown so openly from time to time; all these things
had extremely endeared her to the tenderhearted Mrs. Hamley.

Molly, too, felt the change of atmosphere keenly; and she blamed
herself for so feeling even more keenly still. But she could not
help having a sense of refinement, which had made her appreciate the
whole manner of being at the Hall. By her dear old friends the Miss
Brownings she was petted and caressed so much that she became
ashamed of noticing the coarser and louder tones in which they
spoke, the provincialism of their pronunciation, the absence of
interest in things, and their greediness of details about persons.
They asked her questions which she was puzzled enough to answer
about her future stepmother; her loyalty to her father forbidding
her to reply fully and truthfully. She was always glad when they
began to make inquiries as to every possible affair at the Hall. She
had been so happy there; she liked them all, down to the very dogs,
so thoroughly, that it was easy work replying: she did not mind
telling them everything, even to the style of Mrs. Hamley's invalid
dress; nor what wine the squire drank at dinner. Indeed, talking
about these things helped her to recall the happiest time in her
life. But one evening, as they were all sitting together after tea
in the little upstairs drawing-room, looking into the High
Street--Molly discoursing away on the various pleasures of Hamley
Hall, and just then telling of all Roger's wisdom in natural
science, and some of the curiosities he had shown her, she was
suddenly pulled up by this little speech,--

'You seem to have seen a great deal of Mr. Roger, Molly!' said Miss
Browning, in a way intended to convey a great deal of meaning to her
sister and none at all to Molly. But,--

The man recovered of the bite;
The dog it was that died.'

Molly was perfectly aware of Miss Browning's emphatic tone, though
at first she was perplexed as to its cause; while Miss Phoebe was
just then too much absorbed in knitting the heel of her stocking to
be fully alive to her sister's nods and winks.

'Yes; he was very kind to me,' said Molly, slowly, pondering over
Miss Browning's manner, and unwilling to say more until she had
satisfied herself to what the question tended.

'I dare say you will soon be going to Hamley Hall again? He's not
the eldest son, you know, Phoebe! Don't make my head ache with
your eternal "eighteen, nineteen," but attend to the conversation.
Molly is telling us how much she saw of Mr. Roger, and how kind he
was to her. I've always heard he was a very nice young man, my dear.
Tell us some more about him! Now, Phoebe, attend! How was he kind to
you, Molly?'

'Oh, he told me what books to read; and one day he made me notice
how many bees I saw--'

'Bees, child! What do you mean? Either you or he must have been
crazy!'

'No, not at all. There are more than two hundred kinds of bees in
England, and he wanted me to notice the difference between them and
flies. Miss Browning, I can't help seeing what you fancy,' said
Molly, as red as fire, 'but it is very wrong; it is all a mistake. I
won't speak another word about Mr. Roger or Hamley at all, if it puts
such silly notions into your head.'

'Highty-tighty! Here's a young lady to be lecturing her elders!
Silly notions, indeed! They are in your head, it seems. And let me
tell you, Molly, you are too young to let your mind be running on
lovers.'

Molly had been once or twice called saucy and impertinent, and
certainly a little sauciness came out now.

'I never said what the "silly notion" was, Miss Browning; did I now,
Miss Phoebe? Don't you see, dear Miss Phoebe, it is all her own
interpretation, and according to her own fancy, this foolish talk
about lovers?'

Molly was flaming with indignation; but she had appealed to the
wrong person for justice. Miss Phoebe tried to make peace after the
fashion of weak-minded persons, who would cover over the unpleasant
sight of a sore, instead of trying to heal it.

'I'm sure I don't know anything about it, my dear. It seems to me
that what Sally was saying was very true--very true indeed; and I
think, love, you misunderstood her; or, perhaps, she misunderstood
you; or I may be misunderstanding it altogether; so we'd better not
talk any more about it. What price did you say you were going to
give for the drugget in Mr. Gibson's dining-room, sister?'

So Miss Browning and Molly went on till evening, each chafed and
angry with the other. They wished each other good-night, going
through the usual forms in the coolest manner possible. Molly went
up to her little bedroom, clean and neat as a bedroom could be, with
draperies of small delicate patchwork--bed-curtains,
window-curtains, and counter-pane; a japanned ~toilette~-table, full
of little boxes, with a small looking-glass affixed to it, that
distorted every face that was so unwise as to look in it. This room
had been to the child one of the most dainty and luxurious places
ever seen, in comparison with her own bare, white-dimity bedroom;
and now she was sleeping in it, as a guest, and all the quaint
adornments she had once peeped at as a great favour, as they were
carefully wrapped up in cap-paper, were set out for her use. And yet
how little she had deserved this hospitable care; how impertinent
she had been; how cross she had felt ever since! She was crying
tears of penitence and youthful misery when there came a low tap to
the door. Molly opened it, and there stood Miss Browning, in a
wonderful erection of a nightcap, and scantily attired in a coloured
calico jacket over her scrimpy and short white petticoat.

'I was afraid you were asleep, child,' said she, coming in and
shutting the door. 'But I wanted to say to you we've got wrong
to-day, somehow; and I think it was perhaps my doing. It's as well
Phoebe shouldn't know, for she thinks me perfect; and when there's
only two of us, we get along better if one of us thinks the other
can do no wrong. But I rather think I was a little cross. We'll not
say any more about it, Molly; only we'll go to sleep friends,--and
friends we'll always be, child, won't we? Now give me a kiss, and
don't cry and swell your eyes up;--and put out your candle
carefully.'

'I was wrong--it was my fault,' said Molly, kissing her.

'Fiddlestick-ends! Don't contradict me! I say it was my fault, and I
won't hear another word about it.'

The next day Molly went with Miss Browning to see the changes going
on in her father's house. To her they were but dismal improvements.
The faint grey of the dining-room walls, which had harmonized well
enough with the deep crimson of the moreen curtains, and which when
well cleaned looked thinly coated rather than dirty, was now
exchanged for a pink salmon-colour of a very glowing hue; and the
new curtains were of that pale sea-green just coming into fashion.
'Very bright and pretty,' Miss Browning called it; and in the first
renewing of their love Molly could not bear to contradict her. She
could only hope that the green and brown drugget would tone down the
brightness and prettiness. There was scaffolding here, scaffolding
there, and Betty scolding everywhere.

'Come up now, and see your papa's bedroom. He's sleeping upstairs in
yours, that everything may be done up afresh in his.'

Molly could just remember, in faint clear lines of distinctness, the
being taken into this very room to bid farewell to her dying mother.
She could see the white linen, the white muslin, surrounding the
pale, wan wistful face, with the large, longing eyes, yearning for
one more touch of the little soft warm child, whom she was too
feeble to clasp in her arms, already growing numb in death. Many a
time when Molly had been in this room since that sad day, had she
seen in vivid fancy that same wan wistful face lying on the pillow,
the outline of the form beneath the clothes; and the girl had not
shrunk from such visions, but rather cherished them, as preserving
to her the remembrance of her mother's outward semblance. Her eyes
were full of tears, as she followed Miss Browning into this room to
see it under its new aspect. Nearly everything was changed--the
position of the bed and the colour of the furniture; there was a
grand ~toilette~-table now, with a glass upon it, instead of the
primitive substitute of the top of a chest of drawers, with a mirror
above upon the wall, sloping downwards; these latter things had
served her mother during her short married life.

'You see we must have all in order for a lady who has passed so much
of her time in the countess's mansion,' said Miss Browning, who was
now quite reconciled to the marriage, thanks to the pleasant
employment of furnishing that had devolved upon her in consequence.
'Cromer, the upholsterer, wanted to persuade me to have a sofa and a
writing-table. These men will say anything is the fashion, if they
want to sell an article. I said, "No, no, Cromer: bedrooms are for
sleeping in, and sitting-rooms are for sitting in. Keep everything
to its right purpose, and don't try and delude me into nonsense."
Why, my mother would have given us a fine scolding if she had ever
caught us in our bedrooms in the daytime. We kept our outdoor things
in a closet downstairs; and there was a very tidy place for washing
our hands, which is as much as one wants in the day-time. Stuffing
up a bedroom with sofas and tables! I never heard of such a thing.
Besides, a hundred pounds won't last for ever. I shan't be able to
do anything for your room, Molly!'

'I'm right down glad of it,' said Molly. 'Nearly everything in it
was what mamma had when she lived with my great-uncle. I wouldn't
have had it changed for the world; I am so fond of it.'

'Well, there's no danger of it, now the money is run out. By the
way, Molly, who's to buy you a bridesmaid's dress?'

'I don't know,' said Molly;'I suppose I am to be a bridesmaid; but
no one has spoken to me about my dress.'

'Then I shall ask your papa.'

'Please, don't. He must have to spend a great deal of money just
now. Besides, I would rather not be at the wedding, if they'll let
me stay away.'

'Nonsense, child. Why, all the town would be talking of it. You must
go, and you must be well dressed, for your father's sake.'

But Mr. Gibson had thought of Molly's dress, although he had said
nothing about it to her. He had commissioned his future wife to get
her what was requisite; and presently a very smart dressmaker came
over from the county-town to try on a dress, which was both so
simple and so elegant as at once to charm Molly. When it came home
all ready to put on, Molly had a private dressing-up for the Miss
Brownings' benefit; and she was almost startled when she looked into
the glass, and saw the improvement in her appearance. 'I wonder if
I'm pretty,' thought she. 'I almost think I am--in this kind of
dress I mean, of course. Betty would say, "Fine feathers make fine
birds."'

When she went downstairs in her bridal attire, and with shy blushes
presented herself for inspection, she was greeted with a burst of
admiration.

'Well, upon my word! I shouldn't have known you.' ('Fine feathers,'
thought Molly, and checked her rising vanity.)

'You are really beautiful--isn't she, sister?' said Miss Phoebe.
'Why, my dear, if you were always dressed, you would be prettier
than your dear mamma, whom we always reckoned so very personable.'

'You're not a bit like her. You favour your father, and white always
sets off a brown complexion.'

'But isn't she beautiful?' persevered Miss Phoebe.

'Well! and if she is, Providence made her, and not she herself.
Besides, the dressmaker must go shares. What a fine India muslin it
is! it'll have cost a pretty penny!'

Mr. Gibson and Molly drove over to Ashcombe, the night before the
wedding, in the one yellow post-chaise that Hollingford possessed.
They were to be Mr. Preston's, or, rather, my lord's, guests at the
Manor-house. The Manor-house came up to its name, and delighted
Molly at first sight. It was built of stone, had many gables and
mullioned windows, and was covered over with Virginian creeper and
late-blowing roses. Molly did not know Mr. Preston, who stood in the
doorway to greet her father. She took standing with him as a young
lady at once, and it was the first time she had met with the kind of
behaviour--half complimentary, half flirting--which some men think
it necessary to assume with every woman under five-and-twenty. Mr
Preston was very handsome, and knew it. He was a fair man, with
light-brown hair and whiskers; grey, roving, well-shaped eyes, with
lashes darker than his hair; and a figure rendered easy and supple
by the athletic exercises in which his excellence was famous, and
which had procured him admission into much higher society than he
was otherwise entitled to enter. He was a capital cricketer; was so
good a shot, that any house desirous of reputation for its bags on
the 12th or the 1st, was glad to have him for a guest. He taught
young ladies to play billiards on a wet day, or went in for the game
in serious earnest when required, He knew half the private
theatrical plays off by heart, and was invaluable in arranging
impromptu charades and tableaux. He had his own private reasons for
wishing to get up a flirtation with Molly just at this time; he had
amused himself so much with the widow when she first came to
Ashcombe, that he fancied that the sight of him, standing by her
less polished, less handsome, middle-aged husband, might be too much
of a contrast to be agreeable. Besides, he had really a strong
passion for some one else; some one who would be absent; and that
passion it was necessary for him to conceal. So that, altogether, he
had resolved, even had 'the little Gibson-girl' (as he called her)
been less attractive than she was, to devote himself to her for the
next sixteen hours.

They were taken by their host into a wainscoted parlour, where a
wood fire crackled and burnt, and the crimson curtains shut out the
waning day and the outer chill. Here the table was laid for dinner;
snowy table-linen, bright silver, clear sparkling glass, wine and an
autumnal dessert on the sideboard. Yet Mr. Preston kept apologizing
to Molly for the rudeness of his bachelor home, for the smallness of
the room, the great dining-room being already appropriated by his
housekeeper, in preparation for the morrow's breakfast. And then he
rang for a servant to show Molly to her room. She was taken into a
most comfortable chamber. a wood fire on the hearth, candles lighted
on the ~toilette~-table, dark woollen curtains surrounding a
snow-white bed, great vases of china standing here and there.

'This is my Lady Harriet's room when her ladyship comes to the
Manor-house with my lord the earl,' said the housemaid, striking out
thousands of brilliant sparks by a well-directed blow at a
smouldering log. 'Shall I help you to dress, miss? I always helps
her ladyship.'

Molly, quite aware of the fact that she had but her white muslin
gown for the wedding besides that she had on, dismissed the good
woman, and was thankful to be left to herself.

'Dinner' was it called? Why it was nearly eight o'clock; and
preparations for bed seemed a more natural employment than dressing
at this hour of night. All the dressing she could manage was the
placing of a red damask rose or two in the band of her grey stuff
gown, there being a great nosegay of choice autumnal flowers on the
~toilette~-table. She did try the effect of another crimson rose in
her black hair, just above her ear; it was very pretty, but too
coquettish, and so she put it back again. The dark-oak panels and
wainscoting of the whole house seemed to glow in warm light; there
were so many fires in different rooms, in the hall, and even one on
the landing of the staircase. Mr. Preston must have heard her step,
for he met her in the hall, and led her into a small drawing-room,
with closed folding-doors on one side, opening into the larger
drawing-room, as he told her. This room into which she entered
reminded her a little of Hamley--yellow-satin upholstery of seventy
or a hundred years ago, all delicately kept and scrupulously clean;
great Indian cabinets, and china jars, emitting spicy odours; a
large blazing fire, before which her father stood in his morning
dress, grave and thoughtful, as he had been all day.

'This room is that which Lady Harriet uses when she comes here with
her father for a day or two,' said Mr. Preston. And Molly tried to
save her father by being ready to talk herself.

'Does she often come here?'

'Not often. But I fancy she likes being here when she does. Perhaps
she finds it an agreeable change after the more formal life she
leads at the Towers. '

'I should think it was a very pleasant house to stay at,' said
Molly, remembering the look of warm comfort that pervaded it. But a
little to her dismay Mr. Preston seemed to take it as a compliment to
himself.

'I was afraid a young lady like you might perceive all the
incongruities of a bachelor's home. I am very much obliged to you,
Miss Gibson. In general I live pretty much in the room in which we
shall dine; and I have a sort of agent's office in which I keep
books and papers, and receive callers on business.'

Then they went in to dinner. Molly thought everything that was
served was delicious, and cooked to the point of perfection; but
they did not seem to satisfy Mr. Preston, who apologized to his
guests several times for the bad cooking of this dish, or the
omission of a particular sauce to that; always referring to
bachelor's housekeeping, bachelor's this and bachelor's that, till
Molly grew quite impatient at the word. Her father's depression,
which was still continuing and rendering him very silent, made her
uneasy; yet she wished to conceal it from Mr. Preston; and so she
talked away, trying to obviate the sort of personal bearing which
their host would give to everything. She did not know when to leave
the gentlemen, but her father made a sign to her; and she was
conducted back to the yellow drawing-room by Mr. Preston, who made
many apologies for leaving her there alone. She enjoyed herself
extremely, however, feeling at liberty to prowl about, and examine
all the curiosities the room contained. Among other things was a
Louis Quinze cabinet with lovely miniatures in enamel let into the
fine woodwork. She carried a candle to it, and was looking intently
at these faces when her father and Mr. Preston came in. Her father
looked still careworn and anxious; he came up and patted her on the
back, looked at what she was looking at, and then went off to
silence and the fire. Mr. Preston took the candle out of her hand,
and threw himself into her interests with an air of ready gallantry.

'That is said to be Mademoiselle de St Quentin, a great beauty at
the French Court. This is Madame du Barri. Do you see any likeness
in Mademoiselle de St Quentin to any one you know?' He had lowered
his voice a little as he asked this question.

'No!' said Molly, looking at it again. 'I never saw any one half so
beautiful.'

'But don't you see a likeness--in the eyes particularly?' he asked
again, with some impatience.

Molly tried hard to find out a resemblance, and was again
unsuccessful.

'It constantly reminds me of--of Miss Kirkpatrick.'

'Does it?' said Molly, eagerly. 'Oh! I am so glad--I've never seen
her, so of course I couldn't find out the likeness. You know her,
then, do you? Please tell me all about her.'

He hesitated a moment before speaking. He smiled a little before
replying.

'She's very beautiful; that of course is understood when I say that
this miniature does not come up to her for beauty.'

'And besides?--Go on, please.'

'What do you mean by "besides"?'

'Oh! I suppose she's very clever and accomplished?'

That was not in the least what Molly wanted to ask; but it was
difficult to word the vague vastness of her unspoken inquiry.

'She is clever naturally; she has picked up accomplishments. But she
has such a charm about her, one forgets what she herself is in the
halo that surrounds her. You ask me all this, Miss Gibson, and I
answer truthfully; or else I should not entertain one young lady
with my enthusiastic praises of another.'

'I don't see why not,' said Molly. 'Besides, if you wouldn't do it
in general, I think you ought to do it in my case; for you, perhaps,
don't know, but she is coming to live with us when she leaves
school, and we are very nearly the same age; so it will be almost
like having a sister.'

'She is to live with you, is she?' said Mr. Preston, to whom this
intelligence was news. 'And when is she to leave school? I thought
she would surely have been at this wedding; but I was told she was
not to come. When is she to leave school?'

'I think it is to be at Easter. You know she's at Boulogne, and it's
a long journey for her to come alone; or else papa wished for her to
be at the marriage very much indeed.'

'And her mother prevented it?--I understand.'

'No, it wasn't her mother; it was the French schoolmistress, who
didn't think it desirable.'

'It comes to pretty much the same thing. And she's to return and
live with you after Easter?'

'I believe so. Is she a grave or a merry person?'

'Never very grave, as far as I have seen of her. Sparkling would be
the word for her, I think. Do you ever write to her? If you do, pray
remember me to her, and tell her how we have been talking about
her--you and I.'

'I never write to her,' said Molly, rather shortly.

Tea came in; and after that they all went to bed, Molly heard her
father exclaim at the fire in his bedroom, and Mr. Preston's reply,--

'I pique myself on my keen relish for all creature comforts, and
also on my power of doing without them, if need be. My lord's woods
are ample, and I indulge myself with a fire in my bedroom for nine
months in the year; yet I could travel in Iceland without wincing
from the cold.'


CHAPTER XIV


MOLLY FINDS HERSELF PATRONIZED


The wedding went off much as such affairs do. Lord Cumnor and Lady
Harriet drove over from the Towers, so the hour for the ceremony was
as late as possible. Lord Cumnor came over to officiate as the
bride's father, and was in more open glee than either bride or
bridegroom, or any one else. Lady Harriet came as a sort of amateur
bridesmaid, to 'share Molly's duties,' as she called it. They went
from the Manor-house in two carriages to the church in the park, Mr
Preston and Mr. Gibson in one, and Molly, to her dismay, shut up with
Lord Cumnor and Lady Harriet in the other. Lady Harriet's gown of
white muslin had seen one or two garden-parties, and was not in the
freshest order; it had been rather a freak of the young lady's at
the last moment. She was very merry, and very much inclined to talk
to Molly, by way of finding out what sort of a little personage
Clare was to have for her future daughter. She began,--

'We mustn't crush this pretty muslin dress of yours. Put it over
papa's knee; he doesn't mind it in the least.'

'What, my dear, a white dress!--no, to be sure not. I rather like
it. Besides, going to a wedding, who minds anything? It would be
different if we were going to a funeral.'

Molly conscientiously strove to find out the meaning of this speech;
but before she had done so, Lady Harriet spoke again, going to the
point, as she always piqued herself on doing.

'I daresay it's something of a trial to you, this second marriage of
your father's; but you'll find Clare the most amiable of women. She
always let me have my own way, and I've no doubt she'll let you have
yours.'

'I mean to try and like her,' said Molly, in a low voice, trying
hard to keep down the tears that would keep rising to her eyes this
morning. 'I've seen very little of her yet.'

'Why, it's the very best thing for you that could have happened, my
dear,' said Lord Cumnor. 'You're growing up into a young lady--and
a very pretty young lady, too, if you'll allow an old man to say
so--and who so proper as your father's wife to bring you out, and
show you off, and take you to balls, and that kind of thing? I
always said this match that is going to come off to-day was the most
suitable thing I ever knew; and it's even a better thing for you
than for the people themselves.'

'Poor child!' said Lady Harriet, who had caught a sight of Molly's
troubled face, 'the thought of balls is too much for her just now;
but you'll like having Cynthia Kirkpatrick for a companion, shan't
you, dear?'

'Very much,' said Molly, cheering up a little. 'Do you know her?'

'Oh, I've seen her over and over again when she was a little girl,
and once or twice since. She's the prettiest creature that you ever
saw; and with eyes that mean mischief, if I'm not mistaken. But
Clare kept her spirit under pretty well when she was staying with
us,--afraid of her being troublesome, I fancy.'

Before Molly could shape her next question, they were at the church;
and she and Lady Harriet went into a pew near the door to wait for
the bride, in whose train they were to proceed to the altar. The
earl drove on alone to fetch her from her own house, not a quarter
of a mile distant. It was pleasant to her to be led to the hymeneal
altar by a belted earl, and pleasant to have his daughter as a
volunteered bridesmaid. Mrs. Kirkpatrick in this flush of small
gratifications, and on the brink of matrimony with a man whom she
liked, and who would be bound to support her without any exertion of
her own, looked beamingly happy and handsome. A little cloud came
over her face at the sight of Mr. Preston,--the sweet perpetuity of
her smile was rather disturbed as he followed in Mr. Gibson's wake.
But his face never changed; he bowed to her gravely, and then seemed
absorbed in the service. Ten minutes, and all was over. The bride
and bridegroom were driving together to the Manor-house, Mr. Preston
was walking thither by a short cut, and Molly was again in the
carriage with my lord, rubbing his hands and chuckling, and Lady
Harriet, trying to be kind and consolatory, when her silence would
have been the best comfort.

Molly found out, to her dismay, that the plan was for her to return
with Lord Cumnor and Lady Harriet when they went back to the Towers
in the evening. In the meantime Lord Cumnor had business to do with
Mr. Preston, and after the happy couple had driven off on their
week's holiday tour, she was to be left alone with the formidable
Lady Harriet. When they were by themselves after all the others had
been thus disposed of, Lady Harriet sate still over the drawing-room
fire, holding a screen' between it and her face, but gazing intently
at Molly for a minute or two. Molly was fully conscious of this
prolonged look, and was trying to get up her courage to return the
stare, when Lady Harriet suddenly said,--

'I like you;--you are a little wild creature, and I want to tame
you. Come here, and sit on this stool by me. What is your name? or
what do they call you?--as North-country people would express it.'

'Molly Gibson. My real name is Mary.'

'Molly is a nice, soft-sounding name. People in the last century
weren't afraid of homely names; now we are all so smart and fine: no
more "Lady Bettys" now. I almost wonder they haven't re-christened
all the worsted and knitting-cotton that bears her name. Fancy Lady
Constantia's cotton, or Lady Anna-Maria's worsted.'

'I didn't know there was a Lady Betty's cotton,' said Molly.

'That proves you don't do fancy-work! You'll find Clare will set you
to it, though. She used to set me at piece after piece: knights
kneeling to ladies; impossible flowers. But I must do her the
justice to add that when I got tired of them she finished them
herself. I wonder how you'll get on together?'

'So do I!' sighed out Molly, under her breath.

'I used to think I managed her, till one day an uncomfortable
suspicion arose that all the time she had been managing me. Still
it's easy work to let oneself be managed; at any rate till one
wakens up to the consciousness of the process, and then it may
become amusing, if one takes it in that light.'

'I should hate to be managed,' said Molly, indignantly. 'I'll try
and do what she wishes for papa's sake, if she'll only tell me
outright; but I should dislike to be trapped into anything.'

'Now I,' said Lady Harriet, 'am too lazy to avoid traps; and I
rather like to remark the cleverness with which they're set. But
then of course I know that, if I choose to exert myself, I can break
through the withes of green flax with which they try to bind me.
Now, perhaps, you won't be able.'

'I don't quite understand what you mean,' said Molly.

'Oh, well--never mind; I daresay it's as well for you that you
shouldn't. The moral of all I have been saying is, "Be a good girl,
and suffer yourself to be led, and you'll find your new stepmother
the sweetest creature imaginable." You'll get on capitally with her,
I make no doubt. How you'll get on with her daughter is another
affair; but I daresay very well. Now we'll ring for tea; for I
suppose that heavy breakfast is to stand for our lunch.'

Mr. Preston came into the room just at this time, and Molly was a
little surprised at Lady Harriet's cool manner of dismissing him,
remembering as she did how Mr. Preston had implied his intimacy with
her ladyship the evening before at dinner-time.

'I cannot bear that sort of person,' said Lady Harriet, almost
before he was out of hearing; 'giving himself airs of gallantry
towards one to whom his simple respect is all his duty. I can talk
to one of my father's labourers with pleasure, while with a man like
that underbred fop I am all over thorns and nettles. What is it the
Irish call that style of creature? They've got some capital word for
it, I know. What is it?'

'I don't know--I never heard it,' said Molly, a little ashamed of
her ignorance.

'Oh! that shows you've never read Miss Edgeworth's tales;--now, have
you? If you had, you'd have recollected that there was such a word,
even if you didn't remember what it was. If you've never read those
stories, they would be just the thing to beguile your
solitude--vastly improving and moral, and yet quite sufficiently
interesting. I'll lend them to you while you're all alone.'

'I'm not alone. I'm not at home, but on a visit to the Miss
Brownings.'

'Then I'll bring them to you. I know the Miss Brownings; they used
to come regularly on the school-day to the Towers. Pecksy and Flapsy
I used to call them. I like the Miss Brownings; one gets enough of
respect from them at any rate; and I've always wanted to see the
kind of ~menage~ of such people. I'll bring you a whole pile of
Miss Edgeworth's stories, my dear.'

Molly sate quite silent for a minute or two; then she mustered up
courage to speak out what was in her mind.

'Your ladyship' (the title was the firstfruits of the lesson, as
Molly took it, on paying due respect)--'your ladyship keeps speaking
of the sort of--the class of people to which I belong as if it was a
kind of strange animal you were talking about; yet you talk so
openly to me that--'

'Well, go on--I like to hear you.'

Still silence.

'You think me in your heart a little impertinent--now, don't you?'
said Lady Harriet, almost kindly.

Molly held her peace for two or three moments; then she lifted her
beautiful, honest eyes to Lady Harriet's face, and said,--

'Yes!--a little. But I think you a great many other things.'

'We'll leave the "other things" for the present. Don't you see,
little one, I talked after my kind, just as you talk after your
kind. It's only on the surface with both of us. Why, I daresay some
of your good Hollingford ladies talk of the poor people in a manner
which they would consider as impertinent in their turn, if they
could hear it. But I ought to be more considerate when I remember
how often my blood has boiled at the modes of speech and behaviour
of one of my aunts, mamma's sister, Lady--No! I won't name names.
Any one who earns his livelihood by an exercise of head or hands,
from professional people and rich merchants down to labourers, she
calls "persons." She would never in her most slip-slop talk accord
them even the conventional title of "gentlemen;" and the way in
which she takes possession of human beings, "my woman," "my
people,"--but, after all, it is only a way of speaking. I ought not
to have used it to you; but somehow I separate you from all these
Hollingford people.'

'But why?' persevered Molly. 'I'm one of them.'

'Yes, you I are. But--now don't reprove me again for
impertinence--most of them are so unnatural in their exaggerated
respect and admiration when they come up to the Towers, and put on
so much pretence by way of fine manners, that they only make
themselves objects of ridicule. You at least are simple and
truthful, and that's why I separate you in my own mind from them,
and have talked unconsciously to you as I would--Well! now here's
another piece of impertinence--as I would to my equal--in rank, I
mean; for I don't set myself up in solid things as any better than
my neighbours. Here's tea, however, come in time to stop me from
growing too humble.'

It was a very pleasant little tea in the fading September twilight.
just as it was ended, in came Mr. Preston again.

'Lady Harriet, will you allow me the pleasure of showing you some
alterations I have made in the flower-garden--in which I have tried
to consult your taste--before it grows dark?'

'Thank you, Mr. Preston. I will ride over with papa some day, and we
will see if we approve of them.'

Mr. Preston's brow flushed. But he affected not to perceive Lady
Harriet's haughtiness, and, turning to Molly, he said,--

'Will not you come out, Miss Gibson, and see something of the
gardens? You haven't been out at all, I think, excepting to church.'

Molly did not like the idea of going out for a ~tete-a-tete~
walk with Mr. Preston; yet she pined for a little fresh air, would
have liked to have seen the gardens, and have looked at the
Manor-house from different aspects; and, besides this, much as
she recoiled from Mr. Preston, she felt sorry for him under the
repulse he had just received. While she was hesitating, and
slowly tending towards consent, Lady Harriet spoke,--

'I cannot spare Miss Gibson. If she would like to see the place, I
will bring her over some day myself.'

When he had left the room, Lady Harriet said,--

'I daresay it's my own lazy selfishness has kept you indoors all day
against your will. But, at any rate, you are not to go out walking
with that man. I've an instinctive aversion to him; not entirely
instinctive either; it has some foundation in fact; and I desire you
don't allow him ever to get intimate with you. He's a very clever
land-agent, and does his duty by papa, and I don't choose to be
taken up for libel; but remember what I say!'

Then the carriage came round, and after numberless last words from
the earl--who appeared to have put off every possible direction to
the moment when he stood, like an awkward Mercury, balancing himself
on the step of the carriage--they drove back to the Towers.

'Would you rather come in and dine with us--we should send you home,
of course--or go home straight?' asked Lady Harriet of Molly. She
and her father had both been sleeping till they drew up at the
bottom of the flight of steps.

'Tell the truth, now and evermore. Truth is generally amusing, if
it's nothing else!'

'I would rather go back to Miss Brownings' at once, please,' said
Molly, with a nightmare-like recollection of the last, the only
evening she had spent at the Towers.

Lord Cumnor was standing on the steps, waiting to hand his daughter
out of the carriage. Lady Harriet stopped to kiss Molly on the
forehead, and to say,--

'I shall come some day soon, and bring you a load of Miss
Edgeworth's tales, and make further acquaintance with Pecksy and
Flapsy.'

'No, don't, please,' said Molly, taking hold of her, to detain her.
'You must not come--indeed you must not.'

'Why not?'

'Because I would rather not--because I think that I ought not to
have any one coming to see me who laughs at the friends I am staying
with, and calls them names.' Molly's heart beat very fast, but she
meant every word that she said.

'My dear little woman!' said Lady Harriet, bending over her and
speaking quite gravely. 'I'm very sorry to have called them
names--very, very sorry to have hurt you. If I promise you to be
respectful to them in word and deed--and in very thought, if I
can--you'll let me then, won't you?'

Molly hesitated. 'I'd better go home at once; I shall only say wrong
things--and there's Lord Cumnor waiting all this time.'

'Let him alone; he's very well amused hearing all the news of the
day from Brown. Then I shall come--under promise?'

So Molly drove off in solitary grandeur; and Miss Brownings' knocker
was loosened on its venerable hinges by the never-ending peal of
Lord Cumnor's footman.

They were full of welcome, full of curiosity. All through the long
day they had been missing their bright young visitor, and three or
four times in every hour they had been wondering and settling what
everybody was doing at that exact minute. What had become of Molly
during all the afternoon, had been a great perplexity to them; and
they were very much oppressed with a sense of the great honour she
had received in being allowed to spend so many hours ~tete-a-tete~
with Lady Harriet. They were, indeed, more excited by this one fact
than by all the details of the wedding, most of which they had
known of beforehand, and talked over with much perseverance
during the day. Molly began to feel as if there was some foundation
for Lady Harriet's inclination to ridicule the worship paid by the
good people of Hollingford to their liege lords, and to wonder with
what tokens of reverence they would receive Lady Harriet if she
came to pay her promised visit. She had never thought of concealing
the probability of this call until this evening; but now she felt
as if it would be better not to speak of the chance, as she was
not at all sure if the promise would be fulfilled.

Before Lady Harriet's call was paid, Molly received another visit.
Roger Hamley came riding over one day with a note from his mother,
and a wasps'-nest as a present from himself. Molly heard his
powerful voice come sounding up the little staircase, as he asked if
Miss Gibson was at home from the servant-maid at the door; and she
was half amused and half annoyed as she thought how this call of his
would give colour to Miss Browning's fancies. 'I would rather never
be married at all,' thought she, 'than marry an ugly man,--and dear
good Mr. Roger is really ugly; I don't think one could even call him
plain.' Yet the Miss Brownings, who did not look upon young men as
if their natural costume was a helmet and a suit of armour, thought
Mr. Roger Hamley a very personable young fellow, as he came into the
room, his face flushed with exercise, his white teeth showing
pleasantly in the courteous bow and smile he gave to all around. He
knew the Miss Brownings slightly, and talked pleasantly to them
while Molly read Mrs. Hamley's little missive of sympathy and good
wishes relating to the wedding; then he turned to her, and though
the Miss Brownings listened with all their ears, they could not find
out anything remarkable either in the words he said or the tone in
which they were spoken.

'I've brought you the wasps'-nest I promised you, Miss Gibson. There
has been no lack of such things this year; we've taken seventy-four
on my father's land alone; and one of the labourers, a poor fellow
who ekes out his wages by bee-keeping, has had a sad misfortune--the
wasps have turned the bees out of his seven hives, taken possession,
and eaten up the honey.'

'What greedy little vermin!' said Miss Browning.

Molly saw Roger's eyes twinkle at the misapplication of the word;'
but though he had a strong sense of humour, it never appeared to
diminish his respect for the people who amused him.

'I'm sure they deserve fire and brimstone more than the poor dear
innocent bees,' said Miss Phoebe. 'And then it seems so ungrateful
of mankind, who are going to feast on the honey!' She sighed over
the thought, as if it was too much for her.

While Molly finished reading her note, he explained its contents to
Miss Browning.

'My brother and I are going with my father to an agricultural
meeting at Canonbury on Thursday, and my mother desired me to say to
you how very much obliged to you she should be if you would spare
her Miss Gibson for the day. She was very anxious to ask for the
pleasure of your company, too, but she really is so poorly that we
persuaded her to be content with Miss Gibson, as she wouldn't
scruple leaving a young lady to amuse herself, which she would be
unwilling to do if you and your sister were there.'

'I'm sure she's very kind; very. Nothing would have given us more
pleasure,' said Miss Browning, drawing herself up in gratified
dignity. 'Oh, yes, we quite understand, Mr. Roger; and we fully
recognize Mrs. Hamley's kind intention. We will take the will for the
deed, as the common people express it. I believe that there was an
intermarriage between the Brownings and the Hamleys, a generation or
two ago.'

'I daresay there was,' said Roger. 'My mother is very delicate, and
obliged to humour her health, which has made her keep aloof from
society.'

'Then I may go?' said Molly, sparkling with the idea of seeing her
dear Mrs. Hamley again, yet afraid of appearing too desirous of
leaving her kind old friends.

'To be sure, my dear. Write a pretty note, and tell Mrs. Hamley how
much obliged to her we are for thinking of us.'

'I'm afraid I can't wait for a note,' said Roger. 'I must take a
message instead, for I have to meet my father at one o'clock, and
it's close upon it now.'

When he was gone, Molly felt so light-hearted at the thoughts of
Thursday that she could hardly attend to what the Miss Brownings
were saying. One was talking about the pretty muslin gown which
Molly had sent to the wash only that morning, and contriving how it
could be had back again in time for Molly to wear; and the other,
Miss Phoebe, totally inattentive to her sister's speaking for a
wonder, was piping out a separate strain of her own, and singing
Roger Hamley's praises.

'Such a fine-looking young man, and so courteous and affable. Like
the young men of our youth now, is he not, sister? And yet they all
say Mr. Osborne is the handsomest. What do you think, child?'

'I've never seen Mr. Osborne,' said Molly, blushing, and hating
herself for doing so. Why was it? She had never seen him as she
said. It was only that her fancy had dwelt on him so much.

He was gone; all the gentlemen were gone before the carriage, which
came to fetch Molly on Thursday, reached Hamley Hall. But Molly was
almost glad, she was so much afraid of being disappointed. Besides,
she had her dear Mrs. Hamley the more to herself; the quiet sit in
the morning-room, talking poetry and romance; the mid-day saunter
into the garden, brilliant with autumnal flowers and glittering
dew-drops on the gossamer webs that stretched from scarlet to blue,
and thence to purple and yellow petals. As they were sitting at
lunch, a strange man's voice and step were heard in the hall; the
door was opened, and a young man came in, who could be no other than
Osborne. He was beautiful and languid-looking, almost as frail in
appearance as his mother, whom he strongly resembled. This seeming
delicacy made him appear older than he was. He was dressed to
perfection, and yet with easy carelessness. He came up to his
mother, and stood by her, holding her hand, while his eyes sought
Molly, not boldly or impertinently, but as if appraising her
critically.

'Yes! I'm back again. Bullocks, I find, are not in my line. I only
disappointed my father in not being able to appreciate their merits,
and, I'm afraid, I didn't care to learn. And the smell was
insufferable on such a hot day.'

'My dear boy, don't make apologies to me; keep them for your father.
I'm only too glad to have you back. Miss Gibson, this tall fellow is
my son Osborne, as I daresay you have guessed. Osborne--Miss Gibson.
Now, what will you have?'

He looked round the table as he sate down. 'Nothing here,' said he.
'Is there not some cold game-pie? I'll ring for that.'

Molly was trying to reconcile the ideal with the real. The ideal was
agile, yet powerful, with Greek features and an eagle-eye, capable
of enduring long fasting, and indifferent as to what he ate. The
real was almost effeminate in movement, though not in figure; he had
the Greek features, but his blue eyes had a cold, weary expression
in them. He was dainty in eating, and had anything but a Homeric
appetite. However, Molly's hero was not to eat more than Ivanhoe,
when he was Friar Tuck's guest;' and, after all, with a little
alteration, she began to think Mr. Osborne Hamley might turn out a
poetical, if not a chivalrous hero. He was extremely attentive to
his mother, which pleased Molly, and, in return, Mrs. Hamley seemed
charmed with him to such a degree that Molly once or twice fancied
that mother and son would have been happier in her absence. Yet,
again, it struck on the shrewd, if simple girl, that Osborne was
mentally squinting at her in the conversation which was directed to
his mother. There were little turns and '~fioriture~' of speech
which Molly could not help feeling were graceful antics of language
not common in the simple daily intercourse between mother and son.
But it was flattering rather than otherwise to perceive that a very
fine young man, who was a poet to boot, should think it worth while
to talk on the tight rope for her benefit. And before the afternoon
was ended, without there having been any direct conversation between
Osborne and Molly, she had reinstated him on his throne in her
imagination; indeed, she had almost felt herself disloyal to her
dear Mrs. Hamley when, in the first hour after her introduction, she
had questioned his claims on his mother's idolatry. His beauty came
out more and more, as he became animated in some discussion with
her; and all his attitudes, if a little studied, were graceful in
the extreme. Before Molly left, the squire and Roger returned from
Canonbury.

'Osborne here!' said the squire, red and panting. 'Why the deuce
couldn't you tell us you were coming home? I looked about for you
everywhere, just as we were going into the ordinary. I wanted to
introduce you to Grantley, and Fox, and Lord Forrest-men from the
other side of the county, whom you ought to know; and Roger there
missed above half his dinner hunting about for you; and all the time
you'd stole away, and were quietly sitting here with the women. I
wish you'd let me know the next time you make off. I've lost half my
pleasure in looking at as fine a lot of cattle as I ever saw, with
thinking you might be having one of your old attacks of faintness.'

'I should have had one, I think, if I'd stayed longer in that
atmosphere. But I'm sorry if I've caused you anxiety.'

'Well! well!' said the squire, somewhat mollified. 'And Roger,
too,--there I've been sending him here and sending him there all the
afternoon.'

'I didn't mind it, sir. I was only sorry you were so uneasy. I
thought Osborne had gone home, for I knew it wasn't much in his
way,' said Roger.

Molly intercepted a glance between the two brothers--a look of true
confidence and love, which suddenly made her like them both under
the aspect of relationship--new to her observation.

Roger came up to her, and sate down by her.

'Well, and how are you getting on with Huber; don't you find him
very interesting?'

'I'm afraid,' said Molly, penitently, 'I haven't read much. The Miss
Brownings like me to talk; and, besides, there is so much to do at
home before papa comes back; and Miss Browning doesn't like me to go
without her. I know it sounds nothing, but it does take up a great
deal of time.'

'When is your father coming back?'

'Next Tuesday, I believe. He cannot stay long away.'

'I shall ride over and pay my respects to Mrs. Gibson,' said he. 'I
shall come as soon as I may. Your father has been a very kind friend
to me ever since I was a boy. And when I come, I shall expect my
pupil to have been very diligent,' he concluded, smiling his kind,
pleasant smile at idle Molly.

Then the carriage came round, and she had the long solitary drive
back to Miss Brownings'. It was dark out of doors when she got
there; but Miss Phoebe was standing on the stairs, with a lighted
candle in her hand, peering into the darkness to see Molly come in.

'Oh, Molly! I thought you'd never come back. Such a piece of news!
Sister has gone to bed; she's had a headache--with the excitement, I
think; but she says it's new bread. Come upstairs softly, my dear,
and I'll tell you what it is! Who do you think has been
here,--drinking tea with us, too, in the most condescending manner?'

'Lady Harriet?' said Molly, suddenly enlightened by the word
'condescending.'

'Yes. Why, how did you guess it? But, after all, her call, at any
rate in the first instance, was upon you. Oh dear, Molly! if you're
not in a hurry to go to bed, let me sit down quietly and tell you
all about it; for my heart jumps into my mouth still when I think of
how I was caught. She--that is, her ladyship--left the carriage at
the "George," and took to her feet to go shopping--just as you or I
may have done many a time in our lives. And sister was taking her
forty winks; and I was sitting with my gown up above my knees and my
feet on the fender, pulling out my grandmother's lace which I'd been
washing. The worst has yet to be told. I'd taken off my cap, for I
thought it was getting dusk and no one would come, and there was I
in my black silk skull-cap, when Nancy put her head in, and
whispered, "There's a lady downstairs--a real grand one, by her
talk;" and in there came my Lady Harriet, so sweet and pretty in her
ways, it was some time before I remembered I had never a cap on.
Sister never wakened; or never roused up, so to say. She says she
thought it was Nancy bringing in the tea when she heard some one
moving; for her ladyship, as soon as she saw the state of the case,
came and knelt down on the rug by me, and begged my pardon so
prettily for having followed Nancy upstairs without waiting for
permission; and was so taken by my old lace, and wanted to know how
I washed it, and where you were, and when you'd be back, and when
the happy couple would be back: till sister wakened--she's always a
little bit put out, you know, when she first wakens from her
afternoon nap,--and, without turning her head to see who it was, she
said, quite sharp,--

"Buzz, buzz, buzz! When will you learn that whispering is more
fidgeting than talking out loud? I've not been able to sleep at all
for the chatter you and Nancy have been keeping up all this time.
You know that was a little fancy of sister's, for she'd been snoring
away as naturally as could be."

So I went to her, and leant over her, and said, in a low voice,--

'Sister, it's her ladyship and me that has been conversing.'

'"Ladyship here, ladyship there! have you lost your wits, Phoebe,
that you talk such nonsense--and in your skull-cap, too!"'

By this time she was sitting up, and, looking round her, she saw
Lady Harriet, in her velvets and silks, sitting on our rug, smiling,
her bonnet off, and her pretty hair all bright with the blaze of the
fire. My word! Sister was up on her feet directly; and she dropped
her curtsey, and made her excuses for sleeping, as fast as might be,
while I went off to put on my best cap, for sister might well say I
was out of my wits to go on chatting to an earl's daughter in an old
black silk skull-cap. Black silk, too! when, if I'd only known she
was coming, I might have put on my new brown silk one, lying idle in
my top drawer. And when I came back, sister was ordering tea for her
ladyship,--our tea, I mean. So I took my turn at talk, and sister
slipped out to put on her Sunday silk. But I don't think we were
quite so much at our case with her ladyship as when I sate pulling
out my lace in my skull-cap. And she was quite struck with our tea,
and asked where we got it, for she had never tasted any like it
before; and I told her we gave only 3~s~. 4~d~. a pound for it, at
Johnson's--(sister says I ought to have told her the price of our
company-tea, which is 5~s~. a pound, only that was not what we were
drinking; for, as ill-luck would have it, we'd none of it in the
house)--and she said she would send us some of hers, all the way
from Russia or Prussia, or some out-of-the-way place, and we were to
compare and see which we liked best; and if we liked hers best, she
could get it for us at 3~s~. a pound. And she left her love for you;
and, though she was going away, you were not to forget her. Sister
thought such a message would set you up too much, and told me she
would not be chargeable for the giving it you. "But," I said, "a
message is a message, and it's on Molly's own shoulders if she's set
up by it. Let us show her an example of humility, sister, though we
have been sitting cheek-by-jowl in such company." So sister humphed,
and said she'd a headache, and went to bed. And now you may tell me
your news, my dear.'

So Molly told her small events; which, interesting as they might
have been at other times to the gossip-loving and sympathetic Miss
Phoebe, were rather pale in the stronger light reflected from the
visit of an earl's daughter.


CHAPTER XV


THE NEW MAMMA


On Tuesday afternoon Molly returned home, to the home which was
already strange, and what Warwickshire people would call 'unked,' to
her. New paint, new paper, new colours; grim servants dressed in
their best, and objecting to every change--from their master's
marriage to the new oilcloth in the hall, 'which tripped 'em up, and
threw 'em down, and was cold to the feet, and smelt just
abominable.' All these complaints Molly had to listen to, and it was
not a cheerful preparation for the reception which she already felt
to be so formidable.

The sound of their carriage-wheels was heard at last, and Molly went
to the front door to meet them. Her father got out first, and took
her hand and held it while he helped his bride to alight. Then he
kissed her fondly, and passed her on to his wife; but her veil was
so securely (and becomingly) fastened down, that it was some time
before Mrs. Gibson could get her lips clear to greet her new
daughter. Then there was luggage to be seen about; and both the
travellers were occupied in this, while Molly stood by, trembling
with excitement, unable to help, and only conscious of Betty's
rather cross looks, as heavy box after heavy box jammed up the
passage.

'Molly, my dear, show--your mamma to her room!'

Mr. Gibson had hesitated, because the question of the name by which
Molly was to call her new relation had never occurred to him before.
The colour flashed into Molly's face. Was she to call her
'mamma'?--the name long appropriated in her mind to some one else--
to her own dead mother. The rebellious heart rose against it, but
she said nothing. She led the way upstairs, Mrs. Gibson turning
round, from time to time, with some fresh direction as to which bag
or trunk she needed most. She hardly spoke to Molly till they were
both in the newly-furnished bedroom, where a small fire had been
lighted by Molly's orders.

'Now, my love, we can embrace each other in peace. Oh dear, how
tired I am!'--(after the embrace had been accomplished.) 'My spirits
are so easily affected with fatigue; but your dear papa has been
kindness itself. Dear! what an old-fashioned bed! And what a--But it
doesn't signify. By-and-by we'll renovate the house--won't we, my
dear? And you'll be my little maid to-night, and help me to arrange
a few things, for I'm just worn out with the day's journey.'

'I've ordered a sort of tea-dinner to be ready for you,' said Molly.
'Shall I go and tell them to send it in?'

'I'm not sure if I can go down again to-night. It would be very
comfortable to have a little table brought in here, and sit in my
dressing-gown by this cheerful fire. But, to be sure, there's your
dear papa? I really don't think he would eat anything if I were not
there. One must not think about oneself, you know. Yes, I'll come
down in a quarter of an hour.'

But Mr. Gibson had found a note awaiting him, with an immediate
summons to an old patient, dangerously ill; and, snatching a
mouthful of food while his horse was being saddled, he had to resume
at once his old habits of attention to his profession above
everything.

As soon as Mrs. Gibson found that he was not likely to miss her
presence--he had eaten a very tolerable lunch of bread and cold meat
in solitude, so her fears about his appetite in her absence were not
well founded--she desired to have her meal upstairs in her own room;
and poor Molly, not daring to tell the servants of this whim, had to
carry up first a table, which, however small, was too heavy for her;
and afterwards all the choice portions of the meal, which she had
taken great pains to arrange on the table, as she had seen such
things done at Hamley, intermixed with fruit and flowers that had
that morning been sent in from various great houses where Mr. Gibson
was respected and valued. How pretty Molly had thought her handiwork
an hour or two before! How dreary it seemed as, at last released
from Mrs. Gibson's conversation, she sate down in solitude to cold
tea and the drumsticks of the chicken! No one to look at her
preparations, and admire her left-handedness and taste! She had
thought that her father would be gratified by it, and then he had
never seen it. She had meant her cares as an offering of good-will
to her stepmother, who even now was ringing her bell to have the
tray taken away, and Miss Gibson summoned to her bedroom,

Molly hastily finished her meal, and went upstairs again.

'I feel so lonely, darling, in this strange house; do come and be
with me, and help me to unpack. I think your dear papa might have
put off his visit to Mr. Craven Smith for just this one evening.'

'Mr. Craven Smith couldn't put off his dying,' said Molly, bluntly.

'You droll girl!' said Mrs. Gibson, with a faint laugh. 'But if this
Mr. Smith is dying, as you say, what's the use of your father's going
off to him in such a hurry? Does he expect any legacy, or anything
of that kind?'

Molly bit her lips to prevent herself from saying something
disagreeable. She only answered,--

'I don't quite know that he is dying. The man said so; and papa can
sometimes do something to make the last struggle easier. At any
rate, it's always a comfort to the family to have him.'

'What dreary knowledge of death you have learned for a girl of your
age! Really, if I had heard all these details of your father's
profession, I doubt if I could have brought myself to have him!'

'He doesn't make the illness or the death; he does his best against
them. I call it a very fine thing to think of what he does or tries
to do. And you will think so, too, when you see how he is watched
for, and how people welcome him!'

'Well, don't let us talk any more of such gloomy things to-night! I
think I shall go to bed at once, I am so tired, if you will only sit
by me till I get sleepy, darling. If you will talk to me, the sound
of your voice will soon send me off.'

Molly got a book, and read her stepmother to sleep, preferring that
to the harder task of keeping up a continual murmur of speech.

Then she stole down and went into the dining-room, where the fire
was gone out; purposely neglected by the servants, to mark their
displeasure at their new mistress's having had her tea in her own
room. Molly managed to light it, however, before her father came
home, and collected and rearranged some comfortable food for him.
Then she knelt down again on the hearth-rug, gazing into the fire in
a dreamy reverie, which had enough of sadness about it to cause the
tears to drop unnoticed from her eyes. But she jumped up, and shook
herself into brightness at the sound of her father's step.

'How is Mr. Craven Smith?' said she.

'Dead. He just recognized me. He was one of my first patients on
coming to Hollingford.'

Mr. Gibson sate down in the arm-chair made ready for him, and warmed
his hands at the fire, seeming neither to need food nor talk, as he
went over a train of recollections. Then he roused himself from his
sadness, and looking round the room, he said briskly enough,--

'And where's the new mamma?'

'She was tired, and went to bed early. Oh, papa! must I call her
"mamma"?'

'I should like it,' replied he, with a slight contraction of the
brows.

Molly was silent. She put a cup or tea near him; he stirred it, and
sipped it, and then he recurred to the subject.

'Why shouldn't you call her "mamma"? I'm sure she means to do the
duty of a mother to you. We all may make mistakes, and her ways may
not be quite all at once our ways; but at any rate let us start with
a family bond between us.'

What would Roger say was right?--that was the question that rose to
Molly's mind. She had always spoken of her father's new wife as Mrs
Gibson, and had once burst out at Miss Brownings' with a
protestation that she never would call her 'mamma.' She did not feel
drawn to her new relation by their intercourse that evening. She
kept silence, though she knew her father was expecting an answer. At
last he gave up his expectation, and turned to another subject; told
about their journey, questioned her as to the Hamleys, the
Brownings, Lady Harriet, and the afternoon they had passed together
at the Manor House. But there was a certain hardness and constraint
in his manner, and in hers a heaviness and absence of mind. All at
once she said,--

'Papa, I will call her "mamma"!'

He took her hand, and grasped it tight; but for an instant or two he
did not speak. Then he said,--

'You won't be sorry for it, Molly, when you come to lie as poor
Craven Smith did to-night.'

For some time the murmurs and grumblings of the two elder servants
were confined to Molly's ears, then they spread to her father's,
who, to Molly's dismay, made summary work with them.

'You don't like Mrs. Gibson's ringing her bell so often, don't you?
You've been spoilt, I'm afraid; but if you don't conform to my
wife's desires, you have the remedy in your own hands, you know.'

What servant ever resisted the temptation to give warning after such
a speech as that? Betty told Molly she was going to leave, in as
indifferent a manner as she could possibly assume towards the girl,
whom she had tended and been about for the last sixteen years. Molly
had hitherto considered her former nurse as a fixture in the house;
she would almost as soon have thought of her father's proposing to
sever the relationship between them; and here was Betty coolly
talking over whether her next place should be in town or country.
But a great deal of this was assumed hardness. In a week or two
Betty was in floods of tears at the prospect of leaving her
nursling, and would fain have stayed and answered all the bells in
the house once every quarter of an hour. Even Mr. Gibson's masculine
heart was touched by the sorrow of the old servant, which made
itself obvious to him every time he came across her by her broken
voice and her swollen eyes.

One day he said to Molly, 'I wish you'd ask your mamma if Betty
might not stay, if she made a proper apology, and all that sort of
thing.'

'I don't much think it will be of any use,' said Molly, in a
mournful voice. 'I know she is writing, or has written, about some
under-housemaid at the Towers.'

'Well!--all I want is peace and a decent quantity of cheerfulness
when I come home. I see enough of tears in other people's houses.
After all, Betty has been with us sixteen years--a sort of service
of the antique world. But the woman may be happier elsewhere. Do as
you like about asking mamma; only if she agrees, I shall be quite
willing.'

So Molly tried her hand at making a request to that effect to Mrs
Gibson. Her instinct told her she should be unsuccessful; but surely
favour was never refused in so soft a tone.

'My dear girl, I should never have thought of sending an old servant
away,--one who has had the charge of you from your birth, or nearly
so. I could not have had the heart to do it. She might have stayed
for ever for me, if she had only attended to all my wishes; and I am
not unreasonable, am I? But, you see, she complained; and when your
dear papa spoke to her, she gave warning; and it is quite against my
principles ever to take an apology from a servant who has given
warning.'

'She is so sorry,' pleaded Molly; 'she says she will do anything you
wish, and attend to all your orders, if she may only stay.'

'But, sweet one, you seem to forget that I cannot go against my
principles, however much I may be sorry for Betty. She should not
have given way to ill-temper. As I said before, although I never
liked her, and considered her a most inefficient servant, thoroughly
spoilt by having had no mistress for so long, I should have borne
with her--at least, I think I should--as long as I could. Now I
have all but engaged Maria, who was under-housemaid at the Towers,
so don't let me hear any more of Betty's sorrow, or anybody else's
sorrow, for I'm sure, what with your dear papa's sad stories and
other things, I'm getting quite low.'

Molly was silent for a moment or two.

'Have you quite engaged Maria?' asked she.

'No--I said "all but engaged." Sometimes one would think you did not
hear things, dear Molly!' replied Mrs. Gibson, petulantly. 'Maria is
living in a place where they don't give her as much wages as she
deserves. Perhaps they can't afford it, poor things! I'm always
sorry for poverty, and would never speak hardly of those who are not
rich; but I have offered her two pounds more than she gets at
present, so I think she'll leave. At any rate, if they increase her
wages, I shall increase my offer in proportion; so I think I'm sure
to get her. Such a genteel girl!--always brings in a letter on a
salver!'

'Poor Betty!' said Molly, softly.

'Poor old soul! I hope she'll profit by the lesson, I'm sure,'
sighed out Mrs. Gibson; 'but it's a pity we hadn't Maria before the
county families began to call.'

Mrs. Gibson had been highly gratified by the circumstances of so many
calls 'from county families.' Her husband was much respected; and
many ladies from various halls, courts, and houses, who had profited
by his services towards themselves and their families, thought it
right to pay his new wife the attention of a call when they drove
into Hollingford to shop. The state of expectation into which these
calls threw Mrs. Gibson rather diminished Mr. Gibson's domestic
comfort. It was awkward to be carrying hot, savoury-smelling dishes
from the kitchen to the dining-room at the very time when high-born
ladies, with noses of aristocratic refinement, might be calling.
Still more awkward was the accident which happened in consequence of
clumsy Betty's haste to open the front door to a lofty footman's
ran-tan, which caused her to set down the basket containing the
dirty plates right in his mistress's way, as she stepped gingerly
through the comparative darkness of the hall; and then the young
men, leaving the dining-room quietly enough, but bursting with
long-repressed giggle, or no longer restraining their tendency to
practical joking, no matter who might be in the passage when they
made their exit. The remedy proposed by Mrs. Gibson for all these
distressing grievances was a late dinner. The luncheon for the young
men, as she observed to her husband, might be sent into the surgery.
A few elegant cold trifles for herself and Molly would not scent the
house, and she would always take care to have some little dainty
ready for him. He acceded, but unwillingly, for it was an innovation
on the habits of a lifetime, and he felt as if he should never be
able to arrange his rounds aright with this newfangled notion of a
six o'clock dinner.

'Don't get any dainties for me, my dear; bread and cheese is the
chief of my diet, like it was that of the old woman's.'

'I know nothing of your old woman,' replied his wife; 'but really I
cannot allow cheese to come beyond the kitchen.'

'Then I'll eat it there,' said he. 'It's close to the stable-yard,
and if I come in in a hurry I can get it in a moment.'

'Really, Mr. Gibson, it is astonishing to compare your appearance and
manners with your tastes. You look such a gentleman, as dear Lady
Cumnor used to say.'

Then the cook left; also an old servant, though not so old a one as
Betty. The cook did not like the trouble of late dinners; and, being
a Methodist, she objected on religious grounds to trying any of Mrs
Gibson's new receipts for French dishes. It was not scriptural, she
said. There was a deal of mention of food in the Bible; but it was
of sheep ready dressed, which meant mutton, and of wine, and of
bread, and milk, and figs and raisins, of fatted calves, a good
well-browned fillet of veal, and such like; but it had always gone
against her conscience to cook swine-flesh and make raised
pork-pies, and now if she was to be set to cook heathen dishes after
the fashion of the Papists, she'd sooner give it all up together. So
the cook followed in Betty's track, and Mr. Gibson had to satisfy his
healthy English appetite on badly made omelettes, rissoles,
~vol-au-vents, croquets~, and timbales; never being exactly sure
what he was eating.

He had made up his mind before his marriage to yield in trifles, and
be firm in greater things. But the differences of opinion about
trifles arose every day, and were perhaps more annoying than if they
had related to things of more consequence. Molly knew her father's
looks as well as she knew her alphabet; his wife did not; and being
an unperceptive person, except when her own interests were dependent
upon another person's humour, never found out how he was worried by
all the small daily concessions which he made to her will or her
whims. He never allowed himself to put any regret into shape, even
in his own mind; he repeatedly reminded himself of his wife's good
qualities, and comforted himself by thinking they should work
together better as time rolled on; but he was very angry at a
bachelor great-uncle of Mr. Coxe's, who, after taking no notice of
his red-headed nephew for years, suddenly sent for him, after the
old man had partially recovered from a serious attack of illness,
and appointed him his heir, on condition that his great-nephew
remained with him during the remainder of his life. This had
happened almost directly after Mr. and Mrs. Gibson's return from their
wedding journey, and once or twice since that time Mr. Gibson had
found himself wondering why the deuce old Benson could not have made
up his mind sooner, and so have rid his house of the unwelcome
presence of the young lover. To do Mr. Coxe justice, in the very last
conversation he had as a pupil with Mr. Gibson he had said, with
hesitating awkwardness, that perhaps the new circumstances in which
he should be placed might make some difference with regard to Mr
Gibson's opinion on--

'Not at all,' said Mr. Gibson, quickly. 'You are both of you too
young to know your own minds; and if my daughter was silly enough to
be in love, she should never have to calculate her happiness on the
chances of an old man's death. I dare say he'll disinherit you after
all. He may do, and then you'd be worse off than ever. No! go away,
and forget all this nonsense; and when you've done, come back and
see us!'

So Mr. Coxe went away, with an oath of unalterable faithfulness in
his heart; and Mr. Gibson had unwillingly to fulfil an old promise
made to a gentleman farmer in the neighbourhood a year or two
before, and to take the second son of Mr. Browne in young Coxe's
place. He was to be the last of the race of pupils, and as he was
rather more than a year younger than Molly, Mr. Gibson trusted that
there would be no repetition of the Coxe romance.


CHAPTER XVI


THE BRIDE AT HOME


Among the 'county people' (as Mrs. Gibson termed them) who called
upon her as a bride, were the two young Mr. Hamleys. The Squire,
their father, had done his congratulations, as far as he ever
intended to do them, to Mr. Gibson himself when he came to the hall;
but Mrs. Hamley, unable to go and pay visits herself, anxious to show
attention to her kind doctor's new wife, and with perhaps a little
sympathetic curiosity as to how Molly and her stepmother got on
together, made her sons ride over to Hollingford with her cards and
apologies. They came into the newly-furnished drawing-room, looking
bright and fresh from their ride: Osborne first, as usual,
perfectly dressed for the occasion, and with the sort of fine manner
which sate so well upon him; Roger, looking like a strong-built,
cheerful, intelligent country farmer, followed in his brother's
train. Mrs. Gibson was dressed for receiving callers, and made the
effect she always intended to produce, of a very pretty woman, no
longer in first youth, but with such soft manners and such a
caressing voice, that people forgot to wonder what her real age
might be. Molly was better dressed than formerly; her stepmother saw
after that. She disliked anything old or shabby, or out of taste
about her; it hurt her eye; and she had already fidgeted Molly into
a new amount of care about the manner in which she put on her
clothes, arranged her hair, and was gloved and shod. Mrs. Gibson had
tried to put her through a course of rosemary washes and creams in
order to improve her tanned complexion; but about that Molly was
either forgetful or rebellious, and Mrs. Gibson could not well come
up to the girl's bedroom every night and see that she daubed her
face and neck over with the cosmetics so carefully provided for her.
Still, her appearance was extremely improved, even to Osborne's
critical eye. Roger sought rather to discover in her looks and
expression whether she was happy or not; his mother had especially
charged him to note all these signs.

Osborne and Mrs. Gibson made themselves agreeable to each other
according to the approved fashion when a young man calls on a
middle-aged bride. They talked of the 'Shakespeare and musical
glasses' of the day, each viewing with the other in their knowledge
of London topics. Molly heard fragments of their conversation in the
pauses of silence between Roger and herself. Her hero was coming out
in quite a new character; no longer literary or poetical, or
romantic, or critical, he was now full of the last new play, the
singers at the opera. He had the advantage over Mrs. Gibson, who, in
fact, only spoke of these things from hearsay, from listening to the
talk at the Towers, while Osborne had run up from Cambridge two or
three times to hear this, or to see that, wonder of the season. But
she had the advantage over him in greater boldness of invention to
eke out her facts; and besides she had more skill in the choice and
arrangement of her words, so as to make it appear as if the opinions
that were in reality quotations, were formed by herself from actual
experience or personal observation; such as, in speaking of the
mannerisms of a famous Italian singer, she would ask,--

'Did you observe her constant trick of heaving her shoulders and
clasping her hands together before she took a high note?'--which was
so said as to imply that Mrs. Gibson herself had noticed this trick.
Molly, who had a pretty good idea by this time of how her stepmother
had passed the last year of her life, listened with no small
bewilderment to this conversation; but at length decided that she
must misunderstand what they were saying, as she could not gather up
the missing links for the necessity of replying to Roger's questions
and remarks. Osborne was not the same Osborne he was when with his
mother at the hall. Roger saw her glancing at his brother.

'You think my brother looking ill?' said he, lowering his voice.

'No--not exactly.'

'He is not well. Both my father and I are anxious about him. That
run on the Continent did him harm, instead of good; and his
disappointment at his examination has told upon him, I'm afraid.'

'I was not thinking he looked ill; only changed somehow.'

'He says he must go back to Cambridge soon. Possibly it may do him
good; and I shall be off next week. This is a farewell visit to you,
as well as one of congratulation to Mrs. Gibson.'

'Your mother will feel your both going away, won't she? But of
course young men will always have to live away from home.'

'Yes,' he replied. 'Still she feels it a good deal; and I am not
satisfied about her health either. You will go over and see her
sometimes, will you? she is very fond of you.'

'If I may,' said Molly, unconsciously glancing at her stepmother.
She had an uncomfortable instinct that, in spite of Mrs. Gibson's own
perpetual flow of words, she could, and did, hear everything that
fell from Molly's lips.

'Do you want any more books?' said he. 'If you do, make a list out,
and send it to my mother before I leave, next Tuesday. After I am
gone, there will be no one to go into the library and pick them
out.'

After they were gone, Mrs. Gibson began her usual comments on the
departed visitors.

'I do like that Osborne Hamley! What a nice fellow he is! Somehow, I
always do like eldest sons. He will have the estate, won't he? I
shall ask your dear papa to encourage him to come about the house.
He will be a very good, very pleasant acquaintance for you and
Cynthia. The other is but a loutish young fellow, to my mind; there
is no aristocratic bearing about him. I suppose he takes after his
mother, who is but a parvenue, I've heard them say at the Towers.'

Molly was spiteful enough to have great pleasure in saying,--

'I think I've heard her father was a Russia merchant, and imported
tallow and hemp. Mr. Osborne Hamley is extremely like her.'

'Indeed! But there's no calculating these things. Anyhow, he is the
perfect gentleman in appearance and manner. The estate is entailed,
is it not?'

'I know nothing about it,' said Molly.

A short silence ensued. Then Mrs. Gibson said,--

'Do you know, I almost think I must get dear papa to give a little
dinner-party, and ask Mr. Osborne Hamley? I should like to have him
feel at home in this house. It would be something cheerful for him
after the dulness and solitude of Hamley Hall. For the old people
don't visit much, I believe?'

'He's going back to Cambridge next week,' said Molly.

'Is he? Well, then, we'll put off our little dinner till Cynthia
comes home. I should like to have some young society for her, poor
darling, when she returns.'

'When is she coming?' said Molly, who had always a longing curiosity
for this same Cynthia's return.

'Oh! I'm not sure; perhaps at the new year--perhaps not till Easter.
I must get this drawing-room all new furnished first; and then I
mean to fit up her room and yours just alike. They are just the same
size, only on opposite sides of the passage.'

'Are you going to new-furnish that room?' said Molly, in
astonishment at the never-ending changes.

'Yes; and yours, too, darling; so don't be jealous.'

'Oh, please, mamma, not mine,' said Molly, taking in the idea for
the first time.

'Yes, dear! You shall have yours done as well. A little French bed,'
and a new paper, and a pretty carpet, and a dressed-up
~toilette~-table and glass, will make it look quite a different
place.'

'But I don't want it to look different. I like it as it is. Pray
don't do anything to it.'

'What nonsense, child! I never heard anything more ridiculous! Most
girls would be glad to get rid of furniture only fit for the
lumber-room.'

'It was my own mamma's before she was married,' said Molly, in a
very low voice; bringing out this last plea unwillingly, but with a
certainty that it would not be resisted.

Mrs. Gibson paused for a moment before she replied,--

'It's very much to your credit that you should have such feelings,
I'm sure. But don't you think sentiment may be carried too far? Why,
we should have no new furniture at all, and should have to put up
with worm-eaten horrors. Besides, my dear, Hollingford will seem
very dull to Cynthia, after pretty, gay France, and I want to make
the first impressions attractive. I've a notion I can settle her
down near here; and I want her to come in a good temper; for,
between ourselves, my dear, she is a little, leetle wilful. You need
not mention this to your papa.'

'But can't you do Cynthia's room, and not mine? Please let mine
alone.'

'No, indeed! I couldn't agree to that. Only think what would be said
of me by everybody; petting my own child, and neglecting my
husband's! I couldn't bear it.'

'No one need know.'

'In such a tittle-tattle place as Hollingford! Really, Molly, you
are either very stupid or very obstinate, or else you don't care
what hard things may be said about me: and all for a selfish fancy
of your own! No! I owe myself the justice of acting in this matter
as I please. Every one shall know I'm not a common stepmother. Every
penny I spend on Cynthia I shall spend on you too; so it's no use
talking any more about it.'

So Molly's little white dimity bed, her old-fashioned chest of
drawers, and her other cherished relics of her mother's maiden-days,
were consigned to the lumber-room; and after a while, when Cynthia
and her great French boxes had come home, the old furniture that had
filled up the space required for the fresh importation of trunks,
disappeared into the lumber-room.

All this time the family at the Towers had been absent; Lady Cumnor
had been ordered to Bath for the early part of the winter, and her
family were with her there. On dull rainy days, Mrs. Gibson used to
bethink her of missing 'the Cumnors,' for so she had taken to
calling them since her position had become more independent of
theirs. It marked a distinction between her intimacy in the family,
and the reverential manner in which the townspeople were accustomed
to speak of 'the earl and the countess.' both Lady Cumnor and Lady
Harriet wrote to their dear Clare from time to time. The former had
generally some commissions that she wished to have executed at the
Towers, or in the town; and no one could do them so well as Clare,
who was acquainted with all the tastes and ways of the countess.
These commissions were the cause of various bills for flys and cars
from the 'George' Inn. Mr. Gibson pointed out this consequence to his
wife; but she, in return, bade him remark that a present of game was
pretty sure to follow upon the satisfactory execution of Lady
Cumnor's wishes. Somehow, Mr. Gibson did not quite like this
consequence either; but he was silent about it, at any rate. Lady
Harriet's letters were short and amusing. She had that sort of
regard for her old governess which prompted her to write from time
to time, and to feel glad when the half-voluntary task was
accomplished. So there was no real outpouring of confidence, but
enough news of the family and gossip of the place she was in, as she
thought would make Clare feel that she was not forgotten by her
former pupils, intermixed with moderate but sincere expressions of
regard. How those letters were quoted and referred to by Mrs. Gibson
in her conversations with the Hollingford ladies! She had found out
their effect at Ashcombe; and it was not less at Hollingford. But
she was rather perplexed at kindly messages to Molly, and at
inquiries as to how the Miss Brownings liked the tea she had sent;
and Molly had first to explain, and then to narrate at full length,
all the occurrences of the afternoon at Ashcombe Manor House, and
Lady Harriet's call upon her at Miss Brownings'.

'What nonsense!' said Mrs. Gibson, with some annoyance. 'Lady Harriet
only went to see you out of a desire of amusement. She would only
make fun of the Miss Brownings, and then they will be quoting her
and talking about her, just as if she was their intimate friend.'

'I don't think she did make fun of them. She really sounded as if
she had been very kind.'

'And you suppose you know her ways better than I do, who have known
her these fifteen years? I tell you she turns every one into
ridicule who does not belong to her set. Why, she used always to
speak of the Miss Brownings as "Pecksy and Flapsy."'

'She promised me she would not,' said Molly driven to bay.

'Promised you!--Lady Harriet? What do you mean?'

'Only--she spoke of them as Pecksy and Flapsy--and when she talked
of coming to call on me at their house, I asked her not to come if
she was going to--to make fun of them.'

'Upon my word! with all my long acquaintance with Lady Harriet I
should never have ventured on such impertinence.'

'I didn't mean it as impertinence,' said Molly, sturdily. 'And I
don't think Lady Harriet took it as such.'

'You can't know anything about it. She can put on any kind of
manner.'

Just then Squire Hamley came in. It was his first call; and Mrs
Gibson gave him a graceful welcome, and was quite ready to accept
his apology for its tardiness, and to assure him that she quite
understood the pressure of business on every landowner who farmed
his own estate. But no such apology was made. He shook her hand
heartily, as a mark of congratulation on her good fortune in having
secured such a prize as his friend Gibson, but said nothing about
his long neglect of duty. Molly, who by this time knew the few
strong expressions of his countenance well, was sure that something
was the matter, and that he was very much disturbed. He hardly
attended to Mrs. Gibson's fluent opening of conversation, for she had
already determined to make a favourable impression on the father of
the handsome young man who was heir to an estate, besides his own
personal agreeableness; but he turned to Molly, and, addressing her,
said--almost in a low voice, as if he was making a confidence to her
that he did not intend Mrs. Gibson to hear,--

'Molly, we are all wrong at home! Osborne has lost the fellowship at
Trinity he went back to try for. Then he has gone and failed
miserably in his degree, after all that he said, and that his mother
said; and I, like a fool, went and boasted about my clever son. I
can't understand it. I never expected anything extraordinary from
Roger; but Osborne--! And then it has thrown madam into one of her
bad fits of illness; and she seems to have a fancy for you, child!
Your father came to see her this morning. Poor thing, she's very
poorly, I'm afraid; and she told him how she should like to have you
about her, and he said I might fetch you. You'll come, won't you, my
dear? She's not a poor woman, such as many people think it's the
only charity to be kind to, but she's just as forlorn of woman's
care as if she was poor--worse, I dare say.'

'I'll be ready in ten minutes,' said Molly, much touched by the
squire's words and manner, never thinking of asking her stepmother's
consent, now that she had heard that her father had given his. As
she rose to leave the room, Mrs. Gibson, who had only half heard what
the squire had said, and was a little affronted at the exclusiveness
of his confidence, said,--'My dear, where are you going?'

'Mrs. Hamley wants me, and papa says I may go,' said Molly; and
almost at the same time the squire replied,--

'My wife is ill, and as she's very fond of your daughter, she begged
Mr. Gibson to allow her to come to the Hall for a little while, and
he kindly said she might, and I'm come to fetch her.'

'Stop a minute, darling,' said Mrs. Gibson to Molly--a slight cloud
over her countenance, in spite of her caressing word. 'I am sure
dear papa quite forgot that you were to go out with me to-night, to
visit people,' continued she, addressing herself to the squire,
'with whom I am quite unacquainted--and it is very uncertain if Mr
Gibson can return in time to go with me--so, you see, I cannot allow
Molly to go with you.'

'I shouldn't have thought it would have signified. Brides are always
brides, I suppose; and it's their part to be timid; but I shouldn't
have thought it--in this case. And my wife sets her heart on things,
as sick people do. Well, Molly' (in a louder tone, for these
foregoing sentences were spoken ~sotto voce~), 'we must put it off
till to-morrow: and it's our loss, not yours,' he continued, as he
saw the reluctance with which she slowly returned to her place.
'You'll be as gay as can be to-night, I dare say--'

'No, I shall not,' broke in Molly. 'I never wanted to go, and now I
shall want it less than ever.'

'Hush, my dear,' said Mrs. Gibson; and, addressing the squire, she
added, 'The visiting here is not all one could wish for so young a
girl--no young people, no dances, nothing of gaiety; but it is wrong
in you, Molly, to speak against such kind friends of your father's
as I understand these Cockerells are. Don't give so bad an
impression of yourself to the kind squire.'

'Let her alone! let her alone!' quoth he. 'I see what she means.
She'd rather come and be in my wife's sick-room than go out for this
visit to-night. Is there no way of getting her off?'

'None whatever,' said Mrs. Gibson. 'An engagement is an engagement
with me; and I consider that she is not only engaged to Mrs
Cockerell, but to me--bound to accompany me, in my husband's
absence.'

The squire was put out; and when he was put out he had a trick of
placing his hands on his knees and whistling softly to himself.
Molly knew this phase of his displeasure, and only hoped he would
confine himself to this wordless expression of annoyance. It was
pretty hard work for her to keep the tears out of her eyes; and she
endeavoured to think of something else, rather than dwell on regrets
and annoyances. She heard Mrs. Gibson talking on in a sweet monotone,
and wished to attend to what she was saying, but the squire's
visible annoyance struck sharper on her mind. At length, after a
pause of silence, he started up, and said,--

'Well! it's no use. Poor madam; she won't like it. She'll be
disappointed! But it's but for one evening!--but for one evening!
She may come to-morrow, mayn't she? Or will the dissipation of such
an evening as she describes, be too much for her?'

There was a touch of savage irony in his manner which frightened Mrs
Gibson into good behaviour.

'She shall be ready at any time you name. I am so sorry: my foolish
shyness is in fault, I believe; but still you must acknowledge that
an engagement is an engagement.'

'Did I ever say an engagement was an elephant, madam? However,
there's no use saying any more about it, or I shall forget my
manners. I'm an old tyrant, and she--lying there in bed, poor
girl--has always given me my own way. So you'll excuse me, Mrs
Gibson, won't you; and let Molly come along with me at ten to-morrow
morning?'

'Certainly,' said Mrs. Gibson, smiling. But when his back was turned,
she said to Molly,--

'Now, my dear, I must never have you exposing me to the ill-manners
of such a man again! I don't call him a squire; I call him a boor,
or a yeoman at best. You must not go on accepting or rejecting
invitations as if you were an independent young lady, Molly. Pay me
the respect of a reference to my wishes another time, if you please,
my dear!'

'Papa had said I might go,' said Molly, choking a little.

'As I am now your mamma your references must be to me, for the
future. But as you are to go you may as well look well dressed. I
will lend you my new shawl for this visit, if you like it, and my
set of green ribbons. I am always indulgent when proper respect is
paid to me. And in such a house as Hamley Hall, no one can tell who
may be coming and going, even if there is sickness in the family.'

'Thank you. But I don't want the shawl and the ribbons, please:
there will be nobody there except the family. There never is, I
think; and now that she is so ill'--Molly was on the point of crying
at the thought of her friend lying ill and lonely, and looking for
her arrival. Moreover, she was sadly afraid lest the squire had gone
off with the idea that she did not want to come--that she preferred
that stupid, stupid party at the Cockerells'. Mrs. Gibson, too, was
sorry; she had an uncomfortable consciousness of having given way to
temper before a stranger, and a stranger, too, whose good opinion
she had meant to cultivate: and she was also annoyed at Molly's
tearful face.

'What can I do for you, to bring you back into good temper?' she
said. 'First, you insist upon your knowing Lady Harriet better than
I do--I, who have known her for eighteen or nineteen years at least.
Then you jump at invitations without ever consulting me, or thinking
of how awkward it would be for me to go stumping into a drawing-room
all by myself; following my new name, too, which always makes me
feel uncomfortable, it is such a sad come-down after Kirkpatrick!
And then, when I offer you some of the prettiest things I have got,
you say it does not signify how you are dressed. What can I do to
please you, Molly? I, who delight in nothing more than peace in a
family, to see you sitting there with despair upon your face?'

Molly could stand it no longer; she went upstairs to her own
room--her own smart new room, which hardly yet seemed a familiar
place; and began to cry so heartily and for so long a time, that she
stopped at length for very weariness. She thought of Mrs. Hamley
wearying for her; of the old Hall whose very quietness might become
oppressive to an ailing person; of the trust the squire had had in
her that she would come off directly with him. And all this
oppressed her much more than the querulousness of her stepmother's
words.


CHAPTER XVII


TROUBLE AT HAMLEY HALL


If Molly thought that peace dwelt perpetually at Hamley Hall she was
sorely mistaken. Something was out of tune in the whole
establishment; and, for a very unusual thing, the common irritation
seemed to have produced a common bond. All the servants were old in
their places, and were told by some one of the family, or gathered,
from the unheeded conversation carried on before them, everything
that affected master or mistress or either of the young gentlemen.
Any one of them could have told Molly that the grievance which lay
at the root of everything, was the amount of the bills run up by
Osborne at Cambridge, and which, now that all chance of his
obtaining a fellowship was over, came pouring down upon the squire.
But Molly, confident of being told by Mrs. Hamley herself anything
which she wished her to hear, encouraged no confidences from any one
else.

She was struck with the change in 'madam's' looks as soon as she
caught sight of her in the darkened room, lying on the sofa in her
dressing-room, all dressed in white, which almost rivalled the white
wanness of her face. The squire ushered Molly in with,--

'Here she is at last!' and Molly had scarcely imagined that he had
so much variety in the tones of his voice--the beginning of the
sentence was spoken in a loud congratulatory manner, while the last
words were scarcely audible. He had seen the death-like pallor on
his wife's face; not a new sight, and one which had been presented
to him gradually enough, but which was now always giving him a fresh
shock. It was a lovely tranquil winter's day; every branch and every
twig of the trees and shrubs were glittering with drops of the
sun-melted hoarfrost; a robin was perched on a holly-bush, piping
cheerily; but the blinds were down, and out of Mrs. Hamley's windows
nothing of all this was to be seen. There was even a large screen
placed between her and the wood-fire, to keep off that cheerful
blaze. Mrs. Hamley stretched out one hand to Molly, and held hers
firm; with the other she shaded her eyes.

'She is not so well this morning,' said the squire, shaking his
head. 'But never fear, my dear one; here's the doctor's daughter,
nearly as good as the doctor himself. Have you had your medicine?
Your beef-tea?' he continued, going about on heavy tiptoe and
peeping into every empty cup and glass. Then he returned to the
sofa; looked at her for a minute or two, and then softly kissed her,
and told Molly he would leave her in charge.

As if Mrs. Hamley was afraid of Molly's remarks or questions, she
began in her turn a hasty system of interrogatories.

'Now, dear child, tell me all; it's no breach of confidence, for I
shan't mention it again, and I shan't be here long. How does it all
go on--the new mother, the good resolutions? let me help you if I
can. I think with a girl I could have been of use--a mother does not
know boys. But tell me anything you like and will; don't be afraid
of details.'

Even with Molly's small experience of illness she saw how much of
restless fever there was in this speech; and instinct, or some such
gift, prompted her to tell a long story of many things--the
wedding-day, her visit to Miss Brownings', the new furniture, Lady
Harriet, &c., all in an easy flow of talk which was very soothing to
Mrs. Hamley, inasmuch as it gave her something to think about beyond
her own immediate sorrows. But Molly did not speak of her own
grievances, nor of the new domestic relationship. Mrs. Hamley noticed
this.

'And you and Mrs. Gibson get on happily together?'

'Not always,' said Molly. 'You know we didn't know much of each
other before we were put to live together.'

'I didn't like what the squire told me last night. He was very
angry.'

That sore had not yet healed over; but Molly resolutely kept
silence, beating her brains to think of some other subject of
conversation.

'Ah! I see, Molly,' said Mrs. Hamley; 'you won't tell me your
sorrows, and yet, perhaps, I could have done you some good.'

'I don't like,' said Molly, in a low voice. 'I think papa wouldn't
like it. And, besides, you have helped me so much--you and Mr. Roger
Hamley. I often, often think of the things he said. they come in so
usefully, and are such a strength to me.'

'Ah, Roger! yes. He is to be trusted. Oh, Molly! I've a great deal
to say to you myself, only not now. I must have my medicine and try
to go to sleep. Good girl! You are stronger than I am, and can do
without sympathy.'

Molly was taken to another room; the maid who conducted her to it
told her that Mrs. Hamley had not wished her to have her nights
disturbed, as they might very probably have been if she had been in
her former sleeping-room. In the afternoon Mrs. Hamley sent for her,
and with the want of reticence common to invalids, especially to
those suffering from long and depressing maladies, she told Molly of
the family distress and disappointment.

She made Molly sit down near her on a little stool, and, holding her
hand, and looking into her eyes to catch her spoken sympathy from
their expression quicker than she could from her words, she said,--

'Osborne has so disappointed us! I cannot understand it yet. And the
squire was so terribly angry! I cannot think how all the money was
spent--advances through money-lenders, besides bills. The squire
does not show me how angry he is now, because he's afraid of another
attack; but I know how angry he is. You see he has been spending
ever so much money in reclaiming that land at Upton Common, and is
very hard pressed himself. But it would have doubled the value of
the estate, and so we never thought anything of economics which
would benefit Osborne in the long run. And now the squire says he
must mortgage some of the land; and you can't think how it cuts him
to the heart. He sold a great deal of timber to send the two boys to
college. Osborne--oh! what a dear, innocent boy he was: he was the
heir, you know; and he was so clever, every one said he was sure of
honours and a fellowship, and I don't know what all; and he did get
a scholarship, and then all went wrong. I don't know how. That is
the worst. Perhaps the squire wrote too angrily, and that stopped up
confidence. But he might have told me. He would have done, I think,
Molly, if he had been here, face to face with me. But the squire, in
his anger, told him not to show his face at home till he had paid
off the debts he had incurred out of his allowance. Out of two
hundred and fifty a year to pay off more than nine hundred, one way
or another! And not to come home till then! Perhaps Roger will have
debts too! He had but two hundred; but, then, he was not the eldest
son. The squire has given orders that the men are to be turned off
the draining-works; and I lie awake thinking of their poor families
this wintry weather. But what shall we do? I've never been strong,
and, perhaps, I've been extravagant in my habits; and there were
family traditions as to expenditure, and the reclaiming of this
land. Oh! Molly, Osborne was such a sweet little baby, and such a
loving boy: so clever, too! You know I read you some of his poetry:
now, could a person who wrote like that do anything very wrong? And
yet I'm afraid he has.'

'Don't you know, at all, how the money has gone?' asked Molly.

'No! not at all. That's the sting. There are tailors' bills, and
bills for book-binding and wine and pictures--that come to four or
five hundred; and though this expenditure is extraordinary--
inexplicable to such simple folk as we are--yet it may be only the
luxury of the present day. But the money for which he will give no
account,--of which, indeed, we only heard through the squire's
London agents, who found out that certain disreputable attorneys
were making inquiries as to the entail of the estate,--oh! Molly,
worse than all--I don't know how to bring myself to tell you--as to
the age and health of the squire, his dear father'--(she began to
sob almost hysterically; yet she would go on talking, in spite of
Molly's efforts to stop her)--'who held him in his arms, and blessed
him, even before I had kissed him; and thought always so much of him
as his heir and first-born darling. How he has loved him! How I have
loved him! I sometimes have thought of late that we've almost done
that good Roger injustice.'

'No! I'm sure you've not: only look at the way he loves you. Why,
you are his first thought: he may not speak about it, but any one
may see it. And dear, dear Mrs. Hamley,' said Molly, determined to
say out all that was in her mind now that she had once got the word,
'don't you think that it would be better not to misjudge Mr. Osborne
Hamley? We don't know what he has done with the money: he is so good
(is he not?) that he may have wanted it to relieve some poor
person--some tradesman, for instance, pressed by creditors--some--'

'You forget, dear,' said Mrs. Hamley, smiling a little at the girl's
impetuous romance, but sighing the next instant, 'that all the other
bills come from tradesmen, who complain piteously of being kept out
of their money.'

Molly was nonplussed for the moment; but then she said,--

'I daresay they imposed upon him. I'm sure I've heard stories of
young men being made regular victims of by the shopkeepers in great
towns.'

'You're a great darling, child,' said Mrs. Hamley, comforted by
Molly's strong partisanship, unreasonable and ignorant though it
was.

'And, besides,' continued Molly, 'some one must be acting wrongly in
Osborne's--Mr. Osborne Hamley's, I mean--I can't help saying Osborne
sometimes, but, indeed, I always think of him as Mr. Osborne--'

'Never mind, Molly, what you call him; only go on talking. It seems
to do me good to have the hopeful side taken. The squire has been so
hurt and displeased: strange-looking men coming into the
neighbourhood, too, questioning the tenants, and grumbling about the
last fall of timber, as if they were calculating on the squire's
death.'

'That's just what I was going to speak about. Doesn't it show that
they are bad men? and would bad men scruple to impose upon him, and
to tell lies in his name, and to ruin him?'

'Don't you see, you only make him out weak, instead of wicked?'

'Yes; perhaps I do. But I don't think he is weak. You know yourself,
dear Mrs. Hamley, how very clever he really is. Besides, I would
rather he was weak than wicked. Weak people may find themselves all
at once strong in heaven, when they see things quite clearly; but I
don't think the wicked will turn themselves into virtuous people all
at once.'

'I think I've been very weak, Molly,' said Mrs. Hamley, stroking
Molly's curls affectionately. 'I've made such an idol of my
beautiful Osborne; and he turns out to have feet of clay, not strong
enough to stand firm on the ground. And that's the best view of his
conduct, too!'

What with his anger against his son, and his anxiety about his wife:
the difficulty of raising the money immediately required, and his
irritation at the scarce-concealed inquiries made by strangers as to
the value of his property, the poor squire was in a sad state. He
was angry and impatient with every one who came near him; and then
was depressed at his own violent temper and unjust words. The old
servants, who, perhaps, cheated him in many small things, were
beautifully patient under his upbraidings. They could understand
bursts of passion, and knew the cause of his variable moods as well
as he did himself. The butler, who was accustomed to argue with his
master about every fresh direction as to his work, now nudged Molly
at dinner-time to make her eat of some dish which she had just been
declining, and explained his conduct afterwards as follows,--

'You see, miss, me and cook had planned a dinner as would tempt
master to cat; but when you say, "No, thank you," when I hand you
anything, master never so much as looks at it. But if you takes a
thing, and cats with a relish, why first he waits, and then he
looks, and by-and-by he smells; and then he finds out as he's
hungry, and falls to eating as natural as a kitten takes to mewing.
That's the reason, miss, as I gave you a nudge and a wink, which no
one knows better nor me was not manners.'

Osborne's name was never mentioned during these tete-a-tete meals.
The squire asked Molly questions about Hollingford people, but did
not seem much to attend to her answers. He used also to ask her
every day how she thought that his wife was; but if Molly told the
truth--that every day seemed to make her weaker and weaker--he was
almost savage with the girl. He could not bear it; and he would not.
Nay, once he was on the point of dismissing Mr. Gibson because he
insisted on a consultation with Dr Nicholls, the great physician of
the county.

'It's nonsense thinking her so ill as that--you know it's only the
delicacy she's had for years; and if you can't do her any good in
such a simple case--no pain--only weakness and nervousness--it is a
simple case, eh?--don't look in that puzzled way, man!--you'd better
give her up altogether, and I'll take her to Bath or Brighton,' or
somewhere for change, for in my opinion it's only moping and
nervousness.'

But the squire's bluff florid face was pinched with anxiety, and
worn with the effort of being deaf to the footsteps of fate as he
said these words which belied his fears.

Mr. Gibson replied very quietly,--

'I shall go on coming to see her, and I know you will not forbid my
visits. But I shall bring Dr Nicholls with me the next time I come.
I may be mistaken in my treatment; and I wish to God he may say I am
mistaken in my apprehensions.'

'Don't tell me them! I cannot hear them!' cried the squire. 'Of
course we must all die; and she must too. But not the cleverest
doctor in England shall go about coolly meting out the life of such
as her. I dare say I shall die first. I hope I shall. But I'll knock
any one down who speaks to me of the death sitting within me. And,
besides, I think all doctors are ignorant quacks, pretending to
knowledge they haven't got. Ay, you may smile at me. I don't care.
Unless you can tell me I shall die first, neither you nor your Dr
Nicholls shall come prophesying and croaking about this house.'

Mr. Gibson went away, heavy at heart at the thought of Mrs. Hamley's
approaching death, but thinking little enough of the squire's
speeches. He had almost forgotten them, in fact, when about nine
o'clock that evening, a groom rode in from Hamley Hall in hot haste,
with a note from the squire.

DEAR GIBSON,--For God's sake forgive me if I was rude to-day. She is
much worse. Come and spend the night here. Write for Nicholls, and
all the physicians you want. Write before you start off here. They
may give her ease. There were Whitworth doctors much talked of in my
youth for curing people given up by the regular doctors; can't you
get one of them? I put myself in your hands. Sometimes I think it is
the turning point, and she'll rally after this bout. I trust all to
you.

Yours ever,

R. HAMLEY.

P.S.--Molly is a treasure.--God help me!

Of course Mr. Gibson went; for the first time since his marriage
cutting short Mrs. Gibson's querulous lamentations over her life, as
involved in that of a doctor called out at all hours of day and
night.

He brought Mrs. Hamley through this attack; and for a day or two the
squire's alarm and gratitude made him docile in Mr. Gibson's hands.
Then he returned to the idea of its being a crisis through which his
wife had passed; and that she was now on the way to recovery. But
the day after the consultation with Dr Nicholls, Mr. Gibson said to
Molly,--

'Molly! I've written to Osborne and Roger. Do you know Osborne's
address?'

'No, papa. He's in disgrace. I don't know if the squire knows; and
she has been too ill to write.'

'Never mind. I'll enclose it to Roger; whatever those lads may be to
others, there's as strong brotherly love as ever I saw, between the
two. Roger will know. And, Molly, they are sure to come home as soon
as they hear my report of their mother's state. I wish you'd tell
the squire what I've done. It's not a pleasant piece of work; and
I'll tell madam myself in my own way. I'd have told him if he'd been
at home; but you say he was obliged to go to Ashcombe on business.'

'Quite obliged. He was so sorry to miss you. But, papa, he will be
so angry! You don't know how mad he is against Osborne.'

Molly dreaded the squire's anger when she gave him her father's
message. She had seen quite enough of the domestic relations of the
Hamley family to understand that, underneath his old-fashioned
courtesy, and the pleasant hospitality he showed to her as a guest,
there was a strong will, and a vehement passionate temper, along
with that degree of obstinacy in prejudices (or 'opinions,' as he
would have called them) so common to those who have, neither in
youth nor in manhood, mixed largely with their kind. She had
listened, day after day, to Mrs. Hamley's plaintive murmurs as to the
deep disgrace in which Osborne was being held by his father--the
prohibition of his coming home; and she hardly knew how to begin to
tell him that the letter summoning Osborne had already been sent
off.

Their dinners were ~tete-a-tete~. The squire tried to
make them pleasant to Molly, feeling deeply grateful to her for the
soothing comfort she was to his wife. He made merry speeches, which
sank away into silence, and at which they each forgot to smile. He
ordered up rare wines, which she did not care for, but tasted out of
complaisance. He noticed that one day she had eaten some brown
~buerre~ pears as if she liked them; and as his trees had not
produced many this year, he gave directions that this particular
kind should be sought for through the neighbourhood. Molly felt
that, in many ways, he was full of good-will towards her; but it did
not diminish her dread of touching on the one sore point in the
family. However, it had to be done, and that without delay.

The great log was placed on the after-dinner fire, the hearth swept
up, the ponderous candles snuffed, and then the door was shut, and
Molly and the squire were left to their dessert. She sate at the
side of the table in her old place. That at the head was vacant; yet
as no orders had been given to the contrary, the plate and glasses
and napkin were always arranged as regularly and methodically as if
Mrs. Hamley would come in as usual. Indeed, sometimes, when the door
by which she used to enter was opened by any chance, Molly caught
herself looking round as if she expected to see the tall, languid
figure in the elegant draperies of rich silk and soft lace, which
Mrs. Hamley was wont to wear of an evening.

This evening, it struck her, as a new thought of pain, that into
that room she would come no more. She had fixed to give her father's
message at this very point of time; but something in her throat
choked her, and she hardly knew how to govern her voice. The squire
got up and went to the broad fire-place, to strike into the middle
of the great log, and split it up into blazing, sparkling pieces.
His back was towards her. Molly began, 'When papa was here to-day,
he bade me tell you he had written to Mr. Roger Hamley to say
that--that he thought he had better come home; and he enclosed a
letter to Mr. Osborne Hamley to say the same thing.'

The squire put down the poker, but he still kept his back to Molly.

'He sent for Osborne and Roger?' he asked, at length.

Molly answered, 'Yes.'

Then there was a dead silence, which Molly thought would never end.
The squire had placed his two hands on the high chimney-piece, and
stood leaning over the fire.

'Roger would have been down from Cambridge on the 18th,' said he.
'And he has sent for Osborne, too! Did he know,'--he continued,
turning round to Molly, with something of the fierceness she had
anticipated in voice and look. In another moment he had dropped his
voice. 'It is right, quite right. I understand. It has come at
length. Come! come! Osborne has brought it on, though,' with a fresh
access of anger in his tones. 'She might have' (some word Molly
could not hear--she thought it sounded like 'lingered') 'but for
that. I cannot forgive him; I cannot.'

And then he suddenly left the room. While Molly sate there still,
very sad in her sympathy with all, he put his head in again,--

'Go to her, my dear; I cannot--not just yet. But I will soon. Just
this bit; and after that I won't lose a moment. You are a good girl.
God bless you!'

It is not to be supposed that Molly had remained all this time at
the Hall without interruption. Once or twice her father had brought
her a summons home. Molly thought she could perceive that he had
brought it unwillingly; in fact, it was Mrs. Gibson that had sent for
her, almost, as it were, to preserve a 'right of way' through her
actions.

'You shall come back to-morrow, or the next day,' her father had
said. 'But mamma seems to think people will put a bad construction
on your being so much way from home so soon after our marriage.'

'Oh, papa, I'm afraid Mrs. Hamley will miss me! I do so like being
with her.'

'I don't think it is likely she will miss you as much as she would
have done a month or two ago. She sleeps so much now, that she is
scarcely conscious of the lapse of time. I'll see that you come back
here again in a day or two.'

So out of the silence and the soft melancholy of the Hall Molly
returned into the all-pervading element of chatter and gossip at
Hollingford. Mrs. Gibson received her kindly enough. Once' she had a
smart new winter bonnet ready to give her as a present; but she did
not care to hear any particulars about the friends whom Molly had
just left; and her few remarks on the state of affairs at the Hall
jarred terribly on the sensitive Molly.

'What a time she lingers! Your papa never expected she would last
half so long after that attack. It must be very wearing work to them
all; I declare you look quite another creature since you went there.
One can only wish it mayn't last, for their sakes.'

'You don't know how the squire values every minute,' said Molly.

'Why, you say she sleeps a great deal, and doesn't talk much when
she's awake, and there's not the slightest hope for her. And yet, at
such times, people are kept on the tenterhooks with watching and
waiting. I know it by my dear Kirkpatrick. There really were days
when I thought it never would end. But we won't talk any more of
such dismal things; you've had quite enough of them, I'm sure, and
it always makes me melancholy to hear of illness and death; and yet
your papa seems sometimes as if he could talk of nothing else. I'm
going to take you out to-night, though, and that will give you
something of a change; and I've been getting Miss Rose to trim up
one of my old gowns for you; it's too tight for me. There's some
talk of dancing,--it's at Mrs. Edward's.'

'Oh, mamma, I cannot go!' cried Molly. 'I've been so much with her;
and she may be suffering so, or even dying--and I to be dancing!'

'Nonsense! You're no relation, so you need not feel it so much. I
wouldn't urge you, if she was likely to know about it and be hurt;
but as it is, it's all fixed that you are to go; and don't let us
have any nonsense about it. We might sit twirling our thumbs, and
repeating hymns all our lives long, if we were to do nothing else
when people were dying.'

'I cannot go,' repeated Molly. And, acting upon impulse, and almost
to her own surprise, she appealed to her father, who came into the
room at this very time. He contracted his dark eyebrows, and looked
annoyed as both wife and daughter poured their different sides of
the argument into his ears. He sate down in desperation of patience.
When his turn came to pronounce a decision, he said,--

'I suppose I can have some lunch? I went away at six this morning,
and there's nothing in the dining-room. I have to go off again
directly.'

Molly started to the door; Mrs. Gibson made haste to ring the bell.

'Where are you going, Molly?' said she, sharply.

'Only to see about papa's lunch.'

'There are servants to do it; and I don't like your going into the
kitchen.'

'Come, Molly! sit down and be quiet,' said her father. 'One comes
home wanting peace and quietness--and food too. If I am to be
appealed to, which I beg I may not be another time, I settle that
Molly stops home this evening. I shall come back late and tired. See
that I have something ready to cat, goosey, and then I'll dress
myself up in my best, and go and fetch you home, my dear. I wish all
these wedding festivities were well over. Ready, is it? Then I'll go
into the dining-room and gorge myself. A doctor ought to be able to
eat like a camel, or like Major Dugald Dalgetty.'

It was well for Molly that callers came in just at this time, for
Mrs. Gibson was extremely annoyed. They told her some little local
piece of news, however, which filled up her mind; and Molly found
that, if she only expressed wonder enough at the engagement they had
both heard of from the departed callers, the previous discussion as
to her accompanying her stepmother or not might be entirely passed
over. Not entirely though; for the next morning she had to listen to
a very brilliantly touched-up account of the dance and the gaiety
which she had missed; and also to be told that Mrs. Gibson had
changed her mind about giving her the gown, and thought now that she
should reserve it for Cynthia, if only it was long enough; but
Cynthia was so tall--quite overgrown, in fact. The chances seemed
equally balanced as to whether Molly might not have the gown after
all.


CHAPTER XVIII


MR OSBORNE'S SECRET


Osborne and Roger came to the Hall; Molly found Roger established
there when she returned after this absence at home. She gathered
that Osborne was coming; but very little was said about him in any
way. The Squire scarcely ever left his wife's room now; he sat by
her, watching her, and now and then moaning to himself. She was so
much under the influence of opiates that she did not often rouse up;
but when she did, she almost invariably asked for Molly. On these rare
occasions, she would ask after Osborne--where he was, if he had been
told, and if he was coming? In her weakened and confused state of
intellect she seemed to have retained two strong impressions--one,
of the sympathy with which Molly had received her confidence about
Osborne; the other, of the anger which her husband entertained
against him. Before the squire she never mentioned Osborne's name;
nor did she seem at her case in speaking about him to Roger; while,
when she was alone with Molly, she hardly spoke of any one else.
She must have had some sort of wandering idea that Roger blamed his
brother, while she remembered Molly's eager defence, which she had
thought hopelessly improbable at the time. At any rate she made
Molly her confidante about her first-born. She sent her to ask
Roger how soon he would come, for she seemed to know perfectly
well that he was coming.

'Tell me all Roger says. He will tell you.'

But it was several days before Molly could ask Roger any questions;
and meanwhile Mrs. Hamley's state had materially altered. At length
Molly came upon Roger sitting in the library, his head buried in his
hands. He did not hear her footstep till she was close beside him.
Then he lifted up his face, red, and stained with tears, his hair
all ruffled up and in disorder.

'I've been wanting to see you alone,' she began. 'Your mother does
so want some news of your brother Osborne. She told me last week to
ask you about him, but I did not like to speak of him before your
father.'

'She has hardly ever named him to me.'

'I don't know why; for to me she used to talk of him perpetually. I
have seen so little of her this week, and I think she forgets a
great deal now. Still, if you don't mind, I should like to be able
to tell her something if she asks me again.'

He put his head again between his hands, and did not answer her for
some time.

'What does she want to know?' said he, at last. 'Does she know that
Osborne is coming soon--any day?'

'Yes. But she wants to know where he is.'

'I can't tell you. I don't exactly know. I believe he's abroad, but
I'm not sure.'

'But you've sent papa's letter to him?'

'I've sent it to a friend of his who will know better than I do
where he's to be found. You must know that he isn't free from
creditors, Molly. You can't have been one of the family, like a
child of the house almost, without knowing that much. For that and
for some other reasons I don't exactly know where he is.'

'I will tell her so. You are sure he will come?'

'Quite sure. But, Molly, I think my mother may live some time yet;
don't you? Dr Nicholls said so yesterday when he was here with your
father. He said she had rallied more than he had ever expected.
You're not afraid of any change that makes you so anxious for
Osborne's coming?'

'No. It's only for her that I asked. She did seem so to crave for
news of him. I think she dreamed of him; and then when she wakened
it was a relief to her to talk about him to me. She always seemed to
associate me with him. We used to speak so much of him when we were
together.'

'I don't know what we should any of us have done without you. You've
been like a daughter to my mother.'

'I do so love her,' said Molly, softly.

'Yes; I see. Have you ever noticed that she sometimes calls you
"Fanny"? It was the name of a little sister of ours who died. I
think she often takes you for her. It was partly that, and partly
that at such a time as this one can't stand on formalities, that
made me call you Molly. I hope you don't mind it?'

'No; I like it. But will you tell me something more about your
brother? She really hungers for news of him.'

'She'd better ask me herself. Yet, no! I am so involved by promises
of secrecy, Molly, that I couldn't satisfy her if she once began to
question me. I believe he's in Belgium, and that he went there about
a fortnight ago, partly to avoid his creditors. You know my father
has refused to pay his debts?'

'Yes; at least, I knew something like it.'

'I don't believe my father could raise the money all at once without
having recourse to steps which he would exceedingly recoil from. Yet
for the time it places Osborne in a very awkward position.'

'I think what vexes your father a good deal is some mystery as to
how the money was spent.'

'If my mother ever says anything about that part of the affair,'
said Roger, hastily, 'assure her from me that there's nothing of
vice or wrong-doing about it. I can't say more: I'm tied. But set
her mind at ease on this point.'

'I'm not sure if she remembers all her painful anxiety about this,'
said Molly. 'She used to speak a great deal to me about him before
you came, when your father seemed so angry. And now, whenever she
sees me she wants to talk on the old subject; but she doesn't
remember so clearly. If she were to see him I don't believe she
would recollect why she was uneasy about him while he was absent.'

'He must be here soon. I expect him every day,' said Roger,
uneasily.

'Do you think your father will be very angry with him?' asked Molly,
with as much timidity as if the squire's displeasure might be
directed against her.

'I don't know,' said Roger. 'My mother's illness may alter him; but
he didn't easily forgive us formerly. I remember once--but that is
nothing to the purpose. I can't help fancying that he has put
himself under some strong restraint for my mother's sake, and that
he won't express much. But it doesn't follow that he will forget it.
My father is a man of few affections, but what he has are very
strong; he feels anything that touches him on these points deeply
and permanently. That unlucky valuing of the property! It has given
my father the idea of post-obits--'

'What are they?' asked Molly.

'Raising money to be paid on my father's death, which, of course,
involves calculations as to the duration of his life.'

'How shocking!' said she.

'I'm as sure as I am of my own life that Osborne never did anything
of the kind. But my father expressed his suspicions in language that
irritated Osborne; and he doesn't speak out, and won't justify
himself even as much as he might; and, much as he loves me, I've but
little influence over him, or else he would tell my father all.
Well, we must leave it to time,' he added, sighing. 'My mother would
have brought us all right, if she'd been what she once was.'

He turned away leaving Molly very sad. She knew that every member of
the family she cared for so much was in trouble, out of which she
saw no exit; and her small power of helping them was diminishing day
by day as Mrs. Hamley sank more and more under the influence of
opiates and stupefying illness. Her father had spoken to her only
this very day of the desirableness of her returning home for good.
Mrs. Gibson wanted her--for no particular reason, but for many small
fragments of reasons. Mrs. Hamley had ceased to want her much, only
occasionally appearing to remember her existence. Her position (her
father thought--the idea had not entered her head) in a family of
which the only woman was an invalid confined to bed, was becoming
awkward. But Molly had begged hard to remain two or three days
longer--only that--only till Friday. If Mrs. Hamley should want her
(she argued, with tears in her eyes), and should hear that she had
left the house, she would think her so unkind, so ungrateful!

'My dear child, she's getting past wanting any one! The keenness of
earthly feelings is deadened.'

'Papa, that is worst of all. I cannot bear it. I won't believe it.
She may not ask for me again, and may quite forget me; but I'm sure,
to the very last, if the medicines don't stupefy her, she will look
round for the squire and her children. For poor Osborne most of all;
because he's in sorrow.'

Mr. Gibson shook his head, but said nothing in reply. In a minute or
two he asked,--

'I don't like to take you away while you even fancy you can be of
use or comfort to one who has been so kind to you. But, if she
hasn't wanted you before Friday, will you be convinced, will you
come home willingly?'

'If I go then, I may see her once again, even if she hasn't asked
for me?' inquired Molly.

'Yes, of course. You must make no noise, no step; but you may go in
and see her. I must tell you, I'm almost certain she won't ask for
you.'

'But she may, papa. I will go home on Friday, if she has not. I
think she will.'

So Molly hung about the house, trying to do all she could out of the
sick-room, for the comfort of those in it. They only came out for
meals, or for necessary business, and found little time for talking
to her, so her life was solitary enough, waiting for the call that
never came. The evening of the day on which she had had the above
conversation with Roger, Osborne arrived. He came straight into the
drawing-room, where Molly was seated on the rug, reading by
firelight, as she did not like to ring for candies merely for her
own use. Osborne came in, with a kind of hurry, which almost made
him appear as if he would trip himself up, and fall down. Molly
rose. He had not noticed her before; now he came forwards, and took
hold of both her hands, leading her into the full flickering light,
and straining his eyes to look into her face.

'How is she? You will tell me--you must know the truth! I've
travelled day and night since I got your father's letter.'

Before she could frame her answer, he had sate down in the nearest
chair, covering his eyes with his hand.

'She's very ill,' said Molly. 'That you know; but I don't think she
suffers much pain. She has wanted you sadly.'

He groaned aloud. 'My father forbade me to come.'

'I know!' said Molly, anxious to prevent his self-reproach. 'Your
brother was away, too. I think no one knew how ill she was--she had
been an invalid for so long.'

'You know--Yes! she told you a great deal--she was very fond of you.
And God knows how I loved her. If I had not been forbidden to come
home, I should have told her all. Does my father know of my coming
now?'

'Yes,' said Molly; 'I told him papa had sent for you.'

Just at that moment the squire came in. He had not heard of
Osborne's arrival, and was seeking Molly to ask her to write a
letter for him.

Osborne did not stand up when his father entered. He was too much
exhausted, too much oppressed by his feelings, and also too much
estranged by his father's angry, suspicious letters. If he had come
forwards with any manifestation of feeling at this moment,
everything might have been different. But he waited for his father
to see him before he uttered a word. All that the squire said when
his eye fell upon him at last was,--

'You here, sir!'

And, breaking off in the directions he was giving to Molly, he
abruptly left the room. All the time his heart was yearning after
his first-born; but mutual pride kept them asunder. Yet he went
straight to the butler, and asked of him when Mr. Osborne had
arrived, and how he had come and if he had had any refreshment--
dinner or what--since his arrival?

'For I think I forget everything now!' said the poor squire, putting
his hand up to his head. 'For the life of me, I can't remember
whether we've had dinner or not; these long nights, and all this
sorrow and watching, quite bewilder me.'

'Perhaps, sir, you will take some dinner with Mr. Osborne. Mrs. Morgan
is sending up his directly. You hardly sate down at dinner-time,
sir, you thought my mistress wanted something.'

'Ay! I remember now. No! I won't have any more. Give Mr. Osborne what
wine he chooses. Perhaps he can eat and drink.' So the squire went
away upstairs with bitterness as well as sorrow in his heart.

When lights were brought, Molly was struck with the change in
Osborne. He looked haggard and worn; perhaps with travelling and
anxiety. Not quite such a dainty gentleman either, as Molly had
thought him, when she had last seen him calling on her stepmother,
two months before. But she liked him better now. The tone of his
remarks pleased her more. He was simpler, and less ashamed of
showing his feelings. He asked after Roger in a warm, longing kind
of way. Roger was out: he had ridden to Ashcombe to transact some
business for the squire. Osborne evidently wished for his return;
and hung about restlessly in the drawing-room after he had dined.

'You are sure I may not see her to-night?' he asked Molly, for the
third or fourth time. 'No, indeed. I will go up again if you like
it. But Mrs. Jones, the nurse Dr Nicholls sent, is a very decided
person. I went up while you were at dinner, and Mrs. Hamley had just
taken her drops, and was on no account to be disturbed by seeing any
one, much less by any excitement.'

Osborne kept walking up and down the long drawing-room, half talking
to himself, half to Molly.

'I wish Roger would come. He seems to be the only one to give me a
welcome. Does my father always live upstairs in my mother's rooms,
Miss Gibson?'

'He has done since her last attack. I believe he reproaches himself
for not having been enough alarmed before.'

'You heard all the words he said to me: they were not much of a
welcome, were they? And my dear mother, who always--whether I was to
blame or not--I suppose Roger is sure to come home to-night?'

'Quite sure.'

'You are staying here, are you not? Do you often see my mother, or
does this omnipotent nurse keep you out too?'

'Mrs. Hamley hasn't asked for me for three days now, and I don't go
into her room unless she asks. I'm leaving on Friday, I believe.'

'My mother was very fond of you, I know.'

After a while he said, in a voice that had a great deal of sensitive
pain in its tone,--

'I suppose--do you know whether she is quite conscious--quite
herself?'

'Not always conscious,' said Molly, tenderly. 'She has to take so
many opiates. But she never wanders, only forgets, and sleeps.'

'Oh, mother, mother!' said he, stopping suddenly, and hanging over
the fire, his hands on the chimney-piece.

When Roger came home, Molly thought it time to retire. Poor girl! it
was getting to be time for her to leave this scene of distress in
which she could be of no use. She sobbed herself to sleep this
Tuesday night. Two days more, and it would be Friday; and she would
have to wrench up the roots she had shot down into this ground. The
weather was bright the next morning; and morning and sunny weather
cheer up young hearts. Molly sate in the dining-room making tea for
the gentlemen as they came down. She could not help hoping that the
squire and Osborne might come to a better understanding before she
left; for after all, in the discussion between father and son, lay a
bitterer sting than in the illness sent by God. But though they met
at the breakfast-table, they purposely avoided addressing each
other. Perhaps the natural subject of conversation between the two,
at such a time, would have been Osborne's long journey the night
before; but he had never spoken of the place he had come from,
whether north, south, east, or west, and the squire did not choose
to allude to anything that might bring out what his son wished to
conceal. Again, there was an unexpressed idea in both their minds
that Mrs. Hamley's present illness was much aggravated, if not
entirely brought on, by the discovery of Osborne's debts; so, many
inquiries and answers on that head were tabooed. In fact, their
attempts at easy conversation were limited to local subjects, and
principally addressed to Molly or Roger. Such intercourse was not
productive of pleasure, or even of friendly feeling, though there
was a thin outward surface of politeness and peace. Long before the
day was over, Molly wished that she had acceded to her father's
proposal, and gone home with him. No one seemed to want her. Mrs
Jones, the nurse, assured her time after time that Mrs. Hamley had
never named her name; and her small services in the sickroom were
not required since there was a regular nurse. Osborne and Roger
seemed all in all to each other; and Molly now felt how much the
short conversations she had had with Roger had served to give her
something to think about, all during the remainder of her solitary
days. Osborne was extremely polite, and even expressed his gratitude
to her for her attentions to his mother in a very pleasant manner;
but he appeared to be unwilling to show her any of the deeper
feelings of his heart, and almost ashamed of his exhibition of
emotion the night before. He spoke to her as any agreeable young man
speaks to any pleasant young lady; but Molly almost resented this.
It was only the squire who seemed to make her of any account. He
gave her letters to write, small bills to reckon up; and she could
have kissed his hands for thankfulness.

The last afternoon of her stay at the Hall came. Roger had gone out
on the squire's business. Molly went into the garden, thinking over
the last summer, when Mrs. Hamley's sofa used to be placed under the
old cedar-tree on the lawn, and when the warm air seemed to be
scented with roses and sweetbrier. Now, the trees were
leafless,--there was no sweet odour in the keen frosty air; and
looking up at the house, there were the white sheets of blinds,
shutting out the pale winter sky from the invalid's room. Then she
thought of the day her father had brought her the news of his second
marriage: the thicket was tangled with dead weeds and rime and
hoarfrost; and the beautiful fine articulation of branches and
boughs and delicate twigs were all intertwined in leafless
distinctness against the sky. Could she ever be so passionately
unhappy again? Was it goodness, or was it numbness, that made her
feel as though life was too short to be troubled much about
anything? death seemed the only reality. She had neither energy nor
heart to walk far or briskly; and turned back towards the house. The
afternoon sun was shining brightly on the windows; and, stirred up
to unusual activity by some unknown cause, the housemaids had opened
the shutters and windows of the generally unused library. The middle
window was also a door; the white-painted wood went half-way up.
Molly turned along the little flag-paved path that led past the
library windows to the gate in the white railings at the front of
the house, and went in at the opened doors. She had had leave given
to choose out any books she wished to read, and to take them home
with her; and it was just the sort of half-dawdling employment
suited to her taste this afternoon. She mounted on the ladder to get
to a particular shelf high up in dark corner of the room; and
finding there some volume that looked interesting, she sate down on
the step to read part of it. There she sate, in her bonnet and
cloak, when Osborne suddenly came in. He did not see her at first;
indeed, he seemed in such a hurry that he probably might not have
noticed her at all, if she had not spoken.

'Am I in your way? I only came here for a minute to look for some
books.' She came down the steps as she spoke, still holding the book
in her hand.

'Not at all. It is I who am disturbing you. I must just write a
letter for the post, and then I shall be gone. Is not this open door
too cold for you?'

'Oh, no. It is so fresh and pleasant.'

She began to read again, sitting on the lowest step of the ladder;
he to write at the large old-fashioned writing-table close to the
window. There was a minute or two of profound silence, in which the
rapid scratching of Osborne's pen upon the paper was the only sound.
Then came a click of the gate, and Roger stood at the open door. His
face was towards Osborne, sitting in the light; his back to Molly,
crouched up in her corner. He held out a letter, and said in hoarse
breathlessness,--

'Here's a letter from your wife, Osborne. I went past the
post-office and thought--'

Osborne stood up, angry dismay upon his face.

'Roger! what have you done! Don't you see her?'

Roger looked round, and Molly stood up in her corner, red,
trembling, miserable, as though she were a guilty person. Roger
entered the room. All three seemed to be equally dismayed. Molly was
the first to speak; she came forwards and said,--

'I am so sorry! You didn't wish me to hear it, but I couldn't help
it. You will trust me, won't you?' and turning to Roger she said to
him with tears in her eyes,--'Please say you know I shall not tell.'

'We can't help it,' said Osborne, gloomily. 'Only Roger, who knew of
what importance it was, ought to have looked round him before
speaking.'

'So I should,' said Roger. 'I'm more vexed with myself than you can
conceive. Not but what I'm sure of you as of myself,' continued he,
turning to Molly.

'Yes; but,' said Osborne, 'you see how many chances there are that
even the best-meaning persons may let out what it is of such
consequence to me to keep secret.'

'I know you think it so,' said Roger.

'Well, don't let us begin that old discussion again--at any rate,
not before a third person.'

Molly had had hard work all this time to keep from crying. Now that
she was alluded to as the third person before whom conversation was
to be restrained, she said,--

'I'm going away. Perhaps I ought not to have been here. I'm very
sorry--very. But I will try and forget what I've heard.'

'You can't do that,' said Osborne, still ungraciously. 'But will you
promise me never to speak about it to any one--not even to me, or to
Roger? Will you try to act and speak as if you had never heard it?
I'm sure, from what Roger has told me about you, that if you give me
this promise I may rely upon it.'

'Yes; I will promise,' said Molly, putting out her hand as a kind of
pledge. Osborne took it, but rather as if the action was
superfluous. She added, 'I think I should have done so, even without
a promise. But it is, perhaps, better to bind oneself. I will go
away now. I wish I'd never come into this room.'

She put down her book on the table very softly, and turned to leave
the room, choking down her tears until she was in the solitude of
her own chamber. But Roger was at the door before her, holding it
open for her, and reading--she felt that he was reading--her face.
He held out his band for hers, and his firm grasp expressed both
sympathy and regret for what had occurred.

She could hardly keep back her sobs till she reached her bedroom.
Her feelings had been overwrought for some time past, without
finding the natural vent in action. The leaving Hamley Hall had
seemed so sad before; and now she was troubled with having to bear
away a secret which she ought never to have known, and the knowledge
of which had brought out a very uncomfortable responsibility. Then
there would arise a very natural wonder as to who was Osborne's
wife. Molly had not stayed so long and so intimately in the Hamley
family without being well aware of the manner in which the future
lady of Hamley was planned for. The squire, for instance, partly in
order to show that Osborne, his heir, was above the reach of Molly
Gibson, the doctor's daughter, in the early days before he knew
Molly well, had often alluded to the grand, the high, and the
wealthy marriage which Hamley of Hamley, as represented by his
clever, brilliant, handsome son Osborne, might be expected to make.
Mrs. Hamley, too, unconsciously on her part, showed the projects that
she was constantly devising for the reception of the unknown
daughter-in-law that was to be.

'The drawing-room must be refurnished when Osborne marries'--or
'Osborne's wife will like to have the west suite of rooms to
herself; it will perhaps be a trial to her to live with the old
couple; but we must arrange it so that she will feel it as little as
possible'--'Of course, when Mrs. Osborne comes we must try and give
her a new carriage; the old one does well enough for us'--these, and
similar speeches had given Molly the impression of the future Mrs
Osborne as of some beautiful grand young lady, whose very presence
would make the old Hall into a stately, formal mansion, instead of
the pleasant, unceremonious home that it was at present. Osborne,
too, who had spoken with such languid criticism to Mrs. Gibson about
various country belles, and even in his own home was apt to give
himself airs--only at home his airs were poetically fastidious,
while with Mrs. Gibson they had been socially fastidious--what
unspeakably elegant beauty had he chosen for his wife? Who had
satisfied him; and yet satisfying him, had to have her, marriage
kept in concealment from his parents? At length Molly tore herself
up from her wanderings. It was of no use: she could not find out;
she might not even try. The blank wall of her promise blocked up the
way. Perhaps it was not even right to wonder, and endeavour to
remember slight speeches, casual mentions of a name, so as to piece
them together into something coherent. Molly dreaded seeing either
of the brothers again; but they all met at dinner-time as if nothing
had happened. The squire was taciturn, either from melancholy or
displeasure. He had never spoken to Osborne since his return,
excepting about the commonest trifles, when intercourse could not be
avoided; and his wife's state oppressed him like a heavy cloud
coming over the light of his day. Osborne put on an indifferent
manner to his father, which Molly felt sure was assumed; but it was
not conciliatory, for all that. Roger, quiet, steady, and natural,
talked more than all the others; but he too was uneasy, and in
distress on many accounts. To-day he principally addressed himself
to Molly; entering into rather long narrations of late discoveries
in natural history, which kept up the current of talk without
requiring much reply from any one, Molly had expected Osborne to
look something different from usual--conscious, or ashamed, or
resentful, or even 'married'--but he was exactly the Osborne of the
morning--handsome, elegant, languid in manner and in look; cordial
with his brother, polite towards her, secretly uneasy at the state
of things between his father and himself. She would never have
guessed the concealed romance which lay ~perdu~ under that every-day
behaviour. She had always wished to come into direct contact with a
love-story: here she was, and she only found it very uncomfortable;
there was a sense of concealment and uncertainty about it all; and
her honest straightforward father, her quiet life at Hollingford,
which, even with all its drawbacks, was above-board, and where
everybody knew what everybody was doing, seemed secure and pleasant
in comparison. Of course she felt great pain at quitting the Hall,
and at the mute farewell she had taken of her sleeping and
unconscious friend. But leaving Mrs. Hamley now was a different thing
to what it had been a fortnight ago. Then she was wanted at any
moment, and felt herself to be of comfort. Now her very existence
seemed forgotten by the poor lady whose body appeared to be living
so long after her soul.

She was sent home in the carriage, loaded with true thanks from
every one of the family. Osborne ransacked the houses for flowers
for her; Roger had chosen her out books of every kind. The squire
himself kept shaking her hand, without being able to speak his
gratitude, till at last he had taken her in his arms, and kissed her
as he would have done a daughter.


CHAPTER XIX


CYNTHIA'S ARRIVAL


Molly's father was not at home when she returned; and there was no
one to give her a welcome. Mrs. Gibson was out paying calls, the
servants told Molly. She went upstairs to her own room, meaning to
unpack and arrange her borrowed books, Rather to her surprise she
saw the chamber, corresponding to her own, being dusted; water and
towels too were being carried in.

'Is any one coming?' she asked of the housemaid.

'Missus's daughter from France. Miss Kirkpatrick is coming
to-morrow.'

Was Cynthia coming at last? Oh, what a pleasure it would be to have
a companion, a girl, a sister of her own age! Molly's depressed
spirits sprang up again with bright elasticity. She longed for Mrs
Gibson's return, to ask her all about it: it must be very sudden,
for Mr. Gibson had said nothing of it at the Hall the day before. No
quiet reading now; the books were hardly put away with Molly's usual
neatness. She went down into the drawing-room, and could not settle
to anything. At last Mrs. Gibson came home, tired out with her walk
and her heavy velvet cloak. Until that was taken off, and she had
rested herself for a few minutes, she seemed quite unable to attend
to Molly's questions.

'Oh, yes! Cynthia is coming home to-morrow, by the "Umpire," which
passes through at ten o'clock. What an oppressive day it is for the
time of the year! I really am almost ready to faint. Cynthia heard
of some opportunity, I believe, and was only too glad to leave
school a fortnight earlier than we planned. She never gave me the
chance of writing to say I did, or did not, like her coming so much
before the time; and I shall have to pay for her just the same as if
she had stopped. And I meant to have asked her to bring me a French
bonnet; and then you could have had one made after mine. But I'm
very glad she's coming, poor dear.'

'Is anything the matter with her?' asked Molly.

'Oh, no! Why should there be?'

'You called her "poor dear," and it made me afraid lest she might be
ill.'

'Oh, no! It's only a way I got into, when Mr. Kirkpatrick died. A
fatherless girl--you know one always does call them "poor dears."
Oh, no! Cynthia never is ill. She's as strong as a horse. She never
would have felt to-day as I have done. Could you get me a glass of
wine and a biscuit, my dear? I'm. really quite faint.'

Mr. Gibson was much more excited about Cynthia's arrival than her own
mother was. He anticipated her coming as a great pleasure to Molly,
on whom, in spite of his recent marriage and his new wife, his
interests principally centred. He even found time to run upstairs
and see the bedrooms of the two girls; for the furniture of which he
had paid a pretty round sum.

'Well, I suppose young ladies like their bedrooms decked out in this
way! It's very pretty certainly, but--'

'I liked my own old room better, papa; but perhaps Cynthia is
accustomed to such decking up.'

'Perhaps; at any rate, she'll see we've tried to make it pretty.
Yours is like hers. That's right. It might have hurt her, if hers
had been smarter than yours. Now, good-night in your fine flimsy
bed.'

Molly was up betimes--almost before it was light--arranging her
pretty Hamley flowers in Cynthia's room. She could hardly eat her
breakfast that morning. She ran upstairs and put on her things,
thinking that Mrs. Gibson was quite sure to go down to the 'George'
Inn, where the 'Umpire' stopped, to meet her daughter after a two
years' absence. But to her surprise Mrs. Gibson had arranged herself
at her great worsted-work frame, just as usual; and she, in her
turn, was astonished at Molly's bonnet and cloak.

'Where are you going so early, child? The fog hasn't cleared away
yet.'

'I thought you would go and meet Cynthia; and I wanted to go with
you.'

'She will be here in half an hour; and dear papa has told the
gardener to take the wheelbarrow down for her luggage. I'm not sure
if he is not gone himself.'

'Then are not you going?' asked Molly, with a good deal of
disappointment.

'No, certainly not. She will be here almost directly. And, besides,
I don't like to expose my feelings to every passer-by in High
Street. You forget I have not seen her for two years, and I hate
scenes in the market-place.'

She settled herself to her work again; and Molly, after some
consideration, gave up her own going, and employed herself in
looking out of the downstairs window which commanded the approach
from the town.

'Here she is--here she is!' she cried out at last. Her father was
walking by the side of a tall young lady; William the gardener was
wheeling along a great cargo of luggage. Molly flew to the
front-door, and had it wide open to admit the new corner some time
before she arrived.

'Well! here she is. Molly, this is Cynthia. Cynthia, Molly. You're
to be sisters, you know.'

Molly saw the beautiful, tall, swaying figure, against the light of
the open door, but could not see any of the features that were, for
the moment, in shadow. A sudden gush of shyness had come over her
just at the instant, and quenched the embrace she would have given a
moment before. But Cynthia took her in her arms, and kissed her on
both cheeks.

'Here's mamma,' she said, looking beyond Molly on to the stairs
where Mrs. Gibson stood, wrapped up in a shawl, and shivering in the
cold. She ran past Molly and Mr. Gibson, who rather averted their
eyes from this first greeting between mother and child.

Mrs. Gibson said,--

'Why, how you are grown, darling! You look quite a woman.'

'And so I am,' said Cynthia. 'I was before I went away; I've hardly
grown since,--except, it is always to be hoped, in wisdom.'

'Yes! That we will hope,' said Mrs. Gibson, in rather a meaning way.
Indeed there were evidently hidden allusions in their seeming
commonplace speeches. When they all came into the full light and
repose of the drawing-room, Molly was absorbed in the contemplation
of Cynthia's beauty. Perhaps her features were not regular; but the
changes in her expressive countenance gave one no time to think of
that. Her smile was perfect; her pouting charming; the play of the
face was in the mouth. Her eyes were beautifully shaped, but their
expression hardly seemed to vary. In colouring she was not unlike
her mother; only she had not so much of the red-haired tints in her
complexion; and her long-shaped, serious grey eyes were fringed with
dark lashes, instead of her mother's insipid flaxen ones. Molly fell
in love with her, so to speak, on the instant. She sate there
warming her feet and hands, as much at her ease as if she had been
there all her life; not particularly attending to her mother--who,
all the time, was studying either her or her dress--measuring Molly
and Mr. Gibson with grave observant looks, as if guessing how she
should like them.

'There's hot breakfast ready for you in the dining-room, when you
are ready for it,' said Mr. Gibson. 'I'm sure you must want it after
your night journey.' He looked round at his wife, at Cynthia's
mother, but she did not seem inclined to leave the warm room again.

'Molly will take you to your room, darling,' said she; 'it is near
hers, and she has got her things to take off. I'll come down and sit
in the dining-room while you are having your breakfast, but I really
am afraid of the cold now.'

Cynthia rose and followed Molly upstairs.

'I'm so sorry there isn't a fire for you,' said Molly, 'but--I
suppose it wasn't ordered; and, of course, I don't give any orders.
Here is some hot water, though.'

'Stop a minute,' said Cynthia, getting hold of both Molly's hands,
and looking steadily into her face, but in such a manner that she
did not dislike the inspection.

'I think I shall like you. I am go glad! I was afraid I should not.
We're all in a very awkward position together, aren't we? I like
your father's looks, though.'

Molly could not help smiling at the way this was said. Cynthia
replied to her smile.

'Ah, you may laugh. But I don't know that I am easy to get on with;
mamma and I didn't suit when we were last together. But perhaps we
are each of us wiser now. Now, please leave me for a quarter of an
hour. I don't want anything more.'

Molly went into her own room, waiting to show Cynthia down to the
dining-room. Not that, in the moderate-sized house, there was any
difficulty in finding the way. A very little trouble in conjecturing
would enable a stranger to discover any room. But Cynthia had so
captivated Molly, that she wanted to devote herself to the new
comer's service. Ever since she had heard of the probability of her
having a sister--(she called her a sister, but whether it was a
Scotch sister, or a sister ~a la mode de Bretagne~, would
have puzzled most people)--Molly had allowed her fancy to dwell much
on the idea of Cynthia's coming; and in the short time since they
had met, Cynthia's unconscious power of fascination had been
exercised upon her. Some people have this power. Of course, its
effects are only manifested in the susceptible. A school-girl may be
found in every school who attracts and influences all the others,
not by her virtues, nor her beauty, nor her sweetness, nor her
cleverness, but by something that can neither be described nor
reasoned upon. It is the something alluded to in the old lines:--

Love me not for comely grace,
For my pleasing eye and face;
No, nor for my constant heart,--
For these may change, and turn to ill,
And thus true love may sever.
But love me on, and know not why,
So hast thou the same reason still
To dote upon me ever.'

A woman will have this charm, not only over men but over her own
sex; it cannot be defined, or rather it is so delicate a mixture of
many gifts and qualities that it is impossible to decide on the
proportions of each. Perhaps it is incompatible with very high
principle; as its essence seems to consist in the most exquisite
power of adaptation to varying people and still more various moods;
'being all things to all men.' At any rate, Molly might soon have
been aware that Cynthia was not remarkable for unflinching morality;
but the glamour thrown over her would have prevented Molly from any
attempt at penetrating into and judging her companion's character,
even had such processes been the least in accordance with her own
disposition.

Cynthia was very beautiful, and was so well aware of this fact that
she had forgotten to care about it; no one with such loveliness ever
appeared so little conscious of it. Molly would watch her
perpetually as she moved about the room, with the free stately step
of some wild animal of the forest--moving almost, as it were, to the
continual sound of music. Her dress, too, though now to our ideas it
would be considered ugly and disfiguring, was suited to her
complexion and figure, and the fashion of it subdued within due
bounds by her exquisite taste. It was inexpensive enough, and the
changes in it were but few. Mrs. Gibson professed herself shocked to
find that Cynthia had but four gowns, when she might have stocked
herself so well, and brought over so many useful French patterns, if
she had but patiently awaited her mother's answer to the letter
which she had sent announcing her return by the opportunity madame
had found for her. Molly was hurt for Cynthia at all these speeches;
she thought they implied that the pleasure which her mother felt in
seeing her a fortnight sooner after her two years' absence was
inferior to that which she would have received from a bundle of
silver-paper patterns. But Cynthia took no apparent notice of the
frequent recurrence of these small complaints. Indeed, she received
much of what her mother said with a kind of complete indifference,
that made Mrs. Gibson hold her rather in awe; and she was much more
communicative to Molly than to her own child. With regard to dress,
however, Cynthia soon showed that she was her mother's own daughter
in the manner in which she could use her deft and nimble fingers.
She was a capital workwoman; and, unlike Molly, who excelled in
plain sewing, but had no notion of dressmaking or millinery, she
could repeat the fashions she had only seen in passing along the
streets of Boulogne, with one or two pretty rapid movements of her
hands, as she turned and twisted the ribbons and gauze her mother
furnished her with. So she refurbished Mrs. Gibson's wardrobe; doing
it all in a sort of contemptuous manner, the source of which Molly
could not quite make out.

Day after day the course of these small frivolities was broken in
upon by the news Mr. Gibson. brought of Mrs. Hamley's nearer approach
to death. Molly--very often sitting by Cynthia, and surrounded by
ribbon, and wire, and net--heard the bulletins like the toll of a
funeral bell at a marriage feast. Her father sympathized with her.
It was the loss of a dear friend to him too; but he was so
accustomed to death, that it seemed to him but as it was, the
natural end of all things human. To Molly, the death of some one she
had known so well and loved so much, was a sad and gloomy
phenomenon. She loathed the small vanities with which she was
surrounded, and would wander out into the frosty garden, and pace
the walk, which was both sheltered and concealed by evergreens.

At length--and yet it was not so long, not a fortnight since Molly
had left the Hall--the end came. Mrs. Hamley had sunk out of life as
gradually as she had sunk out of consciousness and her place in this
world. The quiet waves closed over her, and her place knew her no
more.

'They all sent their love to you, Molly,' said her father. 'Roger
Hamley said he knew how you would feel it.'

Mr. Gibson had come in very late, and was having a solitary dinner in
the dining-room. Molly was sitting near him to keep him company.
Cynthia and her mother were upstairs. The latter was trying on a
head-dress which Cynthia had made for her.

Molly remained downstairs after her father had gone out afresh on
his final round among his town patients. The fire was growing very
low, and the lights were waning. Cynthia came softly in, and taking
Molly's listless hand, that hung down by her side, sate at her feet
on the rug, chafing her chilly fingers without speaking. The tender
action thawed the tears that had been gathering heavily at Molly's
heart, and they came dropping down her cheeks.

'You loved her dearly, did you not, Molly?'

'Yes,' sobbed Molly; and then there was a silence.

'Had you known her long?'

'No, not a year. But I had seen a great deal of her. I was almost
like a daughter to her; she said so. Yet I never bid her good-by, or
anything. Her mind became weak and confused.'

'She had only sons, I think?'

'No; only Mr. Osborne and Mr. Roger Hamley. She had a daughter once--
"Fanny." Sometimes, in her illness, she used to call me "Fanny."'

The two girls were silent for some time, both gazing into the fire.
Cynthia spoke first,--

'I wish I could love people as you do, Molly!'

'Don't you?' said the other, in surprise.

'No. A good number of people love me, I believe, or at least they
think they do; but I never seem to care much for any one. I do
believe I love you, little Molly, whom I have only known for ten
days, better than any one.'

'Not than your mother?' said Molly, in grave astonishment.

'Yes, than my mother!' replied Cynthia, half-smiling. 'It's very
shocking, I daresay; but it is so. Now, don't go and condemn me. I
don't think love for one's mother quite comes by nature; and
remember how much I have been separated from mine! I loved my
father, if you will,' she continued, with the force of truth in her
tone, and then she stopped; 'but he died when I was quite a little
thing, and no one believes that I remember him. I heard mamma say to
a caller, not a fortnight after his funeral, "Oh, no, Cynthia is too
young; she has quite forgotten him"--and I bit my lips, to keep from
crying out, "Papa! papa! have I?" But it's of no use. Well, then
mamma had to go out as a governess; she couldn't help it, poor
thing! but she didn't much care for parting with me. I was a
trouble, I daresay. So I was sent to school at four years old; first
one school, and then another; and in the holidays, mamma went to
stay at grand houses, and I was generally left with the
schoolmistresses. Once I went to the Towers; and mamma lectured me
continually, and yet I was very naughty, I believe. And so I never
went again; and I was very glad of it, for it was a horrid place.'

'That it was,' said Molly, who remembered her own day of tribulation
there.

'And once I went to London, to stay with my uncle Kirkpatrick. He is
a lawyer, and getting on now; but then he was poor enough, and had
six or seven children. It was wintertime, and we were all shut up in
a small house in Doughty Street.' But, after all, that wasn't so
bad.'

'But then you lived with your mother when she began school at
Ashcombe. Mr. Preston told me that, when I stayed that day at the
Manor-house.'

'What did he tell you?' asked Cynthia, almost fiercely.

'Nothing but that. Oh, yes! He praised your beauty, and wanted me to
tell you what he had said.'

'I should have hated you if you had,' said Cynthia.

'Of course I never thought of doing such a thing,' replied Molly. 'I
didn't like him; and Lady Harriet spoke of him the next day, as if
he wasn't a person to be liked.'

Cynthia was quite silent. At length she said,--

'I wish I was good!'

'So do I,' said Molly, simply. She was thinking again of Mrs
Hamley,--

Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust

--and 'goodness' just then seemed to her to be the only enduring
thing in the world.

'Nonsense, Molly! You are good. At least, if you're not good, what
am I? There's a rule-of-three sum for you to do! But it's no use
talking; I am not good, and I never shall be now. Perhaps I might be
a heroine still, but I shall never be a good woman, I know.'

'Do you think it easier to be a heroine?'

'Yes, as far as one knows of heroines from history. I'm capable of a
great jerk, an effort, and then a relaxation--but steady every-day
goodness is beyond me. I must be a moral kangaroo!'

Molly could not follow Cynthia's ideas; she could not distract
herself from the thoughts of the sorrowing group at the Hall.

'How I should like to see them all! and yet one can do nothing at
such a time! Papa says the funeral is to be on Tuesday, and that,
after that, Roger Hamley is to go back to Cambridge. It will seem as
if nothing had happened! I wonder how the squire and Mr. Osborne
Hamley will get on together.'

'He's the eldest son, is he not? Why shouldn't he and his father get
on well together?'

'Oh! I don't know. That is to say, I do know, but I think I ought
not to tell.'

'Don't be so pedantically truthful, Molly. Besides, your manner
shows when you speak truth and when you speak falsehood, without
troubling yourself to use words. I knew exactly what your "I don't
know" meant. I never consider myself bound to be truthful, so I beg
we may be on equal terms.'

Cynthia might well say she did not consider herself bound to be
truthful; she literally said what came uppermost, without caring
very much whether it was accurate or not. But there was no
ill-nature, and, in a general way, no attempt at procuring any
advantage for herself in all her deviations; and there was often
such a latent sense of fun in them that Molly could not help being
amused with them in fact, though she condemned them in theory.
Cynthia's playfulness of manner glossed such failings over with a
kind of charm; and yet, at times, she was so soft and sympathetic
that Molly could not resist her, even when she affirmed the most
startling things. The little account she made of her own beauty
pleased Mr. Gibson extremely; and her pretty deference to him won his
heart. She was restless too, till she had attacked Molly's dress,
after she had remodelled her mother's.

'Now for you, sweet one,' said she as she began upon one of Molly's
gowns. 'I've been working as connoisseur until now. Now I begin as
amateur.'

She brought down her pretty artificial flowers, plucked out of her
own best bonnet to put into Molly's, saying they would suit her
complexion, and that a knot of ribbons would do well enough for her.
All the time she worked, she sang; she had a sweet voice in singing,
as well as in speaking, and used to run up and down her gay French
chansons without any difficulty; so flexible in the art was she. Yet
she did not seem to care for music. She rarely touched the piano, on
which Molly practised with daily conscientiousness. Cynthia was
always willing to answer questions about her previous life, though,
after the first, she rarely alluded to it of herself; but she was a
most sympathetic listener to all Molly's innocent confidences of
joys and sorrows; sympathizing even to the extent of wondering how
she could endure Mr. Gibson's second marriage, and why she did not
take some active steps of rebellion.

In spite of all this agreeable and pungent variety of companionship
at home, Molly yearned after the Hamleys. If there had been a woman
in that family she would probably have received many little notes,
and heard of numerous details which were now lost to her, or summed
up in condensed accounts of her father's visits at the Hall, which,
since his dear patient was dead, were only occasional.

'Yes! The squire is a good deal changed; but he's better than he
was. There's an unspoken estrangement between him and Osborne; one
can see it in the silence and constraint of their manners; but
outwardly they are friendly--civil at any rate. The squire will
always respect Osborne as his heir, and the future representative of
the family. Osborne doesn't look well; he says he wants change. I
think he's weary of the domestic ~tete-a-tete~, or
domestic dissension. But he feels his mother's death acutely. It's a
wonder that he and his father are not drawn together by their common
loss. Roger's away at Cambridge too--examination for the
mathematical tripos. Altogether the aspect of both people and place
is changed; it is but natural!'

Such is perhaps the summing-up of the news of the Hamleys, as
contained in many bulletins. They always ended in some kind message
to Molly.

Mrs. Gibson generally said, as a comment upon her husband's account
of Osborne's melancholy,--

'My dear! why don't you ask him to dinner here? A little quiet
dinner, you know. Cook is quite up to it; and we would all of us
wear blacks and lilacs;' he couldn't consider that as gaiety.'

Mr. Gibson took no more notice of these suggestions than by shaking
his head. He had grown accustomed to his wife by this time, and
regarded silence on his own part as a great preservative against
long inconsequential arguments. But every time that Mrs. Gibson was
struck by Cynthia's beauty, she thought it more and more advisable
that Mr. Osborne Hamley should be cheered up by a quiet little
dinner-party. As yet no one but the ladies of Hollingford and Mr
Ashton, the vicar--that hopeless and impracticable old bachelor--
had seen Cynthia; and what was the good of having a lovely daughter,
if there were none but old women to admire her?

Cynthia herself appeared extremely indifferent upon the subject, and
took very little notice of her mother's constant talk about the
gaieties that were possible, and the gaieties that were impossible,
in Hollingford. She exerted herself just as much to charm the two
Miss Brownings as she would have done to delight Osborne Hamley, or
any other young heir. That is to say, she used no exertion, but
simply followed her own nature, which was to attract every one of
those she was thrown amongst. The exertion seemed rather to be to
refrain from doing so, and to protest, as she so often did, by
slight words and expressive looks against her mother's words and
humours--alike against her folly and her caresses. Molly was almost
sorry for Mrs. Gibson, who seemed so unable to gain influence over
her child. One day Cynthia read Molly's thought.

'I am not good, and I told you so. Somehow I cannot forgive her for
her neglect of me as a child, when I would have clung to her.
Besides, I hardly ever heard from her when I was at school. And I
know she put a stop to my coming over to her wedding. I saw the
letter she wrote to Madame Lefevre. A child should be brought up
with its parents, if it is to think them infallible when it grows
up.'

'But though it may know that there must be faults,' replied Molly,
'it ought to cover them over and try to forget their existence.'

'It ought. But don't you see I have grown up outside the pale of
duty and "oughts." Love me as r am, sweet one, for I shall never be
better.'


CHAPTER XX


MRS GIBSON'S VISITORS


One day, to Molly's infinite surprise, Mr. Preston was announced as a
caller. Mrs. Gibson and she were sitting together in the
drawing-room; Cynthia was out--gone into the town a-shopping--when
the door was opened, the name given, and in walked the young man.
His entrance seemed to cause more confusion than Molly could well
account for. He came in with the same air of easy assurance with
which he had received them at Ashcombe Manor-house. He looked
remarkably handsome in his riding-dress, and with the open-air
exercise he had just had. But Mrs. Gibson's smooth brows contracted a
little at the sight of him, and her reception of him was much cooler
than that which she usually gave to visitors. Yet there was a degree
of agitation in it, which surprised Molly a little. Mrs. Gibson was
at her everlasting worsted-work frame when Mr. Preston entered the
room; but somehow in rising to receive him, she threw down her
basket of crewels, and, declining Molly's offer to help her, she
would pick up all the reels herself, before she asked her visitor to
sit down. He stood there, hat in hand, affecting an interest in the
recovery of the worsted which Molly was sure he did not feel; for
all the time his eyes were glancing round the room, and taking note
of the details in the arrangement.

At length they were seated, and conversation began.

'It is the first time I have been in Hollingford since your
marriage, Mrs. Gibson, or I should certainly have called to pay my
respects sooner.'

'I know you are very busy at Ashcombe. I did not expect you to call.
Is Lord Cumnor at the Towers? I have not heard from her ladyship for
more than a week!'

'No! he seemed still detained at Bath. But I had a letter from him
giving me certain messages for Mr. Sheepshanks. Mr. Gibson is not at
home, I'm afraid?'

'No. He is a great deal out--almost constantly, I may say. I had no
idea that I should see so little of him. A doctor's wife leads a
very solitary life, Mr. Preston!'

'You can hardly call it solitary, I should think, when you have such
a companion as Miss Gibson always at hand,' said he, bowing to
Molly.

'Oh, but I call it solitude for a wife when her husband is away.
Poor Mr. Kirkpatrick was never happy unless I always went with
him,--all his walks, all his visits, he liked me to be with him. But
somehow Mr. Gibson feels as if I should be rather in his way.'

'I don't think you could ride pillion behind him on Black Bess,
mamma,' said Molly. 'And unless you could go in that way you could
hardly go with him in his rounds up and down all the rough lanes.'

'Oh! but he might keep a brougham! I've often said so. And then I
could use it for visiting in the evenings. Really it was one reason
why I didn't go to the Hollingford Charity Ball. I couldn't bring
myself to use the dirty fly from the "George." We really must stir
papa up against next winter, Molly; it will never do for you and--'

She pulled herself up suddenly, and looked furtively at Mr. Preston
to see if he had taken any notice of her abruptness. Of course he
had, but he was not going to show it. He turned to Molly, and
said,--

'Have you ever been to a public ball yet, Miss Gibson?'

'No!' said Molly.

'It will be a great pleasure to you when the time comes.'

'I'm not sure. I shall like it if I have plenty of partners; but I'm
afraid I shan't know many people.'

'And you suppose that young men haven't their own ways and means of
being introduced to pretty girls?'

It was exactly one of the speeches Molly had disliked him for
before; and delivered, too, in that kind of underbred manner which
showed that it was meant to convey a personal compliment. Molly took
great credit to herself for the unconcerned manner with which she
went on with her tatting exactly as if she had never heard it.

'I only hope I may be one of your partners at the first ball you go
to. Pray, remember my early application for that honour, when you
are overwhelmed with requests for dances.'

'I don't choose to engage myself beforehand,' said Molly,
perceiving, from under her dropped eyelids, that he was leaning
forwards and looking at her as though he was determined to have an
answer.

'Young ladies are always very cautious in fact, however modest they
may be in profession,' he replied, addressing himself in a
nonchalant manner to Mrs. Gibson. 'In spite of Miss Gibson's
apprehension of not having many partners she declines the certainty
of having one. I suppose Miss Kirkpatrick will have returned from
France before then?'

He said these last words exactly in the same tone as he had used
before; but Molly's instinct told her that he was making an effort
to do so. She looked up. He was playing with his hat, almost as if
he did not care to have any answer to his question. Yet he was
listening acutely, and with a half smile on his face.

Mrs. Gibson reddened a little, and hesitated,--

'Yes; certainly. My daughter will be with us next winter, I believe;
and I daresay she will go out with us.'

'Why can't she say at once that Cynthia is here now?' asked Molly to
herself, yet glad that Mr. Preston's curiosity was baffled.

He still smiled; but this time he looked up at Mrs. Gibson, as he
asked,--'You have good news from her, I hope?'

'Yes; very. By the way, how are our old friends the Robinsons? How
often I think of their kindness to me at Ashcombe! Dear good people,
I wish I could see them again.'

'I will certainly tell them of your kind inquiries. They are very
well, I believe.'

Just at this moment, Molly heard the familiar sound of the click and
opening of the front door. She knew it must be Cynthia; and,
conscious of some mysterious reason which made Mrs. Gibson wish to
conceal her daughter's whereabouts from Mr. Preston, and maliciously
desirous to baffle him, she rose to leave the room, and meet Cynthia
on the stairs; but one of the lost crewels of worsted had entangled
itself in her gown and feet, and before she had freed herself of the
encumbrance, Cynthia had opened the drawing-room door, and stood in
it, looking at her mother, at Molly, at Mr. Preston, but not
advancing one step. Her colour, which had been brilliant the first
moment of her entrance, faded away as she gazed; but her eyes--her
beautiful eyes--usually so soft and grave, seemed to fill with fire,
and her brows to contract, as she took the resolution to come
forwards and take her place among the three, who were all looking at
her with different emotions. She moved calmly and slowly forwards;
Mr. Preston went a step or two to meet her, his hand held out, and
the whole expression of his face that of eager delight.

But she took no notice of the outstretched hand, nor of the chair
that he offered her. She sate down on a little sofa in one of the
windows, and called Molly to her.

'Look at my purchases,' said she. 'This green ribbon was
fourteen-pence a yard, this silk three shillings,' and so she went
on, forcing herself to speak about these trifles as if they were all
the world to her, and she had no attention to throw away on her
mother and her mother's visitor.

Mr. Preston took his cue from her. He, too, talked of the news of the
day, the local gossip--but Molly, who glanced up at him from time to
time, was almost alarmed by the bad expression of suppressed anger,
almost amounting to vindictiveness, which entirely marred his
handsome looks. She did not wish to look again; and tried rather to
back up Cynthia's efforts at maintaining a separate conversation.
Yet she could not help overhearing Mrs. Gibson's strain after
increased civility, as if to make up for Cynthia's rudeness, and, if
possible, to deprecate his anger. She talked perpetually, as though
her object were to detain him; whereas previous to Cynthia's return
she had allowed frequent pauses in the conversation, as though to
give him the opportunity to take his leave.

In the course of the conversation between them the Hamleys came up.
Mrs. Gibson was never unwilling to dwell upon Molly's intimacy with
this county family; and when the latter caught the sound of her own
name, her stepmother was saying,--

'Poor Mrs. Hamley could hardly do without Molly; she quite looked
upon her as a daughter, especially towards the last, when, I am
afraid, she had a good deal of anxiety. Mr. Osborne Hamley--I daresay
you have heard--he did not do so well at college, and they had
expected so much--parents will, you know; but what did it signify?
for he had not to earn his living! I call it a very foolish kind of
ambition when a young man has not to go into a profession.'

'Well, at any rate, the squire must be satisfied now. I saw this
morning's ~Times~, with the Cambridge examination lists in it. Isn't
the second son called after his father, Roger?'

'Yes,' said Molly, starting up, and coming nearer.

'He's senior wrangler, that's all,' said Mr. Preston, almost as
though he were vexed with himself for having anything to say that
could give her pleasure. Molly went back to her seat by Cynthia.

'Poor Mrs. Hamley,' said she very softly, as if to herself. Cynthia
took her hand, in sympathy with Molly's sad and tender look, rather
than because she understood all that was passing in her mind, nor
did she quite understand it herself. A death that had come out of
time; a wonder if the dead knew what passed upon the earth they had
left--the brilliant Osborne's failure, Roger's success; the vanity
of human wishes; all these thoughts, and what they suggested, were
inextricably mingled up in her mind. She came to herself in a few
minutes. Mr. Preston was saying all the unpleasant things he could
think of about the Hamleys in a tone of false sympathy.

'The poor old squire--not the wisest of men--has woefully
mismanaged his estate. And Osborne Hamley is too fine a gentleman to
understand the means by which to improve the value of the land--even
if he had the capital. A man who had practical knowledge of
agriculture, and some thousands of ready money, might bring the
rental up to eight thousand or so. Of course, Osborne will try and
marry some one with money; the family is old and well-established,
and he mustn't object to commercial descent, though I daresay the
squire will for him; but then the young fellow himself is not the
man for the work. No! the family's going down fast; and it's pity
when these old Saxon houses vanish off the land; but it is "kismet"
with the Hamleys. Even the senior wrangler--if it is that Roger
Hamley--he will have spent all his brains in one effort. You never
hear of a senior wrangler being worth anything afterwards. He'll be
a Fellow of his college, of course--that will be a livelihood for
him at any rate.'

'I believe in senior wranglers,' said Cynthia, her clear high voice
ringing through the room. 'And from all I've heard of Mr. Roger
Hamley, I believe he will keep up the distinction he has earned. And
I don't believe that the house of Hamley is so near extinction in
wealth and fame, and good name.'

'They are fortunate in having Miss Kirkpatrick's good word,' said Mr
Preston, rising to take his leave.

'Dear Molly,' said Cynthia, in a whisper, 'I know nothing about your
friends the Hamleys, except that they are your friends, and what you
have told me about them. But I won't have that man speaking of them
so--and your eyes filling with tears all the time. I'd sooner swear
to their having all the talents and good fortune under the sun.'

The only person of whom Cynthia appeared to be wholesomely afraid
was Mr. Gibson. When he was present she was more careful in speaking,
and showed more deference to her mother. Her evident respect for Mr
Gibson, and desire for his good opinion, made her curb herself
before him; and in this manner she earned his good favour as a
lively, sensible girl, with just so much knowledge of the world as
made her a very desirable companion to Molly. Indeed, she made
something of the same kind of impression on all men. They were first
struck with her personal appearance; and then with her pretty
deprecating manner, which appealed to them much as if she had said,
'You are wise, and I am foolish--have mercy on my folly.' It was a
way she had; it meant nothing really; and she was hardly conscious
of it herself; but it was very captivating all the same. Even old
Williams, the gardener, felt it; he said to his confidante, Molly,--

'Eh, miss, but that be a rare young lady! She do have such pretty
coaxing ways. I be to teach her to bud roses come the season--and
I'll warrant ye she'll learn to be sharp enough, for all she says
she bees so stupid.'

If Molly had not had the sweetest disposition in the world she might
have become jealous of all the allegiance laid at Cynthia's feet;
but she never thought of comparing the amount of admiration and love
which they each received. Yet once she did feel a little as if
Cynthia were poaching on her manor. The invitation to the quiet
dinner had been sent to Osborne Hamley, and declined by him. But he
thought it right to call soon afterwards. It was the first time
Molly had seen any of the family since she left the Hall, since Mrs
Hamley's death; and there was so much that she wanted to ask. She
tried to wait patiently till Mrs. Gibson had exhausted the first gush
of her infinite nothings; and then Molly came in with her modest
questions. How was the squire? Had he returned to his old habits?
Had his health suffered?--putting each inquiry with as light and
delicate a touch as if she had been dressing a wound. She hesitated
a little, a very little, before speaking of Roger; for just one
moment the thought flitted across her mind that Osborne might feel
the contrast between his own and his brother's college career too
painfully to like to have it referred to; but then she remembered
the generous brotherly love that had always existed between the two,
and had just entered upon the subject, when Cynthia, in obedience to
her mother's summons, came into the room, and took up her work. No
one could have been quieter--she hardly uttered a word; but Osborne
seemed to fall under her power at once. He no longer gave his
undivided attention to Molly. He cut short his answers to her
questions; and by-and-by, without Molly's rightly understanding how
it was, he had turned towards Cynthia, and was addressing himself to
her. Molly saw the look of content on Mrs. Gibson's face; perhaps it
was her own mortification at not having heard all she wished to know
about Roger, that gave her a keener insight than usual, but certain
it is that all at once she perceived that Mrs. Gibson would not
dislike a marriage between Osborne and Cynthia, and considered the
present occasion as an auspicious beginning. Remembering the secret
which she had been let into so unwillingly, Molly watched his
behaviour, almost as if she had been retained in the interests of
the absent wife; but, after all, thinking as much of the possibility
of his attracting Cynthia as of the unknown and mysterious Mrs
Osborne Hamley. His manner was expressive of great interest and of
strong prepossession in favour of the beautiful girl to whom he was
talking. He was in deep mourning, which showed off his slight figure
and delicate refined face. But there was nothing of flirting, as far
as Molly understood the meaning of the word, in either looks or
words. Cynthia, too, was extremely quiet; she was always much
quieter with men than with women; it was part of the charm of her
soft allurement that she was so passive. They were talking of
France. Mrs. Gibson herself had passed two or three years of her
girlhood there; and Cynthia's late return from Boulogne made it a
very natural subject of conversation. But Molly was thrown out of
it; and with her heart still unsatisfied as to the details of
Roger's success, she had to stand up at last, and receive Osborne's
good-by, scarcely longer or more intimate than his farewell to
Cynthia. As soon as he was gone Mrs. Gibson began in his praise.

'Well, really, I begin to have some faith in long descent. What a
gentleman he is! How agreeable and polite! So different from that
forward Mr. Preston,' she continued, looking a little anxiously at
Cynthia. Cynthia, quite aware that her reply was being watched for,
said, coolly,--

'Mr. Preston doesn't improve on acquaintance. There was a time,
mamma, when I think both you and I thought him very agreeable.'

'I don't remember. You've a clearer memory than I have. But we were
talking of this delightful Mr. Osborne Hamley. Why, Molly, you were
always talking of his brother--it was Roger this, and Roger that--I
can't think how it was you so seldom mentioned this young man.'

'I did not know I had mentioned Mr. Roger Hamley so often,' said
Molly, blushing a little. 'But I saw much more of him--he was more
at home.'

'Well, well! It's all right, my dear. I daresay he suits you best.
But really, when I saw Osborne Hamley close to my Cynthia, I
couldn't help thinking--but perhaps I'd better not tell you what I
was thinking of. Only they are each of them so much above the
average in appearance; and, of course, that suggests things.'

'I perfectly understand what you were thinking of, mamma,' said
Cynthia, with the greatest composure; 'and so does Molly, I have no
doubt.'

'Well! there's no harm in it, I'm sure. Did you hear him say that,
though he did not like to leave his father alone just at present,
yet that when his brother Roger came back from Cambridge, he should
feel more at liberty? It was quite as much to say, "If you will ask
me to dinner then, I shall be delighted to come." And chickens will
be so much cheaper, and cook has such a nice way of boning them, and
doing them up with forcemeat. Everything seems to be falling out so
fortunately. And Molly, my dear, you know I won't forget you.
By-and-by, when Roger Hamley has taken his turn at stopping at home
with his father, we will ask him to one of our little quiet
dinners.'

Molly was very slow at taking this in; but in about a minute the
sense of it had reached her brain, and she went all over very red
and hot; especially as she saw that Cynthia was watching the light
come into her mind with great amusement.

'I'm afraid Molly isn't properly grateful, mamma. If I were you, I
wouldn't exert myself to give a dinner-party on her account. Bestow
all your kindness upon me.'

Molly was often puzzled by Cynthia's speeches to her mother; and
this was one of these occasions. But she was more anxious to say
something for herself; she was so much annoyed at the implication in
Mrs. Gibson's last words.

'Mr. Roger Hamley has been very good to me; he was a great deal at
home when I was there, and Mr. Osborne Hamley was very little there:
that was the reason I spoke so much more of one than the other. If I
had--if he had,'--losing her coherence in the difficulty of finding
words,--'I don't think I should. Oh, Cynthia, instead of laughing at
me, I think you might help me to explain myself!'

Instead, Cynthia gave a diversion to the conversation.

'Mamma's paragon gives me an idea of weakness. I can't quite make
out whether it is in body or mind. Which is it, Molly?'

'He is not strong, I know; but he is very accomplished and clever.
Every one says that,--even papa, who doesn't generally praise young
men. That made the puzzle the greater when he did so badly at
college.'

'Then it's his character that is weak. I'm sure there's weakness
somewhere; but he's very agreeable. It must have been very pleasant,
staying at the Hall.'

'Yes; but it's all over now.'

'Oh, nonsense!' said Mrs. Gibson, wakening up from counting the
stitches in her pattern. 'We shall have the young men coming to
dinner pretty often, you'll see. Your father likes them, and I shall
always make a point of welcoming his friends. They can't go on
mourning for a mother for ever. I expect we shall see a great deal
of them; and that the two families will become very intimate. After
all, these good Hollingford people are terribly behindhand, and I
should say, rather commonplace.'


CHAPTER XXI


THE HALF-SISTERS


It appeared as if Mrs. Gibson's predictions were likely to be
verified; for Osborne Hamley found his way to her drawing-room
pretty frequently. To be sure, sometimes prophets can help on the
fulfilment of their own prophecies; and Mrs. Gibson was not passive.

Molly was altogether puzzled by his manners and ways. He spoke of
occasional absences from the Hall, without exactly saying where he
had been. But that was not her idea of the conduct of a married man,
who, she imagined, ought to have a house and servants, and pay rent
and taxes, and live with his wife. Who this mysterious wife might
be, faded into insignificance before the wonder of where she was.
London, Cambridge, Dover, nay even France, were mentioned by him as
places to which he had been on these different little journeys.
These facts came out quite casually, almost as if he was unaware of
what he was betraying; sometimes he dropped out such sentences as
these:--'Ah, that would be the day I was crossing! It was stormy,
indeed! Instead of our being only two hours, we were nearly five.'
Or, 'I met Lord Hollingford at Dover last week, and he said,' &c.
'The cold now is nothing to what it was in London on Thursday--the
thermometer was down at 15 degrees.' Perhaps, in the rapid flow of
conversation, these small revelations were noticed by no one but
Molly; whose interest and curiosity were always hovering over the
secret she had become possessed of, in spite of all her self-reproach
for allowing her thoughts to dwell on what was still to be kept
as a mystery.

It was also evident to her that Osborne was not too happy at home.
He had lost the slight touch of cynicism which he had affected when
he was expected to do wonders at college; and that was one good
result of his failure. If he did not give himself the trouble of
appreciating other people, and their performances, at any rate his
conversation was not so amply sprinkled with critical pepper. He was
more absent, not so agreeable, Mrs. Gibson thought, but did not say.
He looked ill in health; but that might be the consequence of the
real depression of spirits which Molly occasionally saw peeping out
through all his pleasant surface-talk. Now and then, he referred to
'the happy days that are gone,' or, 'to the time when my mother was
alive,' when talking directly to her; and then his voice sank, and a
gloom came over his countenance, and Molly longed to express her own
deep sympathy. He did not often mention his father; and Molly
thought she could read in his manner, when he did, that something of
the painful restraint she had noticed when she was last at the Hall
still existed between them. Nearly all that she knew of the family
interior she had heard from Mrs. Hamley, and she was uncertain as to
how far her father was acquainted with them; so she did not like to
question him too closely; nor was he a man to be so questioned as to
the domestic affairs of his patients. Sometimes she wondered if it
was a dream--that short half hour in the library at Hamley Hall--
when she had learnt a fact which seemed so all-important to Osborne,
yet which made so little difference in his way of life--either in
speech or action. During the twelve or fourteen hours or so that she
had remained at the Hall afterwards, no further allusion had been
made to his marriage, either by himself or by Roger. It was, indeed,
very like a dream. Probably Molly would have been rendered much more
uncomfortable in the possession of her secret if Osborne had struck
her as particularly attentive in his devotion to Cynthia. She
evidently amused and attracted him, but not in any lively or
passionate kind of manner. He admired her beauty, and seemed to feel
her charm; but he would leave her side, and come to sit near Molly,
if anything reminded him of his mother, about which he could talk to
her, and to her alone. Yet he came so often to the Gibsons', that
Mrs. Gibson might be excused for the fancy she had taken into her
head, that it was for Cynthia's sake. He liked the lounge, the
friendliness, the company of two intelligent girls of beauty and
manners above the average; one of whom stood in a peculiar relation
to him, as having been especially beloved by the mother whose memory
he cherished so fondly. Knowing himself to be out of the category of
bachelors, he was, perhaps, too indifferent as to other people's
ignorance, and its possible consequences.

Somehow, Molly did not like to be the first to introduce Roger's
name into the conversation, so she lost many an opportunity of
hearing intelligence about him. Osborne was often so languid or so
absent that he only followed the lead of talk; and as an awkward
fellow, who had paid her no particular attention, and as a second
son, Roger was not pre-eminent in Mrs. Gibson's thoughts; Cynthia had
never seen him, and the freak did not take her often to speak about
him. He had not come home since he had obtained his high place in
the mathematical lists: that Molly knew; and she knew, too, that he
was working hard for something--she supposed a fellowship--and that
was all. Osborne's tone in speaking of him was always the same:
every word, every inflexion of the voice breathed out affection and
respect--nay, even admiration! And this from the ~nil admirari~
brother, who seldom carried his exertions so far.

'Ah, Roger!' he said one day. Molly caught the name in an instant,
though she had not heard what had gone before. 'He is a fellow in a
thousand--in a thousand, indeed! I don't believe there is his match
anywhere for goodness and real solid power combined.'

'Molly,' said Cynthia, after Mr. Osborne Hamley had gone, 'what sort
of a man is this Roger Hamley? One can't tell how much to believe of
his brother's praises; for it is the one subject on which Osborne
Hamley becomes enthusiastic. I've noticed it once or twice before.'

While Molly hesitated on which point of the large round to begin her
description, Mrs. Gibson struck in,--

'It just shows what a sweet disposition Osborne Hamley is of--that
he should praise his brother as he does. I daresay he is senior
wrangler, and much good may it do him! I don't deny that; but as for
conversation, he's as heavy as heavy can be. A great awkward fellow
to boot, who looks as if he did not know two and two made four, for
all he is such a mathematical genius. You would hardly believe he
was Osborne Hamley's brother to see him! I should not think he had a
profile at all.'

'What do you think of him, Molly?' said the persevering Cynthia.

'I like him,' said Molly. 'He has been very kind to me. I know he
isn't handsome like Osborne.'

It was rather difficult to say all this quietly, but Molly managed
to do it, quite aware that Cynthia would not rest till she had
extracted some kind of an opinion out of her.

'I suppose he will come home at Easter,' said Cynthia, 'and then I
shall see him for myself.'

'It's a great pity that their being in mourning will prevent their
going to the Easter charity ball,' said Mrs. Gibson, plaintively. 'I
shan't like to take you two girls, if you are not to have any
partners. It will put me in such an awkward position. I wish we
could join on to the Towers party. That would secure you partners,
for they always bring a number of dancing men, who might dance with
you after they had done their duty by the ladies of the house. But
really everything is so changed since dear Lady Cumnor has been an
invalid that perhaps they won't go at all.'

This Easter ball was a great subject of conversation with Mrs
Gibson. She sometimes spoke of it as her first appearance in society
as a bride, though she had been visiting once or twice a week all
winter long. Then she shifted her ground, and said she felt so much
interest in it, because she would then have the responsibility of
introducing both her own and Mr. Gibson's daughter to public notice,
though the fact was that pretty nearly every one who was going to
this ball had seen the two young ladies--though not their ball
dresses--before. But, aping the manners of the aristocracy as far as
she knew them, she intended to 'bring out' Molly and Cynthia on this
occasion, which she regarded in something of the light of a
presentation at Court. 'They are not out yet,' was her favourite
excuse when either of them was invited to any house to which she did
not wish them to go, or invited without her. She even made a
difficulty about their 'not being out' when Miss Browning--that old
friend of the Gibson family--came in one morning to ask the two
girls to come to a very friendly tea and a round game afterwards;
this mild piece of gaiety being designed as an attention to three of
Mrs. Goodenough's grandchildren--two young ladies and their
school-boy brother--who were staying on a visit to their grandmamma.

'You are very kind, Miss Browning, but you see I hardly like to let
them go--they are not out, you know, till after the Easter ball.'

'Till when we are invisible,' said Cynthia, always ready with her
mockery to exaggerate any pretension of her mother's. 'We are so
high in rank that our sovereign must give us her sanction before we
can play a round game at your house.'

Cynthia enjoyed the idea of her own full-grown size and stately
gait, as contrasted with that of a meek, half-fledged girl in the
nursery; but Miss Browning was half puzzled and half affronted.

'I don't understand it at all. In my days girls went wherever it
pleased people to ask them, without this farce of bursting out in
all their new fine clothes at some public place. I don't mean but
what the gentry took their daughters to York, or Matlock,
or Bath to give them a taste of gay society when they were growing
up; and the quality went up to London, and their young ladies were
presented to Queen Charlotte, and went to a birthday ball, perhaps.
But for us little Hollingford people, why we knew every child
amongst us from the day of its birth; and many a girl of twelve or
fourteen have I seen go out to a card-party, and sit quiet at her
work, and know how to behave as well as any lady there. There was no
talk of "coming out" in those days for any one under the daughter of
a squire.'

'After Easter, Molly and I shall know how to behave at a card-party,
but not before,' said Cynthia, demurely.

'You're always fond of your quips and your cranks,' my dear,' said
Miss Browning, 'and I wouldn't quite answer for your behaviour: you
sometimes let your spirits carry you away. But I'm quite sure Molly
will be a little lady as she always is, and always was, and I have
known her from a babe.'

Mrs. Gibson took up arms on behalf of her own daughter, or rather,
she took up arms against Molly's praises.

'I don't think you would have called Molly a lady the other day,
Miss Browning, if you had found her where I did: sitting up in a
cherry-tree, six feet from the ground at least, I do assure you.'

'Oh! but that wasn't pretty,' said Miss Browning, shaking her head
at Molly. 'I thought you'd left off those tomboy ways.'

'She wants the refinement which good society gives in several ways',
said Mrs. Gibson, returning to the attack on poor Molly. 'She's very
apt to come upstairs two steps at a time.'

'Only two, Molly!' said Cynthia. 'Why, to-day I found I could manage
four of these broad shallow steps.'

'My dear child, what are you saying?'

'Only confessing that I, like Molly, want the refinements which good
society gives; therefore, please do let us go to Miss Brownings'
this evening. I will pledge myself for Molly that she shan't sit in
a cherry-tree; and Molly shall see that I don't go upstairs in an
unladylike way. I will go upstairs as meekly as if I were a come-out
young lady, and had been to the Easter ball.'

So it was agreed that they should go. If Mr. Osborne Hamley had been
named as one of the probable visitors, there would have been none of
this difficulty about the affair.

But though he was not there his brother Roger was. Molly saw him in
a minute when she entered the little drawing-room; but Cynthia did
not.

'And see, my dears,' said Miss Phoebe Browning, turning them round
to the side where Roger stood waiting for his turn of speaking to
Molly. 'We've got a gentleman for you after all! Wasn't it
fortunate?--just as sister said that you might find it dull--you,
Cynthia, she meant, because you know you come from France; and then,
just as if he had been sent from heaven, Mr. Roger came in to call;
and I won't say we laid violent hands on him, because he was too
good for that; but really we should have been near it, if he had not
stayed of his own accord.'

The moment Roger had done his cordial greeting to Molly, he asked
her to introduce him to Cynthia.

'I want to know her--your new sister,' he added, with the kind smile
Molly remembered so well since the very first day she had seen it
directed towards her, as she sate crying under the weeping ash.
Cynthia was standing a little behind Molly when Roger asked for this
introduction. She was generally dressed with careless grace. Molly,
who was delicate neatness itself, used sometimes to wonder how
Cynthia's tumbled gowns, tossed away so untidily, had the art of
looking so well and falling in such graceful folds. For instance,
the pale lilac muslin gown she wore this evening had been worn many
times before, and had looked unfit to wear again until Cynthia put
it on. Then the limpness became softness, and the very creases took
the lines of beauty. Molly, in a daintily clean pink muslin, did not
look half so elegantly dressed as Cynthia. The grave eyes that the
latter raised when she had to be presented to Roger had a sort of
child-like innocence and wonder about them, which did not quite
belong to Cynthia's character. She put on her armour of magic that
evening--involuntarily as she always did; but, on the other side,
she could not help trying her power on strangers. Molly had always
felt that she should have a right to a good long talk with Roger
when she next saw him; and that he would tell her, or she should
gather from him, all the details she so longed to hear about the
squire--about the Hall--about Osborne--about himself. He was just as
cordial and friendly as ever with her. If Cynthia had not been there
all would have gone on as she had anticipated; but of all the
victims to Cynthia's charms he fell most prone and abject. Molly saw
it all, as she was sitting next to Miss Phoebe at the tea-table,
acting right-hand, and passing cake, cream, sugar, with such busy
assiduity that every one besides herself thought that her mind, as
well as her hands, was fully occupied. She tried to talk to the two
shy girls, as in virtue of her two years' seniority she thought
herself bound to do; and the consequence was, she went upstairs with
the twain clinging to her arms, and willing to swear an eternal
friendship. Nothing would satisfy them but that she must sit between
them at ~vingt-un~; and they were so desirous of her advice in the
important point of fixing the price of the counters that she could
not even have joined in in the animated tete-a-tete
going on between Roger and Cynthia. Or rather, it would be more
correct to say that Roger was talking in a most animated manner to
Cynthia, whose sweet eyes were fixed upon his face with a look of
great interest in all he was saying, while it was only now and then
she made her low replies. Molly caught a few words occasionally in
intervals of business.

'At my uncle's, we always gave a silver threepence for three dozen.
You know what a silver threepence is, don't you, dear Miss Gibson?'

'The three classes are published in the Senate House at nine o'clock
on the Friday morning, and you can't imagine--'

'I think it will be thought rather shabby to play at anything less
than sixpence. That gentleman' (this in a whisper) 'is at Cambridge,
and you know they always play very high there, and sometimes ruin
themselves, don't they, dear Miss Gibson?'

'Oh, on this occasion the Master of Arts who precedes the candidates
for honours when they go into the Senate House is called the Father
of the College to which he belongs. I think I mentioned that before,
didn't I?'

So Cynthia was hearing all about Cambridge, and the very examination
about which Molly had felt such keen interest, without having ever
been able to have her questions answered by a competent person; and
Roger, to whom she had always looked as the final and most
satisfactory answerer, was telling all she wanted to know, and she
could not listen. It took all her patience to make up little packets
of counters, and settle, as the arbiter of the game, whether it
would be better for the round or the oblong counters to be reckoned
as six. And when all was done, and every one sate in their places
round the table, Roger and Cynthia had to be called twice before
they came. They stood up, it is true, at the first sound of their
names; but they did not move: Roger went on talking, Cynthia
listening, till the second call--when they hurried to the table and
tried to appear all on a sudden quite interested in the great
questions of the game, namely, the price of three dozen counters,
and whether, all things considered, it would be better to call the
round counters or the oblong half-a-dozen each. Miss Browning,
drumming the pack of cards on the table, and quite ready to begin
dealing, decided the matter by saying, 'Rounds are sixes, and three
dozen counters cost sixpence. Pay up, if you please, and let us
begin at once.' Cynthia sate between Roger and William Osborne, the
young schoolboy, who bitterly resented on this occasion his sisters'
habit of calling him 'Willie,' as he thought that it was this boyish
sobriquet which prevented Cynthia from attending as much to him as
to Mr. Roger Hamley; he also was charmed by the charmer, who found
leisure to give him one or two of her sweet smiles. On his return
home to his grandmamma's he gave out one or two very decided and
rather original opinions, quite opposed--as was natural--to his
sisters'. One was,--

'That, after all, a senior wrangler was no great shakes. Any man
might be one if he liked, but there were a lot of fellows that he
knew who would be very sorry to go in for anything so slow.'

Molly thought the game would never end. She had no particular turn
for gambling in her; and whatever her card might be, she regularly
put on two counters, indifferent as to whether she won or lost.
Cynthia, on the contrary, staked high, and was at one time very
rich, but ended by being in debt to Molly something like six
shillings. She had forgotten her purse, she said, and was obliged to
borrow from the more provident Molly, who was aware that the round
game of which Miss Browning had spoken to her was likely to require
money. If it was not a very merry affair for all the individuals
concerned, it was a very noisy one on the whole. Molly thought it
was going to last till midnight; but punctually as the clock struck
nine, the little maid-servant staggered in under the weight of a
tray loaded with sandwiches, cakes, and jelly. This brought on a
general move; and Roger, who appeared to have been on the watch for
something of the kind, came and took a chair by Molly.

'I am so glad to see you again--it seems such a long time since
Christmas,' said he, dropping his voice, and not alluding more
exactly to the day when she had left the Hall.

'It is a long time,' she replied; 'we are close to Easter now. I
have so wanted to tell you how glad I was to hear about your honours
at Cambridge. I once thought of sending you a message through your
brother, but then I thought it might be making too much fuss,
because I know nothing of mathematics, or of the value of a
senior-wranglership; and you were sure to have so many
congratulations from people who did know.'

'I missed yours though, Molly,' said he, kindly. 'But I felt sure
you were glad for me.'

'Glad and proud too,' said she. 'I should so like to hear something
more about it. I heard you telling Cynthia--'

'Yes. What a charming person she is! I should think you must be
happier than we expected long ago.'

'But tell me something about the senior-wranglership, please,' said
Molly.

'It's a long story, and I ought to be helping the Miss Brownings to
hand sandwiches--besides, you wouldn't find it very interesting,
it's so full of technical details.'

'Cynthia looked very much interested,' said Molly.

'Well! then I refer you to her, for I must go now. I can't for shame
go on sitting here, and letting those good ladies have all the
trouble. But I shall come and call on Mrs. Gibson soon. Are you
walking home to-night?'

'Yes, I think so,' replied Molly, eagerly foreseeing what was to
come.

'Then I shall walk home with you. I left my horse at the "George,"
and that's half-way. I suppose old Betty will allow me to accompany
you and your sister? You used to describe her as something of a
dragon.'

'Betty has left us,' said Molly, sadly. 'She's gone to live at a
place at Ashcombe.'

He made a face of dismay, and then went off to his duties. The short
conversation had been very pleasant, and his manner had had just the
brotherly kindness of old times; but it was not quite the manner he
had to Cynthia; and Molly half thought she would have preferred the
latter. He was now hovering about Cynthia, who had declined the
offer of refreshments from Willie Osborne. Roger was tempting her,
and with playful entreaties urging her to take something from him.
Every word they said could be heard by the whole room; yet every
word was said, on Roger's part at least, as if he could not have
spoken it in that peculiar manner to any one else. At length, and
rather more because she was weary of being entreated, than because
it was his wish, Cynthia took a macaroon, and Roger seemed as happy
as though she had crowned him with flowers. The whole affair was as
trifling and commonplace as could be in itself. hardly worth
noticing: and yet Molly did notice it, and felt uneasy; she could
not tell why. As it turned out, it was a rainy night, and Mrs. Gibson
sent a fly for the two girls instead of old Betty's substitute. Both
Cynthia and Molly thought of the possibility of their taking the two
Osborne girls back to their grandmother's, and so saving them a wet
walk; but Cynthia got the start in speaking about it; and the thanks
and the implied praise for thoughtfulness were hers.

When they got home Mr. and Mrs. Gibson were sitting in the
drawing-room, quite ready to be amused by any details of the
evening.

Cynthia began,--

'Oh! it wasn't very entertaining. One didn't expect that,' and she
yawned wearily.

'Who were there?' asked Mr. Gibson. 'Quite a young party--wasn't it?'

'They'd only asked Lizzie and Fanny Osborne, and their brother; but
Mr. Roger Hamley had ridden over and called on the Miss Brownings,
and they had kept him to tea. No one else.'

'Roger Hamley there!' said Mr. Gibson. 'He's come home then. I must
make time to ride over and see him.'

'You'd much better ask him here,' said Mrs. Gibson. 'Suppose you
invite him and his brother to dine here on Friday, my dear? It would
be a very pretty attention, I think.'

'My dear! these young Cambridge men have a very good taste in wine,
and don't spare it. My cellar won't stand many of their attacks.'

'I didn't think you were so inhospitable, Mr. Gibson.'

'I'm not inhospitable, I'm sure. If you'll put "bitter beer" in the
corner of your notes of invitation, just as the smart people put
"quadrilles" as a sign of entertainment offered, we'll have Osborne
and Roger to dinner any day you like. And what did you think of my
favourite, Cynthia? You hadn't seen him before, I think?'

'Oh! he's nothing like so handsome as his brother; nor so polished;
nor so easy to talk to. He entertained me for more than an hour with
a long account of some examination or other; but there's something
one likes about him.'

'Well--and Molly--' said Mrs. Gibson, who piqued herself on being an
impartial stepmother; and who always tried hard to make Molly talk
as much as Cynthia--'what sort of an evening have you had?'

'Very pleasant, thank you.' Her heart a little belied her as she
said this. She had not cared for the round game; and she would have
cared for Roger's conversation. She had had what she was indifferent
to, and not had what she would have liked.

'We've had our unexpected visitor, too,' said Mr. Gibson. 'Just after
dinner who should come in but Mr. Preston. I fancy he's having more
of the management of the Hollingford property than formerly.
Sheepshanks is getting an old man. And if so, I suspect we shall see
a good deal of Preston. He's "no blate," as they used to say in
Scotland, and made himself quite at home to-night. If I'd asked him
to stay, or, indeed, if I'd done anything but yawn, he'd have been
here now. But I defy any man to stay when I have a fit of yawning.'

'Do you like Mr. Preston, papa?' asked Molly.

'About as much as I do half the men I meet. He talks well, and has
seen a good deal. I know very little of him, though, except that
he's my lord's steward, which is a guarantee for a good deal.'

'Lady Harriet spoke pretty strongly against him that day I was with
her at the Manor-house.'

'Lady Harriet's always full of fancies: she likes persons to-day,
and dislikes them to-morrow,' said Mrs. Gibson, who was touched on
her sore point whenever Molly quoted Lady Harriet, or said anything
to imply ever so transitory an intimacy with her.

'You must know a good deal about Mr. Preston, my dear? I suppose you
saw a good deal of him at Ashcombe?'

Mrs. Gibson coloured, and looked at Cynthia before she replied.
Cynthia's face was set into a determination not to speak, however
much she might be referred to.

'Yes; we saw a good deal of him--at one time, I mean. He's
changeable, I think. But he always sent us game, and sometimes
fruit. There were some stories against him, but I never believed
them.'

'What kind of stories?' said Mr. Gibson, quickly.

'Oh, vague stories, you know: scandal, I daresay. No one ever
believed them. He could be so agreeable if he chose; and my lord,
who is so very particular, would never have kept him as agent if
they were true; not that I ever knew what they were, for I consider
all scandal as abominable gossip.'

'I'm very glad I yawned in his face,' said Mr. Gibson. 'I hope he'll
take the hint.'

'If it was one of your giant-gapes, papa, I should call it more than
a hint,' said Molly. 'And if you want a yawning chorus the next time
he comes, I'll join in; won't you, Cynthia?'

'I don't know,' replied the latter, shortly, as she lighted her
bed-candle. The two girls had usually some nightly conversation in
one or other of their bed-rooms; but to-night Cynthia said something
or other about being terribly tired, and hastily shut her door.

The very next day, Roger came to pay his promised call. Molly was
out in the garden with Williams, planning the arrangement of some
new flower-beds, and deep in her employment of placing pegs upon the
lawn to mark out the different situations, when, standing up to mark
the effect, her eye was caught by the figure of a gentleman, sitting
with his back to the light, leaning forwards, and talking, or
listening, eagerly. Molly knew the shape of the head perfectly, and
hastily began to put off her brown-holland gardening apron, emptying
the pockets as she spoke to Williams.

'You can finish it now, I think,' said she. 'You know about the
bright-coloured flowers being against the privet-hedge, and where
the new rose-bed it to be?'

'I can't justly say as I do,' said he. 'Mebbe, you'll just go o'er
it all once again, Miss Molly. I'm not so young as I oncst was, and
my head is not so clear now-a-days, and I'd be loth to make mistakes
when you're so set upon your plans.'

Molly gave up her impulse in a moment. She saw that the old gardener
was really perplexed, yet that he was as anxious as he could be to
do his best. So she went over the ground again, pegging and
explaining till the wrinkled brow was smooth again, and he kept
saying, 'I see, miss. All right, Miss Molly, I'se gotten it in my
head as clear as patch-work now.'

So she could leave him, and go in. But just as she was close to the
garden door, Roger came out. It really was for once a case of virtue
its own reward, for it was far pleasanter to her to have him in a
tete-a-tete, however short, than in the restraint of
Mrs. Gibson's and Cynthia's presence.

'I only just found out where you were, Molly. Mrs. Gibson said you
had gone out, but she didn't know where; and it was the greatest
chance that I turned round and saw you.'

'I saw you some time ago, but I couldn't leave Williams. I think he
was unusually slow to-day; and he seemed as if he couldn't
understand my plan for the new flower-beds.'

'Is that the paper you've got in your hand? Let me look at it, will
you? Ah, I see! you've borrowed some of your ideas from our garden
at home, haven't you? This bed of scarlet geraniums, with the border
of young oaks, pegged down! That was a fancy of my dear mother's.'

They were both silent for a minute or two. Then Molly said,--

'How is the squire? I've never seen him since.'

'No, he told me how much he wanted to see you, but he couldn't make
up his mind to come and call. I suppose it would never do now for
you to come and stay at the Hall, would it? It would give my father
so much pleasure: he looks upon you as a daughter, and I'm sure both
Osborne and I shall always consider you are like a sister to us,
after all my mother's love for you, and your tender care of her at
last. But I suppose it wouldn't do.'

'No! certainly not,' said Molly, hastily.

'I fancy if you could come it would put us a little to rights. You
know, as I think I once told you, Osborne has behaved differently to
what I should have done, though not wrongly,--only what I call an
error of judgment. But my father, I'm sure, has taken up some notion
of--never mind; only the end of it is that he holds Osborne still in
tacit disgrace, and is miserable himself all the time. Osborne, too,
is sore and unhappy, and estranged from my father. It is just what
my mother would have put right very soon, and perhaps you could have
done it--unconsciously, I mean--for this wretched mystery that
Osborne preserves about his affairs is at the root of it all. But
there's no use talking about it; I don't know why I began.' Then,
with a wrench, changing the subject, while Molly still thought of
what he had been telling her, he broke out,--'I can't tell you how
much I like Miss Kirkpatrick, Molly. It must be a great pleasure to
you having such a companion!'

'Yes,' said Molly, half smiling. 'I'm very fond of her; and I think
I like her better every day I know her. But how quickly you have
found out her virtues!'

'I didn't say "virtues," did I?' asked he, reddening, but putting
the question in all good faith. 'Yet I don't think one could be
deceived in that face. And Mrs. Gibson appears to be a very friendly
person,--she has asked Osborne and me to dine here on Friday.'

'Bitter beer' came into Molly's mind; but what she said was, 'And
are you coming?'

'Certainly, I am, unless my father wants me; and I've given Mrs
Gibson a conditional promise for Osborne too. So I shall see you all
very soon again. But I must go now. I have to keep an appointment
seven miles from here in half an hour's time. Good luck to your
flower-garden, Molly.'


CHAPTER XXII


THE OLD SQUIRE'S TROUBLES


Affairs were going on worse at the Hall than Roger had liked to
tell. Moreover, very much of the discomfort there arose from 'mere
manner,' as people express it, which is always indescribable and
indefinable. Quiet and passive as Mrs. Hamley had always been in
appearance, she was the ruling spirit of the house as long as she
lived. The directions to the servants, down to the most minute
particulars, came from her sitting-room, or from the sofa on which
she lay. Her children always knew where to find her; and to find
her, was to find love and sympathy. Her husband, who was often
restless and angry from one cause or another, always came to her to
be smoothed down and put right. He was conscious of her pleasant
influence over him, and became at peace with himself when in her
presence; just as a child is at case when with some one who is both
firm and gentle. But the keystone of the family arch was gone, and
the stones of which it was composed began to fall apart. It is
always sad when a sorrow of this kind seems to injure the character
of the mourning survivors. Yet, perhaps, this injury may be only
temporary or superficial; the judgments so constantly passed upon
the way people bear the loss of those whom they have deeply loved,
appear to be even more cruel, and wrongly meted out, than human
judgments generally are. To careless observers, for instance, it
would seem as though the squire was rendered more capricious and
exacting, more passionate and authoritative, by his wife's death.
The truth was, that it occurred at a time when many things came to
harass him, and some to bitterly disappoint him; and ~she~ was no
longer there to whom he used to carry his sore heart for the gentle
balm of her sweet words. So the sore heart ached and smarted
internally; and often, when he saw how his violent conduct affected
others, he could have cried out for their pity, instead of their
anger and resentment: 'Have mercy upon me, for I am very miserable.'
How often have such dumb thoughts gone up from the hearts of those
who have taken hold of their sorrow by the wrong end, as prayers
against sin! And when the squire saw that his servants were learning
to dread him, and his first-born to avoid him, he did not blame
them. He knew he was becoming a domestic tyrant; it seemed as if all
circumstances conspired against him, and as if he was too weak to
struggle with them; else, why did everything indoors and
out-of-doors go so wrong just now, when all he could have done, had
things been prosperous, was to have submitted, in very imperfect
patience, to the loss of his wife? But just when he needed ready
money to pacify Osborne's creditors, the harvest had turned out
remarkably plentiful, and the price of corn had sunk down to a level
it had not touched for years. The squire had insured his life at the
time of his marriage for a pretty large sum. It was to be a
provision for his wife, if she had survived him, and for their
younger children. Roger was the only representative of these
interests now; but the squire was unwilling to lose the insurance by
ceasing to pay the annual sum. He would not, if he could, have sold
any part of the estate which he inherited from his father; and,
besides, it was strictly entailed. He had sometimes thought how wise
a step it would have been could he have sold a portion of it, and
with the purchase-money have drained and reclaimed the remainder;
and at length, learning from some neighbour that Government would
make certain advances for drainage, &c. at a very low rate of
interest, on condition that the work was done, and the money repaid,
within a given time; his wife had urged him to take advantage of the
proffered loan. But now that she was no longer here to encourage
him, and take an interest in the progress of the work, he grew
indifferent to it himself, and cared no more to go out on his stout
roan cob, and sit square on his seat, watching the labourers on the
marshy land all overgrown with rushes; speaking to them from time to
time in their own strong nervous country dialect: but the interest
to Government had to be paid all the same, whether the men worked
well or ill. Then the roof of the Hall let in the melted snow-water
this winter; and, on examination, it turned out that a new roof was
absolutely required. The men who had come about the advances made to
Osborne by the London money-lender, had spoken disparagingly of the
timber on the estate--'Very fine trees--sound, perhaps, too, fifty
years ago, but gone to rot now; had wanted lopping and clearing. Was
there no wood-ranger or forester? They were nothing like the value
young Mr. Hamley had represented them to be of.' The remarks had come
round to the squire's ears. He loved the trees he had played under
as a boy as if they were living creatures; that was on the romantic
side of his nature. Merely looking at them as representing so many
pounds sterling, he had esteemed them highly, and had had, until
now, no opinion of another by which to correct his own judgment. So
these words of the valuers cut him sharp, although he affected to
disbelieve them, and tried to persuade himself that he did so. But,
after all, these cares and disappointments did not touch the root of
his deep resentment against Osborne. There is nothing like wounded
affection for giving poignancy to anger. And the squire believed
that Osborne and his advisers had been making calculations, based
upon his own death. He hated the idea so much--it made him so
miserable--that he would not face it, and define it, and meet it
with full inquiry and investigation. He chose rather to cherish the
morbid fancy that he was useless in this world--born under an
unlucky star--that all things went badly under his management. But
he did not become humble in consequence. He put his misfortunes down
to the score of Fate--not to his own; and he imagined that Osborne
saw his failures, and that his first-born grudged him his natural
term of life. All these fancies would have been set to rights could
he have talked them over with his wife; or even had he been
accustomed to mingle much in the society of those whom he esteemed
his equals; but, as has been stated, he was inferior in education to
those who should have been his mates; and perhaps the jealousy and
~mauvaise honte~ that this inferiority had called out long ago,
extended itself in some measure to the feelings he entertained
towards his sons--less to Roger than to Osborne, though the former
was turning out by far the most distinguished man. But Roger was
practical; interested in all out-of-doors things, and he enjoyed the
details, homely enough, which his father sometimes gave him of the
every-day occurrences which the latter had noticed in the woods and
the fields. Osborne, on the contrary, was what is commonly called
'fine;' delicate almost to effeminacy in dress and in manner;
careful in small observances. All this his father had been rather
proud of in the days when he had looked forward to a brilliant
career at Cambridge for his son; he had at that time regarded
Osborne's fastidiousness and elegance as another stepping-stone to
the high and prosperous marriage which was to restore the ancient
fortunes of the Hamley family. But now that Osborne had barely
obtained his degree; that all the boastings of his father had proved
vain; that the fastidiousness had led to unexpected expenses (to
attribute the most innocent cause to Osborne's debts), the poor
young man's ways and manners became a subject of irritation to his
father. Osborne was still occupied with his books and his writings
when he was at home; and this mode of passing the greater part of
the day gave him but few subjects in common with his father when
they did meet at meal-times, or in the evenings. Perhaps if Osborne
had been able to have more out-of-door amusements it would have been
better; but he was short-sighted, and cared little for the
carefully-observant pursuits of his brother: he knew but few young
men of his own standing in the county; his hunting even, of which he
was passionately fond, had been curtailed this season, as his father
had disposed of one of the two hunters he had been hitherto allowed.
The whole stable establishment had been reduced; perhaps because it
was the economy which told most on the enjoyment of both the squire
and Osborne, and which, therefore, the former took a savage pleasure
in enforcing. The old carriage--a heavy family coach bought in the
days of comparative prosperity--was no longer needed after madam's
death, and fell to pieces in the cobwebbed seclusion of the
coach-house.' The best of the two carriage-horses was taken for a
gig, which the squire now set up; saying many a time to all who
might care to listen to him that it was the first time for
generations that the Hamleys of Hamley had not been able to keep
their own coach. The other carriage-horse was turned out to grass;
being too old for regular work. Conqueror used to come whinnying up
to the park palings whenever he saw the squire, who had always a
piece of bread, or some sugar, or an apple for the old
favourite--and made many a complaining speech to the dumb animal,
telling him of the change of times since both were in their prime.
It had never been the squire's custom to encourage his boys to
invite their friends to the Hall. Perhaps this, too, was owing to
his ~mauvaise honte~, and also to an exaggerated consciousness of
the deficiencies of his establishment as compared with what he
imagined these lads were accustomed to at home. He explained this
once or twice to Osborne and Roger when they were at Rugby.

'You see, all you public schoolboys have a kind of freemasonry of
your own, and outsiders are looked on by you much as I look on
rabbits and all that isn't game. Ay, you may laugh, but it is so;
and your friends will throw their eyes askance at me, and never
think on my pedigree, which would beat theirs all to shivers, I'll
be bound. No: I'll have no one here at the Hall who will look down
on a Hamley of Hamley, even if he only knows how to make a cross
instead of write his name.'

Then, of course, they must not visit at houses to whose sons the
squire could not or would not return a like hospitality. On all
these points Mrs. Hamley had used her utmost influence without avail;
his prejudices were immovable. As regarded his position as head of
the oldest family in three counties, his pride was invincible; as
regarded himself personally--ill at ease in the society of his
equals, deficient in manners, and in education--his morbid
sensitiveness was too sore and too self-conscious to be called
humility.

Take one instance from among many similar scenes of the state of
feeling between the squire and his eldest son, which, if it could
not be called active discord, showed at least passive estrangement.

It took place on an evening in the March succeeding Mrs. Hamley's
death. Roger was at Cambridge. Osborne had also been from home, and
he had not volunteered any information as to his absence. The squire
believed that Osborne had been either in Cambridge with his brother,
or in London; he would have liked to hear where his son had been,
what he had been doing, and whom he had seen, purely as pieces of
news, and as some diversion from the domestic worries and cares
which were pressing him hard; but he was too proud to ask any
questions, and Osborne had not given him any details of his journey.
This silence had aggravated the squire's internal dissatisfaction,
and he came home to dinner weary and sore-hearted a day or two after
Osborne's return. It was just six o'clock, and he went hastily into
his own little business-room on the ground-floor, and, after washing
his hands, came into the drawing-room feeling as if he were very
late, but the room was empty. He glanced at the clock over the
mantelpiece, as he tried to warm his hands at the fire. The fire had
been neglected, and had gone out during the day; it was now piled
with half-dried wood, which sputtered and smoked instead of doing
its duty in blazing and warming the room, through which the keen
wind was cutting its way in all directions. The clock had stopped,
no one had remembered to wind it up, but by the squire's watch it
was already past dinner-time. The old butler put his head into the
room, but, seeing the squire alone, he was about to draw it back,
and wait for Mr. Osborne, before announcing dinner. He had hoped to
do this unperceived, but the squire caught him in the act.

'Why isn't dinner ready?' he called out sharply. 'It's ten minutes
past six. And, pray, why are you using this wood? It's impossible to
get oneself warm by such a fire as this.'

'I believe, sir, that Thomas--'

'Don't talk to me of Thomas. Send dinner in directly.'

About five minutes elapsed, spent by the hungry squire in all sorts
of impatient ways--attacking Thomas, who came in to look after the
fire; knocking the logs about, scattering out sparks, but
considerably lessening the chances of warmth; touching up the
candles, which appeared to him to give a light unusually
insufficient for the large cold room. While he was doing this,
Osborne came in dressed in full evening dress. He always moved
slowly; and this, to begin with, irritated the squire. Then an
uncomfortable consciousness of a rough black coat, drab trowsers,
checked cotton cravat, and splashed boots, forced itself upon him as
he saw Osborne's point-device costume. He chose to consider it
affectation and finery in Osborne, and was on the point of bursting
out with some remark, when the butler, who had watched Osborne
downstairs before making the announcement, came in to say that
dinner was ready.

'It surely isn't six o'clock?' said Osborne, pulling out his dainty
little watch. He was scarcely more aware than it of the storm that
was brewing.

'Six o'clock! It's more than a quarter past,' growled out his
father,

'I fancy your watch must be wrong, sir. I set mine by the Horse
Guards only two days ago.'

Now, impugning that old steady, turnip-shaped watch of the squire's
was one of the insults which, as it could not reasonably be
resented, was not to be forgiven. That watch had been given him by
his father when watches were watches long ago. It had given the law
to house-clocks, stable-clocks, kitchen-clocks--nay, even to Hamley
Church clock in its day; and was it now, in its respectable old age,
to be looked down upon by a little whipper-snapper of a French watch
which could go into a man's waistcoat pocket, instead of having to
be extricated, with due effort, like a respectable watch of size and
position, from a fob in the waistband? No! Not if the
whipper-snapper were backed by all the Horse Guards that ever were,
with the Life Guards to boot. Poor Osborne might have known better
than to cast this slur on his father's flesh and blood; for so dear
did he hold his watch!

'My watch is like myself,' said the squire, 'girning,' as the Scotch
say--'plain, but steady-going. At any rate, it gives the law in my
house. The King may go by the Horse Guards if he likes.'

'I beg your pardon, sir,' said Osborne, really anxious to keep the
peace; 'I went by my watch, which is certainly right by London time;
and I'd no idea you were waiting for me, otherwise I could have
dressed much quicker.'

'I should think so,' said the squire, looking sarcastically at his
son's attire. 'When I was a young man I should have been ashamed to
have spent as much time at my looking-glass as if I'd been a girl. I
could make myself as smart as any one when I was going to a dance,
or to a party where I was likely to meet pretty girls; but I should
have laughed myself to scorn if I'd stood fiddle-faddling at a
glass, smirking at my own likeness, all for my own pleasure.'

Osborne reddened, and was on the point of letting fly some caustic
remark on his father's dress at the present moment; but he contented
himself with saying, in a low voice,--

'My mother always expected us all to dress for dinner. I got into
the habit of doing it to please her, and I keep it up now.' Indeed,
he had a certain kind of feeling of loyalty to her memory in keeping
up all the little domestic habits and customs she had instituted or
preferred. But the contrast which the squire thought was implied by
Osborne's remark, put him beside himself.

'And I, too, try to attend to her wishes. I do: and in more
important things. I did when she was alive; and I do so now.'

'I never said you did not,' said Osborne, astonished at his father's
passionate words and manner.

'Yes, you did, sir. You meant it. I could see by your looks. I saw
you look at my morning-coat. At any rate, I never neglected any wish
of hers in her life-time. If she'd wished me to go to school again
and learn my A, B, C, I would. By--I would; and I wouldn't have gone
playing me, and lounging away my time, for fear of vexing and
disappointing her. Yet some folks older than schoolboys--' The
squire choked here; but though the words would not come his passion
did not diminish. 'I'll not have you casting up your mother's wishes
to me, sir. You, who went near to break her heart at last!'

Osborne was strongly tempted to get up and leave the room. Perhaps
it would have been better if he had; it might then have brought
about an explanation, and a reconciliation between father and son.
But he thought he did well in sitting still and appearing to take no
notice. This indifference to what he was saying appeared to annoy
the squire still more, and he kept on grumbling and talking to
himself till Osborne, unable to bear it any longer, said, very
quietly, but very bitterly,--'I am only a cause of irritation to
you, and home is no longer home to me, but a place in which I am to
be controlled in trifles, and scolded about trifles as if I were a
child. Put me in a way of making a living for myself--that much
your oldest son has a right to ask of you--I will then leave this
house, and you shall be no longer vexed by my dress, or my want of
punctuality.'

'You make your request pretty much as another son did long ago:
"Give me the portion that falleth to me." But I don't think what he
did with his money is much encouragement for me to--' Then the
thought of how little he could give his son his 'portion,' or any
part of it, stopped the squire.

Osborne took up the speech.

'I'm as ready as any man to earn my living; only the preparation for
any profession will cost money, and money I haven't got.'

'No more have I,' said the squire, shortly.

'What is to be done then?' said Osborne, only half believing his
father's words.

'Why, you must learn to stop at home, and not take expensive
journeys; and you must redeem your tailor's bills. I don't ask you
to help me in the management of the land--you're far too fine a
gentleman for that; but if you can't earn money, at least you
needn't spend it.'

'I've told you I'm willing enough to earn money,' cried Osborne,
passionately at last. 'But how am I to do it? You really are very
unreasonable, sir.'

'Am I?' said the squire--cooling in manner, though not in temper,
as Osborne grew warm. 'But I don't set up for being reasonable: men
who have to pay away money that they haven't got for their
extravagant sons, aren't likely to be reasonable. There's two things
you've gone and done which put me beside myself, when I think of
them: you've turned out next door to a dunce at college, when your
poor mother thought so much of you--and when you might have pleased
and gratified her so if you chose--and, well! I won't say what the
other thing is.'

'Tell me, sir,' said Osborne, almost breathless with the idea that
his father had discovered his secret marriage; but the father was
thinking of the money-lenders, who were calculating how soon Osborne
would come into the estate.

'No!' said the squire. 'I know what I know; and I'm not going to
tell you how I know it. Only, I'll just say this--your friends no
more know a piece of good timber when they see it than you or I know
how you could earn five pounds if it was to keep you from starving.
Now, there's Roger--we none of us made an ado about him; but he'll
have his fellowship now I'll warrant him, and be a bishop, or a
chancellor, or something, before we've found out he's clever--we've
been so much taken up thinking about you. I don't know what's come
over me to speak of "we"--"we" in this way,' said he, suddenly
dropping his voice,--a change of tone as sad as sad could be. 'I
ought to say "I;" it will be "I" for evermore in this world.'

He got up and left the room in quick haste, knocking over his chair,
and not stopping to pick it up. Osborne, who was sitting and shading
his eyes with his hand, as he had been doing for some time, looked
up at the noise, and then rose as quickly and hurried after his
father, only in time to hear the study-door locked on the inside the
moment he reached it.

Osborne returned into the dining-room chagrined and sorrowful. But
he was always sensitive to any omission of the usual observances,
which might excite remark; and even with his heavy heart he was
careful to pick up the fallen chair, and restore it to its place
near the bottom of the table; and afterwards so to disturb the
dishes as to make it appear that they had been touched, before
ringing for Robinson. When the latter came in, followed by Thomas,
Osborne thought it necessary to say to him that his father was not
well, and had gone into the study; and that he himself wanted no
dessert, but would have a cup of coffee in the drawing-room. The old
butler sent Thomas out of the room, and came up confidentially to
Osborne.

'I thought master wasn't justly himself, Mr. Osborne, before dinner.
And therefore I made excuses for him--I did. He spoke to Thomas
about the fire, sir, which is a thing I could in nowise put up with,
unless by reason of sickness, which I am always ready to make
allowances for.'

'Why shouldn't my father speak to Thomas?' said Osborne. 'But,
perhaps, he spoke angrily, I daresay; for I'm sure he's not well.'

'No, Mr. Osborne, it wasn't that. I myself am given to anger; and I'm
blessed with as good health as any man in my years. Besides, anger's
a good thing for Thomas. He needs a deal of it. But it should come
from the right quarter--and that is me myself, Mr. Osborne. I know my
place, and I know my rights and duties as well as any butler that
lives. And it's my duty to scold Thomas, and not master's. Master
ought to have said, "Robinson! you must speak to Thomas about
letting out the fire," and I'd ha' given it him well,--as I shall do
now, for that matter. But as I said before, I make excuses for
master, as being in mental distress and bodily ill-health; so I've
brought myself round not to give warning, as I should ha' done, for
certain, under happier circumstances.'

'Really, Robinson, I think it's all great nonsense,' said Osborne,
weary of the long story the butler had told him, and to which he had
not half attended. 'What in the world does it signify whether my
father speaks to you or to Thomas? Bring me coffee in the
drawing-room, and don't trouble your head any more about scolding
Thomas.'

Robinson went away offended at his grievance being called nonsense.
He kept muttering to himself in the intervals of scolding Thomas,
and saying,--'Things is a deal changed since poor missis went. I
don't wonder master feels it, for I'm sure I do. She was a lady who
had always a becoming respect for a butler's position, and could
have understood how he might be hurt in his mind. She'd never ha'
called his delicacies of feelings nonsense--not she; no more would
Mr. Roger. He's a merry young gentleman, and over-fond of bringing
dirty, slimy creatures into the house; but he's always a kind word
for a man who is hurt in his mind. He'd cheer up the squire, and
keep him from getting so cross and wilful. I wish Mr. Roger was here,
I do.'

The poor squire, shut up with his grief and his ill-temper as well,
in the dingy, dreary study in which he daily spent more and more of
his indoors life, turned over his cares and troubles till he was as
bewildered with the process as a squirrel must be in going round in
a cage. He had out day-books and ledgers, and was calculating up
back-rents; and every time the sum-totals came to different amounts.
He could have cried like a child over his sums; he was worn out and
weary, angry and disappointed. He closed his books at last with a
bang.

'I'm getting old,' he said, 'and my head's less clear than it used
to be. I think sorrow for her has dazed me. I never was much to
boast on; but she thought a deal of me--bless her! She'd never let
me call myself stupid; but, for all that, I am stupid. Osborne ought
to help me. He's had money enough spent on his learning; but
instead, he comes down dressed like a popinjay, and never troubles
his head to think how I'm to pay his debts. I wish I'd told him to
earn his living as a dancing-master,' said the squire, with a sad
smile at his own wit. 'He's dressed for all the world like one. And
how he's spent the money no one knows! Perhaps Roger will turn up
some day with a heap of creditors at his heels. No, he won't--not
Roger; he may be slow, but he's steady, is old Roger. I wish he was
here. He's not the eldest son, but he'd take an interest in the
estate; and he'd do up these weary accounts for me. I wish Roger was
here!'


CHAPTER XXIII


OSBORNE HAMLEY REVIEWS HIS POSITION


Osborne had his solitary cup of coffee in the drawing-room. He was
very unhappy too, after his fashion. He stood on the hearth-rug
pondering over his situation. He was not exactly aware how hardly
his father was pressed for ready-money; the squire had never spoken
to him on the subject without being angry; and many of his loose
contradictory statements--all of which, however contradictory they
might appear, had their basis in truth--were set down by his son to
the exaggeration of passion. But it was uncomfortable enough to a
young man of Osborne's age to feel himself continually hampered for
want of a five-pound note. The principal supplies for the liberal--
almost luxurious table at the Hall, came off the estate; so that
there was no appearance of poverty as far as the household went; and
as long as Osborne was content at home, he had everything he could
wish for; but he had a wife elsewhere--he wanted to see her
continually--and that necessitated journeys. She, poor thing! had to
be supported: where was the money for the journeys and for
Aimee's modest wants to come from? That was the puzzle in
Osborne's mind just now. While he had been at college his allowance
--heir of the Hamleys--had been three hundred, while Roger had to be
content with a hundred less. The payment of these annual sums had
given the squire a good deal of trouble; but he thought of it as a
merely temporary inconvenience, perhaps unreasonably thought so.
Osborne was to do great things; take high honours, get a fellowship,
marry a long-descended heiress, live in some of the many uninhabited
rooms at the Hall, and help the squire in the management of the
estate that would some time be his. Roger was to be a clergyman;
steady, slow Roger was just fitted for that, and when he declined
entering the Church, preferring a life of more activity and
adventure, Roger was to be--anything; he was useful and practical,
and fit for all the employments from which Osborne was shut out by
his fastidiousness, and his (pseudo) genius; so it was well he was
an eldest son, for he would never have done to struggle through the
world; and as for his settling down to a profession, it would be
like cutting blocks with a razor! And now here was Osborne, living
at home, but longing to be elsewhere; his allowance stopped in
reality; indeed the punctual payment of it during the last year or
two had been owing to his mother's exertions; but nothing had been
said about its present cessation by either father or son: money
matters were too sore a subject between them. Every now and then the
squire threw him a ten-pound note or so; but the sort of suppressed
growl with which they were given, and the entire uncertainty as to
when he might receive them, rendered any calculation based upon
their receipt exceedingly vague and uncertain.

'What in the world can I do to secure an income?' thought Osborne,
as he stood on the hearth-rug, his back to a blazing fire, his cup
of coffee sent up in the rare old china that had belonged to the
Hall for generations; his dress finished, as dress of Osborne's
could hardly fail to be. One could hardly have thought that this
elegant young man, standing there in the midst of comfort that
verged on luxury, should have been turning over that one great
problem in his mind; but so it was. 'What can I do to be sure of a
present income? Things cannot go on as they are. I should need
support for two or three years, even if I entered myself at the
Temple, or Lincoln's Inn.' It would be impossible for live on my pay
in the army; besides, I should hate that profession. In fact, there
are evils attending all professions--I couldn't bring myself to
become a member of any I've ever heard of. Perhaps I'm more fitted
to take orders than anything else, but to be compelled to write
weekly sermons whether one had anything to say or not, and,
probably, doomed only to associate with people below one in
refinement and education! Yet poor Aimee must have money. I
can't bear to compare our dinners here, overloaded with joints and
game and sweets, as Morgan will persist in sending them up, with
Aimee's two little mutton-chops. Yet what would my father say
if he knew I'd married a Frenchwoman? In his present mood he'd
disinherit me, if that is possible; and he'd speak about her in a
way I couldn't stand. A Roman Catholic, too! Well, I don't repent
it. I'd do it again. Only if my mother had been in good health, if
she could have heard my story, and known Aimee! As it is, I
must keep it secret; but where to get money? Where to get money?'

Then he bethought him of his poems--would they sell, and bring him
in money? In spite of Milton, he thought they might; and he went to
fetch his MSS. out of his room. He sate down near the fire, trying
to study them with a critical eye, to represent public opinion as
far as he could. He had changed his style since the Mrs. Hemans'
days. He was essentially imitative in his poetic faculty; and of
late he had followed the lead of a popular writer of sonnets.' He
turned his poems over: they were almost equivalent to an
autobiographical passage in his life. Arranging them in their order,
they came as follows:--


'To Aimee, Walking with a Little Child.'
'To
Aimee, Singing at her Work.'
'To Aimee, turning away
from me while I told my Love.'
'Aimee's Confession.'

'Aimee in Despair.'
'The Foreign Land in which my Aimee dwells.'
'The Wedding Ring.'
'The Wife.'

When he came to this last sonnet he put down his bundle of papers
and began to think. 'The wife.' Yes, and a French wife. and a Roman
Catholic wife--and a wife who might be said to have been in service!
And his father's hatred of the French, both collectively and
individually--collectively, as tumultuous brutal ruffians, who
murdered their king, and committed all kinds of bloody atrocities:
individually, as represented by 'Boney,' and the various caricatures
of 'Johnny Crapaud' that had been in full circulation about
five-and-twenty years before this time--when the squire had been
young and capable of receiving impressions. As for the form of
religion in which Mrs. Osborne Hamley had been brought up, it is
enough to say that Catholic emancipation had begun to be talked
about by some politicians, and that the sullen roar of the majority
of Englishmen, at the bare idea of it, was surging in the distance
with ominous threatenings; the very mention of such a measure before
the squire was, as Osborne well knew, like shaking a red flag before
a bull.

And then he considered that if Aimee had had the unspeakable,
the incomparable blessing of being born of English parents, in the
very heart of England--Warwickshire, for instance--and had never
heard of priests, or mass, or confession, or the Pope, or Guy
Fawkes, but had been born, baptized, and bred in the Church of
England, without having ever seen the outside of a dissenting
meeting-house, or a papist chapel--even with all these advantages,
her having been a (what was the equivalent for 'bonne' in English?
'nursery governess' was a term hardly invented) nursery-maid, with
wages paid down once a quarter, liable to be dismissed at a month's
warning, and having her tea and sugar doled out to her, would be a
shock to his father's old ancestral pride that he would hardly ever
get over.

'If he saw her!' thought Osborne. 'If he could but see her!' But if
the squire were to see Aimee, he would also hear her speak her
pretty broken English--precious to her husband, as it was in it that
she had confessed brokenly with her English tongue, that she loved
him soundly with her French heart--and Squire Hamley piqued himself
on being a good hater of the French. 'She would make such a loving,
sweet, docile little daughter to my father--she would go as near as
any one could towards filling up the blank void in this house, if he
would but have her; but he won't; he never would; and he shan't have
the opportunity of scouting her. Yet if I called her "Lucy" in these
sonnets; and if they made a great effect--were praised in
~Blackwood~ and the ~Quarterly~--and all the world was agog to find
out the author; and I told him my secret--I could if I were
successful--I think then he would ask who Lucy was, and I could tell
him all then. If--how I hate "ifs." "If me no ifs." My life has been
based on "whens;" and first they have turned to "ifs," and then they
have vanished away. It was "when Osborne gets honours," and then "if
Osborne," and then a failure altogether. I said to Aimee, "When
my mother sees you," and now it is "If my father saw her," with a
very faint prospect of its ever coming to pass.' So he let the
evening hours flow on and disappear in reveries like these; winding
up with a sudden determination to try the fate of his poems with a
publisher, with the direct expectation of getting money for them,
and an ulterior fancy that, if successful, they might work wonders
with this father.

When Roger came home Osborne did not let a day pass before telling
his brother of his plans. He never did conceal anything long from
Roger; the feminine part of his character made him always desirous
of a confidant, and as sweet sympathy as he could extract. But
Roger's opinion had no effect on Osborne's actions; and Roger knew
this full well. So when Osborne began with--'I want your advice on a
plan I have got in my head,' Roger replied: 'Some one told me that
the Duke of Wellington's maxim was never to give advice unless he
could enforce its being carried into effect. now I can't do that;
and you know, old boy, you don't follow out my advice when you've
got it.'

'Not always, I know. Not when it does not agree with my own opinion.
You are thinking about this concealment of my marriage. but you're
not up in all the circumstances. You know how fully I meant to have
done it, if there had not been that row about my debts; and then my
mother's illness and death. And now you've no conception how my
father is changed--how irritable he has become! Wait till you've
been at home a week! Robinson, Morgan--it's the same with them all;
but worst of all with me!'

'Poor fellow!' said Roger; 'I thought he looked terribly changed;
shrunken, and his ruddiness of complexion altered.'

'Why, he hardly takes half the exercise he used to do, so it's no
wonder. He has turned away all the men off the new works, which used
to be such an interest to him; and because the roan cob stumbled
with him one day, and nearly threw him, he won't ride it; and yet he
won't sell it and buy another, which would be the sensible plan; so
there are two old horses eating their heads off, while he is
constantly talking about money and expense. And that brings me to
what I was going to say. I'm desperately hard up for money, and so
I've been collecting my poems--weeding them well, you know--going
over them quite critically, in fact; and I want to know if you think
Deighton would publish them. You've a name in Cambridge, you know;
and I daresay he would look at them if you offered them to him.'

'I can but try,' said Roger; 'but I'm afraid you won't get much by
them.'

'I don't expect much. I'm a new man, and must make my name. I should
be content with a hundred. If I'd a hundred pounds I'd set myself to
do something. I might keep myself and Aimee by my writings
while I studied for the bar; or, if the worst came to the worst, a
hundred pounds would take us to Australia.'

'Australia! Why, Osborne, what could you do there? And leave my
father! I hope you'll never get your hundred pounds, if that's the
use you're to make of it! Why, you'd break the squire's heart.'

'It might have done once,' said Osborne, gloomily, 'but it would not
now. He looks at me askance, and shies away from conversation with
me. Let me alone for noticing and feeling this kind of thing. It's
this very susceptibility to outward things that gives me what
faculty I have; and it seems to me as if my bread, and my wife's
too, were to depend upon it. You'll soon see for yourself the terms
which I am on with my father!'

Roger did soon see. His father had slipped into a habit of silence
at meal times--a habit which Osborne, who was troubled and anxious
enough for his own part, had not striven to break. Father and son
sate together, and exchanged all the necessary speeches connected
with the occasion civilly enough; but it was a relief to them when
their intercourse was over, and they separated--the father to brood
over his sorrow and his disappointment, which were real and deep
enough, and the injury he had received from his boy, which was
exaggerated in his mind by his ignorance of the actual steps Osborne
had taken to raise money. If the money-lenders had calculated the
chances of his father's life or death in making their bargain,
Osborne himself had thought only of how soon and how easily lie
could get the money requisite for clearing him from all imperious
claims at Cambridge, and for enabling him to follow Aimee to
her home in Alsace, and for the subsequent marriage. As yet, Roger
had never seen his brother's wife; indeed, he had only been taken
into Osborne's full confidence after all was decided in which his
advice could have been useful. And now, in the enforced separation,
Osborne's whole thought, both the poetical and practical sides of
his mind, ran upon the little wife who was passing her lonely days
in farmhouse lodgings, wondering when her bridegroom husband would
come to her next. With such an engrossing subject it was, perhaps,
no wonder that he unconsciously neglected his father; but it was
none the less sad at the time, and to be regretted in its
consequences.

'I may come in and have a pipe with you, sir, mayn't I?' said Roger,
that first evening, pushing gently against the study-door, which his
father held only half open.

'You'll not like it,' said the squire, still holding the door
against him, but speaking in a relenting tone. 'The tobacco I use
isn't what young men like. Better go and have a cigar with Osborne.'

'No. I want to sit with you, and I can stand pretty strong tobacco.'

Roger pushed in, the resistance slowly giving way before him.

'It will make your clothes smell. You'll have to borrow Osborne's
scents to sweeten yourself,' said the squire, grimly, at the same
time pushing a short smart amber-mouthed pipe to his son.

'No; I'll have a churchwarden. Why, father, do you think I'm a baby
to put up with a doll's head like this?' looking at the carving upon
it.

The squire was pleased in his heart, though he did not choose to
show it. He only said, 'Osborne brought it me when he came back from
Germany. That's three years ago.' And then for some time they smoked
in silence. But the voluntary companionship of his son was very
soothing to the squire, though not a word might be said. The next
speech he made showed the direction of his thoughts; indeed his
words were always a transparent medium through which the current
might be seen.

'A deal of a man's life comes and goes in three years--I've found
that out.' And he puffed away at his pipe again. While Roger was
turning over in his mind what answer to make to this truism, the
squire again stopped his smoking and spoke.

'I remember when there was all that fuss about the Prince of Wales
being made Regent, I read somewhere--I daresay it was in a
newspaper--that kings and their heirs-apparent were always on bad
terms. Osborne was quite a little chap then: he used to go out
riding with me on White Surrey; you won't remember the pony we
called White Surrey?'

'I remember it; but I thought it a tall horse in those days.'

'Ah! that was because you were such a small lad, you know. I had
seven horses in the stable then--not counting the farm-horses. I
don't recollect having a care then, except--~she~ was always
delicate, you know. But what a beautiful boy Osborne was! He was
always dressed in black velvet--it was a foppery, but it wasn't my
doing, and it was all right, I'm sure. He's a handsome fellow now,
but the sunshine has gone out of his face.'

'He's a good deal troubled about this money, and the anxiety he has
given you,' said Roger, rather taking his brother's feelings for
granted.

'Not he,' said the squire, taking the pipe out of his mouth, and
hitting the bowl so sharply against the hob that it broke in pieces.
'There! But never mind! I say, not he, Roger! He's none troubled
about the money. It's easy getting money from Jews if you're the
eldest son, and the heir. They just ask, "How old is your father,
and has he had a stroke, or a fit?" and it's settled out of hand,
and then they come prowling about a place, and running down the
timber and land--Don't let us speak of him; it's no good, Roger. He
and I are out of tune, and it seems to me as if only God Almighty
could put us to rights. It's thinking of how he grieved her at last
that makes me so bitter with him. And yet there's a deal of good in
him! and he's so quick and clever, if only he'd give his mind to
things. Now, you were always slow, Roger--all your masters used to
say so.'

Roger laughed a little,--

'Yes; I'd many a nickname at school for my slowness,' said he.

'Never mind!' said the squire, consolingly. 'I'm sure I don't. If
you were a clever fellow like Osborne yonder, you'd be all for
caring for books and writing, and you'd perhaps find it as dull as
he does to keep company with a bumpkin-Squire Jones like me. Yet I
daresay they think a deal of you at Cambridge,' said he, after a
pause, 'since you've got this fine wranglership; I'd nearly
forgotten that--the news came at such a miserable time.'

'Well, yes! They're always proud of the senior wrangler of the year
up at Cambridge. Next year I must abdicate.'

The squire sate and gazed into the embers, still holding his useless
pipe-stem. At last he said, in a low voice, as if scarcely aware he
had got a listener,--'I used to write to her when she was away in
London, and tell her the home news. But no letter will reach her
now! Nothing reaches her!'

Roger started up.

'Where's the tobacco-box, father? Let me fill you another pipe!' and
when he had done so, he stooped over his father and stroked his
cheek. The squire shook his head.

'You've only just come home, lad. You don't know me, as I am
now-a-days! Ask Robinson--I won't have you asking Osborne, he ought
to keep it to himself--but any of the servants will tell you I'm not
like the same man for getting into passions with them. I used to be
reckoned a good master, but that is past now! Osborne was once a
little boy, and she was once alive--and I was once a good master--a
good master--yes! It is all past now.'

He took up his pipe, and began to smoke afresh, and Roger, after a
silence of some minutes, began a long story about some Cambridge
man's misadventure on the hunting-field, telling it with such humour
that the squire was beguiled into hearty laughing. When they rose to
go to bed, his father said to Roger,--

'Well, we've had a pleasant evening--at least, I have. But perhaps
you have not; for I'm but poor company now, know.'

'I don't know when I've passed a happier evening, father,' said
Roger. And he spoke truly, though he did not trouble himself to find
out the cause of his happiness.


CHAPTER XXIV


MRS GIBSON'S LITTLE DINNER


All this had taken place before Roger's first meeting with Molly and
Cynthia at Miss Brownings'; and the little dinner on the Friday at
Mr. Gibson's, which followed in due sequence.

Mrs. Gibson intended the Hamleys to find this dinner pleasant; and
they did. Mr. Gibson was fond of these two young men, both for their
parents' sake and their own, for he had known them since boyhood;
and to those whom he liked Mr. Gibson could be remarkably agreeable.
Mrs. Gibson really gave them a welcome--and cordiality in a hostess
is a very becoming mantle for any other deficiencies there may be.
Cynthia and Molly looked their best, which was all the duty Mrs
Gibson absolutely required of them, as she was willing enough to
take her full share in the conversation. Osborne fell to her lot, of
course, and for some time he and she prattled on with all the case
of manner and commonplaceness of meaning which go far to make the
'art of polite conversation.' Roger, who ought to have made himself
agreeable to one or the other of the young ladies, was exceedingly
interested in what Mr. Gibson was telling him of a paper on
comparative osteology in some foreign journal of science, which Lord
Hollingford was in the habit of forwarding to his friend the country
surgeon. Yet every now and then while he listened he caught his
attention wandering to the face of Cynthia, who was placed between
his brother and Mr. Gibson. She was not particularly occupied with
attending to anything that was going on; her eyelids were carelessly
dropped, as she crumbled her bread on the tablecloth, and her
beautiful long eyelashes were seen on the clear tint of her oval
cheek. She was thinking of something else; Molly was trying to
understand with all her might. Suddenly Cynthia looked up, and
caught Roger's gaze of intent admiration too fully for her to be
unaware that he was staring at her. She coloured a little, but after
the first moment of rosy confusion at his evident admiration of her,
she flew to the attack, diverting his confusion at thus being
caught, to the defence of himself from her accusation.

'It is quite true!' she said to him. 'I was not attending: you see I
don't know even the A B C of science. But, please, don't look so
severely at me, even if I am a dunce!'

'I did not know--I did not mean to look severely, I am sure,'
replied he, not knowing well what to say.

'Cynthia is not a dunce either,' said Mrs. Gibson, afraid lest her
daughter's opinion of herself might be taken seriously. 'But I have
always observed that some people have a talent for one thing and
some for another. Now Cynthia's talents are not for science and the
severer studies. Do you remember, love, what trouble I had to teach
you the use of the globes?'

'Yes; and I don't know longitude from latitude now; and I'm always
puzzled as to which is perpendicular and which is horizontal.'

'Yet, I do assure you,' her mother continued, rather addressing
herself to Osborne 'that her memory for poetry is prodigious. I have
heard her repeat the "Prisoner of Chillon" from beginning to end.'

'It would be rather a bore to have to hear her, I think,' said Mr
Gibson, smiling at Cynthia, who gave him back one of her bright
looks of mutual understanding.

'Ah, Mr. Gibson, I have found out before now that you have no soul
for poetry; and Molly there is your own child. She reads such deep
books--all about facts and figures: she'll be quite a blue-stocking
by and by.'

'Mamma,' said Molly, reddening, 'you think it was a deep book
because there were the shapes of the different cells of bees in it;
but it was not at all deep. It was very interesting.'

'Never mind, Molly,' said Osborne. 'I stand up for blue-stockings!'

'And I object to the distinction implied in what you say,' said
Roger. 'It was not deep, ~ergo~, it was very interesting. Now, a
book may be both deep and interesting.'

'Oh, if you are going to chop logic and use Latin words, I think it
is time for us to leave the room,' said Mrs. Gibson.

'Don't let us run away as if we were beaten, mamma,' said Cynthia.
'Though it may be logic, I, for one, can understand what Mr. Roger
Hamley said just now; and I read some of Molly's book; and whether
it was deep or not I found it very interesting--more so than I
should think the "Prisoner of Chillon" now-a-days. I've displaced
the Prisoner to make room for Johnnie Gilpin as my favourite poem.'

'How could you talk such nonsense, Cynthia?' said Mrs. Gibson, as the
girls followed her upstairs. 'You know you are not a dunce. It is
all very well not to be a blue-stocking, because gentle-people don't
like that kind of woman; but running yourself down, and
contradicting all I said about your liking for Byron, and poets and
poetry--to Osborne Hamley of all men, too!'

Mrs. Gibson spoke quite crossly for her.

'But, mamma,' Cynthia replica, 'I am either a dunce, or I am not. If
I am, I did right to own it; if I am not, he's a dunce if he doesn't
find out I was joking.'

'Well,' said Mrs. Gibson, a little puzzled by this speech, and
wanting some elucidatory addition.

'Only that if he's a dunce his opinion of me is worth nothing. So,
any way, it doesn't signify.'

'You really bewilder me with your nonsense, child. Molly is worth
twenty of you.'

'I quite agree with you, mamma,' said Cynthia, turning round to take
Molly's hand.

'Yes; but she ought not to be,' said Mrs. Gibson, still irritated.
'Think of the advantages you've had.'

'I'm afraid I had rather be a dunce than a blue-stocking,' said
Molly; for the term had a little annoyed her, and the annoyance was
rankling still.

'Hush; here they are coming: I hear the dining-room door! I never
meant you were a blue-stocking, dear, so don't look vexed.--Cynthia,
my love, where did you get those lovely flowers--anemones, are they?
They suit your complexion so exactly.'

'Come, Molly, don't look so grave and thoughtful,' exclaimed
Cynthia. 'Don't you perceive mamma wants us to be smiling and
amiable?'

Mr. Gibson had had to go out to his evening round; and the young men
were all too glad to come up into the pretty drawing-room; the
bright little wood fire; the comfortable easy chairs which, with so
small a party, might be drawn round the hearth; the good-natured
hostess; the pretty, agreeable girls. Roger sauntered up to the
corner where Cynthia was standing, playing with a hand-screen.

'There is a charity ball in Hollingford soon, isn't there?' asked
he.

'Yes; on Easter Tuesday,' she replied.

'Are you going? I suppose you are?'

'Yes; mamma is going to take Molly and me.'

'You will enjoy it very much--going together?'

For the first time during this little conversation she glanced up at
him--real honest pleasure shining out of her eyes.

'Yes; going together will make the enjoyment of the thing. It would
be dull without her.'

'You are great friends, then?' he asked.

'I never thought I should like any one so much,--any girl I mean.'

She put in the final reservation in all simplicity of heart; and in
all simplicity did he understand it. He came ever so little nearer,
and dropped his voice a little.

'I was so anxious to know. I am so glad. I have often wondered how
you two were getting on.'

'Have you?' said she, looking up again. 'At Cambridge? You must be
very fond of Molly!'

'Yes, I am. She was with us so long; and at such a time! I look upon
her almost as a sister.'

'And she is very fond of all of you. I seem to know you all from
hearing her talk about you so much.--All of you!' said she, laying
an emphasis on 'all' to show that it included the dead as well as
the living. Roger was silent for a minute or two.

'I didn't know you, even by hearsay. So you mustn't wonder that I
was a little afraid. But as soon as I saw you, I knew how it must
be; and it was such a relief!'

'Cynthia,' said Mrs. Gibson, who thought that the younger son had had
quite his share of low, confidential conversation, 'come here, and
sing that little French ballad to Mr. Osborne Hamley.'

'Which do you mean, mamma? "Tu t'en repentiras, Colin"?'

'Yes; such a pretty, playful little warning to young men,' said Mrs
Gibson, smiling up at Osborne. 'The refrain is--

Tu t'en repentiras, Colin,
Tu t'en repentiras,
Car si tu prends une femme, Colin,
Tu t'en repentiras.

The advice may apply very well when there is a French wife in the
case; but not, I am sure, to an Englishman who is thinking of an
English wife.'

This choice of a song was exceedingly ~mal-apropos~, had Mrs
Gibson but known it. Osborne and Roger knowing that the wife of the
former was a Frenchwoman, and, conscious of each other's knowledge,
felt doubly awkward. while Molly was as much confused as though she
herself were secretly married. However, Cynthia carolled the saucy
ditty out, and her mother smiled at it, in total ignorance of any
application it might have. Osborne had instinctively gone to stand
behind Cynthia, as she sate at the piano, so as to be ready to turn
over the leaves of her music if she required it. He kept his hands
in his pockets and his eyes fixed on her fingers; his countenance
clouded with gravity at all the merry quips which she so playfully
sang. Roger looked grave as well, but was much more at his case than
his brother; indeed, he was half-amused by the awkwardness of the
situation. He caught Molly's troubled eyes and heightened colour,
and he saw that she was feeling this ~contretemps~ more seriously
than she needed to do. He moved to a seat by her, and half
whispered, 'Too late a warning, is it not?'

Molly looked up at him as he leant towards her, and replied in the
same tone,--'Oh, I am so sorry!'

'You need not be. He won't mind it long; and a man must take the
consequences when he puts himself in a false position.'

Molly could not tell what to reply to this, so she hung her head and
kept silence. Yet she could see that Roger did not change his
attitude or remove his hand from the back of his chair, and,
impelled by curiosity to find out the cause of his stillness, she
looked up at him at length, and saw his gaze fixed on the two who
were near the piano. Osborne was saying something eagerly to
Cynthia, whose grave eyes were upturned to him with soft intentness
of expression, and her pretty mouth half-open, with a sort of
impatience for him to cease speaking, that she might reply.

'They are talking about France,' said Roger, in answer to Molly's
unspoken question. 'Osborne knows it well, and Miss Kirkpatrick has
been at school there, you know. It sounds very interesting; shall we
go nearer and hear what they are saying?'

It was all very well to ask this civilly, but Molly thought it would
have been better to wait for her answer. Instead of waiting,
however, Roger went to the piano, and, leaning on it, appeared to
join in the light merry talk, while he feasted his eyes as much as
he dared by looking at Cynthia. Molly suddenly felt as if she could
scarcely keep from crying--a minute ago he had been so near to her,
and talking so pleasantly and confidentially; and now he almost
seemed as if he had forgotten her existence. She thought that all
this was wrong; and she exaggerated its wrongness to herself;
'mean,' and 'envious of Cynthia,' and 'ill-natured,' and 'selfish,'
were the terms she kept applying to herself; but it did no good, she
was just as naughty at the last as at the first.

Mrs. Gibson broke into the state of things which Molly thought was to
endure for ever. Her work had been intricate up to this time, and
had required a great deal of counting; so she had had no time to
attend to her duties, one of which she always took to be to show
herself to the world as an impartial stepmother. Cynthia had played
and sung, and now she must give Molly her turn of exhibition.
Cynthia's singing and playing was light and graceful, but anything
but correct; but she herself was so charming, that it was only
fanatics for music who cared for false chords and omitted notes.
Molly, on the contrary, had an excellent ear, if she had ever been
well taught; and both from inclination and conscientious
perseverance of disposition, she would go over an incorrect passage
for twenty times. But she was very shy of playing in company; and
when forced to do it, she went through her performance heavily, and
hated her handiwork more than any one.

'Now, you must play a little, Molly,' said Mrs. Gibson; 'play us that
beautiful piece of Kalkbrenner's,' my dear.'

Molly looked up at her stepmother with beseeching eyes, but it only
brought out another form of request, still more like a command.

'Go at once, my dear. You may not play it quite rightly; and I know
you are very nervous; but you're quite amongst friends.'

So there was a disturbance made in the little group at the piano,
and Molly sate down to her martyrdom.

'Please, go away!' said she to Osborne, who was standing behind her
ready to turn over. 'I can quite well do it for myself. And oh! if
you would but talk!'

Osborne remained where he was in spite of her appeal, and gave her
what little approval she got; for Mrs. Gibson, exhausted by her
previous labour of counting her stitches, fell asleep in her
comfortable sofa-corner near the fire; and Roger, who began at first
to talk a little in compliance with Molly's request, found his
tete-a-tete with Cynthia so agreeable, that Molly
lost her place several times in trying to catch a sudden glimpse of
Cynthia sitting at her work, and Roger by her, intent on catching
her low replies to what he was saying.

'There, now I've done!' said Molly, standing up quickly as soon as
she had finished the eighteen dreary pages; 'and I think I will
never sit down to play again!'

Osborne laughed at her vehemence. Cynthia began to take some part in
what was being said, and thus made the conversation general. Mrs
Gibson wakened up gracefully, as was her way of doing all things,
and slid into the subjects they were talking about so easily, that
she almost succeeded in making them believe she had never been
asleep at all.


CHAPTER XXV


HOLLINGFORD IN A BUSTLE


All Hollingford felt as if there was a great deal to be done before
Easter this year. There was Easter proper, which always required new
clothing of some kind, for fear of certain consequences from little
birds, who were supposed to resent the impiety of those who do not
wear some new article of dress on Easter-day.' And most ladies
considered it wiser that the little birds should see the new article
for themselves, and not have to take it upon trust, as they would
have to do if it were merely a pocket-handkerchief, or a petticoat,
or any article of under-clothing. So piety demanded a new bonnet, or
a new gown; and was barely satisfied with an Easter pair of gloves.
Miss Rose was generally very busy just before Easter in Hollingford.
Then this year there was the charity ball. Ashcombe, Hollingford,
and Coreham were three neighbouring towns, of about the same number
of population, lying at the three equidistant corners of a triangle.
In imitation of greater cities with their festivals, these three
towns had agreed to have an annual ball for the benefit of the
county hospital to be held in turn at each place; and Hollingford
was to be the place this year.

It was a fine time for hospitality, and every house of any
pretension was as full as it could hold, and flys were engaged long
months before.

If Mrs. Gibson could have asked Osborne, or in default, Roger Hamley
to go to the ball with them and to sleep at their house,--or if,
indeed, she could have picked up any stray scion of a 'county
family' to whom such an offer would have been a convenience, she
would have restored her own dressing-room to its former use as the
spare-room, with pleasure. But she did not think it was worth her
while to put herself out for any of the humdrum and ill-dressed
women who had been her former acquaintance at Ashcombe. For Mr
Preston it might have been worth while to give up her room,
considering him in the light of a handsome and prosperous young man,
and a good dancer besides. But there were more lights in which he
was to be viewed. Mr. Gibson, who really wanted to return the
hospitality shown to him by Mr. Preston at the time of his marriage,
had yet an instinctive distaste to the man, which no wish of freeing
himself from obligation, nor even the more worthy feeling of
hospitality, could overcome. Mrs. Gibson had some old grudges of her
own against him, but she was not one to retain angry feelings, or be
very active in her retaliation; she was afraid of Mr. Preston, and
admired him at the same time. It was awkward too--so she said--to go
into a ball-room without any gentleman at all, and Mr. Gibson was so
uncertain! On the whole--partly for this last-given reason, and
partly because conciliation was the best policy, Mrs. Gibson herself
was slightly in favour of inviting Mr. Preston to be their guest. But
as soon as Cynthia heard the question discussed--or rather, as soon
as she heard it discussed in Mr. Gibson's absence, she said that if
Mr. Preston came to be their visitor on the occasion, she for one
would not go to the ball at all. She did not speak with vehemence or
in anger; but with such quiet resolution that Molly looked up in
surprise. She saw that Cynthia was keeping her eyes fixed on her
work, and that she had no intention of meeting any one's gaze, or
giving any further explanation. Mrs. Gibson, too, looked perplexed,
and once or twice seemed on the point of asking some question; but
she was not angry as Molly had fully expected. She watched Cynthia
furtively and in silence for a minute or two, and then said that
after all she could not conveniently give up her dressing-room; and
altogether, they had better say no more about it. So no stranger was
invited to stay at Mr. Gibson's at the time of the ball; but Mrs
Gibson openly spoke of her regret at the unavoidable inhospitality,
and hoped that they might be able to build an addition to their
house before the triennial Hollingford ball.

Another cause of unusual bustle at Hollingford this Easter was the
expected return of the family to the Towers, after their unusually
long absence. Mr. Sheepshanks might be seen trotting up and down on
his stout old cob, speaking to attentive masons, plasterers, and
glaziers about putting everything--on the outside at least--about
the cottages belonging to 'my lord,' in perfect repair. Lord Cumnor
owned the greater part of the town; and those who lived under other
landlords, or in houses of their own, were stirred up by the dread
of contrast to do up their dwellings. So the ladders of whitewashers
and painters were sadly in the way of the ladies tripping daintily
along to make their purchases, and holding their gowns up in a bunch
behind, after a fashion quite gone out in these days.' The
housekeeper and steward from the Towers might also be seen coming in
to give orders at the various shops; and stopping here and there at
those kept by favourites, to avail themselves of the
eagerly-tendered refreshments.

Lady Harriet came to call on her old governess the day after the
arrival of the family at the Towers. Molly and Cynthia were out
walking when she came--doing some errands for Mrs. Gibson, who had a
secret idea that Lady Harriet would call at the particular time she
did, and had a not uncommon wish to talk to her ladyship without the
corrective presence of any member of her own family.

Mrs. Gibson did not give Molly the message of remembrance that Lady
Harriet had left for her; but she imparted various pieces of news
relating to the Towers with great animation and interest. The
Duchess of Menteith and her daughter, Lady Alice, were coming to the
Towers; would be there the day of the ball; would come to the ball;
and the Menteith diamonds were famous. That was piece of news the
first. The second was that ever so many gentlemen were coming to the
Towers--some English, some French. This piece of news would have
come first in order of importance had there been much probability of
their being dancing men, and, as such, possible partners at the
coming ball. But Lady Harriet had spoken of them as Lord
Hollingford's friends, useless scientific men in all probability.
Then, finally, Mrs. Gibson was to go to the Towers next day to lunch;
Lady Cumnor had written a little note by Lady Harriet to beg her to
come; if Mrs. Gibson could manage to find her way to the Towers, one
of the carriages in use should bring her back to her own home in the
course of the afternoon.

'The dear countess!' said Mrs. Gibson, with soft affection. It was a
soliloquy, uttered after a minute's pause, at the end of all this
information.

And all the rest of that day her conversation had an aristocratic
perfume hanging about it. One of the few books she had brought with
her into Mr. Gibson's house was bound in pink, and in it she studied
'Menteith, Duke of, Adolphus George,' &c. &c., till she was fully up
in all the duchess's connections, and probable interests. Mr. Gibson
made his mouth up into a droll whistle when he came home at night,
and found himself in a Towers' atmosphere. Molly saw the shade of
annoyance through the drollery; she was beginning to see it oftener
than she liked, not that she reasoned upon it, or that she
consciously traced the annoyance to its source; but she could not
help feeling uneasy in herself when she knew her father was in the
least put out.

Of course a fly was ordered for Mrs. Gibson. In the early afternoon
she came home. If she had been disappointed in her interview with
the countess she never told her woe, nor revealed the fact that when
she first arrived at the Towers she had to wait for an hour in Lady
Cumnor's morning-room, uncheered by any companionship save that of
her old friend Mrs. Bradley, till suddenly, Lady Harriet coming in,
she exclaimed, 'Why, Clare! you dear woman! are you here all alone?
Does mamma know?' And, after a little more affectionate
conversation, she rushed to find her ladyship, perfectly aware of
the fact, but too deep in giving the duchess the benefit of her
wisdom and experience in trousseaux to be at all aware of the length
of time Mrs. Gibson had been passing in patient solitude. At lunch
Mrs. Gibson was secretly hurt by my lord's supposing it to be her
dinner, and calling out his urgent hospitality from the very bottom
of the table, giving as a reason for it, that she must remember it
was her dinner. In vain she piped out in her soft, high voice, 'Oh,
my lord! I never eat meat in the middle of the day; I can hardly eat
anything at lunch.' Her voice was lost, and the duchess might go
away with the idea that the Hollingford doctor's wife dined early;
that is to say, if her grace ever condescended to have any idea on
the subject at all; which presupposes that she was cognizant of the
facts of there being a doctor at Hollingford, and that he had a
wife, and that his wife was the pretty, faded, elegant-looking woman
sending away her plate of untasted food--food that she longed to
eat, for she was really desperately hungry after her drive and her
solitude.

And then, after lunch, there did come a tete-a-tete
with Lady Cumnor, which was conducted after this wise:--

'Well, Clare! I am really glad to see you. I once thought I should
never get back to the Towers, but here I am! There was such a clever
man at Bath--a Doctor Snape--he cured me at last--quite set me up. I
really think if ever I am ill again I shall send for him: it is such
a thing to find a really clever medical man. Oh, by the way, I
always forget you've married Mr. Gibson--of course he is very clever,
and all that. (The carriage to the door in ten minutes, Brown, and
desire Bradley to bring my things down.) What was I asking you? Oh!
how do you get on with the step-daughter. She seemed to me to be a
young lady with a pretty stubborn will of her own. I put a letter
for the post down somewhere, and I cannot think where; do help me to
look for it, there's a good woman. Just run to my room, and see if
Brown can find it, for it is of great consequence.'

Off went Mrs. Gibson rather unwillingly; for there were several
things she had wanted to speak about, and she had not heard half of
what she had expected to learn of the family gossip. But all chance
was gone; for when she came back from her fruitless errand, Lady
Cumnor and the duchess were in full talk, Lady Cumnor with the
missing letter in her hand, which she was using something like a
baton to enforce her words.

'Every iota from Paris! Every i-o-ta!'

Lady Cumnor was too much of a lady not to apologize for useless
trouble, but they were nearly the last words she spoke to Mrs
Gibson, for she had to go out and drive with the duchess; and the
brougham to take 'Clare' (as she persisted in calling Mrs. Gibson)
back to Hollingford, followed the carriage to the door. Lady Harriet
came away from her entourage of young men and young ladies, all
prepared for some walking expedition, to wish Mrs. Gibson good-by.

'We shall see you at the ball,' she said. 'You'll be there with your
two girls, of course, and I must have a little talk with you there;
with all these visitors in the house, it has been impossible to see
anything of you to-day, you know.'

Such were the facts, but rose-colour was the medium through which
they were seen by Mrs. Gibson's household listeners on her return.

'There are many visitors staying at the Towers--oh, yes! a great
many: the duchess and Lady Alice, and Mr. and Mrs. Grey, and Lord
Albert Monson and his sister, and my old friend Captain James of the
Blues--many more, in fact. But of course I preferred going to Lady
Cumnor's own room, where I could see her and Lady Harriet quietly,
and where we were not disturbed by the bustle downstairs. Of course
we were obliged to go down to lunch, and then I saw my old friends,
and renewed pleasant acquaintances. But I really could hardly get
any connected conversation with any one. Lord Cumnor seemed so
delighted to see me there again: though there were six or seven
between us, he was always interrupting with some civil or kind
speech especially addressed to me. And after lunch Lady Cumnor asked
me all sorts of questions about my new life with as much interest as
if I had been her daughter. To be sure, when the duchess came in we
had to leave off, and talk about the trousseau she is preparing for
Lady Alice. Lady Harriet made such a point of our meeting at the
ball; she is a good, affectionate creature, is Lady Harriet!'

This last was said in a tone of meditative appreciation.

The afternoon of the day on which the ball was to take place, a
servant rode over from Hamley with two lovely nosegays, 'with the Mr
Hamleys' compliments to Miss Gibson and Miss Kirkpatrick.' Cynthia
was the first to receive them. She came dancing into the
drawing-room, flourishing the flowers about in either hand, and
danced up to Molly, who was trying to settle to her reading, by way
of passing the time away till the evening came.

'Look, Molly, look! Here are bouquets for us! Long life to the
givers!'

'Who are they from?' asked Molly, taking hold of one, and examining
it with tender delight at its beauty.

'Who from? Why, the two paragons of Hamleys, to be sure! Is it not a
pretty attention?'

'How kind of them!' said Molly.

'I'm sure it is Osborne who thought of it. He has been so much
abroad, where it is such a common compliment to send bouquets to
young ladies.'

'I don't see why you should think it is Osborne's thought!' said
Molly, reddening a little. 'Mr. Roger Hamley used to gather nosegays
constantly for his mother, and sometimes for me.'

'Well, never mind whose thought it was, or who gathered them; we've
got the flowers, and that's enough. Molly, I'm sure these red
flowers will just match your coral necklace and bracelets,' said
Cynthia, pulling out some camellias, then a rare kind of flower.

'Oh, please, don't!' exclaimed Molly. 'Don't you see how carefully
the colours are arranged--they have taken such pains; please,
don't.'

'Nonsense!' said Cynthia, continuing to pull them out; 'see, here
are quite enough. I'll make you a little coronet of them--sewn on
black velvet, which will never be seen--just as they do in France!'

'Oh, I am so sorry! It is quite spoilt,' said Molly.

'Never mind! I'll take this spoilt bouquet; I can make it up again
just as prettily as ever; and you shall have this, which has never
been touched.' Cynthia went on arranging the crimson buds and
flowers to her taste. Molly said nothing, but kept on watching
Cynthia's nimble fingers tying up the wreath.

'There,' said Cynthia, at last, 'when that is sewn on black velvet,
to keep the flowers from dying, you'll see how pretty it will look.
And there are enough red flowers in this untouched nosegay to carry
out the idea!'

'Thank you' (very slowly). 'But shan't you mind having only the
wrecks of the other?'

'Not I; red flowers would not go with my pink dress.'

'But--I daresay they arranged each nosegay so carefully!'

'Perhaps they did. But I never would allow sentiment to interfere
with my choice of colours; and pink does tie one down. Now you, in
white muslin, just tipped with crimson, like a daisy, may wear
anything.'

Cynthia took the utmost pains in dressing Molly, leaving the clever
housemaid to her mother's exclusive service. Mrs. Gibson was more
anxious about her attire than was either of the girls; it had given
her occasion for deep thought and not a few sighs. Her deliberation
had ended in her wearing her pearl-grey satin wedding-gown, with a
profusion of lace, and white and coloured lilacs. Cynthia was the
one who took the affair the most lightly. Molly looked upon the
ceremony of dressing for a first ball as rather a serious ceremony;
certainly as an anxious proceeding. Cynthia was almost as anxious as
herself; only Molly wanted her appearance to be correct and
unnoticed; and Cynthia was desirous of setting off Molly's rather
peculiar charms--her cream-coloured skin, her profusion of curly
black hair, her beautiful long-shaped eyes, with their shy, loving
expression. Cynthia took up so much time in dressing Molly to her
mind, that she herself had to perform her ~toilette~ in a hurry.
Molly, ready dressed, sate on a low chair in Cynthia's room,
watching the pretty creature's rapid movements, as she stood in her
petticoat before the glass, doing up her hair, with quick certainty
of effect. At length, Molly heaved a long sigh, and said,--

'I should like to be pretty!'

'Why, Molly,' said Cynthia, turning round with an exclamation on the
tip of her tongue; but when she caught the innocent, wistful look on
Molly's face, she instinctively checked what she was going to say,
and, half-smiling to her own reflection in the glass, she
said,--'The French girls would tell you, to believe that you were
pretty would make you so.'

Molly paused before replying,--

'I suppose they would mean that if you knew you were pretty, you
would never think about your looks; you would be so certain of being
liked, and that it is caring--'

'Listen! that's eight o'clock striking. Don't trouble yourself with
trying to interpret a French girl's meaning, but help me on with my
frock, there's a dear one.'

The two girls were dressed, and were standing over the fire waiting
for the carriage in Cynthia's room, when Maria (Betty's successor)
came hurrying into the room. Maria had been officiating as maid to
Mrs. Gibson, but she had had intervals of leisure, in which she had
rushed upstairs, and, under the pretence of offering her services,
she had seen the young ladies' dresses, and the sight of so many
fine clothes had sent her into a state of excitement which made her
think nothing of rushing upstairs for the twentieth time, with a
nosegay still more beautiful than the two previous ones.

'Here, Miss Kirkpatrick! No, it's not for you, miss!' as Molly,
being nearer to the door, offered to take it and pass it to Cynthia.
'It's for Miss Kirkpatrick; and there's a note for her besides!'

Cynthia said nothing, but took the note and the flowers. She held
the note so that Molly could read it at the same time she did.

I send you some flowers; and you must allow me
to claim the first dance after nine o'clock, before
which time I fear I cannot arrive.--R. P.

'Who is it?' asked Molly.

Cynthia looked extremely irritated, indignant, perplexed--what was
it turned her cheek so pale, and made her eyes so full of fire?

'It is Mr. Preston,' said she, in answer to Molly. 'I shall not dance
with him; and here go his flowers--'

Into the very middle of the embers, which she immediately stirred
down upon the beautiful shrivelling petals as if she wished to
annihilate them as soon as possible. Her voice had never been
raised; it was as sweet as usual; nor, though her movements were
prompt enough, were they hasty or violent.

'Oh!' said Molly, 'those beautiful flowers! We might have put them
in water.'

'No,' said Cynthia; 'it's best to destroy them. We don't want them;
and I can't bear to be reminded of that man.'

'It was an impertinent familiar note,' said Molly. 'What right had
he to express himself in that way--no beginning, no end, and only
initials. Did you know him well when you were at Ashcombe, Cynthia?'

'Oh, don't let us think any more about him,' replied Cynthia. 'It is
quite enough to spoil any pleasure at the ball to think that he will
be there. But I hope I shall get engaged before he comes, so that I
can't dance with him--and don't you, either!'

'There! they are calling for us,' exclaimed Molly, and with quick
step, yet careful of their draperies, they made their way downstairs
to the place where Mr. and Mrs. Gibson awaited them. Yes: Mr. Gibson
was going; even if he had to leave them afterwards to attend to any
professional call. And Molly suddenly began to admire her father as
a handsome man, when she saw him now, in full evening attire. Mrs
Gibson, too--how pretty she was! In short, it was true that no
better-looking a party than these four people entered the
Hollingford ball-room that evening.


CHAPTER XXVI


A CHARITY BALL


At the present time there are few people at a public ball besides
the dancers and their chaperones, or relations in some degree
interested in them. But in the days when Molly and Cynthia were
young--before railroads were, and before their consequences, the
excursion-trains, which take every one up to London now-a-days,
there to see their fill of gay crowds and fine dresses--to go to an
annual charity-ball, even though all thought of dancing had passed
by years ago, and without any of the responsibilities of a
chaperone, was a very allowable and favourite piece of dissipation
to all the kindly old maids who thronged the country towns of
England. They aired their old lace and their best dresses; they saw
the aristocratic magnates of the country side; they gossipped with
their coevals, and speculated on the romances of the young around
them in a curious yet friendly spirit. The Miss Brownings would have
thought themselves sadly defrauded of the gayest event of the year,
if anything had prevented their attending the charity-ball, and Miss
Browning would have been indignant, Miss Phoebe aggrieved, had they
not been asked to Ashcombe and Coreham, by friends at each place,
who had, like them, gone through the dancing stage of life some
five-and-twenty years before, but who liked still to haunt the
scenes of their former enjoyment, and see a younger generation dance
on 'regardless of their doom.' They had come in one of the two
sedan-chairs that yet lingered in use at Hollingford; such a night
as this brought a regular harvest of gains to the two old men who,
in what was called the 'town's livery,' trotted backwards and
forwards with their many loads of ladies and finery. There were some
postchaises, and some 'flys,' but after mature deliberation Miss
Browning had decided to keep to the more comfortable custom of the
sedan-chair; 'which,' as she said to Miss Piper, one of her
visitors, 'came into the parlour, and got full of the warm air, and
nipped you up, and carried you tight and cosy into another warm
room, where you could walk out without having to show your legs by
going up steps, or down steps.' Of course only one could go at a
time; but here again a little of Miss Browning's good management
arranged everything so very nicely, as Miss Hornblower (their other
visitor) remarked. She went first, and remained in the warm
cloak-room until her hostess followed; and then the two ladies went
arm-in-arm into the ball-room, finding out convenient seats whence
they could watch the arrivals and speak to their passing friends,
until Miss Phoebe and Miss Piper entered, and came to take
possession of the seats reserved for them by Miss Browning's care.
These two younger ladies came in, also arm-in-arm, but with a
certain timid flurry in look and movement very different from the
composed dignity of their seniors (by two or three years). When all
four were once more assembled together, they took breath, and began
to converse.

'Upon my word, I really do think this is a better room than our
Ashcombe Court-house!'

'And how prettily it is decorated!' piped out Miss Piper. 'How well
the roses are made! But you all have such taste at Hollingford.'

'There's Mrs. Dempster,' cried Miss Hornblower; 'she said she and her
two daughters were asked to stay at Mr. Sheepshanks'. Mr
Preston was to be there, too; but I suppose they could not all come
at once. Look! and there is young Roscoe, our new doctor. I declare
it seems as if all Ashcombe were here. Mr. Roscoe! Mr. Roscoe! come
here and let me introduce you to the Miss Brownings, the friends we
are staying with. We think very highly of our young doctor, I can
assure you, Miss Browning.'

Mr. Roscoe bowed, and simpered at hearing his own praises. But Miss
Browning had no notion of having any doctor praised, who had come to
settle even on the very verge of Mr. Gibson's practice, so she said
to Miss Hornblower,--

'You must be glad, I am sure, to have somebody you can call in, if
you are in any sudden hurry, or for things that are too trifling to
trouble Mr. Gibson about; and I should think Mr. Roscoe would feel it
a great advantage to profit, as he will naturally have the
opportunity of doing, by witnessing Mr. Gibson's skill!'

Probably Mr. Roscoe would have felt more aggrieved by this speech
than he really was, if his attention had not been called off just
then by the entrance of the very Mr. Gibson who was being spoken of.
Almost before Miss Browning had ended her severe and depreciatory
remarks, he had asked his friend Miss Hornblower,--

'Who is that lovely girl in pink, just come in?'

'Why, that's Cynthia Kirkpatrick!' said Miss Hornblower, taking up a
ponderous gold eyeglass to make sure of her fact. 'How she has
grown! To be sure it is two or three years since she left
Ashcombe--she was very pretty then--people did say Mr. Preston
admired her very much; but she was so young!'

'Can you introduce me?' asked the impatient young surgeon. 'I should
like to ask her to dance.' When Miss Hornblower returned from her
greeting to her former acquaintance, Mrs. Gibson, and had
accomplished the introduction which Mr. Roscoe had requested, she
began her little confidences to Miss Browning.

'Well, to be sure! How condescending we are! I remember the time
when Mrs. Kirkpatrick wore old black silks, and was thankful and
civil as became her place as a schoolmistress, and as having to earn
her bread. And now she is in a satin; and she speaks to me as if she
just could recollect who I was, if she tried very hard! It isn't so
long ago since Mrs. Dempster came to consult me as to whether Mrs
Kirkpatrick would be offended, if she sent her a new breadth for her
lilac silk-gown, in place of one that had been spoilt by Mrs
Dempster's servant spilling the coffee over it the night before; and
she took it and was thankful, for all she's dressed in pearl-grey
satin now! And she would have been glad enough to marry Mr. Preston
in those days.'

'I thought you said he admired her daughter,' put in Miss Browning
to her irritated friend.

'Well! perhaps I did, and perhaps it was so; I am sure I can't tell;
he was a great deal at the house. Miss Dixon keeps a school in the
same house now, and I am sure she does it a great deal better.'

'The earl and the countess are very fond of Mrs. Gibson,' said Miss
Browning. 'I know, for Lady Harriet told us when she came to drink
tea with us last autumn; and they desired Mr. Preston to be very
attentive to her when she lived at Ashcombe.'

'For goodness' sake don't go and repeat what I've been saying about
Mr. Preston and Mrs. Kirkpatrick to her ladyship. One may be mistaken,
and you know I only said "people talked about it."'

Miss Hornblower was evidently alarmed lest her gossip should be
repeated to the Lady Harriet, who appeared to be on such an intimate
footing with her Hollingford friends. Nor did Miss Browning
dissipate the illusion. Lady Harriet had drunk tea with them, and
might do it again; and, at any rate, the little fright she had put
her friend into was not a bad return for that praise of Mr. Roscoe,
which had offended Miss Browning's loyalty to Mr. Gibson.

Meanwhile Miss Piper and Miss Phoebe, who had not the character of
~esprit-forts~ to maintain, talked of the dresses of the people
present, beginning by complimenting each other.

'What a lovely turban you have got on, Miss Piper, if I may be
allowed to say so: so becoming to your complexion!'

'Do you think so?' said Miss Piper, with ill-concealed
gratification; it was something to have a 'complexion' at
forty-five. 'I got it at Brown's, at Somerton, for this very ball. I
thought I must have something to set off my gown, which isn't quite
so new as it once was; and I have no handsome jewellery like
you'--looking with admiring eyes at a large miniature set round with
pearls, which served as a shield to Miss Phoebe's breast.

'It is handsome,' that lady replied. 'It is a likeness of my dear
mother; Sally has got my father on. The miniatures were both taken
at the same time; and just about then my uncle died and left us each
a legacy of fifty pounds, which we agreed to spend on the setting of
our miniatures. But because they are so valuable Sally always keeps
them locked up with the best silver, and hides the box somewhere;
she never will tell me where, because she says I've such weak
nerves, and that if a burglar, with a loaded pistol at my head, were
to ask me where we kept our plate and jewels, I should be sure to
tell him; and she says, for her part, she would never think of
revealing under any circumstances. (I'm sure I hope she won't be
tried.) But that's the reason I don't wear it often; it's only the
second time I've had it on; and I can't even get at it, and look at
it, which I should like to do. I shouldn't have had it on to-night,
but that Sally gave it out to me, saying it was but a proper
compliment to pay to the Duchess of Menteith, who is to be here in
all her diamonds.'

'Dear-ah-me! Is she really! Do you know I never saw a duchess
before.' And Miss Piper drew herself up and craned her neck, as if
resolved to 'behave herself properly,' as she had been taught to do
at boarding-school thirty years before, in the presence of 'her
grace.' By-and-by she said to Miss Phoebe, with a sudden jerk out of
position,--'Look, look! that's our Mr. Cholmley, the magistrate' (he
was the great man of Coreham), 'and that's Mrs. Cholmley in red
satin, and Mr. George and Mr. Harry from Oxford, I do declare; and
Miss Cholmley, and pretty Miss Sophy. I should like to go and speak
to them, but then it's so formidable crossing. a room without a
gentleman. And there is Coxe the butcher and his wife! Why, all
Coreham seems to be here! And how Mrs. Coxe can afford such a gown I
can't make out for one, for I know Coxe had some difficulty in
paying for the last sheep he bought of my brother.'

Just at this moment the band, consisting of two violins, a harp, and
an occasional clarionet, having finished their tuning, and brought
themselves as nearly into accord as was possible, struck up a brisk
country-dance, and partners quickly took their places. Mrs. Gibson
was secretly a little annoyed at Cynthia's being one of those to
stand up in this early dance, the performers in which were
principally the punctual plebeians of Hollingford, who, when a ball
was fixed to begin at eight, had no notion of being later, and so
losing part of the amusement for which they had paid their money.
She imparted some of her feelings to Molly, sitting by her, longing
to dance, and beating time to the spirited music with one of her
pretty little feet.

'Your dear papa is always so very punctual! To-night it seems almost
a pity, for we really are here before there is any one come that we
know.'

'Oh! I see so many people here that I know. There are Mr. and Mrs
Smeaton, and that nice good-tempered daughter.'

'Oh! booksellers and butchers if you will.'

'Papa has found a great many friends to talk to.'

'Patients, my dear--hardly friends. There are some nice-looking
people here,' catching her eye on the Cholmleys; 'but I daresay they
have driven over from the neighbourhood of Ashcombe or Coreham, and
have hardly calculated how soon they would get here. I wonder when
the Towers' party will come. Ah! there's Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Preston.
Come, the room is beginning to fill.'

So it was, for this was to be a very good ball, people said; and a
large party from the Towers was coming, and a duchess in diamonds
among the number. Every great house in the district was expected to
be full of guests on these occasions; but, at this early hour, the
townspeople had the floor almost entirely to themselves; the county
magnates came dropping in later; and chiefest among them all was the
lord-lieutenant from the Towers. But to-night they were unusually
late, and the aristocratic ozone being absent from the atmosphere,
there was a flatness about the dancing of all those who considered
themselves above the plebeian ranks of the tradespeople. They,
however, enjoyed themselves thoroughly, and sprang and pounded till
their eyes sparkled and their cheeks glowed with exercise and
excitement. Some of the more prudent parents, mindful of the next
day's duties, began to consider at what hour they ought to go home;
but with all there was an expressed or unexpressed curiosity to see
the duchess and her diamonds; for the Menteith diamonds were famous
in higher circles than that now assembled; and their fame had
trickled down to it through the medium of ladies'-maids and
housekeepers. Mr. Gibson had had to leave the ball-room for a time,
as he had anticipated, but he was to return to his wife as soon as
his duties were accomplished; and, in his absence, Mrs. Gibson kept
herself a little aloof from the Miss Brownings and those of her
acquaintance who would willingly have entered into conversation with
her, with the view of attaching herself to the skirts of the Towers'
party, when they should make their appearance. If Cynthia would not
be so very ready in engaging herself to every possible partner who
asked her to dance, there were sure to be young men staying at the
Towers who would be on the look-out for pretty girls: and who could
tell to what a dance would lead? Molly, too, though a less good
dancer than Cynthia, and, from her timidity, less graceful and easy,
was becoming engaged pretty deeply; and, it must be confessed, she
was longing to dance every dance, no matter with whom. Even she
might not be available for the more aristocratic partners Mrs. Gibson
anticipated. She was feeling very much annoyed with the whole
proceedings of the evening when she was aware of some one standing
by her; and, turning a little to one side, she saw Mr. Preston
keeping guard, as it were, over the seats which Molly and Cynthia
had just quitted. He was looking so black that, if their eyes had
not met, Mrs. Gibson would have preferred not speaking to him; as it
was, she thought it unavoidable.

'The rooms are not well-lighted to-night, are they, Mr. Preston?'

'No,' said he; 'but who could light such dingy old paint as this,
loaded with evergreens, too, which always darken a room.'

'And the company, too! I always think that freshness and brilliancy
of dress go as far as anything to brighten up a room. Look what a
set of people are here: the greater part of the women are dressed in
dark silks, really only fit for a morning. The place will be quite
different, by-and-by, when the county families are in a little more
force.'

Mr. Preston made no reply. He had put his glass in his eye,
apparently for the purpose of watching the dancers. If its exact
direction could have been ascertained, it would have been found that
he was looking intently and angrily at a flying figure in pink
muslin: many a one was gazing at Cynthia with intentness besides
himself, but no one in anger. Mrs. Gibson was not so fine an observer
as to read all this; but here was a gentlemanly and handsome young
man, to whom she could prattle, instead of either joining herself on
to objectionable people, or sitting all forlorn until the Towers'
party came. So she went on with her small remarks.

'You are not dancing, Mr. Preston!'

'No! The partner I had engaged has made some mistake. I am waiting
to have an explanation with her.'

Mrs. Gibson was silent. An uncomfortable tide of recollections
appeared to come over her; she, like Mr. Preston, watched Cynthia;
the dance was ended, and she was walking round the room in easy
unconcern as to what might await her. Presently her partner, Mr
Harry Cholmley, brought her back to her seat. She took that vacant
next to Mr. Preston, leaving that by her mother for Molly's
occupation. The latter returned a moment afterwards to her place.
Cynthia seemed entirely unconscious of Mr. Preston's neighbourhood.
Mrs. Gibson leaned forwards, and said to her daughter,--

'Your last partner was a gentleman, my dear. You are improving in
your selection. I really was ashamed of you before, figuring away
with that attorney's clerk. Molly, do you know whom you have been
dancing with? I have found out he is the Coreham bookseller.'

'That accounts for his being so well up in all the books I have been
wanting to hear about,' said Molly, eagerly, but with a spice of
malice in her mind. 'He really was very pleasant, mamma,' she added;
'and he looks quite a gentleman, and dances beautifully!'

'Very well. But remember if you go on this way you will have to
shake hands over the counter to-morrow morning with some of your
partners of to-night,' said Mrs. Gibson, coldly.

'But I really don't know how to refuse when people are introduced to
me and ask me, and I am longing to dance. You know to-night it is a
charity-ball, and papa said everybody danced with everybody,' said
Molly, in a pleading tone of voice; for she could not quite and
entirely enjoy herself if she was out of harmony with any one. What
reply Mrs. Gibson would have made to this speech cannot now be
ascertained, for, before she could make reply, Mr. Preston stepped a
little forwards, and said, in a tone which he meant to be icily
indifferent, but which trembled with anger,--

'If Miss Gibson finds any difficulty in refusing a partner, she has
only to apply to Miss Kirkpatrick for instructions.'

Cynthia lifted up her beautiful eyes, and, fixing them on Mr
Preston's face, said, very quietly, as if only stating a matter of
fact,--

'You forget, I think, Mr. Preston: Miss Gibson implied that she
wished to dance with the person who asked her--that makes all the
difference. I can't instruct her how to act in that difficulty.'

And to the rest of this little conversation, Cynthia appeared to
lend no car; and she was almost directly claimed by her next
partner. Mr. Preston took the seat now left empty much to Molly's
annoyance. At first she feared lest he should be going to ask her to
dance; but, instead, he put out his hand for Cynthia's nosegay,
which she had left on rising, entrusted to Molly. It had suffered
considerably from the heat of the room, and was no longer full and
fresh; not so much so as Molly's, which had not, in the first
instance, been pulled to pieces in picking out the scarlet flowers
which now adorned Molly's hair, and which had since been cherished
with more care. Enough, however, remained of Cynthia's to show very
distinctly that it was not the one Mr. Preston had sent; and it was
perhaps to convince himself of this, that he mutely asked to examine
it. But Molly, faithful to what she imagined would be Cynthia's
wish, refused to allow him to touch it; she only held it a little
nearer.

'Miss Kirkpatrick has not done me the honour of wearing the bouquet
I sent her, I see. She received it, I suppose, and my note?'

'Yes,' said Molly, rather intimidated by the tone in which this was
said. 'But we had already accepted these two nosegays.'

Mrs. Gibson was just the person to come to the rescue with her
honeyed words on such an occasion as 'the present. She evidently was
rather afraid of Mr. Preston, and wished to keep at peace with him.

'Oh, yes, we were so sorry! Of course, I don't mean to say we could
be sorry for any one's kindness; but two such lovely nosegays had
been sent from Hamley Hall--you may see how beautiful from what
Molly holds in her hand--and they had come before yours, Mr
Preston.'

'I should have felt honoured if you had accepted of mine, since the
young ladies were so well provided for. I was at some pains in
selecting the flowers at Green's; I think I may say it was rather
more ~recherche~ than that of Miss Kirkpatrick's, which Miss
Gibson holds so tenderly and securely in her hand.'

'Oh, because Cynthia would take out the most effective flowers to
put in my hair!' exclaimed Molly, eagerly.

'Did she?' said Mr. Preston' with a certain accent of pleasure in his
voice, as though he were glad she set so little store by the
nosegay; and he walked off to stand behind Cynthia in the quadrille
that was being danced; and Molly saw him making her reply to him--
against her will, Molly was sure. But, somehow, his face and manner
implied power over her. She looked grave, deaf, indifferent,
indignant, defiant; but, after a half-whispered speech to Cynthia,
at the conclusion of the dance, she evidently threw him an impatient
consent to what he was asking, for he walked off with a disagreeable
smile of satisfaction on his handsome face.

All this time the murmurs were spreading at the lateness of the
party from the Towers, and person after person came up to Mrs. Gibson
as if she were the accredited authority as to the earl and
countess's plans. In one sense this was flattering; but then the
acknowledgment of common ignorance and wonder reduced her to the
level of the inquirers. Mrs. Goodenough felt herself particularly
aggrieved; she had had her spectacles on for the last hour and a
half, in order to be ready for the sight the very first minute any
one from the Towers appeared at the door.

'I had a headache,' she complained, 'and I should have sent my
money, and never stirred out o' doors to-night; for I've seen a many
of these here balls, and my lord and my lady too, when they were
better worth looking at nor they are now; but every one was talking
of the duchess, and the duchess and her diamonds, and I thought I
shouldn't like to be behindhand, and never ha' seen neither the
duchess nor her diamonds; so I'm here, and coal and candlelight
wasting away at home, for I told Sally to sit up for me; and, above
everything, I cannot abide waste. I took it from my mother, who was
such a one against waste as you never see now-a-days. She was a
manager, if ever there was a one, and brought up nine children on
less than any one else could do, I'll be bound. Why! She wouldn't
let us be extravagant--not even in the matter of colds. Whenever any
on us had got a pretty bad cold, she took the opportunity and cut
our hair; for she said, said she, it was of no use having two colds
when one would do--and cutting of our hair was sure to give us a
cold. But, for all that, I wish the duchess would come.'

'Ah! but fancy what it is to me,' sighed out Mrs. Gibson; 'so long as
I have been without seeing the dear family--and seeing so little of
them the other day when I was at the Towers (for the duchess would
have my opinion on Lady Alice's trousseau, and kept asking me so
many questions it took up all the time)--and Lady Harriet's last
words were a happy anticipation of our meeting to-night. It's nearly
twelve o'clock.'

Every one of any pretensions to gentility was painfully affected by
the absence of the family from the Towers; the very fiddlers seemed
unwilling to begin playing a dance that might be interrupted by the
entrance of the great folks. Miss Phoebe Browning had apologized for
them--Miss Browning had blamed them with calm dignity; it was only
the butchers and bakers and candlestick-makers who rather enjoyed
the absence of restraint, and were happy and hilarious.

At last, there was a rumbling, and a rushing, and a whispering, and
the music stopped, so the dancers were obliged to do so too, and in
came Lord Cumnor in his state dress, with a fat, middle-aged woman
on his arm; she was dressed almost like a girl--in a sprigged
muslin, with natural flowers in her hair, but not a vestige of a
jewel or a diamond. Yet it must be the duchess; but what was a
duchess without diamonds?--and in a dress which farmer Hodson's
daughter might have worn! Was it the duchess? Could it be the
duchess? The little crowd of inquirers around Mrs. Gibson thickened,
to hear her confirm their disappointing surmise. After the duchess
came Lady Cumnor, looking like Lady Macbeth in black velvet--a cloud
upon her brow, made more conspicuous by the lines of age rapidly
gathering on her handsome face; and Lady Harriet, and other ladies,
amongst whom there was one dressed so like the duchess as to suggest
the idea of a sister rather than a daughter, as far as dress went.
There was Lord Hollingford, plain in face, awkward in person,
gentlemanly in manner; and half-a-dozen younger men, Lord Albert
Monson, Captain James, and others of their age and standing, who
came in looking anything if not critical. This long-expected party
swept up to the seats reserved for them at the head of the room,
apparently regardless of the interruption they caused; for the
dancers stood aside, and almost dispersed back to their seats, and
when "Money-musk" struck up again, not half the former set of people
stood up to finish the dance.

Lady Harriet, who was rather different to Miss Piper, and no more
minded crossing the room alone than if the lookers-on were so many
cabbages, spied the Gibson party pretty quickly out, and came across
to them.

'Here we are at last. How d'ye do, dear? Why, little one' (to
Molly), 'how nice you're looking! Aren't we shamefully late?'

'Oh! it's only just past twelve,' said Mrs. Gibson; 'and I daresay
you dined very late.'

'It was not that; it was that ill-mannered woman, who went to her
own room after we came out from dinner, and she and Lady Alice
stayed there invisible, till we thought they were putting on some
splendid attire--as they ought to have done--and at half-past ten
when mamma sent up to them to say the carriages were at the door,
the duchess sent down for some beef-tea, and at last appeared
~a l'enfant~ as you see her. Mamma is so angry with her, and
some of the others are annoyed at not coming earlier, and one or two
are giving themselves airs about coming at all. Papa is the only one
who is not affected by it.' Then turning to Molly Lady Harriet
asked,--

'Have you been dancing much, Miss Gibson?'

'Yes; not every dance, but nearly all.'

It was a simple question enough; but Lady Harriet's speaking at all
to Molly had become to Mrs. Gibson almost like shaking a red rag at a
bull; it was the one thing sure to put her out of temper. But she
would not have shown this to Lady Harriet for the world; only she
contrived to baffle any endeavours at further conversation between
the two, by placing herself between Lady Harriet and Molly, whom the
former asked to sit down in the absent Cynthia's room.

'I won't go back to those people, I am so mad with them; and,
besides, I hardly saw you the other day, and I must have some gossip
with you.' So she sat down by Mrs. Gibson, and as Mrs. Goodenough
afterwards expressed it, 'looked like anybody else.' Mrs. Goodenough
said this to excuse herself for a little misadventure she fell into.
She had taken a deliberate survey of the grandees at the upper end
of the room, spectacles on nose, and had inquired, in no very
measured voice, who everybody was, from Mr. Sheepshanks, my lord's
agent, and her very good neighbour, who in vain tried to check her
loud ardour for information by replying to her in whispers. But she
was rather deaf as well as blind, so his low tones only brought upon
him fresh inquiries. Now, satisfied as far as she could be, and on
her way to departure, and the extinguishing of fire and candlelight,
she stopped opposite to Mrs. Gibson, and thus addressed her by way of
renewal of their former subject of conversation,--

'Such a shabby thing for a duchess I never saw; not a bit of a
diamond near her. They're none of them worth looking at except the
countess, and she's always a personable woman, and not so lusty as
she was. But they're not worth waiting up for till this time o'
night.'

There was a moment's pause. Then Lady Harriet put her hand out, and
said,--

'You don't remember me, but I know you from having seen you at the
Towers. Lady Cumnor is a good deal thinner than she was, but we hope
her health is better for it.'

'It's Lady Harriet,' said Mrs. Gibson to Mrs. Goodenough, in
reproachful dismay.

'Deary me, your ladyship! I hope I've given no offence! But, you
see--that is to say, your ladyship sees, that it's late hours for
such folks as me, and I only stayed out of my bed to see the
duchess, and I thought she'd come in diamonds and a coronet; and it
puts one out at my age, to be disappointed in the only chance I'm
like to have of so fine a sight.'

'I'm put out too,' said Lady Harriet. 'I wanted to have come early,
and here we are as late as this. I'm so cross and ill-tempered, I
should be glad to hide myself in bed as soon as you will do.'

She said this so sweetly that Mrs. Goodenough relaxed into a smile,
and her crabbedness into a compliment.

'I don't believe as ever your ladyship can be cross and ill-tempered
with that pretty face. I'm an old woman, so you must let me say so.'
Lady Harriet stood up, and made a low curtsey. Then holding out her
hand, she said,--

'I won't keep you up any longer; but I'll promise one thing in
return for your pretty speech: if ever I am a duchess, I'll come and
show myself to you in all my robes and gewgaws. Good-night, madam!'

'There! I knew how it would be!' said she, not resuming her seat.
'And on the eve of a county election too.'

'Oh! you must not take old Mrs. Goodenough as a specimen, dear Lady
Harriet. She is always a grumbler! I am sure no one else would
complain of your all being as late as you liked,' said Mrs. Gibson.

'What do you say, Molly?' said Lady Harriet, suddenly turning her
eyes on Molly's face. 'Don't you think we've lost some of our
popularity,--which at this time means votes--by coming so late.
Come, answer me! you used to be a famous little truth-teller.'

'I don't know about popularity or votes,' said Molly, rather
unwillingly. 'But I think many people were sorry you did not come
sooner; and isn't that rather a proof of popularity?' she added.

'That's a very neat and diplomatic answer,' said Lady Harriet,
smiling, and tapping Molly's cheek with her fan.'

'Molly knows nothing about it,' said Mrs. Gibson, a little off her
guard. 'It would be very impertinent if she or any one else
questioned Lady Cumnor's perfect right to come when she chose.'

'Well, all I know is, I must go back to mamma now, but I shall make
another raid into these regions by-and-by, and you must keep a place
for me. Ah! there are--the Miss Brownings; you see I don't forget my
lesson, Miss Gibson.'

'Molly, I cannot have you speaking so to Lady Harriet,' said Mrs
Gibson, as soon as she was left alone with her step-daughter. 'You
would never have known her at all if it had not been for me, and
don't be always putting yourself into our conversation.'

'But I must speak if she asks me questions,' pleaded Molly.

'Well! if you must, you must, I acknowledge. I'm candid about that
at any rate. But there's no need for you to set up to have an
opinion at your age.'

'I don't know how to help it,' said Molly.

'She's such a whimsical person; look there, if she's not talking to
Miss Phoebe; and Miss Phoebe is so weak she'll be easily led away
into fancying she is hand and glove with Lady Harriet. If there is
one thing I hate more than another, it is the trying to make out an
intimacy with great people.'

Molly felt innocent enough, so she offered no justification of
herself, and made no reply. Indeed she was more occupied in watching
Cynthia. She could not understand the change that seemed to have
come over the latter. She was dancing, it was true, with the same
lightness and grace as before, but the smooth bounding motion as of
a feather blown onwards by the wind was gone. She was conversing
with her partner, but without the soft animation that usually shone
out upon her countenance. And when she was brought back to her seat
Molly noticed her changed colour, and her dreamily abstracted eyes.

'What is the matter, Cynthia?' asked she, in a very low voice.

'Nothing,' said Cynthia, suddenly looking up, and in an accent of
what was in her, sharpness. 'Why should there be?'

'I don't know; but you look different to what you did--tired or
something.'

'There is nothing the matter, or, if there is, don't talk about it.
It is all your fancy.'

This was a rather contradictory speech, to be interpreted by
intuition rather than by logic. Molly understood that Cynthia wished
for quietness and silence. But what was her surprise, after the
speeches that had passed before, and the implication of Cynthia's
whole manner to Mr. Preston, to see him come up, and, without a word,
offer his arm to Cynthia and lead her off to dance. It appeared to
strike Mrs. Gibson as something remarkable, for, forgetting her late
passage at arms with Molly, she asked, wanderingly, as if almost
distrusting the evidence of her senses,--

'Is Cynthia going to dance with Mr. Preston?'

Molly had scarcely time to answer before she herself was led off by
her partner. She could hardly attend to him or to the figures of the
quadrille for watching for Cynthia among the moving forms.

Once she caught a glimpse of her standing still--downcast--listening
to Mr. Preston's eager speech. Again she was walking languidly among
the dancers, almost as if she took no notice of those around her.
When she and Molly joined each other again, the shade on Cynthia's
face had deepened to gloom. But, at the same time, if a
physiognomist had studied her expression, he would have read in it
defiance and anger, and perhaps also a little perplexity. While this
quadrille had been going on, Lady Harriet had been speaking to her
brother.

'Hollingford!' she said, laying her hand on his arm, and drawing him
a little apart from the well-born crowd amid which he stood, silent
and abstracted, 'you don't know how these good people here have been
hurt and disappointed with our being so late, and with the duchess's
ridiculous simplicity of dress.'

'Why should they mind it?' asked he, taking advantage of her being
out of breath with eagerness.

'Oh, don't be so wise and stupid; don't you see, we're a show and a
spectacle--it's like having a pantomime with harlequin and columbine
in plain clothes.'

'I don't understand how--' he began.

'Then take it upon trust. They really are a little disappointed,
whether they are logical or not in being so, and we must try and
make it up to them; for one thing, because I can't bear our vassals
to look dissatisfied and disloyal, and then there's the election in
June.'

'I really would as soon be out of the House as in it.'

'Nonsense; it would grieve papa beyond measure--but there is no time
to talk about that now. You must go and dance with some of the
townspeople, and I'll ask Sheepshanks to introduce me to a
respectable young farmer. Can't you get Captain James to make
himself useful? There he goes with Lady Alice! If I don't get him
introduced to the ugliest tailor's daughter I can find for the next
dance!' She put her arm in her brother's as she spoke, as if to lead
him to some partner. He resisted, however--resisted piteously.

'Pray don't, Harriet. You know I can't dance. I hate it; I always
did. I don't know how to get through a quadrille.'

'It's a country dance!' said she, resolutely.

'It's all the same. And what shall I say to my partner? I haven't a
notion: I shall have no subject in common. Speak of being
disappointed, they'll be ten times more disappointed when they find
I can neither dance nor talk!'

'I'll be merciful; don't be so cowardly. In their eyes a lord may
dance like a bear--as some lords not very far from me are--if he
likes, and they'll take it for grace. And you shall begin with Molly
Gibson, your friend the doctor's daughter. She's a good, simple,
intelligent little girl, which you'll think a great deal more of, I
suppose, than of the frivolous fact of her being very pretty, Clare!
will you allow me to introduce my brother to Miss Gibson? he hopes
to engage her for this dance. Lord Hollingford, Miss Gibson!'

Poor Lord Hollingford! there was nothing for it but for him to
follow his sister's very explicit lead, and Molly and he walked off
to their places, each heartily wishing their dance together well
over. Lady Harriet flew off to Mr. Sheepshanks to secure her
respectable young farmer, and Mrs. Gibson remained alone, wishing
that Lady Cumnor would send one of her attendant gentlemen for her.
It would be so much more agreeable to be sitting even at the fag-end
of nobility than here on a bench with everybody; hoping that
everybody would see Molly dancing away with a lord, yet vexed that
the chance had so befallen that Molly instead of Cynthia was the
young lady singled out; wondering if simplicity of dress was now
become the highest fashion, and pondering on the possibility of
cleverly inducing Lady Harriet to introduce Lord Albert Monson to
her own beautiful daughter, Cynthia.

Molly found Lord Hollingford, the wise and learned Lord Hollingford,
strangely stupid in understanding the mystery of 'Cross hands and
back again, down the middle and up again.' He was constantly getting
hold of the wrong hands, and as constantly stopping when he had
returned to his place, quite unaware that the duties of society and
the laws of the dance required that he should go on capering till he
had arrived at the bottom of the room. He perceived that he had
performed his part very badly, and apologized to Molly when once
they had arrived at that haven of comparative peace, and he
expressed his regret so simply and heartily that she felt at her
ease with him at once, especially when he had confided to her his
reluctance at having to dance at all, and his only doing it under
his sister's compulsion. To Molly he was an elderly widower, almost
as old as her father, and by-and-by they got into very pleasant
conversation. She learnt from him that Roger Hamley had just been
publishing a paper in some scientific periodical, which had excited
considerable attention, as it was intended to confute some theory of
a great French physiologist, and Roger's article proved the writer
to be possessed of a most unusual amount of knowledge on the
subject. This piece of news was of great interest to Molly, and, in
her questions, she herself evinced so much intelligence, and a mind
so well prepared for the reception of information, that Lord
Hollingford at any rate would have felt his quest of popularity a
very easy affair indeed, if he might have gone on talking quietly to
Molly during the rest of the evening. When he took her back to her
place, he found Mr. Gibson there, and fell into talk with him, until
Lady Harriet once more came to stir him up to his duties. Before
very long, however, he returned to Mr. Gibson's side, and began
telling him of this paper of Roger Hamley's, of which Mr. Gibson had
not yet heard. In the midst of their conversation, as they stood
close by Mrs. Gibson, Lord Hollingford saw Molly in the distance, and
interrupted himself to say, 'What a charming little lady that
daughter of yours is! Most girls of her age are so difficult to talk
to; but she is intelligent and full of interest in all sorts of
sensible things; well read, too--she was up in ~Le Regne
Animal~--and very pretty!'

Mr. Gibson bowed, much pleased at such a compliment from such a man,
was he lord or not. It is very likely that if Molly had been a
stupid listener, Lord Hollingford would not have discovered her
beauty, or the converse might be asserted--if she had not been young
and pretty he would not have exerted himself to talk on scientific
subjects in a manner which she could understand. But in whatever
manner Molly had won his approbation and admiration, there was no
doubt that she had earned it somehow. And, when she next returned to
her place, Mrs. Gibson greeted her with soft words and a gracious
smile; for it does not require much reasoning power to discover that
if it is a very fine thing to be mother-in-law to a very magnificent
three-tailed bashaw, it presupposes that the wife who makes the
connection between the two parties is in harmony with her mother.
And so far had Mrs. Gibson's thoughts wandered into futurity. She
only wished that the happy chance had fallen to Cynthia's instead of
to Molly's lot. But Molly was a docile, sweet creature, very pretty,
and remarkably intelligent, as my lord had said. It was a pity that
Cynthia preferred making millinery to reading; but perhaps that
could be rectified. And there was Lord Cumnor coming to speak to
her, and Lady Cumnor nodding to her, and indicating a place by her
side.

It was not an unsatisfactory ball upon the whole to Mrs. Gibson,
although she paid the usual penalty for sitting up beyond her usual
hour in perpetual glare and movement. The next morning she awoke
irritable and fatigued; and a little of the same feeling oppressed
both Cynthia and Molly. The former was lounging in the window-seat,
holding a three-days-old newspaper in her hand, which she was making
a pretence of reading, when she was startled by her mother's saying,
-

'Cynthia! can't you take up a book and improve yourself. I am sure
your conversation will never be worth listening to, unless you read
something better than newspapers. Why don't you keep up your French?
There was some French book that Molly was reading--~Le Regne
Animal~, I think.'

'No! I never read it!' said Molly, blushing. 'Mr. Roger Hamley
sometimes read pieces out of it when I was first at the Hall, and
told me what it was about.'

'Oh! well. Then I suppose I was mistaken. But it comes to all the
same thing. Cynthia, you really must learn to settle yourself to
some improving reading every morning.'

Rather to Molly's surprise, Cynthia did not reply a word; but
dutifully went and brought down from among her Boulogne
school-books, ~Le Siecle de Louis XIV~. But after a while Molly
saw that this 'improving reading' was just as much a mere excuse for
Cynthia's thinking her own thoughts as the newspaper had been.


CHAPTER XXVII


FATHER AND SONS


Things were not going on any better at Hamley Hall. Nothing had
occurred to change the state of dissatisfied feeling into which the
squire and his eldest son had respectively fallen; and the long
continuance merely of dissatisfaction is sure of itself to deepen
the feeling, Roger did all in his power to bring the father and son
together; but sometimes wondered if it would not have been better to
leave them alone; for they were falling into the habit of
respectively making him their confidant, and so defining emotions
and opinions which would have had less distinctness if they had been
unexpressed. There was little enough relief in the daily life at the
Hall to help them all to shake off the gloom; and it even told on
the health of both the squire and Osborne. The squire became
thinner, his skin as well as his clothes began to hang loose about
him, and the freshness of his colour turned to red streaks, till his
cheeks looked like Eardiston pippins, instead of resembling 'a
Katherine pear on the side that's next the sun.' Roger thought that
his father sate indoors and smoked in his study more than was good
for him, but it had become difficult to get him far afield; he was
too much afraid of coming across some sign of the discontinued
drainage works, or being irritated afresh by the sight of his
depreciated timber. Osborne was wrapt up in the idea of arranging
his poems for the press, and so working out his wish for
independence. What with daily writing to his wife--taking his
letters himself to a distant post-office, and receiving hers
there--touching up his sonnets, &c., with fastidious care; and
occasionally giving himself the pleasure of a visit to the Gibsons,
and enjoying the society of the two pleasant girls there, he found
little time for being with his father. Indeed Osborne was too
self-indulgent or 'sensitive,' as he termed it, to bear well with
the squire's gloomy fits, or too frequent querulousness. The
consciousness of his secret, too, made Osborne uncomfortable in his
father's presence. It was very well for all parties that Roger was
not 'sensitive.' for, if he had been, there were times when it would
have been hard to bear little spurts of domestic tyranny, by which
his father strove to assert his power over both his sons. One of
these occurred very soon after the night of the Hollingford
charity-ball.

Roger had induced his father to come out with him; and the squire
had, on his son's suggestion, taken with him his long unused spud.
The two had wandered far afield; perhaps the elder man had found the
unwonted length of exercise too much for him, for, as he approached
the house, on his return, he became what nurses call in children
'fractious,' and ready to turn on his companion for every remark he
made. Roger understood the case by instinct, as it were, and bore it
all with his usual sweetness of temper. They entered the house by
the front door; it lay straight on their line of march. On the old
cracked yellow-marble slab, there lay a card with Lord Hollingford's
name on it, which Robinson, evidently on the watch for their return,
hastened out of his pantry to deliver to Roger.

'His lordship was very sorry not to see you, Mr. Roger, and his
lordship left a note for you. Mr. Osborne took it, I think, when he
passed through, I asked his lordship if he would like to see Mr
Osborne, who was indoors, as I thought. But his lordship said he was
pressed for time, and told me to make his excuses.'

'Didn't he ask for me?' growled the squire.

'No, sir; I can't say as his lordship did. He would never have
thought of Mr. Osborne, sir, if I hadn't named him. It was Mr. Roger
he seemed so keen after.'

'Very odd,' said the squire. Roger said nothing, although he
naturally felt some curiosity. He went into the drawing-room, not
quite aware that his father was following him. Osborne sate at a
table near the fire, pen in hand, looking over one of his poems, and
dotting the ~i's~, crossing the ~t's~, and now and then pausing over
the alteration of a word.

'Oh, Roger!' he said, as his brother came in, 'here's been Lord
Hollingford wanting to see you.'

'I know,' replied Roger.

'And he's left a note for you. Robinson tried to persuade him it was
for my father, so he's added a "junior" (Roger Hamley, Esq., junior)
in pencil.' The squire was in the room by this time, and what he had
overheard rubbed him up still more the wrong way. Roger took his
unopened note and read it.

'What does he say?' asked the squire.

Roger handed him the note. It contained an invitation to dinner to
meet M. Geoffroi St H--,' whose views on certain subjects Roger had
been advocating in the article Lord Hollingford had spoken about to
Molly, when he danced with her at the Hollingford ball. M. Geoffroi
St H--was in England now, and was expected to pay a visit at the
Towers in the course of the following week. He had expressed a wish
to meet the author of the paper which had already attracted the
attention of the French comparative anatomists; and Lord Hollingford
added a few words as to his own desire to make the acquaintance of a
neighbour whose tastes were so similar to his own; and then followed
a civil message from Lord and Lady Cumnor.

Lord Hollingford's hand was cramped and rather illegible. The squire
could not read it all at once, and was enough put out to decline any
assistance in deciphering it. At last he made it out.

'So my lord lieutenant is taking some notice of the Hamleys at last.
The election is coming on, is it? But I can tell him we're not to be
got so easily. I suppose this trap is set for you, Osborne? What's
this you've been writing that the French ~mounseer~ is so taken
with?'

'It is not me, sir!' said Osborne. 'Both note and call are for
Roger.'

'I don't understand it,' said the squire. 'These Whig fellows have
never done their duty by me; not that I want it of them. The Duke of
Debenham used to pay the Hamleys a respect due to 'em--the oldest
landowners in the county--but since he died, and this shabby Whig
lord has succeeded him, I've never dined at the lord lieutenant's
once--no, not once.'

'But I think, sir, I've heard you say Lord Cumnor used to invite
you,--only you did not choose to go,' said Roger.

'Yes. What d'ye mean by that? Do you suppose I was going to desert
the principles of my family, and curry favour of the Whigs? No!
leave that to them. They can ask the heir of the Hamleys fast enough
when a county election is coming on.'

'I tell you, sir,' said Osborne, in the irritable tone he sometimes
used when his father was particularly unreasonable, 'it is not me
Lord Hollingford is inviting; it is Roger. Roger is making himself
known for what he is, a first-rate fellow,' continued Osborne--a
sting of self-reproach mingling with his generous pride in his
brother--'and he is getting himself a name; he's been writing about
these new French theories and discoveries, and this foreign savant
very naturally wants to make his acquaintance, and so Lord
Hollingford asks him to dine. It's as clear as can be,' lowering his
tone, and addressing himself to Roger, 'it has nothing to do with
politics, if my father would but see it.'

Of course the squire heard this little aside with the unlucky
uncertainty of hearing which is a characteristic of the beginning of
deafness; and its effect on him was perceptible in the increased
acrimony of his next speech.

'You young men think you know everything. I tell you it's a palpable
Whig trick. And what business has Roger--if it is Roger the man
wants--to go currying favour with the French? In my day we were
content to hate 'em and to lick 'em. But it's just like your
conceit, Osborne, setting yourself up to say it's your younger
brother they're asking, and not you; I tell you it's you. They think
the eldest son was sure to be called after his father, Roger--Roger
Hamley, junior. It's as plain as a pike-staff. They know they can't
catch me with chaff, but they've got up this French dodge. What
business had you to go writing about the French, Roger? I should
have thought you were too sensible to take any notice of their
fancies and theories; but if it is you they've asked, I'll not have
you going and meeting these foreigners at a Whig house. They ought
to have asked Osborne. He's the representative of the Hamleys, if
I'm not; and they can't get me, let them try ever so. Besides,
Osborne has got a bit of the ~mounseer~ about him, which he caught
with being so fond of going off to the Continent, instead of coming
back to his good old English home.'

He went on, repeating much of what he had said before, till he left
the room. Osborne had kept on replying to his unreasonable
grumblings, which had only added to his anger; and as soon as the
squire had fairly gone, Osborne turned to Roger, and said,--

'Of course you'll go, Roger? ten to one he'll be in another mind
to-morrow.'

'No,' said Roger, bluntly enough--for he was extremely disappointed;
'I won't run the chance of vexing him. I shall refuse.'

'Don't be such a fool!' exclaimed Osborne. 'Really, my father is too
unreasonable. You heard how he kept contradicting himself; and such
a man as you to be kept under like a child by--'

'Don't let us talk any more about it, Osborne,' said Roger, writing
away fast. When the note was written, and sent off, he came and put
his hand caressingly on Osborne's shoulder, as he sate pretending to
read, but in reality vexed with both his father and his brother,
though on very different grounds.

'How go the poems, old fellow? I hope they're nearly ready to bring
out.'

'No, they're not; and if it were not for the money, I shouldn't care
if they were never published. What's the use of fame, if one mayn't
reap the fruits of it?'

'Come, now, we'll have no more of that; let's talk about the money.
I shall be going up for my fellowship examination next week, and
then we'll have a purse in common, for they'll never think of not
giving me a fellowship now I'm senior wrangler. I'm short enough
myself at present, and I don't like to bother my father; but when
I'm Fellow, you shall take me down to Winchester, and introduce me
to the little wife.'

'It will be a month next Monday since I left her,' said Osborne,
laying down his papers and gazing into the fire, as if by so doing
he could call up her image. 'In her letter this morning she bids me
give you such a pretty message. It won't bear translating into
English; you must read it for yourself,' continued he, pointing out
a line or two in a letter he drew out of his pocket.

Roger suspected that one or two of the words were wrongly spelt; but
their purport was so gentle and loving, and had such a touch of
simple, respectful gratitude in them, that he could not help being
drawn afresh to the little unseen sister-in-law, whose acquaintance
Osborne had made by helping her to look for some missing article of
the children's, whom she was taking for their daily walk in Hyde
Park. For Mrs. Osborne Hamley had been nothing more than a French
~bonne~, very pretty, very graceful, and very much tyrannized over
by the rough little boys and girls she had in charge. She was a
little orphan-girl, who had charmed the heads of a travelling
English family, as she had brought ~madame~ some articles of
~lingerie~ at an hotel; and she had been hastily engaged by them as
bonne to their children, partly as a pet and plaything herself,
partly because it would be so good for the children to learn French
from a native (of Alsace!). By and by her mistress ceased to take
any particular notice of Aimee in the bustle of London and
London gaiety; but though feeling more and more forlorn in a strange
land every day, the French girl strove hard to do her duty. One
touch of kindness, however, was enough to set the fountain gushing;
and she and Osborne naturally fell into an ideal state of love, to
be rudely disturbed by the indignation of the mother, when accident
discovered to her the attachment existing between her children's
~bonne~ and a young man of an entirely different class. Aimee
answered truly to all her mistress's questions; but no worldly
wisdom, nor any lesson to be learnt from another's experience, could
in the least disturb her entire faith in her lover. Perhaps Mrs
Townshend did no more than her duty in immediately sending
Aimee back to Metz, where she had first met with her, and where
such relations as remained to the girl might be supposed to be
residing. But, altogether, she knew so little of the kind of people
or life to which she was consigning her deposed protegee that
Osborne, after listening with impatient indignation to the lecture
which Mrs. Townshend gave him when he insisted on seeing her in order
to learn what had become of his love, that the young man set off
straight for Metz in hot haste, and did not let the grass grow under
his feet until he had made Aimee his wife. All this had
occurred the previous autumn, and Roger did not know of the step his
brother had taken until it was irrevocable. Then came the mother's
death, which, besides the simplicity of its own overwhelming sorrow,
brought with it the loss of the kind, tender mediatrix, who could
always soften and turn his father's heart. It is doubtful, however,
if even she could have succeeded in this, for the squire looked
high, and over high, for the wife of his heir; he detested all
foreigners, and moreover held all Roman Catholics in dread and
abomination something akin to our ancestors' hatred of witchcraft.
All these prejudices were strengthened by his grief. Argument would
always have glanced harmless away off his shield of utter unreason;
but a loving impulse, in a happy moment, might have softened his
heart to what he most detested in the former days. But the happy
moments came not now, and the loving impulses were trodden down by
the bitterness of his frequent remorse, not less than by his growing
irritability; so Aimee lived solitary in the little cottage
near Winchester in which Osborne had installed her when she first
came to England as his wife, and in the dainty furnishing of which
he had run himself so deeply into debt. For Osborne consulted his
own fastidious taste in his purchases rather than her simple
childlike wishes and wants, and looked upon the little Frenchwoman
rather as the future mistress of Hamley Hall than as the wife of a
man who was wholly dependent on others at present. He had chosen a
southern county as being far removed from those midland shires where
the name of Hamley of Hamley was well and widely known; for he did
not wish his wife to assume, if only for a time, a name which was
not justly and legally her own. In all these arrangements he had
willingly striven to do his full duty by her; and she repaid him
with passionate devotion and admiring reverence. If his vanity had
met with a check, or his worthy desires for college honours had been
disappointed, he knew where to go for a comforter; one who poured
out praise till her words were choked in her throat by the rapidity
of her thoughts, and who poured out the small vials of her
indignation on every one who did not acknowledge and bow down to her
husband's merits. If she ever wished to go to the
~chateau~--that was his home--and to be introduced to his
family, Aimee never hinted a word of it to him. Only she did
yearn, and she did plead, for a little more of her husband's
company; and the good reasons which had convinced her of the
necessity of his being so much away when he was present to urge
them, failed in their efficacy when she tried to reproduce them to
herself in his absence.

The afternoon of the day on which Lord Hollingford had called, Roger
was going upstairs, three steps at a time, when, at a turn on the
landing, he encountered his father. It was the first time he had
seen him since their conversation about the Towers' invitation to
dinner. The squire stopped his son by standing right in the middle
of the passage.

'Thou'rt going to meet the ~mounseer~, my lad?' said he, half as
affirmation, half as question.

'No, sir; I sent off James almost immediately with a note declining
it. I don't care about it--that's to say, not to signify.'

'Why did you take me up so sharp, Roger?' said his father pettishly.
'You all take me up so hastily now-a-days. I think it's hard when a
man mustn't be allowed a bit of crossness when he's tired and heavy
at heart--that I do.'

'But, father, I should never like to go to a house where they had
slighted you.'

'Nay, nay, lad,' said the squire, brightening up a little; 'I think
I slighted them. They asked me to dinner after my lord was made
lieutenant time after time, but I never would go near 'em. I call
that my slighting them.'

And no more was said at the time; but the next day the squire again
stopped Roger.

'I've been making Jem try on his livery-coat that he hasn't worn
this three or four years,--he's got too stout for it now.'

'Well, he needn't wear it, need he? and Morgan's lad will be glad
enough of it,--he's sadly in want of clothes.'

'Ay, ay; but who's to go with you when you call at the Towers? It's
but polite to call after Lord What's-his-name has taken the trouble
to come here; and I shouldn't like you to go without a groom.'

'My dear father! I shouldn't know what to do with a man riding at my
back. I can find my way to the stable-yard for myself, or there'll
be some man about to take my horse. Don't trouble yourself about
that.'

'Well, you're not Osborne, to be sure. Perhaps it won't strike 'em
as strange for you. But you must look up, and hold your own, and
remember you're one of the Hamleys, who've been on the same land for
hundreds of years, while they're but trumpery Whig folk who only
came into the county in Queen Anne's time.'


CHAPTER XXVIII


RIVALRY


For some days after the ball Cynthia seemed languid, and was very
silent. Molly, who had promised herself fully as much enjoyment in
talking over the past gaiety with Cynthia as in the evening itself,
was disappointed when she found that all conversation on the subject
was rather evaded than encouraged. Mrs. Gibson, it is true, was ready
to go over the ground as many times as any one liked; but her words
were always like ready-made clothes, and never fitted individual
thoughts. Anybody might have used them, and, with a change of proper
names, they might have served to describe any ball. She repeatedly
used the same language in speaking about it, till Molly knew the
sentences and their sequence even to irritation.

'Ah! Mr. Osborne, you should have been there! I said to myself many a
time how you really should have been there--you and, your brother of
course.'

'I thought of you very often during the evening!'

'Did you? Now that I call very kind of you. Cynthia, darling! Do you
hear what Mr. Osborne Hamley was saying?' as Cynthia came into the
room just then. 'He thought of us all on the evening of the ball.'

'He did better than merely remember us then,' said Cynthia, with her
soft slow smile. 'We owe him thanks for those beautiful flowers,
mamma.'

'Oh!' said Osborne, 'you must not thank me exclusively. I believe it
was my thought, but Roger took all the trouble of it.'

'I consider the thought as everything,' said Mrs. Gibson. 'Thought is
spiritual, while action is merely material.'

This fine sentence took the speaker herself by surprise; and in such
conversation as was then going on, it is not necessary to accurately
define the meaning of everything that is said.

'I'm afraid the flowers were too late to be of much use though,'
continued Osborne. 'I met Preston the next morning, and of course we
talked about the ball. I was sorry to find he had been beforehand
with us,'

'He only sent one nosegay, and that was for Cynthia,' said Molly,
looking up from her work. 'And it did not come till after we had
received the flowers from Hamley.' Molly caught a sight of Cynthia's
face before she bent down again to her sewing. It was scarlet in
colour, and there was a flash of anger in her eyes. Both she and her
mother hastened to speak as soon as Molly had finished, but
Cynthia's voice was choked with passion, and Mrs. Gibson had the
word.

'Mr. Preston's bouquet was just one of those formal affairs any one
can buy at a nursery-garden, which always strike me as having no
sentiment in them. I would far rather have two or three lilies of
the valley gathered for me by a person I like, than the most
expensive bouquet that could be bought!'

'Mr. Preston had no business to speak as if he had forestalled you,'
said Cynthia. 'It came just as we were ready to go, and I put it
into the fire directly.'

'Cynthia, my dear love!' said Mrs. Gibson (who had never heard of the
fate of the flowers until now), 'what an idea of yourself you will
give to Mr. Osborne Hamley; but to be sure, I can quite understand
it. You inherit my feeling--my prejudice--sentimental I grant,
against bought flowers.'

Cynthia was silent for a moment; then she said, 'I used some of your
flowers, Mr. Hamley, to dress Molly's hair. It was a great
temptation, for the colour so exactly matched her coral ornaments;
but I believe she thought it treacherous to disturb the arrangement,
so I ought to take all the blame on myself.'

'The arrangement was my brother's, as I told you; but I am sure he
would have preferred seeing them in Miss Gibson's hair rather than
in the blazing fire. Mr. Preston comes far the worst off.' Osborne
was rather amused at the whole affair, and would have liked to probe
Cynthia's motives a little farther. He did not hear Molly saying in
as soft a voice as if she were talking to herself, 'I wore mine just
as they were sent,' for Mrs. Gibson came in with a total change of
subject.

'Speaking of lilies of the valley, is it true that they grow wild in
Hurst Wood? It is not the season for them to be in flower yet; but
when it is, I think we must take a walk there--with our luncheon in
a basket--a little picnic in fact. You'll join us, won't you?'
turning to Osborne. 'I think it's a charming plan! You could ride to
Hollingford and put up your horse here, and we would have a long day
in the woods and all come home to dinner--dinner with a basket of
lilies in the middle of the table!'

'I should like it very much,' said Osborne; 'but I may not be at
home. Roger is more likely to be here, I believe, at that time--a
month hence.' He was thinking of the visit to London to sell his
poems, and the run down to Winchester which he anticipated
afterwards--the end of May had been the period fixed for this
pleasure for some time, not merely in his own mind, but in writing
to his wife.

'Oh, but you must be with us! We must wait for Mr. Osborne Hamley,
must not we, Cynthia?'

'I'm afraid the lilies won't wait,' replied Cynthia.

'Well, then, we must put it off till dog-rose and honeysuckle time.
You will be at home then, won't you? or does the London season
present too many attractions?'

'I don't exactly know when dog-roses are in flower!'

'Not know, and you a poet? Don't you remember the lines--

"It was the time of roses,
We plucked them as we passed?"

'Yes; but that doesn't specify the time of year that is the time of
roses; and I believe my movements are guided more by the lunar
calendar than the floral. You had better take my brother for your
companion; he is practical in his love of flowers, I am only
theoretical.'

'Does that fine word "theoretical" imply that you are ignorant?'
asked Cynthia.

'Of course we shall be happy to see your brother; but why can't we
have you too? I confess to a little timidity in the presence of one
so deep and learned as your brother is from all accounts. Give me a
little charming ignorance, if we must call it by that hard word.'

Osborne bowed. It was very pleasant to him to be petted and
flattered, even though he knew all the time that it was only
flattery. It was an agreeable contrast to the home that was so
dismal to him, to come to this house where the society of two
agreeable girls, and the soothing syrup of their mother's speeches,
awaited him whenever he liked to come. To say nothing of the
difference that struck upon his senses, poetical though he might
esteem himself, of a sitting-room full of flowers and tokens of
women's presence, where all the chairs were easy, and all the tables
well covered with pretty things, to the great drawing-room at home,
where the draperies were threadbare, and the seats uncomfortable,
and no sign of feminine presence ever now lent a grace to the stiff
arrangement of the furniture. Then the meals, light and well cooked,
suited his taste and delicate appetite so much better than the rich
and heavy viands prepared by the servants at the Hall. Osborne was
becoming a little afraid of falling into the habit of paying too
frequent visits to the Gibsons (and that, not because he feared the
consequences of his intercourse with the two young ladies; for he
never thought of them excepting as friends;--the fact of his
marriage was constantly present to his mind, and Aimee too
securely enthroned in his heart, for him to remember that he might
be looked upon by others in the light of a possible husband); but
the reflection forced itself upon him occasionally, whether he was
not trespassing too often on hospitality which he had at present no
means of returning.

But Mrs. Gibson, in her ignorance of the true state of affairs, was
secretly exultant in the attraction which made him come so often and
lounge away the hours in their house and garden. She had no doubt
that it was Cynthia who drew him to the house; and if the latter had
been a little more amenable to reason, her mother would have made
more frequent allusions than she did to the crisis which she thought
was approaching. But she was restrained by the intuitive conviction
that if her daughter became conscious of what was impending, and was
made aware of Mrs. Gibson's cautious and quiet efforts to forward the
catastrophe, the wilful girl would oppose herself to it with all her
skill and power. As it was, Mrs. Gibson trusted that Cynthia's
affections would become engaged before she knew where she was, and
that in that case she would not attempt to frustrate her mother's
delicate scheming, even though she did perceive it. But Cynthia had
come across too many varieties of flirtation, admiration, and even
passionate love, to be for a moment at fault as to the quiet
friendly nature of Osborne's attentions. She received him always as
a sister might a brother. It was different when Roger returned from
his election as Fellow of Trinity. The trembling diffidence, the
hardly suppressed ardour of his manner, made Cynthia understand
before long with what kind of love she had now to deal. She did not
put it into so many words--no, not even in her secret heart--but she
recognized the difference between Roger's relation to her and
Osborne's, long before Mrs. Gibson found it out. Molly was, however,
the first to discover the nature of Roger's attraction. The first
time they saw him after the ball, it came out to her observant eyes.
Cynthia had not been looking well since that evening; she went
slowly about the house, pale and heavy-eyed; and, fond as she
usually was of exercise and the free fresh air, there was hardly any
persuading her now to go out for a walk. Molly watched this fading
with tender anxiety, but to all her questions as to whether she had
felt over-fatigued with her dancing, whether anything had occurred
to annoy her, and all such inquiries, she replied in languid
negatives. Once Molly touched on Mr. Preston's name, and found that
this was a subject on which Cynthia was raw; now, Cynthia's face
lighted up with spirit, and her whole body showed her ill-repressed
agitation, but she only said a few sharp words, expressive of
anything but kindly feeling towards the gentleman, and then bade
Molly never name his name to her again. Still, the latter could not
imagine that he was more than intensely distasteful to her friend,
as well as to herself, he could not be the cause of Cynthia's
present indisposition. But this indisposition lasted so many days
without change or modification, that even Mrs. Gibson noticed it, and
Molly became positively uneasy. Mrs. Gibson considered Cynthia's
quietness and languor as the natural consequence of 'dancing with
everybody who asked her' at the ball. Partners whose names were in
the 'Red Book' would not have produced half the amount of fatigue,
according to Mrs. Gibson's judgment apparently, and if Cynthia had
been quite well, very probably she would have hit the blot in her
mother's speech with one of her touches of sarcasm. Then, again,
when Cynthia did not rally, Mrs. Gibson grew impatient, and accused
her of being fanciful and lazy; at length, and partly at Molly's
instance, there came an appeal to Mr. Gibson, and a professional
examination of the supposed invalid, which Cynthia hated more than
anything, especially when the verdict was, that there was nothing
very much the matter, only a general lowness of tone, and depression
of health and spirits, which would soon be remedied by tonics, and,
meanwhile, she was not to be urged to exertion.

'If there is one thing I dislike,' said Cynthia to Mr. Gibson, after
he had pronounced tonics to be the cure for her present state, 'it
is the way doctors have of giving tablespoonfuls of nauseous
mixtures as a certain remedy for sorrows and cares.' She laughed up
in his face as she spoke; she had always a pretty word and smile for
him, even in the midst of her loss of spirits.

'Come! you acknowledge you have "sorrows" by that speech; we'll make
a bargain: if you'll tell me your sorrows and cares, I'll try and
find some other remedy for them than giving you what you are pleased
to term my nauseous mixtures.'

'No,' said Cynthia, colouring; 'I never said I had sorrows and
cares; I spoke generally. What should I have a sorrow about--you and
Molly are only too kind to me,' her eyes filling with tears.

'Well, well, we'll not talk of such gloomy things, and you shall
have some sweet emulsion to disguise the taste of the bitters I
shall be obliged to fall back upon.'

'Please, don't. If you but knew how I dislike emulsions and
disguises! I do want bitters--and if I sometimes--if I'm obliged
to--if I'm not truthful myself, I do like truth in others--at least,
sometimes.' She ended her sentence with another smile, bus it was
rather faint and watery.

Now the first person out of the house to notice Cynthia's change of
look and manner was Roger Hamley--and yet he did not see her until,
under the influence of the nauseous mixture, she was beginning to
recover. But his eyes were scarcely off her during the first five
minutes he was in the room. All the time he was trying to talk to
Mrs. Gibson in reply to her civil platitudes, he was studying
Cynthia; and at the first convenient pause he came and stood before
Molly, so as to interpose his person between her and the rest of the
room; for some visitors had come in subsequent to his entrance.

'Molly, how ill your sister is looking! What is it? Has she had
advice? You must forgive me, but so often those who live together in
the same house don't observe the first approaches of illness.'

Now Molly's love for Cynthia was fast and unwavering, but if
anything tried it, it was the habit Roger had fallen into of always
calling Cynthia Molly's sister in speaking to the latter. From any
one else it would have been a matter of indifference to her, and
hardly to be noticed; it vexed both ear and heart when Roger used
the expression; and there was a curtness of manner as well as of
words in her reply.

'Oh! she was over-tired by the ball. Papa has seen her, and says she
will be all right very soon.'

'I wonder if she wants change of air?' said Roger, meditatively. 'I
wish--I do wish we could have her at the Hall; you and your mother
too, of course. But I don't see how it would be possible--or else
how charming it would be!'

Molly felt as if a visit to the Hall under such circumstances would
be altogether so different an affair to all her former ones, that
she could hardly tell if she should like it or not.

Roger went on,--

'You got our flowers in time, did you not? Ah! you don't know how
often I thought of you that evening! And you enjoyed it too, didn't
you?--you had plenty of agreeable partners, and all that makes a
first ball delightful? I heard that your sister danced every dance.'

'It was very pleasant,' said Molly, quietly. 'But, after all, I'm
not sure if I want to go to another just yet; there seems to be so
much trouble connected with a ball.'

'Ah! you are thinking of your sister, and her not being well?'

'No, I was not,' said Molly, rather bluntly. 'I was thinking of the
dress, and the dressing, and the weariness the next day.'

He might think her unfeeling if he liked; she felt as if she had
only too much feeling just then, for it was bringing on her a
strange contraction of heart. But he was too inherently good himself
to put any harsh construction on her speech. Just before he went
away, while he was ostensibly holding her hand and wishing her
good-by, he said to her in a voice too low to be generally heard,--

'Is there anything I could do for your sister? We have plenty of
books, as you know, if she cares for reading.' Then, receiving no
affirmative look or word from Molly in reply to this suggestion, he
went on,--'Or flowers? she likes flowers. Oh! and our forced
strawberries are just ready--I will bring some over to-morrow.'

'I am sure she will like them,' said Molly.

For some reason or other, unknown to the Gibsons, a longer interval
than usual occurred between Osborne's visits, while Roger came
almost every day, always with some fresh offering by which he openly
sought to relieve Cynthia's indisposition as far as it lay in his
power. Her manner to him was so gentle and gracious that Mrs. Gibson
became alarmed, lest, in spite of his 'uncouthness' (as she was
pleased to term it), he might come to be preferred to Osborne, who
was so strangely neglecting his own interests, in Mrs. Gibson's
opinion. In her quiet way, she contrived to pass many slights upon
Roger; but the darts rebounded from his generous nature that could
not have imagined her motives, and fastened themselves on Molly. She
had often been called naughty and passionate when she was a child;
and she thought now that she began to understand that she really had
a violent temper. What seemed neither to hurt Roger nor annoy
Cynthia made Molly's blood boil; and now she had once discovered Mrs
Gibson's wish to make Roger's visits shorter and less frequent, she
was always on the watch for indications of this desire. She read her
stepmother's heart when the latter made allusions to the squire's
loneliness, now that Osborne was absent from the Hall, and that
Roger was so often away amongst his friends during the day,--

'Mr. Gibson and I should be so delighted if you could have stopped to
dinner; but, of course, we cannot be so selfish as to ask you to
stay when we remember how your father would be left alone. We were
saying yesterday we wondered how he bore his solitude, poor old
gentleman!'

Or, as soon as Roger came with his bunch of early roses, it was
desirable for Cynthia to go and rest in her own room, while Molly
had to accompany Mrs. Gibson on some improvised errand or call. Still
Roger, whose object was to give pleasure to Cynthia, and who had,
from his boyhood, been always certain of Mr. Gibson's friendly
regard, was slow to perceive that he was not wanted. If he did not
see Cynthia, that was his loss; at any rate, he heard how she was,
and left her some little thing which he believed she would like, and
was willing to risk the chance of his own gratification by calling
four or five times in the hope of seeing her once. At last there
came a day when Mrs. Gibson went beyond her usual negative
snubbiness, and when, in some unwonted fit of crossness, for she was
a very placid-tempered person in general, she was guilty of positive
rudeness,

Cynthia was very much better. Tonics had ministered to a mind
diseased, though she hated to acknowledge it; her pretty bloom and
much of her light-heartedness had come back, and there was no cause
remaining for anxiety. Mrs. Gibson was sitting at her embroidery in
the drawing-room, and the two girls were at the window, Cynthia
laughing at Molly's earnest endeavours to imitate the French accent
in which the former had been reading a page of Voltaire. For the
duty, or the farce, of settling to 'improving reading' in the
mornings was still kept up, although Lord Hollingford, the
unconscious suggestor of the idea, had gone back to town without
making any of the efforts to see Molly again that Mrs. Gibson had
anticipated on the night of the ball. That Alnaschar vision had
fallen to the ground. It was as yet early morning; a delicious,
fresh, lovely June day, the air redolent with the scents of
flower-growth and bloom; and half the time the girls had been
ostensibly employed in the French reading they had been leaning out
of the open window trying to reach a cluster of climbing roses. They
had secured them at last, and the bunch lay on Cynthia's lap, but
many of the petals had fallen off, so, though the perfume lingered
about the window-seat, the full beauty of the flowers had passed
away. Mrs. Gibson had once or twice reproved them for the merry noise
they had been making, which hindered her in the business of counting
the stitches in her pattern; and she had set herself a certain
quantity to do that morning before going out, and was of that nature
which attaches infinite importance to fulfilling small resolutions,
made about indifferent trifles without any reason whatever.

'Mr. Roger Hamley,' was announced. 'So tiresome!' said Mrs. Gibson,
almost in his hearing, as she pushed away her embroidery frame. She
put out her cold, motionless hand to him, with a half-murmured word
of welcome, still eyeing her lost embroidery. He took no apparent
notice, and passed on to the window.

'How delicious!' said he. 'No need for any more Hamley roses now
yours are out,'

'I agree with you,' said Mrs. Gibson, replying to him before either
Cynthia or Molly could speak, though he addressed his words to them.
'You have been very kind in bringing us flowers so long; but now our
own are out we need not trouble you any more.'

He looked at her with a little surprise clouding his honest face; it
was perhaps more at the tone than the words. Mrs. Gibson, however,
had been bold enough to strike the first blow, and she determined to
go on as opportunity offered. Molly would perhaps have been more
pained if she had not seen Cynthia's colour rise. She waited for her
to speak, if need were; for she knew that Roger's defence, if
defence were needed, might be safely entrusted to Cynthia's ready
wit.

He put out his hand for the shattered cluster of roses that lay in
Cynthia's lap.

'At any rate,' said he, 'my trouble--if Mrs. Gibson considers it has
been a trouble to me--will be over-paid, if I may have this.'

'Old lamps for new,' said Cynthia, smiling as she gave it to him. 'I
wish one could always buy nosegays such as you have brought us, as
cheaply.'

'You forget the waste of time that, I think, we must reckon as part
of the payment,' said her mother. 'Really, Mr. Hamley, we must learn
to shut our doors on you if you come so often, and at such early
hours! I settle myself to my own employment regularly after
breakfast till lunch-time; and it is my wish to keep Cynthia and
Molly to a course of improving reading and study--so desirable for
young people of their age, if they are ever to become intelligent,
companionable women; but with early visitors it is quite impossible
to observe any regularity of habits.'

All this was said in that sweet, false tone which of late had gone
through Molly like the scraping of a slate-pencil on a slate.
Roger's face changed. His ruddy colour grew paler for a moment, and
he looked grave and not pleased. In another moment the wonted
frankness of expression returned. Why should not he, he asked
himself, believe her? it was early to call; it did interrupt regular
occupation. So he spoke, and said,--

'I believe I have been very thoughtless--I'll not come so early
again; but I had some excuse to-day: my brother told me you had made
a plan for going to see Hurst Wood when the roses were out, and they
are earlier than usual this year--I've been round to see. He spoke
of a long day there, going before lunch--'

'The plan was made with Mr. Osborne Hamley. I could not think of
going without him!' said Mrs. Gibson, coldly.

'I had a letter from him this morning, in which he named your wish,
and he says he fears he cannot be at home till they are out of
flower. I daresay they are not much to see in reality, but the day
is so lovely I thought that the plan of going to Hurst Wood would be
a charming excuse for being out of doors.'

'Thank you. How kind you are! and so good, too, in sacrificing your
natural desire to be with your father as much as possible.'

'I am glad to say my father is so much better than he was in the
winter that he spends much of his time out of doors in his fields.
He has been accustomed to go about alone, and I--we think that as
great a return to his former habits as he can be induced to make, is
the best for him.'

'And when do you return to Cambridge?'

There was some hesitation in Roger's manner as he replied,--

'It is uncertain. You probably know that I am a Fellow of Trinity
now. I hardly yet know what my future plans may be; I am thinking of
going up to London soon.'

'Ah! London is the true place for a young man,' said Mrs. Gibson,
with decision, as if she had reflected a good deal on the question.
'If it were not that we really are so busy this morning, I should
have been tempted to make an exception to our general rule; one more
exception, for your early visits have made us make too many already.
Perhaps, however, we may see you again before you go?'

'Certainly I shall come,' replied he, rising to take his leave, and
still holding the demolished roses in his hand. Then, addressing
himself more especially to Cynthia, he added, 'My stay in London
will not exceed a fortnight or so--is there anything I can do for
you--or you?' turning a little to Molly.

'No, thank you very much,' said Cynthia, very sweetly, and then,
acting on a sudden impulse, she leant out of the window, and
gathered him some half-opened roses. 'You deserve these; do throw
that poor shabby bunch away.'

His eyes brightened, his cheeks glowed. He took the offered buds,
but did not throw away the other bunch.

'At any rate, I may come after lunch is over, and the afternoons and
the evenings will be the most delicious time of day a month hence.'
He said this to both Molly and Cynthia, but in his heart he
addressed it to the latter.

Mrs. Gibson affected not to hear what he was saying, but held out her
limp hand once more to him.

'I suppose we shall see you when you return; and pray tell your
brother how we are longing to have a visit from him again.'

When he had left the room, Molly's heart was quite full. She had
watched his face, and read something of his feelings: his
disappointment at their non-acquiescence in his plan of a day's
pleasure in Hurst Wood, the delayed conviction that his presence was
not welcome to the wife of his old friend, which had come so slowly
upon him--perhaps, after all, these things touched Molly more keenly
than they did him. His bright look when Cynthia gave him the
rosebuds indicated a gush of sudden delight more vivid than the pain
he had shown by his previous increase of gravity.

'I can't think why he will come at such untimely hours,' said Mrs
Gibson, as soon as she heard him fairly out of the house. 'It's
different from Osborne; we are so much more intimate with him: he
came and made friends with us all the time this stupid brother of
his was muddling his brains with mathematics at Cambridge. Fellow of
Trinity, indeed! I wish he would learn to stay there, and not come
intruding here, and assuming that because I asked Osborne to join in
a picnic it was all the same to me which brother came.'

'In short, mamma, one man may steal a horse, but another must not
look over the hedge,' said Cynthia, pouting a little.

'And the two brothers have always been treated so exactly alike by
their friends, and there has been such a strong friendship between
them, that it is no wonder Roger thinks he may be welcome where
Osborne is allowed to come at all hours,' continued Molly, in high
dudgeon. 'Roger's "muddled brains," indeed! Roger, "stupid!"'

'Oh, very well, my dears! When I was young it wouldn't have been
thought becoming for girls of your age to fly out because a little
restraint was exercised as to the hours at which they should receive
the young men's calls. And they would have supposed that there might
be good reasons why their parents disapproved of the visits of
certain gentlemen, even while they were proud and pleased to see
some members of the same family.'

'But that was what I said, mamma,' said Cynthia, looking at her
mother with an expression of innocent bewilderment on her face. 'One
man may--'

'Be quiet, child! All proverbs are vulgar, and I do believe that is
the vulgarest of all. You are really catching Roger Hamley's
coarseness, Cynthia!'

'Mamma,' said Cynthia, roused to anger, 'I don't mind your abusing
me, but Mr. Roger Hamley has been very kind to me while I've not been
well: I can't bear to hear him disparaged. If he's coarse, I've no
objection to be coarse as well, for it seems to me it must mean
kindliness and pleasantness, and the bringing of pretty flowers and
presents.'

Molly's tears were brimming over at these words; she could have
kissed Cynthia for her warm partisanship, but, afraid of betraying
emotion, and 'making a scene,' as Mrs. Gibson called any signs of
warm feeling, she laid down her book hastily, and ran upstairs to
her room, and locked the door in order to breathe freely. There were
traces of tears upon her face when she returned into the
drawing-room half-an-hour afterwards, walking straight and demurely
up to her former place, where Cynthia still sate and gazed idly out
of the window, pouting and displeased; Mrs. Gibson, meanwhile,
counting her stitches aloud with great distinctness and vigour.


CHAPTER XXIX


BUSH-FIGHTING


During all the months that had elapsed since Mrs. Hamley's death,
Molly had wondered many a time about the secret she had so
unwittingly become possessed of that last day in the Hall library.
It seemed so utterly strange and unheard-of a thing to her
inexperienced mind, that a man should be married, and yet not live
with his wife--that a son should have entered into the holy state of
matrimony without his father's knowledge, and without being
recognized as the husband of some one known or unknown by all those
with whom he came in daily contact, that she felt occasionally as if
that little ten minutes of revelation must have been a vision in a
dream. Both Roger and Osborne had kept the most entire silence on
the subject ever since. Not even a look, or a pause, betrayed any
allusion to it; it even seemed to have passed out of their thoughts.
There had been the great sad event of their mother's death to fill
their minds on the next occasion of their meeting Molly; and since
then long pauses of intercourse had taken place; so that she
sometimes felt as if each of the brothers must have forgotten how
she had come to know their important secret. She often found herself
entirely forgetting it, but perhaps the consciousness of it was
present to her unawares, and enabled her to comprehend the real
nature of Osborne's feelings towards Cynthia. At any rate she never
for a moment had supposed that his gentle kind manner towards
Cynthia was anything but the courtesy of a friend; strange to say,
in these latter days Molly had looked upon Osborne's relation to
herself as pretty much the same as that in which at one time she had
considered Roger's; and she thought of the former as of some one as
nearly a brother both to Cynthia and herself, as any young man could
well be, whom they had not known in childhood, and who was in nowise
related to them. She thought that he was very much improved in
manner, and probably in character, by his mother's death. He was no
longer sarcastic, or fastidious, or vain, or self-confident. She did
not know how often all these styles of talk or of behaviour were put
on to conceal shyness or consciousness, and to veil the real self
from strangers.

Osborne's conversation and ways might very possibly have been just
the same as before, had he been thrown amongst new people; but Molly
only saw him in their own circle in which he was on terms of decided
intimacy. Still there was no doubt that he was really improved,
though perhaps not to the extent for which Molly gave him credit;
and this exaggeration on her part arose very naturally from the
fact, that he, perceiving Roger's warm admiration for Cynthia,
withdrew a little out of his brother's way; and used to go and talk
to Molly in order not to intrude himself between Roger and Cynthia.
Of the two, perhaps, Osborne preferred Molly; to her he needed not
to talk if the mood was not on him--they were on those happy terms
where silence is permissible, and where efforts to act against the
prevailing mood of the mind are not required. Sometimes, indeed,
when Osborne was in the humour to be critical and fastidious as of
yore, he used to vex Roger by insisting upon it that Molly was
prettier than Cynthia.

'You mark my words, Roger. Five years hence the beautiful Cynthia's
red and white will have become just a little coarse, and her figure
will have thickened, while Molly's will only have developed into
more perfect grace. I don't believe the girl has done growing yet; I
am sure she is taller than when I first saw her last summer.'

'Miss Kirkpatrick's eyes must always be perfection. I cannot fancy
any could come up to them: soft, grave, appealing, tender; and such
a heavenly colour--I often try to find something in nature to
compare them to; they are not like violets--that blue in the eyes is
too like physical weakness of sight; they are not like the sky--that
colour has something of cruelty in it.'

'Come, don't go on trying to match her eyes as if you were a draper,
and they a bit of ribbon; say at once "her eyes are loadstars," and
have done with it! I set up Molly's grey eyes and curling black
lashes, long odds above the other young woman's; but, of course,
it's all a matter of taste.'

And now both Osborne and Roger had left the neighbourhood. In spite
of all that Mrs. Gibson had said about Roger's visits being ill-timed
and intrusive, she began to feel as if they had been a very pleasant
variety, now they had ceased altogether. He brought in a whiff of a
new atmosphere from that of Hollingford. He and his brother had been
always ready to do numberless little things which only a man can do
for women; small services which Mr. Gibson was always too busy to
render. For the good doctor's business grew upon him. He thought
that this increase was owing to his greater skill and experience,
and he would probably have been mortified if he could have known how
many of his patients were solely biassed in sending for him, by the
fact that he was employed at the Towers. Something of this sort must
have been contemplated in the low scale of payment adopted long ago
by the Cumnor family. Of itself the money he received for going to
the Towers would hardly have paid him for horse-flesh, but then as
Lady Cumnor in her younger days had worded it,--

'It is such a thing for a man just setting up in practice for
himself to be able to say he attends at this house!'

So the prestige was tacitly sold and paid for; but neither buyer nor
seller defined the nature of the bargain. On the whole, it was as
well that Mr. Gibson spent so much of his time from home. He
sometimes thought so himself when he heard his wife's plaintive fret
or pretty babble over totally indifferent things, and perceived of
how flimsy a nature were all her fine sentiments. Still, he did not
allow himself to repine over the step he had taken; he wilfully shut
his eyes and waxed up his ears to many small things that he knew
would have irritated him if he had attended to them; and, in his
solitary rides, he forced himself to dwell on the positive
advantages that had accrued to him and his through his marriage. He
had obtained an unexceptionable chaperone, if not a tender mother,
for his little girl; a skilful manager of his formerly disorderly
household; a woman who was graceful and pleasant to look at for the
head of his table. Moreover, Cynthia reckoned for something in the
favourable side of the balance. She was a capital companion for
Molly; and the two were evidently very fond of each other. The
feminine companionship of the mother and daughter was agreeable to
him as well as to his child,--when Mrs. Gibson was moderately
sensible and not over-sentimental, he mentally added; and then he
checked himself, for he would not allow himself to become more aware
of her faults and foibles by defining them. At any rate, she was
harmless, and wonderfully just to Molly for a stepmother. She piqued
herself upon this indeed, and would often call attention to the fact
of her being unlike other women in this respect. Just then sudden
tears came into Mr. Gibson's eyes, as he remembered how quiet and
undemonstrative his little Molly had become in her general behaviour
to him; but how once or twice, when they had met upon the stairs, or
were otherwise unwitnessed, she had caught him and kissed him--hand
or cheek--in a sad passionateness of affection. But in a moment he
began to whistle an old Scotch air he had heard in his childhood,
and which had never recurred to his memory since; and five minutes
afterwards he was too busily treating a case of white swelling in
the knee of a little boy, and thinking how to relieve the poor
mother, who went out charring all day, and had to listen to the
moans of her child all night, to have any thought for his own cares,
which, if they really existed, were of so trifling a nature compared
to the hard reality of this hopeless woe.

Osborne came home first. He returned, in fact, not long after Roger
had gone away; but he was languid and unwell, and, though he did not
complain, he felt unequal to any exertion. Thus a week or more
elapsed before any of the Gibsons knew that he was at the Hall; and
then it was only by chance that they became aware of it. Mr. Gibson
met him in one of the lanes near Hamley; the acute surgeon noticed
the gait of the man as he came near, before he recognized who it
was. When he overtook him he said,--

'Why, Osborne, is it you? I thought it was an old man of fifty
loitering before me! I didn't know you had come back.'

'Yes,' said Osborne, 'I've been at home nearly ten days. I daresay I
ought to have called on your people, for I made a half promise to
Mrs. Gibson to let her know as soon as I returned; but the fact is,
I'm feeling very good-for-nothing,--this air oppresses me; I could
hardly breathe in the house, and yet I'm already tired with this
short walk.'

'You'd better get home at once; and I'll call and see you as I come
back from Rowe's.'

'No, you mustn't, on any account!' said Osborne, hastily; my father
is annoyed enough about my going from home, so often, he says,
though it was six weeks. He puts down all my languor to my having
been away,--he keeps the purse-strings, you know,' he added, with a
faint smile, 'and I'm in the unlucky position of a penniless heir,
and I've been brought up so--In fact, I must leave home from time to
time, and, if my father gets confirmed in this notion of his that my
health is worse for my absences, he will stop the supplies
altogether.'

'May I ask where you do spend your time when you are not at Hamley
Hall?' asked Mr. Gibson, with some hesitation in his manner.

'No!' replied Osborne, reluctantly. 'I will tell you this:--I stay
with friends in the country. I lead a life which ought to be
conducive to health, because it is thoroughly simple, rational, and
happy. And now I've told you more about it than my father himself
knows. He never asks me where I have been; and I shouldn't tell him
if he did--at least, I think not.'

Mr. Gibson rode on by Osborne's side, not speaking for a moment or
two.

'Osborne, whatever scrapes you may have got into, I should advise
your telling your father boldly out. I know him; and I know he'll be
angry enough at first, but he'll come round, take my word for it;
and, somehow or another, he'll find money to pay your debts and set
you free, if it's that kind of difficulty; and if it's any other
kind of entanglement, why still he's your best friend. It's this
estrangement from your father that's telling on your health, I'll be
bound.'

'No,' said Osborne, 'I beg your pardon; but it's not that; I am
really out of order. I daresay my unwillingness to encounter any
displeasure from my father is the consequence of my indisposition;
but I'll answer for it, it is not the cause of it. My instinct tells
me there is something real the matter with me.'

'Come, don't be setting up your instinct against the profession,'
said Mr. Gibson, cheerily. He dismounted, and throwing the reins of
his horse round his arm, he looked at Osborne's tongue and felt his
pulse, asking him various questions. At the end he said,--

'We'll soon bring you about, though I should like a little more
quiet talk with you, without this tugging brute for a third. If
you'll manage to ride over and lunch with us to-morrow, Dr Nicholls
will be with us; he's coming over to see old Rowe; and you shall
have the benefit of the advice of two doctors instead of one. Go
home now, you've had enough exercise for the middle of a day as hot
as this is. And don't mope in the house, listening to the
maunderings of your stupid instinct.'

'What else have I to do?' said Osborne. 'My father and I are not
companions; one can't read and write for ever, especially when there
is no end to be gained by it. I don't mind telling you--but in
confidence, recollect--that I've been trying to get some of my poems
published; but there's no one like a publisher for taking the
conceit out of one. Not a man among them would take them as a gift.'

'0 ho! so that's it, is it, Master Osborne? I thought there was some
mental cause for this depression of health. I wouldn't trouble my
head about it, if I were you, though that's always very easily said,
I know. Try your hand at prose, if you can't manage to please the
publishers with poetry; but, at any rate, don't go on fretting over
spilt milk. But I mustn't lose my time here. Come over to us
to-morrow, as I said; and what with the wisdom of two doctors, and
the wit and folly of three women, I think we shall cheer you up a
bit.'

So saying, Mr. Gibson remounted, and rode away at the long, slinging
trot so well known to the country people as the doctor's pace.

'I don't like his looks,' thought Mr. Gibson to himself at night, as
over his daybooks he reviewed the events of the day. 'And then his
pulse. But how often we're all mistaken; and, ten to one, my own
hidden enemy lies closer to me than his does to him--even taking the
worse view of the case.'

Osborne made his appearance a considerable time before luncheon the
next morning; and no one objected to the earliness of his call. He
was feeling better. There were few signs of the invalid about him;
and what few there were disappeared under the bright pleasant
influence of such a welcome as he received from all. Molly and
Cynthia had much to tell him of the small proceedings since he went
away, or to relate the conclusions of half-accomplished projects.
Cynthia was often on the point of some gay, careless inquiry as to
where he had been, and what he had been doing; but Molly, who
conjectured the truth, as often interfered to spare him the pain of
equivocation--a pain that her tender conscience would have felt for
him, much more than he would have felt it for himself.

Mr. Gibson's talk was desultory, complimentary, and sentimental,
after her usual fashion; but still, on the whole, though Osborne
smiled to himself at much that she said, it was soothing and
agreeable. Presently, Dr Nicholls and Mr. Gibson came in; the former
had had some conference with the latter on the subject of Osborne's
health; and, from time to time, the skilful old physician's sharp
and observant eyes gave a comprehensive look at Osborne.

Then there was lunch, when every one was merry and hungry, excepting
the hostess, who was trying to train her midday appetite into the
genteelest of all ways, and thought (falsely enough) that Dr
Nicholls was a good person to practise the semblance of ill-health
upon, and that he would give her the proper civil amount of
commiseration for her ailments, which every guest ought to bestow
upon a hostess who complains of her delicacy of health. The old
doctor was too cunning a man to fall into this trap. He would keep
recommending her to try the coarsest viands on the table; and, at
last, he told her if she could not fancy the cold beef to try a
little with pickled onions. There was a twinkle in his eye as he
said this, that would have betrayed his humour to any observer; but
Mr. Gibson, Cynthia, and Molly were all attacking Osborne on the
subject of some literary preference he had expressed, and Dr
Nicholls had Mrs. Gibson quite at his mercy. She was not sorry when
luncheon was over to leave the room to the three gentlemen; and ever
afterwards she spoke of Dr Nicholls as 'that bear.'

Presently, Osborne came upstairs, and, after his old fashion, began
to take up new books, and to question the girls as to their music.
Mrs. Gibson had to go out and pay some calls, so she left the three
together; and after a while they adjourned into the garden, Osborne
lounging on a chair, while Molly employed herself busily in tying up
carnations, and Cynthia gathered flowers in her careless, graceful
way.

'I hope you notice the difference in our occupations, Mr. Hamley.
Molly, you see, devotes herself to the useful, and I to the
ornamental. Please, under what head do you class what you are doing?
I think you might help one of us, instead of looking on like the
Grand Seigneur.'

'I don't know what I can do,' said he, rather plaintively. 'I should
like to be useful, but I don't know how; and my day is past for
purely ornamental work. You must let me be, I am afraid. Besides, I
am really rather exhausted by being questioned and pulled about by
those good doctors.'

'Why, you don't mean to say they have been attacking you since
lunch!' exclaimed Molly.

'Yes; indeed, they have; and they might have gone on till now if Mrs
Gibson had not come in opportunely.'

'I thought mamma had gone out some time ago!' said Cynthia, catching
wafts of the conversation as she flitted hither and thither among
the flowers.

'She came into the dining-room not five minutes ago. Do you want
her, for I see her crossing the hall at this very moment?' and
Osborne half rose.

'Oh, not at all!' said Cynthia. 'Only she seemed to be in such a
hurry to go out, I fancied she had set off long ago. She had some
errand to do for Lady Cumnor, and she thought she could manage to
catch the housekeeper, who is always in the town on Thursday.'

'Are the family coming to the Towers this autumn?'

'I believe so. But I don't know, and I don't much care. They don't
take kindly to me,' continued Cynthia, 'and so I suppose I am not
generous enough to take kindly to them.'

'I should have thought that such a very unusual blot in their
discrimination would have interested you in them as extraordinary
people,' said Osborne, with a little air of conscious gallantry.

'Isn't that a compliment?' said Cynthia, after a pause of mock
meditation. 'If any one pays me a compliment, please let it be short
and clear. I'm very stupid at finding out hidden meanings.'

'Then such speeches as "you are very pretty," or "you have charming
manners," are what you prefer. Now, I pique myself on wrapping up my
sugar-plums delicately.'

'Then would you please to write them down, and at my leisure I'll
parse them.'

'No! It would be too much trouble. I'll meet you half way, and study
clearness next time.'

'What are you two talking about?' said Molly, resting on her light
spade.

'It's only a discussion on the best way of administering
compliments,' said Cynthia, taking up her flower-basket again, but
not going out of the reach of the conversation.

'I don't like them at all in any way,' said Molly. 'But, perhaps,
it's rather sour grapes with me,' she added.

'Nonsense!' said Osborne. 'Shall I tell you what I heard of you at
the ball?'

'Or shall I provoke Mr. Preston,' said Cynthia, 'to begin upon you?
It is like turning a tap, such a stream of pretty speeches flow out
at the moment.' Her lip curled with scorn.

'For you, perhaps,' said Molly; 'but not for me.'

'For any woman. It is his notion of making himself agreeable. If you
dare me, Molly, I will try the experiment, and you'll see with what
success.'

'No, don't, pray!' said Molly, in a hurry. 'I do so dislike him!'

'Why?' said Osborne, roused to a little curiosity by her vehemence.

'Oh! I don't know. He never seems to know what one is feeling.'

'He wouldn't care if he did know,' said Cynthia. 'And he might know
he is not wanted,'

'If he chooses to stay, he cares little whether he is wanted or
not.'

'Come, this is very interesting,' said Osborne. 'It is like the
strophe and anti-strophe in a Greek chorus. Pray, go on.'

'Don't you know him?' asked Molly.

'Yes, by sight, and I think we were once introduced. But, you know,
we are much farther from Ashcombe, at Hamley, than you are here, at
Hollingford.'

'Oh! but he is coming to take Mr. Sheepshanks' place, and then he
will live here altogether,' said Molly.

'Molly! who told you that?' said Cynthia, in quite a different tone
of voice to that in which she had been speaking hitherto.

'Papa, didn't you hear him? Oh, no! it was before you were down this
morning. Papa met Mr. Sheepshanks yesterday, and he told him it was
all settled: you know we heard a rumour about it in the spring!'

Cynthia was very silent after this. Presently, she said that she had
gathered all the flowers she wanted, and that the heat was so great
she would go indoors. And then Osborne went away. But Molly had set
herself a task to dig up such roots as had already flowered, and to
put down some bedding-out plants in their stead. Tired and heated as
she was she finished it, and then went upstairs to rest, and change
her dress. According to her wont, she sought for Cynthia; there was
no reply to her soft knock at the bedroom-door opposite to her own,
and, thinking that Cynthia might have fallen asleep, and be lying
uncovered in the draught of the open window, she went in softly.
Cynthia was lying upon the bed as if she had thrown herself down on
it without caring for the ease or comfort of her position. She was
very still; and Molly took a shawl, and was going to place it over
her, when she opened her eyes, and spoke,--

'Is that you, dear? Don't go. I like to know that you are there.'

She shut her eyes again, and remained quite quiet for a few minutes
longer. Then she started up into a sitting posture, pushed her hair
away from her forehead and burning eyes, and gazed intently at
Molly.

'Do you know what I've been thinking, dear?' said she. 'I think I've
been long enough here, and that I had better go out as a governess.'

'Cynthia, what do you mean?' asked Molly, aghast. 'You've been
asleep--you've been dreaming. You're overtired,' continued she,
sitting down on the bed, and taking Cynthia's passive hand, and
stroking it softly--a mode of caressing that had come down to her
from her mother--whether as an hereditary instinct, or as a
lingering remembrance of the tender ways of the dead woman, Mr
Gibson often wondered within himself when he observed it.

'Oh, how good you are, Molly. I wonder, if I had been brought up
like you, if I should have been as good. But I've been tossed about
so.'

'Then, don't go and be tossed about any more,' said Molly, softly.

'Oh, dear! I had better go. But, you see, no one ever loved me like
you, and, I think, your father--doesn't he, Molly? And it's hard to
be driven out.'

'Cynthia, I am sure you're not well, or else you're not half awake.'

Cynthia sate with her arms encircling her knees, and looking at
vacancy.

'Well!' said she, at last, heaving a great sigh; but, then, smiling
as she caught Molly's anxious face, 'I suppose there's no escaping
one's doom; and anywhere else I should be much more forlorn and
unprotected.'

'What do you mean by your doom?'

'Ah, that's telling, little one,' said Cynthia, who seemed now to
have recovered her usual manner. 'I don't mean to have one, though.
I think that, though I am an arrant coward at heart, I can show
fight.'

'With whom?' asked Molly, really anxious to probe the mystery--if,
indeed, there was one--to the bottom, in the hope of some remedy
being found for the distress Cynthia was in when first Molly had
entered,

Again Cynthia was lost in thought; then, catching the echo of
Molly's last words in her mind, she said,--

'"With whom?"--oh! show fight with whom--with my doom, to be sure.
Am not I a grand young lady to have a doom? Why, Molly, child, how
pale and grave you look!' said she, kissing her all of a sudden.
'You ought not to care so much for me; I'm not good enough for you
to worry yourself about me. I've given myself up a long time ago as
a heartless baggage!'

'Nonsense! I wish you wouldn't talk so, Cynthia!'

'And I wish you wouldn't always take me "at the foot of the letter,"
as an English girl at school used to translate it. Oh, how hot it
is! Is it never going to get cool again? My child! what dirty hands
you've got, and face too; and I've been kissing you--I daresay I'm
dirty with it, too. Now, isn't that like one of mamma's speeches?
But, for all that, you look more like a delving Adam than a spinning
Eve.'

This had the effect that Cynthia intended; the daintily clean Molly
became conscious of her soiled condition, which she had forgotten
while she had been attending to Cynthia, and she hastily withdrew to
her own room. When she had gone, Cynthia noiselessly locked the
door; and, taking her purse out of her desk, she began to count over
her money. She counted it once--she counted it twice, as if
desirous of finding out some mistake which should prove it to be
more than it was; but the end of it all was a sigh.

'What a fool!--what a fool I was!' she said, at length. 'But even if
I don't go out as a governess, I shall make it up in time.'

Some weeks after the time he had anticipated when he had spoken of
his departure to the Gibsons, Roger returned back to the Hall. One
morning when he called, Osborne told them that his brother had been
at home for two or three days.

'And why has he not come here, then?' said Mrs. Gibson. 'It is not
kind of him not to come and see us as soon as he can. Tell him I say
so--pray do.'

Osborne had gained one or two ideas as to her treatment of Roger the
last time he had called. Roger had not complained of it, or even
mentioned it, till that very morning; when Osborne was on the point
of starting, and had urged Roger to accompany him, the latter had
told him something of what Mrs. Gibson had said. He spoke rather as
if he was more amused than annoyed; but Osborne could read that he
was chagrined at those restrictions placed upon calls which were the
greatest pleasure of his life. Neither of them let out the suspicion
which had entered both their minds--the well-grounded suspicion
arising from the fact that Osborne's visits, be they paid early or
late, had never yet been met with a repulse.

Osborne now reproached himself with having done Mrs. Gibson
injustice. She was evidently a weak, but probably a disinterested,
woman; and it was only a little bit of ill-temper on her part which
had caused her to speak to Roger as she had done.

'I daresay it was rather impertinent of me to call at such an
untimely hour,' said Roger.

'Not at all; I call at all hours, and nothing is ever said about it.
It was just because she was put out that morning. I'll answer for it
she's sorry now, and I'm sure you may go there at any time you like
in the future.'

Still, Roger did not choose to go again for two or three weeks, and
the consequence was that the next time he called the ladies were
out. Once again he had the same ill-luck, and then he received a
little pretty three-cornered note from Mrs. Gibson:--

MY DEAR SIR,--How is it that you are become so formal all on a
sudden, leaving cards, instead of awaiting our return? Fie for
shame! If you had seen the races of disappointment that I did when
the horrid little bits of pasteboard were displayed to our view, you
would not have borne malice against me so long; for it is really
punishing others as well as my naughty self. If you will come
to-morrow--as early as you like--and lunch with us, I'll own I was
cross, and acknowledge myself a penitent.--Yours ever,
HYACINTH C. K. GIBSON.

There was no resisting this, even if there had not been strong
inclination to back up the pretty words. Roger went, and Mrs. Gibson
caressed and petted him in her sweetest, silkiest manner. Cynthia
looked lovelier than ever to him for the slight restriction that had
been laid for a time on their intercourse. She might be gay and
sparkling with Osborne; with Roger she was soft and grave.
Instinctively she knew her men. She saw that Osborne was only
interested in her because of her position in a family with whom he
was intimate; that his friendship was without the least touch of
sentiment; and that his admiration was only the warm criticism of an
artist for unusual beauty. But she felt how different Roger's
relation to her was. To him she was ~the~ one, alone, peerless. If
his love was prohibited, it would be long years before he could sink
down into tepid friendship; and to him her personal loveliness was
only one of the many charms that made him tremble into passion.
Cynthia was not capable of returning such feelings; she had had too
little true love in her life, and perhaps too much admiration to do
so; but she appreciated this honest ardour, this loyal worship that
was new to her experience. Such appreciation, and such respect for
his true and affectionate nature, gave a serious tenderness to her
manner to Roger, which allured him with a fresh and separate grace.
Molly sate by, and wondered how it would all end, or, rather, how
soon it would all end, for she thought that no girl could resist
such reverent passion; and on Roger's side there could be no
doubt--alas! there could be no doubt. An older spectator might have
looked far ahead, and thought of the question of pounds, shillings,
and pence. Where was the necessary income for a marriage to come
from? Roger had his fellowship now, it is true; but the income of
that would be lost if he married; he had no profession, and the life
interest of the two or three thousand pounds that he inherited from
his mother, belonged to his father. This older spectator might have
been a little surprised at the ~empressement~ of Mrs. Gibson's manner
to a younger son, always supposing this said spectator to have read
to the depths of her worldly heart. Never had she tried to be more
agreeable to Osborne; and though her attempt was a great failure
when practised upon Roger, and he did not know what to say in reply
to the delicate Batteries which he felt to be insincere, he saw that
she intended him to consider himself henceforward free of the house;
and he was too glad to avail himself of this privilege to examine
over-closely into what might be her motives for her change of
manner. He shut his eyes, and chose to believe that she was now
desirous of making up for her little burst of temper on his previous
visit.

The result of Osborne's conference with the two doctors had been
certain prescriptions which appeared to have done him much good, and
which would in all probability have done him yet more, could he have
been free of the recollection of the little patient wife in her
solitude near Winchester. He went to her whenever he could; and,
thanks to Roger, money was far more plentiful with him now than it
had been. But he still shrank, and perhaps even more and more, from
telling his father of his marriage. Some bodily instinct made him
dread all agitation inexpressibly. If he had not had this money from
Roger, he might have been compelled to tell his father all, and to
ask for the necessary funds to provide for the wife and the coming
child. But with enough in hand, and a secret, though remorseful,
conviction that as long as Roger had a penny his brother was sure to
have half of it, made him more reluctant than ever to irritate his
father by a revelation of his secret. 'Not just yet, not just at
present,' he kept saying both to Roger and to himself. 'By and by,
if we have a boy, I will call it Roger'--and then visions of
poetical and romantic reconciliations brought about between father
and son, through the medium of a child, the offspring of a forbidden
marriage, became still more vividly possible to him, and at any rate
it was a staving-off of an unpleasant thing. He atoned to himself
for taking so much of Roger's fellowship money by reflecting that,
if Roger married, he would lose this source of revenue; yet Osborne
was throwing no impediment in the way of this event, rather
forwarding it by promoting every possible means of his brother's
seeing the lady of his love. Osborne ended his reflections by
convincing himself of his own generosity.


CHAPTER XXX


OLD WAYS AND NEW WAYS


Mr. Preston was now installed in his new house at Hollingford; Mr
Sheepshanks having entered into dignified idleness at the house of
his married daughter, who lived in the county town. His successor
had plunged with energy into all manner of improvements; and among
others he fell to draining a piece of outlying waste and unreclaimed
land of Lord Cumnor's, which was close to Squire Hamley's property;
that very piece for which he had had the Government grant, but which
now lay neglected, and only half-drained, with stacks of mossy
tiles, and lines of up-turned furrows telling of abortive plans. It
was not often that the squire rode in this direction now-a-days; but
the cottage of a man who had been the squire's gamekeeper in those
more prosperous days when the Hamleys could afford to preserve, was
close to the rush-grown ground. This old servant and tenant was ill,
and had sent a message up to the Hall, asking to see the squire; not
to reveal any secret, or to say anything particular, but only from
the feudal loyalty, which made it seem to the dying man as if it
would be a comfort to shake the hand, and look once more into the
eyes of the lord and master whom he had served, and whose ancestors
his own forbears had served for so many generations. And the squire
was as fully alive as old Silas to the claims of the tie that
existed between them. Though he hated the thought, and, still more,
should hate the sight of the piece of land, on the side of which
Silas's cottage stood, the squire ordered his horse, and rode off
within half-an-hour of receiving the message. As he drew near the
spot he thought he heard the sound of tools, and the hum of many
voices, just as he used to hear them a year or two before. He
listened with surprise. Yes. Instead of the still solitude he had
expected, there was the clink of iron, the heavy gradual thud of the
fall of barrows-full of soil--the cry and shout of labourers. But
not on his land--better worth expense and trouble by far than the
reedy clay common on which the men were, in fact, employed. He knew
it was Lord Cumnor's property; and he knew Lord Cumnor and his
family had gone up in the world ('the Whig rascals!'), both in
wealth and in station, as the Hamleys had gone down. But all the
same--in spite of long known facts, and in spite of reason--the
squire's ready anger rose high at the sight of his neighbour doing
what he had been unable to do, and he a Whig; and his family only in
the county since Queen Anne's time. He went so far as to wonder
whether they might not--the labourers he meant--avail themselves of
his tiles, lying so conveniently close to hand. All these thoughts,
regrets, and wonders were in his mind as he rode up to the cottage
he was bound to, and gave his horse in charge to a little lad, who
had hitherto found his morning's business and amusement in playing
at 'houses' with a still younger sister, with some of the squire's
neglected tiles. But he was old Silas's grandson, and he might have
battered the rude red earthenware to pieces--a whole stack--one by
one, and the squire would have said little or nothing. It was only
that he would not spare one to a labourer of Lord Cumnor's. No! not
one.

Old Silas lay in a sort of closet, opening out of the family
living-room. The small window that gave it light looked right on to
the 'moor,' as it was called; and by clay the check curtain was
drawn aside so that he might watch the progress of the labour.
Everything about the old man was clean, if coarse; and, with Death,
the leveller, so close at hand, it was the labourer who made the
first advances, and put out his horny hand to the squire.

'I thought you'd come, squire. Your father came for to see my father
as he lay a-dying.'

'Come, come, my man!' said the squire, easily affected, as he always
was. 'Don't talk of dying, we shall soon have you out, never fear.
They've sent you up some soup from the Hall, as I bade 'em, haven't
they?'

'Ay, ay, I've had all as I could want for to eat and to drink. The
young squire and Master Roger was here yesterday.'

'Yes, I know.'

'But I'm a deal nearer Heaven to-day, I am. I should like you to
look after the covers in the West Spinney, squire; them gorse, you
know, where th' old fox had her hole--her as give 'em so many a run.
You'll mind it, squire, though you was but a lad. I could laugh to
think on her tricks yet.' And, with a weak attempt at a laugh, he
got himself into a violent fit of coughing, which alarmed the
squire, who thought he would never get his breath again. His
daughter-in-law came in at the sound, and told the squire that he
had these coughing-bouts very frequently, and that she thought he
would go off in one of them before long. This opinion of hers was
spoken simply out before the old man, who now lay gasping and
exhausted upon his pillow. Poor people acknowledge the
inevitableness and the approach of death in a much more
straightforward manner than is customary among more educated folk.
The squire was shocked at the hard-heartedness, as he considered it;
but the old man himself had received much tender kindness in action
from his daughter-in-law; and what she had just said was no more
news to him than the fact that the sun would rise to-morrow. He was
more anxious to go on with his story.

'Them navvies--I call 'em navvies because some on 'em is strangers,
though some on 'em is th' men as was turned off your own works,
squire, when there came orders to stop 'em last fall--they're
a-pulling up gorse and brush to light their fire for warming up
their messes. It's a long way off to their homes, and they mostly
dine here; and there'll be nothing of a cover left, if you don't see
after 'em. I thought I should like to tell ye afore I died. Parson's
been here; but I did na tell him. He's all for the earl's folk, and
he'd not ha' heeded. It's the earl as put him into his church, I
reckon, for he said what a fine thing it were for to see so much
employment a-given to the poor, and he never said nought o' th' sort
when your works were agait, squire.'

This long speech had been interrupted by many a cough and gasp for
breath; and having delivered himself of what was on his mind, he
turned his face to the wall, and appeared to be going to sleep.
Presently he roused himself with a start.

'I know I flogged him well, I did. But he were after pheasants'
eggs, and I didn't know he were an orphan. Lord, forgive me!'

'He's thinking on David Morton, the cripple, as used to go about
trapping vermin,' whispered the woman.

'Why, he died long ago--twenty year, I should think,' replied the
squire.

'Ay, but when grandfather goes off i' this way to sleep after a bout
of talking he seems to be dreaming on old times. He'll not waken up
yet, sir; you'd best sit down if you'd like to stay,' she continued,
as she went into the house-place and dusted a chair with her apron.
'He was very particular in bidding me wake him if he were asleep,
and you or Mr. Roger was to call. Mr. Roger said he'd be coming again
this morning--but he'll likely sleep an hour or more, if he's let
alone.'

'I wish I'd said good-by, I should like to have done that.'

'He drops off so sudden,' said the woman. 'But if you'd be better
pleased to have said it, squire, I'll waken him up a bit.'

'No, no!' the squire called out as the woman was going to be as good
as her word. 'I'll come again, perhaps to-morrow. And tell him I was
sorry; for I am indeed. And be sure and send to the Hall for
anything you want! Mr. Roger is coming, is he? He'll bring me word
how he is, later on. I should like to have bidden him good-by.'

So, giving sixpence to the child who had held his horse, the squire
mounted. He sate still a moment, looking at the busy work going on
before him, and then at his own half-completed drainage. It was a
bitter pill. He had objected to borrowing from Government, in the
first instance; and then his wife had persuaded him to the step; and
after it was once taken, he was as proud as could be of the only
concession to the spirit of progress he ever made in his life. He
had read and studied the subject pretty thoroughly, if also very
slowly, during the time his wife had been influencing him. He was
tolerably well up in agriculture, if in nothing else; and at one
time he had taken the lead among the neighbouring landowners, when
he first began tile-drainage. In those days people used to speak of
Squire Hamley's hobby; and at market ordinaries, or county dinners,
they rather dreaded setting him off on long repetitions of arguments
from the different pamphlets on the subject which he had read. And
now the proprietors all around him were draining--draining; his
interest to Government was running on all the same, though his works
were stopped, and his tiles deteriorating in value. It was not a
soothing consideration, and the squire was almost ready to quarrel
with his shadow. He wanted a vent for his ill-humour; and suddenly
remembering the devastation on his covers, which he had heard about
not a quarter of an hour before, he rode up to the men busy at work
on Lord Cumnor's land. Just before he got up to them he encountered
Mr. Preston, also on horseback, come to overlook his labourers. The
squire did not know him personally, but from the agent's manner of
speaking, and the deference that was evidently paid to him, Mr
Hamley saw that he was a responsible person. So he addressed the
agent,--'I beg your pardon, I suppose you are the manager of these
works?'

Mr. Preston replied,--'Certainly. I am that and many other things
besides, at your service. I have succeeded Mr. Sheepshanks in the
management of my lord's property. Mr. Hamley of Hamley, I believe?'

The squire bowed stiffly. He did not like his name to be asked or
presumed upon in that manner. An equal might conjecture who he was,
or recognize him, but, till he announced himself, an inferior had no
right to do more than address him respectfully as 'sir.' That was
the squire's code of etiquette.

'I am Mr. Hamley of Hamley. I suppose you are as yet ignorant of the
boundary of Lord Cumnor's land, and so I will inform you that my
property begins at the pond yonder--just where you see the rise in
the ground.'

'I am perfectly acquainted with that fact, Mr. Hamley,' said Mr
Preston, a little annoyed at the ignorance attributed to him. 'But
may I inquire why my attention is called to it just now?'

The squire was beginning to boil over; but he tried to keep his
temper in. The effort was very much to be respected, for it was a
great one. There was something in the handsome and well-dressed
agent's tone and manner inexpressibly irritating to the squire, and
it was not lessened by an involuntary comparison of the capital
roadster on which Mr. Preston was mounted with his own ill-groomed
and aged cob.

'I have been told that your men out yonder do not respect these
boundaries, but are in the habit of plucking up gorse from my covers
to light their fires.'

'It is possible they may!' said Mr. Preston, lifting his eyebrows,
his manner being more nonchalant than his words. 'I daresay they
think no great harm of it. However, I'll inquire.'

'Do you doubt my word, sir?' said the squire, fretting his mare till
she began to dance about. 'I tell you I've heard it only within this
last half-hour.'

'I don't mean to doubt your word, Mr. Hamley; it's the last thing I
should think of doing. But you must excuse my saying that the
argument which you have twice brought up for the authenticity of
your statement, "that you have heard it within the last half-hour,"
is not quite so forcible as to preclude the possibility of a
mistake.'

'I wish you'd only say in plain language that you doubt my word,'
said the squire, clenching and slightly raising his horsewhip. 'I
can't make out what you mean--you use so many words.'

'Pray don't lose your temper, sir. I said I should inquire. You have
not seen the men pulling up gorse yourself, or you would have named
it. I surely may doubt the correctness of your informant until I
have made some inquiry; at any rate, that is the course I shall
pursue, and if it gives you offence, I shall be sorry, but I shall
do it just the same. When I am convinced that harm has been done to
your property, I shall take steps to prevent it for the future, and
of course, in my lord's name, I shall pay you compensation--it may
probably amount to half-a-crown.' He added these last words in a
lower tone, as if to himself, with a slight, contemptuous smile on
his face.

'Quiet, mare, quiet,' said the squire, quite unaware that he was the
cause of her impatient movements by the way he was perpetually
tightening her reins; and also, perhaps, he unconsciously addressed
the injunction to himself.

Neither of them saw Roger Hamley, who was just then approaching them
with long, steady steps. He had seen his father from the door of old
Silas's cottage, and, as the poor fellow was still asleep, he was
coming to speak to his father, and was near enough now to hear the
next words.

'I don't know who you are, but I've known land-agents who were
gentlemen, and I've known some who were not. You belong to this last
set, young man,' said the squire, 'that you do. I should like to try
my horsewhip on you for your insolence.'

'Pray, Mr. Hamley,' replied Mr. Preston, coolly, 'curb your temper a
little, and reflect. I really feel sorry to see a man of your age in
such a passion'--moving a little farther off, however, but really
more with a desire to save the irritated man from carrying his
threat into execution, out of a dislike to the slander and
excitement it would cause, than from any personal dread. Just at
this moment Roger Hamley came close up. He was panting a little, and
his eyes were very stern and dark; but he spoke quietly enough.

'Mr. Preston, I can hardly understand what you mean by your last
words. But, remember, my father is a gentleman of age and position,
and not accustomed to receive advice as to the management of his
temper from young men like you.'

'I desired to keep his men off my land,' said the squire to his
son--his wish to stand well in Roger's opinion restraining his
temper a little; but though his words might be a little calmer,
there were all other signs of passion present--the discoloured
complexion, the trembling hands, the fiery cloud in his eyes. 'He
refused, and doubted my word.'

Mr. Preston turned to Roger, as if appealing from Philip drunk to
Philip sober, and spoke in a tone of cool explanation, which, though
not insolent in words, was excessively irritating in manner.

'Your father has misunderstood me--perhaps it is no wonder,' trying
to convey, by a look of intelligence at the son, his opinion that
the father was in no state to hear reason. 'I never refused to do
what was just and right. I only required further evidence as to the
past wrong-doing; your father took offence at this'--and then he
shrugged his shoulders, and lifted his eyebrows in a manner he had
formerly learnt in France.

'At any rate, sir! I can scarcely reconcile the manner and words to
my father, which I heard you use when I first came up, with the
deference you ought to have shown to a man of his age and position.
As to the fact of the trespass--'

'They are pulling up all the gorse, Roger--there'll be no cover
whatever for game soon,' put in the squire. Roger bowed to his
father, but took up his speech at the point it was at before the
interruption.

'I will inquire into it myself at a cooler moment; and if I find
that such trespass or damage has been committed, of course I shall
expect that you will see it put a stop to. Come, father! I am going
to see old Silas--perhaps you don't know that he is very ill.' So he
endeavoured to wile the squire away to prevent further words. He was
not entirely successful.

Mr. Preston was enraged by Roger's calm and dignified manner, and
threw after them this parting shaft, in the shape of a loud
soliloquy,--

'Position, indeed! What are we to think of the position of a man who
begins works like these without counting the cost, and comes to a
stand-still, and has to turn off his labourers just at the beginning
of winter, leaving--'

They were too far off to hear the rest. The squire was on the point
of turning back before this, but Roger took hold of the reins of the
old mare, and led her over some of the boggy ground, as if to guide
her into sure footing, but, in reality, because he was determined to
prevent the renewal of the quarrel. It was well that the cob knew
him, and was, indeed, old enough to prefer quietness to dancing; for
Mr. Hamley plucked hard at the reins, and at last broke out with an
oath,--'Damn it, Roger! I'm not a child; I won't be treated as such.
Leave go, I say!'

Roger let go; they were not on firm ground, and he did not wish any
watchers to think that he was exercising any constraint over his
father; and this quiet obedience to his impatient commands did more
to soothe the squire than anything else could have effected just
then.

'I know I turned them off--what could I do? I'd no more money for
their weekly wages; it's a loss to me, as you know. He doesn't know,
no one knows, but I think your mother would, how it cut me to turn
'em off just before winter set in. I lay awake many a night thinking
of it, and I gave them what I had--I did, indeed. I hadn't got money
to pay 'em, but I had three barren cows fattened, and gave every
scrap of meat to the men, and I let 'em go into the woods and gather
what was fallen, and I winked at their breaking off old branches,
and now to have it cast up against me by that cur--that servant.
But I'll go on with the works, by--, I will, if only to spite him.
I'll show him who I am. My position, indeed! A Hamley of Hamley
takes a higher position than his master. I'll go on with the works,
see if I don't! I'm paying between one and two hundred a year
interest on Government money. I'll raise some more if I go to the
Jews; Osborne has shown me the way, and Osborne shall pay for it--
he shall. I'll not put up with insults. You shouldn't have stopped
me, Roger! I wish to heaven I'd horsewhipped the fellow!

He was lashing himself again into an impotent rage, painful to a son
to witness; but just then the little grandchild of old Silas, who
had held the squire's horse during his visit to the sick man, came
running up, breathless,--

'Please, sir, please, squire, mammy has 'sent me; grandfather has
wakened up sudden, and mammy says he's dying, and would you please
come; she says he'd take it as a kind compliment, she's sure.'

So they went to the cottage, the squire speaking never a word, but
suddenly feeling as if lifted out of a whirlwind and set down in a
still and awful place.


CHAPTER XXXI


A PASSIVE COQUETTE


It is not to be supposed that such an encounter as Mr. Preston had
just had with Roger Hamley sweetened the regards in which the two
young men henceforward held each other. They had barely spoken to
each other before, and but seldom met; for the land-agent's
employment had hitherto lain at Ashcombe, some sixteen or seventeen
miles from Hamley. He was older than Roger by several years; but
during the time he had been in the county Osborne and Roger had been
at school and at college. Mr. Preston was prepared to dislike the
Hamleys for many unreasonable reasons. Cynthia and Molly had both
spoken of the brothers with familiar regard, implying considerable
intimacy; their flowers had been preferred to his on the occasion of
the ball; most people spoke well of them; and Mr. Preston had an
animal's instinctive jealousy and combativeness against all popular
young men. Their 'position'--poor as the Hamleys might be--was far
higher than his own in the county; and, moreover, he was agent to
the great Whig lord, whose political interests were diametrically
opposed to those of the old Tory squire. Not that Lord Cumnor
troubled himself much about his political interests. His family had
obtained property and title from the Whigs at the time of the
Hanoverian succession; and so, traditionally, he was a Whig, and had
belonged in his youth to Whig clubs, where he had lost considerable
sums of money to Whig gamblers. All this was satisfactory and
consistent enough. And if Lord Hollingford had not been returned for
the county on the Whig interest--as his father had been before him,
until he had succeeded to the title--it is quite probable Lord
Cumnor would have considered the British constitution in danger, and
the patriotism of his ancestors ungratefully ignored. But, excepting
at elections, he had no notion of making Whig and Tory a party cry.
He had lived too much in London, and was of too sociable a nature,
to exclude any man who jumped with his humour, from the hospitality
he was always ready to offer, be the agreeable acquaintance Whig,
Tory, or Radical. But in the county of which he was lord-lieutenant,
the old party distinction was still a shibboleth by which men were
tested for their fitness for social intercourse, as well as on the
hustings. If by any chance a Whig found himself at a Tory
dinner-table--or ~vice-versa~--the food was hard of digestion,
and wine and viands were criticized rather than enjoyed. A marriage
between the young people of the separate parties was almost as
unheard-of and prohibited an alliance as that of Romeo and Juliet's.
And of course Mr. Preston was not a man in whose breast such
prejudices would die away. They were an excitement to him for one
thing, and called out all his talent for intrigue on behalf of the
party to which he was allied. Moreover, he considered it as loyalty
to his employer to 'scatter his enemies' by any means in his power.
He had always hated and despised the Tories in general; and after
that interview on the marshy common in front of Silas's cottage, he
hated the Hamleys and Roger especially, with a very choice and
particular hatred. 'That prig,' as hereafter he always designated
Roger--'he shall pay for it yet,' he said to himself by way of
consolation, after the father and son had left him. 'What a lout it
is!'--watching the receding figure. 'The old chap has twice as much
spunk,' as the squire tugged at his bridle-reins. 'The old mare
could make her way better without being led, my fine fellow. But I
see through your dodge. You're afraid of your old father turning
back and getting into another rage. Position indeed! a beggarly
squire--a man who did turn off his men just before winter, to rot or
starve, for all he cared--it's just like a brutal old Tory.' And,
under the cover of sympathy with the dismissed labourers, Mr. Preston
indulged his own private pique very pleasantly.

Mr. Preston had many causes for rejoicing: he might have forgotten
this discomfiture, as he chose to feel it, in the remembrance of an
increase of income, and in the popularity he enjoyed in his new
abode. All Hollingford came forward to do the earl's new agent
honour. Mr. Sheepshanks had been a crabbed, crusty old bachelor,
frequenting inn-parlours on market-days, not unwilling to give
dinners to three or four chosen friends and familiars, with whom, in
return, he dined from time to time, and with whom, also, he kept up
an amicable rivalry in the matter of wines. But he 'did not
appreciate female society,' as Miss Browning elegantly worded his
unwillingness to accept the invitations of the Hollingford ladies.
He was unrefined enough to speak of these invitations to his
intimate friends aforesaid in the following manner, 'Those old
women's worrying,' but, of course, they never heard of this. Little
quarter-of-sheet notes, without any envelopes--that invention was
unknown in those days--but sealed in the corners when folded up
instead of gummed as they are fastened at present, occasionally
passed between Mr. Sheepshanks and the Miss Brownings, Mrs. Goodenough
or others. In the first instance, the form ran as follows:--'Miss'
Browning and her sister, Miss Phoebe Browning, present their
respectful compliments to Mr. Sheepshanks, and beg to inform him that
a few friends have kindly consented to favour them with their
company at tea on Thursday next. Miss Browning and Miss Phoebe will
take it very kindly if Mr. Sheepshanks will join their little
circle.'

Now for Mrs. Goodenough:--

'Mrs. Goodenough's respects to Mr. Sheepshanks, and hopes he is in
good health. She would be very glad if he would favour her with his
company to tea on Monday. My daughter, in Combermere, has sent me a
couple of guinea fowls, and Mrs. Goodenough hopes Mr. Sheepshanks will
stay and take a bit of supper.'

No need for the dates of the days of the month. The good ladies
would have thought that the world was coming to an end if the
invitation had been sent out a week before the party therein named.
But not even guinea-fowls for supper could tempt Mr. Sheepshanks. He
remembered the made-wines he had tasted in former days at
Hollingford parties, and shuddered. Bread-and-cheese, with a glass
of bitter-beer, or a little brandy-and-water, partaken of in his old
clothes (which had worn into shapes of loose comfort, and smelt
strongly of tobacco), he liked better than roast guinea-fowl and
birch-wine, even without throwing into the balance the stiff uneasy
coat, and the tight neckcloth and tighter shoes. So the ex-agent had
been seldom, if ever, seen at the Hollingford tea-parties. He might
have had his form of refusal stereotyped, it was so invariably the
same.

'Mr. Sheepshanks' duty to Miss Browning and her sister' (to Mrs
Goodenough, or to others, as the case might be). 'Business of
importance prevents him from availing himself of their polite
invitation; for which he begs to return his best thanks.'

But now that Mr. Preston had succeeded, and come to live in
Hollingford, things were changed.

He accepted every civility right and left, and won golden opinions
accordingly. Parties were made in his honour, 'just as if he had
been a bride,' Miss Phoebe Browning said; and to all of them he
went.

'What's the man after?' said Mr. Sheepshanks to himself, when he
heard of his successor's affability, and sociability, and
amiability, and a variety of other agreeable 'ilities,' from the
friends whom the old steward still retained at Hollingford.

'Preston's not a man to put himself out for nothing. He's deep.
He'll be after something solider than popularity.'

The sagacious old bachelor was right. Mr. Preston was 'after'
something more than mere popularity. He went wherever he had a
chance of meeting Cynthia Kirkpatrick.

It might be that Molly's spirits were more depressed at this time
than they were in general; or that Cynthia was exultant, unawares to
herself, in the amount of attention and admiration she was receiving
from Roger by day, from Mr. Preston in the evenings, but the two
girls seemed to have parted company in cheerfulness. Molly was
always gentle, but very grave and silent. Cynthia, on the contrary,
was merry, full of pretty mockeries, and hardly ever silent. When
first she came to Hollingford, one of her great charms had been that
she was such a gracious listener; now her excitement, by whatever
caused, made her too restless to hold her tongue; yet what she said
was too pretty, too witty, not to be a winning and sparkling
interruption, eagerly welcomed by those who were under her sway. Mr
Gibson was the only one who observed this change, and reasoned upon
it.

'She is in a mental fever of some kind,' thought he to himself. 'She
is very fascinating, but I don't quite understand her.' If Molly had
not been so entirely loyal to her friend, she might have thought
this constant brilliancy a little tiresome when brought into
every-day life; it was not the sunshiny rest of a placid lake, it
was rather the glitter of the pieces of a broken mirror, which
confuses and bewilders. Cynthia would not talk quietly about
anything now; subjects of thought or conversation seemed to have
lost their relative value. There were exceptions to this mood of
hers, when she sank into deep fits of silence, that would have been
gloomy had it not been for the never varying sweetness of her
temper. If there was a little kindness to be done to either Mr
Gibson or Molly, Cynthia was just as ready as ever to do it; nor did
she refuse to do anything her mother wished, however fidgety might
be, the humour that prompted the wish. But in this latter case
Cynthia's eyes were not quickened by her heart.

Molly was dejected, she knew not why. Cynthia had drifted a little
apart; that was not it. Her stepmother had whimsical moods; and if
Cynthia displeased her, she would oppress Molly with small
kindnesses and pseudo-affection. Or else everything was wrong, the
world was out of joint, and Molly had failed in her mission to set
it right, and was to be blamed accordingly. But Molly was of too
steady a disposition to be much moved by the changeableness of an
unreasonable person. She might be annoyed, or irritated, but she was
not depressed. That was not it. The real cause was certainly this.
As long as Roger was drawn to Cynthia, and sought her of his own
accord, it had been a sore pain and bewilderment to Molly's heart;
but it was a straightforward attraction, and one which Molly
acknowledged, in her humility and great power of loving, to be the
most natural thing in the world. She would look at Cynthia's beauty
and grace, and feel as if no one could resist it. And when she
witnessed all the small signs of honest devotion which Roger was at
no pains to conceal, she thought, with a sigh, that surely no girl
could help relinquishing her heart to such tender, strong keeping as
Roger's character ensured. She would have been willing to cut off
her right hand, if need were, to forward his attachment to Cynthia;
and the self-sacrifice would have added a strange zest to a happy
crisis. She was indignant at what she considered to be Mrs. Gibson's
obtuseness to so much goodness and worth; and when she called Roger
'a country lout', or any other depreciative epithet, Molly would
pinch herself in order to keep silent. But after all those were
peaceful days compared to the present, when she, seeing the wrong
side of the tapestry, after the wont of those who dwell in the same
house with a plotter, became aware that Mrs. Gibson had totally
changed her behaviour to Roger, from some cause unknown to Molly.

But he was always exactly the same; 'steady as old Time,' as Mrs
Gibson called him, with her usual originality; 'a rock of strength,
under whose very shadow there is rest,' as Mrs. Hamley had once
spoken of him. So the cause of Mrs. Gibson's altered manner lay not
in him. Yet now he was sure of a welcome, let him come at any hour
he would. He was playfully reproved for having taken Mrs. Gibson's
words too literally, and for never coming before lunch. But he said
he considered her reasons for such words to be valid, and should
respect them. And this was done out of his simplicity, and from no
tinge of malice. Then in their family conversations at home, Mrs
Gibson was constantly making projects for throwing Roger 'and
Cynthia together, with so evident a betrayal of her wish to bring
about an engagement, that Molly chafed at the net spread so
evidently, and at Roger's blindness in coming so willingly to be
entrapped. She forgot his previous willingness, his former evidences
of manly fondness for the beautiful Cynthia; she only saw plots of
which he was the victim, and Cynthia the conscious if passive bait.
She felt as if she could not have acted as Cynthia did; no, not even
to gain Roger's love. Cynthia heard and saw as much of the domestic
background as she did, and yet she submitted to the ~role~
assigned to her! To be sure, this ~role~ would have been played
by her unconsciously; the things prescribed were what she would
naturally have done; but because they were prescribed--by
implication only, it is true--Molly would have resisted; have gone
out, for instance, when she was expected to stay at home; or have
lingered in the garden when a long country walk was planned. At last
--for she could not help loving Cynthia, come what would--she
determined to believe that Cynthia was entirely unaware of all; but
it was with an effort that she brought herself to believe it.

It may be all very pleasant 'to sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
or with the tangles of Neaera's hair,' but young men at the
outset of their independent life have many other cares in this
prosaic England to occupy their time and their thoughts. Roger was
Fellow of Trinity, to be sure; and from the outside it certainly
appeared as if his position, as long as he chose to keep unmarried,
was a very easy one. His was not a nature, however, to sink down
into inglorious ease, even had his fellowship income been at his
disposal. He looked forward to an active life; in what direction he
had not yet determined. He knew what were his talents and his
tastes; and did not wish the former to lie buried, nor the latter,
which he regarded as gifts, fitting him for some peculiar work, to
be disregarded or thwarted. He rather liked awaiting an object,
secure in his own energy to force his way to it, when he once saw it
clearly. He reserved enough of money for his own personal needs,
which were small, and for the ready furtherance of any project he
might see fit to undertake; the rest of his income was Osborne's;
given and accepted in the spirit which made the bond between these
two brothers so rarely perfect. It was only the thought of Cynthia
that threw Roger off his balance. A strong man in everything else,
about her he was as a child. He knew that he could not marry and
retain his fellowship; his intention was to hold himself loose from
any employment or profession until he had found one to his mind, so
there was no immediate prospect--no prospect for many years, indeed,
that he would be able to marry. Yet he went on seeking Cynthia's
sweet company, listening to the music of her voice, basking in her
sunshine, and feeding his passion in every possible way, just like
an unreasoning child. He knew that it was folly--and yet he did it;
and it was perhaps this that made him so sympathetic with Osborne.
Roger racked his brains about Osborne's affairs much more frequently
than Osborne troubled himself. Indeed, he had become so ailing and
languid of late, that even the squire made only very faint
objections to his desire for frequent change of scene, though
formerly he used to grumble so much at the necessary expenditure it
involved.

'After all, it does not cost much,' the squire said to Roger one
day. 'Choose how he does it, he does it cheaply; he used to come and
ask me for twenty, where now he does it for five. But he and I. have
lost each other's language, that's what we have! and my dictionary'
(only he called it 'dixonary') 'has all got wrong because of those
confounded debts--which he will never explain to me, or talk
about--he always holds me off at arm's length when I begin upon
it--he does, Roger--me, his old dad, as was his primest favourite of
all, when he was a little bit of a chap!'

The squire dwelt so much upon Osborne's reserved behaviour to
himself' that brooding over this one subject perpetually he became
more morose and gloomy than ever in his manner to Osborne, resenting
the want of the confidence and affection that he thus repelled. So
much so that Roger, who desired to avoid being made the receptacle
of his father's complaints against Osborne--and Roger's passive
listening was the sedative his father always sought--had often to
have recourse to the discussion of the drainage works as a
counter-irritant. The squire had felt Mr. Preston's speech about the
dismissal of his workpeople very keenly; it fell in with the
reproaches of his own conscience, though, as he would repeat to
Roger over and over again,--'I could not help it--how could I?--I
was drained dry of ready money--I wish the land was drained as dry
as I am,' said he, with a touch of humour that came out before he
was aware, and at which he smiled sadly enough. 'What was I to do, I
ask you, Roger? I know I was in a rage--I've had a deal to make me
so--and maybe I did not think as much about consequences as I should
ha' done, when I gave orders for 'em to be sent off; but I could not
have done otherwise if I'd ha' thought for a twelvemonth in cool
blood. Consequences! I hate consequences; they've always been
against me; they have. I'm so tied up I can't cut down a stick more,
and that's a "consequence" of having the property so deucedly well
settled; I wish I'd never had any ancestors. Ay, laugh, lad! it does
me good to see thee laugh a bit, after Osborne's long face, which
always grows longer at sight o' me!'

'Look here, father!' said Roger suddenly, 'I'll manage somehow about
the money for the works. You trust to me; give me two months to turn
myself in, and you shall have some money, at any rate, to begin
with.'

The squire looked at him, and his face brightened as a child's does
at the promise of a pleasure made to him by some one on whom he can
rely. He became a little graver, however, as he said,--'But how will
you get it? It's hard enough work.'

'Never mind; I'll get it--a hundred or so at first--I don't yet know
how--but remember, father, I'm a Senior Wrangler, and a "very
promising young writer," as that review called me. Oh, you don't
know what a fine fellow you've got for a son. You should have read
that review to know all my wonderful merits.'

'I did, Roger. I heard Gibson speaking of it, and I made him get it
for me. I should have understood it better if they could have called
the animals by their English names, and not put so much of their
French jingo into it.'

'But it was an answer to an article by a French writer,' pleaded
Roger.

'I'd ha' let him alone!' said the squire earnestly. 'We had to beat
'em, and we did it at Waterloo; but I'd not demean myself by
answering any of their lies, if I was you. But I got through the
review, for all their Latin and French; I did, and if you doubt me,
you just look at the end of the great ledger, turn it upside down,
and you'll find I've copied out all the fine words they said of you:
"careful observer," "strong nervous English," "rising philosopher."
Oh! I can nearly say it all off by heart, for many a time when I am
frabbed by bad debts, or Osborne's bills, or moidered with accounts,
I turn the ledger wrong way up, and smoke a pipe over it, while I
read those pieces out of the review which speak about you, lad!'


CHAPTER XXXII


COMING EVENTS


Roger had turned over many plans in his mind, by which he thought
that he could obtain sufficient money for the purpose he desired to
accomplish. His careful grandfather, who had been a merchant in the
city, had so tied up the few thousands he had left to his daughter,
that although, in case of her death before her husband's, the latter
might enjoy the life interest thereof, yet in case of both their
deaths, their second son did not succeed to the property until he
was five-and-twenty. and if he died before that age the money that
would then have been his went to one of his cousins on the maternal
side. In short, the old merchant had taken as many precautions about
his legacy as if it had been for tens, instead of units of
thousands. Of course Roger might have slipped through all these
meshes by insuring his life until the specified age; and probably if
he had consulted any lawyer this course would have been suggested to
him. But he disliked taking any one into his confidence on the
subject of his father's want of ready money. He had obtained a copy
of his grandfather's will at Doctors' Commons, and he imagined that
all the contingencies involved in it would be patent to the light of
nature and common sense. He was a little mistaken in this, but not
the less resolved that money in some way he would have in order to
fulfil his promise to his father, and for the ulterior purpose of
giving the squire some daily interest to distract his thoughts from
the regrets and cares that were almost weakening his mind. It was
'Roger Hamley, Senior Wrangler and Fellow of Trinity, to the highest
bidder, no matter what honest employment,' and presently it came
down to 'any bidder at all.'

Another perplexity and distress at this time weighed upon Roger.
Osborne, heir to the estate, was going to have a child. The Hamley
property was entailed on 'heirs male born in lawful wedlock.' Was
the 'wedlock' lawful? Osborne never seemed to doubt that it
was--never seemed, in fact, to think twice about it. And if he, the
husband, did not, how much less did Aimee, the trustful wife?
Yet who could tell how much misery any shadows of illegality might
cast into the future? One evening Roger, sitting by the languid,
careless, dilettante Osborne, began to question him as to the
details of the marriage. Osborne knew instinctively at what Roger
was aiming. It was not that he did not desire perfect legality in
justice to his wife; it was that he was so indisposed at the time
that he hated to be bothered. It was something like the refrain of
Gray's Scandinavian Prophetess: 'Leave me, leave me to repose.'

'But do try and tell me how you managed it.'

'How tiresome you are, Roger,' put in Osborne.

'Well, I dare say I am. Go on!'

'I've told you Morrison married us. You remember old Morrison at
Trinity?'

'Yes; as good and blunder-headed a fellow as ever lived.'

'Well, he's taken orders; and the examination for priest's orders
fatigued him so much that he got his father to give him a hundred or
two for a tour on the Continent. He meant to get to Rome, because he
heard that there were such pleasant winters there. So he turned up
at Metz in August.'

'I don't see why.'

'No more did he. He never was great in geography, you know; and
somehow he thought that Metz, pronounced French fashion, must be on
the road to Rome. Some one had told him so in fun. However, it was
very well for me that I met with him there for I was determined to
be married, and that without loss of time.'

'But Aimee is a Catholic?'

'That's true! but you see I am not. You don't suppose I would do her
any wrong, Roger?' asked Osborne, sitting up in his lounging-chair,
and speaking rather indignantly to Roger, his face suddenly flushing
red.

'No! I'm sure you would not mean it; but you see there's a child
coming, and this estate is entailed on "heirs male." Now, I want to
know if the marriage is legal or not? and it seems to me it's a
ticklish question.'

'Oh!' said Osborne, falling back into repose, 'if that's all, I
suppose you're next heir male, and I can trust you as I can myself.
You know my marriage is ~bona fide~ in intention, and I believe
it to be legal in fact. We went over to Strasbourg; Aimee
picked up a friend--a good middle-aged Frenchwoman--who served half
as bridesmaid, half as chaperone, and then we went before the
mayor--~prefet~--what do you call them? I think Morrison
rather enjoyed the spree. I signed all manner of papers in the
prefecture; I did not read them over, for fear lest I could not sign
them conscientiously. It was the safest plan. Aimee kept
trembling so I thought she would faint, and then we went off to the
nearest English chaplaincy, Carlsruhe, and the chaplain was away, so
Morrison easily got the loan of the chapel, and we were married the
next day.'

'But surely some registration or certificate was necessary?'

'Morrison said he would undertake all those forms; and he ought to
know his own business.' I know I tipped him pretty well for the
job.'

'You must be married again,' said Roger, after a pause, 'and that
before the child is born. Have you got a certificate of the
marriage?'

'I dare say Morrison has got it somewhere. But I believe I'm legally
married according to the laws both of England and France; I really
do, old fellow. I've got the ~prefet~'s papers somewhere.'

'Never mind! you shall be married again in England. Aimee goes
to the Roman Catholic chapel at Prestham, does not she?'

'Yes. She is so good I would not disturb her in her religion for the
world.'

'Then you shall be married both there and at the church of the
parish in which she lives as well,' said Roger, decidedly.

'It's a great deal of trouble, unnecessary trouble, and unnecessary
expense, I should say,' said Osborne. 'Why can't you leave well
alone? Neither Aimee nor I are of the sort of stuff to turn
scoundrels and deny the legality of our marriage, and if the child
is a boy and my father dies, and I die, why I'm. sure you'll do him
justice, as sure as I am of myself, old fellow!'

'But if I die into the bargain? Make a hecatomb of the present
Hamleys all at once, while you are about it. Who succeeds as heir
male?'

Osborne thought for a moment. 'One of the Irish Hamleys, I suppose.
I fancy they are needy chaps. Perhaps you're right. But what need to
have such gloomy forebodings?'

'The law makes one have foresight in such affairs,' said Roger. 'So
I'll go down to Aimee next week when I'm in town, and I'll make
all necessary arrangements before you come. I think you'll be
happier if it is all done.'

'I shall be happier if I've a chance of seeing the little woman,
that I grant you. But what is taking you up to town? I wish I'd
money to run about like you, instead of being shut up for ever in
this dull old house.'

Osborne was apt occasionally to contrast his position with Roger's
in a tone of complaint, forgetting that both were the results of
character, and also that out of his income Roger gave up so large a
portion for the maintenance of his brother's wife. But if this
ungenerous thought of Osborne's had been set clearly before his
conscience, he would have smote his breast and cried '~Mea culpa~'
with the best of them; it was only that he was too indolent to keep
an unassisted conscience.

'I should not have thought of going up,' said Roger, reddening as if
he had been accused of spending another's money instead of his own,
'if I had not had to go up on business. Lord Hollingford has written
for me; he knows my great wish for employment, and has heard of
something which he considers suitable; there's his letter if you
care to read it. But it does not tell anything definitely.'

Osborne read the letter and returned it to Roger. After a moment or
two of silence he said,--'Why do you want money? Are we taking too
much from you? It's a great shame of me; but what can I do? Only
suggest a career for me, and I'll follow it to-morrow.' He spoke as
if Roger had been reproaching him.

'My dear fellow, don't get those notions into your head! I must do
something for myself sometimes, and I have been on the look-out.
Besides, I want my father to go on with his drainage, it would do
good both to his health and his spirits. If I can advance any part
of the money requisite, he and you shall pay me interest until you
can return the capital.'

'Roger, you're the providence of the family,' exclaimed Osborne,
suddenly struck by admiration at his brother's conduct, and
forgetting to contrast it with his own.

So Roger went up to London and Osborne followed him, and for two or
three weeks the Gibsons saw nothing of the brothers. But as wave
succeeds to wave, so interest succeeds to interest. 'The family,' as
they were called, came down for their autumn sojourn at the Towers;
and again the house was full of visitors, and the Towers' servants,
and carriages, and liveries were seen in the two streets of
Hollingford, just as they might have been seen for scores of autumns
past.

So runs the round of life from day to day. Mrs. Gibson found the
chances of intercourse with the Towers rather more personally
exciting than Roger's visits, or the rarer calls of Osborne Hamley.
Cynthia had an old antipathy to the great family who had made so
much of her mother and so little of her; and whom she considered as
in some measure the cause why she had seen so little of her mother
in the days when the little girl had craved for love and found none.
Moreover, Cynthia missed her slave, although she did not care for
Roger one thousandth part of what he did for her; yet she had found
it not unpleasant to have a man whom she thoroughly respected, and
whom men in general respected, the subject of her eye, the glad
ministrant to each scarce spoken wish, a person in whose sight all
her words were pearls or diamonds, all her actions heavenly
graciousness, and in whose thoughts she reigned supreme. She had no
modest unconsciousness about her; and yet she was not vain. She knew
of all this worship; and when from circumstances she no longer
received it she missed it. The Earl and the Countess, Lord
Hollingford and Lady Harriet, lords and ladies in general, liveries,
dresses, bags of game, and rumours of riding parties were as nothing
to her as compared to Roger's absence. And yet she did not love him.
No, she did not love him. Molly knew that Cynthia did not love him.
Molly grew angry with her many and many a time as the conviction of
this fact was forced upon her. Molly did not know her own feelings;
Roger had no overwhelming interest in what they might be; while his
very life-breath seemed to depend on what Cynthia felt and thought.
Therefore Molly had keen insight into her 'sister's' heart; and she
knew that Cynthia did not love Roger, Molly could have cried with
passionate regret at the thought of the unvalued treasure lying at
Cynthia's feet; and it would have been a merely unselfish regret. It
was the old fervid tenderness. 'Do not wish for the moon, O my
darling, for I cannot give it thee.' Cynthia's love was the moon
Roger yearned for; and Molly saw that it was far away and out of
reach, else would she have strained her heart-chords to give it to
Roger.

'I am his sister,' she would say to herself. 'That old bond is not
done away with, though he is too much absorbed by Cynthia to speak
about it just now. His mother called me "Fanny;" it was almost like
an adoption. I must wait and watch, and see if I can do anything for
my brother.'

One day Lady Harriet came to call on the Gibsons, or rather on Mrs
Gibson, for the latter retained her old jealousy if any one else in
Hollingford was supposed to be on intimate terms at the great house,
or in the least acquainted with their plans. Mr. Gibson might
possibly know as much, but then he was professionally bound to
secrecy. Out of the house she considered Mr. Preston as her rival,
and he was aware that she did so, and delighted in teasing her by
affecting a knowledge of family plans and details of affairs of
which she was not aware. Indoors she was jealous of the fancy Lady
Harriet had evidently taken for her stepdaughter, and she contrived
to place quiet obstacles in the way of a too frequent intercourse
between the two. These obstacles were not unlike the shield of the
knight in the old story; only instead of the two sides presented to
the two travellers approaching it from opposite quarters, one of
which was silver, and one of which was gold, Lady Harriet saw the
smooth and shining yellow radiance, while poor Molly only perceived
a dull and heavy lead. To Lady Harriet it was 'Molly is gone out;
she will be so sorry to miss you, but she was obliged to go to see
some old friends of her mother's whom she ought not to neglect: as I
said to her, constancy is everything. It is Sterne, I think, who
says, "Thine own and thy mother's friends forsake not." But, dear
Lady Harriet, you'll stop till she comes home, won't you? I know how
fond you are of her. in fact' (with a little surface playfulness) 'I
sometimes say you come more to see her than your poor old Clare.'

To Molly it had previously been,--

'Lady Harriet is coming here this morning. I can't have any one else
coming in. Tell Maria to say I'm not at home. Lady Harriet has
always so much to tell me. Dear Lady Harriet! I've known all her
secrets since she was twelve years old. You two girls must keep out
of the way. Of course she'll ask for you, out of common civility;
but you would only interrupt us if you came in, as you did the other
day;'--now addressing Molly--'l hardly like to say so, but I thought
it was very forward.'

'Maria told me she had asked for me,' put in Molly, simply.

'Very forward indeed!' continued Mrs. Gibson, taking no further
notice of the interruption, except to strengthen the words to which
Molly's little speech had been intended as a correction.

'I think this time I must secure her ladyship from the chances of
such an intrusion, by taking care that you are out of the house,
Molly. You had better go to the Holly Farm, and speak about those
damsons I ordered, and which have never been sent.'

'I'll go,' said Cynthia. 'It's far too long a walk for Molly; she's
had a bad cold, and is not as strong as she was a fortnight ago. I
delight in long walks. If you want Molly out of the way, mamma, send
her to the Miss Brownings'--they are always glad to see her.'

'I never said I wanted Molly out of the way, Cynthia,' replied Mrs
Gibson. 'You always put things in such an exaggerated--I should
almost say, so coarse a manner. I am sure, Molly, my love, you could
never have so misunderstood me; it is only on Lady Harriet's
account.'

'I don't think I can walk as far as the Holly Farm; papa would take
the message; Cynthia need not go.'

'Well! I'm the last person in the world to tax any one's strength;
I'd sooner never see damson preserve again. Suppose you do go and
see Miss Browning; you can pay her a nice long call--you know she
likes that--and ask after Miss Phoebe's cold from me, you know. They
were friends of your mother's, my dear, and I would not have you
break off old friendships for the world. "Constancy above
everything" is my motto, as you know, and the memory of the dead
ought always to be cherished.'

'Now, mamma, where am I to go?' asked Cynthia. 'Though Lady Harriet
does not care for me as much as she does for Molly--indeed, quite
the contrary I should say--yet she might ask after me, and I had
better be safely out of the way.'

'True!' said Mrs. Gibson, meditatively, yet unconscious of any satire
in Cynthia's speech.--'She is much less likely to ask for you, my
dear: I almost think you might remain in the house, or you might go
to the Holly Farm; I really do want the damsons; or you might stay
here in the dining-room, you know, so as to be ready to arrange
lunch prettily, if she does take a fancy to stay for it. She is very
fanciful, is dear Lady Harriet! I would not like her to think we
made any difference in our meals because she stayed. "Simple
elegance," as I tell her, "always is what we aim at." But still you
could put out the best service, and arrange some flowers, and ask
cook what there is for dinner that she could send us for lunch, and
m