 that burden. I was to keep the secret of my mother's madness;
for it was a secret that might affect me injuriously in after-life. I
was to remember this.

"I did remember this; and it was, perhaps, this that made me selfish and
heartless, for I suppose I am heartless. As I grew older I was told that
I was pretty--beautiful--lovely--bewitching. I heard all these things at
first indifferently, but by-and-by I listened to them greedily, and
began to think that in spite of the secret of my life I might be more
successful in the world's great lottery than my companions. I had learnt
that which in some indefinite manner or other every school-girl learns
sooner or later--I learned that my ultimate fate in life depended upon
my marriage, and I concluded that if I was indeed prettier than my
schoolfellows, I ought to marry better than any one of them.

"I left school before I was seventeen years of age, with this thought in
my mind, and I went to live at the other extremity of England with my
father, who had retired upon his half-pay, and had established himself
at Wildernsea, with the idea that the place was cheap and select.

"The place was indeed select. I had not been there a month before I
discovered that even the prettiest girl might wait a long time for a
rich husband. I wish to hurry over this part of my life. I dare say I
was very despicable. You and your nephew, Sir Michael, have been rich
all your lives, and can very well afford to despise me; but I knew how
far poverty can affect a life, and I looked forward with a sickening
dread to a life so affected. At last the rich suitor, the wandering
prince came."

She paused for a moment, and shuddered convulsively. It was impossible
to see any of the changes in her countenance, for her face was
obstinately bent toward the floor. Throughout her long confession she
never lifted it; throughout her long confession her voice was never
broken by a tear. What she had to tell she told in a cold, hard tone,
very much the tone in which some criminal, dogged and sullen to the
last, might have confessed to a jail chaplain.

"The wandering prince came," she repeated; "he was called George
Talboys."

For the first time since his wife's confession had begun, Sir Michael
Audley started. He began to understand it all now. A crowd of unheeded
words and forgotten circumstances that had seemed too insignificant for
remark or recollection, flashed back upon him as vividly as if they had
been the leading incidents of his past life.

"Mr. George Talboys was a cornet in a dragoon regiment. He was the only
son of a rich country gentleman. He fell in love with me, and married me
three months after my seventeenth birthday. I think I loved him as much
as it was in my power to love anybody; not more than I have loved you,
Sir Michael--not so much, for when you married me you elevated me to a
position that he could never have given me."

The dream was broken. Sir Michael Audley remembered that summer's
evening, nearly two years ago, when he had first declared his love for
Mr. Dawson's governess; he remembered the sick, half-shuddering
sensation of regret and disappointment that had come over him then, and
he felt as if it had in some manner dimly foreshadowed the agony of
to-night.

But I do not believe that even in his misery he felt that entire and
unmitigated surprise, that utter revulsion of feeling that is felt when
a good woman wanders away from herself and becomes the lost creature
whom her husband is bound in honor to abjure. I do not believe that Sir
Michael Audley had ever _really_ believed in his wife. He had loved her
and admired her; he had been bewitched by her beauty and bewildered by
her charms; but that sense of something wanting, that vague feeling of
loss and disappointment which had come upon him on the summer's night of
his betrothal had been with him more or less distinctly ever since. I
cannot believe that an honest man, however pure and single may be his
mind, however simply trustful his nature, is ever really deceived by
falsehood. There is beneath the voluntary confidence an involuntary
distrust, not to be conquered by any effort of the will.

"We were married," my lady continued, "and I loved him very well, quite
well enough to be happy with him as long as his money lasted, and while
we were on the Continent, traveling in the best style and always staying
at the best hotels. But when we came back to Wildernsea and lived with
papa, and all the money was gone, and George grew gloomy and wretched,
and was always thinking of his troubles, and appeared to neglect me, I
was very unhappy, and it seemed as if this fine marriage had only given
me a twelvemonth's gayety and extravagance after all. I begged George to
appeal to his father, but he refused. I persuaded him to try and get
employment, and he failed. My baby was born, and the crisis which had
been fatal to my mother arose for me. I escaped, but I was more
irritable perhaps after my recovery, less inclined to fight the hard
battle of the world, more disposed to complain of poverty and neglect. I
did complain one day, loudly and bitterly; I upbraided George Talboys
for his cruelty in having allied a helpless girl to poverty and misery,
and he flew into a passion with me and ran out of the house. When I
awoke the next morning, I found a letter lying on the table by my bed,
telling me that he was going to the antipodes to seek his fortune, and
that he would never see me again until he was a rich man.

"I looked upon this as a desertion, and I resented it bitterly--resented
it by hating the man who had left me with no protector but a weak, tipsy
father, and with a child to support. I had to work hard for my living,
and in every hour of labor--and what labor is more wearisome than the
dull slavery of a governess?--I recognized a separate wrong done me by
George Talboys. His father was rich, his sister was living in luxury and
respectability, and I, his wife, and the mother of his son, was a slave
allied to beggary and obscurity. People pitied me, and I hated them for
their pity. I did not love the child, for he had been left a burden upon
my hands. The hereditary taint that was in my blood had never until this
time showed itself by any one sign or token; but at this time I became
subject to fits of violence and despair. At this time I think my mind
first lost its balance, and for the first time I crossed that invisible
line which separates reason from madness. I have seen my father's eyes
fixed upon me in horror and alarm. I have known him soothe me as only
mad people and children are soothed, and I have chafed against his petty
devices, I have resented even his indulgence.

"At last these fits of desperation resolved themselves into a desperate
purpose. I determined to run away from this wretched home which my
slavery supported. I determined to desert this father who had more fear
of me than love for me. I determined to go to London and lose myself in
that great chaos of humanity.

"I had seen an advertisement in the _Times_ while I was at Wildernsea,
and I presented myself to Mrs. Vincent, the advertiser, under a feigned
name. She accepted me, waiving all questions as to my antecedents. You
know the rest. I came here, and you made me an offer, the acceptance of
which would lift me at once into the sphere to which my ambition had
pointed ever since I was a school-girl, and heard for the first time
that I was pretty.

"Three years had passed, and I had received no token of my husband's
existence; for, I argued, that if he had returned to England, he would
have succeeded in finding me under any name and in any place. I knew the
energy of his character well enough to know this.

"I said 'I have a right to think that he is dead, or that he wishes me
to believe him dead, and his shadow shall not stand between me and
prosperity.' I said this, and I became your wife, Sir Michael, with
every resolution to be as good a wife as it was in my nature to be. The
common temptations that assail and shipwreck some women had no terror
for me. I would have been your true and pure wife to the end of time,
though I had been surrounded by a legion of tempters. The mad folly that
the world calls love had never had any part in my madness, and here at
least extremes met, and the vice of heartlessness became the virtue of
constancy.

"I was very happy in the first triumph and grandeur of my new position,
very grateful to the hand that had lifted me to it. In the sunshine of
my own happiness I felt, for the first time in my life, for the miseries
of others. I had been poor myself, and I was now rich, and could afford
to pity and relieve the poverty of my neighbors. I took pleasure in acts
of kindness and benevolence. I found out my father's address and sent
him large sums of money, anonymously, for I did not wish him to discover
what had become of me. I availed myself to the full of the privilege
your generosity afforded me. I dispensed happiness on every side. I saw
myself loved as well as admired, and I think I might have been a good
woman for the rest of my life, if fate would have allowed me to be so.

"I believe that at this time my mind regained its just balance. I had
watched myself very closely since leaving Wildernsea; I had held a check
upon myself. I had often wondered while sitting in the surgeon's quiet
family circle whether any suspicion of that invisible, hereditary taint
had ever occurred to Mr. Dawson.

"Fate would not suffer me to be good. My destiny compelled me to be a
wretch. Within a month of my marriage, I read in one of the Essex papers
of the return of a certain Mr. Talboys, a fortunate gold-seeker, from
Australia. The ship had sailed at the time I read the paragraph. What
was to be done?

"I said just now that I knew the energy of George's character. I knew
that the man who had gone to the antipodes and won a fortune for his
wife would leave no stone unturned in his efforts to find her. It was
hopeless to think of hiding myself from him.

"Unless he could be induced to believe that I was dead, he would never
cease in his search for me.

"My brain was dazed as I thought of my peril. Again the balance
trembled, again the invisible boundary was passed, again I was mad.

"I went down to Southampton and found my father, who was living there
with my child. You remember how Mrs. Vincent's name was used as an
excuse for this hurried journey, and how it was contrived I should go
with no other escort than Phoebe Marks, whom I left at the hotel while I
went to my father's house.

"I confided to my father the whole secret of my peril. He was not very
much shocked at what I had done, for poverty had perhaps blunted his
sense of honor and principle. He was not very much shocked, but he was
frightened, and he promised to do all in his power to assist me in my
horrible emergency.

"He had received a letter addressed to me at Wildernsea, by George, and
forwarded from there to my father. This letter had been written within a
few days of the sailing of the _Argus_, and it announced the probable
date of the ship's arrival at Liverpool. This letter gave us, therefore,
data upon which to act.

"We decided at once upon the first step. This was that on the date of
the probable arrival of the _Argus_, or a few days later, an
advertisement of my death should be inserted in the _Times_.

"But almost immediately after deciding upon this, we saw that there were
fearful difficulties in the carrying out of such a simple plan. The date
of the death, and the place in which I died, must be announced, as well
as the death itself. George would immediately hurry to that place,
however distant it might be, however comparatively inaccessible, and the
shallow falsehood would be discovered.

"I knew enough of his sanguine temperament, his courage and
determination, his readiness to hope against hope, to know that unless
he saw the grave in which I was buried, and the register of my death, he
would never believe that I was lost to him.

"My father was utterly dumfounded and helpless. He could only shed
childish tears of despair and terror. He was of no use to me in this
crisis.

"I was hopeless of any issue out of my difficulties. I began to think
that I must trust to the chapter of accidents, and hope that among other
obscure corners of the earth, Audley Court might be undreamt of by my
husband.

"I sat with my father, drinking tea with him in his miserable hovel, and
playing with the child, who was pleased with my dress and jewels, but
quite unconscious that I was anything but a stranger to him. I had the
boy in my arms, when a woman who attended him came to fetch him that she
might make him more fit to be seen by the lady, as she said.

"I was anxious to know how the boy was treated, and I detained this
woman in conversation with me while my father dozed over the tea-table.

"She was a pale-faced, sandy-haired woman of about five-and-forty and
she seemed very glad to get the chance of talking to me as long as I
pleased to allow her. She soon left off talking of the boy, however, to
tell me of her own troubles. She was in very great trouble, she told me.
Her eldest daughter had been obliged to leave her situation from
ill-health; in fact, the doctor said the girl was in a decline; and it
was a hard thing for a poor widow who had seen better days to have a
sick daughter to support, as well as a family of young children.

"I let the woman run on for a long time in this manner, telling me the
girl's ailments, and the girl's age, and the girl's doctor's stuff, and
piety, and sufferings, and a great deal more. But I neither listened to
her nor heeded her. I heard her, but only in a far-away manner, as I
heard the traffic in the street, or the ripple of the stream at the
bottom of it. What were this woman's troubles to me? I had miseries of
my own, and worse miseries than her coarse nature could ever have to
endure. These sort of people always had sick husbands or sick children,
and expected to be helped in their illness by the rich. It was nothing
out of the common. I was thinking this, and I was just going to dismiss
the woman with a sovereign for her sick daughter, when an idea flashed
upon me with such painful suddenness that it sent the blood surging up
to my brain, and set my heart beating, as it only beats when I am mad.

"I asked the woman her name. She was a Mrs. Plowson, and she kept a
small general shop, she said, and only ran in now and then to look after
Georgey, and to see that the little maid-of-all-work took care of him.
Her daughter's name was Matilda. I asked her several questions about
this girl Matilda, and I ascertained that she was four-and-twenty, that
she had always been consumptive, and that she was now, as the doctor
said, going off in a rapid decline. He had declared that she could not
last much more than a fortnight.

"It was in three weeks that the ship that carried George Talboys was
expected to anchor in the Mersey.

"I need not dwell upon this business. I visited the sick girl. She was
fair and slender. Her description, carelessly given, might tally nearly
enough with my own, though she bore no shadow of resemblance to me,
except in these two particulars. I was received by the girl as a rich
lady who wished to do her a service. I bought the mother, who was poor
and greedy, and who for a gift of money, more money than she had ever
before received, consented to submit to anything I wished. Upon the
second day after my introduction to this Mrs. Plowson, my father went
over to Ventnor, and hired lodgings for his invalid daughter and her
little boy. Early the next morning he carried over the dying girl and
Georgey, who had been bribed to call her 'mamma.' She entered the house
as Mrs. Talboys; she was attended by a Ventnor medical man as Mrs.
Talboys; she died, and her death and burial were registered in that
name.

"The advertisement was inserted in the _Times_, and upon the second day
after its insertion George Talboys visited Ventnor, and ordered the
tombstone which at this hour records the death of his wife, Helen
Talboys."

Sir Michael Audley rose slowly, and with a stiff, constrained action, as
if every physical sense had been benumbed by that one sense of misery.

"I cannot hear any more," he said, in a hoarse whisper; "if there is
anything more to be told I cannot hear it. Robert, it is you who have
brought about this discovery, as I understand. I want to know nothing
more. Will you take upon yourself the duty of providing for the safety
and comfort of this lady whom I have thought my wife? I need not ask you
to remember in all you do, that I have loved her very dearly and truly.
I cannot say farewell to her. I will not say it until I can think of her
without bitterness--until I can pity her, as I now pray that God may
pity her this night."

Sir Michael walked slowly from the room. He did not trust himself to
look at that crouching figure. He did not wish to see the creature whom
he had cherished. He went straight to his dressing-room, rung for his
valet, and ordered him to pack a portmanteau, and make all necessary
arrangements for accompanying his master by the last up-train.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE HUSH THAT SUCCEEDS THE TEMPEST.


Robert Audley followed his uncle into the vestibule after Sir Michael
had spoken those few quiet words which sounded the death-knell of his
hope and love. Heaven knows how much the young man had feared the coming
of this day. It had come; and though there had been no great outburst of
despair, no whirlwind of stormy grief, no loud tempest of anguish and
tears, Robert took no comforting thought from the unnatural stillness.
He knew enough to know that Sir Michael Audley went away with the barbed
arrow, which his nephew's hand had sent home to its aim, rankling in his
tortured heart; he knew that this strange and icy calm was the first
numbness of a heart stricken by grief so unexpected as for a time to be
rendered almost incomprehensible by a blank stupor of astonishment; he
knew that when this dull quiet had passed away, when little by little,
and one by one, each horrible feature of the sufferer's sorrow became
first dimly apparent and then terribly familiar to him, the storm would
burst in fatal fury, and tempests of tears and cruel thunder-claps of
agony would rend that generous heart.

Robert had heard of cases in which men of his uncle's age had borne some
great grief, as Sir Michael had borne this, with a strange quiet; and
had gone away from those who would have comforted them, and whose
anxieties have been relieved by this patient stillness, to fall down
upon the ground and die under the blow which at first had only stunned
him. He remembered cases in which paralysis and apoplexy had stricken
men as strong as his uncle in the first hour of the horrible affliction;
and he lingered in the lamp-lit vestibule, wondering whether it was not
his duty to be with Sir Michael--to be near him, in case of any
emergency, and to accompany him wherever he went.

Yet would it be wise to force himself upon that gray-headed sufferer in
this cruel hour, in which he had been awakened from the one delusion of
a blameless life to discover that he had been the dupe of a false face,
and the fool of a nature which was too coldly mercenary, too cruelly
heartless, to be sensible of its own infamy?

"No," thought Robert Audley, "I will not intrude upon the anguish of
this wounded heart. There is humiliation mingled with this bitter grief.
It is better he should fight the battle alone. I have done what I
believe to have been my solemn duty, yet I should scarcely wonder if I
had rendered myself forever hateful to him. It is better he should fight
the battle alone. _I_ can do nothing to make the strife less terrible.
Better that it should be fought alone."

While the young man stood with his hand upon the library door, still
half-doubtful whether he should follow his uncle or re-enter the room in
which he had left that more wretched creature whom it had been his
business to unmask, Alicia Audley opened the dining-room door, and
revealed to him the old-fashioned oak-paneled apartment, the long table
covered with showy damask, and bright with a cheerful glitter of glass
and silver.

"Is papa coming to dinner?" asked Miss Audley. "I'm so hungry; and poor
Tomlins has sent up three times to say the fish will be spoiled. It must
be reduced to a species of isinglass soup, by this time, I should
think," added the young lady, as she came out into the vestibule with
the _Times_ newspaper in her hand.

She had been sitting by the fire reading the paper, and waiting for her
seniors to join her at the dinner table.

"Oh, it's you, Mr. Robert Audley." she remarked, indifferently. "You
dine with us of course. Pray go and find papa. It must be nearly eight
o'clock, and we are supposed to dine at six."

Mr. Audley answered his cousin rather sternly. Her frivolous manner
jarred upon him, and he forgot in his irrational displeasure that Miss
Audley had known nothing of the terrible drama which had been so long
enacting under her very nose.

"Your papa has just endured a very great grief, Alicia," the young man
said, gravely.

The girl's arch, laughing face changed in a moment to a tenderly earnest
look of sorrow and anxiety. Alicia Audley loved her father very dearly.

"A grief?" she exclaimed; "papa grieved! Oh! Robert, what has happened?"

"I can tell you nothing yet, Alicia," Robert answered in a low voice.

He took his cousin by the wrist, and drew her into the dining-room as he
spoke. He closed the door carefully behind him before he continued:

"Alicia, can I trust you?" he asked, earnestly.

"Trust me to do what?"

"To be a comfort and a friend to your poor father under a very heavy
affliction."

"_Yes_!" cried Alicia, passionately. "How can you ask me such a
question? Do you think there is anything I would not do to lighten any
sorrow of my father's? Do you think there is anything I would not suffer
if my suffering could lighten his?"

The rushing tears rose to Miss Audley's bright gray eyes as she spoke.

"Oh, Robert! Robert! could you think so badly of me as to think I would
not try to be a comfort to my father in his grief?" she said,
reproachfully.

"No, no, my dear," answered the young man, quietly; "I never doubted
your affection, I only doubted your discretion. May I rely upon that?"

"You may, Robert," said Alicia, resolutely.

"Very well, then, my dear girl, I will trust you. Your father is going
to leave the Court, for a time at least. The grief which he has just
endured--a sudden and unlooked-for sorrow, remember--has no doubt made
this place hateful to him. He is going away; but he must not go alone,
must he, Alicia?"

"Alone? no! no! But I suppose my lady--"

"Lady Audley will not go with him," said Robert, gravely; "he is about
to separate himself from her."

"For a time?"

"No, forever."

"Separate himself from her forever!" exclaimed Alicia. "Then this
grief--"

"Is connected with Lady Audley. Lady Audley is the cause of your
father's sorrow."

Alicia's face, which had been pale before, flushed crimson. Sorrow, of
which my lady was the cause--a sorrow which was to separate Sir Michael
forever from his wife! There had been no quarrel between them--there had
never been anything but harmony and sunshine between Lady Audley and her
generous husband. This sorrow must surely then have arisen from some
sudden discovery; it was, no doubt, a sorrow associated with disgrace.
Robert Audley understood the meaning of that vivid blush.

"You will offer to accompany your father wherever he may choose to go,
Alicia," he said. "You are his natural comforter at such a time as this,
but you will best befriend him in this hour of trial by avoiding all
intrusion upon his grief. Your very ignorance of the particulars of that
grief will be a security for your discretion. Say nothing to your father
that you might not have said to him two years ago, before he married a
second wife. Try and be to him what you were before the woman in yonder
room came between you and your father's love."

"I will," murmured Alicia, "I will."

"You will naturally avoid all mention of Lady Audley's name. If your
father is often silent, be patient; if it sometimes seems to you that
the shadow of this great sorrow will never pass away from his life, be
patient still; and remember that there can be no better hope of a cure
of his grief than the hope that his daughter's devotion may lead him to
remember there is one woman upon this earth who will love him truly and
purely until the last."

"Yes--yes, Robert, dear cousin, I will remember."

Mr. Audley, for the first time since he had been a schoolboy, took his
cousin in his arms and kissed her broad forehead.

"My dear Alicia," he said, "do this and you will make me happy. I have
been in some measure the means of bringing this sorrow upon your father.
Let me hope that it is not an enduring one. Try and restore my uncle to
happiness, Alicia, and I will love you more dearly than brother ever
loved a noble-hearted sister; and a brotherly affection may be worth
having, perhaps, after all, my dear, though it is very different to poor
Sir Harry's enthusiastic worship."

Alicia's head was bent and her face hidden from her cousin while he
spoke, but she lifted her head when he had finished, and looked him full
in the face with a smile that was only the brighter for her eyes being
filled with tears.

"You are a good fellow, Bob," she said; "and I've been very foolish and
wicked to feel angry with you because--"

The young lady stopped suddenly.

"Because what, my dear?" asked Mr. Audley.

"Because I'm silly, Cousin Robert," Alicia said, quickly; "never mind
that, Bob, I'll do all you wish, and it shall not be my fault if my
dearest father doesn't forget his troubles before long. I'd go to the
end of the world with him, poor darling, if I thought there was any
comfort to be found for him in the journey. I'll go and get ready
directly. Do you think papa will go to-night?"

"Yes, my dear; I don't think Sir Michael will rest another night under
this roof yet awhile."

"The mail goes at twenty minutes past nine," said Alicia; "we must leave
the house in an hour if we are to travel by it. I shall see you again
before we go, Robert?"

"Yes, dear."

Miss Audley ran off to her room to summon her maid, and make all
necessary preparations for the sudden journey, of whose ultimate
destination she was as yet quite ignorant.

She went heart and soul into the carrying out of the duty which Robert
had dictated to her. She assisted in the packing of her portmanteaus,
and hopelessly bewildered her maid by stuffing silk dresses into her
bonnet-boxes and satin shoes into her dressing-case. She roamed about
her rooms, gathering together drawing-materials, music-books,
needle-work, hair-brushes, jewelry, and perfume-bottles, very much as
she might have done had she been about to sail for some savage country,
devoid of all civilized resources. She was thinking all the time of her
father's unknown grief, and perhaps a little of the serious face and
earnest voice which had that night revealed her Cousin Robert to her in
a new character.

Mr. Audley went up-stairs after his cousin, and found his way to Sir
Michael's dressing-room. He knocked at the door and listened, Heaven
knows how anxiously, for the expected answer. There was a moment's
pause, during which the young man's heart beat loud and fast, and then
the door was opened by the baronet himself. Robert saw that his uncle's
valet was already hard at work preparing for his master's hurried
journey.

Sir Michael came out into the corridor.

"Have you anything more to say to me, Robert?" he asked, quietly.

"I only came to ascertain if I could assist in any of your arrangements.
You go to London by the mail?"

"Yes."

"Have you any idea of where you will stay."

"Yes, I shall stop at the Clarendon; I am known there. Is that all you
have to say?"

"Yes; except that Alicia will accompany you?"

"Alicia!"

"She could not very well stay here, you know, just now. It would be best
for her to leave the Court until--"

"Yes, yes, I understand," interrupted the baronet; "but is there nowhere
else that she could go--must she be with me?"

"She could go nowhere else so immediately, and she would not be happy
anywhere else."

"Let her come, then," said Sir Michael, "let her come."

He spoke in a strange, subdued voice, and with an apparent effort, as if
it were painful to him to have to speak at all; as if all this ordinary
business of life were a cruel torture to him, and jarred so much upon
his grief as to be almost worse to bear than that grief itself.

"Very well, my dear uncle, then all is arranged; Alicia will be ready to
start at nine o'clock."

"Very good, very good," muttered the baronet; "let her come if she
pleases, poor child, let her come."

He sighed heavily as he spoke in that half pitying tone of his daughter.
He was thinking how comparatively indifferent he had been toward that
only child for the sake of the woman now shut in the fire-lit room
below.

"I shall see you again before you go, sir," said Robert; "I will leave
you till then."

"Stay!" said Sir Michael, suddenly; "have you told Alicia?"

"I have told her nothing, except that you are about to leave the Court
for some time."

"You are very good, my boy, you are very good," the baronet murmured in
a broken voice.

He stretched out his hand. His nephew took it in both his own, and
pressed it to his lips.

"Oh, sir! how can I ever forgive myself?" he said; "how can I ever cease
to hate myself for having brought this grief upon you?"

"No, no, Robert, you did right; I wish that God had been so merciful to
me as to take my miserable life before this night; but you did right."

Sir Michael re-entered his dressing-room, and Robert slowly returned to
the vestibule. He paused upon the threshold of that chamber in which he
had left Lucy--Lady Audley, otherwise Helen Talboys, the wife of his
lost friend.

She was lying upon the floor, upon the very spot in which she had
crouched at her husband's feet telling her guilty story. Whether she was
in a swoon, or whether she lay there in the utter helplessness of her
misery, Robert scarcely cared to know. He went out into the vestibule,
and sent one of the servants to look for her maid, the smart,
be-ribboned damsel who was loud in wonder and consternation at the sight
of her mistress.

"Lady Audley is very ill," he said; "take her to her room and see that
she does not leave it to-night. You will be good enough to remain near
her, but do not either talk to her or suffer her to excite herself by
talking."

My lady had not fainted; she allowed the girl to assist her, and rose
from the ground upon which she had groveled. Her golden hair fell in
loose, disheveled masses about her ivory throat and shoulders, her face
and lips were colorless, her eyes terrible in their unnatural light.

"Take me away," she said, "and let me sleep! Let me sleep, for my brain
is on fire!"

As she was leaving the room with her maid, she turned and looked at
Robert. "Is Sir Michael gone?" she asked.

"He will leave in half an hour."

"There were no lives lost in the fire at Mount Stanning?"

"None."

"I am glad of that."

"The landlord of the house, Marks, was very terribly burned, and lies in
a precarious state at his mother's cottage; but he may recover."

"I am glad of that--I am glad no life was lost. Good-night, Mr. Audley."

"I shall ask to see you for half an hour's conversation in the course of
to-morrow, my lady."

"Whenever you please. Good night."

"Good night."

She went away quietly leaning upon her maid's shoulder, and leaving
Robert with a sense of strange bewilderment that was very painful to
him.

He sat down by the broad hearth upon which the red embers were fading,
and wondered at the change in that old house which, until the day of his
friend's disappearance, had been so pleasant a home for all who
sheltered beneath its hospitable roof. He sat brooding over the desolate
hearth, and trying to decide upon what must be done in this sudden
crisis. He sat helpless and powerless to determine upon any course of
action, lost in a dull revery, from which he was aroused by the sound of
carriage-wheels driving up to the little turret entrance.

The clock in the vestibule struck nine as Robert opened the library
door. Alicia had just descended the stairs with her maid; a rosy-faced
country girl.

"Good-by, Robert," said Miss Audley, holding out her hand to her cousin;
"good-by, and God bless you! You may trust me to take care of papa."

"I am sure I may. God bless you, my dear."

For the second time that night Robert Audley pressed his lips to his
cousin's candid forehead, and for the second time the embrace was of a
brotherly or paternal character, rather than the rapturous proceeding
which it would have been had Sir Harry Towers been the privileged
performer.

It was five minutes past nine when Sir Michael came down-stairs,
followed by his valet, grave and gray-haired like himself. The baronet
was pale, but calm and self-possessed. The hand which he gave to his
nephew was as cold as ice, but it was with a steady voice that he bade
the young man good-by.

"I leave all in your hands, Robert," he said, as he turned to leave the
house in which he had lived so long. "I may not have heard the end, but
I have heard enough. Heaven knows I have no need to hear more. I leave
all to you, but you will not be cruel--you will remember how much I
loved--"

His voice broke huskily before he could finish the sentence.

"I will remember you in everything, sir," the young man answered. "I
will do everything for the best."

A treacherous mist of tears blinded him and shut out his uncle's face,
and in another minute the carriage had driven away, and Robert Audley
sat alone in the dark library, where only one red spark glowed among the
pale gray ashes. He sat alone, trying to think what he ought to do, and
with the awful responsibility of a wicked woman's fate upon his
shoulders.

"Good Heaven!" he thought; "surely this must be God's judgment upon the
purposeless, vacillating life I led up to the seventh day of last
September. Surely this awful responsibility has been forced upon me in
order that I may humble myself to an offended Providence, and confess
that a man cannot choose his own life. He cannot say, 'I will take
existence lightly, and keep out of the way of the wretched, mistaken,
energetic creatures, who fight so heartily in the great battle.' He
cannot say, 'I will stop in the tents while the strife is fought, and
laugh at the fools who are trampled down in the useless struggle.' He
cannot do this. He can only do, humbly and fearfully, that which the
Maker who created him has appointed for him to do. If he has a battle to
fight, let him fight it faithfully; but woe betide him if he skulks when
his name is called in the mighty muster-roll, woe betide him if he hides
in the tents when the tocsin summons him to the scene of war!"

One of the servants brought candles into the library and relighted the
fire, but Robert Audley did not stir from his seat by the hearth. He sat
as he had often sat in his chambers in Figtree Court, with his elbows
resting upon the arms of his chair, and his chin upon his hand.

But he lifted his head as the servant was about to leave the room.

"Can I send a message from here to London?" he asked.

"It can be sent from Brentwood, sir--not from here."

Mr. Audley looked at his watch thoughtfully.

"One of the men can ride over to Brentwood, sir, if you wish any message
to be sent."

"I do wish to send a message; will you manage it for me, Richards?"

"Certainly, sir."

"You can wait, then, while I write the message."

"Yes, sir."

The man brought writing materials from one of the side-tables, and
placed them before Mr. Audley.

Robert dipped a pen in the ink, and stared thoughtfully at one of the
candles for a few moments before he began to write.

The message ran thus:

"From Robert Audley, of Audley Court, Essex, to Francis Wilmington, of
Paper-buildings, Temple.

"DEAR WILMINGTON--If you know any physician experienced in cases of
mania, and to be trusted with a secret, be so good as to send me his
address by telegraph."

Mr. Audley sealed this document in a stout envelope, and handed it to
the man, with a sovereign.

"You will see that this is given to a trustworthy person, Richards," he
said, "and let the man wait at the station for the return message. He
ought to get it in an hour and a half."

Mr. Richards, who had known Robert Audley in jackets and turn-down
collars, departed to execute his commission. Heaven forbid that we
should follow him into the comfortable servants' hall at the Court,
where the household sat round the blazing fire, discussing in utter
bewilderment the events of the day.

Nothing could be wider from the truth than the speculations of these
worthy people. What clew had they to the mystery of that firelit room in
which a guilty woman had knelt at their master's feet to tell the story
of her sinful life? They only knew that which Sir Michael's valet had
told them of this sudden journey. How his master was as pale as a sheet,
and spoke in a strange voice that didn't sound like his own, somehow,
and how you might have knocked him--Mr. Parsons, the valet--down with a
feather, if you had been minded to prostrate him by the aid of so feeble
a weapon.

The wiseheads of the servants' hall decided that Sir Michael had
received sudden intelligence through Mr. Robert--they were wise enough
to connect the young man with the catastrophe--either of the death of
some near and dear relation--the elder servants decimated the Audley
family in their endeavors to find a likely relation--or of some alarming
fall in the funds, or of the failure of some speculation or bank in
which the greater part of the baronet's money was invested. The general
leaning was toward the failure of a bank, and every member of the
assembly seemed to take a dismal and raven-like delight in the fancy,
though such a supposition involved their own ruin in the general
destruction of that liberal household.

Robert sat by the dreary hearth, which seemed dreary even now when the
blaze of a great wood-fire roared in the wide chimney, and listened to
the low wail of the March wind moaning round the house and lifting the
shivering ivy from the walls it sheltered. He was tired and worn out,
for remember that he had been awakened from his sleep at two o'clock
that morning by the hot breath of blazing timber and the sharp crackling
of burning woodwork. But for his presence of mind and cool decision, Mr.
Luke Marks would have died a dreadful death. He still bore the traces of
the night's peril, for the dark hair had been singed upon one side of
his forehead, and his left hand was red and inflamed, from the effect of
the scorching atmosphere out of which he had dragged the landlord of the
Castle Inn. He was thoroughly exhausted with fatigue and excitement, and
he fell into a heavy sleep in his easy-chair before the bright fire,
from which he was only awakened by the entrance of Mr. Richards with the
return message.

This return message was very brief.

"DEAR AUDLEY--Always glad to oblige. Alwyn Mosgrave, M.D., 12 Saville
Row. Safe."

This with names and addresses, was all that it contained.

"I shall want another message taken to Brentwood to-morrow morning,
Richards," said Mr. Audley, as he folded the telegram. "I should be glad
if the man would ride over with it before breakfast. He shall have half
a sovereign for his trouble."

Mr. Richards bowed.

"Thank you, sir--not necessary, sir; but as you please, of course, sir,"
he murmured. "At what hour might you wish the man to go?"

Mr. Audley might wish the man to go as early as he could, so it was
decided that he should go at six.

"My room is ready, I suppose, Richards?" said Robert.

"Yes, sir--your old room."

"Very good. I shall go to bed at once. Bring me a glass of brandy and
water as hot as you can make it, and wait for the telegram."

This second message was only a very earnest request to Doctor Mosgrave
to pay an immediate visit to Audley Court on a matter of serious moment.

Having written this message, Mr. Audley felt that he had done all that
he could do. He drank his brandy and water. He had actual need of the
diluted alcohol, for he had been chilled to the bone by his adventures
during the fire. He slowly sipped the pale golden liquid and thought of
Clara Talboys, of that earnest girl whose brother's memory was now
avenged, whose brother's destroyer was humiliated in the dust. Had she
heard of the fire at the Castle Inn? How could she have done otherwise
than hear of it in such a place as Mount Stanning? But had she heard
that _he_ had been in danger, and that he had distinguished himself by
the rescue of a drunken boor? I fear that, even sitting by that desolate
hearth, and beneath the roof whose noble was an exile from his own
house, Robert Audley was weak enough to think of these things--weak
enough to let his fancy wander away to the dismal fir-trees under the
cold March sky, and the dark-brown eyes that were so like the eyes of
his lost friend.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

DR. MOSGRAVE'S ADVICE.


My lady slept. Through that long winter night she slept soundly.
Criminals have often so slept their last sleep upon earth; and have been
found in the gray morning slumbering peacefully, by the jailer who came
to wake them.

The game had been played and lost. I do not think that my lady had
thrown away a card, or missed the making of a trick which she might by
any possibility have made; but her opponent's hand had been too powerful
for her, and he had won.

She looked upon herself as a species of state prisoner, who would have
to be taken good care of. A second Iron Mask, who must be provided for
in some comfortable place of confinement. She abandoned herself to a
dull indifference. She had lived a hundred lives within the space of the
last few days of her existence, and she had worn out her capacity for
suffering--for a time at least.

She ate her breakfast, and took her morning bath, and emerged, with
perfumed hair and in the most exquisitely careless of morning toilets,
from her luxurious dressing-room. She looked at herself in the
cheval-glass before she left the room. A long night's rest had brought
back the delicate rose-tints of her complexion, and the natural luster
of her blue eyes. That unnatural light which had burned so fearfully the
day before had gone, and my lady smiled triumphantly as she contemplated
the reflection of her beauty. The days were gone in which her enemies
could have branded her with white-hot irons, and burned away the
loveliness which had done such mischief. Whatever they did to her they
must leave her her beauty, she thought. At the worst, they were
powerless to rob her of that.

The March day was bright and sunny, with a cheerless sunshine certainly.
My lady wrapped herself in an Indian shawl; a shawl that had cost Sir
Michael a hundred guineas. I think she had an idea that it would be well
to wear this costly garment; so that if hustled suddenly away, she might
carry at least one of her possessions with her. Remember how much she
had periled for a fine house and gorgeous furniture, for carriages and
horses, jewels and laces; and do not wonder if she clings with a
desperate tenacity to gauds and gew-gaws, in the hour of her despair. If
she had been Judas, she would have held to her thirty pieces of silver
to the last moment of her shameful life.

Mr. Robert Audley breakfasted in the library. He sat long over his
solitary cup of tea, smoking his meerschaum pipe, and meditating darkly
upon the task that lay before him.

"I will appeal to the experience of this Dr. Mosgrave," he though;
"physicians and lawyers are the confessors of this prosaic nineteenth
century. Surely, he will be able to help me."

The first fast train from London arrived at Audley at half-past ten
o'clock, and at five minutes before eleven, Richards, the grave servant,
announced Dr. Alwyn Mosgrave.

The physician from Saville Row was a tall man of about fifty years of
age. He was thin and sallow, with lantern jaws, and eyes of a pale,
feeble gray, that seemed as if they had once been blue, and had faded by
the progress of time to their present neutral shade. However powerful
the science of medicine as wielded by Dr. Alwyn Mosgrave, it had not
been strong enough to put flesh upon his bones, or brightness into his
face. He had a strangely expressionless, and yet strangely attentive
countenance. He had the face of a man who had spent the greater part of
his life in listening to other people, and who had parted with his own
individuality and his own passions at the very outset of his career.

He bowed to Robert Audley, took the opposite seat indicated by him, and
addressed his attentive face to the young barrister. Robert saw that the
physician's glance for a moment lost its quiet look of attention, and
became earnest and searching.

"He is wondering whether I am the patient," thought Mr. Audley, "and is
looking for the diagnoses of madness in my face."

Dr. Mosgrave spoke as if in answer to this thought.

"Is it not about your own--health--that you wish to consult me?" he
said, interrogatively.

"Oh, no!"

Dr. Mosgrave looked at his watch, a fifty-guinea Benson-made
chronometer, which he carried loose in his waistcoat pocket as
carelessly as if it had been a potato.

"I need not remind you that my time is precious," he said; "your
telegram informed me that my services were required in a case
of--danger--as I apprehend, or I should not be here this morning."

Robert Audley had sat looking gloomily at the fire, wondering how he
should begin the conversation, and had needed this reminder of the
physician's presence.

"You are very good, Dr. Mosgrave," he said, rousing himself by an
effort, "and I thank you very much for having responded to my summons. I
am about to appeal to you upon a subject which is more painful to me
than words can describe. I am about to implore your advice in a most
difficult case, and I trust almost blindly to your experience to rescue
me, and others who are very dear to me, from a cruel and complicated
position."

The business-like attention in Dr. Mosgrave's face grew into a look of
interest as he listened to Robert Audley.

"The revelation made by the patient to the physician is, I believe, as
sacred as the confession of a penitent to his priest?" Robert asked,
gravely.

"Quite as sacred."

"A solemn confidence, to be violated under no circumstances?"

"Most certainly."

Robert Audley looked at the fire again. How much should he tell, or how
little, of the dark history of his uncle's second wife?

"I have been given to understand, Dr. Mosgrave, that you have devoted
much of your attention to the treatment of insanity."

"Yes, my practice is almost confined to the treatment of mental
diseases."

"Such being the case, I think I may venture to conclude that you
sometimes receive strange, and even terrible, revelations."

Dr. Mosgrave bowed.

He looked like a man who could have carried, safely locked in his
passionless breast, the secrets of a nation, and who would have suffered
no inconvenience from the weight of such a burden.

"The story which I am about to tell you is not my own story," said
Robert, after a pause; "you will forgive me, therefore, if I once more
remind you that I can only reveal it upon the understanding that under
no circumstances, or upon no apparent justification, is that confidence
to be betrayed."

Dr. Mosgrave bowed again. A little sternly, perhaps, this time.

"I am all attention, Mr. Audley," he said coldly.

Robert Audley drew his chair nearer to that of the physician, and in a
low voice began the story which my lady had told upon her knees in that
same chamber upon the previous night. Dr. Mosgrave's listening face,
turned always toward the speaker, betrayed no surprise at that strange
revelation. He smiled once, a grave, quiet smile, when Mr. Audley came
to that part of the story which told of the conspiracy at Ventnor; but
he was not surprised. Robert Audley ended his story at the point at
which Sir Michael Audley had interrupted my lady's confession. He told
nothing of the disappearance of George Talboys, nor of the horrible
suspicions that had grown out of that disappearance. He told nothing of
the fire at the Castle Inn.

Dr. Mosgrave shook his head, gravely, when Mr. Audley came to the end of
his story.

"You have nothing further to tell me?" he said.

"No. I do not think there is anything more that need be told," Robert
answered, rather evasively.

"You would wish to prove that this lady is mad, and therefore
irresponsible for her actions, Mr. Audley?" said the physician.

Robert Audley stared, wondering at the mad doctor. By what process had
he so rapidly arrived at the young man's secret desire?

"Yes, I would rather, if possible, think her mad; I should be glad to
find that excuse for her."

"And to save the _esclandre_ of a Chancery suit, I suppose, Mr, Audley,"
said Dr. Mosgrave.

Robert shuddered as he bowed an assent to this remark. It was something
worse than a Chancery suit that he dreaded with a horrible fear. It was
a trial for murder that had so long haunted his dreams. How often he had
awoke, in an agony of shame, from a vision of a crowded court-house, and
his uncle's wife in a criminal dock, hemmed in on every side by a sea of
eager faces.

"I fear that I shall not be of any use to you," the physician said,
quietly; "I will see the lady, if you please, but I do not believe that
she is mad."

"Why not?"

"Because there is no evidence of madness in anything she has done. She
ran away from her home, because her home was not a pleasant one, and she
left in the hope of finding a better. There is no madness in that. She
committed the crime of bigamy, because by that crime she obtained
fortune and position. There is no madness there. When she found herself
in a desperate position, she did not grow desperate. She employed
intelligent means, and she carried out a conspiracy which required
coolness and deliberation in its execution. There is no madness in
that."

"But the traits of hereditary insanity--"

"May descend to the third generation, and appear in the lady's children,
if she have any. Madness is not necessarily transmitted from mother to
daughter. I should be glad to help you, if I could, Mr. Audley, but I do
not think there is any proof of insanity in the story you have told me.
I do not think any jury in England would accept the plea of insanity in
such a case as this. The best thing you can do with this lady is to send
her back to her first husband; if he will have her."

Robert started at this sudden mention of his friend.

"Her first husband is dead," he answered, "at least, he has been missing
for some time--and I have reason to believe that he is dead."

Dr. Mosgrave saw the startled movement, and heard the embarrassment in
Robert Audley's voice as he spoke of George Talboys.

"The lady's first husband is missing," he said, with a strange emphasis
on the word--"you think that he is dead?"

He paused for a few moments and looked at the fire, as Robert had looked
before.

"Mr. Audley," he said, presently, "there must be no half-confidences
between us. You have not told me all."

Robert, looking up suddenly, plainly expressed in his face the surprise
he felt at these words.

"I should be very poorly able to meet the contingencies of my
professional experience," said Dr. Mosgrave, "if I could not perceive
where confidence ends and reservation begins. You have only told me half
this lady's story, Mr. Audley. You must tell me more before I can offer
you any advice. What has become of the first husband?"

He asked this question in a decisive tone, as if he knew it to be the
key-stone of an arch.

"I have already told you, Dr. Mosgrave, that I do not know."

"Yes," answered the physician, "but your face has told me what you have
withheld from me; it has told me that you _suspect_."

Robert Audley was silent.

"If I am to be of use to you, you must trust me, Mr. Audley," said the
physician. "The first husband disappeared--how and when? I want to know
the history of his disappearance."

Robert paused for some time before he replied to this speech; but, by
and by, he lifted his head, which had been bent in an attitude of
earnest thought, and addressed the physician.

"I will trust you, Dr. Mosgrave," he said. "I will confide entirely in
your honor and goodness. I do not ask you to do any wrong to society;
but I ask you to save our stainless name from degradation and shame, if
you can do so conscientiously."

He told the story of George's disappearance, and of his own doubts and
fears, Heaven knows how reluctantly.

Dr. Mosgrave listened as quietly as he had listened before. Robert
concluded with an earnest appeal to the physician's best feelings. He
implored him to spare the generous old man whose fatal confidence in a
wicked woman had brought much misery upon his declining years.

It was impossible to draw any conclusion, either favorable or otherwise,
from Dr. Mosgrave's attentive face. He rose, when Robert had finished
speaking, and looked at his watch once more.

"I can only spare you twenty minutes," he said. "I will see the lady, if
you please. You say her mother died in a madhouse?"

"She did. Will you see Lady Audley alone?"

"Yes, alone, if you please."

Robert rung for my lady's maid, and under convoy of that smart young
damsel the physician found his way to the octagon antechamber, and the
fairy boudoir with which it communicated.

Ten minutes afterward, he returned to the library, in which Robert sat
waiting for him.

"I have talked to the lady," he said, quietly, "and we understand each
other very well. There is latent insanity! Insanity which might never
appear; or which might appear only once or twice in a lifetime. It would
be a _dementia_ in its worst phase, perhaps; acute mania; but its
duration would be very brief, and it would only arise under extreme
mental pressure. The lady is not mad; but she has the hereditary taint
in her blood. She has the cunning of madness, with the prudence of
intelligence. I will tell you what she is, Mr. Audley. She is
dangerous!"

Dr. Mosgrave walked up and down the room once or twice before he spoke
again.

"I will not discuss the probabilities of the suspicion which distresses
you, Mr. Audley," he said, presently, "but I will tell you this much, I
do not advise any _esclandre_. This Mr. George Talboys has disappeared,
but you have no evidence of his death. If you could produce evidence of
his death, you could produce no evidence against this lady, beyond the
one fact that she had a powerful motive for getting rid of him. No jury
in the United Kingdom would condemn her upon such evidence as that."

Robert Audley interrupted Dr. Mosgrave, hastily.

"I assure you, my dear sir," he said, "that my greatest fear is the
necessity of any exposure--any disgrace."

"Certainly, Mr. Audley," answered the physician, coolly, "but you cannot
expect me to assist you to condone one of the worst offenses against
society. If I saw adequate reason for believing that a murder had been
committed by this woman, I should refuse to assist you in smuggling her
away out of the reach of justice, although the honor of a hundred noble
families might be saved by my doing so. But I do not see adequate reason
for your suspicions; and I will do my best to help you."

Robert Audley grasped the physician's hands in both his own.

"I will thank you when I am better able to do so," he said, with
emotion; "I will thank you in my uncle's name as well as in my own."

"I have only five minutes more, and I have a letter to write," said Dr.
Mosgrave, smiling at the young man's energy.

He seated himself at a writing-table in the window, dipped his pen in
the ink, and wrote rapidly for about seven minutes. He had filled three
sides of a sheet of note-paper, when he threw down his pen and folded
his letter.

He put this letter into an envelope, and delivered it, unsealed, to
Robert Audley.

The address which it bore was:

"Monsieur Val,

"Villebrumeuse,

"Belgium."

Mr. Audley looked rather doubtfully from this address to the doctor, who
was putting on his gloves as deliberately as if his life had never known
a more solemn purpose than the proper adjustment of them.

"That letter," he said, in answer to Robert Audley's inquiring look, "is
written to my friend Monsieur Val, the proprietor and medical
superintendent of a very excellent _maison de sante_ in the town of
Villebrumeuse. We have known each other for many years, and he will no
doubt willingly receive Lady Audley into his establishment, and charge
himself with the full responsibility of her future life; it will not be
a very eventful one!"

Robert Audley would have spoken, he would have once more expressed his
gratitude for the help which had been given to him, but Dr. Mosgrave
checked him with an authoritative gesture.

"From the moment in which Lady Audley enters that house," he said, "her
life, so far as life is made up of action and variety, will be finished.
Whatever secrets she may have will be secrets forever! Whatever crimes
she may have committed she will be able to commit no more. If you were
to dig a grave for her in the nearest churchyard and bury her alive in
it, you could not more safely shut her from the world and all worldly
associations. But as a physiologist and as an honest man, I believe you
could do no better service to society than by doing this; for physiology
is a lie if the woman I saw ten minutes ago is a woman to be trusted at
large. If she could have sprung at my throat and strangled me with her
little hands, as I sat talking to her just now, she would have done it."

"She suspected your purpose, then!"

"She knew it. 'You think I am mad like my mother, and you have come to
question me,' she said. 'You are watching for some sign of the dreadful
taint in my blood.' Good-day to you, Mr. Audley," the physician added
hurriedly, "my time was up ten minutes ago; it is as much as I shall do
to catch the train."




CHAPTER XXXVII.

BURIED ALIVE.


Robert Audley sat alone in the library with the physician's letter upon
the table before him, thinking of the work which was still to be done.

The young barrister had constituted himself the denouncer of this
wretched woman. He had been her judge; and he was now her jailer. Not
until he had delivered the letter which lay before him to its proper
address, not until he had given up his charge into the safe-keeping of
the foreign mad-house doctor, not until then would the dreadful burden
be removed from him and his duty done.

He wrote a few lines to my lady, telling her that he was going to carry
her away from Audley Court to a place from which she was not likely to
return, and requesting her to lose no time in preparing for the journey.
He wished to start that evening, if possible, he told her.

Miss Susan Martin, the lady's maid, thought it a very hard thing to have
to pack her mistress' trunks in such a hurry, but my lady assisted in
the task. She toiled resolutely in directing and assisting her servant,
who scented bankruptcy and ruin in all this packing up and hurrying
away, and was therefore rather languid and indifferent in the discharge
of her duties; and at six o'clock in the evening she sent her attendant
to tell Mr. Audley that she was ready to depart as soon as he pleased.

Robert had consulted a volume of Bradshaw, and had discovered that
Villebrumeuse lay out of the track of all railway traffic, and was only
approachable by diligence from Brussels. The mail for Dover left London
Bridge at nine o'clock, and could be easily caught by Robert and his
charge, as the seven o'clock up-train from Audley reached Shoreditch at
a quarter past eight. Traveling by the Dover and Calais route, they
would reach Villebrumeuse by the following afternoon or evening.

It was late in the afternoon of the next day when the diligence bumped
and rattled over the uneven paving of the principal street in
Villebrumeuse.

Robert Audley and my lady had had the _coupe_ of the diligence to
themselves for the whole of the journey, for there were not many
travelers between Brussels and Villebrumeuse, and the public conveyance
was supported by the force of tradition rather than any great profit
attaching to it as a speculation.

My lady had not spoken during the journey, except to decline some
refreshments which Robert had offered her at a halting place upon the
road. Her heart sunk when they left Brussels behind, for she had hoped
that city might have been the end of her journey, and she had turned
with a feeling of sickness and despair from the dull Belgian landscape.

She looked up at last as the vehicle jolted into a great stony
quadrangle, which had been the approach to a monastery once, but which
was now the court yard of a dismal hotel, in whose cellars legions of
rats skirmished and squeaked even while the broad sunshine was bright in
the chambers above.

Lady Audley shuddered as she alighted from the diligence, and found
herself in that dreary court yard. Robert was surrounded by chattering
porters, who clamored for his "baggages," and disputed among themselves
as to the hotel at which he was to rest. One of these men ran away to
fetch a hackney-coach at Mr. Audley's behest, and reappeared presently,
urging on a pair of horses--which were so small as to suggest the idea
that they had been made out of one ordinary-sized animal--with wild
shrieks and whoops that had a demoniac sound in the darkness.

Mr. Audley left my lady in a dreary coffee-room in the care of a drowsy
attendant while he drove away to some distant part of the quiet city.
There was official business to be gone through before Sir Michael's wife
could be quietly put away in the place suggested by Dr. Mosgrave. Robert
had to see all manner of important personages; and to take numerous
oaths; and to exhibit the English physician's letter; and to go through
much ceremony of signing and countersigning before he could take his
lost friend's cruel wife to the home which was to be her last upon
earth. Upward of two hours elapsed before all this was arranged, and the
young man was free to return to the hotel, where he found his charge
staring absently at a pair of wax-candles, with a cup of untasted coffee
standing cold and stagnant before her.

Robert handed my lady into the hired vehicle, and took his seat opposite
to her once more.

"Where are you going to take me?" she asked, at last. "I am tired of
being treated like some naughty child, who is put into a dark cellar as
a punishment for its offenses. Where are you taking me?"

"To a place in which you will have ample leisure to repent the past,
Mrs. Talboys," Robert answered, gravely.

They had left the paved streets behind them, and had emerged out of a
great gaunt square, in which there appeared to be about half a dozen
cathedrals, into a small boulevard, a broad lamp-lit road, on which the
shadows of the leafless branches went and came tremblingly, like the
shadows of a paralytic skeleton. There were houses here and there upon
this boulevard; stately houses, _entre cour et jardin_, and with plaster
vases of geraniums on the stone pillars of the ponderous gateways. The
rumbling hackney-carriage drove upward of three-quarters of a mile along
this smooth roadway before it drew up against a gateway, older and more
ponderous than any of those they had passed.

My lady gave a little scream as she looked out of the coach-window. The
gaunt gateway was lighted by an enormous lamp; a great structure of iron
and glass, in which one poor little shivering flame struggled with the
March wind.

The coachman rang the bell, and a little wooden door at the side of the
gate was opened by a gray-haired man, who looked out at the carriage,
and then retired. He reappeared three minutes afterward behind the
folding iron gates, which he unlocked and threw back to their full
extent, revealing a dreary desert of stone-paved courtyard.

The coachman led his wretched horses into the courtyard, and piloted the
vehicle to the principal doorway of the house, a great mansion of gray
stone, with several long ranges of windows, many of which were dimly
lighted, and looked out like the pale eyes of weary watchers upon the
darkness of the night.

My lady, watchful and quiet as the cold stars in the wintry sky, looked
up at these casements with an earnest and scrutinizing gaze. One of the
windows was shrouded by a scanty curtain of faded red; and upon this
curtain there went and came a dark shadow, the shadow of a woman with a
fantastic head dress, the shadow of a restless creature, who paced
perpetually backward and forward before the window.

Sir Michael Audley's wicked wife laid her hand suddenly upon Robert's
arm, and pointed with the other hand to this curtained window.

"I know where you have brought me," she said. "This is a MAD-HOUSE."

Mr. Audley did not answer her. He had been standing at the door of the
coach when she addressed him, and he quietly assisted her to alight, and
led her up a couple of shallow stone steps, and into the entrance-hall
of the mansion. He handed Dr. Mosgrave's letter to a neatly-dressed,
cheerful-looking, middle-aged woman, who came tripping out of a little
chamber which opened out of the hall, and was very much like the bureau
of an hotel. This person smilingly welcome Robert and his charge: and
after dispatching a servant with the letter, invited them into her
pleasant little apartment, which was gayly furnished with bright amber
curtains and heated by a tiny stove.

"Madam finds herself very much fatigued?" the Frenchwoman said,
interrogatively, with a look of intense sympathy, as she placed an
arm-chair for my lady.

"Madam" shrugged her shoulders wearily, and looked round the little
chamber with a sharp glance of scrutiny that betokened no very great
favor.

"WHAT is this place, Robert Audley?" she cried fiercely. "Do you think I
am a baby, that you may juggle with and deceive me--what is it? It is
what I said just now, is it not?"

"It is a _maison de sante_, my lady," the young man answered, gravely.
"I have no wish to juggle with or to deceive you."

My lady paused for a few moments, looking reflectively at Robert.

"A _maison de sante_," she repeated. "Yes, they manage these things
better in France. In England we should call it a madhouse. This a house
for mad people, this, is it not, madam?" she said in French, turning
upon the woman, and tapping the polished floor with her foot.

"Ah, but no, madam," the woman answered with a shrill scream of protest.
"It is an establishment of the most agreeable, where one amuses one's
self--"

She was interrupted by the entrance of the principal of this agreeable
establishment, who came beaming into the room with a radiant smile
illuminating his countenance, and with Dr. Mosgrave's letter open in his
hand.

It was impossible to say _how_ enchanted he was to make the acquaintance
of M'sieu. There was nothing upon earth which he was not ready to do for
M'sieu in his own person, and nothing under heaven which he would not
strive to accomplish for him, as the friend of his acquaintance, so very
much distinguished, the English doctor. Dr. Mosgrave's letter had given
him a brief synopsis of the case, he informed Robert, in an undertone,
and he was quite prepared to undertake the care of the charming and very
interesting "Madam--Madam--"

He rubbed his hands politely, and looked at Robert. Mr. Audley
remembered, for the first time, that he had been recommended to
introduce his wretched charge under a feigned name.

He affected not to hear the proprietor's question. It might seem a very
easy matter to have hit upon a heap of names, any one of which would
have answered his purpose; but Mr. Audley appeared suddenly to have
forgotten that he had ever heard any mortal appellation except that of
himself and of his lost friend.

Perhaps the proprietor perceived and understood his embarrassment. He at
any rate relieved it by turning to the woman who had received them, and
muttering something about No. 14, Bis. The woman took a key from a long
range of others, that hung over the mantel-piece, and a wax candle from
a bracket in a corner of the room, and having lighted the candle, led
the way across the stone-paved hall, and up a broad, slippery staircase
of polished wood.

The English physician had informed his Belgian colleague that money
would be of minor consequence in any arrangements made for the comfort
of the English lady who was to be committed to his care. Acting upon
this hint, Monsieur Val opened the outer doer of a stately suite of
apartments, which included a lobby, paved with alternate diamonds of
black and white marble, but of a dismal and cellar-like darkness; a
saloon furnished with gloomy velvet draperies, and with a certain
funereal splendor which is not peculiarly conducive to the elevation of
the spirits; and a bed-chamber, containing a bed so wondrously made, as
to appear to have no opening whatever in its coverings, unless the
counterpane had been split asunder with a pen-knife.

My lady stared dismally round at the range of rooms, which looked dreary
enough in the wan light of a single wax-candle. This solitary flame,
pale and ghost-like in itself, was multiplied by paler phantoms of its
ghostliness, which glimmered everywhere about the rooms; in the shadowy
depths of the polished floors and wainscot, or the window-panes, in the
looking-glasses, or in those great expanses of glimmering something
which adorned the rooms, and which my lady mistook for costly mirrors,
but which were in reality wretched mockeries of burnished tin.

Amid all the faded splendor of shabby velvet, and tarnished gilding, and
polished wood, the woman dropped into an arm-chair, and covered her face
with her hands. The whiteness of them, and the starry light of diamonds
trembling about them, glittered in the dimly-lighted chamber. She sat
silent, motionless, despairing, sullen, and angry, while Robert and the
French doctor retired to an outer chamber, and talked together in
undertones. Mr. Audley had very little to say that had not been already
said for him, with a far better grace than he himself could have
expressed it, by the English physician. He had, after great trouble of
mind, hit upon the name of Taylor, as a safe and simple substitute for
that other name, to which alone my lady had a right. He told the
Frenchman that this Mrs. Taylor was distantly related to him--that she
had inherited the seeds of madness from her mother, as indeed Dr.
Mosgrave had informed Monsieur Val; and that she had shown some fearful
tokens of the lurking taint that was latent in her mind; but that she
was not to be called "mad." He begged that she might be treated with all
tenderness and compassion; that she might receive all reasonable
indulgences; but he impressed upon Monsieur Val, that under no
circumstances was she to be permitted to leave the house and grounds
without the protection of some reliable person, who should be answerable
for her safe-keeping. He had only one other point to urge, and that was,
that Monsieur Val, who, as he had understood, was himself a
Protestant--the doctor bowed--would make arrangements with some kind and
benevolent Protestant clergyman, through whom spiritual advice and
consolation might be secured for the invalid lady; who had especial
need, Robert added, gravely, of such advantages.

This--with all necessary arrangements as to pecuniary matters, which
were to be settled from time to time between Mr. Audley and the doctor,
unassisted by any agents whatever--was the extent of the conversation
between the two men, and occupied about a quarter of an hour.

My lady sat in the same attitude when they re-entered the bedchamber in
which they had left her, with her ringed hands still clasped over her
face.

Robert bent over to whisper in her ear.

"Your name is Madam Taylor here," he said. "I do not think you would
wish to be known by your real name."

She only shook her head in answer to him, and did not even remove her
hands from over her face.

"Madam will have an attendant entirely devoted to her service." said
Monsieur Val. "Madam will have all her wishes obeyed; her _reasonable_
wishes, but that goes without saying," monsieur adds, with a quaint
shrug. "Every effort will be made to render madam's sojourn at
Villebrumeuse agreeable. The inmates dine together when it is wished. I
dine with the inmates sometimes; my subordinate, a clever and a worthy
man always. I reside with my wife and children in a little pavilion in
the grounds; my subordinate resides in the establishment. Madam may rely
upon our utmost efforts being exerted to insure her comfort."

Monsieur is saying a great deal more to the same effect, rubbing his
hands and beaming radiantly upon Robert and his charge, when madam rises
suddenly, erect and furious, and dropping her jeweled fingers from
before her face, tells him to hold his tongue.

"Leave me alone with the man who has brought me here." she cried,
between her set teeth. "Leave me!"

She points to the door with a sharp, imperious gesture; so rapid that
the silken drapery about her arm makes a swooping sound as she lifts her
hand. The sibilant French syllables hiss through her teeth as she utters
them, and seem better fitted to her mood and to herself than the
familiar English she has spoken hitherto.

The French doctor shrugs his shoulders as he goes out into the lobby,
and mutters something about a "beautiful devil," and a gesture worthy of
"the Mars." My lady walked with a rapid footstep to the door between the
bed-chamber and the saloon; closed it, and with the handle of the door
still in her hand, turned and looked at Robert Audley.

"You have brought me to my grave, Mr. Audley," she cried; "you have used
your power basely and cruelly, and have brought me to a living grave."

"I have done that which I thought just to others and merciful to you,"
Robert answered, quietly. "I should have been a traitor to society had I
suffered you to remain at liberty after--the disappearance of George
Talboys and the fire at Castle Inn. I have brought you to a place in
which you will be kindly treated by people who have no knowledge of your
story--no power to taunt or to reproach you. You will lead a quiet and
peaceful life, my lady; such a life as many a good and holy woman in
this Catholic country freely takes upon herself, and happily endures
until the end. The solitude of your existence in this place will be no
greater than that of a king's daughter, who, flying from the evil of the
time, was glad to take shelter in a house as tranquil as this. Surely,
it is a small atonement which I ask you to render for your sins, a light
penance which I call upon you to perform. Live here and repent; nobody
will assail you, nobody will torment you. I only say to you, repent!"

"I _cannot!_" cried my lady, pushing her hair fiercely from her white
forehead, and fixing her dilated eyes upon Robert Audley, "I _cannot!_
Has my beauty brought me to _this_? Have I plotted and schemed to shield
myself and laid awake in the long deadly nights, trembling to think of
my dangers, for _this_? I had better have given up at once, since _this_
was to be the end. I had better have yielded to the curse that was upon
me, and given up when George Talboys first came back to England."

She plucked at the feathery golden curls as if she would have torn them
from her head. It had served her so little after all, that gloriously
glittering hair, that beautiful nimbus of yellow light that had
contrasted so exquisitely with the melting azure of her eyes. She hated
herself and her beauty.

"I would laugh at you and defy you, if I dared," she cried; "I would
kill myself and defy you, if I dared. But I am a poor, pitiful coward,
and have been so from the first. Afraid of my mother's horrible
inheritance; afraid of poverty; afraid of George Talboys; afraid of
_you_."

She was silent for a little while, but she held her place by the door,
as if determined to detain Robert as long as it was her pleasure to do
so.

"Do you know what I am thinking of?" she said, presently. "Do you know
what I am thinking of, as I look at you in the dim light of this room? I
am thinking of the day upon which George Talboys disappeared."

Robert started as she mentioned the name of his lost friend; his face
turned pale in the dusky light, and his breathing grew quicker and
louder.

"He was standing opposite me, as you are standing now," continued my
lady. "You said that you would raze the old house to the ground; that
you would root up every tree in the gardens to find your dead friend.
You would have had no need to do so much: the body of George Talboys
lies at the bottom of the old well, in the shrubbery beyond the
lime-walk."

Robert Audley flung his hands and clasped them above his head, with one
loud cry of horror.

"Oh, my God!" he said, after a dreadful pause; "have all the ghastly
things that I have thought prepared me so little for the ghastly truth,
that it should come upon me like this at last?"

"He came to me in the lime-walk," resumed my lady, in the same hard,
dogged tone as that in which she had confessed the wicked story of her
life. "I knew that he would come, and I had prepared myself, as well as
I could, to meet him. I was determined to bribe him, to cajole him, to
defy him; to do anything sooner than abandon the wealth and the position
I had won, and go back to my old life. He came, and he reproached me for
the conspiracy at Ventnor. He declared that so long as he lived he would
never forgive me for the lie that had broken his heart. He told me that
I had plucked his heart out of his breast and trampled upon it; and that
he had now no heart in which to feel one sentiment of mercy for me. That
he would have forgiven me any wrong upon earth, but that one deliberate
and passionless wrong that I had done him. He said this and a great deal
more, and he told me that no power on earth should turn him from his
purpose, which was to take me to the man I had deceived, and make me
tell my wicked story. He did not know the hidden taint that I had sucked
in with my mother's milk. He did not know that it was possible to drive
me mad. He goaded me as you have goaded me; he was as merciless as you
have been merciless. We were in the shrubbery at the end of the
lime-walk. I was seated upon the broken masonry at the mouth of the
well. George Talboys was leaning upon the disused windlass, in which the
rusty iron spindle rattled loosely whenever he shifted his position. I
rose at last, and turned upon him to defy him, as I had determined to
defy him at the worst. I told him that if he denounced me to Sir
Michael, I would declare him to be a madman or a liar, and I defied him
to convince the man who loved me--blindly, as I told him--that he had
any claim to me. I was going to leave him after having told him this,
when he caught me by the wrist and detained me by force. You saw the
bruises that his fingers made upon my wrist, and noticed them, and did
not believe the account I gave of them. I could see that, Mr. Robert
Audley, and I saw that you were a person I should have to fear."

She paused, as if she had expected Robert to speak; but he stood silent
and motionless, waiting for the end.

"George Talboys treated me as you treated me," she said, petulantly. "He
swore that if there was but one witness of my identity, and that witness
was removed from Audley Court by the width of the whole earth, he would
bring him there to swear to my identity, and to denounce me. It was then
that I was mad, it was then that I drew the loose iron spindle from the
shrunken wood, and saw my first husband sink with one horrible cry into
the black mouth of the well. There is a legend of its enormous depth. I
do not know how deep it is. It is dry, I suppose, for I heard no splash,
only a dull thud. I looked down and I saw nothing but black emptiness. I
knelt down and listened, but the cry was not repeated, though I waited
for nearly a quarter of an hour--God knows how long it seemed to me!--by
the mouth of the well."

Robert Audley uttered a word of horror when the story was finished. He
moved a little nearer toward the door against which Helen Talboys stood.
Had there been any other means of exit from the room, he would gladly
have availed himself of it. He shrank from even a momentary contact with
this creature.

"Let me pass you, if you please," he said, in an icy voice.

"You see I do not fear to make my confession to you," said Helen
Talboys; "for two reasons. The first is, that you dare not use it
against me, because you know it would kill your uncle to see me in a
criminal dock; the second is, that the law could pronounce no worse
sentence than this--a life-long imprisonment in a mad-house. You see I
do not thank you for your mercy, Mr. Robert Audley, for I know exactly
what it is worth."

She moved away from the door, and Robert passed her without a word,
without a look.

Half an hour afterward he was in one of the principal hotels at
Villebrumeuse, sitting at a neatly-ordered supper-table, with no power
to eat; with no power to distract his mind, even for a moment, from the
image of that lost friend who had been treacherously murdered in the
thicket at Audley Court.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

GHOST-HAUNTED.


No feverish sleeper traveling in a strange dream ever looked out more
wonderingly upon a world that seemed unreal than Robert Audley, as he
stared absently at the flat swamps and dismal poplars between
Villebrumeuse and Brussels. Could it be that he was returning to his
uncle's house without the woman who had reigned in it for nearly two
years as queen and mistress? He felt as if he had carried off my lady,
and had made away with her secretly and darkly, and must now render up
an account to Sir Michael of the fate of that woman, whom the baronet
had so dearly loved.

"What shall I tell him?" he thought. "Shall I tell the truth--the
horrible, ghastly truth? No; that would be too cruel. His generous
spirit would sink under the hideous revelation. Yet, in his ignorance of
the extent of this wretched woman's wickedness, he may think, perhaps,
that I have been hard with her."

Brooding thus, Mr. Robert Audley absently watched the cheerless
landscape from the seat in the shabby _coupe_ of the diligence, and
thought how great a leaf had been torn out of his life, now that the
dark story of George Talboys was finished.

What had he to do next? A crowd of horrible thoughts rushed into his
mind as he remembered the story that he had heard from the white lips of
Helen Talboys. His friend--his murdered friend--lay hidden among the
moldering ruins of the old well at Audley Court. He had lain there for
six long months, unburied, unknown; hidden in the darkness of the old
convent well. What was to be done?

To institute a search for the remains of the murdered man was to
inevitably bring about a coroner's inquest. Should such an inquest be
held, it was next to impossible that the history of my lady's crime
could fail to be brought to light. To prove that George Talboys met with
his death at Audley Court, was to prove almost as surely that my lady
had been the instrument of that mysterious death; for the young man had
been known to follow her into the lime-walk upon the day of his
disappearance.

"My God!" Robert exclaimed, as the full horror of his position became
evident to him; "is my friend to rest in this unhallowed burial-place
because I have condoned the offenses of the woman who murdered him?"

He felt that there was no way out of this difficulty. Sometimes he
thought that it little mattered to his dead friend whether he lay
entombed beneath a marble monument, whose workmanship should be the
wonder of the universe, or in that obscure hiding-place in the thicket
at Audley Court. At another time he would be seized with a sudden horror
at the wrong that had been done to the murdered man, and would fain have
traveled even more rapidly than the express between Brussels and Paris
could carry him in his eagerness to reach the end of his journey, that
he might set right this cruel wrong.

He was in London at dusk on the second day after that on which he had
left Audley Court, and he drove straight to the Clarendon, to inquire
after his uncle. He had no intention of seeing Sir Michael, as he had
not yet determined how much or how little he should tell him, but he was
very anxious to ascertain how the old man had sustained the cruel shock
he had so lately endured.

"I will see Alicia," he thought, "she will tell me all about her father.
It is only two days since he left Audley. I can scarcely expect to hear
of any favorable change."

But Mr. Audley was not destined to see his cousin that evening, for the
servants at the Clarendon told him that Sir Michael and his daughter had
left by the morning mail for Paris, on their way to Vienna.

Robert was very well pleased to receive this intelligence; it afforded
him a welcome respite, for it would be decidedly better to tell the
baronet nothing of his guilty wife until he returned to England, with
health unimpaired and spirits re-established, it was to be hoped.

Mr. Audley drove to the Temple. The chambers which had seemed dreary to
him ever since the disappearance of George Talboys, were doubly so
to-night. For that which had been only a dark suspicion had now become a
horrible certainty. There was no longer room for the palest ray, the
most transitory glimmer of hope. His worst terrors had been too well
founded.

George Talboys had been cruelly and treacherously murdered by the wife
he had loved and mourned.

There were three letters waiting for Mr. Audley at his chambers. One was
from Sir Michael, and another from Alicia. The third was addressed in a
hand the young barrister knew only too well, though he had seen it but
once before. His face flushed redly at the sight of the superscription,
and he took the letter in his hand, carefully and tenderly, as if it had
been a living thing, and sentient to his touch. He turned it over and
over in his hands, looking at the crest upon the envelope, at the
post-mark, at the color of the paper, and then put it into the bosom of
his waistcoat with a strange smile upon his face.

"What a wretched and unconscionable fool I am!" he thought. "Have I
laughed at the follies of weak men all my life, and am I to be more
foolish than the weakest of them at last? The beautiful brown-eyed
creature! Why did I ever see her? Why did my relentless Nemesis ever
point the way to that dreary house in Dorsetshire?"

He opened the first two letters. He was foolish enough to keep the last
for a delicious morsel--a fairy-like dessert after the commonplace
substantialities of a dinner.

Alicia's letter told him that Sir Michael had borne his agony with such
a persevering tranquility that she had become at last far more alarmed
by his patient calmness than by any stormy manifestation of despair. In
this difficulty she had secretly called upon the physician who attended
the Audley household in any cases of serious illness, and had requested
this gentleman to pay Sir Michael an apparently accidental visit. He had
done so, and after stopping half an hour with the baronet, had told
Alicia that there was no present danger of any serious consequence from
this great grief, but that it was necessary that every effort should be
made to arouse Sir Michael, and to force him, however unwillingly, into
action.

Alicia had immediately acted upon this advice, had resumed her old
empire as a spoiled child, and reminded her father of a promise he had
made of taking her through Germany. With considerable difficulty she had
induced him to consent to fulfilling this old promise, and having once
gained her point, she had contrived that they should leave England as
soon as it was possible to do so, and she told Robert, in conclusion,
that she would not bring her father back to his old house until she had
taught him to forget the sorrows associated with it.

The baronet's letter was very brief. It contained half a dozen blank
checks on Sir Michael Audley's London bankers.

"You will require money, my dear Robert," he wrote, "for such
arrangements as you may think fit to make for the future comfort of the
person I committed to your care. I need scarcely tell you that those
arrangements cannot be too liberal. But perhaps it is as well that I
should tell you now, for the first and only time, that it is my earnest
wish never again to hear that person's name. I have no wish to be told
the nature of the arrangements you may make for her. I am sure that you
will act conscientiously and mercifully. I seek to know no more.
Whenever you want money, you will draw upon me for any sums that you may
require; but you will have no occasion to tell me for whose use you want
that money."

Robert Audley breathed a long sigh of relief as he folded this letter.
It released him from a duty which it would have been most painful for
him to perform, and it forever decided his course of action with regard
to the murdered man.

George Talboys must lie at peace in his unknown grave, and Sir Michael
Audley must never learn that the woman he had loved bore the red brand
of murder on her soul.

Robert had only the third letter to open--the letter which he had placed
in his bosom while he read the others; he tore open the envelope,
handling it carefully and tenderly as he had done before.

The letter was as brief as Sir Michael's. It contained only these few
lines:

"DEAR MR. AUDLEY--The rector of this place has been twice to see Marks,
the man you saved in the fire at the Castle Inn. He lies in a very
precarious state at his mother's cottage, near Audley Court, and is not
expected to live many days. His wife is attending him, and both he and
she have expressed a most earnest desire that you should see him before
he dies. Pray come without delay.

"Yours very sincerely,

"CLARA TALBOYS.

"Mount Stanning Rectory, March 6."

Robert Audley folded this letter very reverently, and placed it
underneath that part of his waistcoat which might be supposed to cover
the region of his heart. Having done this, he seated himself in his
favorite arm-chair, filled and lighted a pipe and smoked it out, staring
reflectingly at the fire as long as his tobacco lasted. "What can that
man Marks want with me," thought the barrister. "He is afraid to die
until he has made confession, perhaps. He wishes to tell me that which I
know already--the story of my lady's crime. I knew that he was in the
secret. I was sure of it even upon the night on which I first saw him.
He knew the secret, and he traded on it."

Robert Audley shrank strangely from returning to Essex. How should he
meet Clara Talboys now that he knew the secret of her brother's fate?
How many lies he should have to tell, or how much equivocation he must
use in order to keep the truth from her? Yet would there be any mercy in
telling that horrible story, the knowledge of which must cast a blight
upon her youth, and blot out every hope she had even secretly cherished?
He knew by his own experience how possible it was to hope against hope,
and to hope unconsciously; and he could not bear that her heart should
be crushed as his had been by the knowledge of the truth. "Better that
she should hope vainly to the last," he thought; "better that she should
go through life seeking the clew to her lost brother's fate, than that I
should give that clew into her hands, and say, 'Our worst fears are
realized. The brother you loved has been foully murdered in the early
promise of his youth.'"

But Clara Talboys had written to him, imploring him to return to Essex
without delay. Could he refuse to do her bidding, however painful its
accomplishment might be? And again, the man was dying, perhaps, and had
implored to see him. Would it not be cruel to refuse to go--to delay an
hour unnecessarily? He looked at his watch. It wanted only five minutes
to nine. There was no train to Audley after the Ipswich mail, which left
London at half-past eight; but there was a train that left Shoreditch at
eleven, and stopped at Brentwood between twelve and one. Robert decided
upon going by this train, and walking the distance between Brentwood and
Audley, which was upwards of six miles.

He had a long time to wait before it would be necessary to leave the
Temple on his way to Shoreditch, and he sat brooding darkly over the
fire and wondering at the strange events which had filled his life
within the last year and a half, coming like angry shadows between his
lazy inclinations and himself, and investing him with purposes that were
not his own.

"Good Heaven!" he thought, as he smoked his second pipe; "how can I
believe that it was I who used to lounge all day in this easy-chair
reading Paul de Kock, and smoking mild Turkish; who used to drop in at
half price to stand among the pressmen at the back of the boxes and see
a new burlesque and finish the evening with the 'Chough and Crow,' and
chops and pale ale at 'Evans'. Was it I to whom life was such an easy
merry-go-round? Was it I who was one of the boys who sit at ease upon
the wooden horses, while other boys run barefoot in the mud and work
their hardest in the hope of a ride when their work is done? Heaven
knows I have learned the business of life since then: and now I must
needs fall in love and swell the tragic chorus which is always being
sung by the poor addition of my pitiful sighs and, groans. Clara
Talboys! Clara Talboys! Is there any merciful smile latent beneath the
earnest light of your brown eyes? What would you say to me if I told you
that I love you as earnestly and truly as I have mourned for your
brother's fate--that the new strength and purpose of my life, which has
grown out of my friendship for the murdered man, grows even stronger as
it turns to you, and changes me until I wonder at myself? What would she
say to me? Ah! Heaven knows. If she happened to like the color of my
hair or the tone of my voice, she might listen to me, perhaps. But would
she hear me any more because I love her truly, and purely; because I
would be constant and honest and faithful to her? Not she! These things
might move her, perhaps to be a little pitiful to me; but they would
move her no more! If a girl with freckles and white eylashes adored me,
I should only think her a nuisance; but if Clara Talboys had a fancy to
trample upon my uncouth person, I should think she did me a favor. I
hope poor little Alicia may pick up with some fair-haired Saxon in the
course of her travels. I hope--" His thoughts wandered away wearily and
lost themselves. How could he hope for anything or think of anything,
while the memory of his dead friend's unburied body haunted him like a
horrible specter? He remembered a story--a morbid, hideous, yet
delicious story, which had once pleasantly congealed his blood on a
social winter's evening--the story of a man, monomaniac, perhaps, who
had been haunted at every turn by the image of an unburied kinsman who
could not rest in his unhallowed hiding-place. What if that dreadful
story had its double in reality? What if he were henceforth to be
haunted by the phantom of murdered George Talboys?

He pushed his hair away from his face with both hands, and looked rather
nervously around the snug little apartment. There were lurking shadows
in the corners of the room that he scarcely liked. The door opening into
his little dressing-room was ajar; he got up to shut it, and turned the
key in the lock with a sharp click.

"I haven't read Alexander Dumas and Wilkie Collins for nothing," he
muttered. "I'm up to their tricks, sneaking in at doors behind a
fellow's back, and flattening their white faces against window panes,
and making themselves all eyes in the twilight. It's a strange thing
that your generous hearted fellow, who never did a shabby thing in his
life, is capable of any meanness the moment he becomes a ghost. I'll
have the gas laid on to-morrow and I'll engage Mrs. Maloney's eldest son
to sleep under the letter-box in the lobby. The youth plays popular
melodies upon a piece of tissue paper and a small-tooth comb, and it
will be quite pleasant company."

Mr. Audley walked wearily up and down the room, trying to get rid of the
time. It was no use leaving the Temple until ten o'clock, and even then
he would be sure to reach the station half an hour too early. He was
tired of smoking. The soothing narcotic influence might be pleasant
enough in itself, but the man must be of a singularly unsocial
disposition who does not, after a half dozen lonely pipes, feel the need
of some friendly companion, at whom he can stare dreamily athwart the
pale gray mists, and who will stare kindly back at him in return. Do not
think that Robert Audley was without friends, because he so often found
himself alone in his chambers. The solemn purpose which had taken so
powerful a hold upon his careless life had separated him from old
associations, and it was for this reason that he was alone.

He had dropped away from his old friends. How could he sit among them,
at social wine parties, perhaps, or at social little dinners, that were
washed down with nonpareil and chambertin, pomard and champagne? How
could he sit among them, listening to their careless talk of politics
and opera, literature and racing, theaters and science, scandal and
theology, and yet carry in his mind the horrible burden of those dark
terrors and suspicions that were with him by day and by night? He could
not do it! He had shrunk from those men as if he had, indeed, been a
detective police officer, stained with vile associations and unfit
company for honest gentlemen. He had drawn himself away from all
familiar haunts, and shut himself in his lonely rooms with the perpetual
trouble of his mind for his sole companion, until he had grown as
nervous as habitual solitude will eventually make the strongest and the
wisest man, however he may vaunt himself of his strength and wisdom.

The clock of the Temple Church, and the clocks of St. Dunstan's, St.
Clement's Danes, and a crowd of other churches, whose steeples uprear
themselves above the house tops by the river, struck ten at last, and
Mr. Audley, who had put on his hat and overcoat nearly half an hour
before, let himself out of the little lobby, and locked his door behind
him. He mentally reiterated his determination to engage "Parthrick," as
Mrs. Maloney's eldest son was called by his devoted mother. The youth
should enter upon his functions the very night after, and if the ghost
of the hapless George Talboys should invade these gloomy apartments, the
phantom must make its way across Patrick's body before it could reach
the inner chamber in which the proprietor of the premises slept.

Do not laugh at poor George because he grew hypochondriacal after
hearing the horrible story of his friend's death. There is nothing so
delicate, so fragile, as that invisible balance upon which the mind is
always trembling. "Mad to-day and sane to-morrow."

Who can forget that almost terrible picture of Dr. Samuel Johnson? The
awful disputant of the club-room, solemn, ponderous, severe and
merciless, the admiration and the terror of humble Bozzy, the stern
monitor of gentle Oliver, the friend of Garrick and Reynolds to-night;
and before to-morrow sunset a weak, miserable old man, discovered by
good Mr. and Mrs. Thrale, kneeling upon the floor of his lonely chamber,
in an agony of childish terror and confusion, and praying to a merciful
God for the preservation of his wits. I think the memory of that
dreadful afternoon, and of the tender care he then received, should have
taught the doctor to keep his hand steady at Streatham, when he took his
bedroom candlestick, from which it was his habit to shower rivulets of
molten wax upon the costly carpet of his beautiful protectress; and
might have even had a more enduring effect, and taught him to be
merciful, when the brewer's widow went mad in her turn, and married that
dreadful creature, the Italian singer. Who has not been, or in not to be
mad in some lonely hour of life? Who is quite safe from the trembling of
the balance?

Fleet street was quiet and lonely at this late hour, and Robert Audley
being in a ghost-seeing mood, would have been scarcely astonished had he
seen Johnson's set come roystering westward in the lamp-light, or blind
John Milton groping his way down the steps before Saint Bride's Church.

Mr. Audley hailed a hansom at the corner of Farrington street, and was
rattled rapidly away across tenantless Smithfield market, and into a
labyrinth of dingy streets that brought him out upon the broad grandeur
of Finsbury Pavement.

The hansom rattled up the steep and stony approach to Shoreditch
Station, and deposited Robert at the doors of that unlovely temple.
There were very few people going to travel by this midnight train, and
Robert walked up and down the long wooden platform, reading the huge
advertisements whose gaunt lettering looked wan and ghastly in the dim
lamplight.

He had the carriage in which he sat all to himself. All to himself did I
say? Had he not lately summoned to his side that ghostly company which
of all companionship is the most tenacious? The shadow of George Talboys
pursued him, even in the comfortable first-class carriage, and was
behind him when he looked out of the window, and was yet far ahead of
him and the rushing engine, in that thicket toward which the train was
speeding, by the side of the unhallowed hiding-place in which the mortal
remains of the dead man lay, neglected and uncared for.

"I must give my lost friend decent burial," Robert thought, as the chill
wind swept across the flat landscape, and struck him with such frozen
breath as might have emanated from the lips of the dead. "I must do it;
or I shall die of some panic like this which has seized upon me
to-night. I must do it; at any peril; at any cost. Even at the price of
that revelation which will bring the mad woman back from her safe
hiding-place, and place her in a criminal dock." He was glad when the
train stopped at Brentwood at a few minutes after twelve.

It was half-past one o'clock when the night wanderer entered the village
of Audley, and it was only there that he remembered that Clara Talboys
had omitted to give him any direction by which he might find the cottage
in which Luke Marks lay.

"It was Dawson who recommended that the poor creature should be taken to
his mother's cottage," Robert thought, by-and-by, "and, I dare say.
Dawson has attended him ever since the fire. He'll be able to tell me
the way to the cottage."

Acting upon this idea, Mr. Audley stopped at the house in which Helen
Talboys had lived before her second marriage. The door of the little
surgery was ajar, and there was a light burning within. Robert pushed
the door open and peeped in. The surgeon was standing at the mahogany
counter, mixing a draught in a glass measure, with his hat close beside
him. Late as it was, he had evidently only just come in. The harmonious
snoring of his assistant sounded from a little room within the surgery.

"I am sorry to disturb you, Mr. Dawson," Robert said, apologetically, as
the surgeon looked up and recognized him, "but I have come down to see
Marks, who, I hear, is in a very bad way, and I want you to tell me the
way to his mother's cottage."

"I'll show you the way, Mr. Audley," answered the surgeon, "I am going
there this minute."

"The man is very bad, then?"

"So bad that he can be no worse. The change that can happen is that
change which will take him beyond the reach of any earthly suffering."

"Strange!" exclaimed Robert. "He did not appear to be much burned."

"He was not much burnt. Had he been, I should never have recommended his
being removed from Mount Stanning. It is the shock that has done the
business. He has been in a raging fever for the last two days; but
to-night he is much calmer, and I'm afraid, before to-morrow night, we
shall have seen the last of him."

"He has asked to see me, I am told," said Mr. Audley.

"Yes," answered the surgeon, carelessly. "A sick man's fancy, no doubt.
You dragged him out of the house, and did your best to save his life. I
dare say, rough and boorish as the poor fellow is, he thinks a good deal
of that."

They had left the surgery, the door of which Mr. Dawson had locked
behind him. There was money in the till, perhaps, for surely the village
apothecary could not have feared that the most daring housebreaker would
imperil his liberty in the pursuit of blue pill and colocynth, of salts
and senna.

The surgeon led the way along the silent street, and presently turned
into a lane at the end of which Robert Audley saw the wan glimmer of a
light; a light which told of the watch that is kept by the sick and
dying; a pale, melancholy light, which always has a dismal aspect when
looked upon in this silent hour betwixt night and morning. It shone from
the window of the cottage in which Luke Marks lay, watched by his wife
and mother.

Mr. Dawson lifted the latch, and walked into the common room of the
little tenement, followed by Robert Audley. It was empty, but a feeble
tallow candle, with a broken back, and a long, cauliflower-headed wick,
sputtered upon the table. The sick man lay in the room above.

"Shall I tell him you are here?" asked Mr. Dawson.

"Yes, yes, if you please. But be cautious how you tell him, if you think
the news likely to agitate him. I am in no hurry. I can wait. You can
call me when you think I can safely come up-stairs."

The surgeon nodded, and softly ascended the narrow wooden stairs leading
to the upper chamber.

Robert Audley seated himself in a Windsor chair by the cold
hearth-stone, and stared disconsolately about him. But he was relieved
at last by the low voice of the surgeon, who looked down from the top of
the little staircase to tell him that Luke Marks was awake, and would be
glad to see him.

Robert immediately obeyed this summons. He crept softly up the stairs,
and took off his hat before he bent his head to enter at the low doorway
of the humble rustic chamber. He took off his hat in the presence of
this common peasant man, because he knew that there was another and a
more awful presence hovering about the room, and eager to be admitted.

Phoebe Marks was sitting at the foot of the bed, with her eyes fixed
upon her husband's face--not with any very tender expression in the pale
light, but with a sharp, terrified anxiety, which showed that it was the
coming of death itself that she dreaded, rather than the loss of her
husband. The old woman was busy at the fire-place, airing linen, and
preparing some mess of broth which it was not likely the patient would
ever eat. The sick man lay with his head propped up by pillows, his
coarse face deadly pale, and his great hands wandering uneasily about
the coverlet. Phoebe had been reading to him, for an open Testament lay
among the medicine and lotion bottles upon the table near the bed. Every
object in the room was neat and orderly, and bore witness of that
delicate precision which had always been a distinguishing characteristic
of Phoebe.

The young woman rose as Robert Audley crossed the threshold, and hurried
toward him.

"Let me speak to you for a moment, sir, before you talk to Luke," she
said, in an eager whisper. "Pray let me speak to you first."

"What's the gal a-sayin', there?" asked the invalid in a subdued roar,
which died away hoarsely on his lips. He was feebly savage, even in his
weakness. The dull glaze of death was gathering over his eyes, but they
still watched Phoebe with a sharp glance of dissatisfaction. "What's she
up to there?" he said. "I won't have no plottin' and no hatchin' agen
me. I want to speak to Mr. Audley my own self; and whatever I done I'm
goin' to answer for. If I done any mischief, I'm a-goin' to try and undo
it. What's she a-sayin'?"

"She ain't a-sayin' nothin', lovey," answered the old woman, going to
the bedside of her son, who even when made more interesting than usual
by illness, did not seem a very fit subject for this tender appellation.

"She's only a-tellin' the gentleman how bad you've been, my pretty."

"What I'm a-goin' to tell I'm only a-goin' to tell to him, remember,"
growled Mr. Mark; "and ketch me a-tellin' of it to him if it warn't for
what he done for me the other night."

"To be sure not, lovey," answered the old woman soothingly.

Phoebe Marks had drawn Mr. Audley out of the room and onto the narrow
landing at the top of the little staircase. This landing was a platform
of about three feet square, and it was as much as the two could manage
to stand upon it without pushing each other against the whitewashed
wall, or backward down the stairs.

"Oh, sir, I wanted to speak to you so badly," Phoebe answered, eagerly;
"you know what I told you when I found you safe and well upon the night
of the fire?"

"Yes, yes."

"I told you what I suspected; what I think still."

"Yes, I remember."

"But I never breathed a word of it to anybody but you, sir, and I think
that Luke has forgotten all about that night; I think that what went
before the fire has gone clean out of his head altogether. He was tipsy,
you know, when my la--when she came to the Castle; and I think he was so
dazed and scared like by the fire that it all went out of his memory. He
doesn't suspect what I suspect, at any rate, or he'd have spoken of it
to anybody or everybody; but he's dreadful spiteful against my lady, for
he says if she'd have let him have a place at Brentwood or Chelmsford,
this wouldn't have happened. So what I wanted to beg of you, sir, is not
to let a word drop before Luke."

"Yes, yes, I understand; I will be careful."

"My lady has left the Court, I hear, sir?"

"Yes."

"Never to come back, sir?"

"Never to come back."

"But she has not gone where she'll be cruelly treated; where she'll be
ill-used?"

"No: she will be very kindly treated."

"I'm glad of that, sir; I beg your pardon for troubling you with the
question, sir, but my lady was a kind mistress to me."

Luke's voice, husky and feeble, was heard within the little chamber at
this period of the conversation, demanding angrily when "that gal would
have done jawing;" upon which Phoebe put her finger to her lips, and led
Mr. Audley back into the sick-room.

"I don't want _you_" said Mr. Marks, decisively, as his wife re-entered
the chamber--"I don't want _you_; you've no call to hear what I've got
to say--I only want Mr. Audley, and I wants to speak to him all alone,
with none o' your sneakin' listenin' at doors, d'ye hear? so you may go
down-stairs and keep there till you're wanted; and you may take
mother--no, mother may stay, I shall want her presently."

The sick man's feeble hand pointed to the door, through which his wife
departed very submissively.

"I've no wish to hear anything, Luke," she said, "but I hope you won't
say anything against those that have been good and generous to you."

"I shall say what I like," answered Mr. Marks, fiercely, "and I'm not
a-goin' to be ordered by you. You ain't the parson, as I've ever heerd
of; nor the lawyer neither."

The landlord of the Castle Inn had undergone no moral transformation by
his death-bed sufferings, fierce and rapid as they had been. Perhaps
some faint glimmer of a light that had been far off from his life now
struggled feebly through the black obscurities of ignorance that
darkened his soul. Perhaps a half angry, half sullen penitence urged him
to make some rugged effort to atone for a life that had been selfish and
drunken and wicked. Be it how it might he wiped his white lips, and
turning his haggard eyes earnestly upon Robert Audley, pointed to a
chair by the bedside.

"You made game of me in a general way, Mr. Audley," he said, presently,
"and you've drawed me out, and you've tumbled and tossed me about like
in a gentlemanly way, till I was nothink or anythink in your hands; and
you've looked me through and through, and turned me inside out till you
thought you knowed as much as I knowed. I'd no particular call to be
grateful to you, not before the fire at the Castle t'other night. But I
am grateful to you for that. I'm not grateful to folks in a general way,
p'r'aps, because the things as gentlefolks have give have a'most allus
been the very things I didn't want. They've give me soup, and tracks,
and flannel, and coals; but, Lord, they've made such a precious noise
about it that I'd have been to send 'em all back to 'em. But when a
gentleman goes and puts his own life in danger to save a drunken brute
like me, the drunkenest brute as ever was feels grateful like to that
gentleman, and wishes to say before he dies--which he sees in the
doctor's face as he ain't got long to live--'Thank ye, sir, I'm obliged
to you."

Luke Marks stretched out his left hand--the right hand had been injured
by the fire, and was wrapped in linen--and groped feebly for that of Mr.
Robert Audley.

The young man took the coarse but shrunken hand in both his own, and
pressed it cordially.

"I need no thanks, Luke Marks," he said; "I was very glad to be of
service to you."

Mr. Marks did not speak immediately. He was lying quietly upon his side,
staring reflectingly at Robert Audley.

"You was oncommon fond of that gent as disappeared at the Court, warn't
you, sir?" he said at last.

Robert started at the mention of his dead friend.

"You was oncommon fond of that Mr. Talboys, I've heard say, sir,"
repeated Luke.

"Yes, yes," answered Robert, rather impatiently, "he was my very dear
friend."

"I've heard the servants at the Court say how you took on when you
couldn't find him. I've heered the landlord of the Sun Inn say how cut
up you was when you first missed him. 'If the two gents had been
brothers,' the landlord said, 'our gent,' meanin' you, sir, 'couldn't
have been more cut up when he missed the other.'"

"Yes, yes, I know, I know," said Robert; "pray do not speak any more of
this subject. I cannot tell you now much it distresses me."

Was he to be haunted forever by the ghost of his unburied friend? He
came here to comfort the sick man, and even here he was pursued by this
relentless shadow; even here he was reminded of the secret crime which
had darkened his life.

"Listen to me, Marks," he said, earnestly; "believe me that I appreciate
your grateful words, and that I am very glad to have been of service to
you. But before you say anything more, let me make one most solemn
request. If you have sent for me that you may tell me anything of the
fate of my lost friend, I entreat you to spare yourself and to spare me
that horrible story. You can tell me nothing which I do not already
know. The worst you can tell me of the woman who was once in your power,
has already been revealed to me by her own lips. Pray, then, be silent
upon this subject; I say again, you can tell me nothing which I do not
know."

Luke Marks looked musingly at the earnest face of his visitor, and some
shadowy expression, which was almost like a smile, flitted feebly across
the sick man's haggard features.

"I can't tell you nothin' you don't know?" he asked.

"Nothing."

"Then it ain't no good for me to try," said the invalid, thoughtfully.
"Did _she_ tell you?" he asked, after a pause.

"I must beg, Marks, that you will drop the subject," Robert answered,
almost sternly. "I have already told you that I do not wish to hear it
spoken of. Whatever discoveries you made, you made your market out of
them. Whatever guilty secrets you got possession of, you were paid for
keeping silence. You had better keep silence to the end."

"Had I?" cried Luke Marks, in an eager whisper. "Had I really now better
hold my tongue to the last?"

"I think so, most decidedly. You traded on your secret, and you were
paid to keep it. It would be more honest to hold to your bargain, and
keep it still."

"But, suppose I want to tell something," cried Luke, with feverish
energy, "suppose I feel I can't die with a secret on my mind, and have
asked to see you on purpose that I might tell you; suppose that, and
you'll suppose nothing but the truth. I'd have been burnt alive before
I'd have told _her_." He spoke these words between his set teeth, and
scowled savagely as he uttered them. "I'd have been burnt alive first. I
made her pay for her pretty insolent ways; I made her pay for her airs
and graces; I'd never have told her--never, never! I had my power over
her, and I kept it; I had my secret and was paid for it; and there
wasn't a petty slight as she ever put upon me or mine that I didn't pay
her out for twenty times over!"

"Marks, Marks, for Heaven's sake be calm" said Robert, earnestly. "What
are you talking of? What is it that you could have told?"

"I'm a-goin to tell you," answered Luke, wiping his lips. "Give us a
drink, mother."

The old woman poured out some cooling drink into a mug, and carried it
to her son.

He drank it in an eager hurry, as if he felt that the brief remainder of
his life must be a race with the pitiless pedestrian, Time.

"Stop where you are," he said to his mother, pointing to a chair at the
foot of the bed.

The old woman obeyed, and seated herself meekly opposite to Mr. Audley.

"I'll ask you another question, mother," said Luke, "and I think it'll
be strange if you can't answer it. Do you remember when I was at work
upon Atkinson's farm; before I was married you know, and when I was
livin' down here along of you?"

"Yes, yes," Mrs. Marks answered, nodding triumphantly, "I remember that,
my dear. It were last fall, just about as the apples was bein' gathered
in the orchard across our lane, and about the time as you had your new
sprigged wesket. I remember, Luke, I remember."

Mr. Audley wondered where all this was to lead to, and how long he would
have to sit by the sick man's bed, hearing a conversation that had no
meaning to him.

"If you remember that much, maybe you'll remember more, mother," said
Luke. "Can you call to mind my bringing some one home here one night,
while Atkinsons was stackin' the last o' their corn?"

Once more Mr. Audley started violently, and this time he looked up
earnestly at the face of the speaker, and listened, with a strange,
breathless interest, that he scarcely understood himself, to what Luke
Marks was saying.

"I rek'lect your bringing home Phoebe," the old woman answered, with
great animation. "I rek'lect your bringin' Phoebe home to take a cup o'
tea, or a little snack o' supper, a mort o' times."

"Bother Phoebe," cried Mr. Marks, "who's a talkin' of Phoebe? What's
Phoebe, that anybody should go to put theirselves out about her? Do you
remember my bringin' home a gentleman after ten o'clock, one September
night; a gentleman as was wet through to the skin, and was covered with
mud and slush, and green slime and black muck, from the crown of his
head to the sole of his foot, and had his arm broke, and his shoulder
swelled up awful; and was such a objeck that nobody would ha' knowed
him; a gentleman as had to have his clothes cut off him in some places,
and as sat by the kitchen fire, starin' at the coals as if he had gone
mad or stupid-like, and didn't know where he was, or who he was; and as
had to be cared for like a baby, and dressed, and dried, and washed, and
fed with spoonfuls of brandy, that had to be forced between his locked
teeth, before any life could be got into him? Do you remember that,
mother?"

The old woman nodded, and muttered something to the effect that she
remembered all these circumstances most vividly, now that Luke happened
to mention them.

Robert Audley uttered a wild cry, and fell down upon his knees by the
side of the sick man's bed.

"My God!" he ejaculated, "I think Thee for Thy wondrous mercies. George
Talboys is alive!"

"Wait a bit," said Mr. Marks, "don't you be too fast. Mother, give us
down that tin box on the shelf over against the chest of drawers, will
you?"

The old woman obeyed, and after fumbling among broken teacups and
milk-jugs, lidless wooden cotton-boxes, and a miscellaneous litter of
rags and crockery, produced a tin snuff-box with a sliding lid; a
shabby, dirty-looking box enough.

Robert Audley still knelt by the bedside with his face hidden by his
clasped hands. Luke Marks opened the tin box.

"There ain't no money in it, more's the pity," he said, "or if there had
been it wouldn't have been let stop very long. But there's summat in it
that perhaps you'll think quite as valliable as money, and that's what
I'm goin' to give you as a proof that a drunken brute can feel thankful
to them as is kind to him."

He took out two folded papers, which he gave into Robert Audley's hands.

They were two leaves torn out of a pocket-book, and they were written
upon in pencil, and in a handwriting that was quite strange to Mr.
Audley--a cramped, stiff, and yet scrawling hand, such as some plowman
might have written.

"I don't know this writing," Robert said, as he eagerly unfolded the
first of the two papers. "What has this to do with my friend? Why do you
show me these?"

"Suppose you read 'em first," said Mr. Marks, "and ask me questions
about them afterwards."

The first paper which Robert Audley had unfolded contained the following
lines, written in that cramped, yet scrawling hand which was so strange
to him:

"MY DEAR FRIEND--I write to you in such utter confusion of mind as
perhaps no man ever before suffered. I cannot tell you what has happened
to me, I can only tell you that something has happened which will drive
me from England a broken-hearted man, to seek some corner of the earth
in which I may live and die unknown and forgotten. I can only ask you to
forget me. If your friendship could have done me any good, I would have
appealed to it. If your counsel could have been any help to me, I would
have confided in you. But neither friendship nor counsel can help me;
and all I can say to you is this, God bless you for the past, and teach
you to forget me in the future. G.T."

The second paper was addressed to another person, and its contents were
briefer than those of the first.

"HELEN--May God pity and forgive you for that which you have done
to-day, as truly as I do. Rest in peace. You shall never hear of me
again; to you and to the world I shall henceforth be that which you
wished me to be to-day. You need fear no molestation from me. I leave
England never to return.

"G.T."

Robert Audley sat staring at these lines in hopeless bewilderment. They
were not in his friend's familiar hand, and yet they purported to be
written by him and were signed with his initials.

He looked scrutinizingly at the face of Luke Marks, thinking that
perhaps some trick was being played upon him.

"This was not written by George Talboys," he said.

"It was," answered Luke Marks, "it was written by Mr. Talboys, every
line of it. He wrote it with his own hand; but it was his left hand, for
he couldn't use his right because of his broken arm."

Robert Audley looked up suddenly, and the shadow of suspicion passed
away from his face.

"I understand," he said, "I understand. Tell me all; tell me how it was
that my poor friend was saved."

"I was at work up at Atkinson's farm, last September," said Luke Marks,
"helping to stack the last of the corn, and as the nighest way from the
farm to mother's cottage was through the meadows at the back of the
Court, I used to come that way, and Phoebe used to stand in the garden
wall beyond the lime-walk sometimes, to have a chat with me, knowin' my
time o' comin' home.

"I don't know what Phoebe was a-doin' upon the evenin' of the seventh o'
September--I rek'lect the date because Farmer Atkinson paid me my wages
all of a lump on that day, and I'd had to sign a bit of a receipt for
the money he give me--I don't know what she was a-doin', but she warn't
at the gate agen the lime-walk, so I went round to the other side o' the
gardens and jumped across the dry ditch, for I wanted partic'ler to see
her that night, as I was goin' away to work upon a farm beyond
Chelmsford the next day. Audley church clock struck nine as I was
crossin' the meadows between Atkinson's and the Court, and it must have
been about a quarter past nine when I got into the kitchen garden.

"I crossed the garden, and went into the lime-walk; the nighest way to
the servants' hall took me through the shrubbery and past the dry well.
It was a dark night, but I knew my way well enough about the old place,
and the light in the window of the servants' hall looked red and
comfortable through the darkness. I was close against the mouth of the
dry well when I heard a sound that made my blood creep. It was a
groan--a groan of a man in pain, as was lyin' somewhere hid among the
bushes. I warn't afraid of ghosts and I warn't afraid of anythink in a
general way, but there was somethin in hearin' this groan as chilled me
to the very heart, and for a minute I was struck all of a heap, and
didn't know what to do. But I heard the groan again, and then I began to
search among the bushes. I found a man lyin' hidden under a lot o'
laurels, and I thought at first he was up to no good, and I was a-goin'
to collar him to take him to the house, when he caught me by the wrist
without gettin' up from the ground, but lookin' at me very earnest, as I
could see by the way his face was turned toward me in the darkness, and
asked me who I was, and what I was, and what I had to do with the folks
at the Court.

"There was somethin' in the way he spoke that told me he was a
gentleman, though I didn't know him from Adam, and couldn't see his
face; and I answered his questions civil.

"'I want to get away from this place,' he said, 'without bein' seen by
any livin' creetur, remember that. I've been lyin' here ever since four
o'clock to-day, and I'm half dead, but I want to get away without bein'
seen, mind that.'

"I told him that was easy enough, but I began to think my first thoughts
of him might have been right enough, after all, and that he couldn't
have been up to no good to want to sneak away so precious quiet.

"'Can you take me to any place where I can get a change of dry clothes,'
he says, 'without half a dozen people knowin' it?'

"He'd got up into a sittin' attitude by this time, and I could see that
his right arm hung close by his side, and that he was in pain.

"I pointed to his arm, and asked him what was the matter with it; but he
only answered, very quiet like: 'Broken, my lad, broken. Not that that's
much,' he says in another tone, speaking to himself like, more than to
me. 'There's broken hearts as well as broken limbs, and they're not so
easy mended.'

"I told him I could take him to mother's cottage, and that he could dry
his clothes there and welcome.

"'Can your mother keep a secret?' he asked.

"'Well, she could keep one well enough if she could remember it,' I told
him; 'but you might tell her all the secrets of the Freemasons, and
Foresters, and Buffalers and Oddfellers as ever was, to-night: and she'd
have forgotten all about 'em to-morrow mornin'.'

"He seemed satisfied with this, and he got himself up by holdin' on to
me, for it seemed as if his limbs was cramped, the use of 'em was almost
gone. I felt as he came agen me, that his clothes was wet and mucky.

"'You haven't been and fell into the fish-pond, have you, sir?' I asked.

"He made no answer to my question; he didn't seem even to have heard it.
I could see now he was standin' upon his feet that he was a tall,
fine-made man, a head and shoulders higher than me.

"'Take me to your mother's cottage,' he said, 'and get me some dry
clothes if you can; I'll pay you well for your trouble.'

"I knew that the key was mostly left in the wooden gate in the garden
wall, so I led him that way. He could scarcely walk at first, and it was
only by leanin' heavily upon my shoulder that he managed to get along. I
got him through the gate, leavin' it unlocked behind me, and trustin' to
the chance of that not bein' noticed by the under-gardener, who had the
care of the key, and was a careless chap enough. I took him across the
meadows, and brought him up here, still keepin' away from the village,
and in the fields, where there wasn't a creature to see us at that time
o' night; and so I got him into the room down-stairs, where mother was
a-sittin' over the fire gettin' my bit o' supper ready for me.

"I put the strange chap in a chair agen the fire, and then for the first
time I had a good look at him. I never see anybody in such a state
before. He was all over green damp and muck, and his hands was scratched
and cut to pieces. I got his clothes off him how I could, for he was
like a child in my hands, and sat starin' at the fire as helpless as any
baby; only givin' a long heavy sigh now and then, as if his heart was
a-goin' to bust. At last he dropped into a kind of a doze, a stupid sort
of sleep, and began to nod over the fire, so I ran and got a blanket and
wrapped him in it, and got him to lie down on the press bedstead in the
room under this. I sent mother to bed, and I sat by the fire and watched
him, and kep' the fire up till it was just upon daybreak, when he 'woke
up all of a sudden with a start, and said he must go, directly this
minute.

"I begged him not to think of such a thing and told him he warn't fit to
move for ever so long; but he said he must go, and he got up, and though
he staggered like, and at first could hardly stand steady two minutes
together, he wouldn't be beat, and he got me to dress him in his clothes
as I'd dried and cleaned as well as I could while he laid asleep. I did
manage it at last, but the clothes was awful spoiled, and he looked a
dreadful objeck, with his pale face and a great cut on his forehead that
I'd washed and tied up with a handkercher. He could only get his coat on
by buttoning it on round his neck, for he couldn't put a sleeve upon his
broken arm. But he held out agen everything, though he groaned every now
and then; and what with the scratches and bruises on his hands, and the
cut upon his forehead, and his stiff limbs and broken arm, he'd plenty
of call to groan; and by the time it was broad daylight he was dressed
and ready to go.

"'What's the nearest town to this upon the London road?' he asked me.

"I told him as the nighest town was Brentwood.

"'Very well, then,' he says, 'if you'll go with me to Brentwood, and
take me to some surgeon as'll set my arm, I'll give you a five pound
note for that and all your other trouble.'

"I told him that I was ready and willin' to do anything as he wanted
done; and asked him if I shouldn't go and see if I could borrow a cart
from some of the neighbors to drive him over in, for I told him it was a
good six miles' walk.

"He shook his head. No, no, no, he said, he didn't want anybody to know
anything about him; he'd rather walk it.

"He did walk it; and he walked like a good 'un, too; though I know as
every step he took o' them six miles he took in pain; but he held out as
he'd held out before; I never see such a chap to hold out in all my
blessed life. He had to stop sometimes and lean agen a gateway to get
his breath; but he held out still, till at last we got into Brentwood,
and then he says, 'Take me to the nighest surgeon's,' and I waited while
he had his arm set in splints, which took a precious long time. The
surgeon wanted him to stay in Brentwood till he was better, but he said
it warn't to be heard on, he must get up to London without a minute's
loss of time; so the surgeon made him as comfortable as he could,
considering and tied up his arm in a sling."

Robert Audley started. A circumstance connected with his visit to
Liverpool dashed suddenly back upon his memory. He remembered the clerk
who had called him back to say there was a passenger who took his berth
on board the _Victoria Regia_ within an hour or so of the vessel's
sailing; a young man with his arm in a sling, who had called himself by
some common name, which Robert had forgotten.

"When his arm was dressed," continued Luke, "he says to the surgeon,
'Can you give me a pencil to write something before I go away?' The
surgeon smiles and shakes his head: 'You'll never be able to write with
that there hand to-day,' he says, pointin' to the arm as had just been
dressed. 'P'raps not,' the young chap answers, quiet enough, 'but I can
write with the other,' 'Can't I write it for you?' says the surgeon.
'No, thank you,' answers the other; 'what I've got to write is private.
If you can give me a couple of envelopes, I'll be obliged to you.'

"With that the surgeon goes to fetch the envelopes, and the young chap
takes a pocket-book out of his coat pocket with his left hand; the cover
was wet and dirty, but the inside was clean enough, and he tears out a
couple of leaves and begins to write upon 'em as you see; and he writes
dreadful awk'ard with his left hand, and he writes slow, but he
contrives to finish what you see, and then he puts the two bits o'
writin' into the envelopes as the surgeon brings him, and he seals 'em
up, and he puts a pencil cross upon one of 'em, and nothing on the
other: and then he pays the surgeon for his trouble, and the surgeon
says, ain't there nothin' more he can do for him, and can't he persuade
him to stay in Brentwood till his arm's better; but he says no, no, it
ain't possible; and then he says to me, 'Come along o' me to the railway
station, and I'll give you what I've promised.'

"So I went to the station with him. We was in time to catch the train as
stops at Brentwood at half after eight, and we had five minutes to
spare. So he takes me into a corner of the platform, and he says, 'I
wants you to deliver these here letters for me,' which I told him I was
willin'. 'Very well, then,' he says; 'look here; you know Audley Court?'
'Yes,' I says, 'I ought to, for my sweetheart lives lady's maid there.'
'Whose lady's maid?' he says. So I tells him, 'My lady's, the new lady
what was governess at Mr. Dawson's.' 'Very well, then,' he says; 'this
here letter with the cross upon the envelope is for Lady Audley, but
you're to be sure to give it into her own hands; and remember to take
care as nobody sees you give it.' I promises to do this, and he hands me
the first letter. And then he says, 'Do you know Mr. Audley, as is nevy
to Sir Michael?' and I said, 'Yes, I've heerd tell on him, and I've
heerd as he was a reg'lar swell, but affable and free-spoken' (for I
heerd 'em tell on you, you know)," Luke added, parenthetically. "'Now
look here,' the young chap says, 'you're to give this other letter to
Mr. Robert Audley, whose a-stayin' at the Sun Inn, in the village;' and
I tells him it's all right, as I've know'd the Sun ever since I was a
baby. So then he gives me the second letter, what's got nothing wrote
upon the envelope, and he gives me a five-pound note, accordin' to
promise; and then he says, 'Good-day, and thank you for all your
trouble,'and he gets into a second-class carriage; and the last I sees
of him is a face as white as a sheet of writin' paper, and a great patch
of stickin'-plaster criss-crossed upon his forehead."

"Poor George! poor George!"

"I went back to Audley, and I went straight to the Sun Inn, and asked
for you, meanin' to deliver both letters faithful, so help me God! then;
but the landlord told me as you'd started off that mornin' for London,
and he didn't know when you'd come back, and he didn't know the name o'
the place where you lived in London, though he said he thought it was in
one o' them law courts, such as Westminster Hall or Doctors' Commons, or
somethin' like that. So what was I to do? I couldn't send a letter by
post, not knowin' where to direct to, and I couldn't give it into your
own hands, and I'd been told partickler not to let anybody else know of
it; so I'd nothing to do but to wait and see if you come back, and bide
my time for givin' of it to you.

"I thought I'd go over to the Court in the evenin'and see Phoebe, and
find out from her when there'd be a chance of seein' her lady, for I
know'd she could manage it if she liked. So I didn't go to work that
day, though I ought to ha' done, and I lounged and idled about until it
was nigh upon dusk, and then I goes down to the meadows behind the
Court, and there I finds Phoebe sure enough, waitin' agen the wooden
door in the wall, on the lookout for me.

"I hadn't been talkin' to her long before I see there was somethink
wrong with her and I told her as much.

"Well,' she says, 'I ain't quite myself this evenin', for I had a upset
yesterday, and I ain't got over it yet.'

"'A upset,' I says. 'You had a quarrel with your missus, I suppose.'

"She didn't answer me directly, but she smiled the queerest smile as
ever I see, and presently she says:

"No, Luke, it weren't nothin' o' that kind; and what's more, nobody
could be friendlier toward me than my lady. I think she'd do any think
for me a'most; and I think, whether it was a bit o' farming stock and
furniture or such like, or whether it was the good-will of a
public-house, she wouldn't refuse me anythink as I asked her.'

"I couldn't make out this, for it was only a few days before as she'd
told me her missus was selfish and extravagant, and we might wait a long
time before we could get what we wanted from her.

"So I says to her, 'Why, this is rather sudden like, Phoebe;' and she
says, 'Yes, it is sudden;' and she smiles again, just the same sort of
smile as before. Upon that I turns round upon her sharp, and says:

"I'll tell you what it is, my gal, you're a-keepin' somethink from me;
somethink you've been told, or somethink you've found out; and if you
think you're a-goin' to try that game on with me, you'll find you're
very much mistaken; and so I give you warnin'."

"But she laughed it off like, and says, 'Lor' Luke, what could have put
such fancies into your head?'

"'Perhaps other people can keep secrets as well as you,' I said, 'and
perhaps other people can make friends as well as you. There was a
gentleman came here to see your missus yesterday, warn't there--a tall
young gentleman with a brown beard?'

"Instead of answering of me like a Christian, my Cousin Phoebe bursts
out a-cryin', and wrings her hands, and goes on awful, until I'm dashed
if I can make out what she's up to.

"But little by little I got it out of her, for I wouldn't stand no
nonsense; find she told me how she'd been sittin' at work at the window
of her little room, which was at the top of the house, right up in one
of the gables, and overlooked the lime-walk, and the shrubbery and the
well, when she see my lady walking with a strange gentleman, and they
walked together for a long time, until by-and-by they--"

"Stop!" cried Robert, "I know the rest."

"Well, Phoebe told me all about what she see, and she told me she'd met
her lady almost directly afterward, and somethin' had passed between
'em, not much, but enough to let her missus know that the servant what
she looked down upon had found out that as would put her in that
servant's power to the last day of her life.

"'And she is in my power, Luke,' says Phoebe; 'and she'll do anythin' in
the world for us if we keep her secret.'

"So you see both my Lady Audley and her maid thought as the gentleman as
I'd seen safe off by the London train was lying dead at the bottom of
the well. If I was to give the letter they'd find out the contrary of
this; and if I was to give the letter, Phoebe and me would lose the
chance of gettin' started in life by her missus.

"So I kep' the letter and kep' my secret, and my lady kep' hern. But I
thought if she acted liberal by me, and gave me the money I wanted, free
like, I'd tell her everythink, and make her mind easy.

"But she didn't. Whatever she give me she throwed me as if I'd been a
dog. Whenever she spoke to me, she spoke as she might have spoken to a
dog; and a dog she couldn't abide the sight of. There was no word in her
mouth that was too bad for me; there was no toss as she could give her
head that was too proud and scornful for me; and my blood b'iled agen
her, and I kep' my secret, and let her keep hern. I opened the two
letters, and I read 'em, but I couldn't make much sense out of 'em, and
I hid 'em away; and not a creature but me has seen 'em until this
night."

Luke Marks had finished his story, and lay quietly enough, exhausted by
having talked so long. He watched Robert Audley's face, fully expecting
some reproof, some grave lecture; for he had a vague consciousness that
he had done wrong.

But Robert did not lecture him; he had no fancy for an office which he
did not think himself fitted to perform.

Robert Audley sat until long after daybreak with the sick man, who fell
into a heavy slumber a short time after he had finished his story. The
old woman had dozed comfortably throughout her son's confession. Phoebe
was asleep upon the press bedstead in the room below; so the young
barrister was the only watcher.

He could not sleep; he could only think of the story he had heard. He
could only thank God for his friend's preservation, and pray that he
might be able to go to Clara Talboys, and say, "Your brother still
lives, and has been found."

Phoebe came up-stairs at eight o'clock, ready to take her place at the
sick-bed, and Robert Audley went away, to get a bed at the Sun Inn. It
was nearly dusk when he awoke out of a long dreamless slumber, and
dressed himself before dining in the little sitting-room, in which he
and George had sat together a few months before.

The landlord waited upon him at dinner, and told him that Luke Marks had
died at five o'clock that afternoon. "He went off rather sudden like,"
the man said, "but very quiet."

Robert Audley wrote a long letter that evening, addressed to Madame
Taylor, care of Monsieur Val, Villebrumeuse; a long letter in which he
told the wretched woman who had borne so many names, and was to bear a
false one for the rest of her life, the story that the dying man had
told him.

"It may be some comfort to her to hear that her husband did not perish
in his youth by her wicked hand," he thought, "if her selfish soul can
hold any sentiment of pity or sorrow for others."




CHAPTER XL.

RESTORED.


Clara Talboys returned to Dorsetshire, to tell her father that his only
son had sailed for Australia upon the 9th of September, and that it was
most probable he yet lived, and would return to claim the forgiveness of
the father he had never very particularly injured; except in the matter
of having made that terrible matrimonial mistake which had exercised so
fatal an influence upon his youth.

Mr. Harcourt-Talboys was fairly nonplused. Junius Brutus had never been
placed in such a position as this, and seeing no way of getting out of
this dilemma by acting after his favorite model, Mr. Talboys was fain to
be natural for once in his life, and to confess that he had suffered
much uneasiness and pain of mind about his only son since his
conversation with Robert Audley, and that he would be heartily glad to
take his poor boy to his arms, whenever he should return to England. But
when was he likely to return? and how was he to be communicated with?
That was the question. Robert Audley remembered the advertisements which
he had caused to be inserted in the Melbourne and Sydney papers. If
George had re-entered either city alive, how was it that no notice had
ever been taken of that advertisement? Was it likely that his friend
would be indifferent to his uneasiness? But then, again, it was just
possible that George Talboys had not happened to see this advertisement;
and, as he had traveled under a feigned name, neither his fellow
passengers nor the captain of the vessel would have been able to
identify him with the person advertised for. What was to be done? Must
they wait patiently till George grew weary of his exile, and returned to
his friends who loved him? or were there any means to be taken by which
his return might be hastened? Robert Audley was at fault! Perhaps, in
the unspeakable relief of mind which he had experienced upon the
discovery of his friend's escape, he was unable to look beyond the one
fact of that providential preservation.

In this state of mind he went down to Dorsetshire to pay a visit to Mr.
Talboys, who had given way to a perfect torrent of generous impulses,
and had gone so far as to invite his son's friend to share the prim
hospitality of the square, red brick mansion.

Mr. Talboys had only two sentiments upon the subject of George's story;
one was a natural relief and happiness in the thought that his son had
been saved, the other was an earnest wish that my lady had been his
wife, and that he might thus have had the pleasure of making a signal
example of her.

"It is not for me to blame you, Mr. Audley," he said, "for having
smuggled this guilty woman out of the reach of justice, and thus, as I
may say, paltered with the laws of your country. I can only remark that,
had the lady fallen into my hands, she would have been very differently
treated."

It was in the middle of April when Robert Audley found himself once more
under those black fir-trees beneath which his wandering thoughts had so
often stayed since his first meeting with Clara Talboys. There were
primroses and early violets in the hedges now, and the streams, which,
upon his first visit, had been hard and frost-bound as the heart of
Harcourt Talboys, had thawed, like that gentleman, and ran merrily under
the blackthorn bushes in the capricious April sunshine.

Robert had a prim bedroom, and an uncompromising dressing-room allotted
him in the square house, and he woke every morning upon a metallic
spring mattress, which always gave him the idea of sleeping upon some
musical instrument, to see the sun glaring in upon him through the
square, white blinds and lighting up the two lackered urns which adorned
the foot of the blue iron bedstead, until they blazed like two tiny
brazen lamps of the Roman period. He emulated Mr. Harcourt Talboys in
the matter of shower-baths and cold water, and emerged prim and blue as
that gentleman himself, as the clock in the hall struck seven, to join
the master of the house in his ante-breakfast constitutional under the
fir-trees in the stiff plantation.

But there was generally a third person who assisted in the
constitutional promenades, and that third person was Clara Talboys, who
used to walk by her father's side, more beautiful than the morning--for
that was sometimes dull and cloudy, while she was always fresh and
bright--in a broad-leaved straw-hat and flapping blue ribbons, one
quarter of an inch of which Mr. Audley would have esteemed a prouder
decoration than ever adorned a favored creature's button-hole.

At first they were very ceremonious toward each other, and were only
familiar and friendly upon the one subject of George's adventures; but
little by little a pleasant intimacy arose between them, and before the
first three weeks of Robert's visit had elapsed, Miss Talboys made him
happy, by taking him seriously in hand and lecturing him on the
purposeless life he had led so long, and the little use he had made of
the talents and opportunities that had been given to him.

How pleasant it was to be lectured by the woman he loved! How pleasant
it was to humiliate himself and depreciate himself before her! How
delightful it was to get such splendid opportunities of hinting that if
his life had been sanctified by an object he might indeed have striven
to be something better than an idle _flaneur_ upon the smooth pathways
that have no particular goal; that, blessed by the ties which would have
given a solemn purpose to every hour of his existence, he might indeed
have fought the battle earnestly and unflinchingly. He generally wound
up with a gloomy insinuation to the effect that it was only likely he
would drop quietly over the edge of the Temple Gardens some afternoon
when the river was bright and placid in the low sunlight, and the little
children had gone home to their tea.

"Do you think I can read French novels and smoke mild Turkish until I am
three-score-and-ten, Miss Talboys?" he asked. "Do you think there will
not come a day in which my meerschaums will be foul, and the French
novels more than usually stupid, and life altogether such a dismal
monotony that I shall want to get rid of it somehow or other?"

I am sorry to say that while this hypocritical young barrister was
holding forth in this despondent way, he had mentally sold up his
bachelor possessions, including all Michel Levy's publications, and half
a dozen solid silver-mounted meerschaums; pensioned off Mrs. Maloney,
and laid out two or three thousand pounds in the purchase of a few acres
of verdant shrubbery and sloping lawn, embosomed amid which there should
be a fairy cottage _ornee_, whose rustic casements should glimmer out of
bowers of myrtle and clematis to see themselves reflected in the purple
bosom of the lake.

Of course, Clara Talboys was far from discovering the drift of these
melancholy lamentations. She recommended Mr. Audley to read hard and
think seriously of his profession, and begin life in real earnest. It
was a hard, dry sort of existence, perhaps, which she recommended; a
life of serious work and application, in which he should strive to be
useful to his fellow-creatures, and win a reputation for himself.

"I'd do all that," he thought, "and do it earnestly, if I could be sure
of a reward for my labor. If she would accept my reputation when it was
won, and support me in the struggle by her beloved companionship. But
what if she sends me away to fight the battle, and marries some hulking
country squire while my back is turned?"

Being naturally of a vacillating and dilatory disposition, there is no
saying how long Mr. Audley might have kept his secret, fearful to speak
and break the charm of that uncertainty which, though not always
hopeful, was very seldom quite despairing, had not he been hurried by
the impulse of an unguarded moment into a full confession of the truth.

He had stayed five weeks at Grange Heath, and felt that he could not, in
common decency, stay any longer; so he had packed his portmanteau one
pleasant May morning, and had announced his departure.

Mr. Talboys was not the sort of man to utter any passionate lamentations
at the prospect of losing his guest, but he expressed himself with a
cool cordiality which served with him as the strongest demonstration of
friendship.

"We have got on very well together, Mr. Audley," he said, "and you have
been pleased to appear sufficiently happy in the quiet routine of our
orderly household; nay, more, you have conformed to our little domestic
regulations in a manner which I cannot refrain from saying I take as an
especial compliment to myself."

Robert bowed. How thankful he was to the good fortune which had never
suffered him to oversleep the signal of the clanging bell, or led him
away beyond the ken of clocks at Mr. Talboys' luncheon hour.

"I trust as we have got on so remarkably well together," Mr. Talboys
resumed, "you will do me the honor of repeating your visit to
Dorsetshire whenever you feel inclined. You will find plenty of sport
among my farms, and you will meet with every politeness and attention
from my tenants, if you like to bring your gun with you."

Robert responded most heartily to these friendly overtures. He declared
that there was no earthly occupation that was more agreeable to him than
partridge-shooting, and that he should be only too delighted to avail
himself of the privilege so kindly offered to him. He could not help
glancing toward Clara as he said this. The perfect lids drooped a little
over the brown eyes, and the faintest shadow of a blush illuminated the
beautiful face.

But this was the young barrister's last day in Elysium, and there must
be a dreary interval of days and nights and weeks and months before the
first of September would give him an excuse for returning to
Dorsetshire; a dreary interval which fresh colored young squires or fat
widowers of eight-and-forty, might use to his disadvantage. It was no
wonder, therefore, that he contemplated this dismal prospect with moody
despair, and was bad company for Miss Talboys that morning.

But in the evening after dinner, when the sun was low in the west, and
Harcourt Talboys closeted in his library upon some judicial business
with his lawyer and a tenant farmer, Mr. Audley grew a little more
agreeable. He stood by Clara's side in one of the long windows of the
drawing-room, watching the shadows deepening in the sky and the rosy
light growing every moment rosier as the sun died out. He could not help
enjoying that quiet _tete-a-tete_, though the shadow of the next
morning's express which was to carry him away to London loomed darkly
across the pathway of his joy. He could not help being happy in her
presence; forgetful of the past, reckless of the future.

They talked of the one subject which was always a bond of union between
them. They talked of her lost brother George. She spoke of him in a very
melancholy tone this evening. How could she be otherwise than sad,
remembering that if he lived--and she was not even sure of that--he was
a lonely wanderer far away from all who loved him, and carrying the
memory of a blighted life wherever he went.

"I cannot think how papa can be so resigned to my poor brother's
absence," she said, "for he does love him, Mr. Audley; even you must
have seen lately that he does love him. But I cannot think how he can so
quietly submit to his absence. If I were a man, I would go to Australia,
and find him, and bring him back; if he was still to be found among the
living," she added, in a lower voice.

She turned her face away from Robert, and looked out at the darkening
sky. He laid his hand upon her arm. It trembled in spite of him, and his
voice trembled, too, as he spoke to her.

"Shall _I_ go to look for your brother?" he said.

"_You!_" She turned her head, and looked at him earnestly through her
tears. "You, Mr. Audley! Do you think that I could ask you to make such
a sacrifice for me, or for those I love?"

"And do you think, Clara, that I should think any sacrifice too great a
one if it were made for you? Do you think there is any voyage I would
refuse to take, if I knew that you would welcome me when I came home,
and thank me for having served you faithfully? I will go from one end of
the continent of Australia to the other to look for your brother, if you
please, Clara; and will never return alive unless I bring him with me,
and will take my chance of what reward you shall give me for my labor."

Her head was bent, and it was some moments before she answered him.

"You are very good and generous, Mr. Audley," she said, at last, "and I
feel this offer too much to be able to thank you for it. But what you
speak of could never be. By what right could I accept such a sacrifice?"

"By the right which makes me your bounden slave forever and ever,
whether you will or no. By right of the love I bear you, Clara," cried
Mr. Audley, dropping on his knees--rather awkwardly, it must be
confessed--and covering a soft little hand, that he had found half
hidden among the folds of a silken dress, with passionate kisses.

"I love you, Clara," he said, "I love you. You may call for your father,
and have me turned out of the house this moment, if you like; but I
shall go on loving you all the same; and I shall love you forever and
ever, whether you will or no."

The little hand was drawn away from his, but not with a sudden or angry
gesture, and it rested for one moment lightly and tremulously upon his
dark hair.

"Clara, Clara!" he murmured, in a low, pleading voice, "shall I go to
Australia to look for your brother?"

There was no answer. I don't know how it is, but there is scarcely
anything more delicious than silence in such cases. Every moment of
hesitation is a tacit avowal; every pause is a tender confession.

"Shall we both go, dearest? Shall we go as man and wife? Shall we go
together, my dear love, and bring our brother back between us?"

Mr. Harcourt Talboys, coming into the lamplit room a quarter of an hour
afterward, found Robert Audley alone, and had to listen to a revelation
which very much surprised him. Like all self-sufficient people, he was
tolerably blind to everything that happened under his nose, and he had
fully believed that his own society, and the Spartan regularity of his
household, had been the attractions which had made Dorsetshire
delightful to his guest.

He was rather disappointed, therefore; but he bore his disappointment
pretty well, and expressed a placid and rather stoical satisfaction at
the turn which affairs had taken.

So Robert Audley went back to London, to surrender his chambers in
Figtree Court, and to make all due inquiries about such ships as sailed
from Liverpool for Sydney in the month of June.

He had lingered until after luncheon at Grange Heath, and it was in the
dusky twilight that he entered the shady Temple courts and found his way
to his chambers. He found Mrs. Maloney scrubbing the stairs, as was her
wont upon a Saturday evening, and he had to make his way upward amidst
an atmosphere of soapy steam, that made the balusters greasy under his
touch.

"There's lots of letters, yer honor," the laundress said, as she rose
from her knees and flattened herself against the wall to enable Robert
to pass her, "and there's some parcels, and there's a gentleman which
has called ever so many times, and is waitin' to-night, for I towld him
you'd written to me to say your rooms were to be aired."

He opened the door of his sitting-room, and walked in. The canaries were
singing their farewell to the setting sun, and the faint, yellow light
was flickering upon the geranium leaves. The visitor, whoever he was,
sat with his back to the window and his head bent upon his breast. But
he started up as Robert Audley entered the room, and the young man
uttered a great cry of delight and surprise, and opened his arms to his
lost friend, George Talboys.

We know how much Robert had to tell. He touched lightly and tenderly
upon that subject which he knew was cruelly painful to his friends; he
said very little of the wretched woman who was wearing out the remnant
of her wicked life in the quiet suburb of the forgotten Belgian city.

George Talboys spoke very briefly of that sunny seventh of September,
upon which he had left his friend sleeping by the trout stream while he
went to accuse his false wife of that conspiracy which had well nigh
broken his heart.

"God knows that from the moment in which I sunk into the black pit,
knowing the treacherous hand that had sent me to what might have been my
death, my chief thought was of the safety of the woman who had betrayed
me. I fell upon my feet upon a mass of slush and mire, but my shoulder
was bruised, and my arm broken against the side of the well. I was
stunned and dazed for a few minutes, but I roused myself by an effort,
for I felt that the atmosphere I breathed was deadly. I had my
Australian experiences to help me in my peril; I could climb like a cat.
The stones of which the well was built were rugged and irregular, and I
was able to work my way upward by planting my feet in the interstices of
the stones, and resting my back at times against the opposite side of
the well, helping myself as well as I could with my hands, though one
arm was crippled. It was hard work, Bob, and it seems strange that a man
who had long professed himself weary of his life, should take so much
trouble to preserve it. I think I must have been working upward of half
an hour before I got to the top; I know the time seemed an eternity of
pain and peril. It was impossible for me to leave the place until after
dark without being observed, so I hid myself behind a clump of
laurel-bushes, and lay down on the grass faint and exhausted to wait for
nightfall. The man who found me there told you the rest. Robert."

"Yes, my poor old friend.--yes, he told me all."

George had never returned to Australia after all. He had gone on board
the _Victoria Regia_, but had afterward changed his berth for one in
another vessel belonging to the same owners, and had gone to New York,
where he had stayed as long as he could endure the loneliness of an
existence which separated him from every friend he had ever known.

"Jonathan was very kind to me, Bob," he said; "I had enough money to
enable me to get on pretty well in my own quiet way and I meant to have
started for the California gold fields to get more when that was gone. I
might have made plenty of friends had I pleased, but I carried the old
bullet in my breast; and what sympathy could I have with men who knew
nothing of my grief? I yearned for the strong grasp of your hand, Bob;
the friendly touch of the hand which had guided me through the darkest
passage of my life."




CHAPTER XLI.

AT PEACE.


Two years have passed since the May twilight in which Robert found his
old friend; and Mr. Audley's dream of a fairy cottage has been realized
between Teddington Locks and Hampton Bridge, where, amid a little forest
of foliage, there is a fantastical dwelling place of rustic woodwork,
whose latticed windows look out upon the river. Here, among the lilies
and the rushes on the sloping bank, a brave boy of eight years old plays
with a toddling baby, who peers wonderingly from his nurse's arms at
that other baby in the purple depth of the quiet water.

Mr. Audley is a rising man upon the home circuit by this time, and has
distinguished himself in the great breach of promise case of Hobbs _v._
Nobbs, and has convulsed the court by his deliciously comic rendering of
the faithless Nobb's amatory correspondence. The handsome dark-eyed boy
is Master George Talboys, who declines _musa_ at Eton, and fishes for
tadpoles in the clear water under the spreading umbrage beyond the ivied
walls of the academy. But he comes very often to the fairy cottage to
see his father, who lives there with his sister and his sister's
husband; and he is very happy with his Uncle Robert, his Aunt Clara, and
the pretty baby who has just begun to toddle on the smooth lawn that
slopes down to the water's brink, upon which there is a little Swiss
boat-house and landing-stage where Robert and George moor their slender
wherries.

Other people come to the cottage near Teddington. A bright,
merry-hearted girl, and a gray-bearded gentleman, who has survived he
trouble of his life, and battled with it as a Christian should.

It is more than a year since a black-edged letter, written upon foreign
paper, came to Robert Audley, to announce the death of a certain Madame
Taylor, who had expired peacefully at Villebrumeuse, dying after a long
illness, which Monsieur Val describes as a _maladie de langueur_.

Another visitor comes to the cottage in this bright summer of 1861--a
frank, generous hearted young man, who tosses the baby and plays with
Georgey, and is especially great in the management of the boats, which
are never idle when Sir Harry Towers is at Teddington.

There is a pretty rustic smoking-room over the Swiss boat-house, in
which the gentlemen sit and smoke in the summer evenings, and whence
they are summoned by Clara and Alicia to drink tea, and eat strawberries
and cream upon the lawn.

Audley Court is shut up, and a grim old housekeeper reigns paramount in
the mansion which my lady's ringing laughter once made musical. A
curtain hangs before the pre-Raphaelite portrait; and the blue mold
which artists dread gathers upon the Wouvermans and Poussins, the Cuyps
and Tintorettis. The house is often shown to inquisitive visitors,
though the baronet is not informed of that fact, and people admire my
lady's rooms, and ask many questions about the pretty, fair-haired woman
who died abroad.

Sir Michael has no fancy to return to the familiar dwelling-place in
which he once dreamed a brief dream of impossible happiness. He remains
in London until Alicia shall be Lady Towers, when he is to remove to a
house he has lately bought in Hertfordshire, on the borders of his
son-in-law's estate. George Talboys is very happy with his sister and
his old friend. He is a young man yet, remember, and it is not quite
impossible that he may, by-and-by, find some one who will console him
for the past. That dark story of the past fades little by little every
day, and there may come a time in which the shadow my lady's wickedness
has cast upon the young man's life will utterly vanish away.

The meerschaum and the French novels have been presented to a young
Templar with whom Robert Audley had been friendly in his bachelor days;
and Mrs. Maloney has a little pension, paid her quarterly, for her care
of the canaries and geraniums.

I hope no one will take objection to my story because the end of it
leaves the good people all happy and at peace. If my experience of life
has not been very long, it has at least been manifold; and I can safely
subscribe to that which a mighty king and a great philosopher declared,
when he said, that neither the experience of his youth nor of his age
had ever shown him "the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their
bread."

THE END.





End of Project Gutenberg's Lady Audley's Secret, by Mary Elizabeth Braddon





Produced by Eric Eldred, Robert Connal
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





LOOK BACK ON HAPPINESS

KNUT HAMSUN

Translated from the Norwegian
By PAULA WIKING




LOOK BACK ON HAPPINESS




I


I have gone to the forest.

Not because I am offended about anything, or very unhappy about men's evil
ways; but since the forest will not come to me, I must go to it. That is
all. I have not gone this time as a slave and a vagabond. I have money
enough and am overfed, stupefied with success and good fortune, if you
understand that. I have left the world as a sultan leaves rich food and
harems and flowers, and clothes himself in a hair shirt.

Really, I could make quite a song and dance about it. For I mean to roam
and think and make great irons red-hot. Nietzsche no doubt would have
spoken thus: The last word I spake unto men achieved their praise, and
they nodded. But it was my last word; and I went into the forest. For then
did I comprehend the truth, that my speech must needs be dishonest or
foolish.... But I said nothing of the kind; I simply went to the forest.

       *       *       *       *       *

You must not believe that nothing ever happens here. The snowflakes drift
down just as they do in the city, and the birds and beasts scurry about
from morning till night, and from night till morning. I could send solemn
stories from this place, but I do not. I have sought the forest for
solitude and for the sake of my great irons; for I have great irons which
lie within me and grow red-hot. So I deal with myself accordingly. Suppose
I were to meet a buck reindeer one day, then I might say to myself:

"Great heavens, this is a buck reindeer, he's dangerous!"

But if then I should be too frightened, I might tell myself a comforting
lie and say it was a calf or some feathered beast.

You say nothing happens here?

One day I saw two Lapps meet. A boy and a girl. At first they behaved as
people do. "_Boris!_" they said to each other and smiled. But
immediately after, both fell at full length in the snow and were gone from
my sight. After a quarter of an hour had passed, I thought, "You'd better
see to them; they may be smothered in the snow." But then they got up and
went their separate ways.

In all my weatherbeaten days, I have never seen such a greeting as that.

       *       *       *       *       *

Day and night I live in a deserted hut of peat into which I must crawl on
my hands and knees. Someone must have built it long ago and used it, for
lack of a better,--perhaps a man who was in hiding, a man who concealed
himself here for a few autumn days. There are two of us in the hut, that
is if you regard Madame as a person; otherwise there is only one. Madame
is a mouse I live with, to whom I have given this honorary title. She eats
everything I put aside for her in the nooks and corners, and sometimes she
sits watching me.

When I first came, there was stale straw in the hut, which Madame by all
means was allowed to keep; for my own bed I cut fresh pine twigs, as is
fitting. I have an ax and a saw and the necessary crockery. And I have a
sleeping bag of sheepskin with the wool inside. I keep a fire burning in
the fireplace all night, and my shirt, which hangs by it, smells of fresh
resin in the morning. When I want coffee, I go out, fill the kettle with
clean snow, and hang it over the fire till the snow turns to water.

Is this a life worth living?

There you have betrayed yourself. This is a life you do not understand.
Yes, your home is in the city, and you have furnished it with vanities,
with pictures and books; but you have a wife and a servant and a hundred
expenses. Asleep or awake you must keep pace with the world and are never
at peace. I have peace. You are welcome to your intellectual pastimes and
books and art and newspapers; welcome, too, to your bars and your whisky
that only makes me ill. Here am I in the forest, quite content. If you ask
me intellectual questions and try to trip me up, then I will reply, for
example, that God is the origin of all things and that truly men are mere
specks and atoms in the universe. You are no wiser than I. But if you
should go so far as to ask me what is eternity, then I know quite as much
in this matter, too, and reply thus: Eternity is merely unborn time,
nothing but unborn time.

My friend, come here to me and I will take a mirror from my pocket and
reflect the sun on your face, my friend.

You lie in bed till ten or eleven in the morning, yet you are weary,
exhausted, when you get up. I see you in my mind's eye as you go out into
the street; the morning has dawned too early on your blinking eyes. I rise
at five quite refreshed. It is still dark outdoors, yet there is enough to
look at--the moon, the stars, the clouds, and the weather portents for the
day. I prophesy the weather for many hours ahead. In what key do the winds
whistle? Is the crack of the ice in the Glimma light and dry, or deep and
long? These are splendid portents, and as it grows lighter, I add the
visible signs to the audible ones, and learn still more.

Then a narrow streak of daylight appears far down in the east, the stars
fade from the sky, and soon light reigns over all. A crow flies over the
woods, and I warn Madame not to go outside the hut or she will be
devoured.

But if fresh snow has fallen, the trees and copses and the great rocks
take on giant, unearthly shapes, as though they had come from another
world in the night. A storm-felled pine with its root torn up looks like a
witch petrified in the act of performing strange rites.

Here a hare has sprung by, and yonder are the tracks of a solitary
reindeer. I shake out my sleeping bag and after hanging it high in a tree
to escape Madame, who eats everything, I follow the tracks of the reindeer
into the forest. It has jogged along without haste, but toward a definite
goal--straight east to meet the day. By the banks of the Skiel, which is
so rapid that its waters never freeze, the reindeer has stopped to drink,
to scrape the hillside for moss, to rest a while, and then moved on.

And perhaps what this reindeer has done is all the knowledge and
experience I gain that day. It seems much to me. The days are short; at
two, I am already strolling homeward in the deep twilight, with the good,
still night approaching. Then I begin to cook. I have a great deal of meat
stored in three pure-white drifts of snow. In fact I have something even
better: eight fat cheeses of reindeer milk, to eat with butter and
crisp-bread.

While the pot is boiling I lie down, and gaze at the fire till I fall
asleep. I take my midday nap before my meal. And when I waken, the food is
cooked, filling the hut with an aroma of meat and resin. Madame darts back
and forth across the floor and at length gets her share. I eat, and light
my cutty-pipe.

The day is at an end. All has been well, and I have had no unpleasantness.
In the great silence surrounding me, I am the only adult, roaming man;
this makes me bigger and more important, God's kin. And I believe the
red-hot irons within me are progressing well, for God does great things
for his kin.

I lie thinking of the reindeer, the path it took, what it did by the
river, and how it continued on its journey. There under the trees it has
nibbled, and its horns have rubbed against the bark, leaving their marks;
there an osier bed has forced it to turn aside; but just beyond, it has
straightened its path and continued east once more. All this I think of.

And you? Have you read in a newspaper, which disagrees with another
newspaper, what the public in Norway is thinking of old-age insurance?




II


On stormy days I sit indoors and find something to occupy my time. Perhaps
I write letters to some acquaintance or other telling him I am well, and
hope to hear the same from him. But I cannot post the letters, and they
grow older every day. Not that it matters. I have tied the letters to a
string that hangs from the ceiling to prevent Madame from gnawing at them.


One day a man came to the hut. He walked swiftly and stealthily; his
clothes were ordinary and he wore no collar, for he was a laboring man. He
carried a sack, and I wondered what could be in it.

"Good morning," we said to each other. "Fine weather in the woods."

"I didn't expect to find anybody in the hut," said the man. His manner was
at once forceful and discontented; he flung down the sack without
humility.

"He may know something about me," I thought, "since he is such a man."

"Have you lived here long?" he asked. "And are you leaving soon?"

"Is the hut yours, perhaps?" I asked in my turn.

Then he looked at me.

"Because if the hut is yours, that's another matter," I said. "But I don't
intend like a pickpocket to take it with me when I leave."

I spoke gently and jestingly to avoid committing a blunder by my speech.

But I had said quite the right thing; the man at once lost his assurance.
Somehow I had made him feel that I knew more about him than he knew about
me.

When I asked him to come in, he was grateful and said:

"Thank you, but I'm afraid I'll get snow all over your floor."

Then he took special pains to wipe his boots clean, and bringing his sack
with him, crawled in.

"I could give you some coffee," I said.

"You shouldn't trouble on my account," he replied, wiping his face and
panting with the heat, "though I've been walking all night."

"Are you crossing the fjeld?"

"That depends. I don't suppose there's work to be got on a winter day on
the other side, either."

I gave him coffee.

"Got anything to eat?" he said. "It's a shame to ask you. A round of
crisp-bread? I had no chance to bring food with me."

"Yes, I've got bread, butter, and reindeer cheese. Help yourself."

"It's not so easy for a lot of people in the winter," said the man as he
ate.

"Could you take some letters to the village for me?" I asked. "I'll pay
you for it."

"Oh, no, I couldn't do that," the man replied. "I'm afraid that's
impossible. I must cross the fjeld now. I've heard there's work in
Hilling, in the Hilling Forest. So I can't."

"Must get his back up a bit again," I thought. "He just sits now there
without any guts at all. In the end he'll start begging for a few
coppers."

I felt his sack and said:

"What's this you're lugging about with you? Heavy things?"

"Mind your own business!" was his instant retort, as he drew the sack
closer to him.

"I wasn't going to steal any of it; I'm no thief," I said, jesting again.

"I don't care what you are," he muttered.

The day wore on. Since I had a visitor, I had no desire to go to the
woods, but wanted to sit and talk to him and ask him questions. He was a
very ordinary man, of no great interest to the irons in my fire, with
dirty hands, uneducated and uninteresting in his speech; probably he had
stolen the things in his sack. Later I learned that he was quick in much
small knowledge that life had taught him. He complained that his heels
felt cold, and took off his boots. And no wonder he felt cold, for where
the heels of his stockings should have been there were only great holes.
He borrowed a knife to cut away the ragged edges, and then drew on the
stockings again back to front, so that the torn soles came over his
instep. When he had put on his boots again, he said, "There, now it's nice
and warm."

He did no harm. If he took down the saw and the ax from their hooks to
inspect them, he put them back again where he had found them. When he
examined the letters, trying perhaps to read the addresses, he did not let
them go carelessly, leaving them to swing back and forth, but held the
string so that it hung motionless. I had no reason to complain about him.

He had his midday meal with me, and when he had eaten, he said:

"Do you mind if I cut myself some pine twigs to sit on?"

He went out to cut off some soft pine, and we had to move Madame's straw
to make room for the man inside the hut. Then we lay on our twigs, burning
resin and talking.

He was still there in the afternoon, still lying down as though to
postpone the time of his leaving. When it began to grow dark, he went to
the low doorway and looked out at the weather. Then, turning his head
back, he asked:

"Do you think there'll be snow tonight?"

"You ask me questions and I ask you questions," I said, "but it looks like
snow; the smoke is blowing down."

It made him uneasy to think it might snow, and he said he had better leave
that night. Suddenly he flew into a rage. For as I lay there, I stretched,
so that my hand accidentally touched his sack again.

"You leave me alone!" he shouted, tearing the sack from my grasp. "Don't
you touch that sack, or I'll show you!"

I replied that I had meant nothing by it, and had no intention of stealing
anything from him.

"Stealing, eh! What of it? I'm not afraid of you, and don't you go
thinking I am! Look, here's what I've got in the bag," said the man, and
began to rummage in it and to show me the contents: three pairs of new
mittens, some sort of thick cloth for garments, a bag of barley, a side of
bacon, sixteen rolls of tobacco, and a few large lumps of sugar candy. In
the bottom of the bag was perhaps half a bushel of coffee beans.

No doubt it was all from the general stores, with the exception of a heap
of broken crisp-bread, which might have been stolen elsewhere.

"So you've got crisp-bread after all," I said.

"If you knew anything about it, you wouldn't talk like that," the man
replied. "When I'm crossing the fjeld on foot, walking and walking, don't
I need food to put in my belly? It's blasphemy to listen to you!"

Neatly and carefully he put everything back into the sack, each article in
its turn. He took pains to build up the rolls of tobacco round the bacon,
to protect the cloth from grease stains.

"You might buy this cloth from me," he said. "I'll
let you have it cheap. It's duffle. It only gets in my way."

"How much do you want for it?" I asked.

"There's enough for a whole suit of clothes, maybe more," he said to
himself as he spread it out.

I said to the man:

"Truly you come here into the forest bringing with you life and the world
and intellectual values and news. Let us talk a little. Tell me something:
are you afraid your footprints will be visible tomorrow if there's fresh
snow tonight?"

"That's my business. I've crossed the field before and I know many paths,"
he muttered. "I'll let you have the cloth for a few crowns."

I shook my head, so the man again neatly folded the cloth and put it back
in the bag exactly as though it belonged to him.

"I'll cut it up into material for trousers; then the pieces won't be so
large, and I'll be able to sell it."

"You'd better leave enough for a whole suit in one piece," I said, "and
cut up the rest for trousers."

"You think so? Yes, maybe you're right."

We calculated how much would be necessary for a grown man's suit, and took
down the string from which the letters hung to measure our own clothes, so
as to be sure to get the measurements right. Then we cut into the edge of
the cloth, and tore it across. In addition to one complete suit, there was
enough left for two good-sized pairs of trousers.

Then the man offered to sell me other things out of his sack, and I bought
some coffee and a few rolls of tobacco. He put the money away in a leather
purse, and I saw how empty the purse was, and the circumstantial and
poverty-stricken fashion in which he put the money away, afterward feeling
the outside of his pocket.

"You haven't been able to sell me much," I said, "but I don't need any
more than that."

"Business is business," said he. "I don't complain."

It was quite decent of him.

While he was making ready to depart and clearing his bed of pine needles
out of the way, I thought pityingly of his sordid little theft. Stealing
because he was needy--a side of bacon and a length of cloth which he was
trying to sell in the forest! Theft has indeed ceased to be a matter of
great moment. This is because legal punishment for misdemeanors of all
kinds has also ceased to be of great moment. It is only a dull, human
punishment; the religious element has been removed from the law, and a
local magistrate is no longer a man of mystic power.

I well remember the last time I heard a judge explain the meaning of the
oath as it should be explained. It chilled us all to the bone to hear him.
We need some witchcraft again, and the Sixth Book of Moses, and the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and signing your name in the blood of a newly
baptized child! Steal a sack of money and silver treasure, if you like,
and hide the sack in the hills where on autumn evenings a blue flame will
hover over the spot. But don't come to me with three pairs of mittens and
a side of household bacon!

The man no longer worried about the sack; leaving it behind, he crawled
out of the hut to study the weather. The coffee and tobacco I had bought I
put back into the sack, for I did not need them. When he returned, he
said:

"I think after all I'd better stop the night here with you, if you don't
mind."

In the evening he gave no indication of being prepared to contribute any
of his own food. I cooked some coffee and gave him some dry bread to eat
with it.

"You shouldn't have expenses for me," he said.

Then he began to rummage in his sack again, pushing the bacon well down so
that the cloth might not be stained by it; after this he took off his
leather belt and put it round the sack, with a loop to carry over one
shoulder.

"Now if I take the neck of the sack over the other shoulder, I'll find it
easier to carry," he said.

I gave him my letters to post on the other side of the fjeld and he stowed
them away safely, slapping the outside of his pocket afterward; I also
gave him a special envelope in which to keep the money for the stamps, and
tied it to the neck of the sack.

"Where do you live?" I asked him.

"Where can a poor man live? Of course I live by the sea. I'm sorry to say
I have a wife and children--no use denying it."

"How many children have you?"

"Four. One's got a crippled arm and the others--there's something wrong
with all of them. It's not easy for a poor devil. My wife's ill, and a few
days ago she thought she was dying and wanted Communion."

A sad note crept into his voice. But the note was false. He was telling me
a pack of lies. When they came to look for him from the village, no
Christian would have the heart to accuse a man with such a large and sick
family. This, no doubt, was his meaning.

Man, oh man, thou art worse than a mouse!

I questioned him no further, but asked him to sing something, a ballad or
a song, since we had nothing else to do.

"I've no heart to sing now," he replied. "Except possibly a hymn."

"All right; sing a hymn, then."

"Not now. I'd like to do you a favor, but--"

His uneasiness was rising. A little later he took his sack and went out.

"Well, he's gone," I thought, "but he hasn't said the customary
peace-be-with-you. I'm glad I've come into the forest," I thought. "This
is my home, and from this day forth, no mother's son shall come within my
walls again."

I made an elaborate agreement with myself that I should have no more truck
with men.

"Madame, come here," I said. "I esteem you highly, and herewith, Madame, I
undertake to enter upon a union with you for life!"

Half an hour later, the man returned. He carried no sack.

"I thought you'd gone," I said.

"Gone? I'm not a dog," he replied. "I've met people before this, and I say
good morning when I come and peace-be-with-you when I go. You shouldn't
sneer at me, you know."

"What have you done with the sack?"

"I've carried it part of the way."

His concealing the sack in case anyone should come proved he had
forethought, for it was easier to get away scot-free without a burden on
one's back. To stop him from telling me any more lies about his poverty, I
said:

"I expect you've raised plenty of dust in your day? Still do, for that
matter?"

"Well, I do what I can," he replied cheerfully. "I can lift a barrel
easier than most, and nobody was able to dance me off the floor last
Christmas! Hush--is that someone coming?"

We listened. His eyes darted toward the entrance, and in a moment he had
chosen to meet danger halfway. He was taut and splendid; I could see his
jaw working.

"It's nothing," I said.

Resolute and strong as a bull, he crawled out of the hut and was gone for
a few minutes. When he returned, breathing heavily, he said:

"It's nothing."

We lay down for the night.

"In God's name!" he said, as he settled himself on his pine bed. I fell
asleep at once, and for some time slept deeply. But during the night
restlessness seized on the man again. "Peace be with you!" I heard him
mutter as he crawled out of the hut.

In the morning I burned the man's bed of pine needles; it made a lively
fire of crackling pine in the hut.

Outside, the ground was covered with new-fallen snow.




III


There is nothing like being left alone again, to walk peacefully with
oneself in the woods. To boil one's coffee and fill one's pipe, and to
think idly and slowly as one does it.

There, now I'll fill the kettle with snow, I think, and now I'm crushing
the coffee beans with a stone; later I must beat my sleeping bag well in
the snow and get the wool white again. There is nothing in this of
literature or great novels or public opinion; does it matter? But then I
haven't been toiling just to get this coffee into my life. Literature?
When Rome ruled the world, she was no more than Greece's apprentice in
literature. Yet Rome ruled the world. Let us look too at another country
we know: it fought a war of independence the glory of which still shines,
and it brought forth the greatest school of painting in the world. Yet it
had no literature, and has none today....

Day by day I grow more knowing in the ways of the trees and the moss and
the snow on the ground, and all things are my friends. The stump of a fir
tree stands thawing in the sun; I feel my familiarity with it grow, and
sometimes I stand there loving it, for there is something in it that moves
my soul. The bark is badly broken. One winter in the deep snow, the tree
must have been crippled, and now it points upward long and naked. I put
myself in its place, and look at it with pity. My eyes perhaps have the
simple, animal expression that human eyes had in the age of the mastodons.

No doubt you will seize this opportunity to mock me, for there are many
amusing things you can say about me and this stump of a fir. Yet in your
heart, you know that I am superior to you in this as in everything else,
with the single exception that I have not your conventional
accomplishments, nor have I passed examinations. About the forest and the
earth you can teach me nothing, for here I feel what no man else has felt.

Sometimes I take the wrong direction and lose my way. Yes, truly this may
happen sometimes. But I do not begin to twist and lose myself outside my
very door, like the children of the city. I am twelve miles out, far up
the opposite bank of the Skjel River, before I begin to get lost, and then
only on a sunless day, with perhaps thick, wild snow coming down, and no
north or south in the sky. Then you must know the special marks of this
kind of tree and that, the galipot of the pine, the bark of deciduous
trees, the moss that grows at their roots, the angle of the south and
north-pointing branches, the stones that are moss-covered and those that
are bare, and the pattern of the network of veins in the leaves. From all
these things while there is daylight I can find my way.

But if the dusk falls, I know it will be impossible for me to get home
till the next day. "How shall I pass this night?" I say to myself. And I
roam about till I find a sheltered spot; the best is a crag standing with
its back to the wind. Here I collect a few armfuls of pine needles, button
my jacket tight, and take a long time to settle. No one who has not tried
it knows anything of the fine pleasure that streams through the soul as
one sits in a snug shelter on such a night. I light my pipe to pass the
time, but the tobacco doesn't agree with me because I haven't eaten, so I
put some resin in my mouth to chew as I lie thinking of many things. The
snow continues to fall outside; if I have been lucky enough to find a
shelter facing the right way, the snowdrifts will close in over me and
form a crest like a roof above my retreat. Then I am quite safe, and may
sleep or wake as I please; there will be no danger of freezing my feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two men came to my hut; they were in a great hurry, and one of them called
to me:

"Good morning. Has a man passed this way?"

I didn't like his face. I was not his servant and his question was too
stupid.

"Many people may have passed this way. Do you mean have I _seen_ a
man go by?"

So much for him!

"I meant what I said," the man replied surlily. "I'm asking you in the
name of the law."

"Oh."

I had no desire for further conversation, and crawled into my hut.

The two men followed me. The constable grinned and said:

"Did you _see_ a man pass by here yesterday?"

"No," I said.

They looked at each other, and took counsel together; then they left the
hut and returned to the village.

I thought: What zeal this policeman showed in the execution of his duties,
how he shone with public spirit! There will be bonuses for the capture and
transport of the criminal; there will be honor in having carried out the
deed. All mankind should adopt this man because he is its son, created in
its image! Where are the irons? He would rattle the links a little and
lift them on his arm like the train of a riding skirt, to make me feel his
terrifying power to put people in irons ... I feel nothing.

And what tradesmen--what kings of trade--we have today! They instantly
miss what a man can carry off in a sack, and notify the police.

From now on I begin to long for the spring. My peat hut lies still too
near to mankind, and I will build myself another when the frost has gone
out of the ground. On the other side of the Skjel, I have chosen a spot in
the forest which I think I shall like. It is twenty-four miles from the
village and eighteen across the fjeld.




IV


Have I said that I was too near men? Heaven help me, for some days in
succession I have been taking strolls in the forest, saying good morning
and pretending I was in human company. If it was a man I imagined beside
me, we carried on a long, intelligent conversation, but if it was a woman,
I was polite: "Let me carry your parcel, miss." Once it must have been the
Lapp's daughter I seemed to meet, for I flattered her most lavishly and
offered to carry her fur cloak if she would take it off and walk in her
skin; tut, tut.

Heaven help me, I am no longer too near men. And probably I will not build
that peat hut still further away from them.

The days grow longer, and I do not mind. The truth is that in the winter I
suffered privation and learned much in order to master myself. It has
taken time and sometimes a resolute will, so it cannot be denied that I am
paying for my education rather dearly. Sometimes I have been needlessly
stern with myself.

"There is a loaf of bread," I said. "It doesn't surprise me, it doesn't
interest me; I am used to it. But if you see no bread for twelve hours, it
will mean something to you," I said, and hid the bread away.

That was in the winter.

Were they dreary days? No, good days. My liberty was so great that I could
do and think as I pleased; I was alone, the bear of the forest. But even
in the heart of the forest no man dares speak aloud without looking round;
rather, he walks in silence. For a time you console yourself that it's
typically English to be silent, it's regal to be silent. But suddenly you
find this has gone too far, your mouth begins to wake, to stretch, and
suddenly to shout nonsense.

"Bricks for the palace! The calf is much stronger today!"

Perhaps if your voice is strong, the sound will carry for a quarter of a
mile--but then you feel a sting as though after a slap. If only you had
kept your regal silence! One day the postman who crosses the fjeld once a
month came on me just as I had shouted.

"What?" he called from the wood.

"Careful below!" I called back to save my face. "I've put out a trap."

But with the longer days, my courage grows; it must be the spring that
causes this mysterious revival within me, and I no longer fear a shout
more or less. I needlessly rattle my pots and pans as I cook, and I sing
at the top of my voice. It is spring.

Yesterday I stood on a hillock and looked out across the wintry woods.
They have a different expression now; they have gone gray and bedraggled,
and the midday sun has thawed down the snow and diminished it. There are
catkins everywhere, drifts of them in the underbrush, looking like letters
of the alphabet piled in a heap. The moon rises, the stars break forth. I
am cold and shiver a little, but I have nothing to do in the hut, and
prefer to shiver as long as possible. In the winter I did nothing so
foolish, but went home if I was cold. Now I'm tired of that, too. It is
the spring.

The sky is pure and cool, lying wide open to all the stars. There is a
great flock of worlds up in that endless meadow, tiny, teeming worlds, so
tiny that they are like the sound of a tinkling bell; as I look at them, I
can hear thousands of tiny bells. Yes, certainly I am being drawn more and
more toward the grassy slopes of spring.




V


I fill the fireplace with pine wood, hoist my belongings to my back, and
leave the hut. "Farewell, Madame."

That was the end.

I feel no pleasure at leaving my shelter, but a touch of sadness--as I
always do on leaving a place that has been my home for some time. But all
the world stands outside calling to me. Indeed I am like all lovers of the
woods and fields; wordlessly we had agreed to meet, and as I sat there
last night, I felt my eyes being drawn to the door.

Several times I look back at the hut, with the smoke rising up from the
chimney; the smoke billows and waves to me, and I wave back.

The silky pallor of the morning refreshes me; in a long blue haze over the
forest, a slow dawn rises. It looks like a cheerful piratical coast in the
sky before me. The mountains are all on my left.

After a few hours' march I am like new from top to toe, and I press on
swiftly. I beat the air with my stick, and it says "hoo" as it swishes;
whenever I think I deserve it, I sit down and give myself food.

No, you have not my pleasures in the town.

I beat my legs with my stick from the sheer exuberance of living, and
nearly cry out. I behave as though the burden on my back had no weight,
taking needless leaps, and overexerting myself a little; but an
overexertion to which one is driven by inner content is easy to bear. In
my solitude, many miles from men and houses, I am in a childishly happy
and carefree state of mind, which you are incapable of understanding
unless someone explains it to you. I play a little game with myself,
pretending to have discovered a remarkable kind of tree. At first I pay
little attention, then I stretch my neck and contract my eyelids and gaze.


"What!" I say to myself. "Surely it couldn't be--"

I throw down my burden and approach, inspect the tree and nod sagely,
saying it is a strange, fabled tree that I have discovered. And I take out
my notebook and describe it.

Merely jest and happiness, a queer little impulse to play. Children have
done it before me. And here comes no postman to surprise me. As suddenly
as I have begun the game, I end it again, as children do. But for a moment
I was transported back to the dear, foolish bliss of childhood.

Perhaps it was the anticipation of soon seeing men again that made me
playful and happy!

Next day, just as a raw mist descends on mountain and forest, I reach the
Lapp's house. I enter. But though I meet with nothing but kindness, a Lapp
hut contains little that is interesting. There are spoons and knives of
bone on the peat wall, and a small paraffin lamp hangs from the roof. The
Lapp himself is a dull nonentity who can neither tell fortunes nor
conjure. His daughter has gone across the field; she has learned to read,
but not to write, at the village school. The two old people, husband and
wife, are fools. The whole family share a sort of animal dumbness; if I
ask them a question, I may or may not get half a reply: "Mm-no, mm-yes." I
am not a Lapp, and so they distrust me.

All the afternoon the mist lay white on the forest. I slept a while. In
the evening, the sky was clear again, and there were a few degrees of
frost. I left the hut. The moon stood full and silent above the earth.

Heigh-ho--what untuned strings!

  But where are the birds all gone away,
  and what kind of place is this?
  Here where I stand nothing moves or stirs,
  in this world that is dead, no event occurs;
  I stand in a silvermine.
  My eyes sweep round, but I sorely miss
  a homely, well-known outline.

  And so he came to a silver wood--
  thus ran an ancient tale.
  Here rests a song of shimmering fire
  as though it were sung by a starry choir.
  And swift in my youth, I leap
  to bind fast the troll, the cunning male,
  and awaken a maid from her sleep.

  Today I smile at childish tales,
  old age has made me wise.
  Once proudly in prodigal youth I trod,
  now by age my foot is heavily shod;
  yet my heart--my heart would fly.
  I am driven by fire and bound by ice,
  no rest nor repose have I.

  A shuddering chill falls on the night,
  like a cloud from the lungs in the cold.
  There passed a great gust through the silver lace
  of the woods, like a lion's royal pace
  on paws that are soundless and still.
  It may be a god on his evening stroll.
  The roots of the forest thrill.

When I returned to the hut, the daughter had also returned home, and sat
eating after her long march. Olga the Lapp, tiny and queer, conceived in a
snowdrift, in the course of a greeting. "_Boris_!" they said and
fell on their noses.

She had bought red and blue pieces of cloth at the draper's shop in the
village, and no sooner had she finished eating than she pushed the cups
and plates away and began to embroider her Sunday jacket with pretty
strips of the cloth. All the while she never spoke a word, because a
stranger was in the room.

"You know me, Olga, don't you?"

"Mm."

"But you look so angry."

"M-no."

"How's the snow track across the fjeld?"

"All right."

I knew there was a deserted hut the family had once lived in, and asked:

"How far is it to your old hut?"

"Not far," said Olga.

Olga Lapp has someone to smile at surely, even if she will not smile at
me. Here she sits in the great forest, pandering to her vanity and sewing
wonderful scrolls on her jacket. On Sunday, no doubt, she will wear it to
church and meet the man whose eyes it is meant to gladden.

I was not anxious to stay any longer with these small beings, these human
grains of sand. As I had slept enough in the afternoon and the moon was
bright, I prepared to leave. After laying in a further supply of reindeer
cheese and whatever other food I could get, I left the hut. But what a
surprise: the bright moonlight was gone, and the sky was overcast; there
was no frost, only mild weather and wet woods. It was spring.

When Olga Lapp saw this, she advised me against leaving; but why should I
listen to her chatter? She came with me a little way into the woods to
direct me, then turned and went back, tiny and queer, her feathers ruffled
like a hen's.




VI


It was difficult to advance. Never mind. A few hours later I found myself
high up on the fjeld; I must have strayed from the path. What is that dark
shape there? A mountain peak. And that over there? Another peak. Let us
pitch camp on the spot, then.

There was a deep goodness and tenderness about this mild night. I sat in
the dark recalling forgotten memories of my childhood, and many
experiences in this place and that. And what a satisfaction it is, too, to
have money in one's pocket, even if one sleeps in the open!

During the night I woke up; I found it growing too warm for me under my
crag, and loosened my sleeping bag. It seemed to me, too, that a sound
still hummed in my ear, as though I had called out or sung in my sleep.
Suddenly I felt completely rested, and turned to look about me. It was
dark and mild, a stone-still world. The sky was paler than the ring of
mountains round me; I lay in the center of a city of peaks, at the foot of
a great cliff, huge to the point of deformity. The wind began to blow, and
suddenly there was a booming in the distance. Then came a streak of
lightning, and immediately after the thunder rolled down like a gigantic
avalanche between the most distant peaks. It was matchless to lie there
listening, and a supernatural delight, a thrill of enjoyment, ran through
me. A stranger madness filled me than I had ever felt before, and I gave
it expression by laughing aloud in wanton and humorous abandon. Many a
thought ran through my mind, witticisms alternating with moments of such
great sorrow that I lay sighing deeply. The lightning and thunder came
closer, and it began to rain--a torrential rain. The echoes were
overpowering; all nature was an uproar, a hullabalooing. I tried to
conquer the night by shouting at it, lest mysteriously it should rob me of
my strength and leave me without a will. These mountains, I thought, are
sheer incantations against my journey, great planted curses that block my
path. Or perhaps I have only strayed into a mountains' trade union? But I
nod my head repeatedly. That means I am brave and happy. Perhaps after all
they are only stuffed mountains.

More lightning and thunder and torrential rain; it felt as though the
near-by echo had slapped me, reverberating a hundred times through me.
Never mind. I have read about many battles and been in a rain of bullets
before this. Yet in a moment of sadness and humility in the presence of
the powers about me, I weep and think:

"Who am I now among men? Or am I lost already? Am I nothing already?"

And I cry out and call my name to hear if it still lives.

A wheel of gold turned before my eyes, and the thunder clapped over my
very head, on my own fjeld. Instantly I started out of the sleeping bag
and left my shelter. The thunder rolled on, there was lightning and more
thunder, worlds were uprooted. Why had I not listened to Olga's advice and
remained in the hut? Is it the Lapps whose magic powers are doing this?
The Lapps? Those human mites, those mountain dwarfs! What is all this
noise to me? I made a feeble effort to walk against it, but stopped again,
for I was among giants, and saw the foolishness of trying to battle with
the thunder.

I leaned against the side of the mountain: no longer did I stand shouting
and hurling challenges at my opponent, but looked at him with milk-blue
eyes. And now that I have yielded, none but a mountain would be so hard.
But I am not rhymes and rhythms alone; did you think I should waste my
good brain chasing such rainbows? You lie. Here I lean against the whole
world, and you, perhaps, believe the blue of my eyes....

At that, the lightning struck me. This was a miracle, and it happened to
me. It ran down my left elbow, scorching the sleeve of my jacket. The
lightning seemed like a ball of wool that dropped to the ground. I felt a
sensation of heat, and saw that the ground farther down the mountain was
struck a loud blow and then split. A great oppression held me down; a
spear of darkness shot through me. And then it thundered beyond all
measure, not long and rumbling, but firm and clear and rattling.

The storm passed on.




VII


Next day I arrived at the deserted hut, drenched to the skin, struck by
lightning, but in a strangely gentle and yielding mood, as after a
punishment. My good fortune in the midst of my ill-luck made me
overfriendly to everything; I tramped on without hurting the ground, and I
avoided sinful thoughts, though it was spring. I was not even out of
temper when I had to retrace my steps across the fjeld to find my way
again to the hut. I had time; there was no hurry. I was the first tourist
of the spring season, and far too early.

So I remained at my ease in the hut for a few days. Sometimes at night
verses and small poems blossomed in my mind as though I had become a real
poet. At any rate there were signs that great changes had taken place
within me since the winter, when I had desired nothing but to lie blinking
my eyes and be left in peace.

One day when everything was thawing in the sun, I left the hut and walked
about the mountains for some hours. I had lately been thinking of writing
some children's verses, addressed to a certain little girl, but nothing
had come of it. Now as I walked on the mountainside, I felt again a desire
for this pastime, and worked at it on several occasions, but could not get
it into shape. The night, when one has slept an hour or two, is the time
when such things come to one.

So I went straight on to the village and bought myself a good store of
food. There were many people in this district, and it did me good to hear
human speech and laughter again; but there was no place here where I could
stay, and in any case I had come too early. I had much to carry on my way
home to my hut again. About halfway I met a man, a casual laborer, a
vagabond, whose name was Solem. Later I heard that he was the bastard son
of a telegraph operator who had been in Rosenlund nearly a generation
before.

That this man should have stepped off the path to let me pass with my
burden was a good trait in him, and I thanked him and said, "I shouldn't
have run over you in any case, ha, ha!"

He asked me if there was much snow on the way to the village. I told him
it was much the same as here. "I see," he said, and turned away. I thought
that perhaps he had come a long way, and since he carried nothing that
looked like provisions, I offered him some of mine in order to make him
talk a little. He thanked me and accepted.

He was above middle height, and quite young, not more than in his
twenties, possibly just on thirty--a fine fellow. After the swaggering
fashion of wanderers, he had a lock of hair escaping from under the peak
of his cap; but he wore no beard. This full-grown man still shaved without
growing tired of doing so, and this, together with his fringe of hair and
his general manner, gave me the impression that he wished to seem younger
than he was.

We talked while he ate; he laughed readily and was in a cheerful mood, and
since his face was beardless and hard, it looked like a laughing iron
mask. But he was sensible and pleasant. There was only one thing: I had
been silent for so long that I talked now perhaps too readily; and if it
happened that both this boy Solem and I spoke at once, he would stop
immediately to let me have my say. When this had happened several times, I
grew tired of winning, and stopped too. But that merely made him nod and
say: "Go ahead."

I explained to him that I idled in solitude, studying strange trees, and
writing a thing or two about them, that I lived in a hut, but that today I
had finished my stock of provisions and had had to go to the village. When
he heard about the hut, he stopped chewing, and sat as though he were
listening; then he said hastily: "Yes, in a way I know these telegraph
poles across the mountains very well. Not these particular poles, but
others. I was a linesman till not long ago."

"Were you?" I said. "Haven't you passed my hut today?" I added.

He hesitated a moment, but when he saw that I was not trying to put him in
the wrong, he admitted that he had been in the hut and rested, and found
my crisp-bread there.

"It wasn't easy to sit there without taking some of it," he said.

We spoke of many things. His language was hardly coarse at all, nor did he
dawdle over his food. My own manners had run wild to such an extent that I
valued his good behavior.

He offered to help me carry my pack as a mark of his gratitude for the
food, and I accepted his offer. It was in this way that the stranger
returned to the hut with me. As soon as I came in I saw a note on the
table, a sort of thanks for the bread; it was an extremely ill-mannered
epistle, full of obscene expressions. When Solem saw what I was reading,
his iron face broke into a smile. I pretended not to understand the note
and threw it back on the table; he picked it up and tore it to shreds.

"I'm sorry you've seen it," he said. "We linesmen have a way of doing that
sort of thing, and I'd forgotten I'd left it here."

Soon after this he went out.

He stayed that night and next day, and found a means of repaying me by
washing some of my clothes and making himself useful in other ways. There
was a large tub outside the hut--had been since the Lapps lived there--
which was cracked and leaked abundantly, but Solem stopped the cracks with
bacon fat and boiled my clothes in it. It was very funny to watch him
imperturbably skimming off the fat that floated up.

He seemed to want to stay till we had finished the provisions again, and
then to go with me to the village; but when he heard I was going the other
way, to the mountain farm somewhere under the great peaks of the Tore,
where summer visitors stayed and many travelers passed, he wanted to go
there, too. He was a bird of passage.

"Can't I come with you and help you carry?" he asked me. "I'm used to farm
work, too, and perhaps I can get a job there."




VIII


The bustle of spring season had already started at the great farm; men and
animals were awake, the barn re-echoed with lowing the whole day long, and
the goats had long since been let out to pasture.

It was a long way between neighbors here; one or two cotters had cleared
an area in the forest, which they had then bought; apart from that, all
the land in sight belonged to the farm. Many new houses had been built
here as the traffic over the fjelds increased, and gargoyles, homelike and
Norwegian, sat on the gable ends, while the sound of a piano came from the
living-room. Do you know the place? You have been here, and the people of
the farm have asked after you.

Good days, nothing but good days: a suitable transition from solitude. I
speak to the young people who own the homestead now, and to the husband's
old father and young sister Josephine. The old man leaves his room to look
at me. He is terrifyingly old, perhaps ninety; his eyes are worn and
half-crazed, and his figure has shrunk to nothing. He toils with both
hands to drag himself into the day, and each time it is as though he left
his mother's womb anew and found a world before him:

"Look, how strange, there are houses on the farm," he thinks as he gazes
at them. And when the barn doors stand open, he looks at them, too, and
thinks:

"Just like a doorway; what can it be? Looks exactly like a doorway...."

And he stands still a long time staring at it.

But Josephine, the daughter of his latest marriage, is young and plays the
piano for me. Ah, Josephine! As she runs through the garden, her feet are
like a breeze under her skirt. How kind she is to the visitors! Surely she
has seen us coming a long way off, Solem and myself, and sat down to play
the piano. She has gray, pathetic, young girl's hands--hands which confirm
an old observation of mine that one's hands reveal one's sexual character,
showing chastity, indifference, or passion.

It is pleasant to watch Josephine crouch down to milk the goat. But she is
only doing this now to charm and please the stranger. Ordinarily she has
no time for such work, for she is too busy at her indoor tasks, waiting at
table and watering the flowers and chatting with me about who climbed the
Tore Peak last summer, and who did it the summer before that. These are
Josephine's tasks.

Refreshed and rejuvenated, I idle about, stand for a while watching Solem,
who has been put to carting manure, then drift on down through the wood to
the cotters' houses. Neat, compact houses, barns with room for two cows
and a couple of goats in each, half-naked children playing homemade games
outside the barns, quarrels and laughter and tears. The men at both places
cart manure on sleighs, seeking a path where the snow and ice still lie on
the ground, and doing very well with it. I do not descend to the houses,
but watch the work from my point of vantage. Well do I know the life of
labor, and well do I like it.

It was no small area these cotters had broken up; the homesteads were tiny
but the fences surrounding the land included a good section of forest.
When the ground was cleared all the way to the fence, this would be a farm
with five cows and a horse. Good luck!

The days pass, the windowpanes have thawed, the snow is melting away,
green things grow against south walls, and the leaves break out in the
woods. My original intention to make great irons hot within me is
unchanged; but if I ever thought this an easy task I must be an incredible
fool. I do not even know with any certainty if there are irons in me
still, or whether I can shape them if there are. Since the winter, life
has made me lonely and small; I idle and loiter here, remembering that
once things were different. Now that I have reached daylight and men
again, I begin to understand all this. I was a different person once. The
wave has its feathered crest, and so had I; wine has its fire, and so had
I. Neurasthenia, the ape of all the diseases, pursues me.

What then? No, I do not mourn this. Mourn? It is for women to mourn. Life
is only a loan, and I am grateful for the loan. At times I have had gold
and silver and copper and iron and other small metals; it was a great
delight to live in the world, much greater than an endless life away from
the world; but pleasure cannot last. I know of no one who has not been
through the same thing; but I know of no one who will admit it. How they
have declined! But they themselves have said:

"See how everything is better!"

At their first jubilee, they left life behind and began a vegetating
existence; once one is fifty, the seventies begin. And the irons were no
longer red-hot; there were no irons. But by heaven, how stubbornly
Simplicity insisted the irons were there, insisted that they were red.

"See the irons!" Simplicity said. "See how red they are!"

As though it mattered that death can be kept off for another twenty years
from one who has already begun to perish! I have no use for such a way of
thinking; but you have, no doubt, you with your cheerful mediocrity and
school education. A one-armed man can still walk; a one-legged man can lie
down. Has the forest taught you nothing, then? What have I learned in the
forest? _That young trees grow there_.

In my footsteps walks youth, youth that is shamelessly, barbarously
scorned, merely because it is young, scorned by stupidity and
degeneration. I have seen this for many years. I know nothing more
despicable than your school education and your school-education standards.
Whether you have a catechism or a compass by which to guide your life is
all the same; come here, my friend, and I will give you a compass made of
my latest iron.




IX


A tourist arrived at the farm: the first tourist. And the master of the
house himself went with him across the fjeld, and as for Solem, why, he,
too, went with him so that he might know the way for later tourists. We
found the fat, short, and thin-haired stranger standing in the yard, an
elderly, well-to-do man who walked for the sake of his health and the last
twenty years of his life. Josephine, the dear girl, made her feet a breeze
beneath her skirts, and got him into the living room, with its piano and
its earthenware bowls with beaded edges. When he was leaving, he brought
out his small change, which Josephine received in her gray, young-girl's
fingers. On the other side of the fjeld, Solem was given two crowns for
acting as guide, and that was good pay. All went so well that the master
himself was content.

"Now they'll be coming," he said. "If only they would leave us in peace,"
he added.

By this he meant he regretted the good, carefree days that he and his
household had enjoyed till now; but in a few weeks a motor road would be
opened in the neighboring valley, and then it was a question whether the
tourist traffic might not be deflected there. His wife and Josephine were
a little afraid it would be; but he himself had held as long as possible
to the opinion that all their regular visitors who had come again year
after year would remain faithful. No matter how many roads and motor cars
they might have in other places, they could not get the peaks of the Tore
range anywhere but here.

The master of the house had felt so confident that once more he had much
timber lying by the wall of the barn, ready to be built into new cottages,
with six new guestrooms, a great hall with reindeer horns and log chairs,
and a bathroom. But what was the matter with him today; was he beginning
to doubt? "If only they would leave us in peace," he said.

A week later Mrs. Brede arrived with her children; she had a cottage to
herself, as in previous summers. So she must be rich and fashionable, this
Mrs. Brede, since she had a cottage to herself. She was a charming lady,
and her little daughters were well-grown, handsome children. They curtsied
to me, making me feel, I don't know why, as though they were giving me
flowers. A strange feeling.

Then came Miss Torsen and Mrs. Molie, who were both to stay for the
summer. They were followed by Schoolmaster Staur, who would stay a week.
Later came two schoolmistresses, the Misses Johnsen and Palm, and still
later Associate Schoolmaster Hoey and several others--tradesmen, telephone
operators, a few people from Bergen, one or two Danes. There were many of
us at table now, and the talk was lively. When Schoolmaster Staur was
asked if he wanted more soup, he replied: "No, thank you; I require no
more!" and then rolled his eyes at us to show that this was the correct
thing to say. Between meals we made up small parties, going this way and
that on the sides of the fjeld and in the woods. But of transient guests
there were few or none at all, and it was really on these that the house
would earn well--on rooms for a night, on single meals, on cups of coffee.
Josephine seemed to be worrying lately, and her young fingers grew more
greedy as they counted silver coins.

Lean brook trout, goat's-meat stew, and tinned foods. Some of the guests
were dissatisfied people who spoke of leaving; others praised both the
food and the wild mountain scenery. Schoolmistress Torsen wanted to leave.
She was tall and handsome and wore a red hat on her dark hair; but there
were no suitable young men here, and in the long run it was a bore to
waste her holidays so completely. Tradesman Batt, who had been in both
Africa and America, was the only possibility, for even the Bergensians
amounted to nothing.

"Where's Miss Torsen?" Batt would ask us.

"Here I am; I'm coming," the lady answered.

They did not care for walks up the fjeld, but preferred to go to the woods
together, where they talked for hours. But Tradesman Batt did not amount
to much either; he was short and freckled, and talked of nothing but money
and trade. Besides, he had only a small shop in the town, and dealt in
tobacco and fruit. No, he did not amount to much.

One day, during a long spell of rain, I sat talking with Miss Torsen. She
was an extraordinary girl, ordinarily proud and reserved, but sometimes
talkative, lively, and perhaps a little inconsiderate, too. We sat in the
living room, with people coming and going continually, but she did not let
that disturb her, and talked in high, clear tones; in her eagerness she
sometimes clasped her hands, and then dragged them apart again. After we
had been sitting there for some time, Tradesman Batt came in, listened to
her for a moment, and then said:

"I'm going out now, Miss Torsen; are you coming?"

She swept him once with her eyes from head to foot; then she turned away
and went on talking, looking very proud and determined as she did so. No
doubt she had many good qualities; she was twenty-seven, she said, and
sick and tired of a teacher's life.

But why had she ever entered on such a life in the first place?

"Oh, just doing what everybody else did," she replied. "The girls next
door were also going to walk the road of scholarship; to study languages,
as they called it, study grammar; it all sounded so fine. We were going to
be independent and earn a lot of money. That's what I thought! Have a
home, however small, that was quite my own. How we slogged away all
through school! Some of the girls had money, but those of us who were poor
couldn't dress like them, and we hadn't well-kept hands like theirs. And
so we came to avoid all work at home for the sake of our hands.

"And we played up to the boys at school, too. We thought them such fine
gentlemen; one of them had a riding horse, bit of a fool, of course, but
he was a millionaire's son and awfully decent, gave us banknotes--me,
anyhow--and he kissed me many times. His name was Flaten; his father was a
merchant. Of course, he being so handsome and dashing, we wanted to be
nice to him too. I should have done anything he asked; I used to pray to
God for him.

"I'm sure I wasn't the only one who wanted to be smart and pretty. That
was how we passed the time. Washing and cooking and mending fell to the
lot of my mother and sisters; we students wouldn't do anything but sit
round being very learned and getting seraphic hands. We were quite mad, as
I don't mind admitting. It was in the course of those years that we
acquired all the distorted ideas we've been burdened with since; we grew
dull with school wisdom, anaemic, unbalanced: sometimes terribly unhappy
about our sad lot, sometimes hysterically happy, and pluming ourselves on
our examinations and our importance. We were the pride of the family.

"And of course we were independent. We got jobs in offices, at forty
_kroner_ a month. Because now there was no longer anything in the
least extraordinary about us students--we were no rarity, there were
hundreds of us--forty _kroner_ was the most they gave us. Thirty went
to Father and Mother for our keep, and ten for ourselves. It wasn't
enough. We had to have pretty clothes for the office, and we were young,
we liked to walk out; but everything was too dear for us, we went into
debt, and some of us got engaged to poor devils like ourselves. The narrow
school life during our years of development did more than hurt our
intelligence; we wanted to show spirit, too, and not recoil before any
experience, so some of us went to the bad, others married--and with such
antecedents, of course, there was first-rate mismanagement in the home;
others disappeared to America. But probably all of them are still boasting
their languages and their examinations. It's all they have left--not
happiness or health or innocence, but their matriculation. Good God!"

"But surely some of you have become schoolmistresses with good salaries?"

"Good salaries! Anyhow, first we had to start studying all over again. As
though Father and Mother and brothers and sisters hadn't sacrificed enough
for our sakes already! There was cramming again for long periods, and then
we began life in the schoolroom--to give to others the same unnatural
upbringing we had had ourselves. Oh, yes, ours was a noble vocation; it
was almost like being missionaries. But now if you'll excuse me, I'd like
to talk about something besides this exalted position. Anything else you
please."

Tradesman Batt opened the door and said:

"Are you coming, Miss Torsen? It's stopped raining now."

"Oh, leave me alone," she replied.

Tradesman Batt withdrew.

"Why do you turn him away like that?" I asked.

"Because ... well, the weather is bad," she said, looking out of the
window. "Besides, he's such a fool. And he takes such liberties."

How sure of herself she looked, and how right she seemed!

Poor Miss Torsen! True or not, the news gradually spread that Miss Torsen
had recently lost her post at the school, where indulgence had been
exercised for a long time toward her eccentric methods of teaching.

So that was it.

But certainly what she had told me was nonetheless true.




X


The news has leaked out that the master of the homestead here owes a huge
debt, and that because he needs cash he has sold new, valuable plots of
land to his cotters. I am finding out many things now. Mrs. Brede with the
handsome, well-modeled head knows something about everything, for her many
summers at the farm have given her knowledge. When she talks about
conditions here, she need not grope for words.

The master has taken a large mortgage.

No one would believe that all is not well here; the many new buildings and
flagpoles, the curtains at the windows and the red-painted well house--all
give an impression of great prosperity. The rooms, too, make a good
impression. I shall not speak of the piano, but here are pictures on the
walls and photographs of the farm seen from all angles; good newspapers
are kept and there is a selection of novels on the tables; though guests
sometimes take books away with them, the books are never missed. Or take a
thing like this: you get your bill on a handsomely printed paper, with a
picture at the top of the farm and the Tore range in the background. In
short, no one would doubt for a moment that there is a fortune here. And
why not, after twenty years as a kind of resort for tourists and
pensioners?

Nevertheless, the truth is that this homestead with all its interior and
exterior furnishings costs more than the business is worth. Manufacturer
Brede, too, has put money into it, and that is why Mrs. Brede comes here
every year with her children, to get their dividends in board and lodging.


No wonder she has a house to herself; after all, it's her own house.

"It was a good place in the old days," says Mrs. Brede. "Travelers stopped
here and had a meal and a bed for the night; it cost nothing to run the
place then. But the tourist traffic has forced him to make improvements
and enlargements. You have to keep pace with development, and be as good
as other such places in the country; they're all competing. And probably
the master here is not the right man to carry on such an irregular and
capricious business; he has learned to like idleness too much, and lets
the farm take care of itself. But the two cotters are hard-working
fellows. They're nephews of his, and bit by bit they're buying the farm
from him and cultivating it. My husband often says it will end with the
cotters or their children buying this whole place of his, Paul's."

"How can the cotters get power to do that?"

"They work hard; they're peasants. They started in the forest with three
or four goats each, first one of them, then the other one, working down in
the village and coming home with food and money, and all the time clearing
their own ground. The goats grew more numerous, a cow was added, they
bought more virgin land, and they acquired still more livestock. They
sowed grain and planted potatoes and cultivated pasture land; the owner
here buys root vegetables from his cotters; he hasn't time to toil with
such things himself; there's a great deal of work in it. Oh, no, they
don't sow anything but green fodder for the stock here; Paul says it's not
worth-while. And in a way he's right. He's tried hiring enough men to run
the farm too, but it won't work. It's just in the spring season that the
tourists start coming, and then the men are constantly being interrupted
in their work on the farm to pilot tourists across the fjeld, or to do
this or that for the guests. And this goes on all through the short summer
months; for several years, they haven't even found the time to spread all
their manure. But the worst time is really the autumn, when the tourists
are all rushing to get home again, and it's quite impossible to do the
harvesting undisturbed. It's almost become a custom here now, my husband
says, for the cotters to get half the harvest of the farm's outlying
fields."

On my wondering at Mrs. Brede's knowledge of farming, she told me with a
shake of the head that she herself knew very little about it, and had all
her information from her husband. The fact was that every time these
cotters wanted to buy a fresh piece of land from Paul, her husband had to
give his consent. This was because of the mortgage, and this, too, was how
they had learned of these matters. Manufacturer Brede, as a matter of
fact, was most anxious to be released from his undertaking, but this was
by no means easy. It was with great apprehensions that he now regarded the
new automobile route.

Mrs. Brede was full of a maternal gentleness; she played with her little
girls, and seemed to enjoy an admirable balance of mind. One day, for
example, a goat came home with one of its hind legs broken, and all the
guests hurried out with brandy and lanolin and bandages for the wound; but
Mrs. Brede remained quietly where she was, experienced, wise, and a little
surprised at all the excitement.

"All you can do with such a goat," she said, "is to slaughter it."

The lady, I understood, must have married early, for her two little girls
were twelve and ten. Her husband seemed to deal in important business, for
he spent a large part of the year in Iceland, and traveled a good deal
elsewhere as well. This, too, the lady bore quietly. And yet she was still
young and handsome, a little plump, perhaps, for her height, but with a
lovely, unwrinkled skin. She was quite unlike Miss Torsen, the only other
good-looking lady at the farm; Miss Torsen was tall and dark.

But perhaps Mrs. Brede was not always so calm as she seemed. One evening
when she went down to the men's hut and asked Solem to do her a service, I
saw that her face was strange and covered with blushes. Would Solem come
to her room and repair a window-blind that had fallen down? It was late in
the evening, and the lady seemed to have been in bed already, and to have
risen again. Solem did not appear very willing. Suddenly their eyes met,
and clung for a moment. Yes, certainly, of course he would come....

What an iron face he had, and what a rogue he was!

Mrs. Brede departed.

But a moment later she returned to say that she had changed her mind.
Never mind, thank you, she would fix the blind in position herself.




XI


An occasional tourist came or went, Solem accompanied him across the
fjeld, and he was gone. But where were all the foreigners this year?
Bennett's and Cook's conducted tours, the hordes that would "do" the
mountain peaks of Norway--where were they?

At last two solitary Englishmen turned up. They were middle-aged, unshaven
and ill-groomed altogether, two engineers or something of that sort, but
quite as speechless and uncivil as the grandest of the traveling British
clowns. "Guide! Guide!" they called. "You the guide?" Nothing about them
was any different from what we had grown to expect; these two traveled
brainlessly and solemnly to the mountain tops, were in a hurry, had a
purpose, behaved as though they were running to catch a doctor. Solem went
with them to the top and down the other side, and they offered him a
fifty-_oere_ bit. Solem held out the palm of his hand, he told me
afterwards, for he thought they would put more in it, but nothing came of
that. So he created a disturbance--Solem has grown spoiled and insolent
from all his idling with tourists.

_"Mehr,_ more," said he.

No, they would not. Solem flung the coin on the ground and struck his
hands together repeatedly. This had the required effect, and one
_krone_ made its appearance. But on Solem's taking the noble lord by
the shoulder and exerting a little pressure, two _kroner_ were at
last forthcoming.

At length a conducted party arrived. Many tongues, both sexes, huntsmen,
fishermen, dogs, mountaineers, porters. There was a tremendous commotion
at the farm; the flag was run up, Paul bent double under all the orders he
received, and Josephine ran, flew at every call. Mrs. Brede had to give up
her sitting room to three English ladies, and the rest of us were crowded
together as close as possible. I, for my part, was to be allowed to keep
my bed because of my settled age; but I said, "By no means, let this
English solicitor or whatever he is have my bed; what does it matter for a
night!"

Then I went out.

If one keeps one's eyes open, one may see a great deal at such a resort in
the daytime. And one may see much at night, too. What is the meaning of
all this bleating of goats in the shed? Why are the animals not at rest?
The door is closed; none of the visiting dogs has got in. Or--_have_
some of the visiting dogs got in? Vice, like virtue, walks in rings and
circles; nothing is new, all returns to its beginnings and repeats itself.
The Romans ruled the world, yes. They were so mighty, the Romans, so
invincible, that they could permit themselves a vice or two, they could
afford to live at the arena, they had their fun with young boys and
animals. Then one day retribution overtook them, their children's children
lost battles everywhere, and their children's children again only sat--sat
and looked backward. The ring was closed; none were less rulers of the
world than the Romans.

They paid no attention to me, the two Englishmen in the goats' shed; I was
merely one of the natives, a Norwegian, who had but to accept the ways of
the mighty tourists. But they themselves belonged to that nation of
gamblers, coachmen, and vice which one day the wholesome Gothic soul will
castigate to death....

The disturbance continued all night, and very early, the dogs began to
bark. The caravan awoke; it was six in the morning, and doors began to
bang in all the houses. They were in a great hurry, these travelers; they
were running to catch the doctor. They had breakfast in two sessions, but
though the household was bent double before them and gave of its best,
they were not satisfied. "If we had only known a little earlier," said
Paul. But they muttered that we should just wait; there were motor cars in
other places. Then Paul spoke--Paul, the master of the farm, the man who
lived under the Tore peaks:

"But I'm going to enlarge; don't you see all the timber outside? And I'm
planning to get a telephone...."

The caravan paid the exact amount of their small bill and departed,
accompanied by the master and Solem, both carrying trunks.

Peace descended on us again.

Schoolmaster Staur left now, too. He had been busy collecting plants round
the Tore peaks, and talked about his plants at table in a very learned
fashion, giving the Latin names, and pointing out their peculiarities.
Yes, indeed, he had learned a great deal at school.

"Here you see an _Artemis cotula_," he said.

Miss Torsen, who had also imbibed much learning, recognized the name and
said:

"Yes, take plenty of it with you."

"What for?"

"It's insect powder."

Schoolmaster Staur knew nothing of that, and there was a good deal of
discussion in which Associate Master Hoey had to take a hand.

No, Schoolmaster Staur knew nothing of that. But he could classify plants
and learn their names by heart. He enjoyed that. The peasant children in
his neighborhood were ignorant of these classes and names, and he could
teach them. He enjoyed that so much.

But was the spirit of the soil his friend? The plant that is cut down one
year, yet grows again the next--did this miracle make him religious and
silent? The stones, and the heather, and the branches of trees, and the
grass, and the woods, and the wind, and the great heaven of all the
universe--were these his friends?

_Artemis cotula_....




XII


When I get tired of Associate Master Hoey and the ladies.... Sometimes I
think of Mrs. Molie. She sits sewing while the Associate Master gravely
keeps her company; they talk about the servants at home whose only desire
is to stay out all night. Mrs. Molie is a thin, flat-chested lady, but
probably she has at one time been less plain; her bluish teeth look as
though they were cold, as though they were made of ice, but perhaps a few
years ago, her full lips and the dark down at the corners of her mouth
seemed to her husband the most beautiful thing he knew. Her husband--well,
he was a seafaring man, a ship's captain; he only came home on rare
occasions, just often enough to increase the family; usually he was in
Australia, China, or Mexico. It was hail and farewell with him. And here
is his wife now for the sake of her health. I wonder--is it only for her
health, or are she and the Associate Master possibly children of the same
provincial town?

When I get tired of Associate Master Hoey and the ladies, I leave them and
go out. And then I stay out all day long and nobody knows where I keep
myself. It is fitting that a settled man should be different from the
Associate Master, who is very far from being so settled. So I go out. It
is a bright day with just the right amount of warmth, and my summer woods
are filled with the fragrance of plants. I rest frequently, not because I
need to, but because the ground is full of caresses. I go so far that no
one can find me; only then am I released. No sound reaches me from farms
or men, no one is in sight; only this overgrown little goat track, which
is green at the edges and lovely. Only a bit of a goat track which looks
as though it had fallen asleep in the woods, lying there so thin and
lonely.

You who read this feel nothing, but I who sit here writing feel a kind of
sweetness at the memory of a mere track in the woods. It was like meeting
a child.

With my hands under my neck and my nose in the air, my eyes flit across
the sky. High up above the peaks of Tore, a clustering mist sways in slow
rhythm, breaks apart and presses close again, fluctuates and strains to
give birth to something. But when I rise to walk on, the end is not yet in
sight.

I meet a line of ants, a procession of ants, busy travelers. They neither
toil nor carry anything; they simply move. I retrace my steps to see if I
can find their leader, but it is useless: farther and farther I retreat, I
begin to run, but the procession is endless before and behind me. Perhaps
they started a week ago. So I go on my way, and the other insects go on
theirs.

Surely this is not a mountainside I walk on; this is a bosom, an embrace,
in its softness. I tread gently, for I do not wish to stamp or weigh it
down, and I marvel: a mountain so tender and defenseless, indulgent like a
mother. To think of an ant walking on this! Here and there lie stones,
half-covered with moss, not because they have fallen there, but because
this is their home, and they have lived here long. This is peerless.

When I reach the top and look back, it is high noon. Far away on another
peak walks one of the cows of the cotters, a strange little cow with red
and white flanks. A crow sits on a high cliff above me and caws down at me
in a voice like an iron rasp scraping against the stone. A warm thrill
runs through me, and I feel, as I have done in the woods so many times
before, that someone has just been here, and has stepped to one side.
Someone is with me here, and a moment later I see his back disappearing
into the woods. "It is God," I think. There I stand, neither speaking nor
singing. I only see. I feel all my face being filled with the sight. "It
was God," I think.

"A vision," you say. "No, a little insight into things," I reply. "Am I
making a god of nature? Do not you? Have not the Mohammedans their god,
the Jews theirs, the Hindus theirs? No one knows God, my friend; man knows
only gods. And sometimes I meet mine."

I go home by a different route, which forms a vast arc with the one I came
by. The sun is warmer now and the ground less smooth. I reach a great
ruin, the remnant of a landslide, and here, to amuse myself, I pretend to
be tired, flinging myself on the ground exactly as though someone were
watching me and saw how exhausted I am. It is only for my amusement,
because my brain has been idle so long. The sky is clear everywhere; the
clusters of mist over the Tore peaks are gone, heaven knows where, but
they have stolen away. In their place, an eagle swings in great circles
over the valley. Huge, black, and inaccessible, he traces ring after ring
as though held on a rail in the air, moving with voluptuous languor, a
thick-necked male, a winged stallion exulting. It is like music to watch
him. At length he disappears behind the peaks.

And here are only myself and the ruin and the little juniper trees. What
miracles all things are! These stones in the ruin perhaps hold some
meaning; they have lain here for thousands of years, but perhaps they,
too, roam, and make an inexpressible journey. The glaciers move, the land
rises, and the land falls; there is no hurry here. But since my
consciousness cannot associate fact with such a conception, it grows blind
with fury and revolts: The ruin cannot move; these are mere words, a game!

This ruin is a town; here and there lie scattered buildings of stone. It's
a peaceable gathering, without sensations or suicides, and perhaps a
well-shaped soul sits in each of these stones. But heaven protect me just
the same from the inhabitants of these towns! Rolling stones cannot bark,
neither do they attract thieves; they are mere ballast. Quiet behavior:
that is what I hold against them, that they make no fiery gestures; it
would become them to roll a little, but there they lie, with even their
sex unknown. But you saw the eagle instead! Be still....

A gentle wind begins to blow, swaying the bracken a little, the flowers
and the straw; but the straw cannot sway, it only trembles.

I walk on along my great arc and come down by the first cotter's house.

"Well, I expect you'll end up by building a summer resort too," I tell him
in the course of our conversation.

"Oh, no; we couldn't venture on anything like that," he replies cunningly.
In his heart I daresay he has no desire to, for he has seen what it leads
to.

I didn't like him; his eyes were fawning and rested on the ground. He
thought of nothing but land; he was land-greedy, like an animal that
sought to escape its padlock. The other cotter had bought a slightly
larger piece of land than he, a marsh that would feed one cow more; but he
himself had only got this bit of a field. Still, this would amount to
something, too, as long as he kept his health to work it.

He gripped his spade again.




XIII


Solem was being discussed at dinner; I don't know who began it, but some
of the ladies thought he was good-looking, and they nodded and said, Yes,
he was the right sort.

"What do you mean by the right sort?" Associate Master Hoey asked, looking
up from his plate.

No one answered.

Then Associate Master Hoey could not help smiling broadly, and said:

"Well, well! I must have a look at this Solem some time. I've never paid
any attention to him."

Associate Master Hoey might look at Solem all he pleased; he would grow no
bigger for that, nor Solem smaller. The good Mr. Hoey was annoyed, and that
was the truth. It is catching for a woman to discover that a man is "the
right sort"; the other women grow curious, and stick their noses into it:
"So-o-o, is he?" And a few days later the whole flock of them are of one
opinion: "Yes, indeed, he's the right sort!"

Pity the poor, left-over associate masters then!

Poor Mr. Hoey; there was Mrs. Molie, too, nodding her head for Solem. To
tell the truth, she had no appearance of knowing much about the matter,
but she could not lag behind the others.

"So, Mrs. Molie is nodding, too!" said Mr. Hoey, and smiled again. He was
intensely annoyed. Mrs. Molie turned pink and pretty.

At the next meal, Mr. Hoey could contain himself no longer.

"Ladies," he said, "mine eyes have now beheld Master Solem."

"Well?"

"Common sneak-thief!"

"Oh, shame!"

"You must admit he has a brazen look on his face. No beard. Blue chin, a
perfect horse-face...."

"There's no harm in that," said Mrs. Molie.

Mrs. Molie doesn't seem to have gone quite out of circulation after all, I
thought. In fact, she had lately been developing quite a little cushion
over her chest, and no longer looked so hunched up. She had eaten well and
slept well, and improved at this resort. Mrs. Molie, I suspect, still has
plenty of life left in her.

This proved true a few days later. Once again: poor Associate Master Hoey!
For now we had a new visitor at the farm, a gay dog of a lawyer, and he
talked more to Mrs. Molie than to anyone else. Had there been anything
between her and Mr. Hoey? True, he was not much to look at, but then
neither was she.

The young lawyer was a sportsman, yet he was learned in the social
sciences, too, had been in Switzerland and studied the principle of the
referendum. At first he had worked a few years in an architect's office,
he told us, but then he had changed to the law instead, which in its turn
had led him into social problems. No doubt he was a rich and unselfish man
to be able to change his vocation and to travel in this way. "Ah,
Switzerland!" he said, and his eyes watered. None of us could understand
his fervor.

"Yes, it must be a wonderful country," Mrs. Molie said.

The Associate Master looked ready to burst, and was quite incapable of
restraining himself.

Speaking of Solem, he said suddenly, "I've changed my mind about him
lately. He's ten times better than many another."

"There, you see!"

"Yes, he is. And he doesn't pretend to be anything more than he is. And
what he is, is of some use. I saw him slaughter the lame goat."

"Did you stop to watch that?"

"I happened to be passing. It was the work of a moment for him. And later
I saw him in the woodshed. He knows his job, that fellow. I can well
understand that the ladies see something in him."

How the Associate Master clowned! He finished by imploring the wife of the
captain who was sailing the China seas to be sure and remain faithful to
her Chinaman.

"Do be quiet and let the lawyer tell us about Switzerland," said Mrs.
Molie.

Witch! Did she want to drive her fellow-being the Associate Master into
jumping off the highest peak of the Tore tonight?

But then Mrs. Brede took a hand. She understood Mr. Hoey's torment and
wanted to help him. Had not this same Mr. Hoey just expressed himself
kindly about Solem, and was not Solem the lad who one fine evening had
caused her to tear down her window blind? There is cause and effect in all
things.

"Switzerland," said Mrs. Brede in her gentle fashion, and then she
reddened and laughed a little. "I don't know anything about Switzerland;
but once I bought some dress material that was Swiss, and I've never in my
life been so cheated."

The lawyer only smiled at this.

Schoolmistress Johnsen talked about what she had learned, watchmakers and
the Alps and Calvin---

"Yes, those are the only three things in a thousand years," said the
Associate Master, his face quite altered and pale with suppressed rage.

"Really, really, Associate Hoey!" exclaimed Schoolmistress Palm with a
smile.

But the lawyer focused everyone's admiration on himself by telling them
all about Switzerland, that wonderful country, that model for all small
countries of the world. What social conditions, what a referendum, what
planning in the exploitation of the country's natural wonders! There they
had sanatoriums; there they knew how to deal with tourists! Tremendous!

"Yes, and what Swiss cheese," said the Associate Master. "It smells like
tourists' feet."

Dead silence. So Associate Master Hoey was prepared to go to such lengths!

"Well, what about Norwegian old-milk cheese?" said a Danish voice mildly.

"Yes, that's filthy stuff, too," Mr. Hoey replied. "Just the thing for
Schoolmaster Staur pontificating in his armchair."

Laughter.

Since matters were now smoothed over again, the lawyer could safely
continue:

"If we could only make such Swiss cheese here," he said, "we should not be
so poor. Generally speaking, I found after my modest investigations in
that country that they are ahead of us in every respect. We have
everything to learn from them: their frugality, their diligence, their
long working hours, the small home industries--"

"And so on," interrupted Associate Master Hoey. "All trifles, nothingness,
negativity! A country that exists thanks only to the mercy of its
neighbors ought not to be a model for any other country on earth. We must
try to rise above the wretched stench of it, which only makes us ill. The
big countries and big circumstances should be our model. Everything grows,
even the small things, unless they're predestined to a Lilliput existence.
A child can learn from another child, of course, but the model is the
adult. Some day the child will be an adult itself. A pretty state of
affairs it would be if an eternal child, a born pygmy, were to be its
model! But that's what all this rubbish about Switzerland really amounts
to. Why on earth should we, of all people, take the smallest and meanest
country as our model? Things are small enough here anyhow. Switzerland is
the serf of Europe. Have you ever heard of a young South American country
of Norway's size trying to be on a level with Switzerland? Why do you
think Sweden is taking such great strides forward now? Not because it
looks to Switzerland, or to Norway, but to Germany! Honor to Sweden for
that! But what about us? We don't want to be a piddling little nation
stuck up in our mountains, a nation that brings forth peace conferences,
ski-runners, and an Ibsen once every thousand years; we have
potentialities for a thousand times more--"

The lawyer had for some time been holding up his hand to indicate that he
wanted to reply; now he shouted at the top of his voice:

"Just a moment!"

The Associate Master stopped.

"Just one question--a small, trifling question," said the lawyer,
preparing his ground well. "Have you ever once set foot in the country you
speak of?"

"I should think I have," replied the Associate Master.

There! The lawyer got nothing for his trifling question. And then it all
came out what a heartless jilt Mrs. Molie was. She had known all the time
that Mr. Hoey had been on a traveling scholarship in Switzerland, but she
had never mentioned it. What a snake in the grass! She had even encouraged
the lawyer, but no one else, to talk about Switzerland.

"Oh, yes, of course Associate Master Hoey has been in Switzerland" she
said, as though to clinch the matter.

"In that case, the Associate Master and I have looked on the country with
different eyes; that's all," said the lawyer, suddenly anxious to end the
controversy.

"They haven't even folk tales there," said the Associate Master, who
seemed unable to stop. "There they sit, generation after generation,
filing watch springs and piloting Englishmen up their mountains. But it's
a country without folk music or folk tales. I suppose you think we ought
to work hard to resemble the Swiss in that, too?"

"What about William Tell?" asked Miss Johnsen.

Several of the ladies nodded, or at any rate Miss Palm did.

At this point Mrs. Molie turned her head and looked out of the window as
she said:

"You really had a very different opinion about Switzerland before, Mr.
Associate Master."

This was a hit below the belt. He wanted to reply, wanted to annihilate
her, but he restrained himself and remained silent.

"Don't you remember?" she asked, goading him.

"No," he replied. "You mistook my meaning. Really, I can't understand it,
I usually make myself quite clear; after all, I'm accustomed to explaining
to children."

Another foul. Mrs. Molie said no more, merely smiling patiently.

"I can only say that my opinion is diametrically opposed to yours," the
lawyer repeated. "But I did think," he went on, "that this was one thing I
knew something about, however...."

Mrs. Molie got up and went out with her head bent, seemingly on the point
of bursting into tears. The Associate Master sat still for a moment, and
then followed her, whistling and putting on as brave a manner as though he
felt quite easy in his mind.

"What's your opinion?" asked Mrs. Brede, turning to the doyen of the
company, namely myself.

And as becomes a man of settled years, I replied:

"Probably there has been a little exaggeration on both sides."

Everybody agreed with this. But I could never have acted as a mediator,
for I thought the Associate Master was right. In one's early seventies,
one still has many pathetically young ideas.

The lawyer rounded off the discussion thus:

"Well, when all's said and done we have Switzerland to thank for being
able to sit here at our ease in this comfortable mountain resort. We get
tourists into the country on the Swiss model, and earn money and pay off
our debts. Ask this man if he would have been willing to do without all we
have learned from Switzerland...."

That evening Mrs. Brede asked,

"Why did you make Mr. Hoey look so unreasonable today, Mrs. Molie?"

"I?" said Mrs., Molie innocently. "Well, really--!"

As a matter of fact, it seemed as though Mrs. Molie had really been
innocent, for the very next morning she and the Associate Master set off
up the fjeld together in a very gay mood, and remained away till midday.
If they had the matter out between them, then no doubt the lady spoke to
her much-tried friend as follows:

"Surely you can see I'm not interested in that lawyer-person! What an
idea! I only drew him out so you'd have the chance to give him a good
dressing down--don't you understand that? Really, you're the silliest,
sweetest--come here, let me kiss you...."




XIV


Since the departure of the great caravan, there have been no other
visitors. Some of us cannot understand it; others have in a manner of
speaking got a whiff of what is wrong; but all of us still believe there
will be more visitors, because after all we're the only ones that have the
Tore peaks!

But no one appears.

The women of the house do their daily work for the inmates and do not
complain, but they are not happy. Paul still takes things quietly; he
sleeps a great deal in his room behind the kitchen, but once or twice I
have seen him walking away from the house at night, walking in deep
thought toward the woods.

From the neighboring valley comes the rumor that the motor traffic has
started there now. So this is the explanation of the quiet in our valley!
Then one day a Dane came down to us from the fjeld. He had climbed the
Tore peaks from the other side, something that had been thought impossible
till now. He had simply driven in a car to the foot of the mountains and
walked across!

So we no longer had the Tore peaks to ourselves, either.

I wonder whether, after all, Paul is not going to try to sow green-fodder
in the long strip of land down by the river. That, at any rate, had been
his original intention, but then came the great caravan, and he neglected
it. Now, of course, the season is too far advanced for sowing, and there
will be nothing but docks and chickweed. Could not the field be turfed, at
least, and sown? Why didn't Paul think of such things instead of walking
the woods at night?

But Paul has many thoughts. At an early age, his interest in farming was
diverted to the tourist traffic, and there it has remained. He hears that
our lawyer is also an architect and asks him to draw a plan for the big
new house with the six rooms, the hall and the bathroom. Paul has already
ordered the log chairs and the reindeer horns for the hall.

"If you weren't alone up here, you might have got some of the cars coming
here too," said the lawyer.

"I've thought of that," Paul replied. "It's not impossible I can do
something about it. But I must have the house first. And I must have a
road."

The lawyer promised to draw a plan of the house, and went round to look at
the site. The house was to cost such and such a sum. Paul was already
quite convinced that three or four good tourist summers would pay it off.

Paul was not worrying. As we looked over the site together, I discovered
that he smelled of brandy.

Finally a small party of Norwegians and foreigners arrived, travelers who
were out to walk, and not to drive in cars. Everyone's spirits rose; the
strangers stayed a few days and nights, and were guided across the fjeld
by Solem, who earned a fair penny. Paul, too, was visibly cheered, and
strolled about the farm in his Sunday clothes. He had a few things to
discuss with the lawyer about the house.

"If there's anything to consult about, we had better do it now," he said.
"I shall be away for a couple of days."

So they attended to a few minor matters.

"Are you going to town?" asked the lawyer.

"No," Paul replied; "only down to the village. I want to see if I can get
the people there to co-operate on a few ideas of mine: a telephone and
automobile service and so on."

"Good luck!" said the lawyer.

So the lawyer sat drafting plans while the rest of us went about our own
affairs. Josephine went to Solem and said:

"Will you go and sow the field by the river?"

"Has Paul said so?" he asked.

"Yes," she replied.

Solem went very unwillingly. While he was drawing the harrow, Josephine
went down to him and said:

"Harrow it once more."

What a brisk little thing she was, with far more forethought than the men!
She looked bewitching, for all her hard work. I have seen her many times
with her hair tumbled, but it didn't matter. And when she pretended that
none but the maids milked the goats and did outside work, it was for the
good name of the house. She had learned to play the piano for the same
reason. The mistress of the house helped her nobly, for both women were
thoughtful and industrious, but Josephine was everywhere, for she was
light as a feather. And the chaste little hands she had!

"Josephine, Josefriendly!" I called her wittily.




XV


Our dark beauty, Miss Torsen, was now seriously considering taking her
departure. She was healthy enough in any case, so she did not need a stay
in the mountains on that account, and if she was bored, why should she
stay?

But a minor event caused her to stay.

In their lack of occupation, the ladies at the resort began to cultivate
Solem. They ate so much and grew so fat and healthy that they felt a need
to busy themselves with something, and to find someone to make a fuss
over. And here was the lad Solem. They got into the habit of telling one
another what Solem had said and what Solem believed, and they all listened
with great interest. Solem himself had grown spoiled, and joked
disrespectfully with the ladies; he called himself a great chap, and once
he had even bragged in a most improper way, saying:

"Look, here's a sinful devil for you!"

"Do you know what Solem said to me?" asked Miss Palm. "He's chopping wood
and he's got a bandage on his finger, and it keeps getting caught in the
wood and bothers him, poor fellow. So he said: 'I wish I had time to stop
so I could chop this blasted finger right off my hand!'"

"Tough, isn't he?" said the other ladies. "He's quite capable of doing it,
too!"

A little later I passed the woodshed and saw Mrs. Brede there, tying a
fresh bandage on Solem's finger.... Poor lady! She was chaste, but young.

The days have been oppressively warm for some time now, with the heat
coming down in waves from the mountain and robbing us of all our strength.
But in the evenings we recovered somewhat, and busied ourselves in various
ways: some of us wrote letters or played forfeit games in the garden,
while others were so far restored that they went for a walk "to look at
nature."

Last Sunday evening I stood talking to Solem outside his room. He had on
his Sunday clothes, and seemed to have no intention of going to bed.

Miss Torsen came by, stopped, and said:

"I hear you're going for a walk with Mrs. Brede?"

Solem removed his cap, which left a red ring round his forehead.

"Who, me?" he said. "Well, maybe she said something about it. There was a
path through the woods she wanted me to show her, she said."

Miss Torsen was filled with madness now; handsome and desperate, she paced
back and forth; you could almost see the sparks flying. Her red felt hat
was held on the back of her head by a pin, the brim turned up high in
front. Her throat was bare, her frock thin, her shoes light.

It was extraordinary to watch her behavior; she had opened a window onto
her secret desires. What cared she for Tradesman Batt! Had she not toiled
through her youth and gained school knowledge? But no reality! Poor Miss
Torsen. Solem must not show a path to any other lady tonight.

As nothing more was said, and Solem was preparing to depart, Miss Torsen
cleared her throat.

"Come with me instead!" she said.

Solem looked round quickly and said, "All right."

So I left them; I whistled as I walked away with exaggerated indifference,
as though nothing on earth were any concern of mine.

"Come with me instead," she said. And he went. They were already behind
the outhouses, then behind the two great rowan trees; they hurried lest
Mrs. Brede should see them. Then they were gone.

A door wide open, but where did it lead? I saw no sweetness in her,
nothing but excitement. She had learned grammar, but no language; her soul
was undernourished. A true woman would have married; she would have been a
man's wife, she would have been a mother, she would have been a
benediction to herself. Why pounce on a pleasure merely to prevent others
from having it? And she so tall and handsome!

The dog stands growling over a bone. He waits till another dog approaches.
Then suddenly he is overcome with gluttony, pounces on the bone and
crushes it between his teeth. Because the other dog is approaching.

It seemed as though this small event had to happen before my mind was
ready for the night. I awoke in the dark and felt within me the nursery
rhyme I had dawdled over so long: four rollicking verses about the juniper
tree.

  To the top of the steepest mountains,
  where the little juniper stands,
  no other tree can follow
  from all the forest lands.
  Halfway to the hilltop
  the shivering pine catches hold;
  the birch has actually passed him,
  though sneezing with a cold.
  But a little shrub outstrips them,
  a sturdy fellow he,
  and stands quite close to the summit,
  though he measures barely a yard.
  They look like a train from the valley below
  with the shortest one for the guard.
  Or else perhaps he's a coachman now---
  why, it's only a juniper tree.

  Down dale there's summer lightning,
  green leaves and St. John's feast,
  with songs and games of children,
  and a dozen dances at least.
  But high on the empty mountain
  stands a shrub in lonely glory,
  with only the trolls that prowl about,
  just like in a story.
  The wind with the juniper's forelock
  is making very free;
  it sweeps across the world beneath
  that lies there helpless and bare,
  but the air on the heights is fresher
  than you'll ever find it elsewhere.
  None can see so far around
  as such a juniper tree.

  There hovers over the mountain
  for a moment summer's breath;
  at once eternal winter
  brings back his companion, death.
  Yet sturdy stands the juniper
  with needles ever green.
  I wonder how the little chap
  can bear a life so lean.
  He's hard as bone and gristle,
  as anyone can see;
  when every other tree is stripped,
  his berries are scarlet and sleek,
  and every berry's plainly marked
  with a cross upon its cheek.
  So now we know what he looks like too,
  this jolly juniper tree.

  At times I think he sings to himself
  a cheerful little song:
  "I've got a bright blue heaven
  to look at all day long!"
  Sometimes to his juniper brothers
  he calls that they need not fear
  the trolls that are prowling and peering
  about them far and near.
  Gently the winter evening
  falls over the copse on the height,
  and a thousand stars and candles
  are lit in the plains of the sky.
  The juniper trees grow weary
  and nod their heads on the sly;
  before we know it they're fast asleep,
  so we say: "Good night, good night!"

I got up and wrote out these rhymes on a sheet of paper, which I sent to a
little girl, a child with whom I had walked much in the country, and she
learned them at once. Then I read them to Mrs. Brede's little girls, who
stood still like two bluebells, listening. Then they tore the paper out of
my hand and ran to their mother with it. They loved their mother very
much. And she loved them too; they had the most delightful fun together at
bedtime.

Brave Mrs. Brede with her children! She might have committed a madness,
but could not find it in her heart to do so. Yet did anyone prize her for
that? Who? Her husband?

A man should take his wife to Iceland with him. Or risk the consequences
of her being left behind for endless days.




XVI


Miss Torsen no longer talks about leaving. Not that she looks very happy
about staying, either; but Miss Torsen is altogether too restless and
strange to be contented with anything.

Naturally she caught cold after that evening in the woods with Solem, and
stayed in bed with a headache next day; when she got up again, she was
quite all right.

Was she? Why was her throat so blue under the chin, as though someone had
seized her by it?

She never went near Solem any more, and behaved as though he were
nonexistent. Apparently there had been a struggle in the woods that had
made her blue under the chin, and they were friends no longer! It was like
her to want nothing real, nothing but the sensation, nothing but the
triumph. Solem had not understood that, and had flown into a passion. Had
it been thus?

Yes, there was no doubt that Solem had been cheated. He was more direct
and lacked subtlety; he made allusions, and said things like "Oh, yes,
that Miss Torsen, she's a fine one; I'll bet she's as strong as a man!"

And then he laughed, but with repressed fury. He followed her with gross
eyes wherever she went, and in order to assert himself and seem
indifferent, he would sing a song of the linesman's life whenever she was
about. But he might have saved himself the trouble. Miss Torsen was
stone-deaf to his songs.

And now it seemed she was going to stay at the resort out of sheer
defiance. We enjoyed her company no more than we had done before, but she
began to make herself agreeable to the lawyer, sitting by his work table
in the living room as he drew plans of houses. Such is the perverse
idleness of summer resorts.

       *       *       *       *       *

So the days pass; they hold no further novelty for me, and I begin to
weary of them. Now and then comes a stranger who is going across the
fjeld, but things are no longer, I am told, as they were in other years,
when visitors came in droves. And things will not improve until we, too,
get roads and cars.

I have not troubled to mention it before this, but the neighboring valley
is called Stordalen (Great Valley), while ours is only called Reisa after
the river: the whole of the Reisa district is no more than an appendage.
Stordalen has all the advantages, even the name. But Paul, our host, calls
the neighboring valley Little Valley, because, says Paul, the people there
are so petty and avaricious.

Poor Paul! He has returned from his tour to the village as hopeless as he
went, and hopelessly drunk besides. For more than a day, he stayed in his
room without once emerging. When he reappeared at last, he was aloof and
reserved, pretending he had been very successful during his absence; he
should manage about the cars, never fear! In the evening, after he had had
a few more drinks, he became self-important in a different way: oh, those
fools in the village had no sense of any kind, and had refused to give
their consent to a road to his place. He was the only one with any sense.
Would not such a bit of a road be a blessing to the whole appendage?
Because then the caravans would come, scattering money over the valley.
They understood nothing, those fools!

"But sooner or later there will have to be a road here," said the lawyer.

"Of course," replied Paul with finality.

Then he went to his room and lay down again.

On another day, a small flock of strangers came again; they had toiled up
themselves, carrying their luggage in the hot sun, and now they wanted
some help. Solem was ready at once, but he could not possibly carry all
the bags and knapsacks; Paul was lying down in his room. I had seen Paul
again during the night go out to the woods, talking loudly and flinging
his arms about as though he had company.

And here were all the strangers.

Paul's wife and Josephine came out of the house and sent Solem across to
Einar, the first cotter, to ask if he would come and help them carry. In
the meantime the travelers grew impatient and kept looking at their
watches, for if they could not cross the Tore fjeld before nightfall, they
would have to spend the night outdoors. One of them suggested to the
others that perhaps this delay was intentional. The owner of the place
probably wanted them to spend the night there; they began to grumble among
themselves, and at last they asked:

"Where is the master, the host?"

"He's ill," said Josephine.

Solem returned and said:

"Einar hasn't time to come; he's lifting his potatoes."

A pause.

Then Josephine said:

"I've got to go across the fjeld anyhow--wait a minute!"

She was gone for a moment, then returned, loaded the bags and knapsacks on
her little back, and trotted off. The others followed.

I caught up with Josephine and took her burden from her. But I would not
allow her to turn back, for this little tour away from the house would do
her good. We walked together and talked on the way: she had really no
complaints, she said, for she had a tidy sum of money saved up.

When we reached the top of the fjeld, Josephine wanted to turn back. She
thought it a waste of time to walk by my side, with nothing to do but
walk.

"I thought you had to cross the fjeld anyhow?" I said.

She was too shrewd to deny it outright, for in that case she, the daughter
of the old man at the Tore Peak farm, would have been going with the
tourists solely to carry their luggage.

"Yes, but there's no hurry. I was to have visited someone, but that can
wait till the winter."

We stood arguing about this, and I was so stubborn that I threatened to
throw all the luggage down the mountainside, and then she would see!

"Then I'll just take them and carry them myself," replied Josephine, "and
then _you'll_ see!"

By this time the others had caught up with us, and before I knew what had
happened, one of the strangers had come forward and lifted the burden from
my back, taken off his cap with a great deal of ceremony, and told me his
own and his companions' names. I must excuse them, I really must forgive
them; this was too bad, he had been so unobserving....

I told him I could easily have carried him as well as the bags. It is not
strength I lack; but day and night I carry about with me the ape of all
the diseases, who is heavy as lead. Ah, well, many another groans under a
burden of stupidity, which is little better. We all have our cross to
bear....

Then Josephine and I turned homeward again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yes, indeed, people treat me with uncontrollable politeness; this is
because of my age. People are indulgent toward me when I am troublesome to
others, when I am eccentric, when I have a screw loose; people forgive me
because my hair is gray. You who live by your compass will say that I am
respected for the writing I have been doing all these years. But if that
were so, I should have had respect in my young days when I deserved it,
not now when I no longer deserve it so well. No one--no one in the world--
can be expected to write after fifty nearly so well as before, and only
the fools or the self-interested pretend to improve after that age.

Now it is a fact that I have been practicing a most distinctive
authorship, better than most; I know that very well. But this is due, not
so much to my endeavors, as to the fact that I was born with this ability.

I have made a test of this, and I know it is true. I have thought to
myself: "Suppose someone else had said this!" Well, no doubt others have
said it sometimes, but that has not hurt me. I have gone even further than
this: I have intentionally exposed myself to direct contempt from other
literary men, and this has not hurt me either. So I am sure of my ground.
On the other hand, my way of life has lent me an inner distinction for
which I have a right to demand respect, because it is the fruit of my own
endeavors. You cannot make me out a small man without lying. Yet one can
endure even such a lie if one has character.

You may quote Carlyle against me--how authors are misjudged!--
"_Considering what book-writers do in the world, and what the world does
with book-writers, I should say it is the most anomalous thing the world
at present has to show_." You may quote many others as well; they will
assert that a great to-do is made over me for my authorship as well as my
native ability, and my struggle to hammer this ability into a useful
shape. And I say only what is the truth, that most of the fuss is made
because I have reached an age in which my years are revered.

And that is what seems to me so wrong; it is a custom which makes it easy
to hold down the gifted young in a most hostile and arrogant fashion. Old
age should not be honored for its own sake; it does nothing but halt and
delay the march of man. The primitive races, indeed, have no respect for
old age, and rid themselves unhesitatingly of it and of its defects. A
long time ago I deserved honor much more, and valued it; now, in more than
one sense, I am a richer man and can afford to do without.

Yet now I have it. If I enter a room, respectful silence falls. "How old
he's grown!" everyone present thinks. And they all remain silent so that I
may speak memorable words in that room. Amazing nonsense!

The noise should raise the roof when I enter: "Welcome, old fellow and old
companion; for pity's sake don't say anything memorable to us--you should
have done that when you were better able to. Sit down, old chap, and keep
us company. But don't let your old age cast a shadow on us, and don't
restrain us; you have had your day--now it's our turn..."

This is honest speech.

In peasant homes they still have the right instinct: the mothers preserve
their daughters, the fathers their sons, from the rough, unpleasant
labors. A proper mother lets her daughter sew while she herself works
among the cattle. And the daughter will do the same with her own daughter.
It is her instinct.




XVII


Dear me, these human beings grow duller every day, and I see nothing in
them that I have not known before. So I sink to the level of watching
Solem's increasing passion for Miss Torsen. But that too is familiar and
dull.

Solem, after all the attention the ladies have paid him, has a delusion of
greatness; he buys clothes and gilt watch chains for the money he earns,
and on Sundays wears a white woolen pullover, though it is very warm;
round his neck and over his chest lies a costly silk tie tied in a
sailor's knot. No one else is so smart as he, as he well knows; he sings
as he crosses the farmyard, and considers no one too good for him now.
Josephine objects to his loud singing, but Solem lad has grown so
indispensable at the resort that he no longer obeys all orders. He has his
own will in many things, and sometimes Paul himself takes a glass in his
company.

Miss Torsen appears to have settled down. She is very busy with the
lawyer, and makes him explain each and every angle he draws in his plans.
Quite right of her, too, for undeniably the lawyer is the right man for
her, a wit and a sportsman, well-to-do, rather simple-minded,
strong-necked. At first Mrs. Molie seemed unable to reconcile herself to
the constant companionship of these two in the living room, and she
frequently had some errand that took her there; what was she after, Mrs.
Molie, of the ice-blue teeth?

At last the lawyer finished his plans and was able to deliver them. He
began to speak again about a certain peak of the Tore range which no one
had yet climbed, and was therefore waiting to be conquered by him. Miss
Torsen objected to this plan, and as she grew to know him better, begged
him most earnestly not to undertake such a mad climb. So he promised with
a smile to obey her wishes. They were in such tender agreement, these two!

But the blue peak still haunted the lawyer's mind; he pointed it out to
his lady, and smacked his lips, his eyes watering again.

"Gracious, it makes me dizzy just to look at it!" she said.

So the lawyer put his arm round her to steady her.

The sight was painful to Solem, whose eyes were continually on the pair.
One day as we left the luncheon table, he approached Miss Torsen and said:

"I know another path; would you like to see it tonight?"

The lady was confused and a little embarrassed, and said at length:

"A path? No, thank you."

She turned to the lawyer, and as they walked away together, she said:

"I never heard of such brazenness!"

"What got into him?" said the lawyer.

Solem went away, his teeth gleaming in a sneer.

That evening, Solem repeated the performance. He went up to Miss Torsen
again and said:

"What about that path? Shall we go now?"

As soon as she saw him coming, she turned quickly and tried to elude him.
But Solem did not hesitate to follow her.

"Now I've just got one thing to say," she said, stopping. "If you're
insolent to me again, I'll see that you're driven off the farm...."

But it was not easy to drive Solem off the farm. After all, he was guide
and porter to the tourists, and the only permanent laborer on the farm as
well. And soon the hay would have to be brought in, and casual laborers
would be engaged to work under him. No, Solem could not be driven off.
Besides, the other ladies were on his side; the mighty Mrs. Brede alone
could save him by a word. She held the Tore Peak resort in the palm of her
hand.

Solem was not discharged; but he held himself in check and became a little
more civil. He seemed to suffer as much as ever. Once at midday, as he was
standing in the woodshed, I saw him make a scratch with the ax across the
nail of his thumb.

"What on earth are you doing?" I asked.

"Oh, I'm just marking myself," he replied, laughing gloomily. "When this
scratch grows out--"

He stopped.

"What then?"

"Oh, I'll be away from here then," he said.

But I had the impression that he meant to say something different, so I
probed further.

"Let me look. Well, it's not a deep scratch; you won't be here long then,
will you?"

"Nails grow slowly," he muttered.

Then he strolled away whistling, and I set about chopping wood.

A little later Solem returned across the farmyard with a cackling hen
under his arm. He went to the kitchen window and called:

"This the kind of hen you want me to kill?"

"Yes," was the reply.

Solem came back to the woodshed and asked me for the ax, as he wanted to
behead a few hens. It was easy to see that he did everything on the farm;
he was, hand and brain, indispensable.

He laid the hen on a block and took aim, but it was not easy, for she
twisted her head like a snake and would not lie still. She had stopped
cackling now.

"I can feel her heart jumping inside her," said Solem.

Suddenly he saw his chance and struck. There lay the head; Solem still
held the body, which jerked under his hand. The thing was done so quickly
that the two sections of the bird were still one in my eyes; I could not
grasp a separation so sudden and unbelievable, and it took my sight a
second or two to overtake the event. Bewilderment was in the expression of
this detached head, which looked as though it could not believe what had
happened, and raised itself a little as if to show there was nothing the
least bit wrong. Solem let the body go. It lay still for a moment, then
kicked its legs, leaped to the ground and began to hop, the headless body
reeling on one wing till it struck the wall and spattered blood in wide
arcs before it fell at last.

"I let her go too soon after all," said Solem.

Then he went off to fetch another hen.




XVIII


I return to the mad idea of Solem's being discharged. This would, to be
sure, have averted a certain disaster here at the farm: but who would
fetch and carry then? Paul? But I've told you he just lounges all day in
his room, and has been doing so lately more than ever; the guests never
see him except through an unsuccessful maneuver on his part.

One evening he came walking across the lawn. He must, in his disregard of
time, have thought the guests had already retired, but we all sat outside
in the mild darkness. When Paul saw us, he drew himself up and saluted as
he passed; then, calling Solem to him, he said:

"You mustn't cross the field again without letting me know. I was right
there in my room, writing. The idea of Josephine carrying luggage!"

Paul strode on. But even yet he felt he had not appeared important enough,
so he turned round and asked:

"Why didn't you take one of my cotters with you to act as porter?"

"They wouldn't go," Solem replied. "They were busy lifting potatoes."

"Wouldn't go?"

"That's what Einar said."

Paul thought this over.

"What insolence! They'd better not go too far or I'll drive them off the
place."

Then the law awoke in the lawyer's bosom, and he asked:

"Haven't they bought their land?"

"Yes," said Paul. "But I'm the master of this farm. I have a say in things
too. I'm not without power up here in Reisa, believe me...."

Then he said sternly to Solem:

"You come to me next time."

Whereupon he stalked off to the woods again.

"He's a bit tight again, our good Paul," said the lawyer.

Nobody replied.

"Can you imagine an innkeeper in Switzerland behaving like that?" the
lawyer remarked.

Mrs. Brede said gently:

"What a pity! He never drank before."

And at once the lawyer was charitable again:

"I'll have a good talk with him," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There followed a period in which Paul was sober from morning till night,
when Manufacturer Brede paid us a visit. The flag was hoisted, and there
was great commotion at the farm; Josephine's feet said _whrr_ under
her skirt. The manufacturer arrived with a porter; his wife and children
went far down the road to meet him, and the visitors at the resort sallied
forth too.

"Good morning!" he greeted us with a great flourish of his hat. He won us
all over. He was big and friendly, fat and cheerful, with the broad good
cheer that plenty of money gives. He became good friends with us at once.

"How long are you staying, Daddy?" his little girls asked, as they clung
to him.

"Three days."

"Is that all!" said his wife.

"Is that all?" he replied, laughing. "That's not such a short time, my
dear; three days is a lot for me."

"But not for me and the children," she said.

"Three whole days," he repeated. "I can tell you I've had to do some
moving to be able to stay as quiet as this, ha, ha!"

They all went in. The manufacturer had been here before and knew the way
to his wife's cottage. He ordered soda water at once.

In the evening, when the children had gone to bed, the manufacturer and
his wife joined us in the living room; he had brought whisky with him for
the gentlemen, and ordered soda water; for the ladies he had wine. It was
quite a little party, the manufacturer playing the host with skill, and we
were all well satisfied. When Miss Palm played folk melodies on the piano,
this heavy-built man grew quiet and sentimental; but he didn't think only
of himself, for suddenly he went out and lowered the flag. Flags should be
lowered at sunset, he said. Once or twice he went across to the cottage,
too, to see if the children were sleeping well. Generally speaking, he
seemed fond of the children. Though he owned factories and hotels and many
other things, yet he seemed to take the greatest pride of all in
possessing a couple of children.

One of the men from Bergen struck his glass for silence, and began to make
a speech.

The Bergensians had all long been very quiet and retiring, but here was a
perfect occasion for making speeches. Was not here a man from the great
world outside, from the heart of life, who had brought them wine and good
cheer and festivity? Strange wares up here in this world of blue
mountains ... and so on.

He talked for about five minutes, and became very animated.

The manufacturer told us a little about Iceland--a neutral country that
neither the Associate Master nor the lawyer had visited, and therefore
could not disagree about. One of the Danes had been there and was able to
confirm the justness of the manufacturer's impressions.

But most of the time he told cheerful anecdotes:

"I have a servant, a young lad, who said to me one day, when I was in a
bad temper: 'You've become a great hand at swearing in Icelandic!' Ha, ha,
ha--he appreciated me: 'a great hand at swearing in Icelandic,' he said!"

Everybody laughed, and his wife asked:

"And what did you say?"

"What did I say? Why, I couldn't say anything, could I, ha, ha, ha!"

Then another man from Bergen took the floor: we must not forget we had the
family of a real man of the world with us here--his wife, "this peerless
lady, scattering charm and delight about her," and the children, dancing
butterflies! And a few minutes later, "Hip, hip, hurrah!" followed by a
flourish on the piano.

The manufacturer drank a toast with his wife.

"Well, that's that!" was all he said.

Mrs. Molie sat off in a corner talking in a loud voice with the Dane who
had come over the top of the Tore from the wrong end; she seemed purposely
to be talking so audibly. The manufacturer's attention was attracted, and
he asked for further information about the motor cars in the neighboring
valley: how many there were, and how fast they could go. The Dane told
him.

"But just imagine coming across the fjeld from the other side!" said Mrs.
Molie. "It hasn't been done before."

In response to the manufacturer's questions, the Dane told him about this
adventurous journey also.

"Isn't there a blue peak somewhere in the mountains about here?" said Mrs.
Molie. "I suppose you'll be going up that next. Where ever will you stop?"

Yes, the Dane felt quite tempted by this peak, but said he believed it was
unconquerable.

"I should have climbed that peak long ago if you, Miss Torsen, hadn't
forbidden me," said the lawyer.

"You'd never have made it," said Mrs. Molie in an indifferent tone. This
was probably her revenge. She turned to the Dane again as though ready to
believe him capable of anything.

"I shouldn't want anyone to think of climbing that peak," said Miss
Torsen. "It's as bare as a ship's mast."

"What if I tried it, Gerda?" the manufacturer asked his wife with a smile.
"After all, I'm an old sailor."

"Nonsense," she said, smiling a little.

"Well, I climbed the mast of a schooner last spring."

"Where?"

"In Iceland."

"What for?"

"I don't know, though--all this mountain climbing--I haven't much use for
it," said the manufacturer.

"What did you do it for? What did you climb the mast for?" his wife
repeated nervously.

The manufacturer laughed.

"The curiosity of the female sex--!"

"How can you do a thing like that! And what about me and the children if
you--"

She broke off. Her husband grew serious and took her hand.

"It was stormy, my dear; the sails were flapping, and it was a question of
life and death. But I shouldn't have told you. Well--we'd better say good
night now, Gerda."

The manufacturer and his wife got up.

Then the first man from Bergen made another speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

The manufacturer stayed with us for the promised three days, and then made
ready to travel again. His mood never changed; he was contented and
entertaining the whole time. Every evening one whisky and soda was brought
him--no more. Before their bedtime, his little girls had a wildly
hilarious half-hour with him. At night a tremendous snoring could be heard
from his cottage. Before his arrival, the little girls had spent a good
deal of time with me, but now they no longer knew I existed, so taken up
with their father were they. He hung a swing for them between the two
rowan trees in the field, taking care to pack plenty of rag under the rope
so as not to injure the tree.

He also had a talk with Paul; there were rumors that he was intending to
take his money out of the Tore Peak resort. Paul's head was bent now, but
he seemed even more hurt that the manufacturer should have paid a visit to
the cotters to see how they were getting on.

"So that's where he's gone?" he said. "Well, let him stay there, for all I
care!"

The manufacturer cracked jokes to the very end. Of course he was a little
depressed by the farewells, too, but he had to keep his family's courage
up. His wife stood holding one of his arms with both hands, and the
children clung to his other arm.

"I can't salute you," the manufacturer said to us, smiling. "I'm not
allowed to say good-bye."

The children rejoiced at this and cried, "No, he can't have his arm back;
Mummy, you hold him tight, too!"

"Come, come!" the father said. "I've got to go to Scotland, just a short
trip. And when you come home from the mountains, I'll be there, too."

"Scotland? What are you going to Scotland for?" the children asked.

He twisted round and nodded to us.

"These women! All curiosity!" he said.

But none of his family laughed.

He continued to us:

"I was telling my wife a story about a rich man who was curious, too. He
shot himself just to find out what comes after death. Ha, ha, ha! That's
the height of curiosity, isn't it? Shooting yourself to find out what
comes after death!"

But he could not make his family laugh at this tale, either. His wife
stood still; her face was beautiful.

"So you're leaving now," was all she said.

Mr. Brede's porter came out with his luggage; he had stayed at the farm
for these three days in order to be at hand.

Then the manufacturer walked down through the field, accompanied by his
wife and children.

I don't know--this man with his good humor and kindliness and money and
everything, fond of his children, all in all to his wife--

Was he really everything to his wife?

The first evening he wasted time on a party, and every night he wasted
time in snoring. And so the three days and nights went by....




XIX


It is very pleasant here at harvest time. Scythes are being sharpened in
the field, men and women are at work; they go thinly clad and bareheaded,
and call to one another and laugh; sometimes they drink from a bucket of
whey, then set to work again. There is the familiar fragrance of hay,
which penetrates my senses like a song of home, drawing me home, home,
though I am not abroad. But perhaps I am abroad after all, far away from
the soil where I have my roots.

Why, indeed, do I stay here any longer, at a resort full of
schoolmistresses, with a host who has once more said farewell to sobriety?
Nothing is happening to me; I do not grow here. The others go out and lie
on their backs; I steal off and find relish in myself, and feel poetry
within me for the night. The world wants no, poetry; it wants only verses
that have not been sung before.

And Norway wants no red-hot irons; only village smiths forge irons now,
for the needs of the mob and the honor of the country.

No one came; the stream of tourists went up and down Stordalen and left
our little Reisa valley deserted. If only the Northern Railway could have
come to Reisa with Cook's and Bennett's tours--then Stordalen in its turn
would have lain deserted. Meanwhile, the cotters who are cultivating the
soil will probably go on harvesting half the crop of the outlying fields
for the rest of time. There is every reason to think so--unless our
descendants are more intelligent than we, and refuse to be smitten with
the demoralizing effects of the tourist traffic.

Now, my friend, you mustn't believe me; this is the point where you must
shake your head. There is a professor scuttling about the country, a born
mediocrity with a little school knowledge about history; you had better
ask him. He'll give you just as much mediocre information, my friend, as
your vision can grasp and your brain endure.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hardly had Manufacturer Brede left when Paul began to live a most
irregular life again. More and more all roads were closed to him; he saw
no way out and therefore preferred to make himself blind, which gave him
an excuse for not seeing. Seven of our permanent guests now left together:
the telephone operators, Tradesman Batt, Schoolmistresses Johnsen and
Palm, and two men who were in some sort of business, I don't quite know
what. This whole party went across the fjeld to Stordalen to be driven
about in cars.

Cases of various kinds of foodstuffs arrived for Paul; they were carried
up one evening by a man from the village. He had to make several journeys
with the side of his cart let down, and bring the cases over the roughest
spots one by one. That was the kind of road it was. Josephine received the
consignment, and noticed that one of the cases gave forth the sound of a
liquid splashing inside. That had come to the wrong place, she said, and
writing another address on it, she told the man to take it back. It was
sirup that had come too late, she said; she had got sirup elsewhere in the
meantime.

Later in the evening we heard them discussing it in the kitchen; the sirup
had not come too late, Paul said angrily.

"And I've told you to clear these newspapers away!" he cried. We heard the
sound of paper and glass being swept to the floor.

Well, things were not too easy for Paul; the days went by dull and empty,
nor had he any children to give him pleasant thoughts at times. Though he
wanted to build still more houses, he could not use half those he had
already. There was Mrs. Brede living alone with her children in one of
them, and since seven of the guests had left, Miss Torsen was also alone
in the south wing. Paul wanted at all costs to build roads and share in
the development of the tourist traffic; he even wanted to run a fleet of
motor cars. But since he had not the power to do this alone and could get
no assistance, nothing was left him but to resign himself. And now to make
matters worse Manufacturer Brede had said he would withdraw his money....

Paul's careworn face looked out of the kitchen door. Before going out
himself he wanted to make sure there was no one about, but he was
disappointed in this, for the lawyer at once greeted him loudly: "Good
evening, Paul!" and drew him outside.

They strolled down the field in the dusk.

Assuredly there is little to be gained by "having a good talk" with a man
about his drinking; such matters are too vital to be settled by talking.
But Paul seems to have admitted that the lawyer was right in all he said,
and probably left him with good resolutions.

Paul went down to the village again. He was going to the post office; the
money he had from the seven departed guests would be scattered to all
quarters of the globe. And yet it was not enough to cover everything--in
fact not enough for anything, for interest, repayments, taxes, and
repairs. It paid only for a few cases of food from the city. And of course
he stopped the case of sirup from going back.

Paul returned blind-drunk because he no longer wished to see. It was the
same thing all over again. But his brain seemed in its own way to go on
searching for a solution, and one day he asked the lawyer:

"What do you call those square glass jars for keeping small fish in--
goldfish?"

"Do you mean an aquarium?"

"That's it," said Paul. "Are they dear?"

"I don't know. Why?"

"I wonder if I could get one."

"What do you want it for?"

"Don't you think it might attract people to the place? Oh, well, perhaps
it wouldn't."

And Paul withdrew.

Madder than ever. Some people see flies. Paul saw goldfish.




XX


The lawyer is constantly in Miss Torsen's company; he even swings her in
the children's swing, and puts his arm around her to steady her when the
swing stops. Solem watches all this from the field where he is working,
and begins to sing a ribald song. Certainly these two have so ill-used him
that if he is going to sing improper songs in self-defense, this is the
time to do it; no one will gainsay that. So he sang his song very loud,
and then began to yodel.

But Miss Torsen went on swinging, and the lawyer went on putting his arm
round her and stopping her....

It was a Saturday evening. I stood talking to the lawyer in the garden; he
didn't like the place, and wanted to leave, but Miss Torsen would not go
with him, and going alone was such a bore. He did not conceal that the
young woman meant something to him.

Solem approached, and lifted his cap in greeting. Then he looked round
quickly and began to talk to the lawyer--politely, as became his position
of a servant:

"The Danish gentleman is going to climb the peak tomorrow. I'm to take a
rope and go with him."

The lawyer was startled.

"Is he--?"

The blankness of the lawyer's face was a remarkable sight. His small,
athletic brain failed him. A moment passed in silence.

"Yes, early tomorrow morning," said Solem. "I thought I'd tell you.
Because after all it was your idea first."

"Yes, so it was," said the lawyer. "You're quite right. But now he'll be
ahead of me."

Solem knew how to get round that.

"No, I didn't promise to go," he said. "I told him I had to go to the
village tomorrow."

"But we can't deceive him. I don't want to do that."

"Pity," said Solem. "Everybody says the first one to climb the Blue Peak
will be in all the papers."

"He'll take offense," the lawyer murmured, considering the matter.

But Solem urged him on:

"I don't think so. Anyhow, you were the first one to talk about it."

"Everybody here will know, and I'll be prevented," said the lawyer.

"We can go at dawn," said Solem.

In the end they came to an agreement.

"You won't tell anyone?" the lawyer said to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

The lawyer was missed in the course of the morning; he was not in his
room, and not in the garden.

"Perhaps the Danish mountaineer can tell us where he is," I said. But it
transpired that the Dane had not even thought of climbing the Blue Peak
that day, and knew nothing whatever about the expedition.

This surprised me greatly.

I looked at the clock; it was eleven. I had been watching the peak through
my field glasses from the moment I got up, but there was nothing to be
seen. It was five hours since the two men had left.

At half-past eleven Solem came running back; he was drenched in sweat and
exhausted.

"Come and help us!" he called excitedly to the group of guests.

"What's happened?" somebody asked.

"He fell off."

How tired Solem was and drenched to the skin! But what could we do? Rush
up the mountainside and look at the accident too?

"Can't he walk?" somebody asked.

"No, he's dead," said Solem, looking from one to another of us as though
to read in our faces whether his message seemed credible. "He fell off; he
didn't want me to help him."

A few more questions and answers. Josephine was already halfway across the
field; she was going to the village to telephone for the doctor.

"We shall have to get him down," said the Danish mountaineer.

So he and I improvised a stretcher; Solem was instructed to take brandy
and bandages to the site of the accident, and the Bergensians, the
Associate Master, Miss Torsen, and Mrs. Molie went with him.

"Did you really say nothing to Solem about climbing the peak today?" I
asked the Dane.

"No," he replied. "I never said a word about it. If I had meant to go, I
should certainly not have wanted company...."

Later that afternoon we returned with the lawyer on the stretcher. Solem
kept explaining all the way home how the accident had happened, what he
had said and what the lawyer had said, pointing to objects on the way as
though this stone represented the lawyer and that the abyss into which he
had plunged.... Solem still carried the rope he had not had a chance to
use. Miss Torsen asked no more than anyone else, and made purely
conventional comments: "I advised him against it, I begged him not to
go...."

But however much we talked, we could not bring the lawyer back to life.
Strange--his watch was still going, but he himself was dead. The doctor
could do nothing here, and returned to his village.

There followed a depressing evening. Solem went to the village to send a
telegram to the lawyer's family, and the rest of us did what we thought
decent under the circumstances: we all sat in the living room with books
in our hands. Now and again, some reference would be made to the accident:
it was a reminder, we said, how small we mortals were! And the Associate
Master, who had not the soul of a tourist, greatly feared that this
disaster would injure the resort and make things still more difficult for
Paul; people would shun a place where they were likely to fall off and be
killed.

No, the Associate Master was no tourist, and did not understand the
Anglo-Saxon mind.

Paul himself seemed to sense that the accident might benefit him rather
than do him harm. He brought out a bottle of brandy to console us on this
mournful evening.

And since it was a death to which we owed this attention, one of the men
from Bergen made a speech.




XXI


The accident became widely known. Newspapermen came from the city, and
Solem had to pilot them up the mountain and show them the spot where it
had taken place. If the body had not been removed at once, they would have
written about that, too.

Children and ignoramuses might be inclined to think it foolish that Solem
should be taken from the work in the fields at harvest time, but must not
the business of the tourist resort go before all else?

"Solem, tourists!" someone called to him. And Solem left his work. A flock
of reporters surrounded him, asked him questions, made him take them to
the mountains, to the river. A phrase was coined at the farm for Solem's
absences:

"Solem's with death."

But Solem was by no means with death; on the contrary, he was in the very
midst of life, enjoying himself, thriving. Once again he was an important
personage, listened to by strangers, doling out information. Nor did his
audience now consist of ladies only--indeed, no; this was something new, a
change; these were keen, alert gentlemen from the city.

To me, Solem said:

"Funny the accident should have happened just when the scratch on my nail
has grown out, isn't it?"

He showed me his thumbnail; there was no mark on it.

The newspaper reporters wrote articles and sent telegrams, not only about
the Blue Peak and the dreadful death, but about the locality, and about
the Tore Peak resort, that haven for the weary, with its wonderful
buildings set like jewels in the mountains. What a surprise to come here:
gargoyles, living room, piano, all the latest books, timber outside ready
for new jewels in their setting, altogether a magnificent picture of
Norway's modern farming.

Yes, indeed, the newspapermen appreciated it. And they did their
advertising.

The English arrived.

"Where is Solem?" they asked, and "Where is the Blue Peak?" they asked.

"We ought to get the hay in," said Josephine and the wife at the farm.
"There'll be rain, and fifty cartloads are still out!"

That was all very well, but "Where is Solem?" asked the English. So Solem
had to go with them. The two casual laborers began to cart away the hay,
but then the women had no one to help them rake. Confusion was rife.
Everyone rushed wildly hither and thither because there was no one to lead
them.

The weather stayed fine overnight; it was patient, slow-moving weather. As
soon as the dew dried up, more hay would be brought in, perhaps all the
hay. Oh, we should manage all right.

More English appeared; and "Solem--the Blue Peak?" they said. Their
perverse, sportsmen's brains tingled and thrilled; they had successfully
eluded all the resorts on the way, and arrived here without being caught.
There was the Blue Peak, like a mast against the sky! They hurried up so
fast that Solem was hardly able to keep pace with them. They would have
felt for ever disgraced if they had neglected to stand on this admirable
site of a disaster, this most excellent abyss. Some said it would be a
lifelong source of regret to them if they did not climb the Blue Peak
forthwith; others had no desire but to gloat over the lawyer's death fall,
and to shout down the abyss, gaping at the echo, and advancing so far out
on the ledge that they stood with their toes on death.

But it's an ill wind that blows good to none, and the resort earned a
great deal of money. Paul began to revive again, and the furrows in his
face were smoothed out. A man of worth grows strong and active with good
fortune; in adversity he is defiant. One who is not defiant in adversity
is worth nothing; let him be destroyed! Paul stopped drinking; he even
began to take an interest in the harvesting, and worked in the field in
Solem's place. If only he had begun when the weather was still slow and
patient!

But at least Paul began to tackle things in the right spirit again; he
only regretted that he had set aside for the cotters those outlying fields
from which they were used to getting half the hay; this year he would have
liked to keep it himself. But he had given his word, and there was nothing
to be done about it.

Besides, it was raining now. Haymaking had to stop; they could not even
stack what had already been gathered. Outside, three cartloads of fodder
were going to waste.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before long the novelty of the Tore Peak resort wore off again. The
newspapermen wrote and sent telegrams about other gratifying misfortunes,
the death on the Blue Peak having lost its news value. It had been an
intoxication; now came the morning after.

The Danish mountaineer quite simply deserted. He strapped on his knapsack
and walked across the field like one of the villagers, caring no more for
the Blue Peak. The commotion he had witnessed in the last week had taught
him a lesson.

And the tourists swarmed on to other places.

"What harm have I done them," Paul probably
thought, "that they should be going again? Have I been
too much in the fields and too little with them? But I
greeted them humbly and took my man out of the
harvesting work to help them...."

Then two young men arrived, sprouts off the Norwegian tree, sportsmen to
their finger tips, who talked of nothing but sailing, cycling, and
football; they were going to be civil engineers--the young Norway. They,
too, wanted to see the Blue Peak to the best of their ability; after all,
one must keep pace with modern life. But they were so young that when they
looked up at the peak, they were afraid. Solem had learned more than one
trick in tourist company; craftily he led them on, and then extorted money
from them in return for a promise not to expose their foolishness. So all
was well; the young sprouts came down the mountain again, bragging and
showing off their sportsmanship. One of them brought down a bloodstained
rag which he flung on the ground, saying,

"There's what's left of your lawyer that fell off."

"Ha, ha, ha, ha!" laughed the other sprout.

Yes, truly, they had acquired dashing ways among their sporting
acquaintances.

It rained for three weeks; then came two fine days, and then rain again
for a fortnight. The sun was not to be seen, the sky was invisible, the
mountain tops had disappeared; we saw nothing but rain. The roofs at the
Tore Peak resort began to leak more and more.

The hay that still lay spread on the ground was black and rotting, and the
stacks had gone moldy.

The cotters had got their hay indoors during the patient spell. They had
carried it, man, woman, and child, on their backs.

The men from Bergen and Mrs. Brede with her children have left for home.
The little girls curtsied and thanked me for taking them walking in the
hills and telling them stories. The house is empty now. Associate Master
Hoey and Mrs. Molie were the last to go; they left last week, traveling
separately, though both were going to the same small town.

He went by way of the village--a very roundabout route--while she crossed
the field. It is very quiet now, but Miss Torsen is still here.

Why do I not leave? Don't know. Why ask? I'm here. Have you ever heard
anyone ask: "How much is a northern light?" Hold your tongue.

Where should I go if I did leave? Do you imagine I want to go to the town
again? Or do you think I'm longing for my old hut and the winter, and
Madame? I'm not longing for any specific place; I am simply longing.

Of course I ought to be old enough to understand what all sensible
Norwegians know, that our country is once more on the right road. The
papers are all writing about the splendid progress the tourist traffic has
made in Stordalen since the motor road was opened--ought I not to go there
and feel gratified?

From old habit, I still take an interest in the few of us who are left;
Miss Torsen is still here.

Miss Torsen--what more is there to be said about her? Well, she does not
leave; she stays here to complete the picture of the woman Torsen, child
of the middle class who has read schoolbooks all through her formative
years, who has learned all about _Artemis cotula_, but undernourished
her soul. That is what she is doing here.

I remember a few weeks ago, when we were infested with Englishmen, a young
sprout coming down from the mountain top with a bloodstained rag which he
threw on the ground, saying, "Here's what's left of your lawyer that fell
off!" Miss Torsen heard it, and never moved a muscle. No, she never
mourned the death of the lawyer very keenly; on the contrary, she wrote
off at once to ask another friend to come. When he came, he turned out to
be a swaggering scatterbrain--a "free lance," he called himself in the
visitors' book. I have not mentioned him before because he was less
important than she; less important, in fact, than any of us. He was
beardless and wore his collar open; heaven knows if he wasn't employed at
a theater or in the films. Miss Torsen went to meet him when he came, and
said, "Welcome to our mountains," and "Thanks for coming." So evidently
she had sent for him. But why did she not leave? Why did she seem to
strike root in the place, and even ask others to come here? Yet she had
been the first to want to leave last summer! There was something behind
this.




XXII


I muse on all this, and understand that her staying here is somehow
connected with her carnal desires, with the fact that Solem is still here.
How muddled it all is, and how this handsome girl has been spoiled! I saw
her not long ago, tall and proud, upright, untouched, walking
intentionally close to Solem, yet not replying to his greeting. Did she
suspect him of complicity in the death of the lawyer and avoid him for
that reason? Not in the least; she avoided him less than before, even
letting him take her letters to the post office, which she had not done
previously. But she was unbalanced, a poor thing that had lost her
bearings. Whenever she could, she secretly defiled herself with pitch,
with dung; she sniffed at foulness and was not repelled.

One day, when Solem swore a needlessly strong oath at a horse that was
restless, she looked at him, shivered, and went a deep red. But she
mastered herself at once, and asked Josephine:

"Isn't that man leaving soon?"

"Yes," Josephine replied, "in a few days."

Though she had seized this opportunity to ask her question with a great
show of indifference, I am certain it was an important one to her. She
went away in silence.

Yes, Miss Torsen stayed, for she was sexually bound to Solem. Solem's
despair, Solem's rough passion that she herself had inflamed, his
brutality, his masculinity, his greedy hands, his looks--she sniffed at
all this and was excited by it. She had grown so unnatural that her sexual
needs were satisfied by keeping this man at a distance. The Torsen type no
doubt lies in her solitary bed at night, reveling in the sensation that in
another house a man lies writhing for her.

But her friend, the actor? He was in no sense the other's equal. There was
nothing of the bull in him, nothing of action, only the braggadocio of the
theater....

       *       *       *       *       *

Here am I, growing small and petty with this life. I question Solem about
the accident. We are alone together in the woodshed.

Why had he lied and said the Dane wanted to climb the Blue Peak that
unfortunate Sunday morning?

Solem looked at me, pretending not to understand.

I repeated my question.

Solem denied he had said any such thing.

"I heard you," I said.

"No, you didn't," he said.

A pause.

Suddenly he dropped to the floor of the shed, convulsed, without shape, an
outline merely; a few minutes passed before he got up again. When he was
on his feet once more, pulling his clothes to rights, we looked at each
other. I had no wish to speak to him further, and left him. Besides, he
was going away soon.

After this, everything was dull and empty again. I went out alone, aping
myself and shouting: "Bricks for the palace! The calf is much stronger
today!" And when this was done, I did other nothings, and when my money
began to run out, I wrote to my publisher, pretending I would soon send
him an unbelievably remarkable manuscript. In short, I behaved like a man
in love. These were the typical symptoms.

And to take the bull by the horns: no doubt you suspect me of dwelling on
the subject of Miss Torsen out of self-interest? In that case I must have
concealed well in these pages that I never think of her except as an
object, as a theme; turn back the pages and you will see! At my age, one
does not fall in love without becoming grotesque, without making even the
Pharaohs laugh.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Finis._

But there is one thing I cannot finish doing, and that is withdrawing to
my room, and sitting alone with the good darkness round me. This, after
all, is the last pleasure.

An interlude:

Miss Torsen and her actor are walking this way; I hear their footsteps and
their voices; but since I am sitting in the dark of the evening, I cannot
see them. They stop outside my open window, leaning against it, and the
actor says something, asks her to do something she does not want to do,
tries to draw her with him; but she resists.

Then he grows angry.

"What the devil did you send for me for?" he asks roughly.

And she begins to weep and says:

"So that's all you've come for! Oh, oh! But I'm not like that at all. Why
can't you leave me alone? I'm not hurting you."

Am I one who understands women? Self-deception. Vain boasting. I made my
presence known then because her weeping sounded so wretched; I moved a
chair and cleared my throat.

The sound caught his attention at once, and he hushed her, trying to
listen; but she said:

"No, it was nothing...."

But she knew very well this was not true; she knew what the sound was. It
was not the first time Miss Torsen used this trick with me; she had often
pretended that she thought I was not within hearing, and then created some
such delicate situation. Each time I had promised myself not to intervene;
but she had not wept before; now she wept.

Why did she use these wiles? To clear herself in my eyes--mine, the eyes
of a settled man--to make me believe how good she was, how well-behaved!
But, dear child, I knew that before; I could see it from your hands! You
are so unnatural that in your seven and twentieth year, you walk
unmarried, barren and unopen!

The pair drifted away.

And there is something else I cannot finish doing: withdrawing into
solitude in the woods, alone with the good darkness round me. This is the
last pleasure.

One needs solitude and darkness, not because one flees the company of
others and can endure only one's own, but because of their quality of
loftiness and religion. Strange how all things pass distantly, yet all is
near; we sit in an omnipresence. It must be God. It must be ourselves as a
part of all things.

  What would my heart, where would I stray?
  Shall I leave the forest behind me?
  It was my home but yesterday;
  now toward the city I wend my way;
  to the darkness of night I've resigned me.

  The world round me sleeps as I tarry, alone,
  soothing my ear with its quiet.
  How large and gray is the city of stone
  in which the many all hopes enthrone!
  Shall I, too, accept their fiat?

  Hark! Do the bells ring on the hillside?

  Back to the peace of the forest I turn
  in the nightly hour that's hoarest.
  There's a sweet-smelling hedgerow to which I yearn;
  I shall rest my head on heather and fern,
  and sleep in the depths of the forest.

  Hark, how the bells ring on the hillside!

Romantic? Yes. Mere sentimentality, mood, rhyme--nothing? Yes.

It is the last happiness.




XXIII


The sun has returned. Not darkly glowing and regal--more than that:
imperial, because it is flaming. This you do not understand, my friend,
whatever the language in which it is dished up for you. But I say there is
an imperial sun in the sky.

It's a good day for going to the woods; it is sweeping time, for the woods
are full of yellow things that have come suddenly into being. A short time
ago they were not there, or I did not see them, or they had the earth's
own complexion. There is something unborn about them, like embryos in an
early stage. But if I whirl them about, they are miracles of fulfillment.

Here are fungi of every sort, mushrooms and puffballs. How close is the
poisonous mushroom to the happy family of the edible mushroom, and how
innocently it stands there! Yet it is deadly. What magnificent cunning! A
spurious fruit, a criminal, habitual vice itself, but preening in splendor
and brilliance, a very cardinal of fungi. I break off a morsel to chew; it
is good and soft on the tongue, but I am a coward and spit it out again.
Was it not the poisonous mushroom that drove men berserker? But in the
dawn of our own day, we die of a hair in the throat.

The sun is already setting. Far up the mountainside are the cattle, but
they are moving homeward now; I can hear by their bells that they are
moving. Tinkling bells and deep-mouthed bells, sometimes sounding together
as though there were a meaning in it, a pattern of tones, a rapture.

And rapture, too, to see all the blades of grass and the tiny flowers and
plants. Beside me where I lie is a small pod plant, wonderfully meek, with
tiny seeds pushing out of the pod--God bless it, it's becoming a mother!
It has got caught in a dry twig and I liberate it. Life quivers within it;
the sun has warmed it today and called it to its destiny. A tiny, gigantic
miracle.

Now it is sunset, and the woods bend under a rustling that passes
through them sweet and heavy; it is the evening.

I lie for another hour or two; the birds have long since gone to rest, and
darkness falls thick and soft.... As I walk homeward, my feet feel their
way and I hold my hands before me till I reach the field, where it is a
little lighter. I walk on the hay that has been left outdoors; it is tough
and black, and I slip on it because it is already rotting. As I approach
the houses, bats fly noiselessly past me, as though on wings of foam. A
slight shudder convulses me whenever they pass.

Suddenly I stop.

A man is walking here. I can see him against the wall of the new house. He
has on a coat that looks like the actor's raincoat, but it is not the
little comedian himself. There he goes, into the house, right into the
house. It is Solem.

"Why, that's where she sleeps!" I think. "Ah, well. Alone in the building,
in the south wing, Miss Torsen alone--yes, quite alone. And Solem has just
gone in."

I stand there waiting to be at hand, to rush in to the rescue, for after
all I am a human being, not a brute. Several minutes pass. He has not even
bothered to be very quiet, for I hear him clicking the key in the lock.
Surely I ought to hear a cry now? I hear nothing, nothing; a chair
scraping across the floor, that is all.

"But good heavens, he may do her some harm! He may injure her; he may
overpower her with rape! Ought I not to tap on the window? I--what for?
But at the very first cry, I shall be on the spot, take my word for it."

Not a single cry.

The hours pass; I have settled down to wait. Of course I cannot go my way
and desert a helpless woman. But the hours wear on. A very thorough
business in there, nothing niggardly about this; it is almost dawn. It
occurs to me that he may be killing her, perhaps has killed her already; I
am alarmed and about to get up--when the key clicks in the lock again and
Solem emerges. He does not run, but walks back the way he came, down to
the veranda of my own house. There he hangs the actor's raincoat where it
hung before, and emerges again. But this time he is naked. He has been
naked under the coat all this time. Is it possible? Why not? No
inhibitions, no restraint, no covering; Solem has thought it all out. Now,
stark naked, he stalks to his room.

What a man!

I sit thinking and collecting myself and regaining my wits. What has
happened? The south wing is still wrapped in silence, but the lady is not
dead; I can see that from Solem's fearless manner as he goes to his room,
lights the lamp, and goes to bed.

It relieves me to know she is alive, revives me, and makes me
superlatively brave: if he has dared to kill her, I will report it at
once. I shall not spare him. I shall accuse him of both her death and the
lawyer's. I shall go further: I shall accuse others--the thief of last
winter, the man that stole the sides of bacon from a tradesman and sold me
rolls of tobacco out of his bag. No, I shall not keep silence about
anything then....




XXIV


When it grew light, Solem went to the kitchen, had his breakfast, settled
his business with Paul and the women, and returned to his room. He was in
no hurry; though it was no longer early in the day, he took his time about
tying his bundles, preparatory to leaving. Lingeringly he looked into the
windows of the south wing as he passed.

Then Solem was gone.

A little later Miss Torsen came in to breakfast. She asked at once about
Solem. And why might she be so interested in Solem? She had certainly
stopped in her room intentionally so as to give him time to leave; if she
wanted to see him she could have been here long ago. But was it not safest
to seem a little angry? Supposing, night owl that I was, that I had seen
something!

"Where is Solem?" she asked indignantly.

"Solem has gone now," Josephine replied.

"Lucky for him!"

"Why?" asked Josephine.

"Oh, he's a dreadful creature!"

How agitated she was! But in the course of the day she calmed down. Her
anger dissolved, and there was neither weeping nor a scene; only she did
not walk proudly, as was her habit, but preferred to sit in silence.

That passed too; she roused herself briskly soon after Solem's departure,
and in a few days she was the same as ever. She took walks, she talked and
laughed with us, she made the actor swing her in the children's swing, as
in the lawyer's day....

I went out one evening, for there was good weather and darkness for
walking; there was neither a moon nor stars. The gentle ripple of the
little Reisa river was all the sound I heard; there were God and Goethe
and _ueber allen Gipfeln ist Ruh'_ that night. On my return, I was in
the mood to walk softly and on tiptoe, so I undressed and went to bed in
the dark.

Then they came again to my window, those two lunatics, the lady and the
actor. What next? But it was not he that chose this spot; of that I was
sure. She chose it because she was convinced I had returned. There was
something she _wanted_ me to hear.

Why should I listen to him still pleading with her?

"I've had enough of this," he said. "I'm leaving tomorrow."

"Oh, well...." she said. "No, let's not tonight," she added suddenly;
"some other time. Yes? In a few days? We'll talk about it tomorrow. Good
night."

For the first time it struck me: she wants to rouse you, too, settled man
though you are; she wants to make you as mad as the others! That's what
she's after!

And now I remember, before the lawyer arrived, when there was Tradesman
Batt--I remember how during his first few days here, she would give me a
kind word or a look that was quite out of the picture, and as unmistakable
as her pride would permit. No, she had no objections to seeing old age
wriggle. And listen to this: before this she had been intent to show a
well-behaved indifference to sex, but that was finished; was she not at
this moment resisting only faintly, and raising definite hopes? "Not
tonight, but some other time," she had said. Yes, a half-refusal, a mere
postponement, that I was meant to hear. She was corrupt, but she was also
cunning, with the cunning of a madman. So corrupt.

Dear child, Pharaoh laughs before his pyramids; standing before his
pyramids he laughs. He would laugh at me, too.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next day we three remaining guests were sitting in the living room. The
lady and the actor read one book; I read another.

"Will you," she says to him, "do me a great favor?"

"With pleasure."

"Would you go out in the grounds where we sat yesterday and fetch my
galoshes?"

So he went out to do her this great favor. He sang a well-known popular
song as he crossed the yard, cheerful in his own peculiar way.

She turned to me.

"You seem silent."

"Do I?"

"Yes, you're very silent."

"Listen to this," I said, and began to read to her from the book I held in
my hands. I read a longish bit.

She tried to interrupt me several times, and at length said impatiently:

"What is this you want me to listen to?"

"The _Musketeers_. You must admit it's entertaining."

"I've read it," she said. And then she began to clasp her hands and drag
them apart again.

"Then you must hear something you haven't read before," I replied, and
went across to my room to fetch a few pages I had written. They were only
a few poems--nothing special, just a few small verses. Not that I am in
the habit of reading such things aloud, but I seized on this for the
moment because I wanted to prevent her from humbling herself, and telling
me anything more.

While I was reading the poems to her, the actor returned.

"I couldn't find any galoshes there," he said.

"No?" she replied absently.

"No, I really looked everywhere, but...."

She got up and left the room.

He looked after her in some surprise, and sat still for a moment. Then it
occurred to him.

"I believe her galoshes are in the passage outside her door," he said, and
hurried after her.

I sat back, thinking it over. There had been a sweetness in her face as
she said, "Yes, you're very silent." Had she seen through me and my
pretext for reading to her? Of course she had. She was no fool. I was the
fool, nobody else. I should have driven a sportsman to despair. Some
practice the sport of making conquests and the sport of making love,
because they find it so agreeable; I have never practiced sport of any
kind. I have loved and raged and suffered and stormed according to my
nature--that is all; I am an old-fashioned man. And here I sit in the
shadow of evening, the shadow of the half-century. Let me have done!

The actor returned to the living room confused and dejected. She had
turned him out; she had wept.

I was not surprised, for it was the mode of expression of her type.

"Have you ever heard the like of it? She told me to get out! I shall leave
tomorrow."

"Have you found the galoshes?" I asked.

"Of course," he replied. "They were right in the passage. 'Here they are,'
I said to her. 'Yes, yes,' she said. 'Right under your nose,' I said.
'Yes, yes, go away,' she said, and began to cry. So I went away."

"She'll get over it."

"Do you think so? Yes, I expect she will. Oh, well, it's my opinion nobody
can understand women, anyhow. But they're a mighty sex, the women, a
mighty sex. They certainly are."

He sat on a while, but he had no peace of mind, and soon went out again.

       *       *       *       *       *

That evening the lady was in the dining room before us; she was there when
we came in, and we all nodded slightly in greeting. To the actor she was
very kind, quite making up for her petulance of the afternoon.

When he sat down he found a letter in his table napkin: a written note
folded into the napkin. He was so surprised that he dropped everything he
was doing to unfold and read it. With an exclamation and a smile, his
blue, delighted eyes splashed over her; but she was looking down into her
lap with her forehead wrinkled, so he put the note away in his vest
pocket.

Then it probably dawned on him that he had betrayed her, and he tried to
cover it up somehow.

"Well, here goes for food!" he said, as though he were going to require
all his energy for the task of eating.

Why had she written? There was nothing to prevent her speaking to him. He
had, after all, been sitting on the doorstep when she emerged from her
room and passed him. Had she foreseen that the good comedian could not
contain himself, but would surely let a third person into the secret?

Why probe or question further? The actor did not eat much, but he looked
very happy. So the note must have said yes, must have been a promise;
perhaps she would not tantalize him further.




XXV


A few days later, they were going to leave. They would travel together,
and that would be the end.

I might have pitied them both, for though life is good, life is stern. One
result at any rate was accomplished. She had not sent for him in vain, nor
had he come in vain.

That was the end of the act. But there were more acts to come--many more.

She had lost much: having been ravished, she gave herself away; why be
niggardly now? And this is the destiny of her type, that they lose
increasingly much, retaining ever less; what need to hold back now? The
ground has been completely shifted: from half-measures to the immolation
of all virtue. The type is well-known, and can be found at resorts and
boarding-houses, where it grows and flourishes.

In spite of her wasted adolescence, her examination and her
"independence," she has been coming home from her office stool or her
teacher's desk more or less exhausted; suddenly she finds herself in the
midst of a sweet and unlimited idleness, with quantities of tinned food
for her meals. The company round her is continually changing, tourists
come and go, and she passes from hand to hand for walks and talks; the
tone is "country informality." This is sheer loose living; this is a life
stripped of all purpose. She does not even sleep enough because she hears
through the thin wall every sound made by her neighbor in the next room,
while arriving or departing Englishmen bang doors all night. In a short
time she has become a neurotic, sated with company, surfeited with herself
and the place. She is ready to go off with the next halfway respectable
organ grinder that happens along. And so she pairs off with the most
casual visitors, flirts with the guide, hovering about him and making
bandages for his fingers, and at last throws herself into the arms of a
nameless nobody who has arrived at the house today.

This is the Torsen type.

And now, at this very moment, she retires to her room to collect the
fragments of herself, in preparation for her departure--at the end of the
summer. It takes time; there are so many fragments, one in every corner.
But perhaps it consoles her to think that she knows the genitive of
_mensa_.

Things are not quite so bad for the actor. He has staked nothing, is
committed to nothing. No part of his life is destroyed, nor anything
within him. As he came, so he goes, cheerful, empty, nice. In fact he is
even something more of a man because he has really made a conquest. He has
no wish but to spend some pleasant hours with the Torsen type.

He strolled about the garden waiting for her to get ready. Once she was
visible through the doorway, and he called to her:

"Aren't you coming soon? Don't forget we've got to cross the mountain!"

"Well, I can't go bareheaded," she replied.

He was impatient.

"No, you've got to put your hat on, and what a lot of time that takes!
Ugh!"

She measured him coldly and said:

"You're very--familiar."

If he had paid her back in the same coin there would have been weeping and
gnashing of teeth and cries of "Go away! Go alone!" and an hour's delay,
and reconciliation and embraces. But the actor's manner changed at once,
and he replied docilely, as his nature was,

"Familiar? Well--perhaps. Sorry!"

Then he strolled about the garden again, humming occasionally and swinging
his stick. I took note of the oddly feminine shape of his knees, and the
unusual plumpness of his thighs; there was something unnatural about this
plumpness, as though it did not belong to his sex.

His shoes were down at the heel, and his collar was open. His raincoat
hung regally from his shoulders and flapped in the wind, though it was not
raining. He was a proud and comical sight. But why speak harsh words about
a raincoat? It was not he, the owner, that had abused it, and it hung from
his shoulders as innocently as a bridal veil.

Why speak harsh words about anyone? Life is good, but life is stern.
Perhaps when she comes out, I think to myself, the following scene will
take place: I stand here waiting only for this departure. So she gives me
her hand and says good-bye.

"Why don't you say something?" she asks in order to seem bright and easy
in her mind.

"Because I don't want to hurt you in the great error of your ways."

"Ha, ha, ha," she laughs, too loudly and in a forced tone; "the great
error of my ways! Well, really!"

And her anger grows, while I am assured and fatherly, standing on the firm
ground of conscious virtue. Yet I say an unworthy thing like this:

"Don't throw yourself away, Miss Torsen!"

She raises her head then; yes, the Torsen type would raise her head and
reply, pale and offended:

"Throw myself away?--I don't understand you."

But it is possible, too, that Miss Torsen, at heart a fine, proud girl,
would have a lucid moment and see things in their true light:

"Why not, why shouldn't I throw myself away? What is there to keep? I am
thrown away, wasted ever since my school days, and now I am seven and
twenty...."

My own thoughts run away with me as I stand there wishing I were somewhere
else. Perhaps she, too, in her room wishes me far away.

"Good-bye," I say to the actor. "Will you remember me to Miss Torsen? I
must go now."

"Good-bye," says he, shaking hands in some surprise. "Can't you wait a few
minutes? Well, all right, I'll give her your greeting. Good-bye,
good-bye."

I take a short cut to get out of the way, and as I know every nook and
corner, I am soon outside the farm, and find a good shelter. From here I
shall see when these two leave. She has only to say good-bye now to the
people of the farm.

It struck me that yesterday was the last time I spoke to her. We spoke
only a few insignificant words that I have forgotten, and today I have not
spoken to her....

Here they come.

Curious--they seemed somehow to have become welded together; though they
walked separately up the mountain track, yet they belonged together. They
did not speak; the essential things had probably already been said. Life
had grown ordinary for them; it still remained to them to be of use to
each other. He walked first, while she followed many paces behind; it was
lonely to look at against the rugged background of the mountain. Where had
her tall figure gone to? She seemed to have grown shorter because she had
hitched up her skirt and was carrying her knapsack on her back. They each
carried one, but he carried hers and she his, probably because, owing to
the greater number of her clothes, hers was the heavier sack. Thus had
they shifted their burdens; what burdens would they carry in the future?
She was, after all, no longer a schoolmistress, and perhaps he was no
longer with the theater or the films.

I watched those two crossing rocky, mountainous ground, bare ground, with
not a tree anywhere except a few stunted junipers; far away near the ridge
murmured the little Reisa. Those two had put their possessions together,
were walking together; at the next halt they would be man and wife, and
take only one room because it was cheaper.

Suddenly I started up and, moved by some impulse of human sympathy--nay,
of duty--I wanted to run across to her, talk to her, say a word of
warning: "Don't go on!" I could have done it in a few minutes--a good
deed, a duty....

They disappeared behind the shoulder of the hill.

Her name was Ingeborg.




XXVI


And now I, too, must wander on again, for I am the last at the Tore Peak
farm. The season is wearing on, and this morning it snowed for the first
time--wet, sad snow.

It is very quiet at the farm now, and Josephine might have played the
piano again and been friendly to the last guest; but now I am leaving,
too. Besides, Josephine has little to play and be cheerful for; things
have gone badly this year, and may grow worse as time goes on. The
prospect is not a good one. "But something will turn up," says Josephine.
She need not worry, for she has money in the bank, and no doubt there is a
young man in the offing, on the other side of the fjeld.

Oh, yes, Josephine will always manage; she thinks of everything. The other
day, for instance--when Miss Torsen and her friend left. The friend could
not pay his bill, and all he said was that he had expected money, but it
hadn't come, and he couldn't stay any longer because of his private
affairs. That was all very well, but when would the bill be paid? Why, he
would send it from the town, of course; that was where he had his money!

"But how do we know we'll get the money?--from him, anyway," said
Josephine. "We've had these actor-people here before. And I didn't like
the way he swanked about outside, thinking he was as good as anybody, and
throwing his stick up in the air and catching it again. And then when Miss
Torsen came in to say good-bye, I told her, and I wondered if she couldn't
let me have the money for him. Miss Torsen was shocked, and said, 'Hasn't
he paid himself?' 'No,' I said, 'he hasn't, and this year being such a bad
one, we need every penny.' So then Miss Torsen said of course we should
get the money; how much was it? And I told her, and she said she couldn't
pay for him now, but she would see the money was sent; we could trust her
for that. And I think we can, too. We'll get the money all right, if not
from him. I daresay she'll send it herself...."

And Josephine went off to serve me my dinner.

Paul is on his feet now, too. Not that his step is always very steady, but
at least he puts his feet to the ground. But he takes no interest in
things; he does little more than feeding the horses and chopping some
wood. He ought to be clearing the manure out of the summer cow houses for
autumn use, but he keeps putting it off, and probably it will not be done
at all. So far it hasn't mattered, but this morning's first wet snow has
covered the hay outdoors and the maltreated land. And so it will remain
till next spring. Poor Paul! He is an easygoing man at heart, but he
pushes doggedly on against a whirlwind; sometimes he smiles to himself,
knowing how useless it is to struggle--a distorted smile.

His father, the old man alone in his room, stands sometimes on his
threshold, as he used to do, and reflects. He is lost in memories, for he
has ninety years behind him. The many houses on the farm confuse him a
little; the roofs are all too big for him, and he is afraid they might
come down and carry him off. Once he asked Josephine if it was right that
his hands and fingers should run away from him every day across the
fields. So they put mittens on his hands, but he took to chewing them; in
fact he ate everything he was given, and enjoyed a good digestion. So they
must be thankful he had his health, Josephine said, and could be up and
about.

       *       *       *       *       *

I did not follow the others across the field, but returned the way I had
come last spring, down toward the woods and the sea. It is fitting that I
should go back, always back, never forward again.

I passed the hut where Solem and I had lived together, and then the
Lapps--the two old people and Olga, this strange cross between a human
being and a dwarf birch. A stove stood against the peat wall, and a
paraffin lamp hung from the roof of their stone-age dwelling. Olga was
kind and helpful, but she looked tiny and pathetic, like a ruffled hen; it
pained me to watch her flit about the room, tiny and crooked, as she
looked for a pair of reindeer cheeses for me.

Then I reached my own hut of last winter where I had passed so many lonely
months. I did not enter it.

Or rather, I did enter it, for I had to spend the night there. But I shall
skip this, so for the sake of brevity, I call it not entering. This
morning I wrote something playful about Madame, the mouse I left here last
spring; but tonight I am taking it out again because I am no longer in the
mood, and because there is no point in it. Perhaps it would have amused
you to read it, my friend; but there is no point in amusing you now. I
must deject you now and make you listen to me; there is not much more to
hear.

Am I moralizing? I am explaining. No, I am not moralizing; I am
explaining. If it is moralizing to see the truth and tell it to you, then
I am moralizing. Can I help that? Intuitively I see into what is distant;
you do not, for this is something you cannot learn from your little
schoolbooks. Do not let this rouse your hatred for me. I shall be merry
again with you later, when my strings are tuned to merriment. I have no
power over them. Now they are tuned to a chorale....

       *       *       *       *       *

At dawn, in the bright moonlight, I leave the hut and push on quickly in
order to reach the village as soon as possible. But I must have started
too early or walked too fast, for at this rate I shall reach the village
at high noon. What am I chasing after? Perhaps it is feeling the nearness
of the sea that drives me forward. And as I stand on the last high ridge,
with the glitter and roar of the sea far beneath, a sweetness darts
through me like a greeting from another world. "_Thalatta!_" I cry;
and I wipe my eyeglasses tremblingly. The roar from below is sleepless and
fierce, a tone of jungle passion, a savage litany. I descend the ridge as
though in a trance and reach the first house.

There was no one about, and a few children's faces at a window suddenly
disappeared. Everything here was small and poor, though only the barn was
of peat; the house was a timbered fisherman's home. As I entered the
house, I saw that though it was as poor within as without, the floor was
clean and covered with pine twigs. There were many children here. The
mother was busy cooking something over the fire.

I was offered a chair, and sitting down, began to chat with a couple of
small boys. As I was in no hurry and asked for nothing, the woman said:

"I expect you want a boat?"

"A boat?" I said in my turn, for I had not come by boat on my last visit;
I had walked instead over fjelds and valleys many miles from the sea.
"Yes, why not?" I said. "But where does it go?"

"I thought you wanted a boat to go to the trading center," she replied,
"because that's where the steamer stops. We've rowed over lots of people
this year."

Great changes here; the motor traffic in Stordalen must have completely
altered all the other traffic since my last visit ten months ago.

"Where can I stop for a few days?" I asked.

"At the trading center, the other side of the islands. Or there's Eilert
and Olaus; they're both on this side. You could go there; they've got big
houses."

She showed me the two places on this side of the water, close to the
shore, and I proceeded thither.




XXVII


A large house, with and upper story of planks built on later, displayed a
new signboard on the wall: Room and Board. The barn, as usual, was a peat
hut.

As I did not know which was Eilert and which Olaus, and had stopped to
consider which road to take, a man came hurrying toward me. Ah, well, the
world is a small place; we meet friends and acquaintances everywhere. Here
am I, meeting an old acquaintance, the thief of last winter, the pork
thief. What luck, what a satisfaction!

This was Eilert. He took in paying guests now.

At first he pretended not to recognize me, but he soon gave that up. Once
he had done so, however, he carried the thing off in style:

"Well, well," he said, "what a nice surprise! You are most welcome under
my humble roof, and such it is!"

My own response was rather less jaunty, and I stood still collecting my
thoughts. When I had asked a few questions, he explained that since the
motor traffic had started in Stordalen, many visitors came through this
way, and sometimes they wanted to stop over at his house before being
rowed across to the steamer. They always came down in the evenings, and it
might be fine, or it might not, and at night the fjord was often wild. He
had therefore had to arrange to house them, because after all, you can't
expect people to spend the night outdoors.

"So you've turned into a hotelkeeper," I said.

"Well, you can joke about it," he returned, "but all I do is to give
shelter to the people who come here. That's all the hotel there is to it.
My neighbor Olaus can't do any more either, even if he builds a place
that's ten times as big. Look over there--now he's building another
house--a shed, I'd call it--and he's got three grown men working on it so
he can get it done by next summer. But it won't be much bigger than my
place at that, and anyhow, the gentry don't want to be bothered walking
all that distance to his place when here's my house right at the car stop.
And besides it was me that started it, and if I was Olaus I wouldn't have
wanted to imitate me like a regular monkey and started keeping boarders
which I didn't know the first thing about. But he can't make himself any
different from what he is, so he puts up a few old bits of canvas and rugs
and cardboard inside his barn and gets people to sleep there. But I'd
never ask the gentry to sleep in a barn, a storehouse for fodder and hay
for dumb beasts, if you'll excuse my mentioning it! But of course if
you've no shame in you and don't know how to behave in company--"

"Lucky I've met you," I said. "Why, I might have gone on down the road to
his place!"

We walked on together, with Eilert talking and explaining all the way, and
assuring me over and over again that Olaus was a good-for-nothing for
copying him as he did.

If I had known what was awaiting me, I should certainly have passed by
Eilert's house. But I did not know. I was innocent, though I may not have
appeared so. It cannot be helped.

"It's too bad I've got somebody in the best room," said Eilert. "They're
gentlefolk from the city. They came down here through Stordalen, and they
had to walk because the cars have stopped for the season. They've been in
my house for quite some days, and I think they'll be staying on a while
yet. I think they're out now, but of course it means I can't let you have
my best room."

I looked up, and saw a face in the window. A shiver ran through me--no, of
course not a shiver, far from it, but certainly this was a fresh surprise.
What a coincidence! As we were about to enter the door, there was the
actor, too--standing there looking at me: the actor from the Tore Peak
resort. It was his knees, his coat, and his stick. So I was right--I
_had_ recognized her face at an upper window. Yes, indeed, the world
is small.

The actor and I greeted each other and began to talk. How nice to see me
again! And how was Paul, the good fellow--still soaking himself in liquor,
he supposed? Funny effect it has sometimes; Paul seemed to think the whole
inn was an aquarium and we visitors the goldfish! "Ha, ha, ha, goldfish; I
wish we were, I must say!--Well, Eilert, are we getting some fresh haddock
for supper? Good!--Really, we like it here very much; we've already been
here several days; we want to stay and get a good rest."

As we stood there, a rather stout girl came down from the loft and
addressed the actor:

"The missis wants you to come right upstairs."

"Oh? Very well, at once.... Well, see you later. You'll be stopping here,
too, I expect?"

He hurried up the stairs.

Eilert and I followed to my room.

       *       *       *       *       *

As a matter of fact, I went out again with Eilert at once. He had a great
deal to tell me and explain to me, and I was not unwilling to listen to
him then. Really, Eilert was not too bad, a fine fellow with four ragged,
magnificent youngsters by his first wife, who had died two years before,
and another child by his second wife. He must have forgotten, as he told
me this, the yarn about the sick wife and the ailing children that he had
spun for me last winter. The girl who had come down the stairs with the
message from the "missis" was no servant, but Eilert's young wife. And
she, too, was all right--strong and good, handy about the stables, and
pregnant again.

It all looks good to me, Eilert: your wife and everything you tell me
about your family.

No one will understand my strange contentment, then; I had been full of an
obscure happiness from the moment I came to this house. Probably a mere
coincidence, but that did not detract from my satisfactory state of mind;
I was pleased with everything, and all things added to my cheerful frame
of mind. There were some pigs by the barn, very affectionate pigs, because
they were used to the children playing with them and kissing them and
riding on their backs. And there was one of the goats, up on the roof of
course, standing so far out along the edge that it was a wonder he didn't
grow dizzy. Seagulls flew criss-cross over the fields, screaming their
own language to one another, and being friends or enemies to the best of
their ability. Down by the mouth of the river, just beneath the sunset,
began the great road that winds up through the woods and the valley. There
is something of the friendliness of a living being about such a forest
road.

Eilert was going out in his boat to fish haddock, and I went with him.
Actually he should have been getting some meat for us; but he had promised
the gentry from the city some fish, and fish was one of the gifts of God.
Besides, if he lacked meat, he could always slaughter one of the pigs.

There was a slight wind; but then we wanted some wind, Eilert said, as
long as there was not too much of it.

"Not reliable tonight though," he said, looking up into the sky; "the
bigger the wind, the stronger the current."

At first I was very brave, and sat on the thwart thinking of Eilert's
French words: _travali, prekevary, sutinary, mankemang_, and many
others. They've had a long way to travel, coming here by ancient routes
via Bergen, and now they're common property.

And then suddenly I lost all interest in French words, and felt extremely
ill. It was much too windy, and we got no haddock.

"Pity she's come up so quick," said Eilert; "let's try inshore for a
while."

But we got nothing there either, and as the wind increased and the sea
rose, "We'd better go home," said Eilert.

The sea had been just right before, remarkably so, but now there was
entirely too much of it. Why on earth did I feel so bad? An inner
exhaustion, some emotional excitement, would have explained it. But I had
experienced no emotional excitement.

We rowed in the foam and feathery jets of spray. "She's rising fast!"
cried Eilert, rowing with all his might.

I felt so wretched that Eilert told me to ship my oars; he would manage by
himself. But for all my wretchedness, I remembered that they could see me
from the shore, and I would not put down my oars. Eilert's wife might see
me and laugh at me.

What a revolting business, this seasickness that forced me to put my head
over the gunwale and make a pig of myself! I had a moment's relief, and
then it began all over again. Charming! I felt as though I were in labor;
the wrong way up, of course, through my throat, but it was a delivery
nonetheless. It moved up, then stopped, came on again and stopped, came on
and stopped once more. It was a lump of iron--iron, did I say? No, steel;
I had never felt anything like it before; it was not something I was born
with. All my internal mechanism was stopped by it. Then I took a running
start far down inside me and began, strangely, to howl with all my
strength; but a howl, however successful, cannot break down a lump of
steel. The pains continued. My mouth filled with bile. Soon, thank heaven,
my chest would burst. O--oh--oh.... Then we rowed inside the islands that
served as a breakwater, and I was saved.

Quite suddenly I was well again, and began to play the clown, imitating my
own behavior in order to deceive the people ashore. And I assured Eilert,
too, that this was the first time I had ever been seasick, so that he
should understand it was nothing to gossip about. After all, he had not
heard about the great seas I had sailed without the slightest discomfort;
once I had been four-and-twenty days on the ocean, with most of the
passengers in bed, and even the captain sick in cascades; but not me!

"Yes, I get seasick sometimes, too," says Eilert.

That evening I sat eating alone in the dining room. Since we had not
brought back any haddock, the visitors upstairs had no desire to come
down. All they wanted, Eilert's wife said, was some bread and butter and
milk to be sent up.




XXVIII


Next morning they had gone.

Yes, indeed, they left at four in the morning, at dawn; I heard them
perfectly well, for my room was near the stairs. The knight of the plump
thighs came first, clumping heavily down the stairs. She hushed him, and
her voice sounded angry.

Eilert had just risen too, and they stood outside for some minutes,
negotiating with him for the boat--yes, at once; they had changed their
minds and wanted to leave, immediately. Then they went down to the boat,
Eilert with them. I could see them through the window, chilled by the cold
of early morning and short-tempered with each other. There had been a
frost during the night; ice lay on the water in the buckets, and the
ground was harsh to walk on. Poor things--no food, no coffee; a windy
morning, with the sea still running rather high. There they go with their
knapsacks on their backs; she is still wearing her red hat.

Well, it was no concern of mine, and I lay down again, intending to sleep
till about noon. Nothing was any concern of mine, except myself. I could
not see the boat from my bed, so I got up again--just to while the time
away--to see how far they had gone. Not very far, though both men were
rowing. A little later I got up and looked again--oh, yes, they were
getting on. I took up my post by the window. It was really quite
interesting to watch the boat getting smaller and smaller; finally I
opened the window, even looked through my field-glasses. As it was not yet
quite light, I could not see them very clearly, but the red hat was still
discernible. Then the boat disappeared behind an island. I dressed and
went down. The children were all still in bed, but the wife, Regine, was
up. How calmly and naturally she took everything!

"Do you know where your husband is?" I asked her.

"Yes--funny, aren't they?" she replied. "I never saw them till after
they'd left--gone down to the fjord. Where do you suppose they're going?
Haddock fishing?"

"Maybe," was all I said. But I thought to myself: "They're leaving, all
right. They had their knapsacks on their backs."

"Funny couple," Regine resumed. "Nothing to eat, no coffee, not a thing!
And the missis not wanting anything to eat last night, neither!"

I merely shook my head and went out. Regine called to me that coffee was
nearly ready, so if I'd like a cup--

Of course the only thing I could do in the face of such foolishness was to
shake my head and go away. One must take the sensible view. How was it
possible to understand such behavior? Nevertheless I, the undersigned,
should have gone on to Olaus yesterday, instead of going fishing. That
would have been still more sensible. What business had I at this house?
Very likely she found it embarrassing to be called the "missis," and this
was why she could neither eat last night nor stay here today. So she had
beaten a retreat, with her friend and her knapsack.

Well, it was not much to go away with, but perhaps that doesn't matter. As
long as one has a reason to go away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later in the forenoon Eilert returned home. He was alone, but he came up
the path carrying one of the knapsacks--the larger one. He was in a
furious temper, and kept saying they'd better not try it on him--no,
they'd just better not.

Of course it was the bill again.

"She'll probably have a good deal of this sort of trouble," I thought to
myself, "but no doubt she'll get used to it, and take it as nonchalantly
as it should be taken. There are worse things."

But the fact remains that it was I that upset them, I that had driven them
away without their clothes; perhaps they had really expected some money to
be sent here--who knows?

I got hold of Eilert. How big was the bill? What, was that all? "Good
heavens! Here you are, here's your money; now row across to them at once
with their clothes!"

But it all proved in vain, for the strangers had gone; they had arrived
just in time for the boat, and were aboard it at that very moment.

Well, there was no help for it.

"Here's their address," says Eilert. "We can send the clothes next
Thursday; that's the next trip the boat goes south again."

I took down the address, but I was most ungracious to Eilert. Why couldn't
he have kept the other knapsack--why this particular one?

Eilert replied that it was true the gentleman had offered him the other
one, but he could see from the outside that it was not so good as this
one. And I should remember that the money the missis had paid him hadn't
covered more than the bill for one of them. So it was only reasonable that
he should take the fullest knapsack. As a matter of fact, he had behaved
very well, and that was the truth. Because when she gave him the larger
knapsack, and wrote the address, she had scolded, but he had kept quiet,
and said not another word. And anyway, nobody had better try it on him--
they'd better not, or he'd know the reason why!

Eilert shook a long-armed fist at the sky.

When he had eaten, drunk his coffee, and rested for a while, he was not so
lively and talkative as on the previous day. He had been brooding and
speculating ever since last summer, when the motor traffic started, and
did I think it would be a good idea for him to hire three grown men, too,
and build a much bigger house than Olaus's?

So he had caught it, too--the great, modern Norwegian disease!

The knapsack was back in her room again; yes, these were her clothes; I
recognized her blouses, her skirts and her shoes. I hardly looked at them,
of course; just unpacked them, folded them neatly, and put them back in
the bag again; because no doubt Eilert had had them all out in a heap.
This was really my only reason for unpacking them.




XXIX


Once more I was run into a party of English, the last for this year.

They arrived by steamer in the morning and stopped at the trading station
for a few hours, meanwhile sending up a detachment through the valley to
order a car to meet them. Stordalen, Stordalen, they said. So they had
apparently not yet seen Stordalen--an omission they must repair at once.

And what a sensation they made!

They came across by rowboat from the trading station; we could hear them a
long way off, an old man's voice drowning out all the others. Eilert
dropped everything he had in hand, and ran down to the landing place in
order to be the first on the spot. From Olaus's house, too, a man and a
few half-grown boys went down, and from all the houses round swarmed
curious and helpful crowds. There were so many spectators at the landing
place that the old man with the loud voice drew himself up to his full
height in the boat and majestically shouted his English at us, as though
his language must of course be ours as well:

"Where's the car? Bring the car down!"

Olaus, who was sharp, guessed what he meant and at once sent his two boys
up the valley to meet the car and hurry it on, for the Englishmen had
arrived.

They disembarked, they were in a great hurry, they could not understand
why the car had not come to meet them: "What was the meaning of this?"
There were four of them. "Stordalen!" they said. As they came up past
Eilert's house, they looked at their watches and swore because so many
minutes were being wasted. Where the devil was the car? The populace
followed at some distance, gazing with reverence on these dressed-up
fools.

I remember a couple of them: an old man--the one with the loud voice--who
wore a pleated kilt on each thigh and a jacket of green canvas with braid
and buckles and straps and innumerable pockets all over it. What a man,
what a power! His beard, streaming out from under his nose like the
northern lights, was greenish-white, and he swore like a madman. Another
of the party was tall and bent, a flagpole of sorts, astonishing,
stupendous, with sloping shoulders, a tiny cap perched above extravagantly
arched eyebrows; he was an upended Roman battering ram, a man on stilts. I
measured him with my eyes, and still there was something left over. Yet he
was bent and broken, old before his time, quite bald; but his mouth was
tight as a tiger's, and he had a madness in his head that kept him on the
move.

"Stordalen!" he cried.

England will soon have to open old people's homes for her sons. She
desexes her people with sport and obsessive ideas: were not other
countries keeping her in perpetual unrest, she would in a couple of
generations be converted to pederasty....

Then the horn of the car was heard tooting in the woods, and everyone
raced to meet it.

Of course Olaus's two boys had done an honest day's work in meeting the
car so far up the road, and urging the driver to hurry; were they not to
get any reward? True, they were allowed to sit in the back seat for their
return journey and thus enjoyed the drive of a lifetime; but money! They
had acquired enough brazenness in the course of the summer not to
hesitate, and approached the loud-voiced old man, holding out their palms
and clamoring: "Money!" But that did not suit the old man, who entered the
car forthwith, urging his companions to hurry. The driver, no doubt
thinking of his own tips, felt he would serve his passengers best by
driving off with them at once. So off he went. A toot of the horn, and a
rapid fanfare--tara-ra-boom-de-ay!

The spectators turned homeward, talking about the illustrious visitors.
Foreign lands--ah, no, this country will not bear comparison with them!
"Did you see how tall the younger lord was?" "And did you see the other
one, the one with the skirts and the northern lights?"

But some of the homeward-turning bumpkins, such as the Olaus family, had
more serious matters on their minds. Olaus for the first time understood
what he had read in the paper so many times, that the Norwegian elementary
school is a worthless institution because it does not teach English to the
children of the lower orders. Here were his boys, losing a handsome tip
merely because they could not swear back intelligibly at the gentleman
with the northern lights. The boys themselves had also something to think
about: "That driver, that scoundrel, that southerner! But just wait!" They
had heard that bits of broken bottle were very good for tires....

       *       *       *       *       *

I return to her knapsack and her clothes, and the reason why I do so is
that Eilert is so little to be trusted. I want to count her clothes to
make sure none of them disappear; it was a mistake not to have done so at
once.

It may seem as though I kept returning to these clothes and thinking about
them; but why should I do that? At any rate it is now evident that I was
right in suspecting Eilert, for I heard him going upstairs, and when I
came in, he was turning out the bag and going through the clothes.

"What are you doing?" I said.

At first he tried to brazen it out.

"Never you mind," he replied. But my knowing something about him was so
much to my advantage that he soon drew in his horns. How I wronged him, he
complained, and exploited him:

"You haven't bought these clothes," he said. "I could have got more for
them if I'd sold them." He had been paid, but he still wanted more, like
the stomach, which goes on digesting after death. That was Eilert. Yet he
was not too bad; he had never been any better, and he certainly had grown
no worse with his new livelihood.

May no one ever grow worse with a new livelihood!

So I moved the knapsack and the clothes into my own room in order to take
better care of them. It was a slow job to tidy everything up for the
second time, but it had to be done. Later that evening I would resume my
journey, taking the knapsack with me. I had done with the place, and the
nights were moonlit again.

Enough of these clothes!




XXX


Once again I am at an age when I walk in the moonlight. Thirty years ago I
walked in the moonlight, too, walked on crackling, snowy roads, on bare,
frozen ground, round unlocked barns, on the hunt for love. How well I
remember it! But it is no longer the same moonlight. I could even read by
it the letter she gave me. But there are no such letters any more.

Everything is changed. The tale is told, and tonight I walk abroad on an
errand of the head, not of the heart: I shall go across to the trading
center and dispatch a knapsack by the steamer; after that I shall wander
on. And that requires nothing but a little ordinary training in walking,
and the light of the moon to see by. But in those old days, those young
days, we studied the almanac in the autumn to find out if there would be a
moon on Twelfth Night, for we could use it then.

Everything is changed; I am changed. The tale lies within the teller.

They say that old age has other pleasures which youth has not: deeper
pleasures, more lasting pleasures. That is a lie. Yes, you have read
right: that is a lie. Only old age itself says this, in a self-interest
that flaunts its very rags. The old man has forgotten when he stood on the
summit, forgotten his own self, his own _alias_, red and white,
blowing a golden horn. Now he stands no longer--no, he sits--it is less of
a strain to sit. But now there comes to him, slow and halting, fat and
stupid, the honor of old age. What can a sitting man do with honor? A man
on his feet can use it; to a sitting man it is only a possession. But
honor is meant to be used, not to be sat with.

Let sitting men wear warm stockings.

       *       *       *       *       *

What a coincidence: another barn on my road, just as in the days of the
golden horn! It offers me plenty of straw and shelter for the night; but
where is the girl who gave me the letter? How warm her breath was, coming
between lips a little parted! She will come again, of course; let us wait,
we have plenty of time, another twenty years--oh, yes, she will come....

I must be on my guard against such traps. I have entered upon the
honorable years; I am weak and quite capable of believing that a barn is a
gift from above: thou well-deserving old man, here is a barn for thee!

No, thank you, I'm only just in my seventies.

And so in my errand of the head I pass by the barn.

Toward morning I find shelter under a projecting crag. It is fitting that
I should live under crags hereafter, and I lie down in a huddle, small and
invisible. Anything else you please, as long as you don't flaunt your
selfishness and your rags!

I am comfortable now, lying with my head on another person's knapsack full
of used clothes; I am doing this solely because it is just the right size.
But sleep will not come; there are only thoughts and dreams and lines of
poetry and sentimentality. The sack smells human, and I fling it away,
laying my head on my arm. My arm smells of wood--not even wood.

But the slip of paper with the address--have I got the address? And I
scratch a match to read it through and know it by heart tomorrow. Just a
line in pencil, nothing; but perhaps there is a softness in the letters, a
womanliness--I don't know.

It doesn't matter.

I manage to reach the trading center at midday, when everyone is up and
about, and the post office open. They give me a large sheet of wrapping
paper and string and sealing wax; I wrap the parcel and seal it and write
on the outside. There!

Oh--I forgot the slip of paper with the address--to put it inside, I mean.
Stupid! But otherwise I have done what I should. As I continue on my way,
I feel strangely void and deserted; no doubt because the knapsack was
quite heavy after all, and now I am well rid of it. "The last pleasure!" I
think suddenly. And as I walk on I think irrelevantly: "The last country,
the last island, the last pleasure...."




XXXI


What now?

I didn't know at first. The winter stood before me, my summer behind me--
no task, no yearning, no ambition. As it made no difference where I
stayed, I remembered a town I knew, and thought I might as well go there--
why not? A man cannot forever sit by the sea, and it is not necessary to
misunderstand him if he decides to leave it. So he leaves his solitude--
others have done so before him--and a mild curiosity drives him to see the
ships and the horses and the tiny frostbitten gardens of a certain town.
When he arrives there, he begins to wonder in his idleness if he does not
know someone in this town, in this terrifyingly large town. The moonlight
is bright now, and it amuses him to give himself a certain address to
visit evening after evening, and to take up his post there as though
something depended on it. He is not expected anywhere else, so he has the
time. Then one evening someone finds him reading under a lamppost, stops
suddenly and stares, takes a few steps toward him, and bends forward
searchingly.

"Isn't it--? Oh, no, excuse me, I thought--"

"Yes, it is. Good evening, Miss Torsen."

"Why, good evening. I thought it looked like you. Good evening. Yes, thank
you, very well. And thanks for the knapsack; I understood all at once--I
quite understand--"

"Do you live here? What a strange coincidence!"

"Yes, I live here; those are my windows. You wouldn't like to come up,
would you? No, perhaps you wouldn't."

"But I know where there are some benches down by the shore. Unless you're
cold?" I suggested.

"No, I'm not cold. Yes, thank you, I'd like to."

We went down to a bench, looking like a father and daughter out walking.
There was nothing striking about us, and we sat the whole evening
undisturbed. Later we sat undisturbed on other evenings all through a cold
autumn month.

Then she told me first the short chapter of her journey home, some of it
only hinted, suggested, and some of it in full; sometimes with her head
deeply bowed, sometimes, when I asked a question, replying by a brief word
or a shake of the head. I write it down from memory; it was important to
her, and it became important for others as well.

Besides--in a hundred years it will all be forgotten. Why do we struggle?
In a hundred years someone will read about it in memoirs and letters and
think: "How she wriggled, how she fussed--dear me!" There are others about
whom nothing at all will be written or read; life will close over them
like a grave. Either way....

What sorrows she had--dear, dear, what sorrows! The day she had been
unable to pay the bill, she thought herself the center of the universe;
everybody stared at her, and she was at her wits' end. Then she heard a
man's voice outside saying: "Haven't you watered Blakka yet?" That was
_his_ preoccupation. So she was not the center of the universe after
all.

Then she and her companion had left the house, and set out on their tour.
The center? Not at all. Day after day they walked across fields, and
through valleys, had meals in houses by the way, and water from the
brooks. If they met other travelers, they greeted them, or they did not
greet them; no one was less a center of attention than they, and no one
more. Her companion walked in vacant thoughtlessness, whistling as he
went.

At one place they stopped for food.

"Will you pay for mine for the time being?" he said.

She hesitated and then said briefly that she could not pay "for the time
being" all the way.

"Of course not, by no means," said he. "Just for the moment. Perhaps we
can get a loan further down the valley."

"I don't borrow."

"Ingeborg!" said he, pretending playfully to whimper.

"What is it?"

"Nothing. Can't I say 'Ingeborg' to my own wife?"

"I'm not your own wife," she said, getting up.

"Pish! We were man and wife last night. It says so in the visitors' book."

She was silent at this. Yes, last night they had been man and wife; that
was to save getting two rooms, and travel economically. But she had been
very foolish to agree to it.

"'Miss Torsen,' then?" he whimpered.

And to put an end to the game, she paid for both of them and took her
knapsack on her back.

They walked again. At the next stop she paid for them both without
discussion--for the evening meal, for bed and breakfast. It grew to be a
habit. They walked on once more. They reached the end of the valley by the
sea, and here she revolted again.

"Go away--go on by yourself; I don't want you in my room any more!"

The old argument no longer held good. When he repeated that they saved
money by it, she replied that she for her part required no more than one
room, and was quite able to pay for it. He joked again, whimpered,
"Ingeborg!" and left her. He was beaten, and his back was bent.

She ate alone that evening.

"Isn't your husband coming in?" asked the woman of the house.

"Perhaps he doesn't want anything," she replied.

There he stood, away by the tiny barn pretending to be interested in the
roof, in the style of building, and walked round looking at it, pursing
his lips and whistling. But she could see perfectly well from the window
that his face was blue and dejected. When she had eaten, she walked down
to the shore, calling as she passed him:

"Go in and eat!"

But he had not sunk quite so low; he would not go in to eat, and slept
under no roof that night.

It ended as such things usually end: when she found him at last next
morning, regretting her action and shaken by his appearance, everything
slipped back again to where it had been.

They stopped at this place a few days, waiting for the mail boat, when one
evening an elderly man came to the house. She knew him, and he knew them
both; she was thrown into a state of the greatest excitement, made ready
to leave at once, wept and beat her breast, and wanted to go home,
immediately, at once. It ended as such things usually end: when she had
calmed down, she went to bed for the night. She was not the center of the
universe, and the old acquaintance who had happened to pass that way did
not appear to be looking only at her. Nevertheless, she staged a sort of
flight early next morning, in the gray dawn, before other people were up.
This much she did.

Aboard the mail boat she met no more acquaintances, and had leisure to
think things over calmly. She now broke with her companion in earnest. She
had a minor disagreement with him again, for he had no ticket, and one
word gave rise to the next. It was all very well for her, he said; she had
her return ticket in her pocket. Besides, had he not got himself involved
in all these trials and tribulations because of her letter last summer,
and was she not ashamed of herself? He would not have moved a foot outside
the town had it not been for that letter of hers. Then she gave him her
purse and all her money and asked him to leave her. There was probably
enough to buy him a ticket, and now she would be rid of him.

"Of course I shouldn't accept this, but there's no other way," he said,
and left her.

She stood gazing across the water, and wondering what to do. She was in a
bad way now, so very different from what she had once thought; what shame,
what utter futility she had wandered into! She brooded till she was worn
out; then she began to listen to what people about her were saying. Two
men were huddled on benches trying to shelter from the wind; she heard one
of them say he was a schoolmaster, and the other that he was an artisan.
The schoolmaster did not remain seated long, but got up and swaggered
toward her. She passed him in silence and took his place on the bench.

It was a raw autumn day, and it did her good to get out of the wind. The
artisan probably thought this tall, well-dressed lady had a berth, but
when she sat down, he moved over on his own bench. He was on the point of
lighting his pipe, but stopped.

"Go on, don't mind me," she said.

So he lit it, but he was careful not to blow the smoke into her face.

He was only a youngster, a little over twenty, with thick reddish hair
under his cap, and whitish eyebrows high up on his forehead. His chest was
broad and flat, but his back was round and his hands massive. A great
horse.

Then a tray was brought him, sandwiches and coffee, which he had evidently
been waiting for; he paid, but went on smoking and let the food stand.

"Please eat," she said. "You don't mind my sitting here?"

"Not at all," he replied. He knocked out his pipe slowly, taking plenty of
time over it; then sat still again.

"I don't really need anything to eat yet, either," he said.

"Oh--haven't you come far?"

"No, only last night. Where do you come from, lady?"

"From the town. I've been on holiday."

"That's what I thought," he said, nodding his head.

"I've been up at the Tore Peak farm," she added.

"The Tore Peak? So."

"Do you know it?"

"No, but I know some of the people there."

A pause.

"Josephine's there," he resumed.

"Yes. Do you know her?"

"Oh, no."

They talked a little more. The boat sailed on, and they sat there talking;
it was all they had to do. She asked where he came from and what his trade
was, and it seemed he was nothing important, only a paltry carpenter, and
his mother had a small farm. Would the lady like a simple cup of coffee?

"Why, yes, thank you." Could she have a little of his, "just a little in
the saucer?"

She poured some of the coffee into the saucer and asked for a bite of food
as well. Never had food tasted so good, and when she had finished, she
thanked him for that, too.

"Haven't you a berth?" he asked.

"Yes, but I'd rather stay here," she said. "If I go below, I'll be sick."

"That's what I thought. Well, now I wonder--"

With that he got up and walked slowly and heavily away. She watched his
back disappearing down the companion to the lower deck.

She waited for him a long time, fearing that someone else might come and
take his place. Coffee from the saucer, a good-sized sandwich with the
carpenter: nothing wily or unnatural about that; this sheltered corner
seemed to her like a tiny foothold in life.

There he was, coming back with more food and coffee, a whole tray in his
big hands. He laughed good-naturedly at himself for walking so carefully.

She threw up her hands and overdid things a little:

"Great heavens! Really, you're much, much too kind!"

"Well, I thought since you were sitting here anyhow--"

They both ate; she grew warm and sleepy, and leaned back half-dozing.
Every time she opened her eyes, she saw the carpenter lighting his pipe;
he struck two or three matches at once, but he was in no hurry; they were
always half burned before he put his pipe in his mouth and began to suck
at it. The schoolmaster called something to him, drew his attention to
something far inland, but the carpenter merely nodded and said nothing.

"I wonder if he's afraid he'll wake me," she thought.

At one stop, her former traveling companion turned up again; he had been
below in the cabin.

"Aren't you coming down, Ingeborg?" he asked.

She did not reply.

The carpenter looked from one to the other.

"Miss Torsen, then!" whimpered the traveling companion playfully. He stood
waiting a moment, and finally went away.

"Ingeborg," the carpenter was probably thinking. "Miss Torsen," he was
thinking.

"How long will you be in the town?" she asked, getting up.

"Oh, I'll be there some time."

"What are you doing there?"

He was a little embarrassed, and since his skin was so fair, she could see
at once that he reddened. He bent forward, planting his elbows on his
knees before he replied.

"I want to learn a little more in my trade, be an apprentice, maybe. It
all depends."

"Oh, I see."

"What do you think of it?" he asked.

"I think it's a good idea."

"Do you?"

They were on deck nearly the whole of the day, but toward evening it
turned bitter cold and windy. When she had grown stiff with sitting, she
got up and stamped her feet, and when she had stamped till she was tired,
she sat down again. Once when she was standing a little distance away, she
saw the carpenter place a parcel on the bench as though to keep her seat
for her.

Her quondam traveling companion stuck his head out of a doorway, the wind
blowing his hair forward over his forehead, and cried:

"Ingeborg, go below, will you!"

"Oh," she groaned. Suddenly she was seized with fury. The ship heeled over
on its side as she walked toward him, and she had to take a few skips to
keep her balance.

"I don't want you to talk to me again," she hissed at him. "Do you hear? I
mean it, by all that's holy!"

"Good gracious!" he exclaimed and disappeared.

At about three o'clock, the carpenter turned up with coffee and sandwiches
again.

"Really you mustn't be doing this all the time," she said.

He merely laughed good-naturedly again, and told her to eat if she thought
it was good enough.

"We'll soon be there now," she said as she ate. "Have you someone to go
to?"

"Oh, yes, I have a sister."

Slowly and thoughtfully he took another sandwich and turned it over,
looking at it absently before he took a bite out of it. When he had
finished one mouthful, he took another. And when he had finished that one,
too, he said:

"I thought that as I'm going to stay in town over the winter, I'd better
learn something. And what with the farm as well--"

"Yes, indeed."

"You think so too?"

"Oh, yes. I think so."

Why did he tell her about his private affairs? She had private affairs of
her own. She thanked him for the sandwiches and got up.

As the boat drew alongside the pier, he offered her his hand and said:

"My name is Nikolai."

"Oh, yes?"

"I thought in case we meet again--Nikolai Palm--but I expect the town's
too big--"

"Yes, I expect it is. Well, thanks ever so much for all your kindness.
Good-bye."




XXXII


I ask Miss Torsen:

"Have you met the carpenter since?"

"What carpenter? Oh--no, I haven't. I only told you about him because he's
a sort of mutual acquaintance."

"Acquaintance?"

"Yes, of yours and mine. Only indirectly, of course. He happens to be the
brother of that schoolmistress Miss Palm that was at the Tore Peak farm
last summer."

"Well, the world's a small place. We all belong to the same family."

"And that's why I've told you all this about him."

"But you didn't find out about this relationship on the boat, did you? So
you must have met him since."

"Yes,--well, no, that is to say I've seen him a few times, but not to
speak to. We just said good morning and how are you and so on. Then he
said he was her brother."

"Ha, ha, ha!"

"It was just in passing, quite by accident."

This gave me a good opportunity for saying: "What a lot of things are
accidental! It was an accident that I should have stopped under a
particular lamppost to look up something, to read a few lines. And then
you happened to live there."

"That's right."

"I expect you and the carpenter will be getting married," I said.

"Ha, ha! No, indeed, I shan't marry anyone."

"No?"

"You have to be pretty naive to marry."

"Well, I don't know that being naive does any harm--being not quite so
clever. Where does your cleverness lead you? Only to being cheated.
Because there isn't anybody who's quite clever enough."

"I should have thought being clever is just the thing to protect you
against being cheated. What else would it do?"

"Exactly. What else? But the trouble is we trust our cleverness so much
that we get cheated that way. Or else we let things go from bad to worse,
because why should we worry? After all we've got our cleverness to help
get us out of the mess!"

"Well, in that case it's pretty hopeless!"

"Relying on your cleverness--yes. That was your own opinion last summer,
you know."

"Yes, I remember that. I thought--oh, I don't know. But when I came back
to town again it was as though--"

A pause.

"I don't know what to think," she said.

"And I do because I'm old and wise. You see, Miss Torsen, in the old days
people didn't think so much about cleverness and secondary schools and the
right to vote; they lived their lives on a different plane, they were
naive. I wonder if that wasn't a pretty good way to live. Of course people
were cheated in those days, too, but they didn't smart under it so; they
bore it with greater natural strength. We have lost our healthy powers of
endurance."

"It's getting cold," she said. "Shall we go home?--Yes, of course that's
all quite true, but we're living in modern times. We can't change the
times; I can't, at any rate; I've got to keep up with the times."

"Yes, that's what it says in the Oslo morning paper. Because it used to
say so in the _Neue Freie Presse_. But a person with character goes
his own way up to a point, even if the majority go a different way."

"Yes--well, I'm really going to tell you something now," she said,
stopping. "I go to a really sensible school during the day."

"Do you?" I said.

"Only this time I'm learning housekeeping; isn't that a good thing?"

"You mean you're learning to cut sandwiches for yourself?"

"Ha, ha!"

"Well, you said you weren't going to marry!"

"Oh, I don't know."

"Very well. You marry; you settle down in his valley. But first you have
to learn housekeeping so that you can make an omelette or possibly a
pudding for tourists or Englishmen that pass through."

"His valley? Whose valley?"

"You'd much better go to his mother's and learn all the housekeeping
you're going to need from her."

"Really, really," she said smiling as she walked on again, "you're quite
on the wrong track. It isn't he--it isn't anybody."

"So much the worse for you. There ought to be somebody."

"Yes, but suppose it's not the one I want."

"Oh, yes, it will be the one you want. You're big enough and handsome
enough and capable enough."

"Thank you very much, but--well. Thanks so much. Good night."

Why did she break off so suddenly and leave me so hurriedly, almost at a
run? Was she crying? I should have liked to have said more, to have been
wise and circumstantial and made useful suggestions, but I was left
standing in a kind of stupid surprise.

Then something happened.

"We haven't seen each other for such a long time," she said, the next time
we met. "I'm so glad to see you again. Shall we take a short walk? I was
just--"

"Going to post a letter, I see."

"Yes, I was going to post a letter. It's only--it's not--"

We went to a newspaper office with the letter. It was evidently an
advertisement; perhaps she was trying to find a situation.

As she came out of the office a gentleman greeted her. She turned a deep
red, and stopped for a moment at the top of the two stone steps leading
from the entrance. Her head was bent almost to her chest, as though she
were looking very carefully at the steps before venturing to come down
them. They greeted each other again; the stranger shook her hand, and they
began to talk.

He was a man of her own age, good-looking, with a soft, fair beard, and
dark eyebrows that looked as though he had blacked them. He wore a top
hat, and his overcoat, which was open, was lined with silk.

I heard them mention an evening of the previous week on which they had
enjoyed themselves; it had been a relaxation. There had been quite a
party, first out driving, then at supper together. It was a memory they
had in common. Miss Torsen didn't say much. She seemed a little
embarrassed, but smiling and beautiful. I began to look at the illustrated
papers displayed in the window, when suddenly the thought struck me: "Good
God, she's in love!"

"Look, I have a suggestion," he said. Then they discussed something,
agreed about something, and she nodded. After that he left her.

She came toward me slowly and in silence. I spoke to her about some of the
pictures in the window. "Yes," she said, "just think!" But she gazed at
them without seeing anything. Silently we walked on, and for several
minutes, at least, she said nothing.

"Hans Flaten never changes," she said finally.

"Is that who it was?" I asked.

"His name's Flaten."

"Yes, I remember you mentioned the name last summer. Who is he?"

"His father's a merchant."

"But he himself?"

"His father owns the big shop in Almes Street, you know."

"Yes, but what about _him_; what does he do?"

"I don't know if he does anything special; he just studies. His father's
so rich, you know."

I recalled old Flaten's shop in Almes Street, a good, solid countryman's
shop; in the mornings the yard was always full of horses, while the owners
were busy making purchases in the shop.

"He's such a man of the world," she went on. "He simply throws money
about--banknotes. When he goes anywhere, the people all whisper, 'That's
Flaten!'"

"He dresses as though he were a baron," I said.

"Yes," she replied, rather offended. "Yes, he dresses well--always has."

"Is that the man you want?" I asked lightly.

She was silent a moment, and then said with a resolute nod:

"Yes."

"What--that dandy?"

"Why not? We're old friends, we've gone to school together, spent a lot of
time together. It's really based on a firm foundation. He's the only man
I've ever been in love with in all my life, and it's lasted many years.
Sometimes, I'll admit, I forget him, but the moment I see him again, I'm
as much in love as ever. I've told him so, and we both laugh about it, but
that doesn't change it. It's queer."

"Then I suppose he's too rich to marry her," I thought, and asked nothing
more.

When we parted, I said:

"Where does Carpenter Nikolai work?"

"I don't know," she replied. "Oh, yes, I do know. We're near there, and I
can show you if you like. What do you want to see him for?"

"Nothing. I just wondered if he's at a good place, with a competent
master."

       *       *       *       *       *

Why did I, indeed, want to see Carpenter Nikolai, the artisan? Yet I have
visited him and made his acquaintance. He is a bull in stature, strong and
plain-featured, a man of few words. Last Saturday we saw the town
together; why, I don't know, but I suggested it myself.

I made friends with the carpenter for my own sake, because of my
loneliness. I no longer went to the benches by the shore, as the weather
was a little too cold, and Miss Torsen interested me very little now; she
had changed so much since returning to the town. She had become more the
ordinary type of girl, not in any one thing, but in general. She thought
of nothing but vanities and nonsense, and seemed quite to have forgotten
her last summer's wholesome, bitter view of life. Now she was back at
school again, in her leisure hours meeting the gentleman named Flaten, and
this occupied all of her time. Either she had no depths, or she had been
vitiated in the vital years of adolescence.

"What do you expect me to do?" she asked. "Of course I'm going to school
again; I've been going to school ever since I was a child. I'm no good at
anything else. I can only learn--that's what I'm used to. There isn't much
I can think or do on my own, and I don't enjoy it either. So what do you
expect?"

No, what could I expect?

Carpenter Nikolai went to the circus. He was not much surprised at
anything he saw there, or he pretended not to be. The acrobatics on
horseback--"Well, not bad, but after all--!" The tiger--"I thought tigers
were much bigger!" Besides, his big, heavy head seemed preoccupied with
other thoughts, and he paid little attention to the women riders who were
doing their tricks.

On the way home he said:

"I ought not to ask you, I expect, but would you go to the _Krone_
with me tomorrow evening?"

"The _Krone_--what's that?"

"It's a place where they dance."

"A dance hall, in other words. Where is it? Do you feel so much like
dancing?"

"No, not much."

"You want to see what goes on there?"

"Yes."

"All right, I'll go."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was on a Sunday evening, the girls' and boys' own evening, that the
carpenter and I went to the dance.

He had decked himself out in a starched collar and a heavy watch chain.
But he was very young, and when you are young, you look well in anything.
He had such remarkable strength that it was never necessary for him to
give way; this had lent him assurance and authority. If you spoke to him,
he was slow to reply, and if you slapped him on the shoulder, he was slow
in turning round to see who had greeted him. He was a pleasant,
good-humored companion.

We went to the booking office; there was no one there, and the window was
closed. Moreover a notice on the wall announced that the hall was let to a
private club for the first two hours of the evening.

A few young people came along as we were standing there, read the notice,
and went away again. The carpenter was unwilling to go, looked round, and
went in through the gate as though looking for someone.

"We can't do anything about it," I called after him.

"No," he said. "But I wonder--?"

He crossed the yard and began to look up at all the windows.

A man came down the stairs.

"What is it?" he asked.

"My friend wanted to buy a ticket," I replied. The carpenter still showed
no inclination to return from the yard.

The man approached me, and proved to be the landlord. He explained, like
the notice, that a club had rented the hall for the first two hours.

"Come along, we can't get in!" I called to my companion.

But he was in no hurry, so I chatted with the landlord while waiting for
him.

"Yes, it's rather an exclusive club. Only eight couples, but just the same
they've hired a full orchestra--rich people, you see."

They had refreshments and plenty of champagne, and then they danced as
though their lives depended on it. Why they did it? Oh, well, young
people, rich and fashionable, bored by Sunday evening at home; they wanted
to work off the week's idleness in two hours, so they danced. Not unusual,
really.

"And of course," said the landlord, "I earn more in those two hours than
in the whole of the evening otherwise. Liberal people--they don't count
the pennies. And yet there's no wear and tear, because of course people
like that don't dance on their heels."

The carpenter, who had come halfway back, stood listening to us.

"What sort of people are they, generally speaking?" I inquired.
"Businessmen, officers, or what?"

"Excuse me, but I can't tell you that," replied the landlord. "It's a
private party; that's all I can say. To-night, for instance, I don't even
know who they are. The money just came by special messenger."

"It's Flaten," said the carpenter.

"Flaten--is it?" said the landlord, as though he did not know it. "Mr.
Flaten has been here before; he's a fine gentleman, always in fashionable
company. So it's Mr. Flaten, is it? Well, excuse me, I must have another
look round the hall--"

The landlord left us.

But the carpenter followed him.

"Couldn't we look on?" he asked.

"What, at the dancing? Oh, no."

"In a corner somewhere?"

"No, I couldn't allow that. I don't even let my own wife and daughter in--
nobody, not a soul. They wouldn't like it."

"Are you coming or--?" I called, as though for the last time.

"Yes, I'm coming," said the carpenter, turning back.

"So you knew about this party?" I said.

"Yes," he replied. "She talked about it last Friday."

"Who talked about it? Miss Torsen?"

"Yes. She said I might sit in the gallery."

We walked on down the street, each busy with his own thoughts--or perhaps
with the same thought. I, at least, was furious.

"Really, my good Nikolai, I have no desire to buy
tickets in order to look at Mr. Flaten and his ladies!"

"No."

Curious idea of hers, inviting this man to watch her dance. It was
preposterous, but like her. Last summer, too--did she not like a third
party within hearing whenever she sailed close to the wind? A thought
struck me, and I asked the carpenter as calmly as I could:

"Did Miss Torsen want me to sit in the gallery, too--did she say anything
about that?"

"No," he replied.

"Didn't she say anything about me?"

"No."

"You're lying," I thought, "and I daresay she's told you to lie!" I was
highly incensed, but I could not squeeze the truth out of the carpenter.

Cars rolled up behind us and stopped at the _Krone_. Nikolai turned
and wanted to go back, but when he saw that I kept straight on, he
hesitated a moment and then followed me. I heard him once sighing heavily.


We strolled the streets for an hour, while I cooled off and made myself
agreeable to my companion again. We had a glass of beer together, then
went to a cinema, and afterward to a shooting gallery. Finally we went to
a skittle ground, where we stayed for some time. Nikolai was the first to
want to leave; he looked at his watch, and was suddenly in a tearing
hurry. He was hardly even willing to finish the game.

We had to pass the _Krone_ again. The cars had gone.

"Just as I thought," said the carpenter, looking very disappointed. I
believe he would have liked to be present when the party came out to enter
their cars. He looked up and down the empty street and repeated, "Just as
I thought!" He was suddenly anxious to go home.

"No, let's go inside," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a big, handsome hall with a platform for the orchestra, and a
throng of people on the great floor. We sat in the gallery looking on.

There was a very mixed crowd: seamen, artisans, hotel staff, shop
assistants, casual workers; the ladies were apparently seamstresses,
servant girls, and shopgirls, with a sprinkling of light-footed damsels
who had no daytime occupation. The floor was crowded with dancers. In
addition to a constable whose duty it was to intervene if necessity arose,
the establishment had its own commissionaire, who walked about the hall
with a stick, keeping an eye on the assembled company. As soon as a dance
was finished, the gentlemen all crowded to the platform and paid ten
_oere_. If anyone seemed to be trying to cheat, the commissionaire
would tap him politely on the arm with his stick. Gentlemen who had to be
tapped many times were regarded as suspicious characters, and might, as a
last resource, even be expelled. Order was admirably maintained.

Waltz, mazurka, schottische, square dance, waltz. I soon noticed a man who
was dancing with great assiduity, never stopping once--tall, swarthy,
lively--a heartbreaker. The ladies clustered round him.

"Can that be Solem down there dominating the crowd?" I thought.

"Wouldn't you like to dance?" I asked Carpenter Nikolai.

"Oh, no," he replied with a smile.

"Then we can leave any time you like."

"All right," he said and remained seated.

"Your thoughts seem to be far away."

A long pause.

"I was thinking that I haven't a horse on my farm. I have to carry all the
manure and the wood myself."

"So that's why you're so strong."

"I'll have to go home in a few days and chop wood for the winter."

"Yes, of course you will."

"I was going to say--," he persisted, and then fell silent.

"Yes?"

"No, it's no use suggesting it. I'd have liked you to come with me this
winter, though--I've got a small spare room."

"Why should I go there?" Still--it wasn't a bad idea.

"It would be nice if you could," said the carpenter.

Just then I heard the name of Solem mentioned in the hall. Yes, there he
was, swaggering as usual, the self-same Solem from Tore Peak. He was
standing alone, in high spirits, announcing that he was Solem--"Solem, my
lad." He appeared not to be in the company of any one lady, for I saw him
choosing partners indiscriminately. Then he chose the wrong lady, and her
partner shook his head and said no. Solem remembered that. He allowed the
couple to dance the next dance, and when it was finished, approached again
and bowed to the lady. Once more he was refused.

The lady's appearance was striking--sophisticated or innocent, who could
tell? Ash-blonde, tall, Grecian, in a black frock without trimming. How
quiet and retiring she was! Of course she was a tart, but what a gentle
one--a nun of vice, with a face as pure as that of a repentant sinner.
Peerless!

This was a woman for Solem.

It was after he had received his second "No" from the gentleman that he
began to talk, to tell everyone that he was "Solem, my lad." But his
boasts were dull: Something was going to happen; he would show them an
image of sin! There was no sting in it; just old, familiar rubbish these
people had heard before. The commissionaire crossed over to him and asked
him to be quiet, pointing at the same time to the constable by the door.
This pouring of oil on the waters was successful, for Solem himself said:
"Hush, we mustn't make trouble." But he did not lose sight of the Grecian
and her partner.

He allowed a few dances to pass again, himself engaging other partners to
dance with. There was now a huge crowd, all the late-comers having by this
time arrived. Many were crowded off the floor and had to wait, rushing to
get first place in the next dance instead.

Then something happened.

A couple slipped and fell. It was Solem and his partner. As he was getting
up again, he tripped up another couple--the Grecian and her partner, both
of whom fell down. And Solem was so strangely clumsy as he rose that his
long arms and legs brought down a third couple. In a few minutes there was
a squirming heap on the floor; screams and oaths were heard, people grew
angry and kicked one another, while Solem skillfully directed the disaster
with sincere and wholehearted malevolence. Couple after couple met their
Waterloo over those already fallen. The commissionaire poked them with his
stick, exhorting them to get up; the constable himself assisted him, and
the music stopped. In the meantime, Solem, acting with the better part of
valor, slipped out of the room and did not return.

Gradually the fallen couples got to their feet again, rubbing their shins,
dusting off their clothes, some laughing, others swearing. The Grecian
lady's partner had a bleeding wound on his temple, and put his hands to
his head in a daze. Questions were being asked about that--what was his
name?--that tall fellow who had started all the trouble. "Solem," said
some of the ladies. Threats were uttered against Solem: he was the one.
"Go and find him, somebody--we'll show him!"--"Why, he couldn't help it,"
said the ladies.

Ah, Solem, Solem--how the ladies loved him!

But the Grecian rose from the dust as from a bath. The sand from the floor
clung to her black dress, making it look as though spangled with stardust.
Submissively she accepted the lot of lying under all the others, entwined
in their legs, and smiled when someone pointed out to her that the comb in
her Grecian knot was crushed.




XXXIII


Today, the first of October forty years ago, we drove the snowplow at
home. Yes, I regret to say that I remember forty years ago.

Nothing escapes my attention yet, but everything moves past me. I sit in
the gallery looking on. If Nikolai the carpenter had been observant, he
would have seen my fingers closing and opening again, my absurdity
augmented by affectation and grimacing. Fortunately he was a child. In the
end I left it all behind me, and took my proper seat. My address is the
chimney corner.

Now it is winter again, with snow over the north, and Anglo-Saxon claptrap
in the town. This is my desolate period; my wheels stop, my hair stops
growing, my nails stop growing, everything stops growing but the days of
my life. And it is well that my days increase--from now on it is well.

Not much happens during the winter. Well, of course, Nikolai has got an
overcoat for the first time in his life. He didn't really need it, he
says, but he bought it because of the advertisement; and it was dear,
twenty _kroner_, but he got it for eighteen! I am sure Nikolai is
much happier about his overcoat than Flaten is about his.

But let me not forget Flaten, for something has happened to him. His
friends have given him a farewell party and drunk him out of bachelordom,
for he is going to marry. It is Miss Torsen who told me this; I met her by
accident again under her own lamppost, and she told me then.

"And you're not wearing mourning?" I said.

"Oh, no," she said, smiling. "No, it's something I've known a long time.
Besides, perhaps I'm not very faithful; I don't know."

"I think you've hit the truth there."

She looked startled.

"What do you mean?"

"I think you've changed very much since last summer. You were straight and
competent then, you saw clearly, you knew what you wanted. What's happened
to your tinge of bitterness? Or have you no longer reason to be bitter?"

This was all too gravely spoken, but I was like a father and meant well.

She began to walk on, her head bent in thought. Then she said something
very sensible:

"Last summer I had just lost my livelihood. I'm telling you things exactly
as they were. I lost my post, which was a very serious matter. This made
me reflect for a time; that's true. But then--I don't know--I'm quite
adult, but not adult enough. I have two sisters who are really steady;
they're married and quite settled, though they're younger than I. I don't
know what's wrong with me."

"Would you like to go to a concert with me?" I asked.

"Now? No, thank you, I'm not dressed for it."

A pause.

"But it's kind of you to ask me!" she said with sudden pleasure. "It might
have been very nice, but--well, you must let me tell you about the dinner
party, the banquet; what a lot of pranks they thought of!"

She was right about that; these jolly young people had played a great many
pranks, some of them childish and stupid, others not too bad. First they
had drunk wine of the vintage of 1812. No, first of all, Flaten was sent
an invitation, of course, and it consisted of a painting, a very
emancipated painting in a frame, the only written words being the date and
the place, and the legend: _Ballads, Bachiads, Offenbachiads,
Bacchanales_. Then there were speeches for him who was about to leave
them, and generally speaking a most deafening shouting over the
wineglasses. And there was music, with someone of the company playing all
the time.

But as the evening wore on, this sort of thing was not enough, and girls
with their faces masked were brought in to dance. As there had been a
great deal of champagne, however, this part of the program tended to
deteriorate into something different, and the girls had to be sent away.
Then the gentlemen went down to the hotel lobby and stood at the door
watching for "opportunities."

There--a young woman approached carrying a baby and a bundle of clothes.
Great, wet flakes of snow were drifting down, and she bent forward over
the child to shelter it as she walked.

"Whoa!" said the gentleman and caught hold of her. "Is that your child!"

"Yes, he's mine."

"What, a boy?"

"Yes."

They talked more with her; she was thin and young, evidently a servant
girl. They also looked at the child, and Helgesen and Lind, who were both
short-sighted, polished their glasses and inspected it carefully.

"Are you going off to drown the child?" somebody says.

"No," says the girl in confusion.

That was a nasty question, all the others agreed, and the first one
admitted it. He went off to fetch his raincoat, and hung it over the
girl's shoulders. Then he tickled the child under the chin and made it
smile--a marvel of a child, human bones and rags and dirt all in one
little bundle.

"Poor bastard," he said. "Born of a maiden!"

"That's better!" the others remarked. "Now let's do something," they said.
"Where do you live?" to the girl.

"I've lived at such and such places," she replied.
"_Have_ lived; very well, this is what we'll do," one of them said,
taking out his pocketbook. The others followed suit, and a great deal of
money was pushed into the girl's hand.

"Wait a minute--wait--I haven't given her enough; I asked her such a nasty
question," said the first of them.

"Neither have I," said another, "because we all thought the same thing,
but now we're going to settle some money on this son of a maiden!"

A collection was taken up, with Helgesen as the cashier. Then Bengt hailed
a cab, invited the girl to enter, and got in after her.

"Go ahead--I want to go to Langes Street!" he called to the driver.

Bengt was taking the child home to his mother, the others said. The group
were rather silent after this.

"Your eyes are so ridiculously wet, Bolt; are you crying about the money?"


"What about you?" Bolt replied. "You're as sentimental as an old woman!"

They grew cheerful again, and there were further "opportunities." A
peasant came down the street with a cow he was taking to the butcher's.

"What will you charge for letting our guest of honor ride your cow?" young
Rolandsen asked him. The peasant smiled and shook his head. So they bought
the cow from him, paying cash for it. "Wait a minute," they said to the
peasant. Then they put a label on the cow, addressed to a lady they knew.

"Take it to this address," they said to the peasant.

By the time they had finished with this, Bengt had returned.

"Where have _you_ been?" they asked in surprise.

"The old lady said yes," was all he replied.

"Hurrah!" they all shouted. "Let's drink to the baby! Here, let's go to
the bar. Did she really say yes? Hurrah for the old lady, too! What are we
standing here for? Let's walk into the bar!"

_"Walk!"_ someone mocks. "No, indeed, we'll drive-waiter, cars!"

The waiter rushed inside to telephone. It took some time, as it was
getting late, but the gentlemen waited. It was already closing time and
people were streaming out of the bar. At length the cars arrived, ten of
them, one for each man. The gentlemen entered them.

"Where to?" asked the drivers.

"Next door," they said.

So the cars drove up to the next door of the same house, that being the
bar, and there the gentlemen gravely got out and paid the drivers.

The bar was closed.

"Shall we break in?" they said.

"Of course," they said.

So they all ran against the door together, till it said _ump!_ and
flew open. The night watchman rushed at them, shouting, and they caught
hold of him, slapped him on the back, and embraced him. Then they went
behind the counter and got out bottles for him and for themselves,
drinking and shouting hurrah for the baby, for Bengt's mother, for the
baby's mother, for the night watchman, for love and for life. When they
had done, they put some banknotes over the night watchman's mouth and tied
a handkerchief over them. Then they went back to the dining room.

The supper was served. Flaten's plate was a red silk bedroom slipper lined
with glass. They ate and drank and rollicked as long as they had the
strength; the hours passed, and dawn approached. Then Flaten began to
distribute souvenirs among them. One got his watch, another his pocketbook
(which was empty), a third his tie pin. After this he went on to his
shoes, giving one to each of two friends, his trousers to another, and his
shirt to still another, till at length he sat there in the nude. Next they
collected quilts from the hotel bedrooms to wrap him up in--red silk
eiderdown quilts. Flaten fell asleep and the other nine watched over him.
He slept for an hour; it was morning then, and they woke him up. He
started up from the quilts, found he was naked, and sent home for some
more clothes. And then the party began all over again....

Later we were discussing Miss Torsen's story; she had forgotten one or two
details which she filled in afterwards.

"Anyhow, it was lucky for the girl with the baby," she said.

"And for the baby itself," I said.

"Yes. But what an idea! Poor old lady, to be told such a tale!"

"Some day perhaps you'll change your mind about that."

"You think so? But it would have been nicer still if I'd got the money
they settled on the child."

"You'll change your mind about that, too."

"Shall I? Why? When?"

"When you yourself have a baby that smiles at you."

"Ugh, how can you say such things!"

She must have misunderstood my meaning, for she was childishly offended.
To restore her to good humor I asked at random:

"What sort of food did you get at the party?"

"Don't know," she replied.

"Don't you know?"

"Good lord, no--I wasn't there," she returned in the greatest amazement.

"Well, no, of course not, I only thought--"

"Oh, so that's it. That's what you thought!" she said, still more
offended. And she clasped her hands as she had done in the summer, and
tore them apart again.

"Really and truly, I do assure you--look here, honestly--I only thought
you were taking a culinary interest. After all, you do learn cooking and
such in the daytime."

"Oh, so you just make conversation with me; you adapt your speech to suit
my narrow outlook!"

A pause.

"Anyhow, perhaps you're right up to a point; I might have asked about the
food, only I forgot."

She seemed very irritable that evening. Would it interest her to talk
about Flaten? A little apprehensively, I ventured:

"But you haven't told me whom Flaten is going to marry."

"She's not pretty at all," she replied suddenly. "What do you want to know
for? You don't know her."

"I suppose Flaten will be entering his father's firm now?" I persisted.

"Oh, damn Flaten! You seem to care about him a lot more than I do! Flaten,
Flaten, Flaten--how should I know if he's going to enter his father's
firm!"

"I only thought once he's married--"

"But she's got money, too. No, I don't think he's going into his father's
firm. He said once he wanted to edit a paper. Well, what's so funny about
that?"

"I'm not laughing."

"Yes, you were. Anyhow, Flaten wants to edit a paper. And since Lind
publishes a kennel journal, Flaten wants to publish a human journal, he
says."

"A human journal?"

"Yes. And you ought to subscribe to it," she added suddenly, almost
throwing the words into my face.

She was now in a state of excitement the cause of which I did not
understand, so I remained silent, merely replying, "Ought I? Yes, perhaps
I ought." Then she began to cry.

"Dear child, don't cry. I shan't torment you any more."

"You're not tormenting me."

"Yes, by talking nonsense; I don't seem to strike the right note."

"Yes, go on talking--that isn't it--I don't know--"

What could I say to her? But since there is, after all, nothing so
interesting as a question about oneself, I said:

"You're nervous about something, but it will pass. Perhaps--well, not at
once, of course--but perhaps it has hurt you that--well, that he's going
his own way now. But remember--"

"You're wrong," she said, shaking her head. "That doesn't really mean
anything to me; I was just slightly attracted to him."

"But you said he was the only one!"

"Oh--you know, you think that sort of thing sometimes. Of course I've been
in love with other people, too; I can't deny that. Flaten was very nice,
and took me out driving sometimes, or to a dance or something like that.
And of course I was proud of his paying attention to me in spite of my
having lost my post. I think I could have got a job in his father's shop
but--anyhow, I'm looking for a job now."

"Are you? I hope you'll find a good one."

"That's just the point. But I'm not getting any job at all. That is, I
shall in the end, of course, but--well, for instance, in old Flaten's
shop--I shouldn't fit in there."

"Not very good pay either, I expect?"

"I'm sure it's not. And then--I don't know; I feel I know too much for it.
That wretched academic training of mine does nothing but harm. Oh, well,
let's not talk any more about me. It must be late; I'd better go."

I saw her to her door, said good night, and went home. I thought about her
ceaselessly. It was wintry weather, with raw streets and an invisible sky.
No, really, she's not suited for marriage. No man is served with a wife
who is nothing but a student. Why has no one in the country noticed what
the young women are coming to! Miss Torsen's tale of the wild party proved
how accustomed she was to sitting and listening, and then herself
disgorging endless tales. She had done it very well and not omitted much,
but she paid attention only to the fun. A grown-up, eternal schoolgirl,
one who had studied her life away.

When I reached my own door, Miss Torsen arrived there at the same time;
she had been close at my heels all the way. I guessed this from the fact
that she was not in the least breathless as she spoke.

"I forgot to ask you to forgive me," she said.

"My dear girl--?"

"Oh, for saying what I did. You mustn't subscribe. I'm so sorry about
that. Please be kind and forgive me."

She took my hand and shook it.

In my amazement I stammered:

"It was really a very witty remark: a human journal--ha, ha! Now don't
stand there and get cold; put your gloves on again. Are you walking back?"


"Yes. Good night. Forgive me for the whole evening."

"Let me take you home; why not stay a few minutes--"

"No, thank you."

She pressed my hand firmly and left me.

I suppose she wanted to spare my aging legs, damn them! Nevertheless I
stole after her to see that she got home safely.

       *       *       *       *       *

It happened that Josephine came to the town--Josephine, that spirit of
labor from the Tore Peak farm. I saw her, too, for she came to pay me a
visit. She had looked up my address, and I joked with her again and called
her Josefriendly.

How was everybody at Tore Peak? Josephine had good news about all of them,
but she shook her head over Paul. Not that he drank much now; but he did
little of anything else either, and had definitely lost interest in his
work. He wanted to sell the farm. He wanted to try carting and delivery by
horse cart in Stordalen. I asked if he had any prospective purchaser. Yes;
Einar, one of the cotters, had had rather an eye on the farm. It all
depended on Manufacturer Brede, who had put so much money into it.

I remembered her father, the old man from another world, the man with
mittens, who had to be spoon-fed on porridge because he was ninety, who
smelled like an unburied corpse. I remembered him and asked Josephine:

"Well, I expect your old father is dead by now?"

"No, praise be," she replied. "Father is better than we dared hope. We
must be thankful he's still on his feet."

I took Josephine to the cinema and the circus, and she thought it all
quite delightful. But she was shocked at the behavior of the ladies who
rode with so little clothing on. She wanted to go to one of the great
churches, too, and found her way there alone. For several days she was in
the town and did a good deal of shopping. I never once saw her dejected or
brooding about anything, and at length she said good-bye, because she was
going back next day.

Oh, so she was going home?

Yes, she had done what she had come to do. She had also been to see Miss
Torsen and got the money for the actor, because of course he had never
sent it.

"Poor Miss Torsen! She was furious with him for not sending it, and turned
quite red and ashamed, too. She didn't seem to find it very easy either,
because she asked me to wait till next day, but she gave it to me then."

So Josephine had nothing more to do in the town.
She had just visited Miss Palm, but she had not, on this occasion, met
Miss Palm's brother, Nikolai, who was apprenticed to a master carpenter.
Not that it mattered, Josephine said, because the last time she had seen
him, nothing came of it, anyhow. So that was that. Because she was not a
one to beg--she had some money of her own and livestock as well. As far as
that was concerned, she had some woolen blankets, and two beds complete
with bedding, too, nor did she lack clothes: she had many changes, both
underthings and top ones. Yet in spite of that she had started some more
weaving.

I asked in some surprise whether they had been engaged. I had had no
inkling--

No, but--. Well, not exactly engaged with a ring, and plighting the troth
and all. But that had been their intention. Because otherwise why should
that schoolmistress, that sister of his, Sophie Palm, have come up and
stayed for nothing at the Tore Peak farm for two whole summers, and
behaved as though she were a lady? No, thank you, that was the end of
that. Anyhow, that was what she, Josephine, had thought once, but it was a
Providence that it wasn't going to happen, because there would never have
been anything but trouble. So it was just as well.

Suddenly Josephine caught herself up:

"Good gracious--I nearly forgot to buy the indigo. It's for my weaving.
Lucky I remembered it! Well--thanks for your hospitality."




XXXIV


It was between Christmas and the New Year, and I had accompanied Nikolai
to his home. Since the town workshop was closed in any case, he had
decided to go home and fell timber in the woods.

It was a big farmhouse, enlarged from the old cottage by Nikolai's father,
while Nikolai himself had moved up the roof and built on a second story.
He has plenty of room for me; I have a small room to myself.

His mother is hard-working and honest; she has a few animals to see to,
and usually she is washing something or other, even if it is nothing more
than some empty potato sacks. She cooks on the kitchen stove, and keeps
her pots and pans shining. She is cleanly, and strains her milk through a
muslin cloth, which she afterward washes and rinses twice. But she picks
food remnants from between the prongs of forks with a hairpin!

A mirror, pictures of the German Kaiser's family, and a crucifix hang on
the walls of the living room; in one corner are two shelves with oddments,
including a hymnbook and a book of sermons. They are still simple and
orthodox in these parts. The rest of the furniture in the house, the
chairs and tables and cupboards and a cleverly constructed chest, have all
been made by Nikolai himself.

Nikolai is just as slow and speechless here as in the town; the day after
we arrived he went out to the woods without telling his mother. When I
asked for him, she said:

"I saw him take the sleigh, so I expect he's gone to the woods."

His mother's name is Petra, and judging from her appearance she cannot be
much over forty; like her son, she is ruddy and big-muscled, with a fair
complexion and thick, graying hair, a veritable lion's mane. Her eyes are
good companions to her hair--dark, and a little worn now, but still good
enough to see far and sharply across the fjord. She, too, is taciturn,
like all the peasants here, and usually keeps her large mouth shut.

I ask her how long she has been a widow, and she says, "For nearly a
generation--no, don't let me tell a lie," she corrects herself. "Sophie is
four and twenty now, and it was the year after her birth that he died."

They had only been married a couple of years. Nikolai is six and twenty.

I ponder over this arithmetic, but as I am old and incapable, I cannot
make it tally.

Petra was very proud of her children, especially Sophie, who had gone to
school and passed an examination, and now held such an important post. Of
course her inheritance was used up, but she had her learning instead.
Nobody could ever take that from her. A big, handsome girl, Sophie--look,
here is her portrait.

I said I had met her at Tore Peak.

At Tore Peak? Oh, yes, she spent her summers there so as to be among her
equals; you couldn't blame her for that. But she came home every year,
too, as sure as the year came round itself. So I had met her at Tore Peak?


Sometimes I went with Nikolai to the forest for timber, and made myself
slightly useful. He is as strong as an ox, and has endurance almost to the
point of insensibility--a cut, black eye--nothing. And now it becomes
evident that his brain works well, too. He should have had a horse, yes,
but he cannot keep a horse till he can provide more fodder. But he cannot
buy more pasture land till he has more money. But he was learning more
about his trade in the town, and when he had finished his course of
training, he would earn more money. After that he would buy a horse.

I visited the neighbors, too. The farms were small, but the farmers
cultivated as much land as they required, and there was no poverty. Here
were no flowerpots in the windows or pictures on the walls, as at Petra's;
but good, thick furs with woven backs hung over the doors, and the
children looked healthy and well-fed. The neighbors all knew I lived at
Petra's house; every visitor to this district lived at Petra's house--had
done so as long as they could remember. I could sense no hostility to
Petra in these silent people, but the old schoolmaster was more talkative,
and he was quite ready to spread gossip about her. This man was a
bachelor; he had his own house and did his own housework. Had he, perhaps,
at some time felt a secret desire for the widow Petra?

The schoolmaster gossiped thus:

People who had visited the village in Petra's girlhood always used to live
at her parents' house. There was a room and a loft, and the engineer that
planned the big road lived there, and so did the two traveling preachers,
to say nothing of the itinerant peddlers who toured the district all the
year round. So it went on for many a year, with the children growing up,
and Petra getting big and hearty. Then Palm came; he was a Swede, a big
merchant--a wholesale merchant, one might almost say, for that period,
with his own boat and even a boy to carry his wares. Well, there were
glass panes again in the windows of Petra's parents' house, and there was
meat on Sundays, for Palm liked things done in style. He gave Petra
presents of dress materials and sweets. Then he was finished with Petra,
and went away to do business elsewhere. But it happened that the child
Petra gave birth to was a boy, and when Palm returned and saw him, he
stayed, and traveled no more. They married, and Palm added two rooms to
the house, for it was his intention to open a shop there. But when he had
built honestly and well, he died. His widow was left with two small
children, but she had means enough, for Palm had had plenty of money. Then
why did not Petra remarry? She could have got a man in spite of the
handicap of two small children, for Petra herself was still a young girl.
But from her childhood days, said the schoolmaster, she had been spoiled
by this love of roving company, and again housed itinerant tramps and
Swedes and peddlers, and thoroughly disgraced herself. Some of them stayed
there for weeks, eating and drinking and idling. It was shameful. Her
parents saw nothing wrong in this because it had always been their way of
living, and besides it brought them a little money. So the years went by.
When the children were grown and Sophie was out of the way, she might have
married even then, for she still had half her money left, and being
childless again, it was not too late. But no, Petra didn't want to, and it
_was_ too late, she said; it was the children's turn to marry now,
she said.

"Well, she's pretty old now, isn't she?" I said.

"Yes, time passes," the schoolmaster replied. "I don't know whether anyone
has asked her this year, but last year there was someone--one person--or
so I've heard, so I've been told. But Petra didn't want to. If I could
only guess what she's waiting for."

"Perhaps she's not waiting at all."

"Well, it's all the same to me," says the schoolmaster. "But she takes in
all these tramps and peddlers and carries on and makes a public nuisance
of herself...."

As I walked home from the schoolmaster's, I found I understood Petra's
arithmetic much better.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nikolai has gone back to his workshop in the town, but I have remained
behind. It matters little where I am, for the winter makes a dead man of
me in any case.

To pass the time, I carefully measure the piece of land that Nikolai is
going to break up when he can afford it, and I calculate what it will cost
him, with drainage and everything: a bare two hundred _kroner_. Then
he could keep a horse. It would have been an act of charity to give him
this money in case his mother could not. He could have added another field
to his land then.

"Look here, Petra--why don't you give Nikolai the two hundred
_kroner_ he needs for fodder for a horse?"

"And four hundred to buy the horse," she muttered.

"That makes six."

"I haven't got such a lot of six hundred _kroners_ lying about."

"But wouldn't the horse be useful for plowing?"

A pause. Then:

"He can break the ground himself."

I was not unfamiliar with this line of reasoning. Everyone has his own
problems, and Petra had hers. But the strange thing is that each one of us
struggles for himself as though he had a hundred years to live. I once
knew two brothers named Martinsen who owned a large farm, the produce of
which they sold. Both were well-to-do bachelors without heirs. But both
had diseased lungs, the younger brother's much worse than the elder's. In
the spring, the younger brother became permanently bedridden, but though
he approached his end, he still maintained an interest in everything that
went on at the farm. He heard strangers talking in the kitchen and called
his brother in.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Only someone to buy eggs."

"What's the price per score now?"

His brother told him.

"Then give him the small eggs," he cautioned.

A few days later he was dead. His brother lived till his sixty-seventh
year, though his lungs were diseased. When anybody came to buy eggs, he
always gave him the smallest....

"But," I insisted to Petra, "Nikolai doesn't want to waste time breaking
his ground himself, does he? Surely if he works at his trade he'll earn
more!"

"They don't pay for joinery here," Petra replied. "People buy their chairs
and tables from the shops now; it's cheaper."

"Then why is Nikolai working as an apprentice?"

"I've asked him the same question," she replied. "Nikolai just wants to be
a carpenter, but it won't get him anywhere. Still, he can do as he likes."

"Well, what else could he do?"

A pause. Petra's big mouth is closed. But at length she says:

"There's plenty of traffic now and a lot of tourists in the summer, both
at Tore Peak and down here on the headland. One time we had two Danes
living here; they had traveled on foot. 'If you had a horse, you could
have driven us here,' they said to me."

"Ah," I thought to myself, "the cat sticking its nose out of the bag!"

"'You've got a big house and four rooms,' the Danes said, and 'There are
high mountains and big woods,' they said, 'and fish in the fjord and fish
in the river; there are lots of things here, and there's a broad road
here,' they said. Nikolai was standing next to them and heard it all, too.
'Now we're here,' they said, 'but we can't get away again unless we
walk.'"

Just to say something, I asked her:

"Four rooms--I thought you only had three?"

"Yes, but the workshop could be turned into a room, too," the big mouth
replied.

"So that's it!" I thought. With hardly a pause, I continued:

"But if Nikolai were going to deal with tourists, he'd have to get a
horse, wouldn't he?"

"Well, I suppose we could have managed it," Petra replied.

"It's four hundred _kroner_."

"Yes," she said, "and the carriage a hundred and fifty."

"But this land won't feed a horse!"

"What do other people feed horses on?" she asked. "They buy sacks of oats
on the headland."

"That's eighteen _kroner_ a sack."

"No, seventeen. And you earn as much as that on your first tourist."

Yes, Petra had it all figured out; she was the born landlady, and had
grown up in a lodginghouse. She could cook, too, for had she not put two
snakes of Italian macaroni in the barley broth? The money for coffee, for
the bed at night and waffles in the morning, had grown so dear to her that
she hid it away, watched it increase, and grew rich on it. She did not
produce like other peasant women, but no one can do everything at one
time, and Petra was a parasite. She did not want to live by earning
something; she wanted to live on the tourists who earned enough
themselves, and could afford to come.

Splendor and Englishmen, no doubt, in these parts! If it all works out as
it should--and it probably will.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is February. I have an idea, a vagrant idea that comes to me, and I
harbor it: now that there is a little snow, and its crust is hard, I shall
walk across the fields into Sweden. That is what I shall do.

But before I can do it, I must wait for my laundry, and Petra, who is
cleanly, washes in many waters. So I pass the time in Nikolai's workshop,
where there are many kinds of planes and saws and drills and lathes, and
there I fashion strange things. For the small boys of the neighboring
farm, I make a windmill that will really turn in the wind. It whirls and
rattles well, and I remember my own childhood when we called this
apparatus onomatopoeically a _windwhirr_.

Besides this, I go out walking, and use my winter head as well as I can,
which is not very well. I do not blame the winter, nor do I blame
anything. But where are the red-hot irons and the youth of omnipotence?
For hours sometimes I walk along a path in the woods with my hands folded
on my back, an old man, my mind gilded for a moment by an occasional
memory; I stop, and raise my eyebrows in surprise. Can this be an iron in
the fire? It is not, for it fades again, and I am left behind in a quiet
melancholy.

But in order to recall my young days, I pretend to be filled with a
heaven-sent energy. It is by no means all pretense, and pictures rise in
my mind, fragmentary flageolet tones:

  We came from the meadow
  and downy heather;
  we came from friendship,
  too-loo-loo-lay!
  A star that watched
  saw lips meet lips.
  None else so dear,
  so sweet as you.

  Those youthful days,
  those happy days,
  unmatched since then!
  but what am I now?
  The bees once swarmed,
  the swan once played.
  There's no play now,
  yet too-loo-loo-lay!

I break off, and put the pencil in my pocket with a tone still resounding
within me. I walk on with some pleasure to myself, at least.

There is a letter for me. Who on earth has found me out here? The letter
is as follows:


Forgive me for writing you, but I should like to talk to you about
something that has happened. I should like to see you as soon as you come
back. There's nothing the matter. Please don't say no.

Yours,

Ingeborg Torsen

I reread it many times. "Something that has happened." But I'm going to
Sweden, I'm going to move about a little, and stop losing myself in the
affairs of others. Do they think I am mankind's old uncle, that I can be
summoned hither and thither to give advice? Excuse me, but I am going to
assert myself and become quite inaccessible; the snow is just right, and I
have planned a big journey--a business tour, I might almost call it, very
important to me--I have a great deal at stake.... How composite is the
mind of man! As I sit talking drivel to myself, and even sometimes saying
an angry word aloud in order that Petra may hear it, I am not at all
displeased at having received this letter; in fact secretly I am so
pleased that I feel ashamed. It is merely because I shall soon see the
town again--the town with its frostbitten gardens and its ships.

But what on earth can this mean? Has she been to my landlady's and got my
address? Or has she met Nikolai?

I left at once.




XXXV


My landlady was surprised.

"Why, good evening. How well and happy you look! Here's your mail."

"Let it lie. I must tell you, Madame Henriksen, that you are a jewel."

"Ha, ha, ha!"

"Yes, you are. You are a very kind woman. But you have given my address to
someone."

"No, indeed; I swear I haven't."

"No? Well, then someone else must have done so. Yes, you're right, I am
happy, and tomorrow morning I shall get up very early and walk down by the
shore."

"But I did send a message," said my landlady. "I hope it wasn't wrong of
me. To a lady who wanted to know as soon as you arrived."

"A lady? You sent a message just now?"

"A little while ago, as soon as you came in. A young, handsome lady; she
might have been your daughter, you know."

"Thank you."

"Well, I'm only saying what's so. She said she would come at once, because
she had to see you about something."

The landlady left me.

So Miss Torsen was coming this very evening; something must have happened.
She had never visited me before. I looked round; yes, everything was neat
and tidy. I washed and made myself ready. There, she can have that chair;
I'd better light the other lamp, too. It might not be a bad idea to sit
down to my correspondence; that would make a good impression, and if I put
some letters in a small, feminine hand on top, it might even make her a
little jealous--hee, hee. Oh, God, ten or fifteen years ago one could play
such tricks; it's too late now....

Then she knocked and came in.

I made no move to shake hands, and neither did she; I merely drew out a
chair for her.

"Excuse my coming like this," she said. "I asked Mrs. Henriksen to send me
a message; it's nothing serious, and now I feel a little embarrassed about
it, but--"

I saw that it was something serious, and my heart began to pound. Why
should my heart be affected?

"This is the first time you've been in my rooms," I said, expectant and on
the defensive.

"Yes. It's very nice," she said, without looking round. She began to clasp
her hands and pull them apart again till the tips of her gloves projected
beyond her finger tips. She was in a state of great excitement.

"Perhaps _now_ I've done something you'll approve of?" she said,
suddenly pulling off her glove.

She had a ring on her finger.

"Good," I said. It didn't affect me immediately; I was to understand more
later, and merely asked:

"Are you engaged?"

"Yes," she replied. And she looked at me with a smile, though her mouth
shook.

I looked back at her, and I believe I said something like, "Well, now,
well, well!" Then I nodded in a fatherly fashion, bowed formally, and
said: "My heartiest congratulations!"

"Yes, that's what it's come to," she said. "I think it was the best thing
to do. Perhaps you think it's a bit unreliable of me or rash or--well,
don't you?"

"Oh, I don't know--"

"But it was absolutely the best thing. And I just thought I'd tell you."

I got up. She started, evidently in a very nervous state. But I had only
risen to turn down the lamp behind her, which had begun to smoke.

A pause. She said nothing more, so what could I say? But as the minutes
passed and I saw she was distressed, I said:

"Why did you want to tell me this?"

"Yes--why did I?"

"Perhaps for a moment you thought you were the center of the world again,
but--"

"Yes, I expect so."

She looked about her with great, roving eyes. Then she got up; she had
been sitting all this time as though about to spring at me. I rose, too.
An unhappy woman--I saw that plainly enough; but good heavens, what could
I do? She had come to tell me she was engaged, and at the same time looked
very unhappy. Was that a way to behave? But as she got up, I could see her
face better under her hat--I could see her hair--the hair that was
beginning to show silken and silver at the temples--how beautiful it was!
She was tall and handsome, and her breast was rising and falling--her
great breast--what a great breast she had, rising and falling! Her face
was brown, and her mouth open, just a little open, dry, feverishly dry--

"Miss Ingeborg!"

It was the first time I called her this. And I moved my hand toward her
slightly, longing to touch her, perhaps to fondle her--I don't know--

But she had collected herself now, and stood erect and hard. Her eyes had
grown cold; they looked at me, putting me in my place again, as she walked
toward the door. A cry of "No!" escaped me.

"What's the matter?" she asked.

"Don't go, not yet, not at once; sit down again and talk to me more."

"No, you're quite right," she said. "I'm not the center of the universe.
Here I come to bother you with my unimportant troubles, and you--well, of
course, you're busy with your extensive correspondence."

"Look here, sit down again, won't you? I shan't even read the letters;
they're nothing, only two or three letters perhaps, probably from complete
strangers. Now sit down; tell me everything; you owe me that much. Look, I
shan't even read the letters."

And with that I swept them up and threw them into the fire.

"Oh--what are you doing?" she cried, and ran to the fireplace, trying to
save them.

"Don't bother," I said. "I expect no happiness to come to me through the
post, and sorrows I do not seek."

She stood so close to me that I found myself again on the point of
touching her, just for a moment, touching her arm; but I caught myself in
time. I had already gone too far, so I said as gently and sympathetically
as I could:

"Dear child, you must not be unhappy; it will all turn out for the best;
you'll see. Now sit down--there, that's better."

No doubt she had been taken aback by my violence, for she sank into her
chair almost absently.

"I'm not unhappy," she said.

"Aren't you? So much the better!"

I began to chatter away at top speed, though I tried to restrain myself,
to show that I was nothing more than an uncle to her. I talked to distract
her, to distract us both; I let my tongue wag--I could hear it buzzing.
What could I say? A little of everything--a great deal, in fact:

"Well, well, child. And whom are you marrying, who is the lucky man? Nice
of you to come and tell me before anyone, really very nice; thank you very
much. You see I've only just come home and I haven't slept much on the
journey. I was anxious to know--well, perhaps not anxious exactly--but
still--You know what such a homecoming is: lots of people, noise, brr!--I
hardly got any sleep. Then I came home, and then you came along--thank you
for coming, Miss Ingeborg--I might be your father and you're just a
child; that's why I say 'Ingeborg.' But when you told me all this, I
hadn't had any sleep, I wasn't quite balanced--not enough to give you
advice; I mean, I hadn't quite appreciated--But now you can quite safely--
I'd like to know, of course--Is he old? Is he young? Young, of course. I
am imagining what will happen to you now, Miss Ingeborg, in your new
condition. I mean, it will be so entirely different from what you've been
accustomed to, but God bless you, it will all turn out for the best, I'm
sure of that--"

"But you don't even know who it is!" she interrupted, looking at me
apprehensively again.

"No, I don't, and I needn't if you'd rather not tell me yet. Who is it? A
dapper little man, I can see that from his ring, a schoolmaster perhaps, a
clever young schoolmaster--"

She shook her head.

"Then a big, good-natured man who wants to dance with you--"

"Yes, perhaps," she said slowly.

"There you are--you see I've guessed it. A bear who will carry you on his
paws. On your birthday--do you know what he'll give you for your
birthday?"

But perhaps I was getting too childish; I bored her, and for the first
time she looked away from me, looked at a picture on the wall, then at
another picture. But it was not easy for me to stop now, after having
spoken hardly at all for several weeks, and feeling profoundly excited
besides--heaven only knows why.

"How did you like the country?" she asked suddenly. As I could not see the
drift of this question, I merely looked at her.

"Weren't you at Nikolai's mother's house?" she persisted.

"Yes."

"What is she like?"

"Are you interested in her?"

"No, I don't suppose so. Oh dear!" she sighed wearily.

"Come, come, you mustn't sound like that when you're newly engaged! What
the country was like? Well, there was a schoolmaster--you know, an old
bachelor, sly, and amusing. Said he knew me, and put on the most
extraordinary airs the first day. And of course I returned the compliment
and said I had come exclusively to meet him. 'Impossible!' he said. 'Why
should it be?' I said; 'forty years a schoolmaster, a respected man,
permanent churchman, chairman, indispensable everywhere!' Well, then I
attended his class. Most impressive. He talked continually; for once he
had an audience, almost like a school inspection. 'You there, Peter!
Ahem,' he said. 'There was a horse and a man, and one of them was riding
on the other's back. Which one was riding, Peter?' 'The man,' Peter
replies. A pause. 'Well, maybe you're right, Peter--maybe the man was
riding. Just like sin, like the devil riding us....'"

But she was looking at the wall again, drifting away from me again. I
changed the subject clumsily:

"Of course you'd rather hear about people you know--about Tore Peak, for
instance. Josephine has been in town."

"Yes, I know," she said, nodding her head.

"Remember the old man at Tore Peak? I don't think I'll ever forget him. In
a certain number of years I shall be like him--perhaps not quite so old.
Then I shall be a child again with age. One day he came out, and went down
to the field. I saw him; he had mittens on. You know he eats all sorts of
things, and I saw him lie down and eat the hay."

She stared at me foolishly.

"But I must say he didn't look as though he had ever eaten hay
before--possibly because it was rotting. It was the hay that had been
left, you know--rotting down for next year--for the next tourist year."

"You seem to think," she said smiling, "that you have to cheer me up,
because I'm terribly unhappy. I'm quite the reverse. Perhaps he's too good
for me; that's what his sister seems to think, anyhow, because she tried
to stop it. But I'm going to enjoy snubbing that sister of his. Anyhow,
I'm not unhappy, and that isn't the reason I've come. I'd really much
rather have him than anyone else--since I can't get the one I really
want."

"You've told me this before, child--last winter, in fact. But the man you
want has gone his way--besides, you said yourself that you didn't belong
with him, or rather, that he didn't with you--I mean--"

"Belong? Do I belong anywhere? Do you think I belong in the place I'm
going to now? I'm afraid I'm not really suitable for anybody--at least I
can't think of anyone I'd suit. I wonder how I'll manage. I wonder if
he'll be able to stand me. But I'll do my very best; I've made up my mind
to that."

"Well, who is it--do I know him? Of course you suit each other. I can't
believe you don't. He must be in love with you, quite madly in love, and
you must love him in return. I'm sure you'll come through with flying
colors, Miss Ingeborg, because you're capable and intelligent."

"Oh, well," she said, rising suddenly to her feet. But she hesitated over
something, and seemed about to speak, then changed her mind again. At the
door, she stood with her back to me, pulling on her gloves, and said:

"So you think I ought to do it?"

I was taken aback by the question, and replied:

"Ought to do it? Haven't you done it already?"

"Yes. That is--well, yes, I've done it, I'm engaged. And I can tell from
your manner that I've done the right thing."

"Well, I don't know. I can't tell."

I crossed the room to her.

"Who is it?"

"Oh, God, no; let's drop it. I can't bear any more now. Good night."

She stretched her hand out fumblingly, but since she was looking at the
floor, she could not find mine, and both our hands circled helplessly
round each other for a moment. Then she opened the door and was gone. I
called to her, begging her to wait, seized my hat, and hurried after her.
An empty staircase. I rushed down and opened the street door. An empty
street. She must have run.

"I'll try to see her tomorrow," I thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day, two days, but I did not see her, though I went to all the usual
places. Another day--nothing. Then I thought I would go up to her home and
inquire about her. At first this did not seem to me too improper, but when
it came to the point, I hesitated. There is, after all, something to be
lost by making a fool of oneself. But was I not a kind of uncle? No--yes,
of course, but still--

A week passes, two weeks, three. The girl has quite disappeared; I hope
she hasn't had an accident. I mount the stairs to her home and ring the
bell....

She's already gone away; they left as soon as they were married, last
week. She's married to Nikolai, Carpenter Nikolai.

       *       *       *       *       *

March--what a month! The winter is over, yet there's no telling how much
longer it may still last. That's what March is for.

I have lived through another winter and seen the nigger entertainment at
the Anglo-Saxon theater. You were there too, my friend. You saw how
cleverly we all turned somersaults. Why, you even took part yourself, and
you carry about a broken rib as a cherished little memento of the
occasion. I saw it all from a slight distance away, ten miles, to be
exact; no people were near me, but there were seven heavens above.

And pretty soon I shall be reading what the officials have to say about
the year's harvest in our country; that is to say, the harvest at the
theater--in dollars, and in sterling.

The waggish professor is enjoying himself, quite in his element. There he
goes, self-assured and complacent, Sir Mediocrity in all his glory. By
next year, he will have dragged other progressive people in his wake; he
will have dressed up Norway still more, and made it still more attractive
to the Anglo-Saxons. More dollars, and more sterling.

What, do I hear someone objecting?

Yes, Switzerland.

Well, then, we shall invite Switzerland to dinner and toast her thus:
"Colleague, our great aim is to resemble you. Who else can squeeze so much
profit out of their mountains? Who else can file at such clockwork?
Switzerland, make yourself at home; we don't want to rob you; there are no
pickpockets at this table. Here's to you!"

But if that doesn't help, we shall have to roll up our sleeves and fight.
There are still Norwegians left in good old Norway, and our rival--is
Switzerland.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Henriksen brings catkins in a vase into my room.

"What, is it spring?"

"Oh, it's getting on."

"Then I shall be going away. You see, Mrs. Henriksen, I should very much
have liked to stay, because this is really where I belong; but what more
can I do here? I don't work; I merely idle. Do you understand me? I grieve
continually, and my heart sits wrinkled. My most brilliant achievement is
spinning coins: I toss a coin into the air and wait. When I came here last
autumn I wasn't so bad, not nearly so bad. I was only half a year younger
then, yet I was ten years younger. What has happened to me since? Nothing.
Only--I'm not a better man than I was last autumn."

"But you've been all right all winter, haven't you? And three weeks ago,
when you came back from the country, you were so happy!"

"Was I? I don't remember that. Ah, well, things don't move so fast, and
nothing has happened to me in these three weeks. Well, never mind; at all
events, I shall go away. I must travel when the spring comes. I have
always done so in the past, and I want to do the same thing now. Sit down,
Mrs. Henriksen."

"No, thank you, I'm too busy."

Too busy! Yes, you work--you're not ten years older than you were last
autumn. You think it's hard work to rest on Sundays, don't you? Dear
Madame Henriksen! You and your little daughter knit stockings for the
whole family, you let your rooms, you keep your family together like a
mother. But you mustn't let your little Louise sit for twelve years on a
school form. If you do, you'll hardly ever see her all through her youth,
those formative years of her life. And then she can't be like you or learn
from you. She'll learn to have children easily enough, but she won't learn
to be a mother, and when the time comes for her to keep her home and
family together, she will not be able to do it. She'll only know
"languages" and mathematics and the story of Bluebeard, but that is not
food for the heart of a woman. That is twelve years of continual famine
for her soul.

"Excuse my asking, but where are you going to?"

"I don't know, but I'm going. Why, where should I go? I shall go aboard a
steamship and sail, and when I have sailed long enough, I will go ashore.
If I find, on looking about me, that I have traveled too far or not far
enough, I shall board a ship again and sail on. Once I walked across into
Sweden as far as Kalmar and even Oeland, but that was too far, so I turned
back. No one cares to know where I am, least of all myself."




XXXVI


You get used to everything; you even get used to the passage of two years.

And now it is spring again....

It is market day in the frontier town; my room is noisy, for there is
music down in the fields, the roundabout is whirling, the tightrope walker
is gossiping outside his tent, and people of every sort throng the
village. The crowds are great, and there is even a sprinkling of
Norwegians from across the border. Horses snort and whinny, cows low, and
trading is brisk.

In the display window of the goldsmith across the road, a great cow of
silver has made its appearance, a handsome breeder that the local farmers
stop to admire.

"She's too smart for my crags," says one of them with a laugh.

"What do you think's her price?" says another with a laugh.

"Why, do you want to buy her?"

"No, haven't got fodder enough this year."

A man trudges placidly down the road and also stops in front of this
window. I see him from behind, and take note of his massive back. He
stands there a long time, trying to make up his mind, no doubt, for now
and then he scratches his beard. There he goes, sure enough, entering the
shop with a ponderous tread. I wonder if he intends to buy the silver cow!


It takes him an age, and still he hasn't come out. What on earth is he
doing in there? Now that I have begun to watch him, I might as well go the
whole hog. So I put on my hat and cross to the goldsmith's window myself,
mingling with the other spectators, and watching the door.

At last the man re-emerges--yes, it _is_ Nikolai. It was his back and
hands, but he has got a beard now, too. He looks splendid. Imagine
Carpenter Nikolai being here!

We greet each other, and we talk as he shakes me slowly and ponderously by
the hand. Our conversation is halting, but we get on. Yes, of course, he
has gone into the shop on business, in a kind of way.

"You've not bought the silver cow, have you?"

"Oh, no, not that. It didn't amount to anything, really. In fact, I didn't
buy anything."

By degrees, I discover that he is buying a horse. And he tells me that he
has dug that piece of land of his, and is turning it into pasture, and his
wife--oh, yes, thank you for asking--she lives in health to this day.

"By the way," he said, "have you come here over the fjeld?"

"Yes, I came last winter. In December."

"What a pity I didn't know!"

I explained that I hadn't had the time to visit his home then; I was in a
hurry, there was some business---

"Yes, I understand," he said.

We said little more, for Nikolai was as taciturn as ever. Besides, he had
other business to attend to; he cannot absent himself from the farm for
long, and had to return next day.

"Have you bought your horse yet?"

"Well, no, I haven't."

"Do you think you will?"

"I don't know yet. I'm trying to split a difference of five and twenty
_kroner_."

Later I saw Nikolai going to the goldsmith's again. He seemed to do a
great deal of business there.

"I could have company across the fjeld now," I thought. "It's spring, and
do I not always travel in the spring?"

I began to pack my knapsack.

Nikolai emerged once more, apparently as empty-handed as he had entered. I
opened my window and called to him to ask if he had bought the horse.

"N-no--the man won't meet my price."

"Well, can't you meet his?"

"Y-yes, I could," he replied slowly. "But I don't think I've got enough
money on me."

"I could lend you some."

At this Nikolai smiled and shook his head as though my offer were a fairy
tale.

"Thank you just the same," he said, turning to walk away.

"Where are you going now?" I asked.

"To look at another horse. It's old and small, still--"

Was I thrusting myself on the man? I? Nonsense! I don't see that at all.
He felt offended because I had passed his door last winter without
stopping and now I wanted to make him friendly again. That was all. But as
I wanted no cause for self-reproach, I stopped packing, nor would I ask
Nikolai if I might go back with him. But I went out for a walk in the
town. I had as much right to do that as anyone.

I met Nikolai in the street with a colt, and we stopped to exchange a few
words.

"Is it yours?"

"Yes, I've bought her; the man met me halfway after all," he replied with
a smile.

We walked along to the stable together and fed and petted the horse. She
was a mare, two and a half years old, with a tawny coat and an off-white
mane and tail--a perfect little lady.

That evening Nikolai came over to my room of his own accord for a chat
about the mare and the state of the roads. When he was saying good-bye at
the door, he seemed struck by a sudden thought.

"By the way," he said, "I suppose it's no good asking you, but you could
get a lift for your knapsack, you know. We could be there day after
tomorrow," he added.

How could I offend him again?

We walked all next day, spent the night in the mountain hut at the
frontier, and then went on again. Nikolai carried my knapsack all the way,
as well as his own smaller parcels. When I suggested that we should share
the burden, he said it was no weight at all. I think Nikolai wanted to
spare the little tawny lady.

At noon we saw the fjord beneath us. Nikolai stopped and carefully rubbed
down the mare once more. As our path sloped downward, I felt a pressure, a
contraction in my chest; it was the sea air. Nikolai asked me what was the
matter, but it was nothing.

On reaching his home, we found the yard well swept, and in the doorway a
woman on her knees with her back toward us, scrubbing the floor. It was
the Saturday cleaning day.

"Hullo!" Nikolai roared in a tremendously loud voice, stopping dead in his
tracks as he did so.

The woman in the doorway looked round; her hair was gray, but it was she,
Miss Ingeborg, _Fru_ [Footnote:  Mrs. (Translator's note.)] Ingeborg.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed, hastily mopping up the rest of the floor.

"Look at all the cleaning that goes on here!" Nikolai said, laughing.
"That's her idea of fun!"

And I had believed Carpenter Nikolai incapable of lightheartedness! Yet I
had seen how content he had been all the way home, how deeply content, and
proud of the little lady he was bringing with him. Even now he was still
stroking her.

Fru Ingeborg rose to her feet, her skirts dark with the damp. It all
seemed strange to me; her hair was so gray. I needed a little time, a
moment, to collect myself, and turned away to give her time, too.

"What a lovely horse!" I heard her exclaim.

Nikolai went on stroking the mare.

"I've brought a visitor with me," he said.

I went to her and perhaps--I don't know--perhaps I rather overdid my
unconcern. I greeted her and insisted on shaking her wet hand, which she
hesitated to give me. I was anxious to appear quite formal with her, and
shook her hand as I repeated my greeting.

"Well, of all people!" she replied.

I persisted in my formal attitude.

"You must blame your husband," I said. "It's his fault that I'm here."

"I wish you heartily welcome," she returned. "How lucky I've just got
through the cleaning!"

A slight pause. We looked at each other; two years had passed since our
last meeting. To break the silence, we all began to admire the mare,
Nikolai swelling with pride. Then we heard a child calling from within the
house, and the young mother ran off.

"Come in, won't you!" she called back over her shoulder.

As soon as I entered, I saw that the room had been changed. There was too
much middle-class frippery: white curtains at the windows, numerous
pictures on the walls, a lamp pendent from the ceiling, underneath it in
the center of the room a round table and chairs, knickknacks in a china
cupboard, a pink-painted spinning wheel, flowers in pots--in short, the
room was crowded. This, no doubt, was the sort of thing Fru Ingeborg had
been used to and considered in good taste. But in Petra's day, this had
been a light and spacious room.

"How's your mother?" I asked Nikolai.

As usual he was slow to reply. His wife answered for him:

"She's very well."

I wanted to ask, "Where is she?" but I refrained.

"Look, I want to show you something," said Fru Ingeborg.

It was the child in his bed--a boy, big and handsome, about a year old. He
frowned at me at first, but only for a moment. As soon as he was on his
mother's arm, he looked at me without fear.

How happy and beautiful the young mother looked! Peerless, indeed, with
her eyes full of an inscrutable graciousness she had not possessed before.


"What a fine little _man!_" I said, admiring the boy.

"I should think he was!" said the mother.

       *       *       *       *       *

You get used to everything. The sea air no longer oppresses me; I can
speak without losing my breath to the woman who is now the mistress of
this house. She likes to talk, too, pouring out her words nervously, as
though it had been a long time since she last opened her mouth. What we
talked about? Well, we neither asked nor answered questions about
measuring angles or analyzing Shakespeare's grammar.

Had she ever thought her matriculation would land her up here, amid
livestock and Saturday cleaning?

Oh, that parody of an education! She had taken the first toddling steps in
a dozen sciences, but if she met someone with fully adult knowledge she
was lost. She had other things to think about now, her home and her family
and the farm. Of course there wasn't much livestock, now that Nikolai's
mother had taken half of it with her--

"Has Petra gone away?"

Married--to the schoolmaster. No, Petra hadn't wanted to stay when the
young wife took possession. One evening a strange man had come to the
house, and Petra had wanted to admit him, but Fru Ingeborg would not. She
knew who he was and wanted him to leave. So there were quarrels between
the older woman and the young one.

Petra was also dissatisfied with the young wife's work in the barn. It was
true she was not very skillful, but she was learning all the time, and
enjoyed improving her skill. She never asked questions; that, she saw,
would have been foolish, but she worked things out by herself, and kept
her eyes open when she visited neighboring farms. That didn't mean to say
she could learn everything. There were things she never learned properly
because she was not "to the manner born." Often the wives of rural
officials are from small towns, and have not learned the ways of the
country, though they must learn them in time. But they never learn them
well. They know only just enough for their daily needs. To set up a weave,
you must have grown up with the sound of the shuttle in your ears; to tend
the cattle as they should be tended, you must have helped your mother
since childhood. You can learn from others, but it will not be in your
blood.

Not everyone has a man like Nikolai to live with, either. The young wife
is very fond of her Nikolai, this sound, hearty bear who loves her in
return. Besides, Nikolai is not exacting; his wife seems to him peerless
in all she does. Of course she has taken great pains; it has left its mark
on her, too, and she is not gray for nothing. A few months ago she lost a
front tooth, too--broke it on some bird shot left in the breast of a
ptarmigan she was eating. She hardly dared look in the mirror now--didn't
recognize herself. But what did it matter as long as Nikolai....

Look what he'd brought her, this brooch, bought at the goldsmith's at the
market: wasn't it lovely? Oh, Nikolai was mad; but she would do anything
in the world for him, too. Imagine using some of the money for the horse
on a brooch! Where is he now, where's he gone to? She'll bet anything he's
stroking the mare again.

"Nikolai!" she called.

"Yes," his reply came from the stable.

She sat down again, crossing her legs. Her face had turned pink; perhaps a
thought, a memory, passed through her mind. She was suffused with
excitement and beauty. Her dress clung to her body, outlining its
contours. She began gently to stroke her knee.

"Is the child asleep?" I asked. I had to say something.

"Yes, he's asleep. And think of him!" she exclaimed. "Can you imagine
anything more wonderful? Excuse my talking like this, but.... You know
he's not a year old yet. I never knew children were such a blessing."

"Well, you see they are."

"Yes, I thought differently once; I remember that perfectly well, and you
contradicted me. Of course it was stupid of me. Children? Miracles! And
when you're old, they're the only happiness--the last happiness. I shall
have more; I shall have many of them, a whole row of them, like organ
pipes, each taller than the last. They're lovely.... But I wish I hadn't
lost my tooth; it leaves such a black gap. I really feel quite bad about
it, on Nikolai's account. I suppose a false one could be put in, but I
shouldn't dream of it. Besides, I understand it's quite dear. But I've
given up using any arts; I only wish I'd stopped earlier--I've gone on
much too long. Think of all I've missed by it: all my childhood, all my
youth. Haven't I idled away whole summers at resorts, even as a grown
woman? I needed a holiday from my school work, a rest, and immediately
turned it into sheer futility, every day a disgrace. I could cry with
regret. I should have been married ten years ago, and had my husband all
that time, and a home and many children. Now I'm already old, cheated out
of ten years of my life, with gray hair and one tooth gone--"

"Well, you've lost one tooth, but I've hardly got one left!"

No sooner had I consoled her thus than I regretted it. Why should I make
myself worse than I am? Things were bad enough anyhow. I was sick with
fury at myself, and grinned and grimaced to show her my teeth: "Here,
don't miss them, have a good look!" But I'm afraid she saw what a fool I
was making of myself; everything I did was wrong.

Then she consoled me in her turn, as people do when they can well afford
it:

"What, you old? Nonsense!"

"Have you met the schoolmaster?" I asked abruptly.

"Of course. I remember what you told me about him: a horse and a man came
riding along the road.... But he's got sense, and he's terribly stingy.
Oh, he's cunning; he borrows our harrow because ours is new and good.
They've built a house at the end of the valley, and take in travelers--
quite a big hotel, in fact, with the waitresses dressed in national
costume. Of course Nikolai and I both went to the wedding; Petra really
looked a charming and lovely bride. You mustn't think she and I are still
unfriendly; she likes me better now that I'm more competent, and last
summer they sent for me several times to interpret for some English people
and that sort of thing--at least I know how to say soap and food and
conveyance and tips in other languages!

"But I don't think I should ever have had any serious trouble with Petra
in the first place if Sophie hadn't come home--you know, the
schoolmistress in the town. She's always found plenty to criticize in me,
so I never liked her very much, I must admit. But when she came here, she
was very arrogant toward me, and lorded it over me, showing off all her
knowledge. I was busy trying to learn what I needed to know for the life
up here, and then she came along and made me look small, talking about the
Seven Years' War all the time. She was terribly learned about the Seven
Years' War, because that's what she had in her examination. And our way of
talking wasn't elegant enough for her; Nikolai used rough country
expressions sometimes, and she didn't like that. But Nikolai speaks quite
well enough, and I can't see what that fool of a sister of his has got to
put on airs for! And on top of that she came home to stay--for six months,
anyhow. She'd been engaged, so then she had to take a six months' holiday.
The baby's with Petra, with his grandmother, so he's well taken care of.
It's a boy, too, but he's hardly got any hair; mine has plenty of hair.
Well, in a way, of course, it's a pity about Sophie, because she'd used up
her legacy and her youth studying to be a schoolmistress, and then she
comes home like that. But she really was insufferable, thinking she was a
lot better than I because she hadn't been discharged, like me. So I asked
her to leave. And then they both left, Sophie and her mother. Anyhow, her
mother and I are quite reconciled.

"But you mustn't think we've had any help from her to buy the horse.
Nothing of the kind! We borrowed the money from the bank. But we'll
manage, because it's our only debt. Nikolai has made all the furniture in
here himself, the table and china cupboard and everything; we haven't
bought a thing. He's dug up the new field himself, too. And we'll be
getting more cattle; you ought to see what a handsome heifer we've got....

"Even the food wasn't good enough for Sophie. Tins saved such a lot of
trouble, she said; we ought to buy tinned food. It was enough to make you
sick to listen to her. I was just beginning to knit, too; I'd got one of
my neighbors to teach me, and I was knitting stockings for myself. But of
course Lady Sophie--well, she bought her stockings in the city. Oh, she
was charming. 'Get out!' I said to her. So they left."

Nikolai entered the room.

"Did you want me?"

"No--oh, yes, I wanted you to come upstairs with me. I need something to
hang things on in front of the fire, a clotheshorse--come along--"

I stayed behind, thinking:

"If only it lasts, if only it lasts! She's so overwrought; living on her
nerves. And pregnant again. But what splendid resolution she shows, and
how she's matured in these two years! But it has cost her a great deal,
too.

"Good luck to you, Ingeborg, good luck!"

At all events, she had triumphed over Schoolmistress Sophie, who had once
tried so hard to set Nikolai against her. "Get out!" How content Fru
Ingeborg must be--what delight in this small triumph! Life had changed so
much that such things were important to her; she grew heated again when
she mentioned it, and pulled at her fingers as she had done in her
schooldays. And why should she not be content? A small triumph now had the
rank of a bigger one in the old days. Proportions were changed, but her
satisfaction was no less.

Listen--she has begun to read upstairs; there's the sound of a steady hum.
Yes, it's Sunday today, and she, being the best educated of them,
naturally reads the service. Bravo! Magnificent! She has extended her
self-discipline even to this, for they are all orthodox Christians in this
neighborhood. Believing? No, but not hostile, either. One reads Scripture.
Rather a clever ruse, that of the clotheshorse.

She has become an excellent cook, too, in the peasant style. Delicious
broth, without noodles, but otherwise just as it should be, with barley,
carrots, and thyme. I doubt whether she has learned this at the domestic
science school. I consider all the things she has learned, and find them
numerous. Had she, perhaps, been a little overstrung in her talk about
children like organ pipes? I don't know, but her nostrils dilated like a
mare's as she spoke. She must have known how unwillingly middle-class
couples have children, and how short is the love between them: in the
daytime they are together so that people might not talk, but the night
separates them. She was different, for she would make hers a house of
fruitfulness: often she and her husband were apart during the day, when
their separate labors called them, but the night united them.

Bravo, Fru Ingeborg!




XXXVII


Really, it was time I was leaving; at least I could have moved across to
Petra and the Schoolmaster, who take in travelers. Really I ought to do
that....

Nikolai has got his tawny lady working on the farm; she's harnessed to a
neat cart that he has made himself and banded with iron. And now the lady
carts manure. The tiny farm with its few head of cattle doesn't yield too
much of this precious substance, so it is soon spread. Then the lady draws
the plow, and looks as though it were no more than the heavy train of a
ball dress behind her! Nikolai has never heard of such a horse before, and
neither has his wife.

I take a walk down to the newly dug field and look at it from every angle.
Then I take soil in my hand and feel it and nod, exactly as though I knew
something about it. Rich, black soil--sheer perfection.

I walk so far that I can see the gargoyles on Petra's hotel--and suddenly
turn off the path into the woods, to sheltered groves and catkins and
peace. The air is still; spring will soon be here.

And so the days wear on.

I am comfortable and feel very much at home; how I should like to stay
here! I should pay well for my keep, and make myself useful and popular; I
shouldn't harm a fly. But that evening I tell Nikolai that I must think of
moving on; this will not do.... And perhaps he will mention it....

"Can't you stop a while longer?" he says. "But I suppose it isn't the kind
of place--"

"God bless you, Nikolai; it _is_ the kind of place, but--well, it's
spring now, and I always travel in the spring. I should have to be very
low before I gave that up. And besides, I expect you're both pretty tired
of me, at least your wife."

This, too, I hoped he would mention.

Then I packed my knapsack and waited. No--no one came to take the knapsack
out of my hand and forbid me to pack any farther. So perhaps Nikolai
hasn't mentioned it. The man never does open his mouth. So I placed the
knapsack on a chair in the middle of the room, all packed and ready, for
everyone to see that we're leaving. And I waited for the morning of the
next day, and this time the knapsack _was_ observed. No, it wasn't.
So I had to wait till the housewife called us to the midday meal, and tell
her then, pointing to what was in the middle of the room:

"I'm afraid I shall have to be leaving today."

"No! Really? Why do you want to go away?" she said.

"Why? Well, don't you think I should?"

"Well, of course--But you might have stayed on a bit longer; the cows will
be going out to spring pasture now, and we should have had more milk."

That was all we said about it, and then she went back to her work.

Bravo, Fru Ingeborg. You're true-blue. It struck me then, as it had done
already on several occasions, that she had grown very like Josephine at
Tore Peak, both in her way of thinking and her mode of expression. Twelve
years of school had laid no foundations in her young mind, though it had
loosened much that was firm within her. But that did not matter, as long
as she kept a firm hold now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nikolai is going down to the trading center, and since he will be bringing
back some sacks of flour, he intends to drive. I know very well that I
ought to go with him, because then I could catch the mail packet next day
but one. I explain this to Nikolai and pay my bill. While he is harnessing
the horse, I finish packing my bag.

Oh, these eternal journeys! Hardly am I settled in one place than I am
again unsettled in another--no home, no roots. What are those bells I
hear? Ah, yes--Fru Ingeborg lets the cows out. They are going to pasture
for the first time this spring, so that they shall give more milk.... Here
comes Nikolai to tell me he is ready. Yes, here is the knapsack....

"Nikolai, isn't it a bit early to let the cows out?"

"Yes, but they're getting restless in the cow houses."

"Yesterday I was in the woods and wanted to sit down, but I cannot sit in
the snow. No, I cannot, though I could ten years ago. I must wait till
there is really something to sit on. A rock is good enough, but you can't
sit on a rock for very long in May."

Nikolai looks uneasily at the mare through the window.

"Yes, let's go.... And there were no butterflies, either. You know those
butterflies that have wings exactly like pansies--there weren't any. And
if happiness lives in the forest, I mean if God himself--well, He hasn't
moved out yet; it's too early."

Nikolai does not reply to my nonsense. After all, it is only the
incoherent expression of a vague feeling, a gentle melancholy.

We go outside together.

"Nikolai, I'm not going."

He turns around and looks at me, his eyes smiling good-humoredly.

"You see, Nikolai, I think I have got an idea; I feel exactly as though an
idea had come to me that may turn into a great, red-hot iron. So I mustn't
disturb myself. I'm staying."

"Well, I'm very glad to hear that," says Nikolai. "As long as you like
being here...."

And a quarter of an hour later, I can see Nikolai and the mare trotting
briskly down the road. Fru Ingeborg stands in the yard with the boy on her
arm to watch the gamboling calves.

And here stand I. A fine old specimen, I am!

       *       *       *       *       *

Nikolai returned with my mail; quite a little pile had accumulated in the
past few weeks.

"I thought you're not in the habit of reading your letters," said Fru
Ingeborg banteringly. Nikolai sat listening to us.

"No," I returned. "Just say the word, and I'll burn them unread."

Suddenly she turned pale; she had put her hand with a smile on the
letters, brushing my hand as she did so. I felt a great ardor, a moment's
miraculous blood heat, more than blood heat--only for a moment--then she
withdrew her hand and said:

"Better read them."

She was deeply flushed now.

"I saw him burn his letters once," she explained to Nikolai. Then she
found something to do at the stove, while she asked her husband about his
journey, about the road, whether the mare had behaved well--which she had.


A minor occurrence, of no importance to anyone. Perhaps I should not have
mentioned it.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days later.

The weather has grown warm, my window is open, my door to the living room
is open, all is still; I stand at the window looking out.

A man entered the courtyard carrying an unshapely burden. I could not see
his face very well, but thought it was Nikolai carrying something, so I
went back to my table to work again.

A little later I heard someone say "Good morning" in the living room.

Fru Ingeborg did not return the greeting. Instead, I heard her ask in
loud, hostile tones:

"What do you want?"

"I've come to pay you a visit."

"My husband isn't in--he's in the field."

"Never mind."

"I do mind," she cried. "Go away!"

I don't know what her face looked like then, but her voice was gray--gray
with tears and indignation. In a moment I was in the living room.

The stranger was Solem. Another meeting with Solem. He was everywhere. Our
eyes met.

"I think you were asked to leave?" I said.

"Take it easy, take it easy," he said, in a kind of half-Norwegian,
half-Swedish. "I trade in hides; I go round to the farms buying up hides.
Have you got any?"

"No!" she cried out. Her voice broke. She was completely distracted, and
suddenly dipped a ladle into a pot that was boiling on the stove: Perhaps
she was on the point of flinging it at him....

At this juncture, Nikolai entered the house.

He was a slow-moving man, but his eyes suddenly quickened as he took in
the situation. Did he know Solem, and had he seen him coming to the farm?
He laughed a little. "Ha, ha, ha," he said, and went on smiling--left his
smile standing. It looked horrible; he was quite white, and his mouth
seemed to have stiffened in a smiling cramp. Here was an equal for Solem,
a sexual colleague, a stallion in strength and stubbornness. And still he
went on smiling.

"Well, if you haven't any hides--," said Solem, finding the door. Nikolai
followed him, still smiling. In the yard he helped Solem raise his burden
to his back.

"Oh, thank you," said Solem in an uncomfortable tone. The bale of furs and
skins was a large one; Nikolai picked it up and put it on Solem's back,
swung it to his back in a curious fashion, with needless emphasis. Solem's
knees gave way under him, and he fell on his face. We heard a groan of
pain, for the paved yard was hard as the face of the mountain. Solem lay
still for a moment, then he rose to his feet. His face had struck the
ground in falling, and the blood was running down into his eyes. He tried
to hoist his burden higher up his back, but it remained hanging slack. He
began to walk away, with Nikolai behind him, still smiling. Thus they
walked down the road, one behind the other, and disappeared into the
woods.

Well, let us be human. That fall to the ground was bad. The heavy burden
hanging down so uncomfortably from one shoulder looked bad.

Indoors I heard a sound of sobbing; Fru Ingeborg was in a state of
collapse in a chair. And in her condition, too!

Well, give it time--it will pass off. Gradually we begin to talk, and by
asking her questions, I force her to collect herself.

"He--that man--that beast--oh, you don't know how dreadful he is--I could
murder him. He was the one--he was the first, but now he's getting it all
back, he's getting more than his own back--you'll see. He was the first; I
was all right till then, but he was the first. Not that it meant a great
deal to me; I don't want to seem any better than I am--it was all the same
to me. But afterward I began to understand. And it drew so much evil in
its train, I fell so low; I was on my knees. It was his fault. And
afterward it all grew clear to me. I want that man to leave me alone; I
don't ever want to see him again. That's not unreasonable, is it?--Oh,
where's Nikolai? You don't think he'll do anything to him, do you? They'll
put him in prison. Please, run after them, stop him! He'll kill him--"

"No, no. He has too much sense. Besides, he doesn't know, does he, that
Solem has done anything to you?"

She looked up at me then.

"Are you asking on your own account?"

"What do you mean?--I don't understand--"

"I want to know if you're asking on your own account! Sometimes you seem
as though you were trying to find me out. _No_, I _haven't_ told
my husband. You can think what you please about my honesty. I've only told
him part of it, just a little--that the man wouldn't leave me alone. He's
been here once before; he was the man Petra wanted to admit that I
wouldn't have in. I said to Nikolai, 'I won't have that man coming in
here!' And I told him a little more. But I didn't tell him about myself;
so now what do you think of my honesty? But I don't want to tell him now
either; I don't ever want to tell him. Why? Well, I don't owe you any
explanation. But I don't mind your knowing--yes, I want to tell you,
please! You see, it's not because I'm afraid of Nikolai's anger, but of
his forgiveness--I couldn't bear to go on living as though nothing had
happened. I'm sure he'd try to find excuses for me, because that's his
nature; he's fond of me, and he's a peasant, too, and peasants don't take
these things so seriously. But if he did find excuses for me, he wouldn't
be much good, and I don't want him to be no good; I swear I don't--I'd
rather be no good myself! Oh, we both have faults to forgive in each
other, but we need all of what's left. We don't want to be animals; we
want to be human beings, and I'm thinking of the future and our
children.... But you oughtn't to make me talk so much. Why did you ask me
that?"

"All I meant was that if Nikolai doesn't know, then it couldn't occur to
him to kill the man, and that was what you were worried about. I just
wanted to reassure you."

"Yes, you're always so clever; you turn me inside out. I wish now I hadn't
told you--I wish you didn't know; I should have kept it to myself till I
died. Now you just think I'm thoroughly dishonest."

"On the contrary."

"Really? Don't you think that?"

"Quite the contrary. What you've told me is absolutely right, entirely
true and right. And not only that--it's fine."

"God bless you," she said, and began to sob again.

"There now, you mustn't cry. Here comes Nikolai walking up the road as
good and placid as ever."

"Is he? Oh, thank God. You know, I haven't really any fault to find with
him; I was too hasty when I said that. Even if I tried to find something,
I couldn't. Of course he uses expressions sometimes--I mean he says some
words differently, but it was only his sister that put that into my head.
I must go out and meet him now."

She began to look around for something to slip over her shoulders, but it
took her a few minutes because she was still quite shaken. Before she had
found anything, Nikolai trudged into the yard.

"Oh, there you are! You haven't done anything rash, have you?"

Nikolai's features were still a little drawn as he replied:

"No, I just took him over to see his son."

"Has Solem got a son here?" I asked.

Neither of them replied. Nikolai turned to go back to his work, and his
wife went with him across the field.

Suddenly I understood: Sophie's child.

How well I remember that day at Tore Peak, when Schoolmistress Sophie Palm
came in to tell us the latest news about Solem, about the bandage on his
finger, the finger he never had time to get rid of--stout fellow! They
made each other's acquaintance then, and probably met again later in the
town. Solem was everywhere.

The ladies at the Tore Peak resort--well, Solem was no angel, but they did
little to improve him. And so he met this woman who had learned nothing
but to teach....

       *       *       *       *       *

I ought to have understood before this. I don't understand anything any
more.

But something has happened to me now.

At last I'm beginning to suspect that their chief reason for wanting to
keep me here is simply that they need money; my board and rent are to pay
for the mare. That's all it amounts to.

I should have known it long ago, but I am old. Perhaps I may add without
being misunderstood that the brain withers before the heart. You can see
it in all grandparents.

At first I said "Bravo!" to my discovery, "Bravo! Fru Ingeborg," I said,
"you are priceless once again!" But human nature is such that I began to
feel hurt. How much better it would be to pay for the mare once and for
all and depart; I should have been more than pleased to do so. But I
should not have succeeded. Nikolai would have shaken his head as though it
were a fairy tale. Then I began to calculate that in fact there couldn't
be much to pay for the mare now--perhaps nothing, perhaps she was paid
for....

Fru Ingeborg labors and slaves--I'm afraid she works too hard. She seldom
sits down, though her pregnancy is far advanced now and she needs rest.
She makes beds, cooks, sees to the animals, sews, mends, and washes. Often
a lock of gray hair falls down on either side of her face, and she is so
busy that she lets it hang; it's too short to be fastened back with a pin.
But she looks charming and motherly, with her fine skin and her
well-shaped mouth; she and the child together are sheer beauty. Of course
I help to carry wood and water, but I make more work for her just the
same. When I think of that, I grow hot about the ears.

But how could I have imagined that anyone would want to keep me for my own
sake? I should not have had all these years too many then, and these
ardors too few. A good thing I've found it out at last.

In a way the discovery made it easier for me to leave them, and this--time
when I packed my knapsack, I meant it. But at least the child, her boy,
had some love for me, and liked to sit on my arm because I showed him so
much that was strange. It was the child's instinct for the peerless
grandfather.

At about this time, a sister of Fru Ingeborg's came to the farm to help
with the housework. I began to pack then; overcome with grief, I packed.
To spare Nikolai and the mare, I decided to make my way down to the
steamship landing on foot. I shall also arrange to relieve all of us of
the need for farewells and handshakes and _au revoirs_, believe me!

But in spite of my resolution, I could not, after all, avoid taking them
both by the hand and thanking them for their hospitality. That was all
that was necessary. I stood in the doorway with my knapsack already on my
back, smiling a little, and behaving splendidly.

"Yes, indeed," I said, "I must begin to move about again."

"Are you really going?" said Fru Ingeborg.

"Why not?"

"But so suddenly?"

"Didn't I tell you yesterday?"

"Yes, of course, but--would you like Nikolai to drive you?"

"No, thank you."

The boy was interested now, for I had a knapsack on my back and a coat
with entirely unfamiliar buttons; he wanted me to carry him. Very well,
then--just for a moment. But it was for more than a moment, more than a
few moments, too. The knapsack had to be opened and investigated, of
course. Then Nikolai entered the room.

Fru Ingeborg said to me:

"I'm afraid you think that just because my sister's here now--but we've
got another room. And besides, now that it's summer, she could easily
sleep in the loft."

"But, my dear child, I must leave _some_ time--I have work to do,
too, you know."

"Well, of course," said Fru Ingeborg, giving it up.

Nikolai offered to drive me, but did not press me when I thanked him and
refused.

They came to the gate with me, and watched me walk away, the boy sitting
on his mother's arm.

At the bend of the road, I turned round to wave--to the child, of course,
not to anyone else--only to the child. But there was no longer anyone
there.




XXXVIII


I have written this story for you.

Why have I written thus? Because my soul cries out with boredom before
every Christmas, boredom with all the books that are all written the same
way. I had even the intention of writing in dialect, so as to be truly
Norwegian; but when I saw you understood the country's language also, I
gave up writing in dialect because, for one thing, it is becoming
obsolete.

But why have I gathered so many incongruities within a single framework?
My friend, one of the most celebrated literary creations was written
during a plague, _because_ of a plague--this is my answer. And, my
friend, when you have lived for a long time away from the human beings you
know inside and out, then you indulge once more in the iniquity of speech;
your powers have been so little used that your head is filled with a
thousand sermons. This is my defense.

If I know you at all, you will revel in one or other of my outspoken
passages; especially where there is a nocturnal episode, you will lick
your chops. But to others you will shake your head and say: "Think of his
writing such things!" Alas, small, vulgar soul, retire into solitude and
try to understand that episode! It has cost me much to surrender it to
you.

Perhaps, too, you will be interested in myself and ask about my irons?
Well, I may give you their greeting. They are the irons of one who is half
a century old--he has no other kind. But the distinction between myself
and my brother travelers is that I freely admit: I have none but these.
They were planned so big and so red; yet they are small irons, and they
hardly glow. This is the truth. They congregate with the painstaking works
of others round the Christmas table. This is the truth. It is the truth
even though, in spite of everything, they are distinct from the
nothingness of others. You cannot judge this, for you are the modern
spirit in Norway, and this is the spirit I scorn.

One thing you will admit: you have not wasted your time in "cultured
company"; I have not tried to quench your little upstart heart with a
"lady." I have written about human beings. But within the speech that is
spoken, another lies concealed, like the veins under the skin, like a
story within a story. I have followed the septuagenarian of literature
step by step, and reported the progress of his disintegration. I should
have written this description long ago, but I had not years enough; only
now am I entering upon them, directly and indirectly. I should have done
it while the country was groping for long periods under the shadow of
superannuated incompetence. Instead I do it now, when I myself am being
accused of a tendency to cast shadows. "Sensationalism," you will say,
"chasing after fame!" My dear, chaste friend, I have fame enough for the
last twenty years of my life, and after that I shall be dead. And you? May
you live long; you deserve it. May you almost survive me--in the flesh.

I have just read what a man on the pinnacle of culture has said:
"Experience shows that when culture spreads, it grows thin and colorless."
Then one must not raise an outcry against the bearers of a new
renaissance. I can no longer herald a renaissance; it is too late now.
Once, when I had the power to do much and the desire to do more,
mediocrity everywhere was too strong. I was the giant with the feet of
clay--the lot of many youths. But now, my small, small friend, look about
you: there has appeared, within even your field of vision, a figure here
and a figure there, a shining crest, lavish with its bounty, geniuses
beneath the open sky--you and I should bid them welcome. I walk in the
evening of life and, trembling, recognize myself in them; they are youth
with jeweled eyes. Yet you begrudge them your recognition; yes, you
begrudge them fame. Because you are nobody.

To you--to the modern spirit of Norway! I have written this during a
plague, and because of the plague. I cannot stop the rot; no, it is
unassailable now, it flourishes under national protection,
tarara-boom-de-ay. But one day no doubt it will stop. Meanwhile I do what
I can to fight it; you do the reverse.

Of course I have shouted in the marketplace; perhaps that is why my voice
is hoarse now, cracked at times. There are worse things. A worse thing
would have been if it had not obeyed me. Is there any danger of that? No,
my friend, not for you; you will live till you die, be assured.

Why have I written to you, of all people? Why do you think? You refused to
be convinced of the truth and integrity of my conclusions; but I shall yet
force you to recognize that I am close to the truth. Not until then shall
I make allowance for the fool in you.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Look Back on Happiness, by Knut Hamsun





Produced by Charles Franks, Eric Eldred
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





ROBERT GRANT


The Law-Breakers
and Other Stories


_The American Short Story Series_


VOLUME 58




CONTENTS

The Law-Breakers
Against His Judgment
St. George and the Dragon
The Romance of a Soul
An Exchange of Courtesies
Across the Way
A Surrender




THE LAW-BREAKERS


I


George Colfax was in an outraged frame of mind, and properly so.
Politically speaking, George was what might be called, for lack of a
better term, a passive reformer. That is, he read religiously the New
York _Nation_, was totally opposed to the spoils system of party
rewards, and was ostensibly as right-minded a citizen as one would
expect to find in a Sabbath day's journey. He subscribed one dollar a
year to the civil-service reform journal, and invariably voted on
Election Day for the best men, cutting out in advance the names of the
candidates favored by the Law and Order League of his native city, and
carrying them to the polls in order to jog his memory. He could talk
knowingly, too, by the card, of the degeneracy of the public men of
the nation, and had at his finger-ends inside information as to the
manner in which President This or Congressman That had sacrificed the
ideals of a vigorous manhood to the brass idol known as a second term.
In fact, there was scarcely a prominent political personage in the
country for whom George had a good word in every-day conversation. And
when the talk was of municipal politics he shook his head with a
profundity of gloom which argued an utterly hopeless condition of
affairs--a sort of social bottomless pit.

And yet George was practically passive. He voted right, but, beyond
his yearly contribution of one dollar, he did nothing else but cavil
and deplore. He inveighed against the low standards of the masses, and
went on his way sadly, making all the money he could at his private
calling, and keeping his hands clean from the slime of the political
slough. He was a censor and a gentleman; a well-set-up, agreeable,
quick-witted fellow, whom his men companions liked, whom women termed
interesting. He was apt to impress the latter as earnest and at the
same time fascinating--an alluring combination to the sex which always
likes a moral frame for its fancies.

It was to a woman that George was unbosoming his distress on this
particular occasion, and, as has been already indicated, his
indignation and disgust were entirely justified. Her name was Miss
Mary Wellington, and she was the girl whom he wished with all his
heart to marry. It was no hasty conclusion on his part. He knew her,
as he might have said, like a book, from the first page to the last,
for he had met her constantly at dances and dinners ever since she
"came out" seven years before, and he was well aware that her physical
charms were supplemented by a sympathetic, lively, and independent
spirit. One mark of her independence--the least satisfactory to
him--was that she had refused him a week before; or, more accurately
speaking, the matter had been left in this way: she had rejected him
for the time being in order to think his offer over. Meanwhile he had
decided to go abroad for sixty days--a shrewd device on his part to
cause her to miss him--and here he was come to pay his adieus, but
bubbling over at the same time with what he called the latest piece of
disregard for public decency on the part of the free-born voter.

"Just think of it. The fellow impersonated one of his heelers, took
the civil-service examination in the heeler's name, and got the
position for him. He was spotted, tried before a jury who found him
guilty, and was sentenced to six months in jail. The day he was
discharged, an admiring crowd of his constituents escorted him from
prison with a brass band and tendered him a banquet. Yesterday he was
chosen an alderman by the ballots of the people of this city. A
self-convicted falsifier and cheat! A man who snaps his fingers in the
face of the laws of the country! Isn't that a commentary on the
workings of universal suffrage?" This was a caustic summing up on
George's part of the story he had already told Miss Wellington
piecemeal, and he looked at her as much as to ask if his dejection
were not amply justified.

"It's a humiliating performance certainly," she said. "I don't wonder
you are exercised about it. Are there no extenuating circumstances?"
Miss Wellington appeared duly shocked; yet, being a woman of an alert
and cheery disposition, she reached out instinctively for some
palliative before accepting the affair in all its stark offensiveness.

"None which count--none which should weigh for a moment with any one
with patriotic impulses," he answered. "The plea is that the people
down there--Jim Daly's constituents--have no sympathy with the
civil-service examination for public office, and so they think it was
rather smart of him than otherwise to get the better of the law. In
other words, that it's all right to break a law if one doesn't happen
to fancy it. A nation which nurses that point of view is certain to
come to grief."

Mary nodded gravely. "It's a dangerous creed--dangerous, and a little
specious, too. And can nothing be done about it? About Daly, I mean?"

"No. He's an alderman-elect, and the hero of his district. A
wide-awake, square-dealing young man with no vices, as I heard one of
his admirers declare. By the time I return from my trip to the
Mediterranean I expect they will be booming him for Congress."

Looking at the matter soberly, Mary Wellington perceived that Jim
Daly's performance was a disreputable piece of business, which merited
the censure of all decent citizens. Having reached this conclusion,
she dismissed George Colfax on his travels with a sense of
satisfaction that he viewed the affair with such abhorrence. For, much
as she liked George, her hesitation to become his wife and renounce
the bachelor-girl career to which, since her last birthday--her
twenty-fifth--she had felt herself committed, was a sort of
indefinable suspicion as to the real integrity of his standards. He
was an excellent talker, of course; his ideals of public life and
private ethics, as expressed in drawing-rooms, or during pleasant
dialogues when they were alone together, were exemplary. But every now
and then, while he discoursed picturesquely of the evils of the age
and the obligations of citizenship, it would occur to her to wonder
how consistent he would be in case his principles should happen to
clash with his predilections. How would he behave in a tight place? He
was a fashionable young man with the tastes of his class, and she
thought she had detected in him once or twice a touch of that
complacent egotism which is liable to make fish of one foible and
flesh of another, as the saying is, to suit convention. In short, were
his moral perceptions genuinely delicate?

However, she liked him so well that she was anxious to believe her
questionings groundless. Accordingly, his protestations of repugnance
at Jim Daly's conduct were reassuring. For though they were merely
words, his denunciation appeared heartfelt and to savor of clean and
nice appreciation of the distinction between truth and falsehood.
Indeed, she was half-inclined to call him back to tell him that she
had changed her mind and was ready to take him for better or for
worse. But she let him go, saying to herself that she could live
without him perfectly well for the next sixty days, and that the
voyage would do him good. Were she to become his wife, it would be
necessary to give up the Settlement work in which she had become
deeply interested as the result of her activities as a bachelor-girl.
She must be certain that he was all she believed him to be before she
admitted that she loved him and burned her philanthropical bridges.

Returning to her quarters in the heart of the city, Mary Wellington
became so absorbed in her work of bringing cheer and relief to the
ignorant and needy that she almost forgot George Colfax. Yet once in a
while it would occur to her that it would be very pleasant if he
should drop in for a cup of tea, and she would wonder what he was
doing. Did she, perchance, at the same time exert herself with an
ardor born of an acknowledged inkling that these might be the last
months of her service? However that may have been, she certainly was
very busy, and responded eagerly to every call upon her sympathy.

Among the cases of distress brought to her attention which interested
her most was that of two children whose mother had just died. Their
father was a drinking man--a reeling sot who had neglected his family
for years. His wife, proud in her destitution, had worked her fingers
to the bone to maintain a tenement-roof over the heads of their two
little boys and to send them neat and properly nourished to school.
This labor of love had been too much for her strength, and finally she
had fallen a victim to consumption. This was shortly after her
necessities had become known to the Settlement to which Mary
Wellington belonged. The dying mother besought her visitor to keep
watch over her boys, which Mary promised faithfully to do.

The waifs, Joe and Frank, were two bright-eyed youngsters of eleven
and nine. They stood so well in their classes at school that Mary
resolved that their attendance should not be interrupted during the
interval while a new home was being found for them. She accompanied
them to the school-house, on the morning after the funeral, in order
to explain the situation to their teacher and evince her personal
interest. Miss Burke was a pretty girl two or three years younger than
herself. She looked capable and attractive; a little coquettish, too,
for her smile was arch, and her pompadour had that fluffy fulness
which girls who like to be admired nowadays are too apt to affect. She
was just the sort of girl whom a man might fall desperately in love
with, and it occurred to Mary, as they conversed, that it was not
likely she would remain a public-school teacher long.

Miss Burke evidently knew the art of ingratiating herself with her
pupils. Joe and Frank smiled bashfully, but contentedly, under her
sympathetic, sunny welcome. The two young women exchanged a few words,
the sequel of which was that Mary Wellington accepted the invitation
to remain and observe how the youthful mind was inoculated with the
rudiments of knowledge by the honeyed processes of the modern school
system. While the teacher stepped to the blackboard to write some
examples before the bell should ring, Joe, the elder of the two
orphans, utilized the occasion to remark in a low voice intended for
Mary's ear:

"She's Jim Daly's mash."

Mary, who failed on the instant to grasp the meaning of this piece of
eloquent information, invited the urchin to repeat it, which he did
with the sly unction of one proud of his secret. Mary laughed to
herself. Some girls would have repressed the youthful gossip, but she
was human. Somehow, too, the name sounded familiar.

"Who's Jim Daly, Joe?"

"He's the boss of the Ninth Ward."

"The Daly who has just been elected alderman?"

"Yes, ma'am."

Then Mary understood. "Really, Joe!" she said in the stage whisper
necessary to the situation.

"Maybe she's going to be married after Easter," the guileless prattler
continued, to make his confidence complete.

"Then you and Frank would lose her." This was the answer which rose to
Mary's lips, partly prompted, doubtless, by her own instinctive
aversion to the match.

The suggestion of another loss worked upon Joe's susceptible feelings.
Evidently he had not taken this side of the matter into consideration,
and he put up one of his hands to his eyes. Fortunately the bell for
the opening of the session broke in upon the conversation, and not
only diverted him, but relegated the whole subject to the background
for the time being. Nevertheless, the thought of it continued in
Mary's mind as she sat listening to the exercises. How could an
attractive girl like this take a fancy to such a trickster? It seemed
totally incompatible with the teacher's other qualities, for in her
attitude toward her pupils she appeared discerning and conscientious.

When the time came to go, Mary referred to her connection with the
Settlement work in the course of the few minutes' further conversation
which they had together. Miss Burke expressed so lively an interest in
this that it was agreed before they parted that the schoolmistress
should pay Mary a visit some day later in the week, with the twofold
object of taking tea with the two orphans and of being shown the
workings of the establishment.

At this subsequent interview, the two young women chatted briskly in a
cosey corner. Each found the other sympathetic, despite Mary's secret
prejudice; and it happened presently that Miss Burke, whose
countenance now and again had seemed a little pensive, as though she
had something on her mind, said after a pause:

"I'd like to ask your advice about something, Miss Wellington, if you
don't object."

Mary thought she knew what was coming, surprising as it was to be
consulted. She smiled encouragingly.

"It's about a gentleman friend of mine," continued Miss Burke, with
rising color, "who wishes me to marry him. Perhaps you have heard of
him," she added with a suggestion of furtive pride. "His name is Jim
Daly."

"I know all about him."

Miss Burke was evidently not prepared for such a sweeping answer. "You
know what he did, then?" she asserted after a moment's hesitation.

"He pretended to be some one else, and passed a civil-service
examination, wasn't it?"

"Yes. I can tell by your tone that you think it was disreputable. So
do I, Miss Wellington; though some of my friends say that it was Jim's
desire to help a friend which led him to do it. But he had to serve
his time in jail, didn't he?" She looked as though she were going to
cry. Then she said awkwardly: "What I wished to ask was whether you
would marry him if you were I."

Mary frowned. The responsibility was disconcerting. "Do you love him?"
she asked plumply.

"I did love him; I suppose I do still; yes, I do." She jerked out her
answers in quick succession. "But our engagement is broken."

"Because of this?"

"Because he has been in jail. None of my family has ever been in
jail." Miss Burke set in place the loose hairs of her pompadour with a
gesture of severe dignity as she spoke.

"And he knows, of course, that his dishonesty is the reason why you
feel that you cannot trust him?" inquired Mary, who, being a logical
person, regarded the last answer as not altogether categorical.

"It wasn't like stealing," said the girl, by way of resenting the
phrase.

"It was dishonorable and untrue."

"The people down my way don't think much of the civil-service laws.
They call them frills, something to get round if you can. That's how
they excuse him." She spoke with nervous rapidity and a little warmth.

"But they are our country's laws just the same. And a good man--a
patriotic man--ought not to break them." Mary was conscious of voicing
George Colfax's sentiments as well as her own. The responsibility of
the burden imposed on her was trying, and she disliked her part of
mentor. Nevertheless, she felt that she must not abstain from stating
the vital point clearly; so she continued:

"Is not the real difficulty, my dear, that the man who could be false
in one thing might be false in another when the occasion arose?"

Miss Burke flushed at the words, and suddenly covered her face with
her hands.

"That's it, of course. That's what haunts me. I could forgive him the
other--the having been in jail and all that; but it's the possibility
that he might do something worse after we were married--when it was
too late--which frightens me. 'False in one thing, false in
everything,' that's what the proverb is. Do you believe that is true,
Miss Wellington?"

Her unmasked conscience revealed clearly the distress caused by its
own sensitiveness; but she spoke beseechingly, as though to invite
comfort from her companion on the score of this adage.

"Tell me what sort of a man Mr. Daly is in other respects," said Mary.

"Oh, he's kind!" she answered with enthusiasm. "He has been a good son
and brother; he is always helping people, and has more friends than
any one in the district. I don't see why he cared for me," she added
with seeming irrelevance.

"It's a great point in his favor that he does care for you, my dear.
Is he steady at his work?"

"When he isn't too busy with politics. He says that he will give them
up, if I insist; but my doing so might prevent his being chosen to
Congress." There was again rueful pride in her plaint.

Mary sat silent for a moment. "He stands convicted of falsehood." She
seemed to be speaking to herself.

"Yes," gasped the girl, as her mentor paused to let the fell
substantive be weighed.

"That seems terrible to me. But you know him better than I do."

Miss Burke's face lighted at the qualification. Yet her quick
intelligence refused to be thus cajoled. "But what would you do in my
place? That's what I wish to know."

Mary winced. She perceived the proud delicacy of the challenge, and
recognized that she had condescendingly shirked the real inquiry.

"It is so hard to put oneself in another's place. The excuses you have
given for his conduct seem to me inadequate. That is, if a man gave
those reasons to me--I believe I could never trust him again." Mary
spoke with conviction, but she realized that she felt like a
grandmother.

"Thank you," said Miss Burke. "That's what I wished to know." She
looked at the floor for an instant. "Suppose you felt that you could
trust him?"

Mary smiled and reflected. "If I loved him enough for that, I dare say
I should forgive him."

"You really would?" Then Miss Burke perceived that in her elation she
had failed to observe the logical inconsistency which the counsel
contained. "I don't know that I understand exactly," she added.

Mary smiled again, then shook her head. "I doubt if I can make it any
plainer than that. I mean that--if I were you--I should have to feel
absolutely sure that I loved him; and even then--" She paused without
completing the ellipsis. "As to that, dear, no one can enlighten you
but yourself.'

"Of course," said poor Miss Burke. Yet she was already beginning to
suspect that the sphinx-like utterance might contain both the kernel
of eternal feminine truth and the real answer to her own doubts.




II


Some two months later the _Meteoric_, one of the fast ocean
greyhounds, was approaching the port of New York. At sight of land the
cabin passengers, who had been killing time resignedly in one
another's society, became possessed with a rampant desire to leave the
vessel as soon as possible. When it was definitely announced that the
_Meteoric_ would reach her dock early enough in the afternoon to
enable them to have their baggage examined and get away before dark,
they gave vent to their pent-up spirits in mutual congratulations and
adieus.

Among those on board thus chafing to escape from the limitations of an
ocean voyage was George Colfax, whose eagerness to land was enhanced
by the hope that his absence had made the heart of his lady-love
fonder. His travels had been restful and stimulating; but there is
nothing like one's own country, after all. So he reflected as, cigar
in mouth, he perused the newspapers which the pilot had brought, and
watched the coast-line gradually change to the familiar monuments of
Manhattan.

Yet apparently there was a subconsciousness to his thought, for as he
folded his last newspaper and stretched himself with the languor of a
man no longer harried by lack of knowledge as to what has happened
during the last seven days, he muttered under his breath:

"Confound the customs anyway!"

A flutter of garments and a breezy voice brought him politely to his
feet.

"That's over with, thank Heaven!" The speaker was a charming woman
from Boston, whose society he had found engrossing during the
voyage--a woman of the polite world, voluble and well informed.

"I just signed and swore to the paper they gave me without reading
it," she added, with a gay shrug of her shoulders, as though she were
well content with this summary treatment of a distasteful matter.
"Have you made your declaration yet?" she asked indifferently.

"No."

"What I don't understand is why they should make you take oath to a
thing and then rummage through your trunks as though they didn't
believe you."

"It's an outrage--an infernal outrage," said George. "Every time the
Government does it the spirit of American institutions is insulted."

"I haven't much with me this time, anyway; they can hardly expect that
a person will go to Europe for six months and not bring back more than
one hundred dollars' worth of things," continued Miss Golightly
artlessly. "One might almost as well stay at home. It isn't as if I
bought them to sell. They are my own ownty donty effects, and I've no
intention of paying the Government one cent on them if I can help it.
And they charge one for presents. Of course, I won't pay on presents I
have bought to give other people. That would simply make them cost so
much more."

"The whole thing is a wretched and humiliating farce," was George's
not altogether illuminating comment on this naive revelation of the
workings of the female mind. He spoke doggedly, and then hummed the
refrain of a song as though to keep up his courage.

"Well, I'll go and take my turn," he said, with the air of
aristocratic urbanity which made him a favorite in social circles.

Miss Golightly detained him to add: "If you find any better method, I
wish you'd let me know. It seemed the simplest way not to declare
anything, and to trust to luck."

So great was the bustle and confusion that George was not conscious of
the presence of his lively companion again until he heard her voice in
his ear two hours later on the pier or platform where the baggage from
the _Meteoric_ was being inspected.

"Well," she said under her breath, "I'm all through. They gave me a
jewel of a man. And you?"

"I've had no trouble." George spoke with nonchalance as if to imply
that he had expected none. Out of the corner of his eye he was
following the actions of the custom-house official allotted to him who
was chalking his examined trunks with the hieroglyphics which
signified that the Government had released its grip on them.

This done, George beckoned to an attendant porter, after which he
turned again to Miss Golightly.

"If you'll wait a moment until I see these things of mine safely in
the hands of the transfer express, I'll put you into your carriage and
take a fond farewell."

"You needn't hurry," was her answer.

"My friend, Miss Pilgrim, has declared thirty-four articles, and she
doesn't know in which of her eight trunks any of them are. She and the
citizen in glasses meted out to her, who insists on finding every one,
are now engaged in ransacking her entire wardrobe. I intend to keep at
a safe distance from the scene of worry. That's what comes of being
conscientious."

George and the inspector, preceded by the porter wheeling the
traveller's three trunks, hat-box, and small bags, set out for the
other end of the shed.

George returned ten minutes later; he stepped briskly and was beaming.

"Still waiting, I see," he said jocularly.

"And in your eyes I read the purple light of love, young man. I wish
you success." Her words were the rallying outcome of confidences on
shipboard after five days at sea.

George blushed, but looked pleased. "You may see her first," he said,
"for she is constantly at her cousin's, or was before she took up
Settlement life."

"How much did you give him?" asked Miss Golightly.

The reversion to their previous topic was so abrupt and barefaced that
the lover stared for a moment, then tried not to appear confused.

"Oh, a mere trifle!" he said with offhand dignity.

"I gave mine twenty-five dollars," she whispered. "Wasn't that
enough?"

"Abundant, I should say. But I am not well posted on such matters." It
was evident he wished to avoid the subject, and was also impatient to
get away, for he took out his watch. "If Miss Pilgrim is really likely
to be detained--" he began.

Miss Golightly rose to the occasion and dismissed him. "I understand,"
she exclaimed amiably. "Every minute is precious."

Nevertheless, it was not until two days later that he succeeded in
finding Mary Wellington at home. He called that evening, but was told
by the person in charge that she had taken a brief respite from work
and would not return for another twenty-four hours. On the second
occasion, as the first, he brought with him under his arm a good-sized
package, neatly done up.

"I am back again," he said, and he pressed her hand with unmistakable
zeal.

Her greeting was friendly; not emotional like his, or unreserved; but
he flattered himself that she seemed very glad to see him. He
reflected: "I don't believe that it did my cause a particle of harm to
let her go without the constant visits she had grown accustomed to
expect."

He said aloud: "I came across this on the other side and took the
liberty of bringing it to you."

Mary undid the parcel, disclosing a beautiful bit of jade; not too
costly a gift for a friend to accept, yet really a defiance of the
convention which forbids marriageable maidens to receive from their
male admirers presents less perishable than flowers or sweetmeats.

"It is lovely, and it was very kind of you to remember me."

"Remember you? You were in my thoughts day and night."

She smiled to dispel the tension. "I shall enjoy hearing about your
travels. A friend of yours has told me something of them."

"Ah! Miss Golightly. You have seen her, then, at your cousin's? A
companionable woman; and she knows her Europe. Yes, we compared notes
regarding our travels."

He colored slightly, but only at the remembrance of having confided to
this comparative stranger his bosom's secret under the spell of an
ocean intimacy.

"You brought home other things, I dare say?" Mary asked after a pause,
glancing up at him.

"Oh, yes!" The trend of the question was not clear to him, but he was
impelled to add: "For one thing, I ordered clothes enough to last me
three years at least. I bought gloves galore for myself and for my
sister. As I belong to the working class, and there is no knowing how
soon I may be able to get away again, I laid in a stock of everything
which I needed, or which took my fancy. Men's things as well as
women's are so much cheaper over there if one knows where to go."

"With the duties?"

The words, gently spoken, were like a bolt from the blue. George
betrayed his distaste for the inquiry only by a sudden gravity. "Yes,
with the duties." He hastened to add: "But enough of myself and my
travels. They were merely to pass the time." He bent forward from his
chair and interrogated her meaningly with his glance.

"But I am interested in duties."

He frowned at her insistence.

"Miss Golightly," continued Mary, "explained to us yesterday how she
got all her things through the custom-house by giving the inspector
twenty-five dollars. She gloried in it and in the fact that, though
her trunks were full of new dresses, she made oath that she had
nothing dutiable."

He suspected now her trend, yet he was not certain that he was
included in its scope. But he felt her eyes resting on him
searchingly.

"Did she?" he exclaimed, with an effort at airy lightness which seemed
to afford the only hope of escape.

"How did you manage?"

"I?" He spoke after a moment's pause with the calm of one who slightly
resents an invasion of his privacy.

"Did you pay the duties on your things?"

George realized now that he was face to face with a question which, as
lawyers say, required that the answer should be either "yes" or "no."
Still, he made one more attempt to avert the crucial inquiry.

"Does this really interest you?"

"Immensely. My whole future may be influenced by it."

"I see." There was no room left for doubt as to her meaning. Nor did
he choose to lie. "No, I paid no duties."

"I feared as much."

There was a painful silence. George rose, and walking to the
mantel-piece, looked down at the hearth and tapped the ironwork with
his foot. He would fain have made the best of what he ruefully
recognized to be a shabby situation by treating it jocosely; but her
grave, grieved demeanor forbade. Yet he ventured to remark:

"Why do you take this so seriously?"

"I expected better things of you."

He felt of his mustache and essayed extenuation. "It was--er--unworthy
of me, of course; foolish--pig-headed--tricky, I suppose. I got mad.
I'd nothing to sell, and the declaration is a farce when they examine
after it. So I left them to find what they chose. I'm terribly sorry,
for you seem to hate it so. But it's an idiotic and impertinent law,
anyway."

"In other words, you think it all right to break a law if you don't
happen to fancy it."

George started visibly and colored. He recognized the aphorism as his,
but for the moment did not recall the occasion of its use. He chose to
evade it by an attempt at banter. "You can't make a tragedy, my dear
girl, out of the failure to pay duties on a few things bought for
one's personal use, and not for sale. Why, nearly every woman in the
world smuggles when she gets the chance--on her clothes and finery.
You must know that. Your sex as a class doesn't regard it as
disreputable in the least. At the worst, it is a peccadillo, not a
crime. The law was passed to enable our native tailors to shear the
well-to-do public."

Mary ignored the plausible indictment against the unscrupulousness of
her sex. "Can such an argument weigh for a moment with any one with
patriotic impulses?"

Again the parrot-like reminder caused him to wince, and this time he
recognized the application.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, with sorry yet protesting confusion.

"It's the inconsistency," she answered without flinching, perceiving
that he understood.

George flushed to the roots of his hair. "You compare me with
that--er--blatherskite?" he asked, conscious as he spoke that her
logic was irrefutable. Yet his self-respect cried out to try to save
itself.

"Why not? The civil-service law seemed a frill to Jim Daly; the
customs law an impertinence to you."

He looked down at the hearth again. There was an air of finality in
her words which was disconcerting.

"I've been an ass," he ejaculated. "I'll give the things up; pay the
duties; go to prison, if you like. The punishment is fine or
imprisonment." He intended to be sincere in his offer of
self-humiliation, though his speech savored of extravagance.

Mary shrugged her shoulders. "If you did, I dare say a bevy of society
women would tender you a banquet when you were released from jail."

He bit his lip and stared at her. "You are taking this seriously with
a vengeance!"

"I must."

He crossed the room and, bending beside her, sought to take her hand.
"Do you mean that but for this--? Mary, are you going to let a little
thing like this separate us?"

He had captured her fingers, but they lay limp and unresponsive in
his.

"It is not a little thing; from my standpoint it is everything."

"But you will give me another chance?"

"You have had your chance. That was it. I was trying to find out
whether I loved you, and now I know that I do not. I could never marry
a man I could not--er--trust."

"Trust?" I swear to you that I am worthy of trust."

She smiled sadly and drew away her hand. "Maybe. But I shall never
know, you see, because I do not love you."

Her feminine inversion of logic increased his dismay. "I shall never
give up," he exclaimed, rising and buttoning his coat. "When you think
this over you will realize that you have exaggerated what I did."

She shook her head. His obduracy made no impression on her, for she
was free from doubts.

"We will be friends, if you like; but we can never be anything
closer."

An inspiration seized him. "What would the girl whom Jim Daly loves,
if there is one, say? She has never given him up, I wager."

Mary blushed at his unconscious divination. "I do not know," she said.
"But you are one person, Jim Daly is another. You have had every
advantage; he is a--er--blatherskite. Yet you condescend to put
yourself on a par with him, and condone the offence on the ground that
your little world winks at it. Remember

  "'Spirits are not finely touched
     But to fine issues.'

How shall society progress, unless my sex insists on at least that
patent of nobility in the men who woo us? I am reading you a lecture,
but you insisted on it."

George stood for a moment silent. "You are right, I suppose." He
lifted her hand to his lips and kissed it. Then he turned and left the
room.

As he passed out, Mary heard the voices of the orphans, Joe and Frank,
in the entry. The former in greeting her held out a letter which had
just been delivered by the postman.

"You've come back, Miss Wellington," cried the little boy rapturously.

"Yes, Joe dear."

Mechanically she opened the envelope. As she read the contents she
smiled faintly and nodded her head as much as to say that the news was
not unexpected.

"But _noblesse oblige_," she murmured to herself proudly, not
realizing that she had spoken aloud.

"What did you say, Miss Wellington?"

Mary recalled her musing wits. "I've something interesting to tell
you, boys. Miss Burke is going to be married to Jim Daly. That is bad
for you, dears, but partly to make up for it, I wish to let you know
that there is no danger of my leaving you any more."




AGAINST HIS JUDGMENT


Three days had passed, and the excitement in the neighborhood was
nearly at an end. The apothecary's shop at the corner into which John
Baker's body and the living four-year-old child had been carried
together immediately after the catastrophe had lost most of its
interest for the curious, although the noses of a few idlers were
still pressed against the large pane in apparent search of something
beyond the brilliant colored bottles or the soda-water fountains. Now
that the funeral was over, the womenkind, whose windows commanded a
view of the house where the dead man had been lying, had taken their
heads in and resumed their sweeping and washing, and knots of their
husbands and fathers no longer stood in gaping conclave close to the
very doorsill, rehearsing again and again the details of the
distressing incident. Even the little child who had been so
miraculously saved from the jaws of death, although still decked in
the dirty finery which its mother deemed appropriate to its having
suddenly become a public character, had ceased to be the recipient of
the dimes of the tender-hearted. Such is the capriciousness of the
human temperament at times of emotional excitement, the plan of a
subscription for the victim's family had not been mooted until what
was to its parents a small fortune had been bestowed on the rescued
child; but the scale of justice had gradually righted itself.
Contributions were now pouring in, especially since it was reported
that the mayor and several other well-known persons had headed the
list with fifty dollars each; and there was reason to believe that a
lump sum of from fifteen hundred to two thousand dollars would be
collected for the benefit of the widow and seven children before
public generosity was exhausted.

Local interest was on the wane; but, thanks to the telegraph and the
press, the facts were being disseminated through the country, and
every leading newspaper in the land was chronicling, with more or less
prominence according to the character of its readers, the item that
John Baker, the gate-keeper at a railroad crossing in a Pennsylvania
city, had snatched a toddling child from the pathway of a swiftly
moving locomotive and been crushed to death.

A few days later a dinner-company of eight was gathered at a country
house several hundred miles distant from the scene of the calamity.
The host and hostess were people of wealth and leisure, who enjoyed
inviting congenial parties from their social acquaintance in the
neighboring city to share with them for two or three days at a time
the charms of nature. The dinner was appetizing, the wine good, and
conversation turned lightly from one subject to another.

They had talked on a variety of topics: of tarpon fishing in Florida;
of amateur photography, in which the hostess was proficient, and of
gardens; of the latest novels and some current inelegancies of speech.
Some one spoke of the growing habit of feeing employes to do their
duty. Another referred to certain breaches of trust by bank officers
and treasurers, which occurring within a short time of one another had
startled the community. This last subject begot a somewhat doleful
train of commentary and gave the lugubrious their cue. Complaints were
made of our easygoing standards of morality, and our disposition not
to be severe on anybody; of the decay of ideal considerations and the
lack of enthusiasm for all but money-spinning.

"The gist is here," reiterated one of the speakers: "we insist on
tangible proof of everything, of being able to see and feel it--to get
our dollar's worth, in short. We weigh and measure and scrutinize, and
discard as fusty and outworn, conduct and guides to conduct that do
not promise six per cent per annum in full sight."

"What have you to say to John Baker?" said the host, breaking the
pause which followed these remarks. "I take for granted that you are
all familiar with his story: the newspapers have been full of it.
There was a man who did not stop to measure or scrutinize."

A murmur of approbation followed, which was interrupted by Mrs. Caspar
Green, a stout and rather languid lady, inquiring to whom he referred.
"You know I never read the newspapers," she added, with a decidedly
superior air, putting up her eye-glass.

"Except the deaths and marriages," exclaimed her husband, a lynx-eyed
little stockbroker, who was perpetually poking what he called fun at
his more ponderous half.

"Well, this was a death: so there was no excuse for her not seeing
it," said Henry Lawford, the host. "No, seriously, Mrs. Green, it was
a splendid instance of personal heroism: a gate-keeper at a railway
crossing in Pennsylvania, perceiving a child of four on the track just
in front of the fast express, rushed forward and managed to snatch up
the little creature and threw it to one side before--poor fellow!--he
was struck and killed. There was no suggestion of counting upon six
per cent there, was there?"

"Unless in another sphere," interjected Caspar Green.

"Don't be sacrilegious, Caspar," pleaded his wife, though she added
her mite to the ripple of laughter that greeted the sally.

"It was superb!--superb!" exclaimed Miss Ann Newbury, a young woman
not far from thirty, with a long neck and a high-bred, pale,
intellectual face. "He is one of the men who make us proud of being
men and women." She spoke with sententious earnestness and looked
across the table appealingly at George Gorham.

"He left seven children, I believe?" said he, with precision.

"Yes, seven, Mr. Gorham--the eldest eleven," answered Mrs. Lawford,
who was herself the mother of five. "Poor little things!"

"I think he made a great mistake," remarked George, laconically.

For an instant there was complete silence. The company was evidently
making sure that it had understood his speech correctly. Then Miss
Newbury gave a gasp, and Henry Lawford, with a certain stern dignity
that he knew how to assume, said----

"A mistake? How so, pray?"

"In doing what he did--sacrificing his life to save the child."

"Why, Mr. Gorham!" exclaimed the hostess, while everybody turned
toward him. He was a young man between thirty and thirty-five, a
lawyer beginning to be well thought of in his profession, with a
thoughtful, pleasant expression and a vigorous physique.

"It seems to me," he continued, slowly, seeking his words, "if John
Baker had stopped to think, he would have acted differently. To be
sure, he saved the life of an innocent child; but, on the other hand,
he robbed of their sole means of support seven other no less innocent
children and their mother. He was a brave man, I agree; but I, for
one, should have admired him more if he had stopped to think."

"And let the child be killed?" exclaimed Mr. Carter, the gentleman who
had deplored so earnestly the decay of ideal considerations. He was a
young mill-treasurer, with aristocratic tendencies, and a strong
interest in church affairs.

"Yes, if need be. It was in danger through no fault of his. Its
natural guardians had neglected it."

"What a frightful view to take!" murmured Mrs. Green; and, although
she was very well acquainted with George Gorham's physiognomy, she
examined him disapprovingly through her glass, as if there must be
something compromising about it which had hitherto escaped detection.

"Well, I don't agree with you at all," said the host, emphatically.

"Nor I," said Mr. Carter.

"Nor I, Mr. Gorham," said Mrs. Lawford, plaintively conveying the
impression that if a woman so ready as she to accept new points of
view abandoned him there could be no chance of his being right.

"No, you're all wrong, my dear fellow," said Caspar Green. "Such ideas
may go down among your long-haired artistic and literary friends at
the Argonaut Club, but you can't expect civilized Christians to accept
them. Why, man, it's monstrous--monstrous, by Jove!--to depreciate
that noble fellow's action--a man we all ought to be proud of, as Miss
Newbury says. If we don't encourage such people, how can we expect
them to be willing to risk their lives?" Thereupon the little broker,
as a relief to his outraged feelings, emptied his champagne-glass at a
draught and scowled irascibly. His jesting equanimity was rarely
disturbed; consequently, everybody felt the importance of his
testimony.

"I'm sorry to be so completely in the minority," said Gorham, "but
that's the way the matter strikes me. I don't think you quite catch my
point, though, Caspar," he added, glancing at Mr. Green. At a less
heated moment the company, with the possible exception of Mrs. Green,
might have tacitly agreed that this was extremely probable; but now
Miss Newbury, who had hitherto refrained from comment, in order to
digest the problem thoroughly before speaking, came to the broker's
aid.

"It seems to me, Mr. Gorham," she said, "that your proposition is a
very plain one: you claim simply that John Baker had better not have
saved the child if, in order to do so, it was necessary to lose his
own life."

"Precisely," exclaimed Mr. Green, in a tone of some contempt.

"Was not Mr. Gorham's meaning that, though it required very great
courage to do what Baker did, a man who stopped to think of his own
wife and children would have shown even greater courage?" asked Miss
Emily Vincent. She was the youngest of the party, a beautiful girl, of
fine presence, with a round face, dark eyes, and brilliant
pink-and-white coloring. She had been invited to stay by the Lawfords
because George Gorham was attentive to her; or, more properly
speaking, George Gorham had been asked because he was attentive to
her.

"Thank you, Miss Vincent: you have expressed my meaning perfectly,"
said Gorham; and his face gladdened. He was dead in love with her, and
this was the first civil word, so to speak, she had said to him during
the visit.

"Do you agree with him?" inquired Miss Newbury, with intellectual
sternness.

"And do you agree with Mr. Gorham?" asked Mrs. Lawford, at the same
moment, caressingly.

All eyes were turned on Emily Vincent, and she let hers fall. She felt
that she would give worlds not to have spoken. Why had she spoken?

"I understand what he means; but I don't believe a man in John Baker's
place could help himself," she said quietly.

"Of course he couldn't!" cried Mrs. Lawford. "There, Mr. Gorham, you
have lost your champion. What have you to say now?" A murmur of
approval went round the table.

"I appreciate my loss, but I fear I have nothing to add to what has
been said already," he replied, with smiling firmness. "Although in a
pitiful minority, I shall have to stand or fall by that."

"Ah, but when it came to action we know that under all circumstances
Mr. Gorham would be his father's son!" said Mrs. Lawford, with less
than her usual tact, though she intended to be very ingratiating.
Gorham's father, who was conspicuous for gallantry, had been killed in
the Civil War.

Gorham bowed a little stiffly, feeling that there was nothing for him
to say. There was a pause, which showed that the topic was getting
threadbare. This prompted the host to call his wife's attention to the
fact that one of the candles was flaring. So the current of
conversation was turned, and the subject was not alluded to again,
thereby anticipating Mr. Carter, who, having caught Miss Newbury's
eye, was about to philosophize further on the same lines.

During the twelve months following his visit at the Lawfords' the
attentions of George Gorham to Emily Vincent became noticeable. He had
loved her for three years in secret; but the consciousness that he was
not able to support a wife had hindered him from devoting himself to
her. He knew that she, or rather her father, had considerable
property; but Gorham was not willing to take this into consideration;
he would never offer himself until his own income was sufficient for
both their needs. But, on the other hand, his ideas of a sufficient
income were not extravagant. He looked forward to building a
comfortable little house in the suburbs in the midst of an acre or two
of garden and lawn, so that his neighbors' windows need not overlook
his domesticity. He would have a horse and buggy wherewith to drive
his wife through the country on summer afternoons, and later, if his
bank-account warranted it, a saddle-horse for Emily and one for
himself. He would keep open house in the sense of encouraging his
friends to visit him; and, that they might like to come, he would have
a thoroughly good plain cook--thereby eschewing French kickashaws--and
his library should contain the best new books, and etchings and
sketches luring to the eye, done by men who were rising, rather than
men who had risen. There should be no formality; his guests should do
what they pleased, and wear what they pleased, and, above all, they
should become intimate with his wife, instead of merely tolerating her
after the manner of the bachelor friends of so many other men.

Thus he had been in the habit of depicting to himself the future, and
at last, by dint of undeviating attention to his business, he had got
to the point where he could afford to realize his project if his
lady-love were willing. His practice was increasing steadily, and he
had laid by a few thousand dollars to meet any unexpected emergency.
His life was insured for fifty thousand dollars, and the policies were
now ten years old. He had every reason to expect that in course of
time as the older lawyers died off he would either succeed to the
lucrative conduct of large suits or be made a judge of one of the
higher tribunals. In this manner his ambition would be amply
satisfied. His aim was to progress slowly but solidly, without splurge
or notoriety, so that every one might regard him as a man of sound
dispassionate judgment, and solid, keen understanding. His especial
antipathy was for so-called cranks--people who went off at half-cock,
who thought nothing out, but were governed by the impulse of the
moment, shilly-shally and controlled by sentimentality.

It was with hope and yet with his heart in his mouth that he set out
one afternoon determined to ask Emily Vincent to become his wife. She
lived in the suburbs, within fifteen minutes by the train, or an
hour's walk from town. Gorham took the cars. It was a beautiful day,
almost the counterpart of that which they had passed together at the
Lawfords' just a year before. As he sat in the train he analyzed the
situation once more for the hundredth time, taking care not to give
himself the advantage of any ambiguous symptoms. Certainly she was not
indifferent to him; she accepted his attentions without demur, and
seemed interested in his interests. But was that love? Was it any more
than esteem or cordial liking, which would turn to pity at the first
hint of affection on his part? But surely she could not plead
ignorance of his intentions; she must long ere this have realized that
he was seriously attentive to her. Still, girls were strange
creatures. He could not help feeling nervous, because so very much was
involved for him in the result. Should she refuse him, he would be and
remain for a long time excessively unhappy. He obliged himself to
regard this alternative, and his heart sank before the possibility.
Not that the idea of dying or doing anything desperate presented
itself to him. Such extravagance would have seemed out of keeping with
respect either for her or for himself. Doubtless he might recover some
day, but the interim would be terribly hard to endure. Rejection meant
a dark, dreary bachelorhood; success, the crowning of his dearest
hopes.

He found his sweetheart at home, and she came down to greet him with
roses that he had sent her in her bosom. It was not easy for him to do
or say anything extravagant, and Emily Vincent, while she might have
pardoned unseemly effusiveness to his exceeding love for her, was well
content with the deeply earnest though unriotous expression of his
passion. When finally he had folded her in his arms she felt that the
greatest happiness existence can give was hers, and he knew himself to
be an utterly blissful lover. He had won the prize for which he had
striven with a pertinacity like Jacob's, and life looked very roseate.

The news was broken to her family that evening, and received
delightedly, though without the surprise which the lovers expected.
They were left alone for a little while before the hour of parting,
and in the sweet kisses given and taken Gorham redeemed himself in his
mistress's estimation for any lack of folly he had been guilty of when
he had asked her to be his wife. There was riot now in his eyes and in
his embraces, revealing that he had needed only to be sure of her
encouragement to become as ridiculous as she could desire. He stood
disclosed to himself in a new light; and when he had kissed her once
more for the last time he went tripping down the lawn radiantly happy,
turning now and again to throw back with his fingers a message from
his lips to the one being in all the world for him, who stood on the
threshold, adding poetry and grace to the beautiful June evening.

When out of sight of the house, Gorham sped fleetly along the road. He
intended to walk to town, for he felt like glorying in his happiness
under the full moon which was shedding her silver light from a clear
heaven. The air was not oppressive, and it was scented with the
perfume of the lilacs and apple-blossoms, so that Gorham was fain
every now and then to draw a deep breath in order to inhale their
fragrance. There was no dust, and nature looked spruce and trig,
without a taint of the frowziness which is observable in the foliage a
month later.

Gorham took very little notice of the details; his eyes were busy
rather with mind-problems than with the particular beauties of the
night; yet his rapt gaze swept the brilliant heavens as though he felt
their lustre to be in harmony with the radiance in his own soul. He
was imagining the future--his hearth forever blessed by her sweet
presence, their mutual joys and sorrows sweetened and alleviated
through being shared. His efforts to live worthily would be fortified
by her example and counsel. How the pleasures of walking and riding
and reading and travelling--of everything in life--would be a
hundredfold enhanced by being able to interchange impressions with
each other! He pictured to himself the cosey evenings they would pass
at home when the day's work was done, and the jolly trips they would
take together when vacation-time arrived. How he would watch over her,
and how he would guard her and tend her and comfort her if misfortune
came or ill health assailed her! There would be little ones, perhaps,
to claim their joint devotion, and bid him redouble his energies; he
smiled at the thought of baby fingers about his neck, and there arose
to his mind's eye a sweet vision of Emily sitting, pale but
triumphant, rocking her new-born child upon her breast.

He walked swiftly on the wings of transport. It was almost as light as
day, yet he met but few travellers along the country road. An
occasional vehicle passed him, breaking the silvery stillness with its
rumble which subsided at last into the distance. A pair of whispering
lovers, arm in arm, who slunk into the shadow as he came abreast of
them, won from him a glance of sympathy. Just after he had left them
behind the shrill whistle of a locomotive jarring upon the silence
seemed to bring him a message from the woman he adored. Had he not
preferred to walk, this was the train he would have taken, and it must
have stopped not many hundred yards from her door. As he listened to
it thundering past almost parallel to him in the cut below he breathed
a prayer of blessing on her rest.

A little beyond this point the road curved and ran at a gradual
incline so as to cross the railroad track at grade about half a mile
farther on. This stretch was lined on each side by horse-chestnut
trees set near to one another, the spreading foliage of which darkened
the gravelled foot-path, so that Gorham, who was enjoying the
moonlight, preferred to keep in the middle of the road, which, by way
of contrast, gleamed almost like a river. He was pursuing his way with
elastic steps, when of a sudden his attention was arrested about a
hundred and fifty yards from the crossing by something lying at the
foot of one of the trees on the right-hand side. At a second glance he
saw that it was a woman's figure. Probably she was asleep: but she
might be ill or injured. It was a lonely spot, so it occurred to him
that it was proper for him to investigate. Accordingly, he stepped to
her side and bent over her. From her calico dress, which was her only
covering, she evidently belonged to the laboring class. She was a
large, coarse-looking woman, and was lying, in what appeared to Gorham
to be drunken slumber, on her bonnet, the draggled strings of which
caught his eye. He hesitated a moment, and then shook her by the arm.
She groaned boozily, but after he had shaken her again two or three
times she rolled over and raised herself on her elbow, rubbing her
eyes and staring at him glassily.

"Are you hurt, woman?" he asked.

She made a guttural response which might have meant anything, but she
proved that she was uninjured by getting on her feet. She stared at
her disturber bewilderedly, then, perceiving her bonnet, stooped to
pick it up, and stood for a moment trying sleepily to poke it into
shape and readjust its tawdry plumage. But all of a sudden she gave a
start and began looking around her with recovered energy. She missed
something, evidently. Gorham followed the direction of her gaze as it
shifted, and as his glance met the line of the road he perceived a
little figure standing in the middle of the railway crossing. It was a
child--her child, without doubt--and as he said so to himself the roar
of an approaching train, coupled with the sound of the whistle, made
him start with horror. The late express from town was due. Gorham
remembered that there was a considerable curve in the railroad at this
point. The woman had not perceived the situation--she was too far in
the shade--but Gorham from where he stood commanded a clear view of
the track.

Without an instant's hesitation, he sprang forward and ran at full
speed. His first thought was that the train was very near. He ran with
all his might and main, his eyes fixed on the little white figure, and
shouting to warn it of its danger. Suddenly there flashed before his
mind with vividness the remembrance of John Baker, and he recalled his
argument at the Lawfords'. But he did not abate his speed. The child
had plumped itself down on one of the sleepers, and was apparently
playing with some pebbles. It was on the farther track, and, startled
by his cries and by the clang of the approaching train, looked up at
him. He saw a pale, besmeared little countenance; he heard behind him
the agonizing screams of the mother, who had realized her baby's
peril; in his ears rang the shrill warning of the engineer as the
engine rounded the curve. Would he be in time?

As he reached the edge of the tracks, thought of Emily and a terrible
consciousness of the sorrow she would feel if anything were to happen
to him compressed his heart. But he did not falter. He was aware of
the jangle of a fiercely rung bell, the hiss of steam, and a blinding
glare; he could feel on his cheek the breath of the iron monster. With
set teeth he threw himself forward, stooped, and reached out over the
rail: in another instant he had tossed the child from the pathway of
danger, and he himself had been mangled to death by the powerful
engine.




ST. GEORGE AND THE DRAGON


Paul Harrington, the reporter, shifted his eagle glance from one
feature to another of the obsequies with the comprehensive yet swift
perception of an artist. An experience of three years on the staff had
made him an expert on ceremonies, and, captious as he could be when
the occasion merited his scorn, his predilection was for praise, as he
was an optimist by instinct. This time he could praise unreservedly,
and he was impatient to transfer to the pages of his note-book his
seething impressions of the solemn beauty and simplicity of the last
rites in the painful tragedy. In the rustic church into which he had
wormed his way he had already found time to scribble a brief paragraph
to the effect that the melancholy event had "shrouded the picturesque
little town of Carver in gloom," and now as he stood on the greensward
near, though not too near, he hastily jotted down the points of
interest with keen anticipation of working out some telling
description on the way home.

Out from the little church where the families of the pair of lovers
had worshipped in summer time for a generation, the two coffins, piled
high with flowers (Harrington knew them reportorially as caskets),
were borne by the band of pall-bearers, stalwart young intimate
friends, and lifted by the same hands tenderly into the hearse. The
long blackness of their frock-coats and the sable accompaniment of
their silk hats, gloves, and ties appealed to the observant faculties
of Harrington as in harmony both with the high social position of the
parties and the peculiar sadness of the occasion. That a young man and
woman, on the eve of matrimony, and with everything to live for,
should be hurled into eternity (a Harringtonian figure of speech) by a
railroad train at a rustic crossing, while driving, was certainly an
affair heartrending enough to invite every habiliment of woe. As he
thus reasoned Harrington became aware that one of the stalwart young
men was looking at him with an expression which seemed to ask only too
plainly, "What the devil are you doing here?"

As a newspaper man of some years' standing Harrington was hardened.
Such an expression of countenance was an almost daily experience and
slipped off the armor of his self-respecting hardihood like water off
the traditional duck's back. When people looked at him like this he
simply took refuge in his consciousness of the necessities of the case
and the honesty of his own artistic purpose. The press must be served
faithfully and indefatigably--boldly, moreover, and at times
officiously, in order to attain legitimate results; yet he flattered
himself that no one could ever say of him that he had "butted in"
where others of his craft would have paused, or was lacking in
reportorial delicacy. Was he not simply doing his professional duty
for hire, like any respectable lawyer or doctor or architect, in order
to support his family? Were he to trouble his head because impetuous
people frowned, his wife, Amelia, and infant son, Tesla, would be the
sufferers--a thought which was a constant stimulus to enterprise. His
"job" required "cheek" perhaps, but nine people out of ten were not
sensible enough to realize that he was a modern necessity, and to ask
themselves, "Is this man doing his work creditably?" There was the
essence of the situation for Harrington, and from the world's lack of
nice perception he had made for himself a grievance which rendered him
indifferent to ill-considered scowls.

But, however indifferent his attitude, nothing ever escaped
Harrington, and he noticed that the young man whose eyes met his with
the expression of annoyance was well set up and manly in appearance--a
"dude," in Harrington's parlance, but a pleasant-looking dude, with an
open and rather strong countenance. Such was Harrington's deduction,
in spite of the obvious hostility to himself, and in confirmation of
this view he had the satisfaction of perceiving the tension of the
young man's face relax, as though he had come to the conclusion, on
second thoughts, that interference was, on the whole, not worth while.

"He realizes," said the reporter to himself approvingly, "that there's
no sense in being peevish. A swell funeral must be written up like any
other society function."

While he thus soliloquized, the nearest relatives of the deceased
victims issued from the church, seeking the carriages in waiting for
them. Among those who came next was a handsome, spirited-looking girl
of twenty-five, who, though not of the family group, was a sincere
mourner. As she stepped forward with the elasticity of youth, glad of
the fresh air on her tear-stained cheeks, it happened that she also
observed the presence of the reporter, and she paused, plainly
appalled. Her nostrils quivered with horrified distress, and she
turned her head as though seeking some one. It proved to be the young
man who had misjudged Harrington a few moments before. At least, he
sprang to her side with an agility which suggested that his eyes had
been following her every movement, thereby prompting Harrington, who
was ever on the alert for a touch of romance amid the prose of
every-day business, to remark shrewdly:

"That's plain as the nose on your face; he's her 'steady.'"

He realized at the same time that he was being pointed out in no
flattering terms by the young lady in question, who cast a single
haughty glance in his direction by way of identification. He saw her
eyes flash, and, though the brief dialogue which ensued was
necessarily inarticulate to him, it was plain that she was laying her
outraged feelings at the feet of her admirer, with a command for
something summary and substantial by way of relief.

At any rate, Harrington jumped at once to this conclusion, for he
murmured: "She's telling him I'm the scum of the earth, and that it's
up to him to get rid of me." He added, sententiously: "She'll find, I
guess, that this is about the most difficult billet a fair lady ever
intrusted to a gallant knight." Whereupon, inspired by his metaphor,
he proceeded to hum under his breath, by way of outlet to his amused
sensibilities, the dulcet refrain which runs:

  In days of old, when knights were bold
    And barons held their sway,
  A warrior bold, with spurs of gold.
    Sang merrily his lay,
    Sang merrily his lay:
    "My love is young and fair,
    My love hath golden hair,
 And eyes so blue and heart so true
   That none with her compare.
 So what care I, though death be nigh?
   I'll live for love or die!
 So what care I, though death be nigh,
   I'll live for love or die!"

What was going to happen? How would Sir Knight set to work to slay or
expel the obnoxious dragon? Harrington felt mildly curious despite his
sardonic emotions, and while he took mental note of what was taking
place around him he contrived to keep an eye on his censors. He had
observed that the young man's face while she talked to him had worn a
worried expression, as though he were already meditating whether the
situation was not hopeless unless he had recourse to personal
violence; but, having put his Dulcinea into her carriage, he appeared
to be in no haste to begin hostilities. Indeed, without further ado,
or even a glance in Harrington's direction, he took his place in the
line of mourners which was moving toward the neighboring cemetery.

Harrington was for a moment divided in his own mind between the claims
of reportorial delicacy and proper self-respect. It had been his
intention to absent himself from the services at the grave, out of
consideration for the immediate family. It occurred to him now that it
was almost his duty to show himself there, in order not to avoid a
meeting. But the finer instinct prevailed. Why allow what was, after
all, nothing save ignorant disapproval to alter his arrangements? He
had just time to walk leisurely to the station without overheating
himself, and delay would oblige him to take a later train, as there
was no vehicle at his disposal.

Consequently, after his brief hesitation, he followed a high-road at
right angles to that taken by the funeral procession, and gave himself
up to the beguilement of his own thoughts. They were concerned with
the preparation of his special article, and he indulged in the
reflection that if it were read by the couple who had looked at him
askance they would be put to shame by its accuracy and good taste.

Before Harrington had finished three-quarters of the distance which
lay between the church and his destination, the carriages of those
returning from the cemetery began to pass him. When the dust raised by
their wheels had subsided he looked for an undisturbed landscape
during the remainder of his walk, and had just given rein again to
contemplation when a sound which revealed unmistakably the approach of
an automobile caused him to turn his head. A touring car of large
dimensions and occupied by two persons was approaching at a moderate
rate of speed, which the driver, who was obviously the owner, reduced
to a minimum as he ran alongside him.

"May I give you a lift?" asked a strong, friendly voice.

Before the question was put Harrington had recognized in the speaker
the young man whose mission it had become, according to his shrewd
guess, to call him to account for his presence at the funeral. He had
exchanged his silk hat for a cap, and drawn on a white dust-coat over
his other sable garments, but his identity was unmistakable. Viewing
him close at hand Harrington perceived that he had large, clear eyes,
a smooth-shaven, humorous, determined mouth, and full ruddy cheeks,
the immobility of which suggested the habit of deliberation.
Physically and temperamentally he appeared to be the antipodes of the
reporter, who was thin, nervous, and wiry, with quick, snappy ways and
electric mental processes. It occurred to him now at once that the
offer concealed a trap, and he recalled, knowingly, the warning
contained in the classical adage concerning Greeks who bear gifts.
But, on the other hand, what had he to fear or to apologize for?
Besides, there was his boy Tesla to consider. How delighted the little
fellow, who already doted on electricity, would be to hear that his
father had ridden in a huge touring car! He would be glad, too, of the
experience himself, in order to compare the sensation with that of
travelling in the little puffing machines with which he was tolerably
familiar. Therefore he answered civilly, yet without enthusiasm:

"I don't mind if you do, as far as the station."

At his words the chauffeur at a sign made place for him, and he
stepped in beside his pseudo-enemy, who, as he turned on the power,
met Harrington's limitation as to distance with the remark:

"I'm going all the way to New York, if you care to go with me."

Harrington was tempted again. Apart from the peculiar circumstances of
the case he would like nothing better. Then, why not? What had he or
his self-respect to dread from a trip with this accommodating dude? He
would hardly sandbag him, and were he--Harrington grinned inwardly at
the cunning thought--intending to have the machine break down in an
inaccessible spot, and leave him stranded, what difference would it
make? His article was too late already for the evening papers, and he
would take excellent care to see that nothing should interfere with
its appearance the following morning, for at a pinch he was within
walking distance of the city. The thought of such an attempt to muzzle
the liberty of the press was rather an incentive than otherwise, for
it savored of real adventure and indicated that a moral issue was
involved.

While he thus reflected he appeared not to have heard the observation.
Meanwhile the automobile was running swiftly and smoothly, as though
its owner were not averse to have his guest perceive what a superb
machine it was.

"What make?" asked the reporter, wishing to show himself affable, yet
a man of the world. He had come to the conclusion that if the
invitation were repeated he would accept it.

His companion told him, and as though he divined that the inquiry had
been intended to convey admiration, added, "She's going now only at
about half her speed."

Harrington grinned inwardly again. "Springes to catch woodcock!" he
said to himself, quoting Shakespeare, then went on to reflect in his
own vernacular: "The chap is trying to bribe me, confound him! Well,
here goes!" Thereupon he said aloud, for they were approaching the
station: "If you really would like my company on the way to town I'd
be glad to see how fast she can go." As he spoke he drew out his watch
and added with suppressed humorous intention: "I suppose you'll
guarantee to get me there in a couple of hours or so?"

"If we don't break down or are not arrested." The voice was gay and
without a touch of sinister suggestion.

"Here's a deep one, maybe," thought Harrington.

Already the kidnapper--if he were one--was steering the car into a
country way which diverged at a sharp curve from that in which they
had been travelling. It was a smooth, level stretch, running at first
almost parallel with the railroad, and in another moment they were
spinning along at a hair-lifting rate of speed, yet with so little
friction that the reporter's enthusiasm betrayed itself in a grunt of
satisfaction, though he was reflecting that his companion knew the way
and did not intend to allow him to change his mind. But Harrington was
quite content with the situation, and gave himself up unreservedly to
the pleasant thrill of skimming along the surface of the earth at such
a pace that the summer breeze buffeted his face so that his eyes
watered. There was nothing in sight but a clear, straight road flanked
by hedges and ditches, save the railroad bed, along which after a
while the train came whizzing. A pretty race ensued until it crossed
their path at almost a right angle.

"Now he thinks he has me," thought Harrington.

It almost seemed so, for in another moment he of the humorous,
determined mouth diminished the power, and after they were on the
other side of the railroad track he proceeded at a much less strenuous
pace and opened conversation.

"You're a reporter, I judge?"

Harrington, who was enjoying himself, would have preferred to avoid
business for a little longer and to talk as one gentleman to another
on a pleasure trip. So, in response to this direct challenge, he
answered with dry dignity:

"Yes. I have the honor of representing the Associated Press."

"One of the great institutions of the country."

This was reasonable--so reasonable, indeed, that Harrington pondered
it to detect some sophistry.

"It must be in many respects an interesting calling."

"Yes, sir; a man has to keep pretty well up to date."

"Married or single, if I may be so bold?"

"I have a wife and a son nine years old."

"That is as it should be. Lucky dog!"

Harrington laughed in approval of the sentiment. "Then I must assume
that you are a bachelor, Mr. ---- ?"

"Dryden. Walter Dryden is my name. Yes, that's the trouble."

"She won't have you?" hazarded the reporter, wishing to be social in
his turn.

"Exactly."

"Mrs. Harrington would not the first time I asked her."

"I have offered myself to her six separate times, and she has thus far
declined."

Harrington paused a moment. The temptation to reveal his own
astuteness, and at the same time enhance the personal flavor which the
dialogue had acquired, was not to be resisted. "May I venture to ask
if she is the lady with whom you exchanged a few words this forenoon
at the door of the church?"

The young man turned his glance from the road toward his questioner by
way of tribute to such acumen. "I see that nothing escapes your
observation."

"It is my business to notice everything and to draw my own
conclusions," said the reporter modestly.

"They are shrewdly correct in this case. Would you be surprised,"
continued Dryden in a confidential tone, "if I were to inform you that
I believe it lies in your power to procure me a home and happiness?"

Harrington chuckled in his secret soul. He would dissemble. "How could
that possibly be?"

"I don't mind telling you that the last time I offered myself the
young lady appeared a trifle less obdurate. She shook her head, but I
thought I observed signs of wavering--faint, yet appreciable. If now I
could only put her under an obligation and thus convince her of my
effectiveness, I am confident I could win her."

"Your effectiveness?" queried Harrington, to whom the interview was
becoming more psychologically interesting every moment.

"Yes, she considers me an unpractical person--not serious, you know. I
know what you consider me," he added with startling divergence--"a
dude."

Harrington found this searchlight on his own previous thought
disconcerting. "Well, aren't you one?" he essayed boldly.

Dryden pondered a moment. "I suppose so. I don't wear reversible cuffs
and I am disgustingly rich. I've shot tigers in India, lived in the
Latin quarter, owned a steam yacht, climbed San Juan Hill--but I have
not found a permanent niche. There are not places enough to go round
for men with millions, and she calls me a rolling stone. Come, now,
I'll swap places with you. You shall own this motor and--and I'll
write the press notice on the Ward-Upton funeral."

Harrington stiffened instinctively. He did not believe that the
amazing, splendid offer was genuine. But had he felt complete faith
that the young man beside him was in earnest, he would have been proof
against the lure of even a touring car, for he had been touched at his
most sensitive point. His artistic capacity was assailed, and his was
just the nature to take proper umbrage at the imputation. More; over,
though this was a minor consideration, he resented slightly the
allusion to reversible cuffs. Hence the answer sprang to his lips:

"Can you not trust me to write the notice, Mr. Dryden?"

"She would like me to write it."

"Ah, I see! Was that what she whispered to you this morning?"

Dryden hesitated. "Certainly words to that effect. Let me ask you in
turn, can you not trust me? If so, the automobile is yours and----"

Harrington laughed coldly. "I'm sorry not to oblige you, Mr. Dryden.
If you understood my point of view you would see that what you propose
is out of the question. I was commissioned to write up the Ward-Upton
obsequies, and I alone must do so."

As he spoke they were passing at a lively gait through the
picturesquely shaded main street of a small country town and were
almost abreast of the only tavern of the place, which wore the
appearance of having been recently remodelled and repainted to meet
the demands of modern road travel.

"Your point of view? What is your point of view?"

Before Harrington had time to begin to put into speech the statement
of his principles there was a sudden loud explosion beneath them like
the discharge of a huge pistol, and the machine came abruptly to a
stop. So unexpected and startling was the shock that the reporter
sprang from the car and in his nervous annoyance at once vented the
hasty conclusion at which he arrived in the words: "I see; this is a
trap, and you are a modern highwayman whose stunt will make good
Sunday reading in cold print." He wore a sarcastic smile, and his
sharp eyes gleamed like a ferret's.

Dryden regarded him humorously with his steady gaze. "Gently there;
it's only a tire gone. Do you suspect me of trying to trifle with the
sacred liberties of the press?"

"I certainly did, sir. It looks very much like it."

"Then you agree that I chose a very inappropriate place for my
purpose. 'The Old Homestead' there is furnished with a telephone, a
livery-stable, and all the modern protections against highway robbery.
Besides, there is a cold chicken and a bottle of choice claret in the
basket with which to supplement the larder of our host of the inn. We
will take luncheon while my chauffeur is placing us on an even keel
again, and no time will be lost. You will even have ten minutes in
which to put pen to paper while the table is being laid."

Harrington as a nervous man was no less promptly generous in his
impulses when convinced of error than he was quick to scent out a
hostile plot. "I beg your pardon, Mr. Dryden. I see I was mistaken."
He thrust out a lean hand by way of amity. "Can't I help?"

"Oh, no, thank you. My man will attend to everything."

"You see I got the idea to begin with and then the explosion following
so close upon your offer----"

"Quite so," exclaimed Dryden. "A suspicious coincidence, I admit." He
shook the proffered fingers without a shadow of resentment. "I dare
say my dust-coat and goggles give me quite the highwayman effect," he
continued jollily.

"They sort of got on my nerves, I guess." Under the spell of his
generous impulse various bits of local color flattering to his
companion began to suggest themselves to Harrington for his article,
and he added: "I'll take advantage of that suggestion of yours and get
to work until luncheon is ready."

Some fifteen minutes later they were seated opposite to each other at
an appetizing meal. As Dryden finished his first glass of claret, he
asked:

"Did you know Richard Upton?"

"The man who was killed? Not personally. But I have read about him in
the society papers."

"Ah!" There was a deep melancholy in the intonation which caused the
reporter to look at his companion a little sharply. For a moment
Dryden stirred in his chair as though about to make some comment, and
twisted the morsel of bread at his fingers' ends into a small pellet.
But he poured out another glass of claret for each of them and said:

"He was the salt of the earth."

"Tell me about him. I should be glad to know. I might----"

"There's so little to tell--it was principally charm. He was one of
the most unostentatious, unselfish, high-minded, consistent men I ever
knew. Completely a gentleman in the finest sense of that overworked
word."

"That's very interesting. I should be glad----"

Dryden shook his head. "You didn't know him well enough. It was like
the delicacy of the rose--finger it and it falls to pieces. No offence
to you, of course. I doubt my own ability to do him justice, well as I
knew him. But you put a stopper on that--and you were right. My kind
regards," he said, draining his second glass of claret. "The laborer
is worthy of his hire, the artist must not be interfered with. It was
an impertinence of me to ask to do your work."

Harrington's eyes gleamed. "It's pleasant to be appreciated--to have
one's point of view comprehended. It isn't pleasant to butt in where
you're not wanted, but there's something bigger than that involved,
the----"

"Quite so; it was a cruel bribe; and many men in your shoes would not
have been proof against it."

"And you were in dead earnest, too, though for a moment I couldn't
believe it. But the point is--and that's what I mean--that the
public--gentlemen like you and ladies like the handsome one who looked
daggers at me this morning--don't realize that the world is bound to
have the news on its breakfast-table and supper-table, and that when a
man is in the business and knows his business and is trying to do the
decent thing and the acceptable artistic thing, too, if I do say it,
he is entitled to be taken seriously and--and trusted. There are
incompetent men--rascals even--in my calling. What I contend is that
you'd no right to assume that I wouldn't do the inevitable thing
decently merely because you saw me there. For, if you only knew it, I
was saying to myself at that very moment that for a funeral it was the
most tastefully handled I ever attended."

"It is the inevitable thing; that's just it. My manners were bad to
begin to with, and later--" Dryden leaned forward with his elbows on
the table and his head between his hands, scanning his eager
companion.

"Don't mention it. You see, it was a matter of pride with me. And now
it's up to me to state that if there's anything in particular you'd
like me to mention about the deceased gentleman or lady----"

Dryden sighed at the reminder, "One of the loveliest and most
pure-hearted of women."

"That shall go down," said the reporter, mistaking the apostrophe for
an answer, and he drew a note-book from his side pocket.

Dryden raised his hand by way of protest. "I was merely thinking
aloud. No, we must trust you."

Harrington bowed. He hesitated, then by way of noticing the plural
allusion in the speech added: "It was your young lady's look which
wounded me the most. And she said something. I don't suppose you'd
care to tell me what she said? It wasn't flattering, I'm sure of that,
but it was on the tip of her tongue. I admit I'm mildly curious as to
what it was."

Dryden reflected a moment. "You've written your article?" he asked,
indicating the note-book.

"It's all mapped out in my mind, and I've finished the introduction."

"I won't ask to see it because we trust you. But I'll make a compact
with you." Dryden held out a cigar to his adversary and proceeded to
light one for himself. "Supposing what the lady said referred to
something which you have written there, would you agree to cut it
out?"

Harrington looked gravely knowing. "You think you can tell what I have
written?" he asked, tapping his note-book.

Dryden took a puff. "Very possibly not. I am merely supposing. But in
case the substance of her criticism--for she did criticise--should
prove to be almost word for word identical with something in your
handwriting--would you agree?"

Harrington shrugged his shoulders. "Against the automobile as a stake,
if it proves not to be?" he inquired by way of expressing his
incredulity.

"Gladly."

"Let it be rather against another luncheon with you as agreeable as
this."

"Done. I will write her exact language here on this piece of paper and
then we will exchange copy."

Harrington sat pleasantly amused, yet puzzled, while Dryden wrote and
folded the paper. Then he proffered his note-book with nervous
alacrity. "Read aloud until you come to the place," he said jauntily.

Dryden scanned for a moment the memoranda, then looked up. "It is all
here at the beginning, just as she prophesied," he said, with a
promptness which was almost radiant, and he read as follows: "The dual
funeral of Miss Josephine Ward, the leading society girl, and Richard
Upton, the well-known club man, took place this morning at--" He
paused and said: "Read now what you have there."

Harrington flushed, then scowled, but from perplexity. He was seeking
enlightenment before he proceeded further, so he unfolded the paper
with a deliberation unusual to him, which afforded time to Dryden to
remark with clear precision:

"Those were her very words."

Harrington read aloud: "'Look at that man; he is taking notes. Oh, he
will describe them in his newspaper as a leading society girl and a
well-known club man, and they will turn in their graves. If you love
me, stop it.'"

There was a brief pause. The reporter pondered, visibly chagrined and
disappointed. The silence was broken by Dryden. "Do you not
understand?" he inquired.

"Frankly, I do not altogether. I--I thought they'd like it."

"Of course you did, my dear fellow; there's the ghastly humor of it;
the dire tragedy, rather." As he spoke he struck his closed hand
gently but firmly on the table, and regarded the reporter with the
compressed lips of one who is about to vent a long pent-up grievance.

"He was in four clubs; I looked him up," Harrington still protested in
dazed condition.

"And they seemed to you his chief title to distinction? You thought
they did him honor? He would have writhed in his grave, as Miss
Mayberry said. Like it? When the cheap jack or the social climber
dies, he may like it, but not the gentleman or lady. Leading society
girl? Why, every shop-girl who commits suicide is immortalized in the
daily press as 'a leading society girl,' and every deceased Tom, Dick,
or Harry has become a 'well-known club man.' It has added a new terror
to death. Thank God, my friends will be spared!"

Harrington felt of his chin. "You object to the promiscuity of it, so
to speak. It's because everybody is included?"

"No, man, to the fundamental indignity of it. To the baseness of the
metal which the press glories in using for a social crown."

Harrington drew himself up a little. "If the press does it, it's
because most people like it and regard it as a tribute."

"Ah! But my friends do not. You spoke just now of your point of view.
This is ours. Think it over, Mr. Harrington, and you will realize that
there is something in it." He sat back in his chair with the air of a
man who has pulled victory out of the jaws of defeat and is well
content.

Harrington meditated a moment. "However that be, one thing is
certain--it has got to come out. It will come out. You may rest
assured of that, Mr. Dryden." So saying he reached for his note-book
and proceeded to run a pencil through the abnoxious paragraph.

"You have won your bet and--and the young lady, too, Sir Knight, I
trust. You seem to have found your niche." Which goes to prove that
the reporter was a magnanimous fellow at heart.

Dryden forbore to commit himself as to the condition of his hopes as
he thanked his late adversary for this expression of good-will. Ten
minutes later they were sitting in the rehabilitated motor-car and
speeding rapidly toward New York. When they reached the city Dryden
insisted on leaving the reporter at his doorsteps, a courtesy which
went straight to Harrington's heart, for, as he expected would be the
case, his wife and son Tesla were looking out of the window at the
moment of his arrival and saw him dash up to the curbstone. His sturdy
urchin ran out forthwith to inspect the mysteries of the huge machine.
As it vanished down the street Harrington put an arm round Tesla and
went to meet the wife of his bosom.

"Who is your new friend, Paul?" she asked.

It rose to Harrington's lips to say--an hour before he would have said
confidently--"a well-known club man"; but he swallowed the phrase
before it was uttered and answered thoughtfully:

"It was one of the funeral guests, who gave me a lift in his motor,
and has taught me a thing or two about modern journalism on the way
up. I got stung."

"I thought you knew everything there is to know about that," remarked
Mrs. Harrington with the fidelity of a true spouse.

To this her husband at the moment made no response. When, six months
later, however, he received an invitation to the wedding of Walter
Dryden and Miss Florence Mayberry, he remarked in her presence, as he
sharpened his pencil for the occasion: "Those swells have trusted me
to write it up after all."




THE ROMANCE OF A SOUL


When Marion Willis became a schoolmistress in the Glendale public
school at twenty-two she regarded her employment as a transient
occupation, to be terminated presently by marriage. She possessed an
imaginative temperament, and one of her favorite and most satisfying
habits was to evoke from the realm of the future a proper hero,
shining with zeal and virtue like Sir Galahad, in whose arms she would
picture herself living happily ever after a sweet courtship,
punctuated by due maidenly hesitation. This fondness for letting her
fancy run riot and evolve visions splendid with happenings for her own
advancement and gladness was not confined to matrimonial day-dreams.
On the morning when she entered the school-house door for the first
time the eyes of her mind saw the curtain which veils the years
divide, and she beheld herself a famous educator, still young, but
long since graduated from primary teaching. She forgot the vision of
her Sir Galahad there. Nor were the circumstances of her several
day-dreams necessarily consistent in other respects. It sufficed for
her spiritual exaltation that they should be merely a fairy-like
manifestation in her own favor. But though she loved to give her
imagination rein, the fairy-like quality of these visions was patent
to Miss Willis, for she possessed a quiet sense of humor as a sort of
east-wind supplementary to the sentimental and poetic properties of
her nature. She had a way of poking fun at herself, which, when
exercised, sent the elfin figures scattering with a celerity
suggestive of the departure of her own pupils at the tinkle of the
bell for dismissal. Then she was left alone with her humor and her New
England conscience, that stern adjuster of real values and enemy of
spiritual dissipation. This same conscience was a vigilant monitor in
the matter of her school-teaching, despite Miss Willis's reasonable
hope that Sir Galahad would claim her soon. The hope would have been
reasonable in the case of any one of her sex, for every woman is said
to be given at least one opportunity to become a wife; but in the case
of Miss Willis nature had been more than commonly bounteous. She was
not a beauty, but she was sweet and fresh-looking, with clear, honest
eyes, and a cheery, gracious manner such as is apt to captivate
discerning men. She was one of those wholesome spirits, earnest and
refined, yet prone to laughter, which do not remain long unmated in
the ordinary course of human experience. But her conscience did not
permit her to dwell on this advantage to the detriment of her
scholars.

Miss Willis lived at home with her mother. They owned their small
house. The other expenses were defrayed from the daughter's salary;
hence strict economy was obligatory, and the expenditure of every
five-dollar bill was a matter of moment. Miss Willis's father had died
when she was a baby. The meagre sum of money which he left had
sufficed to keep his widow and only child from want until Marion's
majority. All had been spent except the house; but, as Miss Willis now
proudly reflected, she had become a breadwinner, and her mother's
declining years were shielded from poverty. They would be able to
manage famously until Sir Galahad arrived, and when he came one of the
joys of her surrender would be that her mother's old age would be
brightened by a few luxuries.

Glendale, as its name denotes, had been a rustic village. When Miss
Willis was engaged (to teach school, not to be married) it was a
thriving, bustling, overgrown, manufacturing town already yearning to
become a city. By the end of another five years Glendale had realized
its ambition, and Miss Willis was still a teacher in its crowded
grammar-school. How the years creep, yet how they fly, when one is
busy with regular, routine employment! The days are such a repetition
of each other that they sometimes seem very long, but when one pauses
and looks back one starts at the accumulation of departed time, and
deplores the swiftness of the seasons.

Five years had but slightly dimmed the freshness of Miss Willis's
charms. She was as comely as ever. She was a trifle stouter, a trifle
less girlish in manner, and only a trifle--what shall we call
it?--wilted in appearance. The close atmosphere of a school-room is
not conducive to rosiness of complexion; and the constant strain of
guiding over forty immature minds in the paths of knowledge will weigh
upon the flesh, though the soul be patient and the heart light. Miss
Willis's class comprised the children whose average age was twelve to
thirteen--those who had been in the school three years. There were
both boys and girls, and they remained with her a year. She had begun
with the youngest children, but promotion had presently established
her in this position.

Forty immature minds--minds just groping on the threshold of life--to
be watched, shaped, and helped for ten months, and their individual
needs treated with sympathy and patience. For ten months--the school
term,--then to be exchanged for a new batch, and so from year to year.
Glendale's manufacturing population included several nationalities, so
that the little army of scholars which sat under Miss Willis's eye
included Poles, Italians, negroes, and now and then a youthful
Chinaman, as well as the sons and daughters of the merchant, the
tailor, the butcher, and baker, and other citizens whose title as
Americans was of older date. It was not easy to keep the atmosphere of
such a school-room wholesome, for the apparel of the poorest children,
though often well darned, was not always clean, and the ventilating
apparatus represented a political job. But it was Miss Willis's pride
that she knew the identity of every one of her boys and girls, and
carried it by force of love and will written on her brain as well as
on the desk-tablets which she kept as a safeguard against possible
lapses of memory. She loved her classes, and it was a grief to her at
first to be obliged to pass them on at the end of the school year. But
habit reconciles us to the inevitable, and she presently learned to
steel her heart against a too sensitive point of view in this respect,
and to supplement the bleeding ties thus rudely severed with a fresh
set without crying her eyes out. Yet though faithful teachers are thus
schooled to forget, they rarely do, and Miss Willis found herself
keeping track, in her mind's eye, of her little favorites--some of
them youthful reprobates--in their progress up the ladder of knowledge
and out into the world.

But what of Sir Galahad? He had dallied, but about this time--the
sixth year of her life as a teacher--he appeared. Not as she had
imagined him--a lover of great personal distinction, amazing talents,
compelling virtues, and large estates; yet, nevertheless, a
presentable being in trousers, whose devotion touched her maidenly
heart until it reciprocated the passion which his lips expressed. He
was a young bookkeeper in a banker's office, with a taste for literary
matters and a respectable gift for private theatricals. A small social
club was the medium by which they became intimate. Sir Galahad was
refined in appearance and bearing, a trifle too delicate for perfect
manliness, yet, as Miss Willis's mother justly observed, a gentle soul
to live with. He had a taste for poetry, and a sentimental vein which
manifested itself in verses of a Wordsworthian simplicity descriptive
of his lady-love's charms. No wonder Marion fell in love with him, and
renounced, without even a sigh of regret, her vision of a husband with
lordly means. Sir Galahad had only his small means, which were not
enough for a matrimonial venture. They would wait in the hope that
some opportunity for preferment would present itself. So for three
years--years when she was in the heyday of her comeliness--they
attended the social club as an engaged couple, and fed their mutual
passion on the poets and occasional chaste embraces. Marion felt sure
that something would happen before long to redeem the situation and
establish her Sir Galahad in the seat to which his merit entitled him.
Her favorite vision was of some providential catastrophe, even an
epidemic or wholesale maiming, by which the partners of the
banking-house and all in authority over her lover should be
temporarily incapacitated, and the entire burden of the business be
thrown on his shoulders long enough to demonstrate his true worth. As
a sequel she beheld him promptly admitted to partnership and herself
blissfully married.

The course of events did not respect her vision. After they had been
engaged nearly four years Sir Galahad came to the conclusion one day
that the only hope of establishing himself in business on his own
account was (to repeat his own metaphor) to seize the bull by the
horns and go West. Marion bravely and enthusiastically seconded his
resolution, and fired his spirit by her own prophecy as to his rapid
success. Western real estate for Eastern investors was the line of
business to which Sir Galahad decided to fasten his hopes. He set
forth upon his crusade protesting that within a twelvemonth he would
win a home for Marion and her mother in the fashionable quarter of St.
Paul, Minn., and carrying in his valise a toilet-case tastefully
embroidered by his sweetheart, in a corner of which were emblazoned
two hearts beating as one.

Marion returned to her scholars more than ever convinced that her
employment was but a transient occupation. What followed was this: Sir
Galahad put out his sign as a broker in Western real estate for
Eastern investors, and fifteen months slipped away before he earned
more than his bare living expenses. He had carried with him his poetic
tastes and his gift for private theatricals. The first of these he
exercised in his fond letters home; the second he employed for the
entertainment of the social club in St. Paul, to which he presently
obtained admittance. By the end of the second year he was doing better
financially, but his letters to Marion had become less frequent and
less frank in regard to his own circumstances and doings. There came a
letter at last from Sir Galahad--a letter of eight pages of soul
stress and sorrow, as he would have called it, and of disingenuous
wriggling, as the world would call it--in which he explained as
delicately as was possible under the circumstances that his love for
Miss Willis had become the love of a brother for a sister, and that he
was engaged to be married to Miss Virginia Crumb, the only daughter of
Hon. Cephas I. Crumb, owner and treasurer of the Astarte Metal Works,
of Minnesota. Exit Sir Galahad! And following his perfidy Marion's
imagination evoked a vision of revenge in which she figured as the
plaintiff in a breach-of-promise suit, and had the fierce yet
melancholy joy of confronting him and his new love face to face before
a sympathizing judge and jury. But her New England conscience and her
sense of humor combined disposed of this vision in a summary fashion,
so that she let Sir Galahad off with the assurance that it was a
happiness to her that he had discovered how little he cared before it
was too late. Then her New England conscience bade her settle down to
her teaching with a grim courage, and be thankful that she had never
been unfaithful to her work. Also her sense of humor told her that she
must not assume all men to be false because Sir Galahad had been. It
was then, when she needed him sorely, that destiny introduced on the
scene Jimmy.

Jimmy was no Sir Galahad. He was a chunky, round-faced school-boy with
brown hair, which, when it had not been cut for a month, blossomed
into close, curly tangles. At first sight Jimmy was dull-eyed, and in
the class his mental processes were so slow that he had already
acquired among his mates the reputation of being stupid. The teacher
who had taught him last confided to Miss Willis that she feared Jimmy
was hopeless. Hopeless! Somehow the word went to Marion's heart. Not
that she was hopeless; far from it, she would have told you. But her
sense of humor did not conceal from her that in spite of her
grin-and-bear-it mien, she was far from happy. At any rate, the
suggestion that Jimmy was hopeless awoke a sympathetic chord in her
breast, so that she looked at him more tenderly on the day after she
had been told. Jimmy was slow of speech and rather dirty as to his
face. There were warts on his hands, and his sphinx-like countenance
was impassive almost to the point of stolidity. Somehow, though, Miss
Willis said to herself, in her zeal to characterize him fairly, the
little thirteen-year-old product of democracy (Jimmy was the son of a
carpenter and a grocer's daughter) suggested power; suggested it as a
block of granite or a bull-dog suggests it. His compact, sturdy frame
and well-poised head, with its close, brown curls, seemed a protest in
themselves against hopelessness. On the third day he smiled; it was in
recess that she detected him at it. An organ-grinder's monkey in the
school-yard called it forth, a sweet, glad smile, which lit up his
dense features as the sun at twilight will pierce through and
illuminate for a few minutes a sullen cloud-bank. Miss Willis saw in a
vision on the spot a refuge from hopelessness. Behind that smile there
must be a winsome soul. That spiritless expression was but a veil or
rind hiding the germs of sensibility and reason. This was discovery
number one. After it came darkness again, so far as outward
manifestation was concerned. Jimmy's attitude toward his lessons
appeared to be one of utter density. He listened with blank but
slightly lowered eyes. When questioned he generally gurgled
inarticulately, as though seeking a response, then broke down.
Occasionally he essayed an answer, which revealed that he had
understood nothing. Oftener he sought refuge in complete silence. But
hope had been stimulated in Miss Willis's breast, and she relaxed
neither scrutiny nor tenderness. One day matters were brought to a
head by the thoughtless jest of a classmate, a flaxen-haired fairy,
who, in the recess following one of Jimmy's least successful gurgles,
crept up behind him and planted upon his curls a brown-paper cap,
across which the little witch had painted "DUNCE" in large capital
letters.

Jimmy did not know what had happened. For a moment he thought,
perhaps, that he had been introduced to some new game. But the jeers
of the children checked the rising smile and led him to pluck at his
forehead. As he gazed at the fool's-cap in his hand a roar of
merciless laughter greeted his discovery. Miss Willis had realized the
fairy's deed too late to prevent the catastrophe. The sharp tap of her
ruler on the desk produced a silence interjected with giggles. The
fairy was a successful scholar, and would not have harmed a fly
willingly. It was a case of fun--the rough expression of an
indisputable fact. Jimmy was such a dunce that he ought really to wear
the brand as a notice to the world. What Miss Willis said by way of
reproof to the fairy is immaterial. If Jimmy heard it he gave no sign.
He dropped his head upon his desk and was sobbing audibly. The
bewildered children hearkened to the protest against cruelty with that
elfin look which mischievous youth dares assume, while the culprit
stood with a finger in her mouth, not quite understanding the enormity
of her conduct. In a moment more they were in the school-yard, and
Miss Willis was beside Jimmy's desk patting his tangled head. He wept
as though his heart would break.

"No matter, Jimmy; it was only a thoughtless jest. She didn't mean to
hurt your feelings."

Her words and variations on the same theme called forth successive
bursts of sobs. Only silence diminished their intensity. When at last
they had become only quiverings of his shoulders he looked up and
said, with a wail of fierce despair, but with a grasp upon self which
was a fresh revelation:

"It's true; it's true! She did it because I'm so stupid!"

Thereupon his shoulders shook again convulsively, and he burst into
fresh grief.

Marion's arms were about him in an instant. "Jimmy, Jimmy, it is not
true! You are not stupid! You and I will fight it out together! Will
you trust me, Jimmy?"

He sobbed, but she could perceive that he was listening. Had her hope
become his? Surely they were words he had never heard before.

"Jimmy, listen to me. I have found out something, and all owing to
that ridiculous dunce-cap. It is I who have been stupid. I never knew
until now how much you wish to learn and to improve. You are not
stupid, Jimmy. I am sure of it. You are slow, but you and I will put
our heads together and make the best of that. Will you try with me,
Jimmy?"

The curly head was raised again. His tear-stained eyes looked out at
her shyly, but with a beam of astonished gratitude. From his quivering
lips fell a low but resolute "Yes, ma'am!"

"We will begin to-day. We need each other, Jimmy."

As a work of art grows slowly from confusion and lack of form to
coherence and symmetry to the moral joy of its maker, so her
experience in human plastic enterprise filled the heart of Miss Willis
with a vital happiness. For two years--day in and day out--she never
flagged in her task of giving sight to the eyes and ears to the mind
of the unshaped clay which fate had put into her hands for making or
marring. How patient she had to be! How ingenious, vigilant, and
sympathetic! Through working upon the souls of Jimmy's father and
mother by pathetic appeal she obtained permission to keep him an hour
after school each day and drill him step by step, inch by inch. She
brought her midday meal and shared it with him. In the evening she
framed cunning devices to lure his budding intelligence. And from the
very first she beheld her figure of human ignorance respond to her
gentle moulding. Jimmy's soul was first of all a hot-spring of
ambition; the evidences of which, when once recognized, were ever
paramount. But how blocked and intricate were the passages through
which this yearning for fame sought to express itself! Sometimes it
seemed even to her as though she would never dissipate the fog-bank
which tortured his intelligence. But Jimmy was patient, too, and his
bull-dog features were but the reflex of a grim tenacity of purpose.
At the end of the first year she reported that he was unfit to be
promoted, in order that she need not lose him just when he needed her
most. She was able to make clear to Jimmy that this was not a
disgrace, but a sign of progress. But when the end of the second year
came she passed him on with only the qualm of love parting with its
own. Her task was done. The dull, clouded brow was clear with the
light of eager reason; the still struggling faculties had begun to
understand that in slowness there was the compensation of power, and
were resolute with hope.

"Good-by, Miss Willis. I'm going to be at the head of my class next
year; see if I'm not!"

So said Jimmy as he left her. She hesitated a moment, then stooped and
kissed him. It made her blush, for she had never kissed a pupil
before, nor any one but her mother since Sir Galahad. It made Jimmy
blush, too, for he did not know exactly what to make of it. So they
parted, and Jimmy went up the ladder of knowledge for two years more
at that school. He was not the head of his class; he was number five
the first year and number three the second. When he graduated he
promised to write; but, boylike, he never did, so he vanished into the
open polar world, and was lost to the eyes of the woman who had grown
gray in his service.

Yes, Miss Willis had grown gray. That is, there were more or less
becoming threads of silver in her maiden tresses, and the dignity of
middle age had added inches to her waist and a few interesting lines
to her forehead. There was no new Sir Galahad on the horizon even of
her day-dreams, and her mother was in failing health. Mrs. Willis
continued now to fail for five years--years which taxed her daughter's
strength, though not her affection. Pupils came and went--pupils to
whom she gave herself with the faithfulness of her New England
conscience--but no one exactly like Jimmy. He remained unique, yet
lost in the maze of life. When her mother died she settled down as an
incorrigible old maid, and her daydreams knew no more the vision of a
love coming from the clouds to possess her. Nor did the years bring
with them realization of that other vision--herself enthroned in the
public mind as a wonderful educator to whom the world should bow. She
was only Miss Marion Willis, the next to the oldest and the most
respected teacher of the Glendale grammar-school. So she found herself
at the end of twenty-five years of continuous service. It did occur to
her as a delightful possibility that the authorities or scholars or
somebody would observe this quarter-centennial anniversary in a
suitable manner, and a vision danced before her mind's eye of a
surprise-party bearing a pretty piece of silver or a clock as a
memorial of her life-work. But the date came and passed without
comment from any source, and Marion's sense of humor made the best of
it by drinking her own health on the evening of the day in question,
and congratulating herself that she loved her work and was happy. At
that supper there was no guest save Jimmy's tintype, which she fetched
from the mantelpiece and leaned against the cake-basket on the table.
Jimmy stood now not only for himself, but for a little army of
struggling souls upon whom her patient intelligence had been freely
lavished.

Of course, Jimmy was found. Miss Willis had always felt sure that he
would be. But ten years more had slipped away before he was brought to
light. One day she discovered his name in the newspaper as a rising
political constellation, and she was convinced, without the least
particle of evidence to support her credulity, that the James in
question was her Jimmy. His name had suddenly become prominent in the
political firmament on account of his resolute conduct as the mayor of
a Western city. The public had been impressed by his strength and
pluck and executive ability, working successfully against a gang of
municipal cutthroats, and his name was being paraded over the country.

"I've half a mind to write to him and discover if it's he," Miss
Willis said to herself. "How surprised he would be to receive a postal
card 'Are you my Jimmy?'" But somehow she refrained. She did not wish
to run the risk of disappointment, though she was sure it was he. She
preferred to wait and to watch him now that she had him under her eye
again. This was an easy thing to do, for Jimmy the mayor became Jimmy
the governor before two years had passed, and one morning Miss Willis
found facing her in the Daily Dispatch a newspaper cut of large
dimensions which set her heart beating as it had not throbbed since
the days of Sir Galahad. It was a portrait of her Jimmy; Jimmy
magnified and grown into a hirsute man, but the same old Jimmy with
the tangled hair, serious brow, and large, pathetic eyes. Miss Willis
laughed and Miss Willis cried, and presently, after she had time to
realize the full meaning of what had happened, she had a vision of
Jimmy in the White House, and herself, a venerable yet hale old woman,
standing beside him in a famous company, and Jimmy was saying before
them all, "I wish to make you acquainted with my dear teacher--the
woman to whom I owe my start in life." The idea tickled her
imagination, and she said to herself that she would keep the secret
until that happy day arrived. What a delightful secret it was, and how
surprised he would be when she said to him, "I suppose you don't
recognize me, Jimmy?" Then, perhaps, he would embrace her before
everybody, and the newspapers would have her picture and give the
particulars of her life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jimmy was not elected President until four years later, and in the
meantime Miss Willis kept her secret. When he was nominated, and the
details of his career were eagerly sought for, it was announced by the
press that in early life he had attended the Glendale grammar-school,
and the fact was regarded by the authorities as a feather in the
school's cap, and was commemorated during the campaign by the display
in the exhibition hall of a large picture of the candidate festooned
with an American flag. It was vaguely remembered that he had been
under Miss Willis, among other teachers, but the whole truth was
unknown to anybody, and Marion's New England conscience shrank from
obtaining glory and sympathy through brag. She hugged her secret, and
bore it with her intact when she took her departure for Washington to
attend the inauguration ceremonies. She did not tell the authorities
where she was going when she asked for a short leave of absence--the
first she had ever requested in all her years of service. She was
setting forth on the spree of her life, and her spirit was jubilant at
the thought of Jimmy's amazement when he found out who she was.

A day came at last, after the new chief magistrate had taken the oaths
of office and was in possession of the White House, when the American
public was at liberty to file past their President and shake his hand
in their might as free men and free women. Miss Willis had not been
able to obtain a location near enough to the inauguration proceedings
to distinguish more than the portly figure of a man, or to hear
anything except the roar of the multitude. But now she was to have the
chance to meet Jimmy face to face and overwhelm him with her secret.
Little by little the file of visitors advanced on its passage toward
the nation's representative, and presently Miss Willis caught her
first glimpse of Sir Galahad--her real Sir Galahad. Her heart throbbed
tumultuously. It was he--her Jimmy; he, beyond the shadow of a doubt;
a strong, grave, resolute man; the prototype of human power and
American intelligence.

Her Jimmy! She let her eyes fall, for it would soon be her turn, and
her nerves were all tingling with a happy mixture of pride and
diffidence. Her vision, her dearest vision, was about to be realized.
There was no chance for delusion or disappointment now. So it seemed.
Yet, as she stood there waiting, with her New England conscience and
her sense of humor still active, of a sudden her imagination was
seized by a new prospect. Why should she tell her secret? What was the
use? There he stood--her Jimmy--good, great, and successful, and she
had helped to make him so. Nothing could ever deprive her of that. The
truth was hers forever. She was only an elderly spinster. Perhaps he
would have forgotten. He was but fifteen when he left her, and he had
never written to her during all these years. Very likely he did not
realize at all what she had done for him. Nothing which he could do
for her now would add to the joy of her heart. Secret? To share it
with him might spoil all. The chances were it was her secret only;
that only she could understand it.

She was close to the President now, and some one at her ear was asking
her name. Suddenly she heard her name called, and stepping forward she
was face to face with her soul's knight, and he was holding her hand.

"I am very glad to see you, Miss Willis," she heard him say.

She had been stepping shyly, with her eyes lowered. At his words,
spoken in a voice which for all its manliness was still the same, she
looked up into his face and murmured, as she pressed his fingers:

"God bless you, sir!"

She did not even say "Jimmy." Then she passed, and--and her secret was
safe.

Six months later Miss Willis was found one morning dead in her bed.
She had died peacefully in her sleep. When her personal effects were
administered there was noticed on the mantelpiece in her sitting-room
a mounted tintype, on the paper back of which were two inscriptions.
Of these the upper, in faded ink, was dated forty years before and
read "From Jimmy." The other, recent and written with the pen of an
elderly person, ran as follows: "Portrait of the President of the
United States as a school-boy."




AN EXCHANGE OF COURTESIES


I


In the opinion of many persons competent to judge, "The Beaches" was
suffering from an invasion of wealth. Unquestionably it had been
fashionable for a generation; but the people who had established
summer homes there were inhabitants of the large neighboring city
which they forsook during five months in the year to enjoy the ocean
breezes and sylvan scenery, for The Beaches afforded both. Well-to-do
New England families of refinement and taste, they enjoyed in comfort,
without ostentation, their picturesque surroundings. Their cottages
were simple; but each had its charming outlook to sea and a sufficient
number of more or less wooded acres to command privacy and breathing
space. In the early days the land had sold for a song, but it had
risen steadily with the times, as more and more people coveted a
foothold. The last ten years had introduced many changes; the older
houses had been pulled down and replaced by lordly structures with all
the modern conveniences, including spacious stables and farm
buildings. Two clubs had been organized along the six miles of coast
to provide golf and tennis, afternoon teas and bridge whist for the
entertainment of the colony. The scale of living had become more
elaborate, and there had been many newcomers--people of large means
who offered for the finest sites sums which the owners could not
afford to refuse. The prices paid in several instances represented ten
times the original outlay. All the desirable locations were held by
proprietors fully aware of their value, and those bent on purchase
must pay what was asked or go without.

Then had occurred the invasion referred to--the coming to The Beaches
of the foreign contingent, so called: people of fabulous means,
multi-millionaires who were captains in one or another form of
industry and who sought this resort as a Mecca for the social
uplifting of their families and protection against summer heat. At
their advent prices made another jump--one which took the breath away.
Several of the most conservative owners parted with their estates
after naming a figure which they supposed beyond the danger point, and
half a dozen second-rate situations, affording but a paltry glimpse of
the ocean, were snapped up in eager competition by wealthy capitalists
from Chicago, Pittsburg, and St. Louis who had set their hearts on
securing the best there was remaining.

Among the late comers was Daniel Anderson, known as the furniture king
in the jargon of trade, many times a millionaire, and comparatively a
person of leisure through the sale of his large plants to a trust. He
hired for the season, by long-distance telephone, at an amazing
rental, one of the more desirable places which was to let on account
of the purpose of its owners to spend the summer abroad. It was one of
the newer houses, large and commodious; yet its facilities were
severely taxed by the Anderson establishment, which fairly bristled
with complexity. Horses by the score, vehicles manifold, a steam
yacht, and three automobiles were the more striking symbols of a
manifest design to curry favor by force of outdoing the neighborhood.

The family consisted of Mrs. Anderson, who was nominally an invalid,
and a son and daughter of marriageable age. If it be stated that they
were chips of the old block, meaning their father, it must not be
understood that he had reached the moribund stage. On the contrary, he
was still in the prime of his energy, and, with the exception of the
housekeeping details, set in motion and directed the machinery of the
establishment.

It had been his idea to come to The Beaches; and having found a
foothold there he was determined to make the most of the opportunity
not only for his children but himself. With his private secretary and
typewriter at his elbow he matured his scheme of carrying everything
before him socially as he had done in business. The passport to
success in this new direction he assumed to be lavish expenditure. It
was a favorite maxim of his--trite yet shrewdly entertained--that
money will buy anything, and every man has his price. So he began by
subscribing to everything, when asked, twice as much as any one else,
and seeming to regard it as a privilege. Whoever along The Beaches was
interested in charity had merely to present a subscription list to Mr.
Anderson to obtain a liberal donation. The equivalent was
acquaintance. The man or woman who asked him for money could not very
well neglect to bow the next time they met, and so by the end of the
first summer he was on speaking terms with most of the men and many of
the women. Owing to his generosity, the fund for the building of a new
Episcopal church was completed, although he belonged to a different
denomination. He gave a drinking fountain for horses and dogs, and
when the selectmen begrudged to the summer residents the cost of
rebuilding two miles of road, Daniel Anderson defrayed the expense
from his own pocket. An ardent devotee of golf, and daily on the
links, he presented toward the end of the season superb trophies for
the competition of both men and women, with the promise of others in
succeeding years. In short, he gave the society whose favor he coveted
to understand that it had merely "to press the button" and he would do
the rest.

Mr. Andersen's nearest neighbors were the Misses Ripley--Miss Rebecca
and Miss Caroline, or Carry, as she was invariably called. They were
among the oldest summer residents, for their father had been among the
first to recognize the attractions of The Beaches, and their childhood
had been passed there. Now they were middle-aged women and their
father was dead; but they continued to occupy season after season
their cottage, the location of which was one of the most picturesque
on the whole shore. The estate commanded a wide ocean view and
included some charming woods on one side and a small, sandy, curving
beach on the other. The only view of the water which the Andersons
possessed was at an angle across this beach. The house they occupied,
though twice the size of the Ripley cottage, was virtually in the rear
of the Ripley domain, which lay tantalizingly between them and a free
sweep of the landscape.

One morning, early in October of the year of Mr. Anderson's advent to
The Beaches, the Ripley sisters, who were sitting on the piazza
enjoying the mellow haze of the autumn sunshine, saw, with some
surprise, Mr. David Walker, the real-estate broker, approaching across
the lawn--surprise because it was late in the year for holidays, and
Mr. Walker invariably went to town by the half-past eight train. Yet a
visit from one of their neighbors was always agreeable to them, and
the one in question lived not more than a quarter of a mile away and
sometimes did drop in at afternoon tea-time. Certain women might have
attempted an apology for their appearance, but Miss Rebecca seemed
rather to glory in the shears which dangled down from her
apron-strings as she rose to greet her visitor; they told so
unmistakably that she had been enjoying herself trimming vines. Miss
Carry--who was still kittenish in spite of her forty years--as she
gave one of her hands to Mr. Walker held out with the other a basket
of seckel pears she had been gathering, and said:

"Have one--do."

Mr. Walker complied, and, having completed the preliminary
commonplaces, said, as he hurled the core with an energetic sweep of
his arm into the ocean at the base of the little bluff on which the
cottage stood:

"There is no place on the shore which quite compares with this."

"We agree with you," said Miss Rebecca with dogged urbanity. "Is any
one of a different opinion?"

"On the contrary, I have come to make you an offer for it. It isn't
usual for real-estate men to crack up the properties they wish to
purchase, but I am not afraid of doing so in this case." He spoke
buoyantly, as though he felt confident that he was in a position to
carry his point.

"An offer?" said Miss Rebecca. "For our place? You know that we have
no wish to sell. We have been invited several times to part with it,
and declined. It was you yourself who brought the last invitation. We
are still in the same frame of mind, aren't we, Carry?"

"Yes, indeed. Where should we get another which we like so well?"

"My principal invites you to name your own figure."

"That is very good of him, I'm sure. Who is he, by the way?"

"I don't mind telling you; it's your neighbor, Daniel Anderson." David
Walker smiled significantly. "He is ready to pay whatever you choose
to ask."

"Our horses are afraid of his automobiles, and his liveried grooms
have turned the head of one of our maids. Our little place is not in
the market, thank you, Mr. Walker."

The broker's beaming countenance showed no sign of discouragement. He
rearranged the gay blue flower which had almost detached itself from
the lapel of his coat, then said laconically:

"I am authorized by Mr. Anderson to offer you $500,000 for your
property."

"What?" exclaimed Miss Rebecca.

"Half a million dollars for six acres," he added.

"The man must be crazy." Miss Rebecca stepped to the honeysuckle vine
with a detached air and snipped off a straggling tendril with her
shears. "That is a large sum of money," she added.

David Walker enjoyed the effect of his announcement; it was clear that
he had produced an impression.

"Money is no object to him. I told him that you did not wish to sell,
and he said that he would make it worth your while."

"Half a million dollars! We should be nearly rich," let fall Miss
Carry, upon whom the full import of the offer was breaking.

"Yes; and think what good you two ladies could do with all that
money--practical good," continued the broker, pressing his opportunity
and availing himself of his knowledge of their aspirations. "You could
buy elsewhere and have enough left over to endow a professorship at
Bryn Mawr, Miss Rebecca; and you, Miss Carry, would be able to revel
in charitable donations."

Those who knew the Ripley sisters well were aware that plain speaking
never vexed them. Beating about the bush from artificiality or
ignoring a plain issue was the sort of thing they resented.
Consequently, the directness of David Walker's sally did not appear to
them a liberty, but merely a legitimate summing up of the situation.
Miss Rebecca was the spokesman as usual, though her choice was always
governed by what she conceived to be the welfare of her sister, whom
she still looked on as almost a very young person. Sitting upright and
clasping her elbows, as she was apt to do in moments of stress, she
replied:

"Money is money, Mr. Walker, and half a million dollars is not to be
discarded lightly. We should be able, as you suggest, to do some good
with so much wealth. But, on the other hand, we don't need it, and we
have no one dependent on us for support. My brother is doing well and
is likely to leave his only child all that is good for her. We love
this place. Caroline may marry some day" (Miss Carry laughed
protestingly at the suggestion and ejaculated, "Not very likely"),
"but I never shall. I expect to come here as long as I live. We love
every inch of the place--the woods, the beach, the sea. Our garden,
which we made ourselves, is our delight. Why should we give up all
this because some one offers us five times what we supposed it to be
worth? My sister is here to speak for herself, but so far as I am
concerned you may tell Mr. Anderson that if our place is worth so much
as that we cannot afford to part with it."

"Oh, no, it wouldn't do at all! Our heartstrings are round the roots
of these trees, Mr. Walker," added the younger sister in gentle echo
of this determination.

"Don't be in a hurry to decide; think it over. It will bear
reflection," said the broker briskly.

"There's nothing to think over. It becomes clearer every minute," said
Miss Rebecca a little tartly. Then she added: "I dare say it will do
him good to find that some one has something which he cannot buy."

"He will be immensely disappointed, for his heart was set on it," said
David Walker gloomily. His emotions were not untinged by personal
dismay, for his commission would have been a large one.

He returned forthwith to his client, who was expecting him, and who
met him at the door.

"Well, Walker, what did the maiden ladies say? Have one of these," he
exclaimed, exhibiting some large cigars elaborately wrapped in gold
foil. "They're something peculiarly choice which a friend of mine--a
Cuban--obtained for me."

"They won't sell, Mr. Anderson."

The furniture king frowned. He was a heavily built but compact man who
looked as though he were accustomed to butt his way through life and
sweep away opposition, yet affable and easy-going withal.

"They won't sell? You offered them my price?"

"It struck them as prodigious, but they were not tempted."

"I've got to have it somehow. With this land added to theirs I should
have the finest place on the shore."

The broker disregarded this flamboyant remark, which was merely a
repetition of what he had heard several times already. "I warned you,"
he said, "that they might possibly refuse even this munificent offer.
They told me to tell you that if it was worth so much they could not
afford to sell."

"Is it not enough? They're poor, you told me--poor as church mice."

"Compared with you. But they have enough to live on simply, and--and
to be able to maintain such an establishment as yours, for instance,
would not add in the least degree to their happiness. On the contrary,
it is because they delight in the view and the woods and their little
garden just as they see them that they can't afford to let you have
the place." Now that the chances of a commission were slipping away
David Walker was not averse to convey in delicate language the truth
which Miss Rebecca had set forth.

Mr. Anderson felt his chin meditatively. "I seem to be up against it,"
he murmured. "You think they are not holding out for a higher figure?"
he asked shrewdly.

David shook his head. Yet he added, with the instinct of a business
man ready to nurse a forlorn hope, "There would be no harm in trying.
I don't believe, though, that you have the ghost of a chance."

The furniture king reflected a moment. "I'll walk down there this
afternoon and make their acquaintance."

"A good idea," said Walker, contented to shift the responsibility of a
second offer. "You'll find them charming--real thoroughbreds," he saw
fit to add.

"A bit top-lofty?" queried the millionaire.

"Not in the least. But they have their own standards, Mr. Anderson."

The furniture king's progress at The Beaches had been so uninterrupted
on the surface and so apparently satisfactory to himself that no one
would have guessed that he was not altogether content with it. With
all his easy-going optimism, it had not escaped his shrewd
intelligence that his family still lacked the social recognition he
desired. People were civil enough, but there were houses into which
they were never asked in spite of all his spending; and he was
conscious that they were kept at arm's length by polite processes too
subtle to be openly resented. Yet he did resent in his heart the check
to his ambitions, and at the same time he sought eagerly the cause
with an open mind. It had already dawned on him that when he was
interested in a topic his voice was louder than the voices of his new
acquaintances. He had already given orders to his chauffeur that the
automobiles should be driven with some regard for the public safety.
Lately the idea had come to him, and he had imparted it to his son,
that the habit of ignoring impediments did not justify them in driving
golf balls on the links when, the players in front of them were slower
than they liked.

On the way to visit the Misses Ripley later in the day the broker's
remark that they had standards of their own still lingered in his
mind. He preferred to think of them and others along the shore as
stiff and what he called top lofty; yet he intended to observe what he
saw. He had been given to understand that these ladies were almost
paupers from his point of view; and, though when he had asked who they
were, David Walker had described them as representatives of one of the
oldest and most respected families, he knew that they took no active
part in the social life of the colony as he beheld it; they played
neither golf, tennis, nor bridge at the club; they owned no
automobile, and their stable was limited to two horses; they certainly
cut no such figure as seemed to him to become people in their
position, who could afford to refuse $500,000 for six acres.

He was informed by the middle-aged, respectable-looking maid that the
ladies were in the garden behind the house. A narrow gravelled path
bordered with fragrant box led him to this. Its expanse was not large,
but the luxuriance and variety of the old-fashioned summer flowers
attested the devotion bestowed upon them. At the farther end was a
trellised summer-house in which he perceived that the maiden ladies
were taking afternoon tea. There was no sign of hothouse roses or rare
exotic plants, but he noticed a beehive, a quaint sundial with an
inscription, and along the middle path down which he walked were at
intervals little dilapidated busts or figures of stone on
pedestals--some of them lacking tips of noses or ears. It did not
occur to Mr. Anderson that antiquity rather than poverty was
responsible for these ravages. Their existence gave him fresh hope.

"Who can this be?" said Miss Carry with a gentle flutter. An unknown,
middle-aged man was still an object of curiosity to her.

Miss Rebecca raised her eyeglass. "I do believe, my dear, that
it's--yes, it is."

"But who?" queried Miss Carry.

Miss Rebecca rose instead of answering. The stranger was upon them,
walking briskly and hat in hand. His manner was distinctly
breezy--more so than a first meeting would ordinarily seem to her to
justify.

"Good afternoon, ladies. Daniel Anderson is my name. My wife wasn't
lucky enough to find you at home when she returned your call, so I
thought I'd be neighborly."

"It's very good of you to come to see us," said Miss Rebecca,
relenting at once. She liked characters--being something of one
herself--and her neighbor's heartiness was taking. "This is my sister,
Miss Caroline Ripley," she added to cement the introduction, "and I am
Rebecca. Sit down, Mr. Anderson; and may I give you a cup of tea?"

Four people were apt to be cosily crowded in the summer-house. Being
only a third person, the furniture king was able to settle himself in
his seat and look around him without fear that his legs would molest
any one. He gripped the arms of his chair and inhaled the fragrance of
the garden.

"This is a lovely place, ladies," he asserted.

"Those hollyhocks and morning-glories and mignonettes take me back to
old times. Up to my place it's all roses and orchids. But my wife told
me last week that she heard old-fashioned flowers are coming in again.
Seems she was right."

"Oh, but we've had old-fashioned flowers for years! Our garden has
been always just like this--only becoming a little prettier all the
time, we venture to hope," said Miss Carry.

"I want to know!" said Mr. Anderson; and almost immediately he
remembered that both his son and daughter had cautioned him against
the use of this phrase at The Beaches. He received the dainty but
evidently ancient cup from Miss Rebecca, and seeing that the subject
was, so to speak, before the house, he tasted his tea and said:

"It's all pretty here--garden, view, and beach. And I hear you decline
to sell, ladies."

Miss Rebecca had been musing on the subject all day, and a heartfelt
response rose promptly to her lips--spoken with the simple grace of a
self-respecting gentlewoman:

"Why should we sell, Mr. Anderson?"

The question was rather a poser to answer categorically; yet the
would-be purchaser felt that he sufficiently conveyed his meaning when
he said:

"I thought I might have made it worth your while."

"We are people of small means in the modern sense of the word," Miss
Rebecca continued, thereby expressing more concretely his idea; "yet
we have sufficient for our needs. Our tastes are very simple. The sum
which you offered us is a fortune in itself--but we have no ambition
for great wealth or to change our mode of life. Our associations with
this place are so intimate and tender that money could not induce us
to desecrate them by a sale."

"I see," said Mr. Anderson. Light was indeed breaking on him. At the
same time his appreciation of the merits of the property had been
growing every minute. It was an exquisite autumn afternoon. From where
they sat he could behold the line of shore on either side with its
background of dark green woods. Below the wavelets lapped the shingle
with melodious rhythm. As far as the eye could see lay the bosom of
the ocean unruffled, and lustrous with the sheen of the dying day.
Accustomed to prevail in buying his way, he could not resist saying,
after a moment of silence:

"If I were to increase my offer to a million would it make any
difference in your attitude?"

A suppressed gurgle of mingled surprise and amusement escaped Miss
Carry.

Miss Rebecca paused a moment by way of politeness to one so generous.
But her tone when she spoke was unequivocal, and a shade sardonic.

"Not the least, Mr. Anderson. To tell the truth, we should scarcely
understand the difference."




II


One summer afternoon two years later the Ripley sisters were again
drinking tea in their attractive summer-house. In the interval the
peaceful current of their lives had been stirred to its depths by
unlooked-for happenings. Very shortly after their refusal of Mr.
Anderson's offer, their only brother, whose home was on the Hudson
within easy distance of New York, had died suddenly. He was a widower;
and consequently the protection of his only daughter straightway
devolved on them. She was eighteen and good-looking. This they knew
from personal observation at Thanksgiving Day and other family
reunions; but owing to the fact that Mabel Ripley had been quarantined
by scarlet fever during the summer of her sixteenth year, and in
Europe the following summer, they were conscious, prior to her arrival
at The Beaches, that they were very much in the dark as to her
characteristics.

She proved to be the antipodes of what they had hoped for. Their
traditions had depicted a delicate-appearing girl with reserved
manners and a studious or artistic temperament, who would take an
interest in the garden and like nothing better than to read aloud to
them the new books while they did fancy-work. A certain amount of coy
coquetry was to be expected--would be welcomed, in fact, for there
were too many Miss Ripleys already. Proper facilities would be offered
to her admirers, but they took for granted that she would keep them at
a respectful distance as became a gentlewoman. She would be urged to
take suitable exercise; they would provide a horse, if necessary; and
doubtless some of the young people in the neighborhood would invite
her occasionally to play tennis.

Mabel's enthusiasm at the nearness of the sea took precedence over
every other emotion as she stood on the piazza after the embraces were
over.

"How adorably stunning! I must go out sailing the first thing," were
her words.

Meanwhile the aunts were observing that she appeared the picture of
health and was tall and athletic-looking. In one hand she had carried
a tennis-racket in its case, in the other, a bag of golf clubs, as she
alighted from the vehicle. These evidently were her household gods.
The domestic vision which they had entertained might need
rectification.

"You sail, of course?" Mabel asked, noticing, doubtless, that her
exclamation was received in silence.

Aunt Rebecca shook her head. "I haven't been in a sail-boat for twenty
years."

"But whose steam yacht is that?"

"It belongs to Mr. Anderson, a wealthy neighbor."

"Anyhow, a knockabout is more fun--a twenty-footer," the girl
continued, her gaze still fixed on the haven which the indentations of
the coast afforded, along which at intervals groups of yachts, large
and small, floated at their moorings picturesque as sea-gulls on a
feeding-ground.

"There is an old rowboat in the barn. I daresay that Thomas, the
coachman, will take you out rowing sometimes after he has finished his
work," said Aunt Carry kindly.

"Do you swim?" inquired Aunt Rebecca, failing to note her niece's
bewildered expression.

"Like a duck. I'm quite as much at home on the water as on land. I've
had a sailboat since I was thirteen, and most of our summers have been
spent at Buzzard's Bay."

"But you're a young lady now," said Aunt Rebecca.

Mabel looked from one to the other as though she were speculating as
to what these new protectors were like. "Am I?" she asked with a
smile. "I must remember that, I suppose; but it will be hard to change
all at once." Thereupon she stepped lightly to the edge of the cliff
that she might enjoy more completely the view while she left them to
digest this qualified surrender.

"'No pent-up Utica contracts her powers,'" murmured Miss Rebecca, who
was fond of classic verse.

"It is evident that we shall have our hands full," answered Miss
Carry. "But she's fresh as a rose, and wide-awake. I'm sure the dear
girl will try to please us."

Mabel did try, and succeeded; but it was a success obtained at the
cost of setting at naught all her aunts' preconceived ideas regarding
the correct deportment of marriageable girls. The knockabout was
forthcoming shortly after she had demonstrated her amphibious
qualities by diving from the rocks and performing water feats which
dazed her anxious guardians. Indeed, she fairly lived in her
bathing-dress until the novelty wore off. Thomas, the coachman, who
had been a fisherman in his day, announced with a grin, after
accompanying her on the trial trip of the hired cat-boat, that he
could teach her nothing about sailing. Henceforth her small craft was
almost daily a distant speck on the horizon, and braved the seas so
successfully under her guidance that presently the aunts forbore to
watch for disaster through a spyglass.

She could play tennis, too, with the best, as she demonstrated on the
courts of The Beaches Club. Her proficiency and spirit speedily made
friends for her among the young people of the colony, who visited her
and invited her to take part in their amusements. She was prepared to
ride on her bicycle wherever the interest of the moment called her,
and deplored the solemnity of the family carryall. When her aunts
declared that a wheel was too undignified a vehicle on which to go out
to luncheon, she compromised on a pony cart as a substitute, for she
could drive almost as well as she could sail. She took comparatively
little interest in the garden, and was not always at home at
five-o'clock tea to read aloud the latest books; but her amiability
and natural gayety were like sunshine in the house. She talked freely
of what she did, and she had an excellent appetite.

"She's as unlike the girls of my day as one could imagine, and I do
wish she wouldn't drive about the country bareheaded, looking like a
colt or a young Indian," said Miss Rebecca pensively one morning, just
after Mabel's departure for the tennis-court. "But I must confess that
she's the life of the place, and we couldn't get on without her now. I
don't think, though, that she has done three hours of solid reading
since she entered the house. I call that deplorable."

"She's a dear," said Aunt Carry. "We haven't been much in the way of
seeing young girls of late, and Mabel doesn't seem to me different
from most of those who visit her. Twenty years ago, you remember,
girls pecked at their food and had to lie down most of the time. Now
they eat it. What I can't get quite used to is the habit of letting
young men call them by their first names on short acquaintance. In my
time," she added with a little sigh, "it would have been regarded as
inconsistent with maidenly reserve. I'm sure I heard the young man who
was here last night say, 'I've known you a week now; may I call you
Mabel?'"

As to young men, be it stated, the subject of this conversation showed
herself impartially indifferent. Her attitude seemed to be that boys
were good fellows as well as girls, and should be encouraged
accordingly. If they chose to make embarrassing speeches regarding
one's personal appearance and to try to be alone with one as much as
possible, while such favoritism was rather a fillip to existence, it
was to be considered at bottom as an excellent joke. Young men came
and young men went. Mabel attracted her due share. Yet evidently she
seemed to be as glad to see the last comer as any of his predecessors.

Then occurred the second happening in the tranquil existence of the
maiden ladies. One day at the end of the first summer, an easterly
day, when the sky was beginning to be obscured by scud and the sea was
swelling with the approach of a storm, Dan Anderson, the only son of
his father, was knocked overboard by the boom while showing the heels
of his thirty-foot knockabout to the hired boat of his neighbor, Miss
Mabel Ripley. They were not racing, for his craft was unusually fast,
as became a multi-millionaire's plaything. Besides, he and the girl
had merely a bowing acquaintance. The _Firefly_ was simply
bobbing along on the same tack as the _Enchantress_, while the
fair skipper, who had another girl as a companion, tried vainly, at a
respectful distance, to hold her own by skill.

The headway on Dan's yacht was so great that before the two dazed
salts on board realized what had happened their master was far astern.
They bustled to bring the _Enchantress_ about and to come to his
rescue in the dingy. Stunned by the blow of the--spar, he had gone
down like a stone; so, in all probability, they would have been too
late. When he came up the second time it was on the port bow of the
_Firefly_, but completely out of reach. Giving the tiller to her
friend, and stripping off superfluous apparel, Mabel jumped overboard
in time to grasp and hold the drowning youth. There she kept him until
aid reached them. But the unconscious victim did not open his eyes
until after he had been laid on the Misses Ripley's lawn, where, by
virtue of brandy from the medicine-closet and hot-water bottles, the
flickering spark of life was coaxed into a flame.

It was an agitating experience for the aunts. But Mabel was none the
worse for the wetting; and though she naturally made light of her
performance, congratulations on her pluck and presence of mind came
pouring in. David Walker suggested that the Humane Society would be
sure to take the matter up and confer a medal upon the heroine. The
members of the Anderson family came severally to express with emotion
their gratitude and admiration. The father had not been there since
his previous eventful visit, though once or twice he had met his
neighbors on the road and stopped to speak to them, as if to show he
harbored no malice in spite of his disappointment.

Now with a tremulous voice he bore testimony to the greatness of the
mercy which had been vouchsafed him.

The third and last happening might be regarded as a logical sequel to
the second by those who believe that marriages are made in heaven. It
was to ponder it again after having pondered it for twenty-four hours
that the Ripley sisters found themselves in their pleached garden at
the close of the day. That the event was not unforeseen by one of them
was borne out by the words of Miss Carry:

"I remember saying to myself that day on the lawn, Rebecca, that it
would be just like the modern girl if she were to marry him; because
she saved his life, I mean. If he had saved hers, as used to happen,
she would never have looked at him twice. I didn't mention it because
it was only an idea, which might have worried you."

"We have seen it coming, of course," answered Miss Rebecca, who was
clasping the points of her elbows. "And there was nothing to do about
it--even if we desired to. I can't help, though, feeling sorry that
she isn't going to marry some one we know all about--the family, I
mean.

"Well," she added with a sigh, "the Andersons will get our place in
the end, after all, and we shall be obliged to associate more or less
with multi-millionaires for the rest of our days. It's depressing
ethically; but there's no use in quarrelling with one's own flesh and
blood, if it is a modern girl, for one would be quarrelling most of
the time. We must make the best of it, Carry, and--and try to like
it."

"He really seems very nice," murmured Miss Carry. "He gives her some
new jewel almost every day."

Miss Rebecca sniffed disdainfully, as though to inquire if love was to
be attested by eighteen-carat gold rather than by summer blooms.

The sound of steps on the gravel path interrupted their confabulation.

"It is Mr. Anderson, _pere_" said Miss Carry laconically.

"He is coming to take possession," responded her sister.

The crunch of the gravel under his solid, firm tread jarred on their
already wearied sensibilities. Nevertheless they knew that it behooved
them to be cordial and to accept the situation with good grace. Their
niece was over head and ears in love with a young man whose personal
character, so far as they knew, was not open to reproach, and who
would be heir to millions. What more was to be said? Indeed, Miss
Rebecca was the first to broach the subject after the greetings were
over.

"Our young people seem to have made up their minds that they cannot
live apart," she said.

"So my son has informed me."

Mr. Anderson spoke gravely and then paused. His habitually confident
manner betrayed signs of nervousness.

"I told him this morning that there could be no engagement until after
I had talked with you," he added.

One could have heard a pin drop. Each of the sisters was tremulous to
know what was coming next. Could he possibly be meditating purse-proud
opposition? The Ripley blue blood simmered at the thought, and Miss
Rebecca, nervous in her turn, tapped the ground lightly with her foot.

"The day I was first here," he resumed, "you ladies taught me a
lesson. I believed then that money could command anything. I
discovered that I was mistaken. It provoked me, but it set me
thinking. I've learned since that the almighty dollar cannot buy
gentle birth and--and the standards which go with it."

Unexpectedly edifying as this admission was, his listeners sought in
vain to connect it with the immediate issue, and consequently forebore
to speak.

"The only return I can make for opening my eyes to the real truth is
by doing what I guess you would do if you or one of your folk were in
my shoes. I'm a very rich man, as you know. If your niece marries my
son her children will never come to want in their time. He's a good
boy, if I do say it; and I should be mighty proud of her."

Miss Carry breathed a gentle sigh of relief at this last avowal.

"I don't want her to marry him, though, without knowing the truth, and
perhaps when you hear it you'll decide that she must give him up."

Thereupon Mr. Anderson blew his nose by way of gathering his faculties
for the crucial words as a carter rests his horse before mounting the
final hill when the sledding is hard.

"I'm going to tell you how I made my first start. I was a clerk in a
bank and sharp as a needle in forecasting what was going to happen
downtown. I used to say to myself that if I had capital it would be
easy to make money breed money. Well, one day I borrowed from the
bank, without the bank's leave, $3,000 in order to speculate. I won on
that deal and the next and the next. Then I was able to return what
I'd borrowed and to set up in a small way for myself in the furniture
business. That was my start, ladies--the nest-egg of all I've got."

He sat back in his chair and passed his handkerchief across his
forehead like one who has performed with credit an agonizing duty.

There was silence for a moment. Unequivocal as the confession was,
Miss Rebecca, reluctant to believe her ears, asked with characteristic
bluntness:

"You mean that you--er--misappropriated the money?"

"I was an embezzler, strictly speaking."

"I see."

"Perhaps you wonder why I told you this," he said, bending forward.

"No, we understand," said Miss Rebecca.

"We understand perfectly," exclaimed Miss Carry with gentle warmth.

"It's very honest of you, Mr. Anderson," said Miss Rebecca after a
musing pause.

"I've never been dishonest since then," he remarked naively. "But a
year ago I wouldn't have told you this, though it's been in the back
of my mind as a rankling sore, growing as I grew in wealth and
respectability. I made a bluff at believing that it didn't matter, and
that a thing done has an end. Well, now I've made a clean breast of it
to the ones who have a right to know. I should like you to tell
Mabel."

As he spoke the lovers appeared in the near distance at the edge of
the lawn, coming up from the beach. "But I don't think it will be
necessary to tell my son," he added yearningly.

"Certainly _not_" said Miss Rebecca with emphasis.

The sisters exchanged glances, trying to read each other's thoughts.

"It's a blot in the 'scutcheon, of course," said Miss Rebecca. "It's
for our niece to say." But there was no sternness in her tone.

This gave Miss Carry courage. Her hand shook a little as she put down
her teacup, for she was shy of taking the initiative. "I think I know
what she would say. In our time it would probably have been different,
on account of the family--and heredity; but Mabel is a modern girl.
And a modern girl would say that she isn't to marry the father but the
son. She loves him, so I'm certain she would never give him up.
Therefore is it best to tell her?"

Daniel Anderson's face was illumined with the light of hope, and he
turned to the elder sister, whom he recognized as the final judge.

Miss Rebecca sniffed. Her ideas of everlasting justice were a little
disconcerted. Nevertheless she said firmly after brief hesitation:

"I was taught to believe that the sins of the fathers should be
visited on the children; but I believe, Carry, you're right."

"Bless you for that," exclaimed the furniture king. Then, groping in
the excess of his emotion for some fit expression of gratitude, he
bent forward and, taking Miss Rebecca's hand, pressed his lips upon
her fingers as an act of homage.

Miss Carry would have been justified in reflecting that it would have
been more fitting had he kissed her fingers instead. But she was used
to taking the second place in the household, and the happy expression
of her countenance suggested that her thoughts were otherwise engaged.




ACROSS THE WAY


The news that the late Mr. Cherrington's house on Saville Street had
been let for a school, within a few months after his death, could not
have been a surprise to any one in the neighborhood. Ten years before,
when Mr. Cherrington and those prominent in his generation were in
their heyday, Saville Street had been sacred to private residences
from one end to the other, but the tide of fashion had been drifting
latterly. There was already another school in the same block, and
there were scattered all along on either side of the street a
sprinkling of throat, eye, and ear doctors, a very fashionable
dressmaker or two, an up-town bank, and numerous apartments for
bachelors.

The news could not have been a surprise even to Mr. Homer Ramsay, but
that crusty old bachelor in the seventies brought down his
walking-stick with a vicious thump when he heard it, and remarked that
he would live to be ninety "if only to spite 'em." This threat,
however, had reference, not to Mr. Cherrington's residence, but his
own, which was exactly opposite, and which he had occupied for more
than forty years. It was a conviction of Mr. Ramsay's that there was a
conspiracy on foot to purchase his house, and accordingly he took
every opportunity to declare that he would never part with an inch of
his land while he was in the flesh. A wag in the neighborhood had
expressed the opinion that the old gentleman waxed hale and hearty on
his own bile. He was certainly a churlish individual in his general
bearing toward his fellow-beings, and violent in his prejudices. For
the last ten years his favorite prophecy had been that the country was
going to the devil.

Besides the house on Saville Street, Mr. Ramsay had some bonds and
stock--fifty or sixty thousand dollars in all--which tidy little
property would, in the natural course of events, descend to his next
of kin; in this case, however, only a first cousin once removed. In
the eye of the law a living person has no heir; but blood is thicker
than water, and it was generally taken for granted that Mr. Horace
Barker, whose grandmother had been the sister of Mr. Ramsay's father,
would some day be the owner of the house on Saville Street. At least,
confident expectation that this would come to pass had long restrained
Mr. Barker from letting any one but his better half know that he
regarded his Cousin Homer as an irascible old curmudgeon; and perhaps,
on the other hand, had justified Mr. Ramsay in his own mind for
referring in common parlance to his first cousin once removed as a
stiff nincompoop who had married a sickly doll. Not that Mr. Horace
Barker needed the money, by any means. He was well-to-do already, and
lived in a more fashionable street than Saville Street, where he
occupied a dignified-looking brown-stone house, from the windows of
which his three little people--all girls--peeped and nodded at the
organ-grinder and the street-band.

The name of the person to whom Mr. Cherrington's house had been leased
was Miss Elizabeth Whyte. She was twenty-five, and she was starting a
school because it was necessary for her to earn her own living. She
considered that life, from the point of view of happiness, was over
for her; and yet, though she had made up her mind that she could never
be really happy again, she was resolved neither to mope nor to be a
burden on any one. Mr. Mills, the executor of Mr. Cherrington's
estate, who believed himself to be a judge of human nature withal, had
observed that she seemed a little overwrought, as though she had lived
on her nerves; but, on the other hand, he had been impressed by her
direct, business-like manner, which argued that she was very much in
earnest. Besides, she was vouched for by the best people, and Mrs.
Cyrus Bangs was moving heaven and earth to procure pupils for her. It
was clearly his duty as a business man to let her have the house.

Until within a few months Elizabeth Whyte had lived in a neighboring
town--the seat of a college, where the minds of young men for
successive generations have been cultivated, but sometimes at the
expense of a long-suffering local community. Her father, who at the
time of her birth was a clergyman with a parish, had subsequently
evolved into an agnostic and an invalid without one, and she had been
used to plain living and high thinking from her girlhood. Even parents
who find it difficult to keep the wolf at a respectful distance by
untiring economy will devise some means to make an only daughter look
presentable on her first appearance in society. Fine feathers do not
make fine birds, and yet the consciousness of a becoming gown will
irradiate the cheek of beauty. Elizabeth at eighteen would have been
fetching in any dress, but in each of her three new evening frocks she
looked bewitching. She was a gay, trig little person, with snapping,
dark eyes and an arch expression; a tireless dancer, quick and
audacious at repartee; the very ideal of a college belle. The student
world had fallen prostrate at her feet, and Tom Whittemore most
conspicuously and devotedly of all.

Tom was, perhaps, the most popular man of his day; a Philadelphian of
reputedly superfine stock, fresh-faced and athletic, with a jaunty
walk. There was no one at the college assemblies who whispered so
entrancingly in her ear when she was all alone with him in a corner,
and no one who placed her new fleecy wrap about her shoulders with
such an air of devotion when it was time to go home. She liked him
from the very first; and all her girl friends babbled, "Wouldn't it be
a lovely match?" But Tom's classmates from Philadelphia, when they
became confidential in the small hours of the morning, asked each
other what Tom's mother would say. Tom was a senior, and it was
generally assumed that matters would culminate on Class-day evening,
that evening of all evenings in the collegiate world sacred to
explanation and vows. Elizabeth lay awake all that night, remembering
that she had let Tom have his impetuous say, and that at the end he
had folded her in his arms and kissed her. Not until the next morning,
and then merely as an unimportant fact, did it occur to her that,
though Tom had told her she was dearer to him than all the world
besides, there was no definite engagement between them. It was only
when whispers reached her that Tom, who had gone to Philadelphia to
attend the wedding of a relation, was not coming back to his
Commencement, that she began to think a little. But she never really
doubted until the news came that Tom had been packed off by his mother
on a two years' journey round the world.

What mother in a distant city would be particularly pleased to have
her only son, on whom rested the hopes of an illustrious stock, lose
his heart to a college belle? But Elizabeth can scarcely be blamed for
not having taken the illustrious stock into consideration. She kept
saying to herself, that, if he had only written, she could have
forgiven him; and it was not surprising that the partners with whom
she danced at the college assemblies during the next five years
described her to each other as steely. Indeed, she danced and prattled
with such vivacious energy, and her black eyes shone so like beads,
that college tradition twisted her story until it ran that she had
thrown over Tom Whittemore, the most popular man of his day, and that
she had no more heart than a nether millstone. And all the time, just
to prove to herself that she had not cared for him, she kept the roses
that he had given her on that Class-day evening in the secret drawer
of her work-box. It had been all sheer nonsense, a boy and girl
flirtation. So she had taught herself to argue, knowing that it was
untrue, and knowing that she knew it to be so.

Then had come the deaths of her father and mother within three months
of each other, and she had awakened one morning to the consciousness
that she was alone in the world, and face to face with the necessity
of earning her daily bread. The gentleman who had charge of the few
thousand dollars belonging to her father's estate, in announcing that
her bonds had ceased to pay interest, had added that she was in the
same boat with many of the best people; which ought to have been a
consolation, had she needed any. But this loss of the means of living
had seemed a mere trifle beside her other griefs; indeed, it acted as
a spur rather than a bludgeon. The same pride which had prompted her
to continue to dance bade her bestir herself to make a living. Upon
reflection, the plan of starting a school struck her as the most
practicable. But it should be a school for girls; she had done with
the world of men. She had loved with all her heart, and her heart was
broken; it was withered, like the handful of dried roses in the secret
drawer of her work-box.

       *       *       *       *       *

Elizabeth was fortunate enough to obtain at the outset the patronage
of some of those same "best people" in the adjacent city, who happened
to know her story. Fashionable favor grows apace. It was only after
hearing that Mrs. Cyrus Bangs had intrusted her little girl to the
tender mercies of Miss Whyte that Mrs. Horace Barker subdued the
visions of scarlet-fever, bad air, and evil communications which
haunted her, sufficiently to be willing to send her own darlings to
the new kindergarten. People intimate with Mrs. Barker were apt to say
that worry over her three little girls, who were exceptionally healthy
children, kept her a nervous invalid.

"I consider Mrs. Cyrus Bangs a very particular woman," she said, with
plaintive impressiveness to her husband. "If she is willing to send
her Gwendolen to Miss Whyte, I am disposed to let Margery, Gladys, and
Dorothy go. Only you must have a very clear understanding with Miss
Whyte, at the outset, as to hours and ventilation and Gladys's hot
milk. We cannot move from the seaside until a fortnight after her term
begins, and it will be utterly impossible for me to get the children
to school in the mornings before half-past nine."

It never occurred to Horace Barker, when one morning about ten
o'clock, some six weeks later, he called at the kindergarten with his
precious trio, that there was any impropriety in breaking in upon Miss
Whyte's occupations an hour after school had begun. What
school-mistress could fail to be proud of the distinction of obtaining
his three daughters as pupils at any hour of the twenty-four when he
saw fit to proffer them? He expected to find a cringing, deferential
young person, who would, in the interest of her own bread and butter,
accede without a murmur to any stipulations which so important a
patroness as Mrs. Horace Barker might see fit to impose. He became
conscious, in the first place, that the school-mistress was a much
more attractive-looking young person than he had anticipated, and
secondly, that she seemed rather amused than otherwise at his
conditions. No man, and least of all a man so consummate as Mr.
Barker--for he was a dapper little person with a closely cropped beard
and irreproachable kid gloves--likes to be laughed at by a woman,
especially by one who is young and moderately good-looking; and he
instinctively drew himself up by way of protest before Elizabeth
spoke.

"Really, Mr. Barker," she replied, after a few moments of reflection,
"I don't see how it is possible for me to carry out Mrs. Barker's
wishes. To let the children come half an hour later and go home half
an hour earlier than the rest would interfere with the proper conduct
of the school. I will do my best to have the ventilation satisfactory,
and perhaps I can manage to provide some hot milk for the second one,
as her mother desires; but in the matter of the hours, I do not see
how I can accommodate Mrs. Barker. To make such an exception would be
entirely contrary to my principles."

Horace Barker smiled inwardly at the suggestion that a school-mistress
could have principles which an influential parent might not violate.

"When I say to you that it is Mrs. Barker's particular desire that her
preferences regarding hours should be observed, I am sure that you
will interpose no further objection."

Elizabeth gave a strange little laugh, and her eyes, which were still
her most salient feature, snapped noticeably. "It is quite out of the
question, Mr. Barker," she said with decision. "Much as I should like
to have your little girls, I cannot consent to break my rules on their
account."

"Mrs. Barker would be very sorry to be compelled to send her children
elsewhere," he said solemnly, with the air of one who utters a dire
threat.

"I should be glad to teach your little girls upon the same terms as I
do my other pupils," said Elizabeth, quietly. "But if my regulations
are unsatisfactory, you had better send them elsewhere."

Horace Barker was a man who prided himself on his deportment. He would
no more have condescended to express himself with irate impetuosity
than he would have permitted his closely cropped beard to exceed the
limits which he imposed upon it. He simply bowed stiffly, and turning
to the Misses Barker, who, under the supervision of a nurse, whom they
had been taught to address by her patronymic Thompson instead of by
her Christian name Bridget, had been open-mouthed listeners to the
dialogue, said, "Come, children."

It so happened that as Mr. Horace Barker and the Misses Barker
descended the steps of the late Mr. Cherrington's house, they came
plump upon Mr. Homer Ramsay, who was taking his morning stroll. The
old gentleman was standing leaning on his cane, glaring across the
street; and, by way of acknowledging that he perceived his first
cousin once removed, he raised the cane, and, pointing in the line of
his scowling gaze, ejaculated:

"This street is going to perdition. As though it weren't enough to
have a school opposite me, a fellow has had the impudence to put his
doctor's sign right next door to my house--an oculist, he calls
himself. In my day, a man who was fit to call himself a doctor could
set a leg, or examine your eyes, or tell what was the matter with your
throat, and not leave you so very much the wiser even then; but now
there's a different kind of quack for every ache and pain in our
bodies."

"We live in a progressive world, Cousin Homer," said Mr. Barker,
placing his eyeglass astride his nose to examine the obnoxious sign
across the way. "Dr. James Clay, Oculist," he read aloud,
indifferently.

"Progressive fiddlesticks, Cousin Horace. A fig for your oculists and
your dermatologists and all the rest of your specialists! I have
managed to live to be seventy-five, and I never had anybody prescribe
for me but a good old-fashioned doctor, thank Heaven! And I'm not dead
yet, as the speculators who have their eyes on my house and are
waiting for me to die will find out." Mr. Ramsay scowled ferociously;
then casting a sweeping glance from under his eyebrows at the little
girls, he said, "Cousin Horace, if your children don't have better
health than their mother, they might as well be dead. Do they go
there?" he asked, indicating the school-house with his cane.

"I am removing them this morning. Anabel had concluded to send them
there, but I find that the young woman who is the teacher has such
hoity-toity notions that I cannot consent to let my daughters remain
with her. In my opinion, so arbitrary a young person should be
checked; and my belief is that before many days she will find herself
without pupils." Whereupon Mr. Barker proceeded on his way, muttering
to himself, when at a safe distance, "Irrational old idiot!"

Mr. Ramsay stood for some moments mulling over his cousin's answer; by
degrees his countenance brightened and he began to chuckle; and every
now and then, in the course of his progress along Saville Street, he
would stand and look back at the late Mr. Cherrington's house, as
though it had acquired a new interest in his eyes. His daily promenade
was six times up and six times down Saville Street; and he happened to
complete the last lap, so to speak, of his sixth time down at the very
moment when Miss Whyte's little girls came running out on the sidewalk
for recess. Behind them appeared the school-mistress, who stood
looking at her flock from the top of the stone flight.

Elizabeth knew the old gentleman by sight but not by name, and she was
therefore considerably astonished to see him suddenly veer from his
ordinary course, and come slowly up the steps.

"You're the school-mistress?" he asked, with the directness of an old
man who feels that he need not mince his words.

"Yes, sir. I'm Miss Whyte."

"My name's Ramsay; Homer Ramsay. I live opposite, and I've come to
tell you I admire your pluck in not letting my cousin, Hortace Barker,
put you down. I'll stand by you, too; you can tell him that. Break up
your school? I should like to see him do it. Had to take his three
little girls away, did he? Ho, ho! A grand good joke that; a grand
good joke. What was it he asked you to do?"

"Mr. Barker wished me to change some of my rules about hours, and I
was not able to accommodate him, that was all," answered Elizabeth,
who found herself eminently puzzled by the interest in her affairs
displayed by this strange visitor.

"I'll warrant he did. And you wouldn't make the change. A grand good
joke that. I know him; he's my first cousin once removed, and the only
relation I've left. And he is going to try and break up your school.
I'd like to see him do it."

"I don't believe that Mr. Barker would do anything so unjust," said
Elizabeth, flushing.

"Yes, he would. I had it from his own lips. But he shan't; not while
I'm in the flesh. What did you say your name was?"

"Whyte--Elizabeth Whyte."

"And what made you become a school-teacher, I should like to know?"

"I had to earn my living."

"Humph! In my day, girls as pretty as you got married; but now the
rich ones are those who get husbands, and those who are poor have to
tend shop instead of baby."

"I know a number of girls who were poor, who have excellent husbands,"
said Elizabeth quietly, spurred into coming to the rescue of the sex
she despised. "But," she added, "there are many girls nowadays who are
poor who prefer to remain single." She was amused at having been led
into so unusual a discussion with this queer old gentleman.

"Bah! That caps the climax. When pretty girls pretend that they don't
wish to be married, the world is certainly turned upside down. Well, I
like your spirit, though I don't approve of your methods. I just
dropped in to say that if Horace Barker does cause you any trouble,
you've a friend across the way. Good-morning."

And before Elizabeth could bethink herself to say that she was very
much obliged to him, Mr. Ramsay was gone.

That very day after school, while Elizabeth was on her way across the
park which lay between Saville Street and the section of the city
where her rooms were, she dodged the wrong way in a narrow path, so
that she ran plump into the arms of a young man who was walking in the
opposite direction. Most women expect men to look out for them when
they dodge, but Elizabeth's code did not allow her to put herself
under obligations to any man. To tell the truth, she was in such a
brown study over the events of the morning that she had become
practically oblivious of her surroundings. When she recovered
sufficiently from her confusion at her clumsiness to take in the
details of the situation, she realized that the individual in question
was a young man whom she was in the habit of passing daily at this
same hour. Only the day before he had rescued her veil which had been
swept away by a high wind; and here she was again, within twenty-four
hours, forcing herself upon his attention. She, too, of all women, who
had done with men forever!

But Elizabeth's confusion was slight compared with that manifested by
her victim, who, notwithstanding that his hat had been jammed in by
her school-bag (which she had raised as a shield), was so profuse in
the utterance of his apologies and so willing to shoulder all
responsibility, that her own sensibilities were speedily comforted.
She found herself, after they had separated, much more engrossed by
the fact that he had addressed her by name. Although they had been
passing each other daily for over two months, it had never occurred to
her to wonder who he might be. But it was evident that she was not
unknown to him. She remembered now merely that he was a gentleman, and
that he had intelligent eyes and a pleasant, deferential smile. The
recollection of his blushing diffidence made her laugh.

On the following day, when they were about to pass as usual, she was
suddenly confronted in her mind by the alternative whether to
recognize him or not. A glance at him as he approached told her that
he himself was evidently uncertain if she would choose to consider
their experience of the previous day as equivalent to an introduction,
and yet she noticed a certain wistfulness of expression which
suggested the desire to be permitted to doff his hat to her. To
acknowledge by a simple inclination of her head the existence of a man
whom she was likely to pass every day seemed the natural thing to do,
however unconventional; so she bowed.

"Good afternoon, Miss Whyte," he said, lifting his hat with a glad
smile.

How completely our lives are often appropriated by incidents which
seem at the time of but slight importance! For the next few months
Elizabeth was buffeted as it were between the persistent persecution
of Mr. Horace Barker and the persistent devotion of Mr. Homer Ramsay.
With Mr. Barker she had no further interview, but not many weeks
elapsed before the influence of malicious strictures and insinuations
circulated by him concerning the hygienic arrangements of her school
began to bear their natural fruit. Parents became querulous and
suspicious; and when calumny was at its height, a case of
scarlet-fever among her pupils threw consternation even into the soul
of Mrs. Cyrus Bangs, her chief patroness. But, on the other hand, she
soon realized that she possessed an ardent, if not altogether
discreet, champion in her enemy's septuagenarian first cousin once
removed, who sang her praises and fought her battles from one end of
Saville Street to the other. Mr. Ramsay no longer railed against
electric cars and specialists; all his fulminations were uttered
against the malicious warfare which his Cousin Horace and that blood
relative's sickly wife were waging against the charming little Miss
Whyte, who had hired Mr. Cherrington's house across the way. What is
more, he paid Elizabeth almost daily visits, during which, after he
had discussed ways and means for confounding his vindictive kinsman,
he was apt to declare that she ought to be married, and that it was a
downright shame so pretty a girl should be condemned to drudgery
because she lacked a dowry. This was a point on which the old
gentleman never ceased to harp; and Elizabeth labored vainly to make
him understand that teaching was a delight to her instead of a
drudgery, and that she had not the remotest desire for a husband. And
by way of proving how indifferent she was to the whole race of men,
she continued to bow to the unknown stranger of her daily walk without
making the slightest effort to discover his name.

Pneumonia, that deadly foe of hale and hearty septuagenarians, carried
Mr. Homer Ramsay off within forty-eight hours in the first week of
May. And very shortly after, Elizabeth received a letter from Mr.
Mills, the lawyer, requesting her to call on a matter of importance.
She supposed that it concerned her lease. Perhaps her enemy had bought
the roof over her head.

Mr. Mills ushered her into his private office. Then opening a
parchment envelope on his desk, he turned to her, and said: "I have
the pleasure to inform you, Miss Whyte, that my client, the late Mr.
Homer Ramsay, has left you the residuary legatee of his entire
property--some fifty or sixty thousand dollars. Perhaps," he added,
observing Elizabeth's bewildered expression, "you would like to read
the will while I attend to a little matter in the other office. It is
quite short, and straight as a string. I drew the instrument, and the
testator knew what he was about just as well as you or I."

Mr. Mills, who, as you may remember, was a student of human nature,
believed that Miss Whyte lived on her nerves, and he had therefore
planned to leave her alone for a few moments to allow any hysterical
tendency to exhaust itself. When he returned, he found her looking
straight before her with the document in her lap.

"Is it all plain?" he asked kindly.

"Yes. But I don't understand exactly why he left it to me."

"Because he liked you, my dear. He had become very fond of you. And if
you will excuse my saying so," he added, with a knowing smile, "he was
very anxious to see you well married. He said that he wished to
provide you with a suitable dowry."

"I see," said Elizabeth, coloring. She reflected for a moment, then
looked up and said, "But I am free to use it as I see fit?"

"Absolutely. I may as well tell you now as any time, however," Mr.
Mills added smoothly, "that Mr. Ramsay's cousin, Mr. Horace Barker,
has expressed an intention to contest the will. He is the next of kin,
though only a first cousin once removed."

Elizabeth started at the name, and drew herself up slightly.

"You need not give yourself the smallest concern in the matter," the
lawyer continued. "If Mr. Barker were in needy circumstances or were a
nearer relative, he might be able to make out a case, but no jury will
hesitate between a first cousin once removed, amply rich in this
world's goods, and a--a--pretty woman. I myself am ready to testify
that Mr. Ramsay was completely in his right mind," he added, with
professional dignity; "and as for the claim of undue influence, it is
rubbish--sheer rubbish."

Elizabeth sat for a few moments without speaking. She seemed to pay no
heed to several further reassuring remarks which Mr. Mills, who judged
that she was appalled by the idea of a legal contest, hastened to let
fall. At last she looked straight at him, and said with firmness, "I
suppose that I am at liberty not to take this money, if I don't wish
to?"

"At liberty? Bless my stars, Miss Whyte, anybody is at liberty to
refuse a gift of fifty thousand dollars. But when you call to see me
again, you will be laughing at the very notion of such a thing. Go
home, my dear young lady, and leave the matter in my hands. Naturally
you are overwrought at the prospect of going into court."

"It isn't that, Mr. Mills. I cannot take this money; I have no right
to it. I am no relation to Mr. Ramsay, and the only reason he left it
to me was--was because he thought it would help me to be married.
Otherwise he would have left it to Mr. Barker. I have no intention of
marrying, and I should not be willing to take a fortune under such
circumstances."

"The will is perfectly legal, my dear. And as to marrying, you are
free to remain single all your days, if you wish to," said Mr. Mills,
with another knowing smile. "Indeed, you are overwrought."

Elizabeth shook her head. "I am sure that I shall never change my
mind," she answered. "I could never take it."

Elizabeth slept little that night; but when she arose in the morning,
she felt doubly certain that she had acted to her own satisfaction.
What real right had she to this money? It was coming to her as the
result of the fancy of an eccentric old man, who, in a moment of
needless pity and passing interest, had made a will in her favor to
the prejudice of his natural heir. Of what odds was it that that heir
had ample means already, or even that he was her bitter enemy? Did not
the very fact that he was her enemy and that she despised him make it
impossible for her to take advantage of an old man's whim so as to rob
him? She would have no lawsuit; he might keep the fifty thousand
dollars, and she would go her way as though Mr. Homer Ramsay and Mr.
Horace Barker had never existed. Mr. Ramsay had left her his money on
the assumption that she would be able to marry. To have taken it
knowing that she intended never to marry would have been to take it
under false pretences.

Mr. Mills consoled himself after much additional expostulation with
the reflection that if a woman is bent on making a fool of herself,
the wisest man in the world is helpless to prevent her. He set himself
at last to prepare the necessary papers which would put Mr. Horace
Barker in possession of his cousin's property; and very shortly the
act of signal folly, as he termed it, was completed. Tongues in the
neighborhood wagged energetically for a few days; but presently the
birth of twins in the next block distracted the public mind, and
Elizabeth was allowed to resume the vocation of an inconspicuous
schoolmistress. From the object of her bounty, Mr. Horace Barker, she
heard nothing directly; but at least he had the grace to discontinue
his persecutions. And parental confidence, which, in spite of
scarlet-fever, had never been wholly lost, was manifested in the form
of numerous applications to take pupils for the coming year. For the
first time for many weeks Elizabeth was in excellent spirits and was
looking forward to the summer vacation, now close at hand; during
which she hoped to be able to fit herself more thoroughly for her
duties after a few weeks of necessary rest.

One evening, about a fortnight before the date when the school was to
close, she noticed that the print of her book seemed blurred; she
turned the page and, perceiving the same effect, realized that her
vision was impaired. On the following morning at school she noticed
the same peculiarity whenever she looked at a book. She concluded that
it was but a passing weakness, the result of having studied too
assiduously at night. Still, recognizing that her eyes were
all-important to her, she decided to consult an oculist at once. It
would be a simple matter to do, for was there not one directly
opposite in the house next to Mr. Ramsay's? The sign, Dr. James Clay,
Oculist, had daily stared her in the face. She resolved to consult him
that very day after school. To be sure she knew nothing about him
individually, but she was aware that only doctors of the best class
were to be found in Saville Street.

She was obliged to wait in an anteroom, as there were three or four
patients ahead of her. When her turn came to be ushered into the
doctor's office, she found herself suddenly in the presence of the
unknown young man whom she was accustomed to meet daily on her way
from school. Her impulse at recognizing him, though she could not have
told why, was to slip away; but before she could move, he looked up
from the table over which he was bent making a memorandum.

"Miss Whyte!" he exclaimed with pleased astonishment and some
confusion, advancing to meet her. "In what way can I be of service to
you?"

"Dr. Clay? I should like you to look at my eyes; they have been
troubling me lately."

Elizabeth briefly detailed her symptoms. He listened with gravity, and
then after requesting her to change her seat, he examined her eyes
with absorbed attention. This took some minutes, and when he had
finished there was something in his manner which prompted her to say:

"Of course you will tell me, Dr. Clay, exactly what is the matter."

"I am bound to do so," he said, slowly. "I wished to make perfectly
sure, before saying that your eyes are quite seriously affected--not
that there is danger of a loss of sight, if proper precautions are
taken--but--but it will be absolutely necessary for you to abstain
from using them in order to check the progress of the disease."

"I see," she said, quietly, after a brief silence. "Do you mean that I
cannot teach school? I am a school-teacher."

"I knew that; and knowing it, I thought it best to tell you the whole
truth. No, Miss Whyte; you must not use your eyes for at least a year,
if you do not wish to lose your sight."

"I see," said Elizabeth again, with the hopeless air of one from whom
the impossible is demanded. "I thank you, Dr. Clay, for telling me the
truth," she added, simply. "Have I strained my eyes?"

"You have evidently overtaxed them a little; but the disease is
primarily a disease of the nerves. Will you excuse me for asking if at
any time within the last few years you have suffered a severe shock?"

"A shock?" Elizabeth hesitated an instant, and replied gently: "Yes;
but it was a number of years ago."

"That would account for the case, nevertheless."

A few minutes later Elizabeth was walking along the street, face to
face with despair. She had not been able to obtain permission from the
doctor to use her eyes even during the ten days which remained before
vacation. He had said that every moment of delay would make the cure
more difficult. She must absolutely cease to look at a book for one
whole year. It would be necessary at first for her to visit him for
treatment two or three times a week. He had said--she remembered his
exact words--"I cannot do a very great deal for you; we can rely only
on time for that; but believe me, I shall endeavor to help you so far
as it lies in human power. I hope that you will trust me--and--and
come to me freely." Kind words these, but of what avail were they to
answer the embarrassing question how she was to live? She must give up
her school at least for a year; that seemed inevitable. How was she to
earn her daily bread if she obeyed the doctor's orders? Would it not
be better to use her eyes to the end, and trust to charity to send her
to an infirmary when she became blind? Why had she been foolish enough
to refuse Mr. Ramsay's property? But for a quixotic theory, she would
not now have been at the world's mercy.

It was the sting of shame which this last thought aroused, following
in the train of her bitter reasoning, that caused her to quicken her
pace and clinch her hands. That same pride, which had been her ally
hitherto, had come to her rescue once more. She said to herself that
she had done what she knew was right, and that no force of cruel
circumstances should induce her to regret that she had not acted
differently. She would prove still that she was able to make her own
way without assistance, even though she were obliged to scrub floors.
A shock? The shock of a betrayed faith which had arrayed her soul in
bitterness against mankind. Must she own that she was crushed? Not
while she had an arm to toil and a heart to strive.

The next ten days were bitter ones. Elizabeth, after disbanding her
school, began to plan and contrive for the future. Schemes bright with
prospect suggested themselves, and faded into smoke at the touch of
practicability. She had a few hundred dollars, which would enable her
to live until she had been able to devise a plan, and she determined
that the world should not think that she was discouraged. The world,
and chiefly at the moment Dr. Clay, whose kindness and earnest
attention during the visits which she paid him suggested that he felt
great pity for her. Pity? She wished the pity of no man.

One evening while she was alone in her parlor, wrestling with her
schemes, the maid entered and said that a gentleman wished to see her.
A gentleman? She could think of none who would be likely to call upon
her, but she bade the girl show him in; and a moment later she was
greeting Dr. Clay. Presently, while she was wondering why he had come,
she found herself listening to these words: "I am a stranger to you to
all intents and purposes, but you are none to me. For months I have
dogged your footsteps unknown to you, and haunted this house in my
walks because I knew that you lived here. The memory of your face has
sweetened my dreams, and those brief moments when we have passed each
other daily have been sweeter than any paradise. I know the story of
your struggle with that coward and of your noble act of renunciation.
It cut into my heart like a knife to speak to you those necessary
words the other day, and I have been miserable ever since. I said to
myself at last that I would go to you and tell you that I could not be
happy apart from you; and that your happiness was mine. This seems
presumptuous, intrusive: I wish to be neither. I have merely come to
ask that I may be free to call upon you and to try to make you love
me. I am not rich, but my practice is such that I am able to offer you
a home. Will you allow me to come to see you, at least to be your
friend?"

The silence which followed this eager question seemed to demand an
answer. Elizabeth, who had been sitting with bent head, looked up
presently and answered with a sweet smile:

"I have no friends, Dr. Clay. I think it would be very pleasant to
have one."

A few minutes later when he was gone, Elizabeth sat for some time
without moving, with the same happy smile on her lips. He had asked
nothing more and she had given him no greater assurance. Why was it
that at last she buried her face in her hands and sobbed as though her
bosom would break? Why was it, too, that before she went to bed that
night she took a handful of withered flowers, mere dust and ashes,
from the secret drawer of her work-box, and, wrapping them in the
paper which had enclosed them, held them in the flame of the lamp
until they were consumed? Why? Because love, unwatched for, unbidden
had entered her heart, which she thought sere as the rose-leaves, and
restored light to the sunshine and joy to the world.




A SURRENDER


Morgan Russell and I were lolling one day on the beach at Rock Ledge
watching the bathers. We had played three sets of tennis, followed by
a dip in the ocean, and were waiting for the luncheon hour. Though
Russell was my junior by four years, we were old friends, and had
prearranged our vacation to renew our intimacy, which the force of
circumstances had interrupted since we were students together at
Harvard. Russell had been a Freshman when I was a Senior, but as we
happened to room in the same entry, this propinquity had resulted in
warm mutual liking. I had been out of college for eight years, had
studied law, and was the managing clerk of a large law firm, and in
receipt of what I then thought a tremendous salary. Russell was still
at Cambridge. He had elected at graduation to pursue post-graduate
courses in chemistry and physics, and had recently accepted a
tutorship. He had not discovered until the beginning of the Junior
year his strong predilection for scientific investigation, but he had
given himself up to it with an ardor which dwarfed everything else on
the horizon of his fancy. It was of his future we were talking, for he
wished to take his old chum into his confidence and to make plain his
ambition. "I recognize of course," he told me, "that I've an uphill
fight ahead of me, but my heart is in it. My heart wouldn't be in it
if I felt that the best years of my life were to be eaten up by mere
teaching. Nowadays a man who's hired to teach is expected to teach
until his daily supply of gray matter has run out, and his original
work has to wait until after he's dead. There's where I'm more
fortunate than some. The fifteen hundred dollars--a veritable
godsend--which I receive annually under the will of my aunt, will keep
the wolf at a respectful distance and enable me to play the
investigator to my heart's content. I'm determined to be thorough,
George. There is no excuse for superficiality in science. But in the
end I intend to find out something new. See if I don't, old man."

"I haven't a doubt you will, Morgan," I replied. "I don't mind letting
on that I ran across Professor Drayson last winter, and he told me you
were the most promising enthusiast he had seen for a long time; that
you were patient and level-headed as well as eager. Drayson doesn't
scatter compliments lightly. But fifteen hundred dollars isn't a very
impressive income."

"It was very good of the old fellow to speak so well of me."

"Suppose you marry?"

"Marry?" Russell looked up from the sea-shells with which he had been
playing, and smiled brightly. He had a thin, slightly delicate face
with an expression which was both animated and amiable, and keen,
strong gray eyes. "I've thought of that. I'm not what is called
contemplating matrimony at the moment; but I've considered the
possibility, and it doesn't appall me."

"On fifteen hundred a year?"

"And why not, George?" he responded a little fiercely. "Think of the
host of teachers, clerks, small tradesmen, and innumerable other
reputable human beings who marry and bring up families on that or
less. Which do you think I would prefer, to amass a fortune in
business and have my town and country house and steam yacht, or to
exist on a pittance and discover before I die something to benefit the
race of man?"

"Knowing you as I do, there's only one answer to that conundrum," said
I. "And you're right, too, theoretically, Morgan. My ancestors in
Westford would have thought fifteen hundred downright comfort, and in
admitting to you that five thousand in New York is genteel poverty, I
merely reveal what greater comforts the ambitious American demands. I
agree with you that from the point of view of real necessity one-half
the increase is sheer materialism. But who's the girl?"

"There is no girl. Probably there never will be. But I'm no crank. I
like a good dinner and a seat at the play and an artistic domestic
hearth as well as the next man. If I were to marry, of course I should
retain the tutorship which I accepted temporarily as a means of
training my own perceptions, though I should try to preserve as at
present a considerable portion of my time free from the grind of
teaching. Then much as I despise the method of rushing into print
prematurely in order to achieve a newspaper scientific reputation, I
should expect to eke out my income by occasional magazine articles and
presently a book. With twenty-five hundred or three thousand a year we
should manage famously."

"It would all depend upon the woman," said I with the definiteness of
an oracle.

"If the savants in England, France, and Germany--the men who have been
content to starve in order to attain immortality--could find wives to
keep them company, surely their counterparts are to be found here
where woman is not the slave but the companion of man and is
encouraged to think not merely about him but think of him." After this
preroration Russell stopped abruptly, then raised himself on one
elbow. Attracted by his sudden interest I turned lazily in the same
direction, and after a moment's scrutiny ejaculated: "It looks just
like her."

As it was nearing the luncheon hour, most of the bathers had retired.
Two women, one of them a girl of twenty-five, in the full bloom of
youth and vigor, with an open countenance and a self-reliant, slightly
effusive smile, were on the way to their bath. They were stepping
transversely across the beach from their bath-house at one end in
order to reach the place where the waves were highest, and their
course was taking them within a few yards of where we lay. For some
reason the younger woman had not put on the oil-skin cap designed to
save her abundant hair from getting wet, but carried it dangling from
her fingers, and, just as Russell noticed her, she dropped it on the
beach. After stooping to pick it up, she waited a moment for her
friend to join her, revealing her full face.

"Yes, it's certainly she," I announced. "I spoke to her on the pier in
New York last autumn, when she was returning from Europe, and it's
either she or her double."

"You know her?"

"Yes, the Widow Spaulding."

"Widow? You mean the girl?"

There was just a trace of disappointment in the tone of Russell's
surprise.

"Yes, I mean the girl. But you needn't dismiss her altogether from
your fastidiously romantic soul merely because she has belonged to
another. There are extenuating circumstances. She married the Rev.
Horace Spaulding, poor fellow, on his deathbed, when he was in the
last stages of consumption, and two days later she was his widow."

"You seem to know a good deal about her."

"I ought to, for she was born and bred in Westford. Edna Knight was
her name--the daughter of Justin Knight, the local attorney,
half-lawyer and half-dreamer. His parents were followers of Emerson,
and there have been plain living and high thinking in that family for
three generations. Look at her," I added, as she breasted a giant wave
and jubilantly threw herself into its embrace, "she takes to the water
like a duck. I never saw a girl so metamorphosed in three years."

"What was she like before?" asked Russell.

"Changed physically, I mean, and--and socially, I suppose it should be
called. Three years ago, at the time of her marriage to Spaulding, she
was a slip of a girl, shy, delicate, and introspective. She and her
lover were brought up in adjacent houses, and the world for her
signified the garden hedge over which they whispered in the gloaming,
and later his prowess at the divinity school and his hope of a parish.
When galloping consumption cut him off she walked about shrouded in
her grief as one dead to the world of men and women. I passed her
occasionally when I returned home to visit my family, and she looked
as though she were going into a decline. That was a year after her
marriage. Solicitous sympathy was unavailing, and the person
responsible for her regaining her grip on life was, curiously enough,
a summer boarder whom old Mrs. Spaulding had taken into her family in
order to make both ends meet. Westford has been saved from rusting out
by the advent in the nick of time of the fashionable summer boarder,
and Mrs. Sidney Dale, whose husband is a New York banker, and who
spent two summers there as a cure for nervous prostration, fascinated
Edna without meaning to and made a new woman of her in the process.
There is the story for you. A year ago Mrs. Dale took her to Europe as
a sort of finishing touch, I suppose. I understand Westford thinks her
affliction has developed her wonderfully, and finds her immensely
improved; which must mean that she has triumphed over her grief, but
has not forgotten, for Westford would never pardon a purely material
evolution."

"I noticed her at the hotel this morning before you arrived, and
admired the earnestness and ardor of her expression."

"And her good looks presumably. I saw you start when she approached
just now. She may be just the woman for you."

"Introduce me then. And her companion?"

"Will fall to my lot, of course, but I have no clew as to her
identity."

Mrs. Spaulding enlightened me on the hotel piazza, after luncheon,
when, as a sequence to this persiflage I brought up my friend. The
stranger proved to be Mrs. Agnes Gay Spinney, a literary person, a
lecturer on history and literature. It transpired later that she and
Edna had become acquainted and intimate at Westford the previous
spring during a few weeks which Mrs. Spinney had spent there in the
preparation of three new lectures for the coming season. She was a
rather serious-looking woman of about forty with a straight figure,
good features, and a pleasant, but infrequent smile, suggesting that
its owner was not susceptible to flippancy. However, she naively
admitted that she had come away for pure recreation and to forget the
responsibilities of life.

Morgan and the widow were conversing with so much animation that I, to
whom this remark was addressed, took upon myself to give youth a free
field; consequently I resigned myself to Mrs. Spinney's dignified
point of view, and, avoiding badinage or irony, evinced such an
amiable interest in drawing her out that by the end of fifteen minutes
she asked leave to show me