ut elevating a whole Exhibition in the background. At Earl's Court
they still keep up a pretence of Industrial Exhibition, though we have
long since lost interest in the pretext, and no longer inquire whether
the painted scenery that walls in the grounds is called the Alps or the
Apennines or the Champs-Elysees. And yet methinks mankind did discover
the open-air entertainment, as perchance roast pig was known and
forgotten again long centuries before Bo-bo. For what was Ranelagh, what
Vauxhall? Were not the gardens of Vauxhall "made illustrious by a
thousand lights finely disposed," or, as Thackeray puts it, by a "hundred
thousand _extra_ lamps, which were always lighted"? Were not "concerts of
musick" given nightly by fiddlers in cocked hats, ensconced in a "gilded
cockleshell," and was not the price of admission a shilling? "Vauxhall
must ever be an estate to its proprietor," wrote Boswell, "as it is
peculiarly adapted to the taste of the English nation; there being a
mixture of curious show--gay exhibition--music, vocal and instrumental,
not too refined for the general ear; and, though last not least, good
eating and drinking for those who choose to purchase that regale." But
Boswell prophesied ill. Public gardens were always distasteful to English
Puritanism, because they lent themselves to rendezvous; and though
Boswell, in protesting against the rise of price to two shillings,
certifies to the elegance and innocence of the entertainment, and though
Mr. Osborne and Miss Amelia walked unharmed in its groves and glades, and
it was not Rebecca Sharp's fault that Jos. Sedley got drunk on the bowl
of rack punch, still Vauxhall, like Ranelagh and Cremorne, has come down
to us with tainted reputation. It died in the odour of brimstone, and
only in the magical ink-pool of literature can we still behold the
heralded gallants in the boxes junketing with low-bodiced ladies of
quality whose patches show piquantly on their damask cheeks. Rosherville
remains in ignoble respectability, the place to spend an h-less day, our
one uninstructive institution, for even "Constantinople" and "Venice"
have a specious background of geographical and even of industrial
information: Rosherville, which only once flowered into poetry, and then
under another name,--when Mr. Anstey's barber wedded the Tinted Venus
with a ring.

And in the magical ink-pool I see you and me still sitting, O
Transatlantic Parisienne, as we sat that sunny afternoon--three hundred
years ago--in ancient Antwerp, in _oud Antwerpen_, niched in the
windowseat of that quaint hostelry which gives on the great market-place,
and watching the festive procession. Do you remember the gorgeous
costumes of our fellow-burghers, and the trappings of their prancing
chargers in those days when life was not plain, but coloured, and
existence was one vast fancy-dress ball? How glad we were to welcome the
Archduke Martinias of Austria, our sovereign elect, or was it Francois
Sonnius, our first Bishop, coming to be installed in our glorious
Cathedral, amid the joyous carillons of its bells! Can you not still see
the Angels hovering over the Virgin, and the Golden Calf,
flower-wreathed, and the Flight into Egypt, on that naive donkey, and
"the Flying Dutchman," tugged by a horse, and the gilded galley rowed in
make-believe by little children in their Sunday clothes, catching crabs
in air, and the incongruous camels bestridden by Arab sheikhs with
African pages, and the Persians on ponies, and the Crusaders in their
fine foolish coats-of-mail, and the gay courtiers, with clanking swords,
and the halberdiers, and the particoloured arquebusiers, and the archers
in green and red, and the spearsmen in sugarloaf hats, and the cherubs
riding on dolphins? Can you not hear the beating of the drum, and the Ave
Maria of the white-robed chorus-boys, and the irrelevant strains of the
Danish national anthem, and the japes of the jester with his cap and
bells? What happy times for butchers and bakers and candlestick-makers
when, instead of working, they could go in processions, bearing aloft the
insignia of their guilds, and when middle-class girls, ignorant of the
New Womanhood, could loll on triumphal cars with roses in their hair! Do
you remember how the topmost divinity smiled to me from her perilous
perch, too high to rouse your jealousy, and how the little cherub that
sat up aloft besprinkled us mischievously with eau de cologne? Ah, shall
we ever again be as happy as we were three hundred years ago? will the
wine be ever as red, the potato salad as appetising, or the cheese (did
they really enjoy Gorgonzola and Camembert in the sixteenth century?) as
delicious as in that ancient Flemish hostelry with its Lutheran motto:

  Wie nikt mint Wijn, Wijf en Sangh,
  Blijft een Geck sijn Leven langh!

Was it from its inscribed beams that Shelley borrowed his famous lyric
"Love's Philosophy"? for did we not read:

  Den Hemel drinckt, en d'Aerde drinckt:
  Waerom souden wij niet drinckt?

("Heaven drinks, and earth drinks: why shouldn't we drink?") At any rate
it pleased us to recall the delectable lines:

  And the sunlight clasps the earth,
  And the moonbeams kiss the sea;
  What are all these kissings worth
      If thou kiss not me?

But what does it matter what one did three hundred years ago?

Or, what does it matter what one did that dim Arabian night when we set
out with the cavalcade of camels in the marriage procession, and the
bride cowered veiled in her corner of the coach, and the plump mother
smiled archly at us, and the brother and the bridegroom, mounted on Arab
steeds, smacked each other's faces in ceremonial solemnity, exactly like
"the two Macs" in the music-hall? Was it then, or in the nineteenth
century, that we rode the camel together, I on the hindmost peak? "Oh,
the oont, oh, the oont, oh, the gawdforsaken oont!" as the poet of the
barrack-room sings. He seems to double up like a garden-chair to receive
one; then his knees unfold and the rider shoots up; then the camel rises
to his full height, and one ducks instinctively for fear of striking the
stars. "_Salaam Aleikhoom_," I cried to the drivers, airing my Arabic,
which I make by mispronouncing Hebrew; and they answered effusively,
"Yankee Doodle! Chicago!" Alas for the glamour of the Orient! They had
all come from the greater fair, perhaps spent their lives in traveling
from fair to fair, mercenaries of some latter-day Barnum.

There was a fine stalwart Egyptian, who stood beating a gong to summon
the faithful to improper dances. I gave him a cup of coffee, and he held
it on high, and with gratitude effusing from every pore of his dusky
face, cried, "Columbus!" Then he mounted a flight of stairs and shouted
beamingly, "1492!"

He took a sip, and then his wife called him chidingly, and he fled to
her. But he returned to drain the cup in my presence, crying between each
sip "Columbus" or "1492." Never before have I bought so much gratitude
for ten centimes. Henceforward I found "Columbus" a watchword, and "1492"
a magic talisman, causing dusky eyes to kindle and turbaned heads to nod
beamingly.

The town-barber of _Alt Antwerpen_, who was wont to shave me in the
sixteenth century, had a beautiful motto:--

  I am Hair-dresser, Barber, and Surgeon,
   I shave with, soap and much delight,
  Although there are barbers who do it
    As though they were in a fright.

But it is surpassed by a hundred delightful things in "The Visitor's
Handybook," which the touts in New Antwerp, ignorant of its treasures,
press upon the traveller gratis. It opens auspiciously: "The opening
pages of our little guide we have devoted to a short review of the city
of Antwerp, the streets of which still contain elegant specimens of those
quaint and handsome edifices of the Netherlands are truly famous, and
which in Antwerp, perhaps more than in any other city, seem to abound."
Here are some more gems: "Visitors will be naturally anxious to secure a
comfortable apartment, in selecting which the following list will be
found of service:--see advertisements, all of which can be strongly
recommended." "Facing you is the King's Palace; not a very attractive
one; however, as a rule, not open to the public, but admission may
sometimes be obtained although at great trouble during the absence of the
King." "It was formally inaugurated by the presence of the Queen,
Princess Beatrice, and a numerous compagny representing the European
Benches and Pairs." "A wonderfully painted ceiling, in which the
attendant can point out some marvellous effects." "The Visitor's
Handybook" is in its thirteenth free edition, and is worth double the
price. Antwerp is very strong linguistically. The _quatre
langues_--Flemish, French, English, and German--make a universal
confusion of tongues, and the whole town is nothing but a huge open
Flemish--French dictionary, every shop-sign or street-name being
translated. A few sturdy burghers stick to the old tongue, and sometimes
English rules the roast. "The Welsh Harp" (which is Antwerp way) is a
sailor's cabaret near the quay. There is even a trace of Irish influence
in the etymology of Antwerp as given in the official handbook; for
Antigon, the giant who used to cut off the hand of any shipman that
refused him tribute, and whose throwing it (_Handwerpen_) into the river
gave the name to the city, is stated beforehand to have lived in the
castle of Antwerp. They are not destitute of wit, the Belgians, if I may
judge by some specimens I heard. It is a local joke to refer to the
famous "_dirigeable_" balloon, which burst in the latter days of the
Exhibition, as the "_dechirable_" balloon. "They pooh-pooh the past
nowadays," said a tram-conductor to me, "but when I look at the Cathedral
and Rubens' 'Descent from the Cross' I think our forefathers were _assez
malins_." A seedy vendor of lottery-tickets declared that every one of
them would draw a prize. "Wherefore, then, my friend," quoth I, "do you
not keep them?" "_Je ne suis pas egoiste_," he said, with a shrug. To
defend myself against his masterful solicitousness, I stated solemnly
that lotteries were illegal in England, and that if I returned thither
with a lottery-ticket the British Government would throw me into prison.
But he was not daunted: "_Appuyez-vous sur moi_," he replied
reassuringly.




BROADSTAIRS AND RAMSGATE

A story is current in the Clubs that Mr. Henry James innocently went to
Ramsgate, in order to possess his soul in peace. 'T was the height of the
rougher Ramsgate season, and there is something irresistibly incongruous
in the juxtaposition of the rarefied American novelist and the roaring
sands of Albion. In the which juxtaposition the story leaves him; and we
are ignorant of whether he turned tail and fled back to quieter London,
or whether he stayed on to collect unexpected material. Our analytical
cousin's stippling methods are, it is to be feared, but poorly adapted
for the painting of holiday crowds, which require the scene-painter's
brush, and lend themselves reluctantly to nuances. The colours have not
that dubiety so dear to the artist of the penumbra; the sands are as
yellow as the benches are red; and the niggers are quite as black as they
are burnt-corked. The love-making, too, is devoid of subtlety. When you
see--as I saw last Bank Holiday on Ramsgate beach--Edwin and Angelina
asleep in each other's arms, the situation strikes you as too simple for
analysis. It is like the loves of the elements, or the propensity of
carbon to combine with oxygen. An even more idyllic couple I came upon
prone amid the poppies on the cliff hard by, absorbing the peace and the
sunshine, steeping themselves in the calm of Nature after the finest
Wordsworthian manner. But presently there is the roll of a drum, and the
scream of a fife in distress rises from below, and Angelina pricks up her
ears. "I wish they'd come up 'ere," she murmurs wistfully; "I'd jump up
like steam; I could just do a dance."

Yet all the same their seclusion among the wild flowers on the edge of
the cliff showed a glimmering of soul. Not theirs the hankering for that
strip of sand near the stone pier, which a worthy dame of my acquaintance
once compared to a successful fly-paper. Scientific investigation shows
the congestion at this particular spot to be due to the file of
bathing-machines which blocks the view of the sea from half the beach. To
the bulk of the visitors this yellow patch _is_ Ramsgate, just as a
small, cocoanut-bearing area of Hampstead woodland is the Heath, most of
whose glorious acres have never felt the tread of a donkey or a cheap
tripper. Not that there are many other attractions in Ramsgate, which is
administered by councillors more sleepy than sage. Having literally
defaced their town by a railway-station, built a harbour which will not
hold water, constructed a promenade pier in the least accessible quarter,
and provided a band which plays mainly "intervals," they naturally refuse
to venture on further improvements, such as refuges on the parade, or
trees in the shadeless streets, and, in the excess of their zeal, have
even, so I hear, declined the railway company's offer to give them a lift
(from sands to cliff), and Mr. Sebag Montefiore's offer to allow the
public gardens to be continued right through his estate on towards
Dumpton. Even so, these worthy burghers have more of my regard than their
brethren of Margate, who have sacrificed their trust to the Moloch of
advertisement. Stand on Margate Parade and look seaward, and the main
impression is Pills. Sail towards Margate Pier and look landward, and the
main impression is Disinfectant Powder.

Baby Broadstairs has known better how to guard its dignity and its
beauty; so that Dickens might still look from Bleak House on as dainty a
scene as in the days when he lounged on the dear old, black,
weather-beaten pier. I spent a week at Broadstairs in the height of a
Dynamite Mystery. We were very proud of the Mystery, we of Broadstairs,
and of the space we filled in the papers. Ramsgate, with its
contemporaneous murder sensation, we turned up our noses at, till
Ramsgate had a wreck and redressed the balance. For the rest, we made
sand-pies, and bathed and sailed, and listened to a band that went wheezy
on Bank Holiday. Broadstairs boasts of one drunkard, who does odd jobs as
well. He is tall, venerable, and melancholy, and has the air of a
temperance orator. "Joe's one of the best chaps on the pier when he's
sober," said his mate to me sorrowfully; "but when he's drunk he makes a
fool of himself." This was not quite true; for Joe was not always
foolish. Why, when two gentlemen came down from London in a gipsy caravan
to teach us Theosophy, and all Broadstairs fluttered towards their
oil-lamp, leaving the band to tootle to the sad sea waves, I could not
get him to mount the Cheap Jack rostrum in opposition! The most I could
spur him to was an indignant defence of London against the lecturer's
denunciation of it as an immoral city, a pit of unrighteousness. "'T
ain't true!" he thundered raucously. "Many's the gent from Lunnon as has
behaved most liberal to me." One day there was an attempt to disturb
Joe's monopoly as drunkard, and I am afraid I had a hand in it. A human
caricature in broken boots addressed me as I lay on the beach (writing
with a stylographic pen and blotting the sheets with the sand), and
besought me to buy sprigs of lavender. He proved to me by ocular
demonstration that he had no money in his pockets; whereupon I proved to
him by parity of reasoning that I had none in mine either. However, I
remembered me of a penny postage-stamp (unlicked), and tendered it
diffidently, and he received it with disproportionate benedictions. Later
in the day he reappeared under my window, hurling up maudlin abuse. He
had got drunk on my postage-stamp!

I told him to get along with him, which he did. For some time he
staggered about Broadstairs in search of its policeman. He came across
him at last, and was straightway clapped into an open victoria and driven
across the sunny fields to Ramsgate. Meantime, Broadstairs was left
unprotected--perhaps Joe kept an eye on it.

Broadstairs has also a jolly old waterman, who paddles about apparently
to pick up exhausted bathers. One morning as I was swimming past his boat
he warned me back. "Any danger?" I asked. "Ladies," he replied,
ambiguously enough. It thus transpired that his function is to preserve a
scientific frontier between the sexes. Considering that the ladies one
meets at sea are much more clothed than the ladies whose diaphanous
drapery one engirdles in ball-rooms, this prudery is amusing. It is
consoling to remember that the Continental practice prevails in many a
quaint nook along our coasts, and that the ladies are sensible enough to
walk to and from their bathing tents, clothed and unashamed. Strange to
say, Broadstairs has placed its ladies' machines nearest the pier, for
the benefit of loungers armed with glasses; and I must not forget to
mention that the boatman himself holds a daily _levee_ of mermaidens, who
make direct for his boat and gambol around the prow. If anything needs
reforming in our marine manners, it is rather the male costume. Why we
men are allowed to go about like savages, clothed only in skins (and
those our own), is to me one of the puzzles of popular ethics. What is
sauce for the gander is sauce for the goose. At Folkestone, where the
machine-people are dreadfully set against ladies and gentlemen using the
same water, promiscuous bathing flourishes more nakedly than anywhere on
the Continent; and the gentlemen have neither tents nor costumes. In
Margate and Deal the machines are of either sex, and the gentlemen are
clad in coloured pocket-handkerchiefs. At Birchington I bathed from a
boat which was besieged by a bevy of wandering water-nymphs, begging me
to let them dive from it. And they dived divinely!

Though the _profanum vulgus_ takes possession of our strands, and Edwin
and Angelina are common objects of the sea-shore, yet I cannot help
thinking that there is many a vulgar British beach that would ravish us
did we light upon it in other lands. Oh, how picturesque! What a gay
grouping of colour! What an enchanting medley of pink parasols and golden
sand and chintz tents and white bathing-machines, and blue skies and
black minstrels and green waters, and creamy flannels and gauzy dresses!
And--_ciel!_ what cherubic children! and--_corpo di Bacco!_--what pretty
women! What frank _abandon_ to the airy influences of the scene! What
unconventionality! What unrestraint! See how that staid old _signor_
allows himself to be buried and excavated by the _bambino_. Watch that
charming _maman_ unblushingly bathing _bebe_. Note that portly _matrona_
careering upon the _asino_! What cares she for her dignity? Listen to the
babel--"[Greek: hokae pokae, hokae pokae]" "Drei shies a pfennig!" "Your
photograph, _senorita?_" Look! the coquettish _contadina_ is slapping the
face of the roguish _vetturino_! How the good-natured crowd, easily
pleased, gathers round the Ethiopian troubadour, trolling in unison his
amorous catches!--

  _Daisy, Daisy, donne-moi ta reponse._

And hark! Do you not hear in the distance the squeak of _Puncinello_? Ah!
why have we none of this happy carelessness in England?--we who take our
pleasures _moult tristement_--why have we not this lightheartedness, this
_camaraderie_ of enjoyment? Why cannot we throw aside our insular
stiffness, our British hauteur, and be natural?

I journeyed to Broadstairs, late at night, riding in a three-horsed brake
with many a jocund passenger. And then something happened. Something
ineffably trivial, and yet a matter of life and death. We were bowling
merrily along the country lanes in the fragrant air. It was a dark,
starless night, but so warm that the easterly sea-breeze fanned us like a
zephyr. And through the gloom a flash-light leaped and waned, flickered
and died and gleamed again with electric brilliance--"the Winnaker(?)
light from France," a garrulous inhabitant assured us; a rare phenomenon
to be seen only once in a decade, when an east wind clarifies the
atmosphere, and allows the rays to pierce through two dozen miles of
strait. It seemed like La Belle France winking amicably to us across the
waters. And a little to the left twinkled "The Green Man"--no friendly
public-house, but a danger-signal from behind the Goodwin Sands, likewise
visible but by miracle.

And as we marvelled at these jewels of the night, that shamed the
absentee stars, the brake stood still with a jolt and a shock that threw
our gay company into momentary alarm. But it was nothing. Only a horse
fallen down dead! One of our overworked wheelers had suddenly sunk upon
the earth, a carcase. Dust to dust! Who shall tell of the daylong agony
of the dumb beast as he plodded pertinaciously through the heat,
ministering to the pleasures of his masters? Had he been a man, how we
should have praised him, belauded the beauty of his end, telling one
another sanctimoniously that he had died in harness. As it was we merely
stripped him of his harness and deposited it in the brake! We unhitched
the leader and put him between the shafts, side by side with the other
horse, both incurious and indifferent, wasting nor glance nor nasal rub
upon their defunct comrade. We men feign better. And then we drew him to
the edge of the track, a rigid, lumbering mass; and the garrulous
inhabitant discussed the value of the carcase, and the driver cracked his
whip, and the living horses stirred their haunches, and in a moment we
were spanking along, leaving our fellow-creature to darkness and
solitude. Only the flash-light from France glimmered upon the poor dead
beast, coming all the way to cheer him; only the green eye from beyond
the Goodwins blinked upon his unheaving flanks.

And from far ahead came back to his deaf ears with ever-diminishing
intensity our noisy madrigal--most music-hall, most melancholy--his only
dirge:

  Mary Jane was a farmer's daughter,
  Mary Jane did what she oughter.
  She fell in love but all in vain.
  O poor Mary! O poor Jane!




BUDAPEST

The Millennial Exhibition of Budapest--for which the Directors gave me a
season ticket as soon as they heard I was leaving--professes to celebrate
the foundation of Hungary; but 896 is a very long time ago, and the event
does not seem to have been reported in the newspapers of the period.
However, as a Hungarian explained to me, when you are counting by
thousands you are not particular to a year or two, so perhaps it was not
precisely ten centuries ago that the foundation of Hungary was
inaugurated by a national assembly that created "the Constitution of
Pusztaszer." After all, have not those irrepressible German savants
discovered that Christ was born in the year 6 B.C.? At any rate, there is
no doubt that the Magyars did steal a country some time or other in the
remote past, or in more political language, did obtain a footing in
Europe by ousting the Slav tribes that peopled the great plain bounded by
the Carpathians and the Danube and the Tisza. They came from Central
Asia, on a late wave of that big "Westward ho!" movement of the Eastern
peoples, a race of shepherds changed into an army of mounted archers, and
pitched their tents first in Galieia, uniting their seven tribes under
the great chief Arpad; but, harassed continually by local tribes with
unpronounceable names, they moved farther westwards to their present
quarters, where, after a vain but spirited attempt to annex Europe
generally, they settled down to comfort and civilisation, ceased to offer
white horses to idols, and embraced Christianity.

It seems that land-thieves are called conquerors; and after a thousand
years of possession of their stolen goods, the glamour of a divine
sanctity gets over the past, and high-minded natives live and die for the
country which seems to have been theirs from time immemorial, and in
which their holiest feelings are enrooted. What makes national robberies
moral is the fact that there is honour among the thieves. The morality of
crowds is, in fact, as different from that of individuals as "the
psychology of crowds" which has just engaged the attention of an
ingenious scientist. Into the original conquerors of a country a
miscellaneous assortment of other races always gets absorbed, as the
Franks by the Gauls, the Turkish Bulgarians by the Slavs. The Hungarians
absorbed into themselves Italians, Germans, and Czechs, and the modern
Hungarian is, according to Arminius Vambery, a typical product of the
fusion of Europe and Asia, Turanian and Aryan. And that is the sort of
way in which after a few centuries we get the chauvinistic cries:
"Germany for the Germans," "Poland for the Polish," "Hungary for the
Hungarians." In truth, no nation has a right to anything it cannot hold
by might. And who shall determine what a nation is? Who are the
Americans? Who are the English? "Norman and Saxon and Dane are we." And
once upon a time some of us threw up our country and sailed away in the
_Mayflower_. For patriotism is not the only bond of brotherhood. Men may
be the sons of an idea as well as of a soil. There was a Hungarian girl
selling silver at a stall, who had spent four years in Chicago. Never
have I heard better American, except it be from a Budapest man who had
come back to revisit his native town, and was disgusted with its
smallness and slowness. _Per contra_, I met an American girl in
Switzerland who had lived much in Germany, and whose English had such a
Teutonic intonation that it was difficult to realise she was not speaking
German. And language is but typical of the rest. All other national
characteristics are imbibed as subtly. What makes a nation is a certain
common spirit,--_Volksgeist_, as the German psychologists have christened
it,--and this spirit exercises a hypnotic effect over all that comes
within its range, moulding and transforming. There is action and
reaction. The nation makes the national spirit, and the national spirit
makes the nation. The flag, the constitution, the national anthems, the
national prejudices, the language, the proverbs--these are the product of
the people they produce.

I am inclined to allow more importance to education and environment than
to actual birth in a country, and to believe that for a "native," birth
is only an etymological necessity. Natives are made as well as born. The
"born" native has merely the advantage of prior arrival, and if the
"foreign" immigrant is only of a plastic age he may come to love the
step-mother-country more than one of her own sons, educated abroad. This
consideration would solve every _Uitlander_ question: is the national
spirit strong enough to suck in the foreigners? Can the nation digest
them, to vary the metaphor--assimilate them to its own substance? I once
proposed to a biologist--who flouted it--that a definition of Life might
be "the power of converting foreign elements, taken in as food, to one's
own substance." Thus, a plant sucks up chemical elements and makes
flowers; a man turns them to flesh. Here is a piece of meat: eaten by a
dog it runs to tail and teeth, for a cat it makes fur and whiskers, for a
bird feathers, for a woman a lovable face. And so the test of life in a
nation would be its power of transforming its immigrants into patriots.
Only a dead nation is afraid of foreigners.

The figure has its limits, however: one cannot gulp down too large a
piece of meat. And there are things inedible--substances which no stomach
can digest. The Americans will never make Yankees of their Chinese. On
the other hand, nowhere have I found more ardent patriots than among the
Jews. Englishmen in England, Americans in America, Italians in Italy,
Frenchmen in France, and only not Russians in Russia because they are not
allowed to be, they are rabid Hungarians in Hungary; and if I have caught
any enthusiasm for Hungary it is from the lips of a young and brilliant
Jew, Vidor Emil, who piloted me about Budapest, and who, under Marmorek
Oszkar, another young Jew, built "Old Buda," perhaps the most interesting
feature of the Millennial Exhibition. This Jewish patriotism, which loves
at once Israel and some other nation, may appear curious and
contradictory; but human nature is nothing if not curious and
contradictory, and this dual affection has been aptly compared to that of
a mother for her different children. And besides, in a contest the love
of Israel goes down before the more local patriotism. French and German
Jews fought each other in the Franco-German war, and probably it is only
persecution that accentuates the consciousness of Jewish brotherhood.
Wherever the Jews have perfect equality and have been tempted out of the
Ghetto, there the beginnings of disintegration are manifest. And who
shall say how much Jewish blood dilutes the nations of the Occident, for
all their chauvinistic talk!

Mr. Du Maurier, in his unmentionable novel, suspects, like Lowell, that a
drop of it has lurked in every artistic temperament. And, in sober truth,
the drain from Israel throughout the centuries has been immense. In every
age, in every country, Jews have been sucked up into the more brilliant
life around them, exchanging contempt and danger for consideration and
peace. I know an English gentleman who goes about in fear and trembling
lest it transpire that he is of the race of the apostles, and he be
driven out of decent Christian society.  _Cherchez le Juif_ is, indeed,
no empty cry, whenever a new artistic or journalistic planet swims into
our ken. That the Jew rules over the Continental press is not quite so
untrue as most anti-Semitic cries. "Have you any Christians on your
staff?" I said to the editor of the great Budapest newspaper, "Pesther
Lloyd," a fine figure of a man, long-bearded and benevolent, like an
ancient sage. He pondered. "I think we have one," he said. On the other
hand, there are many German and Austrian papers on which there is only
one Jew. And in any case the real meaning of the cry is ludicrously
untrue.

For the Jew by no means uses his power to help Jews indiscriminately:
there is no secret brotherhood of the synagogue. The Jewish journalists
have probably never been in a synagogue, except perhaps as children; they
are divorced in thought and temper from the body proper. And the only
sense in which their pen can be said to have a Jewish bias is in that
complimentary sense which makes the Jew synonymous with the champion of
sweetness and light, of liberty and reason. In this sense it is true that
the Jew is wielding an insidious influence throughout Europe, like the
old apostles among the heathen.

"Oh yes, the Jews are very well off in Hungary," said one of the staff of
the "Pesther Lloyd." "There are 150,000 Jews in Budapest; they enter all
the professions, and supply two members to the House of Magnates, and
nine to the Chamber of Deputies, and there are two State Councillors; and
you know with us every member of Parliament 'thous' every other in
private as an equal. For the laws, liberal as they are, are not so
liberal as the spirit of society. I, mere journalist as I am, have the
most friendly talks with the Prime Minister, and am a member of the
swellest political clubs. We are a good deal like England, by the way:
our middle-classes produce our leaders, our aristocracy lacks eloquence
and talent, and has only a court influence. Our House of Commons is the
most fashionable club. We have no censor, whereas Austria has an
oppressive censorship as well as anti-Semitism. In fact, the influence of
Vienna has caused a decline in our own tolerant spirit, and at the best
of times a Jew needed to have three times the talent of a Christian to
make equal progress in any career." A consideration which sufficiently
accounts for the superiority of the Jewish remnant. Intolerance and
persecution are furnaces which, when they do not destroy, temper and
anneal and strengthen. It is as with the bare-footed, half-clad, underfed
children of the slums: those that do survive are strong indeed. Let my
patriotic cicerone, the Jewish architect, testify. First in all his
examinations, a violinist, a bicyclist, a gymnast, he was to be gazetted
a premier lieutenant as soon as he had completed his military service. He
was a linguist, too (as every travelled Hungarian must be, for Hungarian
will carry him nowhere), speaking excellent English and reading our
magazines regularly. _Humani nihil a me alienum puto_ might have been his
motto. Kossuth himself is said to have had a Jewish grandmother. The Jews
are largely responsible for the prosperity of Budapest, as they were for
that of Vienna, which now turns round upon them. Fancy a country
quarrelling with its coal and iron! And the true wealth of a country is
even more in its population than in its dead products. I found the
Viennese comic papers full of the old anti-Semitic jokes, hashed up, I
have little doubt, by the same journalists who are supposed to judaize
the press of Europe. Even so in America, are not the Jewish caricatures
in _Puck_ often done by a brother of M. de Blowitz? In something of the
same spirit, when the notorious Lueger, whose platform was the extinction
of the Jews of Vienna, was up for election as Burgomaster of that town, a
poor Jew took a bribe of a couple of florins to vote for him. "God will
frustrate him," said the pious Jew. "Meantime I have his money."

The chief surprise of Hungary is its language. Though one knows that
Jokai writes in the strange tongue which sticks its verb into the middle
of its noun, yet one vaguely thinks of it as of Gaelic or
Welsh--something archaic, kept for Eisteddfods and Renaissances--and it
is not till one arrives in Hungary that one realises that it is a living,
disconcerting reality. The great European languages have affinities with
one another: Latin puts one on bowing terms with French and Spanish,
Italian and Portuguese; English is not entirely unrelated to German,
Dutch, and even Norwegian; old Greek is the key to modern. But in Hungary
one comes face to face with an absolutely new language, in which even
guesswork is impossible. When "Levelezoe-Lap" means a postcard, and "ara
egy napra" means price per day, you feel that it is all up. The nearest
relatives of Hungarian are Turkish and Finnish, the Asiatic ancestors of
the race having lived between Finns and Turks; and it bears traces of
their migrations, and of the great Mongol invasion of Europe by Djingis
Khan.

With a language thus handicapped, it was a mistake to have scarcely a
word of any other tongue in an Exhibition designed to attract Europe. The
only scrap of English I saw was in the "French Theatre," in the show of
"Living Pictures," the (London) director of which had forgotten to alter
the titles printed beneath the frames. Even in giving the names of
foreign authors the Hungarians preserve their habit of placing the
Christian name second; so that I saw in the booksellers' windows works by
Eliot George, Kock Paul, and Black William.

Hungary is still in the flush of youth, high-spirited, brilliant,
enthusiastic, and a little out of perspective in its national
consciousness. But who would ever do anything if he saw his true place in
the cosmos? The rapid rise of Budapest--unprecedented save in the gold
countries--into a capital of European importance, has shed a buoyant
optimism, refreshing enough in this jaded century, over the inhabitants
of that beautiful city. "We are the Vienna of the future," cried my
cicerone, "and already Vienna is feeling our rivalry. The retired Jewish
merchants who went there to spend their fortunes are now coming to us;
the anti-Semitism of Vienna is at once the cause and the effect of bad
business. And Vienna is on the downward grade; we are on the upward.
Vienna has never been the capital of Austria,--which is a mere federation
of races,--as Budapest is the capital of Hungary. The German is proud of
Vienna, yes; but the Czech looks to Prague, the Pole to Cracow, the
Austro-Italian swears by Trieste."

He also complained that there is rather a tendency to think of Hungary as
subject to Austria, instead of an associated state; and that this
tendency is fomented by the Austrian papers, whose references to Hungary
insinuate this conception. The Hungarian papers, whose tone would
counteract it, not being in German, are not read by the rest of Europe.
Hungary had always beaten Austria. She had never been defeated save by
allies of Austria. But Hungary, which is so mettlesome and restive in her
patriotism, whose great son, Kossuth, would never even accept the
compromise with the House of Hapsburg, has yet no compunction in
dominating inferior races, in grinding Serbs, Croats and Roumanians into
her own pattern. The Hungarians, who are in the minority, are yet
moulding these alien nationalities to their own will. But _que
voulez-vous?_ The inhabitants of many nations have adopted Christianity,
the nations themselves never. Perhaps the next step for the Christian
missionaries is to found international Christianity.

Still the Hungarians have the qualities of their defects. Unlike the
Turks, their neighbours, they are a race with a future, and Budapest is
from one point of view one of the sightliest capitals of Europe. What
town has a fairer situation? With Parisian Pesth sitting stately on one
bank of the Danube, and Turkish Buda climbing up the hills in a series of
hanging gardens crowned by gilt domes and cupolas on the other, the two
joined by wonderful bridges, she exhibits an unsurpassed contrast; and at
night, when the long stretch of the river is a-twinkle with lights
reflected as shining spears, she may even vie with Venice or the Thames
Embankment. From the Andrassy Avenue, a beautiful Boulevard, with its
cafes and book-shops, and pleasant interludes of flower-beds and
fountains, you may get, in a few minutes--crossing the Danube on a great
steamer, and ascending the heights of Buda by a funicular railway--to a
spot where, seated in an avenue of chestnut trees and looking on the
villa-strewn slopes of sleeping hills, or watching the sun set in
splendour behind them, you may forget that you are living in a bustling
modern town, and one with an Exhibition to boot.

You may dream of the picturesque days when, as shown in Ujvary's great
panorama of the sister towns in 1680, Buda was by far "the better half,"
and Pesth was a tiny spot. You may visit the tomb of Gul Baba, father of
the roses, a shrine of pilgrimage to all good Turks. You may find a good
quarter of an hour in the Church of St. Matthias, whose spire comes up
white amid the green as you turn a corner; a curious monument, that was
three centuries a-building; its interior suffused, like St. Mark's, by a
golden glow, its coloured windows original in shape, and no two pillars
or capitals alike in design, yet all contributing to a quaint unity and
harmony. And it is at Buda that the chief national buildings stand,
usually flanked by chestnut trees, and the statues in memory of the wars.
Here is the War-Office of the Territorial Army (which is distinct from
the joint Austro-Hungarian army); here are the Premier's Palace, the
Houses of Parliament, and the King's Palace of many windows set on a
breezy hill, and now being enlarged at a cost of thirty million florins.
Fortunate Francis Joseph, to command such a panorama from his bedroom
window: his hanging gardens, that slope towards the Danube, flowing with
molten sparkle, spanned by the great suspension bridge and the railway
bridges; and broken by the beautiful Margaret Island; the spires and
chimneys and cupolas of Pesth, and the mountains of Buda.

Margaret Island is the "Pearl of the Danube," a charming retreat in
spring and autumn, when the heat does not force Fashion to the mountains,
and famous for its mineral springs, hot and cold. It belongs to the
King's cousin, Prince Joseph, and is a white elephant. The cost of
gardening this beautiful island is colossal, and though the Prince has
just drained a portion which used to be a swamp, the Danube is a standing
danger. It is scarcely surprising that he cannot find a purchaser at
three million florins. One of the walls of his private garden (which
produces celebrated roses) is the remnant of an old cloister. A tramcar
runs through the island, giving one tantalising vistas of glorious
stretches of woodland. Altogether Budapest would be an ideal place for a
honeymoon but for the beauty of the women, which might make the
bridegroom dissatisfied.

But the Pesth part of Budapest is a disappointment. One expects to feel
the first breath of the East, and one gets a modern, a Western, almost an
American town, with an electric underground railway and a telephonic
newspaper which reads itself out all day long to whosoever will clap the
cups to his ears--the old town crier in terms of modern science. But it
rounds off the day, poetically enough, with music, so that when I sought
to hear the latest news, I was treated to Handel's "Hallelujah." How much
more soothing than our own "extra special," with its final crop of
horrors! Music, indeed, is ever resounding: the gipsy bands are
everywhere playing--Hungarian, not gipsy music, as Liszt imagined, for
they never play to "the white men." The splendid "Rakoczi" March, which
Berlioz introduced into his "Faust," is, however, of gipsy origin, having
been invented, says tradition, by Cinka Panna, the faithful gipsy girl of
Rakoczi II., after his defeat. There are also Betjar melodies, the songs
of the brigand cavaliers, the romantic robbers who took from the rich to
give to the poor, like our Robin Hood.

The Exhibition, which I fear will be a financial failure, is only one of
the many celebrations of the Millennium, which include the erection of
statues and an Arc de Triomphe, the opening of a canal, the construction
of two new bridges, of three or four great public buildings, the
inauguration of the splendid new Houses of Parliament--situated like our
own on the river-side,--international congresses, historical corteges,
and the opening of five hundred new primary schools! This programme is a
sufficient guarantee that the Exhibition itself is similarly
thorough-going, that it represents every side and department of the
national life; and if much of it does not differ from other Exhibitions,
or even from Whiteley's Stores, this can only be the more gratifying to
the Hungarians, inasmuch as it proves that they have indeed come into
step with the general march of European civilisation. For my part I am
not sure that I do not prefer Arpad's Hungarians, who believed in one God
and one wife, and roved about Europe in the four-wheeled waggons they had
invented. And I am certain that in the Exhibition I preferred the
beautiful aquarium in the cool dim grotto, which has nothing to do with
Hungary, to all the splendours of the Historical Group of Buildings, to
the great model steamer, the naval and military pavilions, the very new
and very glaring native pictures, and even the wonderful models of the
town and the steamer-laden Danube. One great lack in the Exhibition is
lavatories. Even at my hotel--a place of gilded saloons--they charged two
florins (about 3_s_. 4_d_.) for a plain bath, as if in sheer surprise. In
"Old Buda" I could only get a bucket from an old woman in which to wash.
And the next day, when I repaired confidently in search of this bucket,
there was nothing but a tiny saucepan, the contents of which she poured
over my hands, watering a garden-plot at the same time. After the first
jet I moved my hands away and said that would do. "No, no," she cried:
"if you wash, you must wash properly." And I had to stand still and be
poured upon till she was satisfied.

Perhaps the most interesting exhibit is the "ethnographic village,"
designed to represent the life of the Hungarian provinces, though made
rather ridiculous by the rigidity of the waxwork figures, arranged about
the quaint and impossibly clean houses in their various occupations, but
having the air of "tableaux morts" rather than of "tableaux vivants." The
best group was _al fresco_, representing half-naked gipsy-like creatures
with coal-black hair squatting outside tents and mud-houses, the women
smoking pipes. And this exhibition of unrealities brings me on to the
most original feature of the Exhibition, which seems to have escaped all
the reporters--to wit, the exhibition of realities. For the committee
have hit on a most ingenious notion. The peasants of Hungary marry, and
they marry picturesquely. Why should this picturesqueness be wasted, or
only be reproduced artificially in comic operas? When a marriage is to be
celebrated in any village, let the scene be shifted to the capital: let
the wedding-party come up to the Exhibition. Free transit is provided on
the railway for the happy couple, the wedding-guests, and all the
stage-properties. And so they come up to Budapest,--from Toroczko,
Szabolcs, Krasso-Szoereny, and who knows what outlandish places, glad of
the opportunity of seeing the great capital,--and they gather in the
Exhibition grounds, the lads with flower-wreathed hats and streamers of
many-coloured ribbons, the lasses with gay skirts and tall black combs,
the old women with lace head-shawls, carrying bundles of house-linen and
stockings for the bride; and the sheepish pair are made one, and the
peasants dance and then go in procession to the strains of the Rakoczi
March, and are photographed with odd spectators (like myself) tacked on,
and they sit down to the wedding-dinner under the trees, and the viands
are heaped high on the white table-cloths, sun-dappled with the shadows
of the moving leaves. And then they visit themselves in waxwork, and go
into ecstacies over the stolid representations of their life and their
furniture, and they walk about the town--a sort of grown-up
school-procession--and go home to thrill the wide-eyed village with tales
of the wonderful city.

But the other instance of converting realities into spectacles is not so
commendable. In the supplementary exhibition of "Old Buda" stands a
reproduction of an Old Buda mosque, built of stone, majolica and wood, in
a mixture of Turkish and European architecture, with minaret and cupolas,
and a small kiosk in the Indian style for a sleeping fakir. Here Moslems
and Dervishes assemble to say or dance their prayers; and for a florin
you may ascend the gallery and watch them below. The mosque opened on the
holy night of Bairam, the most solemn feast of the Mohammedan year, and
quite a crowd planked down their silver to listen to the pious
worshippers. Is it not shameful? I am happy to say I did not pay for my
seat. Even in Budapest I was a _persona gratis_. 'T was certainly a
remarkable scene, its solemnity emphasized by the thunder without, that
drowned the voice of the mueddin calling to prayer, and by the lightning
and rain-torrents that sent the pretty little _al fresco_ waitresses
scudding about with their serviettes on their heads to tend the few
parties in the leafy square that dined on regardless of diluted wine or
under the protection of umbrellas. How the Turks further wetted
themselves by complex ablutions in the tank (meydiaeh) in the courtyard
without, how they removed their shoes and, entering the mosque, knelt on
their carpets facing towards Mecca, and turning their backs on me, a
serried array of long-robed figures swaying and falling forward with
automatic regularity, and showing pairs of heels not always clean, while
the Imam chanted heart-breaking dirges overhead, I shall not detail, for
everybody has read of Moslem services. But I do not remember to have come
across any accurate description of a service of Dancing Dervishes such as
followed the more orthodox ceremonial.

All the mere Mussulmans having retired, the Dervishes sat around
cross-legged, forming an oval. Presently they began to say some phrase,
presumably Turkish (it sounded like _es "klabbam vivurah"_), which they
repeated and repeated and repeated with the same endless, uniform,
monotonous intonation, swaying from right to left and from left to right,
till I felt the whole universe was this phrase, and nothing else would
happen till the end of the world, and the world would never end. At last,
when I had reconciled myself to living for ever and ever with this sound
in my ears, they broke into a pleasant melody with rhyming stanzas and a
refrain of _Hazlee_. Then they started on another word with endless
iteration, and then they repeated _Allah, Allah, Allah_, swaying and
swaying till the universe began to reel. I became aware that their chief,
who was seated on a special red carpet, was counting on a rosary, and I
drew relief from the deduction that an end would come. It did, but worse
remained behind; for the Dervishes got up and formed a ring round their
chief, and began swaying right and left and backwards and forwards,
unrestingly, remorselessly, getting quicker and quicker, till there was
nothing in the world but swayings this way and that way, back and forth.

At last the movements began to slow down and to sweep over larger curves,
and suddenly they stopped altogether, only to recommence as the fanatics
started singing a joyous hymn. Alas! thought I, one half the world is a
laughing-stock to the other half, if indeed not rather a source of tears.
For now the chief, whose fine gloomy Eastern face still haunts me, was
bowing to his men, and they were responding with strange raucous cries
compounded of the roars of wild beasts and the pants of locomotives. _Hu!
Hu!_ they roared in savage unison, _Hu! Hu!_ monotonously, endlessly,
making strange motions. Hoarser and more bestial grew the frightful
roars, wilder and wilder grew the movements, the head-gear falling off,
faces growing black, the chief standing silent with his hand on his
breast, but in his pale face a tense look of ever-gathering excitement.
And then two of the Dervishes held out a curved sword, and the roars
redoubled and the chests heaved with wilder breaths; and suddenly the
Chief, throwing off his stocking-wraps, jumped on the blade with his
naked feet and balanced himself upon it, the muscles of his face rigid,
his teeth clenched. Four times he stood upon the bare sword-edge amid
this hellish howling and this mad swaying, the perspiration running down
the foreheads of the devotees, some of them foaming at the mouth. And
then they moved round in a circle to the right, howling _He! He!_ an
Armenian Dervish in a tall brown hat varying it by _Ho! Ho!_ and another
worshipper singing in a high voice.

The chief bared his breast, and twirling a heavy-hafted dagger, plunged
it into his side. When this had been repeated three or four times,
pandemonium ceased. The Holy Man, with an air of supreme exhaustion and
supreme ecstasy, reclad himself in his white mantle, and the faithful
ones wiped their brows, and re-squatting on the ground exultantly
vociferated _Allah_ about a hundred times, nodding their heads, and
finally changing their cry into _Bou! Bou!_ After a little singing and a
shouting of _Din! Din!_ they pressed their foreheads to the ground with a
shout of _Bou!_ and suddenly rose and decamped. Other nights other
services, and the hysterical worship sometimes embraces a sort of
serpentine skirt-dancing with frenzied twirling. There was no blood from
the chief's wounds, but the performance does not seem to me to be
jugglery. It seems rather akin to hypnotism. The wild cries and gyrations
induce a state of anesthesia, just as by the excitement of battle the
soldier is so wrought up that he does not feel his wounds. Even in a sham
fight a soldier told me he got to such a pitch that he could have done or
suffered anything. As for the blood not running from the wounds, I
conjecture that the places had become insensitive by frequent stabbing in
the same spot. And this is the miracle that testifies to the saintliness
of the Dervish and to the truth of his doctrines! I suspect that much of
"the wisdom of the East" is of this character: ancient discoveries of the
shady side of human psychology, the grotesque aberrations, trances,
hypnotic impressionability, double personalities, ghosts, second-sight,
what not. And these being misunderstood have always been supposed to
trench on the divine. For what is not normal is not human, and what is
not human is superhuman. So runs the simple logic. But hysteria can never
be a foundation for a creed, and a true religion must always appeal to
the common central facts of human experience.

There was another Exhibition going on, as it always goes on, in the town,
for the People's Park has very little verdure and consists almost
entirely of side-shows and open-air restaurants. I saw swings and
merry-go-rounds, a circus, and a marionette theatre, and heard Punch and
Judy discussing their domestic differences in Hungarian, and Toby barking
in the same uncouth tongue. The joy with which the public greeted each
crack on the head administered by Herr Punch's stick showed me how
hopeless it was to write literary plays. For the primitive emotions will
always be the most captivating. A fight must ever beat the most subtle
psychology; and indeed those writers for whom the drama is the art of
manufacturing excitement and suspense must find it difficult to compete
with a lottery drawing, a prize-fight, or a horse-race, where the issue
is known not even to the organiser of the excitement. And this
consideration will show why some books are very successful, the art of
which is very little. Nothing is harder in real life than to put your
back against the wall on a dark staircase and keep three armed men at bay
with your whirling sword. But nothing is easier than for the romantic
writer to dip his pen in ink and say that his hero did that. And nothing
is more stimulating and exciting for the reader than to imagine the hero
doing it; and in his gratitude to the giver of all this beautiful
breathlessness he is likely, unless he is an analytical person, to
mistake a cheap effect for precious art. But the bulk of humanity must
always remain at the Punch-and-Judy stage of art. If only the critics
would outgrow it! The clowns in the circus who came on with red noses
were a further proof of the sempiternal simplicity of our race; and I
could have wished for the heart of that urchin whom I saw trying to peer
in under the canvas, and whom, with a reminiscence of the young
Gradgrinds, I was about to pay for, when he suddenly produced a florin
and many coppers and went in like a man. Sitting in the front row, I had
a curious presentiment that the daring bare-backed rider would be thrown
at my feet; and sure enough he was, and, as I picked him up, I saw by the
perspiration what toil his graceful feats concealed. Poor cavalier! I am
sure his pride was more hurt than his person, and he excelled himself in
galloping round poised on one toe. When he was recalled after his exit,
he tumbled his thanks, giving us complex somersaults in lieu of bows. I
sometimes fancy he was a holier person than the Chief of the Dancing
Dervishes.




CHICAGO

The function and value of literature are curiously illustrated by the
passing away of the Great White Elephant. The criticisms by spectators of
the World's Fair have not been so comprehensive as the Fair itself, and I
feel that I ought to supplement them by the impressions it made upon one
who did not see it. For, despite the assurance of the official programme,
that I delivered an address in the Parliament of Religions, I was in
England, so far as I know, the whole time. The first impression the Fair
made upon me was one of sublimity--but of what Sir William Hamilton calls
"the material sublime," scarcely at all of "the moral sublime," which was
supposed to be its _raison d'etre_. I was, of course, aware that great
spiritual facts underlay the physical grandeurs; but spiritual emotion is
difficult to get at a distance. One requires the actual objects to
impinge on the soul, the architectural glories and industrial splendours
to touch through bodily vision. One realises it so vaguely, and fails to
get the half-aesthetic, half-religious, uplifting that concrete
visualisation should supply. It is, perhaps, a pity that Whitman did not
live to see the spectacle, he whose inspiration came so often from
synthesis, from a vision of the ALL. The cosmopolitan cataloguer, the man
who made inventories almost epical, is the one man to whom the Fair would
have been a magnificent inspiration. Judging from the Fair, Whitman would
seem justified in claiming to be the voice of America. The Fair was like
him both in its moral broadness and its material all-inclusiveness. In
his absence no poet has risen "to the height of this great argument," so
that now the insubstantial pageant is faded, now that "the cloud-capp'd
towers, the gorgeous palaces, the solemn temples," have dissolved, "like
the baseless fabric of a vision," they have left not a rack of real
literature behind. And to what but literature can one look for a
permanent conservator of the eternal lesson of an ephemeral exhibition?
Truly, as the Latin poet said, literature is more durable than monuments
and dynasties. Except as an object-lesson in the unity and federation of
mankind, the Fair had no valuable _raison d'etre_, and, unfortunately,
the school-term was short and the number of pupils comparatively limited.

America is a long way from everywhere, even from itself, and the moral
heat dissipates in crossing the ocean to the Old World. The Congress of
Religions in whose voluminous report the Fair has still a chance of
surviving itself, was the most patently spiritual side of the Exposition,
and was, undoubtedly, a most valuable index of the progress of human
catholicism. That the sects are as narrow as they are numerous, is still
largely true, and half the world is still ignorant of how the other half
prays, though by a happy accident of birth all the world inherits the one
true religion. The greatest force in the universe is the "_vis
inertiae_," and the forces already at work must "dree their weird." To
those who are outside all the sects without even circumscribing them, the
World's Fair must bring home at once the greatness and vanity of man's
life--man who lives like the angels and dies like the brutes--the mortal
paradox that has puzzled all thinkers from the Psalmist to Pascal. For
the unbeliever this must ever be the ugly reverse of all glories that are
merely material, though the sensuous optimist need not allow the skeleton
at the feast to spoil his appetite.

The last impression made by the World's Fair upon me was one of
sadness--sadness at not having seen it.




EDINBURGH

Till I went to Edinburgh I did not know what "The Evergreen" was.
Newspaper criticisms had given me vague misrepresentations of a Scottish
"Yellow Book" calling itself a "Northern Seasonal." But even had I seen a
copy myself I doubt if I should have understood it without going to
Edinburgh and even had I gone to Edinburgh I should still have been in
twilight had? I not met Patrick Geddes, Professor of Botany at the
University of Dundee. For Patrick Geddes is the key to the Northern
position in life and letters. "The Evergreen" was not established as an
antidote to the "Yellow Book," though it might well seem a colour
counter-symbol--the green of spring set against the yellow of decadent
leaves. It is, indeed, an antidote but undesigned; else had not yellow
figured so profusely upon the cover. "The Evergreen" of to-day professes
to be inspired by "The Evergreen" which Allan Ramsay published in 1724,
to stimulate a return to local and national tradition and living nature.
Patrick Geddes and Colleagues, who publish it and other books--on a new
system of giving the author all the profits, as certified by a chartered
accountant--inherit Ramsay's old home. That is to say, they are located
in a sort of "University Settlement," known as Ramsay Garden, a charming
collection of flats, overlooking from its eastled hill the picturesque
city, and built by the many-sided Professor of Botany, and they aspire
also to follow in "the gentle shepherd's" footsteps as workers and
writers, publishers and builders. In fact, their aim is synthesis,
construction, after our long epoch of analysis, destruction. They would
organise life as a whole, expressing themselves through educational and
civic activities, through art and architecture, and make of Edinburgh the
"Cite du Bon Accord" dreamed of by Elisee Reclus. They feel acutely the
"need of fresh readings in life, of fresh groupings in science, both now
mainly from the humanist's side, as lately from the naturalist's side."
In this University Settlement the publishing and writing department is to
represent the scriptorium of the ancient monasteries. Of the local and
national traditions this new Scottish school is particularly concerned to
foster the so-called "Celtic renascence," and--what is more interesting
to outsiders--the revival and development of the old Continental
sympathies of Scotland. The ancient league with France has deeply marked
Scotch history, and even moulded Scotch architecture. As Disraeli said in
his inaugural address on his institution as Lord Rector of the University
of Glasgow, "it is not in Scotland that the name of France will ever be
mentioned without affection." So, among the endless projects of the
effervescent Professor, is one for reviving the Scotch college in
Paris--the original building happening still to survive--and for making
it a centre for Scottish students and Scottish culture in the gay city.

Thus, while the men of "The Evergreen" would renew local feeling and
local colour, they "would also express the larger view of Edinburgh as
not only a National and Imperial but a European city--the larger view of
Scotland, again as in recent, in mediaeval, most of all in ancient times,
one of the European Powers of Culture--as of course far smaller countries
like Norway are to-day." An aspiration with which all intelligent men
must sympathise. The quest at once of local colour and cosmopolitanism is
not at all self-contradictory. The truest cosmopolitanism goes with the
intensest local colour, for otherwise you contribute nothing to the human
treasury and make mankind one vast featureless monotony. Harmonious
diversity is the true cosmopolitan concept, and who will not applaud this
desire of Edinburgh to range itself again amongst the capitals of
culture? Why should it take its tone from London? That centripetal force
which draws villages to towns and towns to capitals everywhere tends to
concentrate in one city a country's culture, and to brand as provincial
that which is not of the centre. But the centre is corrosive of
originality, and if now and then a great man does abide therein, it is
because he has the gift of solitude amid crowds, and is not obnoxious to
the contagion of the common thought. The Scotch School, though its effort
to emancipate itself from the intellectual thraldom of London is to be
commended, does not escape the dangers that lie in wait for all schools,
which upset one convention by another. Still, a school of thought which
is also a school of action has in itself the germs of perpetual
self-recuperation.

Yes, there can be little danger of sinking into barren formulae, into
glib aesthetic prattle about Renascence, in a movement of which one
expression is the purification of those plaguy, if picturesque, Closes,
which are the foul blot upon the beautiful Athens of the North. Those
sunless courts, entered by needles' eyes of apertures, congested with
hellish, heaven-scaling barracks, reeking with refuse and evil odours,
inhabited promiscuously by poverty and prostitution, worse than the worst
slums of London itself--how could they have been left so long to pollute
the fairest and well-nigh the wealthiest city in the kingdom? "Do you
wonder Edinburgh is renowned for its medical schools?" asked the
Professor grimly, as he darted in and out among those foul alleys,
explaining how he was demolishing this and reconstructing that--at once a
Destroying Angel and a Redeemer. Veritable ghettoes they seemed, these
blind alleys of gigantic habitations, branching out from the High Street,
hidden away from the superficial passer-by faring to Holyrood. They were
the pioneers of the trans-Atlantic sky-builders, were those old burghers,
who, shut in about their castled hill by the two lochs, one of which is
now the enchanting Princes Street, were fain to build heavenwards as
population grew. It was a stormy morning when the mercurial Professor of
Botany, recking naught of the rain that saturated his brown cloak, itself
reluctantly donned, led me hither and thither, through the highways and
byways of old Edinburgh. Everywhere a litter of building operations, and
we trod gingerly many a decadent staircase. Sometimes a double row of
houses had already been knocked away, revealing a Close within a Close,
eyeless house behind blind alley, and even so the diameter of the court
still but a few yards. What human ant-heaps, what histories, farces,
tragedies played out in airless tenebrosity!

The native writers seem to have strangely neglected the artistic wealth
of all this poverty: pathos and humour reside, then, only in villages!
Thrums and Drum-tochty and Galloway exhaust the human tragi-comedy. Ah!
my friends, go to the ant-hill and be wise! The Professor of Botany
(seeming now rather of entomology) explained the principle upon which he
was destroying and rebuilding. One had to be cautious. He pointed out the
head of a boy carved over one of the archways, the one survivor of a
fatal subsidence many years ago, when the ground floor of one of the
gigantic houses was converted into a shop, with plate-glass windows in
lieu of the solid stonework. "Heave awa'!" cried a piping voice amid the
_debris_: "I'm no dead yet."

The Professor's own destruction was conservative in character: it was his
aim to preserve the ancient note in the architecture, and to make a clean
Old Edinburgh of a dirty. Air and light were to be no longer excluded;
outside every house, as flats or storeys are called, a balcony was to
run, giving on sky and open ground. Eminent personages like Lord
Rosebery, ancestrally connected with ancient demesnes, long perverted
into pigsties, had been induced to repurchase them, thus restoring an
archaic flavour of aristocratic prestige to these despised quarters. The
moral effect of grappling with an evil that had seemed so hopeless could
not fail to be inspiring; and, as we plodded through the pouring:
streets, "I will remove this, I will reconstruct that," cried the
enthusiastic Professor, till I almost felt I was walking with the Emperor
of Edinburgh. But whence come the sinews of war? Evidently no professor's
privy purse would suffice. I gathered that the apostle of the sanitary
picturesque had inspired sundry local capitalists with his own patriotic
enthusiasm. What a miracle, this trust in a man over-brimming with ideas,
the brilliant biological theoriser of "The Evolution of Sex" in the
Contemporary Science Series, the patron of fantastic artists like John
Duncan! Obviously it is his architectural faculty that has saved him.
There stand the houses he has built--visible, tangible, delectable;
concrete proofs that he is no mere visionary.

And yet we may be sure the more frigid society of Edina still looks
askance on this dreamer in stone and fresco; for after all Edinburgh, as
Professor Blaekie said, is an "East-windy, west-endy city." Cold and
stately, it sits on its height with something of the austere mournfulness
of a ruined capital. But we did not concern ourselves about the legal and
scholastic quarters, the Professor and I. We penetrated into inhabited
interiors in the Closes, meeting strange female ruins on staircases, or
bonny housewives in bed-sitting-rooms, in one of which a sick husband lay
apologetically abed. And when even the Professor was forced at last to
take refuge from the driving rain, it was in John Knox's house that we
ensconced ourselves--the grim, unlovely house of the great Calvinist, the
doorway of which fanatically baptised me in a positive waterfall, and in
whose dark rooms, as the buxom care-taker declared in explaining the
presence of an empty cage, no bird could live. It is not only in its
Closes, methought, that Scotland needs regen eration. Many a spiritual
blind-alley has still to receive sunshine and air, "sweetness and light."
So let us welcome "The Evergreen" and the planters thereof, stunted and
mean though its growth be as yet; for not only in Scotland may they bring
refreshment, but in that larger world where analysis and criticism have
ended in degeneration and despair.




FIESOLE AND FLORENCE

At Fiesole I just missed a sensation. Two friends of mine were climbing
at midnight the steep hill to the village, when from beneath a dark arch
there dashed down towards them two breathless _carabinieri_, their cloaks
flapping in the moonlight like the wings of the demon-bats of pantomime.
"Is it your way that the murdered man lies?" they panted. "Murdered man!"
At once a hundred shadowy reminiscences stirred in my friends' minds:
Prosper Merimee's novels, stories of vendettas, plots of plays, _morceaux
d'operas_, even of comic operas; and it was with a feeling in which the
latter element predominated that they answered that they had come across
no corpse. The police-officers thanked them and hurried off, so my
friends soon understood, as far as possible from the scene of the event;
for, passing through the arch, the _Inglesi_ came upon a track of blood,
black and clotted in the moonlight. But it did not seem real to
them--they still had a consciousness of comic opera, a consciousness
which was intensified rather than lessened when they emerged upon a group
of excited villagers discussing the crime, and learnt its cause. Two
rival bands, one from a neighbouring village, had been performing at a
local _concerto_, and the two rival trumpeters had continued to blow
their own trumpets after business hours. "Fancy blowing with that little
mouth!" said one. "I'm glad I haven't your maw (_boccone_)!" retorted the
other.

From words it came to knives, and ere you could say Jacopo Robinson a
trumpeter lay weltering in his blood, or rather in his gore, and the
murderer was flying into the arms of the police, who incontinently turned
and fled the other way. When my friends passed by the house of the
victim, the midnight air was ringing with the horrible curses of his
bereaved sister, whose spasmodic face was visible at a window. But the
cold-blooded artistic English felt no answering throb of sympathy--it was
still a scene in a play to them, still a _coup de theatre_--they had lost
the primary human instincts, corrupted by a long course of melodrama and
comic opera. To-day I myself saw a carnival procession in the village
piazza--a veritable survival of the Middle Ages; a triumphal car wreathed
in flowers, driven by masquerading mummers and surrounded by Pierrots and
peasant buffoons, a thoroughly naive and primitive bit of religion. But
it needed a perceptible effort to shake off the sense of the operatic, to
accept the thing as genuine. Ruskin contended (in that _olla podrida_
called "Modern Painters") that the Swiss peasants do not really dance and
sing happily in the market-place; and hence he argued--comically
enough--that the money spent on the stage reproduction of their happiness
should be spent in really promoting their happiness. With my Italian
peasants I feel the opposite: that such excellent picturesque effects
should not be wasted on mere reality, but should be turned to real use
upon the stage. So, too, it is difficult to take a roadside beggar
seriously; he seems to ask, not for alms, but for a frame. Happy the
unlettered and the inartistic, to whom even the picturesque person is a
person, who can think of olive oil when he sees the olive-trees weaving
their graceful patterns above the stone walls, and can watch the sun set
in lurid splendour behind the purple mountains with never a thought of
Turner or Childe Harold!

For modern civilised beings, in incessant relations with the reflections
of life through literature and art, it is difficult to receive any
impressions which do not re-reflect what lies in the mirror of art. And
here is an amusing side-issue. We are presented in plays and books, with
numerous situations in which the ignorance of one of the parties is a
necessary factor in the particular dramatic situation which it is sought
to evolve. But as this person, _ex hypothesi_, belongs to the class of
society which is familiar with this particular plot _ad nauseam_, is it
possible that he or she should go on betraying the same ignorance on
which the plot originally was based? Even Marguerite has seen "Faust"
nowadays!

This suggests an objection to old plots quite apart from their oldness,
for that which started by being probable becomes improbable by age. Even
if it were ever possible for a man to be jealous of a woman because he
saw her kissing a man whom, after long and weary years of superfluous
separation, he discovered to be her brother, it should surely be
impossible to-day. If I saw any man kissing my _fiancee_ I should know at
once it was my future brother-in-law--or at any rate I should
inquire--which the old hero never seemed to do. And yet I will wager that
in the course of this year at least a dozen novels and plays will be
built up upon this theme. It is, by the way, a noticeable characteristic
of people in plays never to have read nor to be interested in any but the
petty dramatic matter which is interesting them--and let us hope the
audience--at the moment. It may be replied that the economy of the stage
demands that everything that is not strictly essential should be
eliminated; but yet it ought to be possible, by a few words, to give the
idea that the figures upon the boards are doing more than moving to the
strings of the playwright. Just so the painter of the gulf should suggest
the ocean beyond; the painter of the landscape, the infinity of space and
atmosphere in which it is enisled. What the _plein air_ school contended
for in painting is no less requisite in literature.

This consideration seems to account for the uneasy sense of unreality
which we feel in the modern machine-made Sardou play, in which the
characters have the air of existing entirely to themselves, and for the
sake of the particular play, and do not give that large sense of being
part of the civilised humanity we know that reads and thinks. The men
make love or profess hate, repudiate their wives, or cut off their sons
with shillings, all with the air of its happening for the first time, and
wholly devoid of that sense of the ridiculous which they could not help
feeling if they had been accustomed themselves to read novels and sit in
stalls.

It is, in fact, impossible for us moderns, educated in a long literary
tradition, to live our lives as naturally and naively as the unlettered
of to-day, or the people of the preliterary geological epoch. This is
brought out "ostensively," as Bacon would say, in "Don Quixote," or in
the Russian novel "A Simple Story"--apparently so called because it is so
complex--in which Gontcharov's hero lives in what Alice might call
"behind the looking-glass" of literature. He is a country boy who comes
up to St. Petersburg, and after a course of Russian novels is transformed
into a series of imitations of their heroes. He does nothing, feels
nothing, thinks nothing except after the pattern of these creatures of
the quill.

Well! we are all like that, more or less. Though we may not be as
chivalrously inspired as the Knight of La Mancha, nor run to the extremes
of the simple Russian, we are all to some extent remoulded in imitation
of the Booklanders, and this is the truth in the "decadent" paradox that
nature copies art. There is a drop of ink in the blood of the most
natural of us; we are all hybrids, crossed with literature, and
Shakespeare is as much the author of our being as either of our parents.
The effect of the stage in regulating the poses and costumes of
susceptible souls has not escaped notice; but the effect of novels and
poetry is more insidious. Who ever shuddered with bitter alliterative
kisses before Swinburne, and who has failed to do so since? What poor
little cockney clerk in his first spasms of poetry but has felt, sitting
by his girl in the music hall, that if she walked over the grave in which
he was planted, his "dust would hear her and beat, had he lain for a
century dead" (though how Maud could survive her lover for a century,
Tennyson failed to explain)?  _Per contra_, the ingenuous spinster taking
her notions of love from Maupassant's "Bel-Ami," or Gabriele d'Annunzio's
"Trionfo della Morte," becomes a man-hater. Yes, I fear that the artistic
treatment of life has a good deal to answer for. People do not yet
understand that the mirror of art does not reflect life unrefracted. The
great eternal theme of art is love-making; but even artists have to give
up some time to art-making.

But to wind up anent our murderer. He is still at large. The police have
given up the chase in despair. But he has never left the village, and we
villagers all wink at one another as we discuss his whereabouts; and when
we meet him driving his cart or come across him cutting wood in the
forest and he genially gives us _Buon' giorno_ we salute him with
answering politeness. Only in the village band there is a temporary
trumpeter, for even the police might hear of him if he performed in
public loudly enough. But Italian justice, though it does really savour
of comic opera, is not so farcical as it appears on the surface. It is an
unwritten law that the police shall not _pigliare_ him till the sessions
are nigh. He is on parole, so to speak, to come up when called upon; if
he were really to take flight, he would be declared an outlaw, and the
only reason the police cannot find him is that they know where he is. How
sensible! Why board and lodge him gratis for weeks? He has outraged the
community: shall the community reward him with free meals? Even when he
is caught he will be treated with the same economy. Capital punishment
there is none in Italy. Why waste a citizen and a tax-payer? Especially
when one has already been destroyed! No, he will be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment. But he will not serve it. He will escape, or it will be
commuted. And while he is in gaol he will have a good time. He will smoke
and play cards, or, leaning out of his dungeon casement, hold a levee of
his friends. Recently the soldiers at Bergamo mutinied because they were
supplied with worse bread than the denizens of the gaol. I trust the
ringleaders were sent to prison so as to remedy this dietary injustice.

Please do _me_ the justice to remark that I have been in Italy for
several paragraphs without once referring to the Old Masters. But the
fact is that I have not been much at the Masked Balls. Does this saying
seem cryptic? All it means is that the confusion into which our
scientific century has thrown us is worse confounded than usual in the
universe of pictures; that the Galleries appear to be made up of pictures
masquerading under wrong names. Time was when one might go about
comfortably with a Baedeker and a stock of admiration and distribute it
as per instructions. But these good old times are over. The Old Masters
of yesterday are the young apprentices of to-day. It is pitiable to think
how many well-meaning enthusiasts have fallen victims to the careless or
crafty curator. Sometimes it scarcely needs a connoisseur to suspect the
good faith of catalogues. I, myself, a mere babe and suckling, came to
the conclusion, after a visit to the Velasquez Exhibition in London, that
Velasquez must have been very versatile. It is too bad that artists
should be hanged for crimes they never committed. 'T is to be hoped their
ghosts carefully avoid the Galleries. But beshrew your paintings! My eyes
make pictures--not like Coleridge's when they're shut, but when they 're
open. Who would not rather lie with me in the _podere_ in the shade of
the cypress trees, under the blue, blue sky, and behold through a tangle
of olive-boughs the marvellous Dome of Florence, as satisfying as the
sea, or under a starry heaven the loveliest of cities glittering like a
rival firmament with answering constellations? And yet I recant. For if
there is one piece of art which is better than nature, 't is Botticelli's
so-called "Spring," which, long misprised and now worm-riddled, adds the
last magic to the wonderful flower-city. To her that hath shall be given.




GLASGOW

"And what do you think of Glasgow?" said the pretty lady interviewer--I
have the right to say she was pretty because she said in print that I
wasn't. I replied that of course Glasgow wasn't pretty but--and here
would have followed an amiable dissertation upon the municipal
superiority of Glasgow. "But," hastily interrupted the lady interviewer,
"have you seen the fine vista of St. Vincent Street, the Great Western
Road, the finest thoroughfare in Europe, the charming residential
districts of Pollokshields West and Dowanhill, the wide view from the
South Side Park or picturesque Camphill?" I tried to edge in an abashed
"No," for a monosyllable is the most one can hope to secure of the
conversation in an interview; but the pretty lady interviewer went on
reproachfully: "Have you seen that stately hill of the dead, the
Necropolis, from Cathedral Square? It is itself a quaint and beautiful
medley of architecture past and present. Have you seen beautiful
Kelvingrove, through which flows the classic Kelvin? In many world-famous
cities have I been and yet seen nothing more beautiful than the view on
one side of Partick Bridge." I apologised to Glasgow, inwardly
confounding the eminent Scotch _litterateur_ who had assured me that
Glasgow was the most loathsome den north of Tweed, almost the only such
den,--his malison upon Glasgow! But although I feel personally nothing
but gratitude to Glasgow and its noisy University students, I cannot
honestly award it the apple for beauty. After all it is the centre of the
town that one naturally gravitates to, and no charm of suburbs can remove
the general impression of commercial dinginess.

No, Glasgow must be content with its wealth and its public spirit. If it
does not stir the imagination like Edinburgh, it satisfies the brain and
the heart, for it is grappling manfully with many social problems, with
the opening of parks and hospitals, and especially with the housing of
the poor, and is developing an artistic conscience to boot. It owns its
gas and water, and I had the felicity of meeting the Lord Provost at the
very moment when, his glittering insignia heaving with emotion on his
joyous breast, he had to announce to the Town Council that the
fiercely-canvassed step of taking over the tramways had resulted in a
balance to the good. When the Lord Provost had returned to his chair, I
was shown the Councillors themselves at their mahogany tables, in their
beautiful Council-chamber, and I made notes--not of the debate, as the
lynx-eyed reporter, who counted the number of times I sucked my pencil,
imagined--but of the improved appearance of George Square under snow.
Seen through the windows the square stretched away pure and beautiful the
gloomy statues blanched and Prince Albert's horse gleaming proudly with
white trappings. The Municipal Buildings deserve all the praise they have
received. The special staircase, which is used only on state occasions,
presents from point to point a marvellously proportioned medley of arches
and pillars and arcades, with a dominant Corinthian note. It is really
"frozen music." And when adorned with tropical plants and lit up with
electric lights and pretty faces, it must indeed be a superb sight. Very
imposing, too, is the vast Banqueting Hall, from whose platform, to test
the acoustic effect of the rows of wires stretched six inches apart under
the ceiling to break the sound, I addressed vacancy. The panels of this
hall still await their artists. 'T is a rare opportunity for Glasgow to
emulate the Parisian Pantheon; and, indeed, there is so much art-work to
be done in Glasgow that one begins to understand why it is threatening to
become the capital of British Art. The best road in Scotland is no longer
that which leads to England. It was curious for a humble author to walk
these stately halls, convoyed by courteous officers in red swallow-tails,
and to rub shoulders with civic millionaires. An awesome air of wealth
hung over the men and the place, a crushing suggestion of vast
enterprises, of engineering and railway building and the running of
steamers, a subtle aroma of colossal fortunes, wrested from the world by
the leverage of an initial half-crown. I have often gone to places with
only half a crown in my pocket, but it never seemed to lead to anything.
So I surveyed these men with blended reverence and bewilderment,
wondering why they bothered themselves to make all that money, and
whether they ever suspected they were but tools in the hands of destiny,
by whose marvellous alchemy the self-centred ambition of the individual
is transmuted to the service of the world. The genial Bailie Simons, who
was my host--fancy living in daily contact with a Bailie!--informed me
that the grave city fathers are sadly degenerating. Thirty years ago they
did not smoke in public: now there is a smoking-room in the sacred
building itself; and at least one of them has been seen to leave it in a
white hat.

Like the king's daughter, Glasgow is all glorious within, and its inner
artistic aspirations make up for and are perhaps inversely inspired by
its outer unloveliness. The world must not judge Glasgow's taste by the
recent Puritanic rumpus over the nude. The worthy Bailies and the Chief
Constable who drew the line at Leighton and Solomon have overlooked the
interesting nudities in their own Galleries. The affinity of the Scotch
and the French, which has often been noted in history, and which accounts
for their swamping the English in literature, has made Style the
watchword of the Glasgow School of Art. Whistler's "Carlyle" hangs in the
Corporation Galleries, and it was the stylist, Lavery, who secured the
tedious commission to commemorate Her Majesty's opening of the Glasgow
Exhibition by the usual plethora of portraits. It would have made a more
interesting picture had Mr. Lavery perpetuated the fact--so pregnant a
contribution to the philosophy of Exhibitions--that a profit of L10,000
was derived from the switchbacks. The picture would then have made a nice
supplement to Mr. Lavery's famous studies of "Croquet" and "Tennis." The
very slabs of the Corporation staircase are infected with Impressionism,
and their natural veinings body forth, here a charge of cavalry, there a
march of infantry, and yonder a portrait of Sir William Vernon Harcourt
with a prophetic coronet. The stones of Glasgow await their Ruskin. The
Exhibition which I saw at the Glasgow Institute of Fine Arts was far more
interesting than the last Academy, though it contained some of the same
pictures. I was able to tell the Scotch artists an anecdote which no one
had heard before, for the simple reason that it was true, and that it
happened to me. It was in Perth that, puzzling over a grimy statue, I was
accosted by a bare-footed newsboy with his raucous cry of "Hair-r-ald,
Glasgow Hair-r-ald!"

"I'll take one," quoth I, "if you'll tell me whose statue that is."

"'T is Rabbie Burns" replied he, on the nail.

"Thank you," said I, taking the paper. "And what did he do, to deserve
the statue?"

My newsboy scratched his head. Perceiving his embarrassment, a party of
his friends down the street called out in stentorian chorus: "Ay, 't is
Babbie Burns."

"But what did he do to deserve the statue?" I thundered back. They hung
their heads. At last my newsboy recovered himself; his face brightened.
"Well?" said I again, "what did he do to deserve this statue?"

"He _deed_!" answered the intelligent little man.

Another newsboy, whom I asked if he had ever read Sir Walter Scott,
replied, "No, he is _ower dreich_ (over dry)."

Talking of statues, I see that Paisley is going to erect a full-sized
figure of the late Thomas Coats, with a bronze high hat under his bronze
arm. The history of the Corporation Art Galleries is curious. The nucleus
of the collection is the bequest of a coach-builder, who seems to have
had a Glaswegian Renaissance all to himself, for it was years after his
death before his legacy was routed out from the lumber-rooms to which it
had been consigned, and ere its many genuine treasures were catalogued by
Mr. James Paton, the learned curator, whose magic-lantern exhibit the
other day of the coach-building connoisseur's face was the first display
of his lineaments to an ungrateful posterity. The Galleries now claim to
contain so many Old Masters that no connoisseur is complete without a
knowledge of them. Except Velasquez, there is scarcely one of the great
painters who is not represented here, even including Giorgione, of whom,
parodying Hegel's remark about the one disciple who understood him ("and
he doesn't understand me!"), it may be said that there are only two
genuine specimens of him in the world, and that both of these are by his
pupils. What Mary Logan would say to these Rembrandts and Rubenses I know
not; but there is much of indisputable value in this collection, to say
nothing of Flaxman's masterpiece--the statue of Pitt,--or the recent
accessions, such as the Whistler, or David Murray's "Fir Faggots," or the
bust of Victor Hugo by Rodin.

Pictorially the hill of the dead was the most interesting part of Glasgow
I saw--a scene which, especially in its simple severe Protestant draping
of snow, might well tempt the artist. At its summit John Knox looks down
upon the Cathedral, whose altars and images were broken during the
Reformation, and whose new stained windows (made in Germany) testify by
their preference for Old Testament subjects to the latent Puritanism of
Caledonia. Especially interesting is the crypt, with its sepulchral
church, whose subterranean service is recorded in "Rob Roy." One of the
pillars of the crypt proper is called the Rob Roy pillar, for behind it
the great outlaw is supposed to have hidden. Near it is the shrine of St.
Mungo, patron saint of Glasgow, who has presumably risen in the hierarchy
now that Glasgow has been made a county. Facing the shrine is a window
decorated with a portrait of Edward Irving, clothed as St. John the
Baptist. The cicerone said it was greatly admired because the eyes
followed you about wherever you walked. This is not the first time I have
been asked to admire as supreme art what is really one of the commonest
of optical delusions. After the Cathedral had closed, it had to be
reopened because I had lost a glove within. After a careful search the
glove was found in the gloomy crypt, pointing its finger at this
miraculous picture, unable to tear itself away. But perhaps the most
characteristic thing I came across in Glasgow was an inscription at the
end of the bridge leading to the picturesque cemetery. "The adjoining
bridge was erected by the Merchants' House of Glasgow to afford a proper
entrance to their new cemetery, combining convenient access to the
grounds with suitable decoration to the venerable Cathedral and
surrounding scenery, to unite the tombs of many generations who have gone
before with the resting-places destined for generations yet unborn, where
the ashes of all shall repose until the rising of the just, when that
which is born a natural body shall be raised a spiritual body, when this
corruptible must put on incorruption, when this mortal must put on
immortality, when death is swallowed up in victory." There you have
Glasgow! An auctioneer's advertisement blent with an edifying sermon, a
happy combination of commerce and Christianity, making the best of this
world and the next.

I left Glasgow in a choking yellow fog. Five minutes from the city the
train steamed into bright sunshine, which continued till five minutes
from London, where a sisterly yellow fog was waiting. As Tennyson sings,
I had gone "from the night to the night."




HASLEMERE

I am up a "Bo tree." Every schoolboy knows (that is, of course, every
Buddhistic schoolboy) that when the Buddha made "the great renunciation,"
he attained Nirvana by sitting under a "Bo tree." My "Bo tree" is a great
oak in the heart of the woods, mounted by a dizzy spiral staircase, at
the summit of which you enter Nirvana by means of the "House on the
Garden," a glass-house floored with boards and furnished with rustic
chairs, a lounge and a writing-table; and here, amid the tree-tops, I
write to the music of thrush and blackbird, with restful glances at the
sailing clouds or at the sunny weald, that circles for miles around and
ends to the south in the "downs" that hide the English Channel. Perhaps
it is because my landscape takes in Tennyson's happy Haslemere home that
my thought runs so much on him to-day, and then runs back to a cold stone
staircase up which I toiled in pitchy blackness to see a great French
poet. Taine, who preferred Alfred de Musset to Tennyson, made of a
contrast between the two men the most telling pages in his history of our
literature, setting in graphic antithesis the dust and flare and fever of
the Boulevards against the

  English home, gray twilight poured
    On dewy pastures, dewy trees,
  Softer than sleep,--all things in order stored,
    A haunt of ancient peace,

where the English Laureate brooded over his chiselled verses. How much
more piquant a contrast might be drawn between the jealously-guarded
castle in which Tennyson entrenched himself and the accessible garret in
the Rue St. Jacques where Verlaine held his court in absolute bonhomie
and deshabille.

But, alas! there is no Nirvana on my "Bo Tree"--at least, not to-day. The
blatancy of a brass band bursts forth on the breeze. A popular waltz
silences the cuckoos. I climb down my spiral staircase and hasten across
the wood to discover what these strange sounds portend. In front of the
creeper-clad house I come upon a scene of comic opera. This is the
village fete day, and here are the festive villagers come to pay
allegiance to the lord of the manor. The majority are Foresters,
and wear green sashes, and carry banners like to the pictorial
pocket-handkerchiefs of Brobdingnag. The music gives over, and my host
addresses them from between the roses of his porch, and they laugh at his
genial jokes with the unanimity of the footlights. There are tiny tots
and old women in the background, and yonder is the Village Beauty--a ripe
maid, i' faith, and a comely. There are other girls in her train; but,
oddsbobs! what have they done with their tights? and why do they delay to
announce her approaching marriage in merry melodic chorus? But I conceal
my surprise and, as the cynical Man from Town (gadzooks!), ogle the Pride
of the Village, to the disgust of her rural swain, who has started
blowing the trombone and dare not desist, though his cheeks get redder
and more explosive each instant. In the next Act we all go down to the
annual dinner, in a long rose-wreathed tent, and the Parson says grace
and the Parson's Clerk "Amen," and the Squire (in corduroy knickerbockers
and leggings) bestows his benediction on all the village, while without,
the happy peasants project sticks at cocoanuts or try their strength with
mallets, and all is virtuous and feudal. In the third Act we are in the
Vicarage Garden--a beautiful set, with real rhododendrons. Sir Roger de
Coverley takes tea i'fackins with the Parson, and the Stalwart Farmer
passes the sugar to the Man from Town, who is gazing out wistfully
towards the Village Green, where the Village Beauty foots it featly with
the Village Idiot. The last Act passes in the Drawing-Boom of "Bo tree"
House, where the Archdeacon's Daughter touches her tinkling guitar and
warbles a plaintive ballad:--

   O give my love to Nancy,
     The girl that I adore--
   Tell her that she'll never see
     Her soldier any more--
   Tell her I died in battle
     Fighting with the black,
   Every inch a soldier,
     Beneath the Union Jack.

Dear naive old song, fitting climax of a feudal day, sweet with the
freshness of those simple times, when art for art's sake was a shibboleth
uninvented, and every other man was not diabolically clever! How many
mothers and sisters wept over thy primitive pathos, as they knitted the
Berlin wool-work! how many masculine hearts throbbed more manfully at the
appeal of thy crude patriotism! To-day we analyse ruthlessly thy metre,
proclaiming it the butterwoman's rank to market, and thy sentiment, which
we dub pinchbeck, and we remember that the Union Jack is used only in the
Navy; we are deaf to thy inspiration and dumb at thy chorus; we are
sceptical as to thy soldier's love: Nancy, we know from realistic poets
of the Barrack Room, took up with another young man before her month was
out; and as for the black, he is the object of our devoutest solicitude.
Go to! thou art surely a Gilbertian travesty, a deliciously droll
compound of vulgar patriotism and maudlin pathos. And yet somehow there
are tears on the smiling cheeks of the Man from Town. Let us go out and
hear the nightingales and be sentimental under the moon. Hark how they
precipitate their notes in a fine lyric rapture. This is the same "Jug,
Jug, Jug," that called forth Keats' immortal ode. We cannot hear the
birds' music for itself; it comes to us through melodious chimes of
poetry. Nature has been so filtered through human emotion, so passed and
repassed through the alembic of poetic passion, that she has ceased to be
natural. Little children and fools, on whom, according to the Talmud, the
gift of prophecy devolved when the Temples fell, may still see her naked,
but for the lettered man she is draped in lyric conventions. There is
anthropomorphism in literature as well as in theology: for George Eliot
Nature is steeped in humanity; she cannot see anything for itself. "Our
delight in the sunshine on the deep-bladed grass to-day might be no more
than the faint perception of wearied souls, if it were not for the
sunshine and the grass in the far-off years which still live in us and
transform our perception into love." I wonder if she ever wrote a pure
description of scenery without psychological or mythological allusions.
To a soul saturated with literary prepossessions, nightingales, like love
and most things human, are apt to disappoint and disenchant.

  Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
  Are sweeter.

The cultured American, who has no nightingales at home--not even big
ones--and who arranges to hear an English nightingale between a
performance at Ober-Ammergau and an exploration of the Catacombs of
Paris, often wants his money back after the songster "on yon bloomy
spray" has "warbled at eve when all the woods are still." He has been
expecting something like a song of Patti accompanied on the piano by
Paderewski. It was an American poetess--Mrs. Piatt--who informed the
skylark:

  The song thou sang'st to Shelley was not half
  So sweet as that which Shelley sang to thee!

After all, birds repeat themselves sadly--they strike one note, like a
minor poet, and live on the reputation of their first success. It is
amusing for a few minutes to hear a clever bird giving imitations of the
cuckoo clock, but the joke palls. The Archdeacon's Daughter has a wider
repertoire. And so? though the nightingales are still singing,
conversation springs up in the copse as if it were a drawing-room and the
singers human. My host discourses of the litter of pigs just arrived from
the Great Nowhere, and dilates upon the fact that of the 3,423,807 pigs
in England no two tails are curled alike. Perhaps even so no two
nightingales curl their phrase identically, and one roulade differeth
from another in glory.




PARIS

Decidedly the Parisian atmosphere is charged with artistic electricity.
The play, the novel and the picture flourish on the same stem, and the
very advertisement posters tell their lies artistically. Paris is the
metropolis of ideas. You may catch them there and set up as a prophet on
the strength of a fortnight's holiday. Maeterlinck says he learnt all he
knows from a man he met in a _brasserie_. Fancy picking up ideas in a
pothouse! In London you could only pick up "h's." The reverse of the
medal is the morbidity that ideas and _brasseries_ engender. In the cafes
of the Boule Miehe, where the decadent movements are hatched and the
fledgling Verlaines come to drown theusorrows in vermouth, you may see
the lacklustre visages and tumbled hair of "diabolical" poets and the
world-weary figures of end-of-the-century youngsters pledging their
mistresses in American grog.

But the great heart of the People, that beats still to the homely old
music, and you shall find no trace of morbidity in the melodramas of the
Porte-St.-Martin or the music-halls of the people's quarter. To-day is
the Gingerbread Fair--_La Foire au Pain d'Epices_; and _Tout Paris_--that
is to say, everybody who isn't anybody--is elbowing its way towards the
centre of gaiety. Tramcars deposit their packed freights near the
Bastile[*], and where the women of the Revolution knitted, feeding their
eyes on blood, bonnetless old crones sit drinking red wine in the sun.
The sky is radiantly blue, and there is a music of merry-go-rounds. They
are far more elegant than our English merry-go-rounds, these
_carrousels_, hung with tapestry, and offering you circumambient
palanquins or even elephants. Before a toy stage, on which a mechanical
skirt-dancer disports herself with a tireless smile, an automatic
_chef-d'orchestre_ conducts the revolutionary march (none other than
"Ta-ra-ra-Boom-de-ay") while grotesque figures strike stiffly at bells.
On the pavement an old man has spread for sale a litter of broken dolls,
blind, halt and lame, when not decapitated; and in the roadway the
festive crowd splits to allow the passage of a child's coffin covered
with white flowers. The air thrills with the "ping" of unsuccessful
shots: I take a gun, and by aiming at a ball dancing on a fountain jet,
hit a bull's-eye two yards to the left. I throw flat rings at a sort of
ninepins, five shots for a halfpenny: the first four leave the pins
stolid and the public derisive. I throw the last at random, bring down
half the pins, and stalk off: nonchalantly, the pet of the fickle French
populace. I buy pancakes fried on the stall while you wait--they are
selling like hot cakes--and but for the difficulty of finding one with my
name picked out in pink on the gingerbread, I would buy a pig and hang it
on my breast. Some of the pigs have mottoes instead of names:

  De toute la creation
  C'est moi le plus cochon.

[* Transcriber's note: So in original.]

Another asserts:

  De la tete a la queue
  Je suis delicieux.

I ignore the pigs, but I pacify local prejudice by buying two gingerbread
sailors--a Russian and a French--shaking hands in symbolisation of the
Russo-French alliance, and I further prove myself a patriot by throwing
bright wooden balls into the mouth of a great-faced German, for which I
receive the guerdon of a paper rose and a Berlin wool monkey. I purchase
a ticket from a clown standing on a platform begirt by noisy cages, and
partake in a raffle for a live turkey; but fortunately I am spared the
task of carrying it through the Fair, and not wishing to tempt Providence
again, I content myself with trying for soap. A pack of cards is spread
round a wheel with an index: round goes the wheel, and whoever has the
card at which the index stops gets an orange, or if he likes to save up
his oranges exchanges them for a box of soap. You get four cards for two
sous, but I take all the pack. Round goes the wheel imperturbably. It
stops. Amid the breathless anxiety of the crowd I examine my cards, and
invariably find myself the fortunate possessor of the winning one. But,
by some mysterious arithmetic, which amuses the crowd, every time I win I
have to pay several sous. By such roundabout methods I ultimately arrive
at the soap. I have my portrait taken, allured by the "only a franc." My
image has a degenerate air; the photographer informs me it will not stay
unless he fixes it with enamel--which will be another franc. By the time
it is framed it has come up to six francs, and then, as I leave, the
attendant begs I will remember him! I give him the photograph, and
depart, hoping he will remember me. At the Place de la Nation the fun
grows thicker: there is a rain of confetti, and everybody comes out in
coloured spots; the switchback is busy, chairs mount and descend on
ropes, and there is a bunch of balloons; on a platform outside a booth a
showman beats a drum, the riding-master cracks his whip, and ladies of
uncertain ages and exuberant busts smile all day in evening dress; in the
neighbouring Cirque the Ball of the City of Paris is whirling noisily.
Yes, life goes on in the old, old way in the land of equality and
brotherhood; and the "red fool-fury of the Seine" is but a froth on the
surface. The "Twilight of the Peoples" is the morbid vision of a myopic
seer. With which reflection we will leave Sanity Fair.

As I write there is an appalling, long-drawn crash, which brings the
whole Quarter to its doors and windows. "Bombs" are in everybody's mouth,
and I find myself automatically repeating a sentence out of the Latin
exercise-book of my boyhood: "How comes it that thunder is sometimes
heard when the sky is clear?" I irrelevantly remember that "sometimes"
must be translated "not never." In the streets little groups are
gathered, gesticulating and surmising. Some say "The Pantheon," others
"The Luxembourg"; others trust it is only a gas explosion. I shock my
group by hoping it is a bomb, so that I may say I have heard it go off.
But I know nothing till I read "Paris Day by Day" next evening in "The
Daily Telegraph," and find that my ambition has been gratified, and that
the chief victim of the explosion is a Decadent Poet. Has any one been
taking seriously Nordau's cry for the extinction of the Degenerates?

The dead have their day in France, but it was not _le jour des morts_
when I bethought myself of visiting the grave of Maupassant. I do not
care for these crowded "at homes,"--I prefer to pay my respects in
solitude. You will not think this remark flippant if you are familiar
with French cemeteries, if you know those great family sepulchres, fitted
up as little chapels, through whose doors, crowned with the black cross,
you may see the great wax tapers in the candelabra at the altar, the
stained-glass windows with the figure of the Madonna and Child, the
eikons of Christ, the praying-stools, the vases, the busts or photographs
of the deceased--worthy people who not only thought life worth living but
death worth dying, and did the one and the other respectably and
becomingly. Maupassant lies in one art-quarter of Paris, just as Heinrich
Heine lies in the other. The cemetery is off the Boulevard Raspail,
within bow-shot of the _ateliers_ of Whistler and Bouguereau, overlooked
by an imposing statue of M. Raspail which sets forth that scientific
citizen's many virtues and services. He proclaimed Universal Franchise in
1830, he proclaimed the Republic in 1848, and his pedestal now proclaims
with equal cocksureness that science is the only religion of the future.
"Give me a cell and I will build you up all organised life," cries the
statue, and its stony hand seems to wave theatrically as in emulation of
the bas-reliefs on its base representing Raspail animating his
_camarades_ to victory. But alas! _tout passe, tout casse, tout lasse_,
and not all the residents of the Boulevard are aware of the origin of
their address. Chateaubriand survives as a steak and Raspail as a
Boulevard.

The cemetery Montparnasse is densely populated, and I wandered long
without finding the author of "Boule de Suif." It was a wilderness of
artificial flowers, great wreaths made of beads. Beads, beads, beads,
black or lavender, and even white and yellow, blooming garishly in all
sizes on every grave and stone, in strange theatrical sentimentality;
complex products of civilisation, making death as unnatural as the
feverish life of the Boulevards. Sometimes the beaded flowers were
protected by glass shades, sometimes they were supplemented by leaden or
marble images. Over one grave I found a little porcelain angel, his wings
blue as with the cold; and under him last year's angel in melancholy
supersession. Elsewhere, most terrible sight of all in this ghastly
place, was a white porcelain urn on which were painted a woman's and a
man's hand clasped, the graceful feminine fingers in artistic contrast
with the scrupulously-cuffed male wrist with the motto, "_A mon mari,
Regrets eternels._" Wondering how soon she remarried, I roved gloomily
among these arcades of bourgeois beads, these fadeless flowers, these
monstrous ever-blacks, relieved to find a touch of humour, as in a
colossal wreath ostentatiously inscribed "_A ma belle-mere._" I peeped
into the great family tombs, irresistibly reminded of "Lo, the poor
Indian," and the tribes who provision their dead; I wondered if the old
ghosts ever turn in their graves (as there is plenty of room for them to
do) when some daughter of their house makes an imprudent alliance. Do
they hold family councils in the chapel, I thought, and lament the
growing scepticism of their grandchildren? Do they sigh to see themselves
so changed from the photographs in the family album that confronts their
hollow orbits? Do they take themselves as seriously in death as they did
in life? But they were all scornfully incommunicative. And at last,
despairing of discovering the goal of my journeyings, I inquired of a
guardian in a peaked blue cap and a blue cloak, who informed me that it
was in the twenty-sixth section of the other cemetery. Wonderfully
precise, red-tape, bureaucratic, symmetrical people, the French, for all
their superficial curvetings! I repaired to the other portion of the
cemetery, to lose myself again among boundless black beads and endless
chapels and funereal urns; and at last I besought another blue-cloaked
guardian to show me the grave of Maupassant. "_Par ici,_" he said
nonchalantly: and eschewing the gravel walks he took a short cut through
a lane of dead maidens--

  What's become of all the gold
  Used to hang and brush their bosoms?--

and, descending an avenue of estimable _peres de famille_, turned the
corner of an elegant sepulchre, to which only the most fashionable ghosts
could possibly have the entry. Dear, dear, what heart-burnings there must
be among the more snobbish shadows of Montparnasse! My guide made me
pause and admire, and he likewise insisted on the tribute of my tear
before an obelisk to slaughtered soldiers and a handsome memorial to
burnt firemen.

But perceiving my impatience to arrive at the grave of Maupassant,
"_Mais, monsieur_," he protested, "_il n'y a rien d'extraordinaire._"
"_Vraiment!_" said I, "_c'est la l'extraordinaire._" "_Rien du tout
d'extraordinaire_," he repeated doggedly. "_Sauf le cadavre_," I
retorted. He shook his head, "_Tres pauvre la tombe_," he muttered: "_pas
du tout riche._" Another guardian, wall-eyed, here joined him, and
catching the subject of conversation, "_Tres pauvre_," he corroborated
compassionately. But he went with us, accompanied by a very lean young
Frenchman with a soft felt hat, an over-long frock-coat, tweed trowsers,
and a black alpaca umbrella. He looked like a French translation of some
character of Dickens. At last we arrived at the grave. "_C'est la!_" and
both guardians shook their heads dolefully. "_Tres pauvre!_" sighed one.
"_Rien du tout--rien_," sighed the other. And, thank Heaven, they were
right. Nothing but green turf and real flowers, and a name and a date on
a black cross--the first real grave I had come across. No beads, no
tawdry images, nothing but the dignity of death, nothing but "Guy de
Maupassant, 6 Juillet, '93," on the cross, and "Guy de Maupassant,
1850-93," at the foot. The shrubs were few, and the flowers were common
and frost-bitten; but in that desert of bourgeois beads, the simple green
grave stood out in touching sublimity. The great novelist seemed to be as
close to the reality of death as he had been to that of life. Those other
dead seemed so falsely romanticist. It was a beautiful sunny winter
afternoon. There was a feel of spring in the air, of the Resurrection and
the Life. Beyond the bare slim branches of the trees of the other
cemetery, gracefully etched against the sky, the sun was setting in a
beautiful bank of dusky clouds. Life was so alive that day, and death so
dead. Outside the tomb the poem of light and air, and inside the
tomb--what? I thought of the last words of "Une Vie," that fine novel,
which even Tolstoi considers great, of the old servant's summing up: "_La
vie, voyez-vous, ca n'est jamais si bon ni si mauvais qu'on croit_."
"Perhaps," thought I, "'t is the same with death." "The _Societe des Gens
de Lettres_ had to buy the ground for him," interrupted the wall-eyed
guardian compassionately. The Dickensy Frenchman heaved a great sigh.
"_Vous croyez!_" he said. "Yes," asseverated the other guardian--"he has
it in perpetuity." Ignorant of the customs of death, I wondered if one's
corpse were liable to eviction, and whether the statute of limitations
ought not to apply. "_Je pensais qu'il avait une certaine position_,"
observed the Frenchman dubiously. "_Non_," replied the wall-eyed
guardian, shaking his head, "_Non, il est mort sans le sou_." At the
mention of coin I distributed _pourboire_. The first guardian went away.
I lingered at the tomb, alive now to its more sordid side. Only one row
of bourgeois graves, some occupied, some still _a louer_, separated it
from an unlovely waste piece of ground, bounded by the gaunt brick wall
of the fast-filling cemetery. As I began to muse thereon, I heard a cry,
and perceived my guardian peeping from round the corner of a distant
tomb, and beckoning me with imperative forefinger. I wanted to stay; I
wanted to have "Meditations at the grave of Maupassant," to ponder on the
irony of death, to think of the brilliant novelist, the lover of life,
cut off in his pride, to lie amid perspectives of black and lavender
beads. But my guardian would not let me. "_Il n'y a rien a voir_," he
cried almost angrily, and haled me off to see the real treasures of his
cemetery. In vain I persisted that I must not give him trouble, that I
could discover the beauties for myself. "_O monsieur!_" he said
reproachfully. Fearing he might return my _pourboire_, I followed him
helplessly to inspect the pompous bead-covered tombs of the well-to-do,
shocking him by stopping to muse at the rude mound of an anonymous
corpse, remembered only by a little bunch of _immortelles_. One of the
fashionable sepulchres stood open, and was being dusted by a man and a
woman (on a dust _from_ dust principle, apparently). Most of the dust
seemed to be little beads. My keeper exchanged a word with the cleaners,
and I profited by the occasion to escape. I sneaked back to the grave of
Maupassant, but I had barely achieved a single Reflection, when "_Hola,
hola!_" resounded in loud tones from afar. I started guiltily, but in a
moment I realised that it was the cry of expulsion. The sunset was
fading, and the gates were to be locked. I hastened across the cemetery,
evading my guardian's face of reproach, and in another few moments the
paths were deserted, the twilight had fallen, and the dead were left
alone with their beads.




SLAPTON SANDS

After all the world is a large place. At the moment of writing I have
never heard of Home Rule, nor do I care two straws whether the House of
Lords is to be blown up on the fifth of November. What moves my interest,
what stirs my soul, what arouses the politician that lurks in the best of
us, is this question of the crab-pots. Shall the trawlers of Brixham be
allowed to slash at our cords and to send our wicker baskets adrift,
spoiling our marine harvests and making our larders barren against the
winter? They hover about our beautiful bay--these fiends in human shape,
with brown wings outspread--and wantonly lay waste our fishing-pots in
their reckless course, so that our crabs walk backwards into the sea. We
have had gentlefolks down from London about it, men who argue and
palaver, and wear high hats and are said to have long bills, and there is
talk of a Government cutter to protect us, towed by red tape, and the
trawlers are to cast their nets farther asea. But beware of believing
what you read in the Brixham papers,--we have no voice to represent us in
the press, and so these Brixham organs spread falsehoods about us in
every corner of the globe. A pretty pretence, forsooth, that it is the
steamers who plough up our crab-pots. Why, from Michaelmas to Christmas,
when the trawlers are away, not a single pot is disturbed from its
station, though the funnels smoke as usual in the eye of heaven. No, no,
ye hirelings of the press. Turn your mercenary quills elsewhere, beslaver
Mr. Gladstone or belabour him, arbitrate on the affairs of nations, and
throw your weighty influence into the scale of European politics. But do
not confuse the mind of the country on the question of crab-pots.

We do not get the Brixham papers here, but friends in London tell us that
is what they say. It is the same with the crabs--we have to order them
from London. All local products come _via_ London nowadays: London is
like a central ganglion, through which all sensations must travel before
being felt at the outside points where they were really incurred. This is
the case even with Irish patriots: they are made in Ireland, but if you
want them you have to go to London clubs for them. We have only had one
funeral here since I came, and then we got our material from London. He
had gone up to a London hospital--poor fellow!--and that was the end of
him. The village butcher it was, who thus went the way of all flesh, and
all of us went to his funeral and wept, for want of something else to do.
One cannot always be flippant, even on a holiday. Fortunately the butcher
left an aged father, who announced his intention of carrying on the
business, so we dried our eyes and dined, sure of the future. We thought
of the many creatures the deceased had killed--the Juno-eyed oxen, the
tender lambs, the peaceful pigs--and we did not see why we should be so
sentimental over the human species. We are all murderers, and yet we are
ready to gush over the first corpse that comes along. How I envy the
death-bed of a vegetarian!

We are not vegetarians here, but at least we eschew the six-course dinner
which so few travellers ever succeed in shaking off, even in _Ultima
Thule_. The most of modern travelling is a sort of Cook's Tour.
Everywhere the _menu_ is before you, everywhere waves the napkin, like
the flag of civilisation. Nowhere do we eat ourselves into the real life
of the people; everywhere the same monotonous variety of fare in
kitchen-French. In the remotest Orkneys, in the caves of Iona, in the
fjords of Norway, amid the crevasses of the Alps,--'t is the same tale of
_entrees_ and _entremets_. When Dr. Johnson made his tour in the
Highlands, he was allowed to forget he was not taking a walk down Fleet
Street. He interviewed the chiefs in their fastnesses, the cottagers in
their crofts. He broke rye-bread with the shepherd, ate haggis and
porridge with the peasant, and drank a gill of whisky to see "what makes
a Scotchman happy." Behind him he left his dish of tea, and the pet pork
that made the veins of his forehead swell with ecstasy. But to-day the
dinner-gong resounds where Rob Boy's bugle blared, and you may sit behind
your serviette

  Where the sun his beacon red
  Kindles on Ben Voirlich's head,

or where the monument of a Gaelic poet broods above the heather. The
tyranny of the _table-d'hote_ ceases not even at sea. Every ship bears
these monster meals in its belly--from salami to pineapple--whether it
walk the Boreal waters, or touch the Happy Isles of Mid-Pacific, or
swelter in the Red Sea. Not all the majesties and terrors of naked nature
can dock one _hors d'oeuvre_ from the _menu_. Our stomachs we have always
with us--the traveller's only real _vade mecum_. We change our sky but
not our stomach. When Nansen reaches the North Pole, he will, I am sure,
be able to put up at the local hotel, and have every luxury of the
cosmopolitan cuisine except the ices, which will probably have been all
sent up to the London market. It is this sort of thing that makes foreign
travel merely an expensive delusion. Your common traveller never gets
away from England, fare he never so far. His church, his kitchen and his
company are those he left behind him. To get away from England one must
go to Devonshire or Cornwall. But even here, amid the combes and the
leys, the crags and the quarries, the modern hotel, with its perfect
sanitation and imperfect French, is springing up with the rapidity of
Badraoulbadour's palace. It spoils the primitiveness of the people, and
gives them ideas below their station. They lose their simple manliness
and take tips. They corrupt their autochthonic customs, and drink
champagne cider. The modern hotel is a upas-tree, under whose boughs
poetry withers. One looks to see the ancient ballads lose their blood and
brawn. In time we may expect to find Cornwall producing _vers de
societe_. As thus:--

      And shall Trelawney dine?
      And shall Trelawney dine?
  Then thrice ten thousand Cornish men
      Will order in the wine.

In the absence of six-course dinners and newspapers about Home Rule, we
have had to fall back upon literature. We borrowed Zola's latest--from
the rector,--and read it simultaneously, stealing it from one another.
Even the dogs have devoured bits of it. The poodle has taken in most,
being French. She is an elegant, tricksy creature, Miss Plachecki by
name, but called--for short--"Wopsy." Wopsy's back is arranged in beds
like a Dutch garden; she has rosettes of black hair symmetrically
disposed about her hind quarters, and her tail is exactly like a mutton
cutlet in its frill. She belongs to the Woman of the party. Chum belongs
to the Girl. He is a bull-pup, with a frightfully ferocious face, but he
never bites unless he wants to hurt you. Girl says she took him to a
fashionable photographer's, but the artist refused to pose him. In vain
she pointed out that Chum was more paralysed than he; that Chum was
trembling all over (I opine 't was at the sight of the actresses'
portraits--the young dog!). The photographer steadfastly kept the
apparatus between him and the animal, telling Girl a story about a man
who owned a bull-dog with a bad memory. The man, coming home late, and
entering his sitting-room, was met by an ominous growl in the darkness.
Bull-dogs have little smell, and so the man was not recognized. He made a
movement towards the mantelpiece, where the matches were, to strike a
light and convince the dog of its mistake. But unfortunately the dog
guarded the mantelpiece, and every move was answered by a ghastly growl.
More unfortunately still, the man's bedroom was only approached through
the sitting-room, and its door was only approached through the dog. So,
for want of a match, the man passed the night like a Peri at the gates of
Paradise. At last Girl posed Chum, herself, her draperies constituting a
nebulous background; and the artist, walking warily, adjusted his
instrument, and the sun which shines alike on saints and bull-pups,
painted the squatter's portrait. But, alas! a woeful disappointment was
in store. When the proofs arrived, it was found that all that delightful
uncouthness of visage which is Chum's chief charm, all that fascinating
ferocity which makes him a thing of ugliness and a joy for ever, had
vanished--refined away, idealised into a demureness as of domestic tabby,
a platitudinarian peacefulness--nay, a sort of beauty! The camera had
been so accustomed to actresses that it could no longer work naturally.




VENICE

I am reading Nietzsche and Tolstoi. Each tells me that the morality of
the day is all wrong, and that he has discovered the one true way of
salvation. Life, cries Nietzsche, strength, sunshine, beauty. Death,
cries Tolstoi, abnegation, pity, holiness. 'T is all as old as the hills,
and withal so simple that one wonders why Nietzsche should have needed
eleven volumes to say it in and Tolstoi endless pamphlets. I never can
understand the lengths to which some authors go in self-repetition. Half
the books are written to prove that water is dry, and the other half that
it's wet. If you would only stop and think just for one moment, cries
Tolstoi, you would at once see what a ridiculous life you are leading and
you would refuse to lead it any longer. Stop and think! Ay, but 't is
difficult thinking to-day.

It will be all over and done with so long--by the time you read
this--that the Triple Alliance may be in three pieces; but for the moment
the complications of European politics alternately startle and depress my
day with furious cannonades of honour from an Italian gunboat and brazen
dronings of national anthems from a German band. For the young man whom
Tolstoi has described as the most comic figure in Europe, coming to meet
Umberto I. in Venice, inconsiderately stationed his yacht just outside my
window; and though he is gone at last, _Gott sei Dank_, the echoes of him
still linger in irrelevant cannon-shots that send the pigeons scurrying
in mad swoops; while, as if removed from the oppression of his presence,
the band of the _Hohenzollern_ plays London music-hall tunes all day
long, commencing, significantly enough, with "Oh, Mr. Porter, what a
funny man you are!" I never realised how international is our music-hall
till I heard Italians staggering home at midnight, singing "Two lovely
black eyes" in choice Venetian. A beautiful yacht this _Hohenzollern_, as
large as an Atlantic liner: I suppose an Imperial yacht is like an
Imperial pint.  'T was a great moment when it sailed in round a bend,
slow and serene--a glorious white vessel, radiant with flags, stately and
majestic in its movement as a sonnet of Milton, and about it a black
swarm of gondolas, those of the noble families equipped with half a dozen
gondoliers in green, yellow, or blue liveries, and at the stern of each
boat a trail of silk. And the dense crowds huzzahed, and the band played
"God Save the Queen," only in German, so that it meant, _Heil dir im
Siegeskranz_. And after that came the Italian national air, which isn't
an anthem, but a quick march, and so lacks dignity. The "Wacht am Rhein"
made a half-hearted effort to be present, but in the night we had the
Emperor's own "Sang an Aegir," stuck in the middle of a Wagner programme.
Beyond this, compliment could scarcely go.

This brazen air was the one jar on the poetry of a spectacle possible
only in Venice. Imagine it! Wagner played on a floating fairy-pagoda,
built as of gold flame, and shot with green and red, on the broad bosom
of St. Mark's basin, in the divine night, the stars seen hanging
diversely in free space, not stuck like gold-headed nails in a dark
ceiling; and in the mystery of the darkness, the domes and spires and
palaces of Venice, and the dim creeping boats, and the quivering
reflections of the illuminated Imperial vessel; and across the narrow
track of luminous water made by the Pagoda--that glittered with a
fantastic splendour as of Aladdin and Arabian nights--sudden gondolas
gliding from darkness to darkness, the beautiful curve of the prow
sharply revealed, the gondolier growing semi-transparent and quivering
with light, a strange half-demoniac figure bestriding his black bark.
And, mingled with the music, the hum of multitudes and the tramp of feet
and the silence of the vast night. All as Nietzsche's poem on Venice hath
it--"Gondeln, Lichter, Musik." Yes, they play politics prettily on the
Grand Canal--the finest street in Europe. Does it matter much what is the
game? Cannons and colour, bands and decorations, bread and circuses,
emperors uncovering to us, beautiful queens waving dainty
handkerchiefs--this is what lies behind the dry Treaties of the history
books. A few short weeks back we had been very angry with our King, and
had talked of Republics and what not. But the dead men in Abyssinia are
dead, and we are alive, and the Bengal fire on the palaces is really very
picturesque. If we would only stop and think--just for one moment! But
there's the rub.

It's no use stopping and thinking, unless everybody else will stop and
think at the same time. For you cannot refuse to lead a life that
everybody is leading, unless you are willing to be crushed by the
revolutions of the social machinery. Socialists, for instance, are often
twitted with not "behaving as sich." But socialists say that socialism
should be the law of the land: they do not say that it is practicable for
an odd man here and there to be a socialist in a world of individualists.
Tolstoi, to be of effect, would have to move all mankind at once to
renounce its ways, to abjure the lust of the eye and the pride of life.
And he would have to keep on moving it, or back it would roll. Mazzini
and the unification of Italy--what words to conjure with! But Mazzini is
dead, and how much of Italy is alive! 'T is more like a great show-place,
supported by its visitors, than a real, live country. Stop and think! 'T
is perhaps better not to think, for fear we should stop. William II., at
any rate--he is not likely to stop and think. This young man--from all I
have observed since he became my neighbour--lives a highly coloured
dramatic existence, in which there are sixty minutes to every hour and
sixty seconds to every minute, the sort of life that should have pleased
Walter Pater. He must be a disciple of Nietzsche, a lover of the strong
and the splendid, this German gentleman who is just off to Vienna to
prance at the head of fifteen hundred horsemen. While he lived opposite
me, it was all excursions and alarums. As a neighbour an emperor is
distinctly noisy. The local comic papers suggested that, as a universal
genius, Guglielmo II. would at once set about rowing a two-oared sandolo.
But this difficult feat Guglielmo did not essay, being convoyed more
comfortably in a long-boat by a brawny crew. Curious, by the way, that
transformation of William! They announce plays here by G. Shakespeare,
the divine Guglielmo.

'T is all very well for Guglielmo, the gondola of Avon, to invite us to
sit on the ground and tell sad stories of the death of kings; and in a
city of departed Doges and lost glories't is easy to moralise over
earthly greatness. But kings are not always dead, and I daresay as
William II. in his cocked hat gazed from the quarter-deck of the
_Hohenzollern_ at the marvellous but untenanted Palace of the ancient
Bridegrooms of the Sea, he felt that a living lion is better than a dead
Doge. And yet it is a strange life, a king's. What an unreal universe of
flags and cannons and phrases must monarchs inhabit! Do they think that
the streets are always gay with streamers and bunting and triumphal
arches, always thunderous with throats of men or guns, always impassable?
Do they imagine their subjects spend their whole lives in packed black
masses, waving hats? Poor kings! I always class them with novelists for
ignorance of real life. And to think that they can only get to know life
from novels! If they would only stop, and think! But even when they do
stop, they never seem to think. Napoleon on St. Helena never faced
realities, aggressively pompous to the end. Then there is Don Carlos,
whom I miss in my afternoon stroll. He who might have dazzled us with
divinity is visibly a feather-less biped. The poor, mock king had to
leave Venice because his brother-sovereigns would not have called upon
him. For Don Carlos still keeps up the form and style of a crowned head,
and remains the last of the Bourbons, a picturesque ruin, reproach to a
blasphemous generation, heedless of the divine right of kings.

And the "divinity that doth hedge a king" can be kept up nowhere so
cheaply as in Venice. Venice is the dress-coat of cities, making all men
equal. Well might Wordsworth dub her "the eldest child of liberty"! For
in the streets of Venice you cannot drive or ride--walk you must. No
gleaming broughams, no spanking steeds: nothing--be you monarch or
mendicant--but your two legs. 'T is strange, in a land of no horses, to
find Venetians styled "Cavalier" for title of honour. They should surely
be called "Gondoliers." For the gondola is your only chance of display.
Rich Americans may flaunt it with four gondoliers and print "Palazzo" on
their visiting-cards. But doctors and lawyers live in Palaces, and even a
moderate purse can keep a horseless carriage. And your St. Mark's Square,
which is the largest drawing-room in the world, is also the most
democratic. Ladies of quality jostle shawled street-walkers, a German
sailor galls the kibe of a beautiful Browning duchess, officers with
showy epaulettes glitter among respectable shopkeepers; helmeted
cuirassiers, Austrian admirals, policemen with coloured tufts like
lamp-cleaners, German baronesses, bouncing bonnes with babies,
garlic-scented workingmen, American schoolgirls, and kings in exile, are
mixed pell-mell, all in perfect freedom and equality, and, though in the
shadow of St. Mark's Church, quite Christian. And an Italian crowd is
also Christian in its freedom from crush. It does not turn a fete into a
fight and a concourse into a competition. Thus, as the Prince Consort was
amused to find we English said of our pleasure-parties, all "passes off
well." Except when there is rain. And the heavens threw unmistakable cold
water on the Triple Alliance. The day of the Emperor's stay was the one
wet day Venice had known for months--so dank and chill, with so sooty a
sky, that my friend the artist, who had just been reading in the London
paper that his work had not caught the glamour and the colour of Venice,
that the South had not yet revealed its passionate secrets to him,
chuckled grimly. What is all this nonsense about an Italian hothouse? At
Florence I was afraid of being snow-bound in the sunny South. For, long
and heavily, though the London meteorologists registered sunshine,

  Cadeva dal cielo la neve
  Con tutta la sua quiete.

  (Down from heaven fell the snow
  With all its quietness.)

This perfect description of snowfall--which I found rudely chalked on the
wall of a Venetian alley--could never have been conceived in the Italy of
popular imagination. The superstition about Italian sunshine is like that
about Italian beauty. If the country about Florence is the loveliest in
Europe, surely the plain of Lombardy around Padua is the ugliest--a land
of symmetrical tree-stumps and stony villas flaunting themselves on the
roadway in pompous publicity.

In Venice the Emperor seemed specially to irritate the elements. The
illuminations were extinguished by a terrific torrent that sent the
people pattering away into the black, starless night, gleaming with rain
and fire; and to-night when the imperial band attempted to play "Sang an
Aegir" again, the heavens fell, and audience and orchestra vanished in
the twinkling of a gas-lamp, while the pavement of the Piazza glittered
golden as the facade of St. Mark's with dancing reflections, and the
lights burnt blue in the wind. Yes, though the papers next day said the
Emperor's Song was applauded enthusiastically, Jupiter Pluvius at least
never plays the courtier, and Boreas must be a rude reminder to monarchs
of their essential humanity. Come, let us sit upon the ground and tell
sad stories of the colds of kings. In the daylight I chanced upon a rough
wooden platform, bordered with plush and surrounded by tawdry terraces of
coloured, glass cups. This was the fairy, Aladdin-like Pagoda. And such,
methinks, are kings, on closer acquaintance. How majestic seemed William
II., and Humbert, the Kaiserin and Queen Margherita, when, massed in our
thousands on the Piazza, we clamoured for a glimpse of them: how
inaccessible and star-like when, after much exciting but irrelevant
shadow pantomime, they actually appeared on the balcony of the Palace, as
if to feed us like the pigeons we had displaced! With what tumultuous
rapture did we behold their faces! Stop and think! You cannot stop and
think. Enthusiasm is a microbe, and is independent of its object: even so
we could yawn over Punch and Judy, if the crowd assembled to yawn.
Republicans who came to sneer remained to cheer.

  'T is comic this,
  And comic that,
  And clown on royal pay,
  But 't is "Long live _unser Kaiser!_"
  When the band begins to play.

And humanity has need of leaders, heroes--'t is a primal instinct. The
Jews had Jehovah himself for sovereign, but nothing would content them
but a real man-king, who should rule them and judge them and go out
before them in war. Kings were leaders once, but in modern days they are
only symbols, just as flags are: the whole force of the nation is behind
them, and they stand for home and country. This it is that gives them
majesty and divinity. 'T is a case of transformation of function, an old
institution adapted to new uses, and valuable partly as giving colour to
life, partly for preventing the evils which Gibbon so pregnantly showed
to be inseparable from any system of primacy not based on an immutable
heredity. The trouble is when the flag wishes to order the march.

An unbroken tradition has kept up the old phrases of loyalty, and so what
wonder if a king sometimes takes them seriously! "_Le roi le veult_" not
unnaturally leads sometimes to a king willing. And also we are not quite
conscious of the transformation; it has come about so gradually that no
one knows when kings ceased to be leaders, and when they became flags,
and so with the new feeling blend confusedly strands of the old. We
English have abolished the sovereign, but we are too loyal to say so. In
Germany the sovereign has refused to be a symbol, and in a country
over-civilised in thought and under-civilised in action, he has had a
pretty good innings. I must confess I do not find this attitude of his
merely ridiculous. It forces clearly upon the modern world the question
of kingship, whether it is to be a sham or a reality. Unpopular as
William II. has made himself by his martinet methods--ridiculous, if you
will--yet there is only one step from the ridiculous to the sublime. In a
flippant age he takes himself seriously, has a sense of a responsible
relation to his people. Have you seen the cartoon he designed to inspire
the nations of the West to league together for the protection of their
ideals against the races of the East? The thought may be trite, the
philosophy leagues behind the doctrines of the Berlin _Aufgeklaerter_, but
it shows a soul above card-playing or court-gossip. What a noble chance
there would be for a modern sovereign who should really be the head of
his people, on a par with the culture of his age, in harmony with its
highest ideals, fostering all that is finest in life and character, in
art and thought! Snobbishness would be converted to useful ends, and
courtiers would become philosophers out of sheer flattery. But such a
Platonic king is scarcely to be looked for: the training is so bad.

The presence of kings makes places abnormal and out of character, but in
Venice it rather gives one a sense of the true Venice, she that once held
the gorgeous East in fee. For the Venice of every day only escapes
vulgarity by force of beauty: she lives up to the English and German
tripper, borders her great Piazza with photograph shops, and counts on
the sentimental traveller to feed her pigeons. Oh, that trail of the
tourist over Europe, falsifying the very things he went out for to see!
"Coelum non animum mutant," said the Roman poet long ago of travellers,
but the modern traveller carries his sky with him. Instead of "Venice in
London" 't is London in Venice. Carefully fenced off from the local life
by his _table d'hote_, it is rarely that the Briton comes to understand
that he and not the native is the foreigner, the _forestiere_. Cities on
show are never real; they are like people posturing before a camera,
instead of being taken _au naturel_. And "the season" is the time in
which they are least real. Too many Cooks' tourists spoil the broth.
Cities _en fete_ are masked and prankt, and the spring in Italy is like
one long _Forestieri_ day. At the church of Eremitani in Padua I was
taken to see some Mantegnas at a side-altar while a very devout
congregation was celebrating Eastertide, and the verger unlocked a gate
and pocketed his tip with undiminished piety. How apt an image of life,
these Italian churches--some of us praying and some of us sightseeing! It
must be confusing to the celestial bookkeepers to distinguish the Bibles
from the Baedekers. And while the real Venice is as unreal as the real
Florence or the real Rome, Venice welcoming her king gives one a truer
impression of the Venice of our dreams, the Queen of the seas in the
brave days of old. Let us forget the steamboats and the iron bridges, let
us make believe that the _Hohenzollern_ is the great Bucentaur, in which
the Doge went out to wed the Adriatic and which that arch-Philistine
Napoleon broke up. For the Venice of every day is a dead city, with
nothing left of its ancient glories but wealth. Though the millions be
reckoned in lire, there are over a hundred millionaires in Venice. But of
that mighty artistic and religious impulse which produced countless
churches and palaces, pictures and frescoes, which strewed the very
street walls with spirited sculpture, and warmed even parochial offices
with priceless paintings, there is as little trace as of the indomitable
energy that founded a great Republic on wooden piles and guarded it from
the sea by dykes and from its enemies by the sea. The escutcheons of its
great families are fast becoming archaeological, and Americans and Jews
inhabit their palaces. How great a power Venice was I never realised till
I was permitted to see the Archives. It takes three-quarters of an hour
to walk through these galleries of town records. Miles of memorandums,
wildernesses of reports, acres of ambassadors' letters from every court
in Europe, written in cipher with inter-bound Italian translations. I
tried to find the report of the ambassador at the Court of St. James
anent the execution of Charles I., but gave up hopeless, oppressed by the
musty myriads of volumes, and found comfort in the signature of Queen
Elizabeth, surely the most regal autograph in the world, like some ship
going out against the Armada with swelling canvas and pennants streaming.
There's a woman after Nietzsche's heart--strong, splendid, and
unscrupulous. If Nietzsche had married her, he might have changed his
philosophy. What a diplomatist, this Englishwoman! To this day the
Direttore of the Archives of Venice swears by her. Those awesome
Archives! The reports of the Council of Ten alone stretch away through
vasty halls of death. And then people talk of writing history! How
fortunate that the exact details of royal, political and military events
are as unessential as they are unattainable! Real history consists mainly
of the things that haven't happened--the millions of everyday lives,
sunrise and sunset, ships and harvests, the winds and the rain, and the
bargains in the market-place. The reading of Clio's blood-stained scroll
would be unbearable, were it not for the reflection that all the
important things have been left out--the myriads of sunny mornings that
dawned on the "Dark Ages," and filled creation with the joy of life; the
hopes and loves throbbing in the great obscure mass of humanity; the
individual virtues and victories that co-existed with the decadence of
great empires; the vast ocean of consciousness of which History just
skims the surface. And now all that great Venetian life is over, the
dreaded Council of Ten is as the dust that covers its reports, and the
Doge's Palace is a spectacle for tourists at a franc a head. Great Caesar
dead and turned to show. And those who pay the franc scarcely seem to
reflect that princes and artists did not live and die in Italy to help
young British or German couples over their honeymoon; that Dandolo and
Foscari, Sansovino and Tintoretto, passed away with no suspicion of that
latter-day trinity--Bride, Bridegroom, and Baedeker. Strange that that
which was so real to themselves is so romantic to us! Such is the
transmutation of time, which can colour with poetry things much more
prosaic than life in ancient Venice. Nothing of us that doth fade

  But doth, suffer a sea-change
  Into something rich and strange.

Poets and seers feel the richness and strangeness of the life that is
passing under their very eyes. With Maeterlinck it is the mystery, with
Stevenson the colour, with Wordsworth the divinity. To see the glamour of
the contemporary is the note of your modern. Whitman spent his life
trying to see it in the most unpromising materials. The wondering
perception of steamships and electric-cables has already grown dulled to
us: it requires a Kipling to revivify it. The new photographic process
which enables one to carry out Sydney Smith's desire on a hot day, to
take off one's flesh and sit in one's bones, alone seems wonderful to us;
though to see through a window is just as marvellous as to see through a
brick wall. For if _nil admirari_ be the motto of the sage, _omne
admirari_ is that of the poet, and the poetry which wafts from the past
to the soul of the most commonplace person is seen in the present by him
who hath eyes. The pathos of that which _must_ pass away is no less great
than the pathos of that which _has_ passed away. And what produces the
art-feeling in both cases is the same--the fresh, intense perception of
things for themselves alone: only the ordinary man finds it easier to
detach his own interests from the past than from the present of which he
is part. Romance is not in things, but in the souls that observe. Every
place, however enchanted, is inhabited by prosaic persons who earn their
living there. My chambermaid was born in Padua--Padua, outside which
Donatello could not achieve perfection; Padua, ever dear to us because
Portia feigned to have studied law at its University. Alas! alas! the two
gentlemen of Verona go down to business in tram-cars, and the

  Magic casements opening on the foam
  Of faery lands in perilous seas forlorn

are cleaned and repaired by some one who sends in the bill. Yet, since
believing is seeing, let us behold, not the chambermaid and the
window-cleaner, but the magic casement and the moonrise. And if to the
commonplace our own age is commonplace, yet our age, like youth, is a
fault that will mend with time. Our politics, and philosophies too, will
crumble and decay, the dust will gather on our books and newspapers,
archaeologists will prize our coins, the fashion of our ugly garments
will grow picturesque, and samples of our streets will be rebuilt in
exhibitions. What is then left to console us for the eternal flux? Only
that posterity shall grow old-fashioned too, while we, like antiquity,
shall have enjoyed that which never grows old--the sunshine and the
stars, love and friendship, the smiles of little children, and the
freshness of flowers, aspiration and achievement, thought and worship,
struggle and self-sacrifice.

These, these are the eternal things--that persist in every age, in every
environment, in old Etruscan villages as in the Paris of to-day: these
are the realities to which "the latest scientific conveniences" are but
padding, and in which we have had no superiority over our ancestors, even
as we shall have no inferiority to our successors, though they riot in
"Vril" and balloons, and go on Cooks' Tours to the constellations. The
network of nerves in which we live and move and have our being is only
capable of a certain quota of sensations, and no invention will really
enlarge our enjoyments except it be of a new set of nerves. Persons whose
lives have known strange vicissitudes have been astonished to find
pleasure and pain about equally distributed in all; and I am optimist
enough to think that no age will be really less unhappy than the present.
Reformers who imagine they improve on the past age do but alter old
institutions to fit new feelings. Reformers are necessary because
otherwise the new feelings would be cramped by the old institutions. But
there is no addition to the sum of pleasure. Progress really means not
lagging behind; and however far we march, the same sunshine will throw
the same shadow of pain across our path. The notion of progress, said
Spinoza, is a futility, because God, of whom the universe is a
manifestation, is always perfect. Later philosophers have found this
doctrine a barren blind-alley, and craved for the notion of a more
energising God. But both notions seem perfectly compatible. Progress may
be just the way perfection manifests itself. The universe moves--and at
each point is perfect. It is as good as it could be--at the moment: it
could not be any better. For if it could have been, it would have been:
it has no interest in being otherwise. That it is not perfect in our
sense of the word matters little to the metaphysician. We have such
limited experiences of universes that we cannot judge what a really good
one should be like; and to say that ours is bad is to foul our own nest.

He had no doubt of the perfection of the universe, that gentle old
Franciscan who lives with his twenty-nine brethren on the islet of St.
Francesco del Deserto, a rarely visited spot off Venice, that somehow
reminded me of the island in Mr. H. A. Jones' "Michael and his Lost
Angel." He had never been to Assisi, where his tutelary saint was born.
"Have you no wish to see it?" I asked. "My only wish is to obey." Dear
old man! He had stopped all his life; but thinking--ah! that is another
matter. It was in this island that St. Francis preached to the birds. He
was saying the Office when all the birds stopped to listen, and St.
Francis took advantage of the opportunity. It was his disciple St. Antony
who preached to the fishes, and there is a delicious picture in Padua
showing all the fishes perking their heads out of the water and listening
in devout dumbness, the very oysters open to conviction. Poor dear
fishes! What a delightful change to receive from the upper world
something else than hooks! What a sweet simple cloister hath this lonely
monastery--a plain stone walk under a red-tiled arcade supported by rough
brick pillars, the walls lined by quaint black-and-white engravings of
saints engaged in miracles. There is a well in the centre which used to
be of sea-water, but St. Bernard of Siena blessed it and it turned sweet.
I have drunk of the water, so I can vouch the story is true. And there is
a beautiful cypress walk. What a tranquil retreat!

  O Beata Solitudo!
  O Sola Beatitudo!

as the inscription over the lintel hath it. I do not wonder that St.
Francis came here when he was greatly fatigued, "after converting the
Sultan of Egypt," as the old Franciscan naively explained. 'T is the sort
of sanatorium Tolstoi would need, after converting the German Emperor!
And despite St. Francis, and his doctrine of brotherhood with birds and
fishes, we go on with our cannibal cookery, and even his own Church still
teaches that animals have no souls, though that is perhaps because they
have no _soldi_. And despite Tolstoi and his tracts, the people who stop
will not think and the people who think will not stop. For to convert the
world is the one miracle that the saints have never compassed. Yet is the
sunshine of these sweet souls never lost, and the gentle mien of the old
Franciscan made me feel at peace even with my sandolier when I found him
sound asleep in his boat, wrapped up in my cloak.

And these are the types of character Nietzsche would destroy. They are
degenerative, forsooth! They make against life and the joy thereof. Ah,
but the joy of life is not only the joy of self-assertion: there is the
joy of self-effacement, which is only another form of self-expression,
the assertion of a higher self. That was the secret of Jesus, of Buddha.
Whereas the doctrine of Nietzsche--_c'est le secret de Polichinelle_. The
man in the street needs no encouragement to enjoyment. It is only by the
travail of the centuries that he has been taught to prefer to his own
pleasure somebody else's absence of pain. Human nature is like Venice or
Holland--a province slowly wrested from the sea, and secured by dams and
dykes. Woe to him who makes a breach in the sea-walls! And yet Nietzsche
is to be read, though 't is a pity he is to be translated into English
for the seduction of unripe minds. The desuetude of Latin as a common
language for scholars is to be regretted; it kept the thinkers of Europe
in touch, and kept out the _profanum vulgus_. As I have often pointed
out, a truth grows so stale that it is almost a lie, and to invert any
conventionality is to produce what is almost a truth. Truth is convex as
well as concave.

This method of inversion is Nietzsche's main weapon: as earnest as any of
our pulpiteering Puritans, he wears his morality inside out. He denies
the copy-book, as Luther denied the infallibility of the Pope. He
transposes all moral values, finds virtue often weakness and vice often
strength, girds at all the cloud-spinning philosophers, and is one of the
most brilliant and suggestive of modern writers, full of epigram and
whimsy, and wielding the clumsy German tongue with rare grace and
dexterity. But, as might be expected of the son of a parson, he pursues
his reaction against conventional cant beyond the bounds of legitimate
paradox, replacing the narrow by the narrower. Nietzsche was necessary;
some one had to call a spade a spade. The great forces of modern thought,
which have been gathering for centuries, had to find shameless
expression; and Nietzsche's scorn for those who have tried to patch up
hollow truces with bygone beliefs, and dress up new heresies in old
Sunday clothes, is amply justified. But what is not justified is his
admiration of himself--an admiration so pronounced that it has landed him
in a lunatic asylum. Our systems of chronology ought to be recast, cries
he; and even as men have dated from A.D., so are they to date from A.N.,
the year of Nietzsche. Not that he expects immediate recognition: "Erst
das Uebermorgen gehoert mir. Einige werden posthum geboren." But the bulk
of what he tells us is really involved in all modern conceptions of the
cosmus--it could have been found long ago in Herbert Spencer.

Anti-Christ he calls himself, and beats the drum and invites you to
inspect the greatest philosophy on earth. "Now hold your breath with
awe," he has the air of saying, "or if you are not strong enough to hear
this fearsome truth, go home to the nursery and read Hegel." And after
this fanfaronade, lo! some commonplace that you shall find in a hundred
modern poets or philosophers. 'T is like the clown in the circus who
works himself up with a mighty pother to mount the bare-backed steed, and
then hangs on to the tail. No, no, good Herr Nietzsche, we want our
Saints Francis as well as our Napoleons. The one kind is as much in the
"order of nature" as the other; and pity and humility, if they are the
virtues of "nations in their decline," are preferable to the vices of
nations at their zenith. And, good Count Tolstoi, a universe of Saints
Francis would be an intolerable bore. The cowl does not cover all the
virtues, nor the dress-coat all the sins.  'T is a world we live in, not
a monastery; and it is amid the clash of mighty opposites that the music
of the spheres is beaten out.

"Everything in Venice is delivered up to the Evil One now," writes John
Buskin to Father Jacopo of the Armenian monastery; and such has been the
immemorial language of prophets. I sometimes suspect the Evil One
deserves more gratitude than he gets. Where would be the play without the
villain of the piece? No, the devil is not so black as he is painted, nor
the angel so white. And hence these incessant swings of the philosophical
pendulum as one truth or the other is perceived. The true ethics of the
future will give the devil his due, and deduct a discount from the angel.

The Armenian monastery which has posted up Ruskin's letter is
paradoxically proud of its association with Lord Byron, who studied
Armenian there; and visitors come there in consequence, and buy books
that the monks print. So that Satan has his uses, and Scripture can quote
the devil for its own purposes. The book I bought was a charming
collection of Armenian folk-songs, and it contains one delicious poem
whose refrain has haunted me ever since:

  ON THE PARTRIDGE.

  The sun boats from the mountain's top,
       Pretty, pretty.
  The partridge comes from her nest:
  She was saluted by the flowers,
  She flew and came from the mountain's top,
       Ah! pretty, pretty,
       Ah! dear little partridge!

Only the highest genius--and what is higher than the folk-genius?--would
dare to be so naive:

  Ah! pretty, pretty,
  Ah! dear little partridge!




VENTNOR

I did not get to Ventnor without a struggle. Everybody that I met held up
hands of horror. "What! Going to Ventnor? You will be roasted before your
time." My friends grieved, my very publishers wrung their hands, my
newsvendor took me aside and besought me to live on a high hill. Yet
through the whole of August I sat coolly writing on a low terrace. There
is a superstition about Ventnor, and none of the people who talk glibly
about its temperature have ever been there. But I think I have discovered
the origin of the great Ventnor myth. The place is a winter resort of
consumptives; and Mr. Frederick Greenwood, who was the chief charm of
Ventnor, told me that you may take coffee on your lawn in November. The
town, then, is warm in winter. The popular mind, with its hasty logic,
thinks that this is tantamount to saying it is broiling hot in summer. I
fancy there is a similar fiction about Bournemouth. But as a rule the
British climate pays no heed to guide-books. By the natives, Ventnor,
though as beautiful as a little Italian town, seems to be regarded as a
good place to go away from, for every other man keeps a coaching
establishment (I don't mean a school), and you cannot walk two yards
without being accosted by a tout, who resents your walking the next two.
Its regatta is a puerile affair, its own boating crews going off by
preference to rival regattas. But in illuminations it comes out far
better than Cowes, whose loyal inhabitants throw all the burden of
fireworks upon the royal and other yachts anchored in the bay. And
besides, Ventnor has a carnival, which I saw in the shop-windows in the
shape of comic masks.

Bonchurch, the suburb of Ventnor, which plumes itself upon a very
artificial pond, furnished in the best style with sycamores, Scotch firs,
elms and swans, is more interesting for containing the old churchyard by
the sea which received the bones of John Sterling and inspired the best
poem of Philip Bourke Marston:--

  Do they hear, through the glad April weather,
    The green grasses waving above them?
    Do they think there are none left to love them,
  They have lain for so long there together?
    Do they hear the note of the cuckoo,
      The cry of gulls on the wing,
    The laughter of winds and waters,
      The feet of the dancing Spring?

I was married in Ventnor. At least so I gather from the local newspapers,
in whose visitors' lists there figures the entry, "Mr. and Mrs.
Zangwill." I do not care to correct it, because, the lady being my
mother, it is perfectly accurate and leads to charming misconceptions.
"There, that's he," loudly whispered a young man, nudging his sweetheart,
"and there's his wife with him." "That! why, she looks old enough to be
his mother," replied the young lady. "Ah!" said her lover, with an air of
conscious virtue and a better bargain, "they're awfully mercenary, these
literary chaps." The reverse of this happened to a young friend of mine.
He married an old lady who possessed a very large fortune. During the
honeymoon his solicitous attentions to her excited the admiration of
another old lady, who passed her life in a Bath-chair. "Dear me!" she
thought: "how delightful in these degenerate days to see a young man so
attentive to his mother!" and, dying soon after, left him another large
fortune.




SOMEWHERE ELSE

Before I chanced on the great discovery which has made all my holidays
real boons, and pleasure trips quite a pleasure, I used to go through all
the horrors of preliminary indecision, which are still, alas! the lot of
the vast majority. I would travel for weeks in Bradshaw, and end by
sticking a pin at random between the leaves as if it were a Bible, vowing
to go where destiny pointed. Once the pin stuck at London, and so I had
to stick there too, and was defrauded of my holiday. But even when the
pin sent me to Putney, or Coventry, I was invariably disappointed. Like
the inquisitive and precocious infant of the poem, I was always asking
for the address of Peace, but whenever I called I was told that she was
not in, while the mocking refrain seemed to ring in my ears: "Not there,
not there, my child." And at last I asked angrily of the rocks and caves:
"Will no one tell me where Peace may be found? Wherever I go I find she
is somewhere else." Then, at last, one nymph's soft heart grew tender and
pitiful towards me, and Echo, hardly waiting till I had completed my
sentence, answered: "Somewhere Else."

A wild thrill of joy ran through me. At last I had found the solution of
the haunting puzzle. Somewhere Else. That was it. Not Scotland, nor
Switzerland, nor Japan. None of the common places of travel. But
Somewhere Else. Wherever I went, I wished I had gone Somewhere Else.
Then, why not go there at first? What was the good of repining when it
was too late? In future, I would make a bee-line for the abode of
Peace--not hesitate and shilly-shally, and then go to Bournemouth, or
Norway, or Ceylon, only to be sorry I had not gone to Somewhere Else
direct. In a flash, all the glories of the discovery crowded upon me--the
gain of time, temper, money, everything. "A thousand thanks, sweet Echo,"
I cried. "My obedience to thy advice shall prove that I am not
ungrateful." Echo, with cynical candour, shouted "Great fool," but I
cannot follow her in her end-of-the-century philosophy. And I have taken
her advice. I went Somewhere Else immediately, and since then I have gone
there every year regularly. My relatives do not care for it, and suggest
all sorts of conventional places, such as Monte Carlo and Southend, but
wherever they go, be it the most beautiful spot on earth, I remain
faithful to my discovery, and go to Somewhere Else, where Peace never
fails to greet me with the special welcome accorded to an annual visitor.
The place grows upon me with every season. Sometimes, I think I should
like to stay on and die there. No other spot in the wide universe has
half such charm for me, and even when I do die, I don't think I shall go
to where all the other happy idlers go. I shall go to Somewhere Else.

For Cromer may be the garden of sleep, but you shall find sleepier
gardens and more papaverous poppies--Somewhere Else. The mountain-pines
of Switzerland may be tall, and the skies of Italy blue, but there are
taller pines and bluer skies--Somewhere Else. The bay of San Francisco
may be beautiful, and the landscapes of Provence lovely, and the crags of
Norway sublime, but Somewhere Else there are fairer visions and scenes
more majestical--

  An ampler setter, a diviner air,
  And fields invested with purpureal gleams.

It never palls upon you--Somewhere Else. Every loved landmark grows
dearer to you year by year, and year by year apartments are
cheaper--Somewhere Else. The facilities for getting to it are enormous.
All roads lead to it, far more truly than to Rome. There can be no
accidents on the journey. How often do we read of people setting forth on
their holidays full of life and hope--yea, sometimes even on their
honeymoon--and lo! a signalman nods, or a bridge breaks, and they are
left mangled on the rails or washed into the river. And to think that
they would have escaped if they had only gone to Somewhere Else! Too late
the weeping relatives wring their hands and moan the remark. Henceforth,
among the ten million pleasure-pilgrims, who will be guided by me, there
will be no more tragedies by flood or field. Railway assurance will
become a thing of the past, and a fatal blow will be struck at modern
hebdomadal journalism. To turn to minor matters, your friends can never
utter the irritating "I told you not to go there!" if you have been to
Somewhere Else. And you need not label your luggage; that always goes to
Somewhere Else of itself. Last advantage of Somewhere Else, you may show
your face in it, though you departed last year without paying your bill.
There are no creditors in this blessed haven. Earth's load drops off your
shoulders when you go to Somewhere Else.

I give this counsel in a disinterested spirit. I have not made
speculative purchases of land, I am not booming a generous jerry-builder.
And yet I cannot help reflecting apprehensively on the consequences of my
recommendation. Already I see my sweet retreat the prey of the howling
mob; I hear the German band playing on the stone parade, and catch the
sad strains of the comic singer. Sacrilegious feet tramp the solitudes,
and sandwich papers become common objects of the sea-shore. Shilling
yachts will ply where I watched the skimming curlew, and new villas will
totter on the edge of the ocean and beguile the innocent billows to be
house-breakers. Nay, the place will become the Alsatia of humanity, the
refuge for all those men and women people would rather see Somewhere
Else, and whose travelling expenses they will perchance defray.
Imagination reels before the horror of such an agglomeration of the
unamiable. And the terrible thing about my terrestrial paradise is that
there is no escaping from it. Everything has the defects of its
qualities, and this is the reverse of the dazzling medal--the drawback
which annuls all the advantages of Somewhere Else in the event of its
becoming popular. In vain shall I then endeavour to flee from it. Though
I projected myself from the giant cannon that sent Jules Verne's hero to
the moon, I should inevitably arrive--boomerang-like--at Somewhere Else.




PART III.

AFTER-THOUGHTS: A BUNDLE OF BREVITIES.




[Sidenote: Moonshine]

Certainly the Moon was very charming that soft summer's night, as I
watched its full golden orb gliding nonchalantly in the serene, starry
heaven, and keeping me company as I strode across the silent gorse.
But--to be indiscreet--I had grown aweary of the Moon, and of the stars
also, as of beautiful pictures hung--or should one say, skied?--in a
perpetual Academy. _Caelum non animum mutant_ is only tolerably true. A
derangement of stars is all the change you get by travelling--everywhere
the same golden-headed nails, as Hugo, hard-driven, called them, are
sticking in the firmament. This particular moon was hanging, not over a
church steeple, like De Musset's moon,

  Comme un point sur un i,

but like the big yellow dial of the clock in a church tower. An
illuminated clock-face--but blank, featureless, expressionless, useless;
in a word, without hands. Now I could not help thinking that if there had
really been a Providence it would have put hands to the Moon--a big and a
little--and made it the chronometer of the world--nay, of the cosmos--the
universal time-piece, to which all eyes, in every place and planet, could
be raised for information; by which all clocks could be set--moon
time--an infallible monitor and measurer of the flight of the hours;
divinely right, not to be argued with; though I warrant there be some
would still swear by their watches. This were the true cosmopolitanism,
destroying those distressful variations which make your clock vary with
your climate, and which throw the shadow of pyrrhonism over truths which
should be clear as daylight. For if, when it is five o'clock here, it may
be two o'clock there and supper-time yonder, if it is night and day at
the same moment, then is black white, and Pilate right--and
Heraclitus,--and the nonconformist conscience a vain thing.

In supporting correct moral principles, the Moon would be of some use,
instead of staring at us with an idiot face, signifying nothing. The
stars, too, could be better employed than in winking at what goes on here
below. Like ladies' gold watches by the side of Big Ben, they could
repeat the same great eternal truth--that it was half-past nine, or five
minutes to eleven.

  Soon as the evening shades prevail
  The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
  While all the stars that round her burn,
  And all the planets in their turn,
  Confirm the tidings as they roll,
  And spread the _time_ from pole to pole.

An obvious result of a synchronised universe would be the federation of
mankind, Peace on Earth, and all those other beatitudes at present vainly
sought by World Fairs, and pig-sticking prophets.

Till we have hands to the Moon I shall not look for the Millennium.




[Sidenote: Capital]

Suddenly the Moon went behind a cloud, as if to demonstrate that even
then there would be difficulties. Besides, I remembered it had its
quarter-days. Here my thoughts made a transition to money matters, and,
after the manner of Richard Carstone in "Bleak House," I fell to
reckoning up the sums I had saved of late. It is a calculation I make
almost every week nowadays. I have lost nothing by any of the
Jerry-Building Societies, nothing by any of the great Bank Failures. By
not having any money one saves thousands a year in these unsettled times.
Mr. Hamerton cites with amusement the remark of a wealthy Englishman, who
could not understand "why men are so imprudent as to allow themselves to
sink into money embarrassments." "There is a simple rule that I follow
myself," said he, "and that I have always found a great safeguard: it is,
_never to let one's balance at the banker's fall below five thousand
pounds_." The rich Englishman's rule was quite wrong: the only safeguard
is to have no balance at all. High and dry on the Lucretian tower of
poverty, you may watch with complacency the struggles of the sinking
funds. What a burden capital must be to those anxious to find safe
investments at high rates of interest! It looks as if interest will sink
to freezing point, and capital will have to flow to other planets if that
comical claim for "wages of abstinence" is to be met any longer. Perhaps
it will flow to Mars, the home in exile of the old political economy.
Already a beginning has been made by investments in mines which are not
upon this earth.




[Sidenote: Credit]

Every day makes clearer the evils of our complex credit system--that
Frankenstein creation we have lost control over, that ampulaceous growth
of capital, most of which is merely figures in a book, and which only
exists in virtue of not being asked for, much as the tit-bits on a
restaurant menu are "off" when ordered. The real meaning of National
Debts is that every civilised country is bankrupt, and only goes on
trading because its creditors give it time. To the uncertainties of the
weather, and the chances of cholera, war, and earthquake, we have added
an artificial uncertainty worse than any of these--we have invented a
series of financial cyclones, which sweep round the globe, devastating
all lands, and no more to be predicted--despite theories of sun-spots,
cyclones and financial crises--than wrecks at sea; indeed, far less
predictable, for I believe with the ex-mayor quoted by Bonamy Price, that
finance is a subject which no man can understand in this world, or even
in the next. The infinite ramifications, the endless actions and
reactions, are beyond the grasp of any one but an impostor. The Professor
just mentioned thought he had found the right thread of theory in the
labyrinth of "Currency and Banking," and really did make a most sensible
analysis of what actually went on in financial operations. Only he left
out one great factor--the immense influence on the market of other
people's wrong theories. No, if there is a right thread of theory, it
must be so tangled as to be worse than useless. My friend the business
man tells me that for success in business one requires four things: a
large capital, industry, insight, and caution--and then it's a toss-up. I
am fain to believe this whole system of modern commerce was devised to
please the amateurs of the aleatory.




[Sidenote: The Small Boy]

A plague on both your Houses of Parliament! They legislate day and night,
yet leave our lives unmodified. For our lives revolve on the pivot of
custom, and our everyday movements are not political. The real ruler of
England is the small boy of the streets! And, in truth, is it not so? By
the unphilosophic regarded as akin to vermin, existing for the greater
confusion of theologians, the small boy looms large to the man of
insight, as the true conservator of custom--the one efficient _custos
morum_. He it is who regulates the lengths to which we may go in
eccentricity, and, above all, in hair:

    Get your hair cut!

He is particular to a shade about clothes, and has a nice taste in hats.
One wonders how he acquired it. His patriotic proclivity, his hostility
to national costumes other than English, his preference for uncoloured
complexions--this one may understand; but his aesthetic instinct is a
problem for Weismann. As the interpreter of the conventions, he is of a
cast-iron rigidity, for is he not a child of Mrs. Grundy--his mother's
own boy? He has no exceptions--it is "one law and one measure." He is the
scavenger of manners, as the Constantinople street-dog is of gutters; a
natural _police des moeurs_, infinitely more efficient than any
artificial organisation; an all-ramifying association created to keep the
bounds of social order, on duty at every street corner, alert to check
every outbreak of individuality. Do ladies aspire to ride bicycles? Or
wear bloomers? There is the small boy to face. It is a question for him.
Conciliate him, and you may laugh at the pragmatic. His, too, is a
healthy barbarism, beneficent in its action, that thinks scorn of
eyeglasses and spectacles, and leads him to denounce quadruple vision,
as, indeed, all departure from the simplicities of physical perfection. A
human scarecrow he abhors, and will follow such an one through six
streets to express his disapprobation. Extremes of size? whether of
tallness or shortness? offend him equally. Whitman was not kinder to "the
average man." Nor is the small boy's influence limited to sumptuary and
corporeal censorship: by taking up certain songs he "makes" the nation's
ballads, and every one knows what that means. Let me train a nation's
small boys, I care not who makes its laws. O small boy, true sovereign of
England, I take off my hat to thee!--to show thee the maker's name in the
lining, and satify thy anxious inquiries as to where I got it.




[Sidenote: A Day in Town.]

I have often wondered what country children do for a holiday. Do good
people go round collecting to give them a day in London or Liverpool or
Manchester, so that their stunted lives that stretch on from year to year
with never a whiff of town fog, never a glimpse of green 'buses, or
dangerous crossings, or furnace-smoke, may be expanded and elevated? If
not, I beg to move the starting of a Town Fund at once. Nothing can be
more narrowing than rustic existence--there are old yokels whose lives
have always moved within a four-mile radius, women who have grown gray
without ever knowing what lay beyond the blue hills that girdled their
native village. I once knew a chawbacon who came to town and was barked
at by a street-dog. He stooped down to pick up one of the rough stones
lying in the roadway to ward it off withal, but to his astonishment the
stone refused to budge, for it was an integral part of the road. "Danged
if that baint[*] queer!" he exclaimed. "At home the dogs be tied and the
stones be loose. Here the dogs be loose and the stones be tied." Now, if
that man had enjoyed a school excursion to the town when a boy, he would
have deprived me of a good story. A glimpse of the town in youth might
also do good in checking the perpetual urban immigration, which, alas!
removes so many of the rustic population from the soil, and places them
under it. To this end all school excursions to London should take place
in November. Yes, there is a vast future before that fund, and I shall be
happy to start it with five thousand pounds, if two hundred and
sixty-three one-armed Scotchmen of good moral character will bind
themselves to do the same.

[* Transcriber's note: So in original.]




[Sidenote: The Profession of Charity.]

Mr. Labouchere is singularly unfair to a new profession. Beggary has long
been a recognised profession, with its traditions, customs, and
past-masters, and it is time that philanthropy should now be admitted to
an equal status. There is no reason in the world why it should be left in
the hands of amateurs, who muddle away funds by their lack of science and
experience. Supposing a man sees his way to doing good--founding a home
for incurables, or drunkards, or establishing a dispensary, or anything
you please--why should he not make a living by it? What if he does get
five hundred a year, is he not worth it, provided always the institution
fulfils a useful function and is not a sham? Surely he does more for
Society in return for his money than a Treasury clerk! Probably but for
him--but for his wish to earn an income--the charitable institution would
never have come into existence. Political economy already shows us how
the individual's desire for profit brings humanity all its blessings,
opens up new countries for it, and supplies them with wars and railways.
If men did not buy shares with a view to a percentage on their savings,
the march of civilisation would come to a halt. Since the philanthropy of
percentage is so obvious, why should we not recognise the percentage of
philanthropy? Charity has gone into business. Why not?




[Sidenote: The Privileges of Poverty.]

The only people who seem to escape the malady of the century are the
poor. The _Weltschmerz_ touches them not; however great their suffering,
it is always individual. The privileges of poverty are, I fear,
insufficiently appreciated in these grasping times. It is not only
income-tax that the poor man is exempt from. There is a much more painful
tax on income than the pecuniary--it is the thought of those who are
worsted in the struggle for bare existence. _Vae victis!_ Yet those who
achieve the bare existence, who starve not, neither shiver, have surely
enviable compensations. Not theirs the distressful, wearying problems of
sociology. Far from feeling any responsibility for their fellow-beings,
they do not even fulfil their own personal duty to society,--witness the
breeding of babies in back streets. They have no sympathy with the
troubles of any other class--they eat their hard crust and they drink
their bitter beer without a thought of the dyspepsia of the diner-out,
and their appetite is not dulled by any suspicion of heart-sickness in
good society. Starvation other than physical they do not understand, and
spiritual struggles are caviare. The state of the rich does not give them
sleepless nights--they have no yearnings to reform them or amend their
condition. The terrible overcrowding of the upper classes on Belgravian
staircases wakes not a pang; they are untouched by the sufferings of
insufficiently-clad ladies in draughty stalls and royal antechambers; and
the grievances of old army men move them not. Not theirs to ponder
sorrowfully over the lost souls of politicians or the degeneration of
public manners. They live their own lives--and, whatsoever the burden,
they do not bear any one's but their own.




[Sidenote: Salvation for the Seraphim]

Herbert Spencer says he knew a retired naval officer in whose mind God
figured as a transcendently powerful sea-captain; and we have all heard
the story of the English admiral who, when fighting the Dutch, felt sure
God wouldn't desert a fellow-countryman. But this ingenuous
identification of earthly and divine interests has been carried to the
point of imbecility by General Booth in his claim to

  "THE LARGEST CIRCULATION."

  The _War Cry_, so the General states,
  Among the angels circulates,
  To Heaven having gone; but, oh,
  That it had first expired below!

Which is uglier--the crude spiritualism of the Salvationist or the crude
materialism of the scientist? I receive the same sort of shock when I
peruse Mrs. Spurgeon's fond picture of her departed husband waylaying the
angels at the shining street-corners to preach the gospel to them, as
when I read that woman's poetry is inferior to man's because she exhales
less carbonic acid.




[Sidenote: Truth--Local and Temporal]

The other day I listened to some green-room persiflage between an actress
and an eminent actor-manager. The lady said she had loved him years ago,
and thrown herself at his head, but had never been able to bring him to a
proposal. I asked if she would have been satisfied with the provincial
rights. I am not at all sure that the introduction of this principle of
legal partition would not promote domestic harmony, especially in
theatrical circles, where the practice already prevails in the matter of
plays. Indeed, this principle of partition has already been carried
beyond its original sphere. Do I not remember a theatrical lawsuit four
or five years ago in which the plaintiff sought to restrain the defendant
from styling himself part-author of a piece, on the ground that he (the
defendant) had not done a stroke of the work, and had been paid ten
pounds for it; while the defendant claimed that he had only parted with
his rights as regards London, and that in the provinces he was still
entitled to claim a share of the authorship? Pascal long ago pointed out,
in his "Pensees," that virtue and vice were largely dependent on distance
from the equator (a latitudinarianism in morals that does not seem to
have shocked his Port Royal friends). But even he failed to reach this
daring conception of "local fame." The marvel is that when once reached
it should have been let slip again. It seems to me an invaluable remedy
for disputes: absolutely infallible. When Mr. Stuart Cumberland wrote
from India to claim the plot of "The Charlatan," how simple to accord him
the authorship--_in India!_ At once we perceive a _modus vivendi_ for the
followers of Donnelly and the adherents of common-sense. In America Bacon
shall be the author of "Hamlet," but the English rights in the piece
shall go to Shakespeare. In the same spirit of compromise Cruikshank
might have been content to be the author of "Oliver Twist" in the
Hebrides and the second-class saloons of Atlantic steamers. Herman should
be sole author of "The Silver King" in Pall Mall, and Jones in
Piccadilly. Some metropolitan streets belong by one pavement to one
parish, and by the other to another; so that in the case of parochial
celebrities it would be possible for the rival great men to glare at each
other across the road--not, however, daring to cross it, for fear of
losing their reputation. The Frenchman's long-standing assumption of
Parisian rights in the victory of Waterloo would be put upon a legitimate
basis.

By a logical extension of the principle we could allow Homer to be born
in Chios on Mondays, in Colophon on Tuesdays, and so with each of the
seven cities which starved him. They use up the week nicely. On the odd
day of leap year we might concede that he never existed, and allow him to
be resolved into the pieces into which he was torn by Wolf. Had this
pacificatory principle been discovered earlier, "The Letters of Phalaris"
would never have fluttered Europe, and Swift would have had no need to
write "The Battle of the Books." It is never too late to mend, however,
and an academy of leading politicians and ecclesiastics should be at once
formed to draw up an authoritative "Calendar and Topography of Belief,"
fixing once for all the dates and places on or in which it is permissible
to hold any given opinion. Although, when I come to think of it, Science
and Religion have long been tacitly reconciled on this principle,
Religion being true on Sundays and Science on week-days.




[Sidenote: The Creed of Despair.]

I am convinced that optimism is exactly the wrong sort of medicine for
our "present discontents." It is time to try homoeopathy. My suggestion
is that the religion of the future shall consist of the most pessimistic
propositions imaginable; its creed shall be godless and immoral, its
thirty-nine articles shall exhaust the possibilities of unfaith and its
burden shall be _vanitas vanitatum_. Man shall be an automaton, and life
an hereditary disease, and the world a hospital, and truth a dream, and
beauty an optical illusion. These sad tidings of great sorrow shall be
organized into a state church, with bishops and paraphernalia, and shall
be sucked in by the infant at its mother's breast. Men shall be tutored
in unrighteousness, and innocence shall be under ecclesiastical ban.
Faith and Hope shall be of the seven deadly virtues, and unalloyed
despair of man and nature a dogma it were blasphemous to doubt. The good
shall be persecuted and the theists tortured, and those that say there is
balm in Gilead, shall be thrust beyond the pale of decent society.

Then, oh, what a spiritual revival there will be! Every gleam of light
will be eagerly sought for, every ray focussed; every hint of love and
pity and beauty, of significance and divinity, in this infinite and
infinitely mysterious universe, will be eagerly snatched up and thrust
upon an age hide-bound in orthodoxy; every touch and trace of tenderness
that softens suffering and sweetens the bitterness of death, will be
treasured up in secret mistrust of the reigning creed; every noble
thought and deed, every sacred tear, will be thrown into the balance of
heresy with every dear delight of poetry and art, of woods and waters, of
dawns and sunsets; with every grace of childhood and glory of man and
womanhood. And every suppressed doubt of the hideousness of the universe
will sink deep and ferment in darkness, and persecution will sit on every
natural safety valve till at last the pent forces will swell and crack
the sterile soil, and there will be an explosion that shall send a pillar
of living fire towards the heavens of brass. The clerics will be among
the first to feel the stirrings of infidel hope--a few will give up their
livings rather than preach what they do not believe, but the
majority--especially the bishops--will cling to the Church of Despair,
hoping against hope that their despair is true. There will be wonderful
word-spinnings in the reviews, and the dominant pessimism will be
justified by algebraic analogies. But, beneath it all, the church will be
infected to the core with faith, and for the first time in history we
shall get a believing clergy. There will be secret societies founded to
publish the Bible, and Colonel Ingersoll will lecture at the hall of
religion, and the prisons will be crowded with martyred iconoclasts
incredulous of the gospel of science. No, there is nothing so unwise as
your optimistic organized creeds, with their suggestions of officialdom,
red-tape, and back-stairs influence. We shall never be perfectly
religious and moral till we are trained from childhood to ungodly works,
forced to attend long sermons on the error of existence, and badgered
into public impiety by force of opinion.




[Sidenote: Social Bugbears.]

First there were the Radicals, who stood for the apogee of human
villainy, though it now appears they were Conservatives of the mildest
type. Then came the turn of the Atheists, who, for all I have been able
to discover, were very respectable creatures full of religious ardour,
who spelt God with a small "g" and justice with a capital "J." Then the
Socialists had their innings. But "we are all Socialists now," and the
empty mantle of villainy has fallen upon Anarchism, which, as far as I
can make out, is the simplest and most innocent creed ever invented, and
which debars its adherents from exercising any compulsion upon anybody
else, relying upon the natural moral working of the human heart. How this
is compatible with bombs it is for _Messieurs les Anarchistes_ to
explain. Needless to say the assassinous Anarchists are disavowed by
their philosophical brethren.




[Sidenote: Martyrs.]

Although we moderns work harder than our fathers for our opinions, we are
sometimes taunted with not being so ready to die for them. But, as Renan
points out, thinkers have no need to die to demonstrate a theorem. Saints
may die for their faith because faith is a personal matter. Even so we
are still ready to die for our honour. The Christian martyrs did prove
that Christianity was a reality to them; but Galileo's death would have
been irrelevant to the rotation of the earth. There is no _argumentum per
hominem_ possible here; the truth is impersonal. It is only for beliefs
that exclude certainty that a man is tempted to martyrdom. The martyr is
indeed, as the etymology implies, a witness; but his death is not a
witness to the truth of his belief--merely to the truth of his believing.
Blandine at her stake, enduring a hundred horrors unflinchingly, seems in
addition to prove that faith was the first anaesthetic. It is curious to
note how the word "martyr" has been degraded; so that we have to-day
martyrs to the gout instead of to the truth. The idea of suffering has
quite ousted the idea of witnessing. What a pity the word got these
painful associations! There are "martyrs" to the truth--witnesses who
without dying testify to the divine streak in life; and unconscious
"martyrs" who, by their simple sincerity, their unpretentious
unselfishness, prove more than a bookshelf of theology. I have found
"martyrdom" in the grip of a friend's hand, though if I had told him so
he would have apologised for squeezing so hard. And is not every pretty
woman a "martyr"--a revelation of an inner soul of beauty and goodness in
this chaotic universe? There! I have succumbed again to the common
masculine impulse to conceive beauty and goodness as a chemical
combination, subtly inter-related; whereas the slightest practical
experience in the laboratory of life discovers them but a mechanical
mixture, dissociable and not seldom antipathetic.




[Sidenote: The London Season]

I remember being so bored one night at dinner, by the ceaseless chatter
about Burne-Jones, that I asked my fair neighbour: "Who is Burne-Jones?"
Her reply was as smart as it was feminine. "I don't believe you." There
is a moral in this. Why be a slave to the season? Why bother to read all
the newest novels, see all the newest plays, hear all the newest
musicians, remember all the newest "Reminiscences," and believe all the
newest religions, when by pleading ignorance you will pass not only as an
eccentric but a connoisseur? On second thoughts, why not eschew the
season altogether? God made the seasons and man made the season, as
Cowper forgot to say. And a nice mess man has made of it, turning night
into day and heating his rooms in the summer. The London Season, not
Winter, Mr. Cowper, is the true "Ruler of the Inverted Year."




[Sidenote: The Academy]

The Academy has survived Mr. Burne-Jones' desertion of his old
associates, as it would survive art itself. I for one should regret its
disappearance. It is a whetstone for wit, like everything established and
respectable. I am only sorry we have no Academy of Letters. It gives one
such a standing not to be a member--almost as good a standing as to be
one. If you are left out in the cold you loudly pity those asphyxiating
in the heat, and if you have a cozy chair by the fireside you fall asleep
and say nothing. This promotes happiness all round, and makes the
literary man contented with his lot. In England authors have no Academy,
and so have to fall back on the poor publishers: _Hinc illae lachrymae!_




[Sidenote: Portraits of Gentlemen]

Everybody paints the portrait of nobody. Imagine a great writer being
called upon to produce a black-and-white picture of a man of no
importance: Let us imagine, say Meredith, being offered a thousand pounds
for a pen-and-ink portrait of a provincial mayor--being asked to devote
his graphic art, his felicitous choice of words, his gifts of insight and
sympathy, his genius, in a word, to the portrayal of a real live
mayor--the same to be published in book-form, asked for at the libraries,
and discussed at dinner-tables and in the reviews as a specimen of the
season's art. Of course Meredith would tell the man to go and be hanged
(in the Academy); but if he consented, see what would take place. The
literary portrait involves, of course, both mind and body, and
practically the work would have to take the shape of a biography. For
some weeks the man would come to Meredith's study and give him talkings.
At the first talking Meredith would also make a sketch of the outside
appearance of his subject. Here the resources of language far exceed
those of colour. The happy euphemism of language permits a squint to be
described as an ambidexterity of vision; it is even quite possible to
omit an ill-regulated feature altogether. Suppose an artist paints a man
without a nose--the defect _sauterait aux yeux_: it would be as plain as
the nose not upon his face. But it is quite possible for the literary
artist to omit a man's nose without attracting any attention. The
reader's imagination supplies the nose, without even being conscious of
its purveyorship. As for the psychological portion of the portrait, the
author would be entirely dependent on the information given by the
subject, so that provincial mayors would develop unsuspected virtues.
Where the difficulty would come in would be in the absence of darker
qualities, which would make literary chiaroscuro impossible. It is quite
likely, though, that as a result of the talkings the subject would
unwittingly present the novelist with a real character who would appear
in his next work of fiction, and be entirely unrecognized either by the
reader of the biography or its subject.




[Sidenote: Photography and Realism]

No artist of the brush can afford to dispense with models; when he draws
from his inner consciousness the composition is tame and the
draughtsmanship wild. The novelist, though his object is not portraiture,
but creation, can as little afford to keep aloof from real men and women.
When George Eliot ceased to draw from models and fell back on intuition
and her library, she produced "Daniel Deronda." But I would demur
altogether to the use of "photography" in literary criticism as
synonymous with realism. The photograph is an utter misrepresentation of
life, and this not merely because of its false shades and its lack of
colour, but because the photographer is not content with literalness. He
aspires to art. So far from being a realist, he is the greatest idealist
of all. He not only puts you into poses you would never fall into
naturally, he not only arranges you so as to hide your characteristic
uglinesses, and bids you call up an expression you never use, but he
touches up and tones down after you are gone, and treats his pictures,
indeed, as though they were actors and he the dresser. And as each
photographer has his own style, no two portraits are ever alike. My
portraits of Annabel pass as a collection of pretty actresses. Still, if
they are not like one another, they resemble one another in being unlike
her. The only good photographs I have ever seen of myself were done by an
amateur--most of the others might just as well have been taken in my
absence. And there is always a painful neatness about photographs: my
humble study was once photographed, and it looked like a princely
library. Bags come out with artistic interstices, fustian gleams like
satin. It is the true Platonic touch, glorifying and gilding everything.
Filth itself would come out like roses. No, no, let us hear no more about
Zola's "photography."




[Sidenote: The Great Unhung]

What becomes of all the old pins is a problem that worries many simple
souls. What becomes of all the rejected pictures is a question that seems
to trouble nobody. And yet at every exhibition the massacre of innocents
is appalling. The Royal Academy of London, which is the most hospitable
institution in the world toward "wet paint," still turns away very many
more canvases than it admits. Their departure is like the retreat of the
Ten Thousand. Into the Salon one year six thousand eager frames crowded,
but when the public came to see, only thirteen hundred were left to tell
the tale--

  All that was left of them,
    Left of six thousand.

More ruthless still was the slaughter in the New Salon, the Salon of the
Champs de Mars, where the pictures were decimated. Out of two thousand
seven hundred works sent in by outsiders, only three hundred survived. It
is impossible to believe that ideal justice was done, especially when we
consider that the jury took only one day to consider the outcome of so
many aspirations, such manifold toil. The pictures were wheeled past them
on gigantic easels, an interminable panorama. Even supposing that the
gentlemen of the jury took a full working day of eight hours, with no
allowance for dejeuner, the average time for examining a picture works
out at something like ten seconds. In each minute of that fateful day the
destiny of half a dozen pictures was decided. Verily, our
picture-connoisseur seems to have elevated criticism into an instinct--he
is the smoothest human mechanism on record. One wonders if the critic
will ever be replaced by an automaton, something analogous to the camera
that has replaced the artist. Meantime, the point is--what becomes of the
refused, those unwelcome revenants that return to lower the artist in the
eyes of landladies and concierges? Sometimes, we know, the stone which
the builders rejected becomes the corner-stone of the temple, and the
proscribed painter lives to despise publicly the judges in the gate. But
these revenges are rare, and for the poor bulk of mankind the whirligig
of time revolves but emptily. The average artist rejected of one
exhibition turns him to another, and the leavings of the Salon beat at
the doors of Antwerp and Munich, where the annual of art blooms a little
later in the spring.

Pitiful it is to follow a picture from refusal to refusal; one imagines
the painter sublime amid the litter of secretarial notifications,
gathering, Antaeus-like, fresh strength from every fall, and coming to a
grim and gradual knowledge of the great cosmopolitan conspiracy. One year
the rejected of the Academy were hung in London by an enterprising
financier. It was the greatest lift-up the Academy had ever had. Even its
enemies were silenced temporarily. But the rejected may console
themselves. The accepted have scant advantage over them. To sell a
picture is becoming rarer and rarer, and the dealer is no more respectful
to the canvas that has achieved the honor of the catalogue than to that
which has preserved the sequestration of the studio. Sometimes the unhung
picture becomes the medium upon which another is painted (for a picture
is always worth the canvas it is painted on), sometimes (if it is large)
it is cut up and sold in bits, sometimes it adorns the family
dining-room, or decorates the hall of a good-natured friend, and
sometimes, after a variety of pecuniary adventures, it becomes the proud
possession of a millionaire.




[Sidenote: The Abolition of Catalogues.]

The average Englishman takes his religion on Sundays and his Art in the
spring. Influences that should permeate life are collected in chunks at
particular seasons. This is sufficient to prove how little they are
really felt or understood. The Academy headache is the due penalty of
hypocrisy. It is the catalogue that is the greatest coadjutor of cant. If
pictures, besides being hung, were treated like convicts in becoming
merely numbers, without names either of painters or subjects, what a
delightful confusion of critical tongues would ensue! But conceding that
a picture should have the painter's name, for the sake of the artist (or
his enemies), I would propose that everything else be abolished. It is
not unfair to subject pictures to this severe test, because, of all forms
of art, painting is the one whose appeal is instantaneous, simple and
self-complete. If a picture cannot speak for itself, no amount of
advocacy will save it. If it tells a story (which no good picture
should), let it at least do so without invoking the aid of the rival art
of literature. Literature does not ask the assistance of pictures to make
its meaning clear. Nor, too, is anything gained by calling colours
harmonies or symphonies. Let such pictures strike their own chords and
blow their own trumpets. Catalogues of all kinds are but props to
artistic inefficiency. If dumb-show plays did not rely on "books of the
words," pantomime would have to become a finer art. If ballets had no
thread of narrative attached to them, their constructors would be driven
to achieve greater intelligibility, or to give up trying for it--which
were the more gratifying alternative. So with the descriptions of
symphonies we find in our programmes. Why should good music be translated
into bad literature? Surely each art should be self-sufficient;
developing its effects according to its own laws! A melody does not need
to be painted, nor a picture to be set to music. The graceful evolutions
of the dance are their own justification. The only case in which I would
allow a title to a picture is when it is a portrait. That is an obvious
necessity. Portrait-painting is a branch of art which demands
recognition.




[Sidenote: The Artistic Temperament]

There are two aspects of the artistic temperament--the active or creative
side, and the passive or receptive side. It is impossible to possess the
power of creation without possessing also the power of appreciation; but
it is quite possible to be very susceptible to artistic influences while
dowered with little or no faculty of origination. On the one hand is the
artist--poet, musician, or painter; on the other, the artistic person to
whom the artist appeals. Between the two, in some arts, stands the
artistic interpreter--the actor who embodies the aery conceptions of the
poet, the violinist or pianist who makes audible the inspirations of the
musician. But in so far as this artistic interpreter rises to greatness
in his field, in so far he will be found soaring above the middle ground,
away from the artistic person, and into the realm of the artist or
creator. Joachim and De Reszke, Paderewski and Irving, put something of
themselves into their work; apart from the fact that they could all do
(in some cases have done) creative work on their own account. So that
when the interpreter is worth considering at all, he may be considered in
the creative category. Limiting ourselves, then, to these two main
varieties of the artistic temperament, the active and the passive, I
should say that the latter is an unmixed blessing, and the former a mixed
curse.

What, indeed, can be more delightful than to possess good aesthetic
faculties--to be able to enjoy books, music, pictures, plays! This
artistic sensibility is the one undoubted advantage of man over other
animals, the extra octave in the gamut of life. Most enviable of mankind
is the appreciative person, without a scrap of originality? who has every
temptation to enjoy, and none to create. He is the idle heir to treasures
greater than India's mines can yield; the bee that sucks at every flower,
and is not even asked to make honey. For him poets sing, and painters
paint, and composers write. "_O fortunates nimium_," who not seldom yearn
for the fatal gift of genius! For _this_ artistic temperament is a
curse--a curse that lights on the noblest and best of mankind! From the
day of Prometheus to the days of his English laureate it has been a curse

  To vary from the kindly race of men,

and the eagles have not ceased to peck at the liver of men's benefactors.
All great and high art is purchased by suffering--it is not the
mechanical product of dexterous craftsmanship. This is one part of the
meaning of that mysterious "Master Builder" of Ibsen's. "Then I saw
plainly why God had taken my little children from me. It was that I
should have nothing else to attach myself to. No such thing as love and
happiness, you understand. I was to be only a master builder--nothing
else." And the tense strings that give the highest and sweetest notes are
most in danger of being overstrung.

But there are compensations. The creative artist is higher in the scale
of existence than the man, as the man is higher than the beatified oyster
for whose condition, as Aristotle pointed out, few would be tempted to
barter the misery of human existence. The animal has consciousness, man
self-consciousness, and the artist over-consciousness. Over-consciousness
may be a curse, but, like the primitive curse--labour--there are many who
would welcome it!




[Sidenote: Professional Ethics]

There's no knowing where the artistic temperament may break out. "I don't
think that a person ought to come to the binder and just say to him,
'Bind that book for so much money.' I think the binder ought to say, 'Is
the book worth binding?' and that if it were not he ought to refuse." The
applications of this remarkable principle, enunciated by a bookbinder,
are obvious. Applied universally it would reform the race. The tailor,
when a man came to be measured, would say, "Yes, but are you worth
measuring?" and if he was out of drawing would refuse to dress him, thus
extruding deformity from the world and restoring the Olympian gods. The
charwoman, inspired by George Herbert, would not only "sweep a room as by
God's laws," but would inquire whether it was worth sweeping; the wine
merchant would refuse wine to rich customers who did not deserve to drink
it; and the doctors would certainly not devote their best energies to
keeping gouty old noblemen alive.




[Sidenote: Lay Confessors]

We writers, as Beaeonsfield said to his sovereign, are a good substitute
for the confessional; we like to be allowed peeps into the secret
chambers of the heart. The most miserable sinners may be as sure of our
secrecy as of our absolution. The more terrible the crime the better we
are pleased. So come and ease your labouring consciences, and pour your
sorrows into our sympathetic shorthand books, and we will work you up the
bare material of your lives so artistically that you are the veriest
Philistines if you shall not be rather glad to have sinned and suffered.
For deep down in our hearts lurks the belief that, as Jerome wittily puts
it, "God created the world to give the literary man something to write
about!"




[Sidenote: Q. E. D. Novels]

A novel, like a metaphor, proves nothing: 't is merely a vivid pictorial
presentation of a single case. I have just read one novel aspiring to
prove that a couple who skip the marriage ceremony cannot be happy ever
after, and another aspiring to prove that marriage is the one drawback to
a happy union. In reality both novels prove the same thing--that the
author is a fool. There is nothing I would not undertake to "prove" in a
novel. You have only to take an exceptional case and treat it as if it
were normal. Aesop's fables could easily be rewritten to prove exactly
the opposite morals, just as there is no popular apothegm whose antidote
may not be found in the same treasury of folk-wisdom: "Never put off till
to-morrow what you can do to-day," and "Sufficient for the day is the
evil thereof"; "Penny wise, pound foolish!" "Look after the pence and the
pounds will take care of themselves."

In sooth I suffer from an inability to see the morals of stories--like
the auditor who blunts the point of the drollest anecdote by inquiring
"And what happened then?" Even the beautiful allegory of the three rings
in "Nathan der Weise," always seems to me to throw considerable discredit
on the father who set his sons wrangling over the imitation rings. And,
inversely, nothing seems easier to me than to invent fables to prove
wrong morals: _e.g._




[Sidenote: The Mouse Who Died]

A pretty gray mouse was in the habit of sauntering from its hole every
evening to pick up the Crumbs in the Dining Boom. "What a pretty Mouse!"
said the Householder, and made more crumbs for Mousie to eat. So great a
banquet was thus spread that the Noble-hearted little Mouse cheeped the
news to its Sisters and its Cousins and its Aunts, and they all came
every evening in the Train of its Tail to regale themselves on the
remains of the Repast. "Dear, dear!" cried the Householder in despair,
"the house is overrun with a plague of Vermin." And he mixed poison with
the crumbs, and the poor little pioneer Mouse perished in contortions of
agony. Moral: Don't.




[Sidenote: Theologic Novels]

Usually the speculations that first reach the great public through the
medium of the novel have been familiar _ad nauseam_ to the reading
classes for scores of years. Conceive Noah, aroused by the grating of the
Ark upon the summit of Mount Ararat, looking out of the window and
exclaiming, "Why, it's been raining!" Then imagine Mrs. Noah, catching an
odd syllable of her husband's remark, writing a love story to prove that
the barometer portended showers. Finally, picture the world looking in
alarm for its umbrella, and you have an image of the inception and effect
of the modern Mrs. Noah's theologic novel.

   MUDIE MEASURE.

   Ten lines make one page;
   Ten pages make one point;
   Two points make one chapter;
   Five chapters make one episode;
   Two episodes make one volume:
   Three volumes make one tired.




[Sidenote: The Prop of Letters]

Is it a bright or a black day for an author when he gets so popular that
the big advertisers insist on having him in any organ in which they place
their advertisements? There can be no question but that it will be a
black day for letters when the advertiser becomes the arbiter of
literature, as this newest development forebodes. Where is this leprosy
of advertisement to stop? Already it covers almost our whole
civilisation. Already the advertiser is a main prop of the press.

  A SONG OF ADVERTISEMENTS. (_After_ Whitman.)

  Give me Hornihand's Pure Mustard;
  Give me Apple's Soap, with the negress laving the cherub;
  Give me Bentley's Brimstone Tablets, and Ploughman's
     Pills--those of the Little Liver.
  (O get me ads., you agent with the frock-coat and the fountain pen,
  You with the large commissions
  And the further discount on cash,
  Get me ads., _camarado_!
  Full pages preferred, though little ones not scorning,
  For I scorn nothing, my brother.)
  Give me the Alphabetical Snuff;
  Give me Electric Batteries and False Teeth; also the Tooth-powders;
  Give me all the Soft Soaps and the Soothing Syrups;
  Give me all the Cocoas and Cough Lozenges and Corsets;
  Give me Infants' Food--yea, the diet of babes and sucklings;
  Give me the Nibs and the Beef Essences, and do not forget the
     Typewriters.
  (Forget nothing, _camarado_, for I, the poet, never forget
     anything.)
  Give me of the Fat of your agency, and of the Anti-Fat thereof!
  And I will build you magazines, high-class and well illustrated;
  Or pictureless _a volonte_, the latter with heavier articles.
  Also newspapers, daily and weekly, with posters flamboyant,
  That shall move the state and its pillars,
  That shall preach the loftiest morals, elevating the masses,
  By the strength of advertisements,
  By the mighty strength of advertisements!

It has been suggested that flypapers should be so sprinkled as to produce
an aesthetic design in dead flies, so as to introduce beauty into the
homes of the poor. It would be more in harmony with the age to lay out
our public gardens with floral injunctions to use B's hair-dye and C's
corn-plaster. Brag and display are the road to riches, and the trail of
vulgarity is over it all. I take credit to myself for having been among
the first to cry in the wilderness; but the critics--bless them!--say it
is all empty paradox.




[Sidenote: The Latter-day Poet]

The one exception to the hunger for advertisement is the modern bard. He
achieves his vogue by limited editions, and takes pains to prevent
himself being an influence. He acquires a factitious fame and an
artificial value by printing only a few copies, thus making his paper and
print sought after rather than his matter. It is all very well for a book
to become rare by the vicissitudes of literary fortune, but this
machine-made rarity can only be prized by people who value their
possessions merely because other people haven't got them. The old minor
poet was frenzied and unbought; the new is calm and "collected." At this
rate the greatest poets would be those of whose works only one copy is
extant--in MS.

  Bend, bend the knee, and bow the head
  To reverence the great unread,
  The great unread and much-reviewed,
  Whose lines are treasured like the lewd,
  His first editions prizes reckoned
  Because there never was a second.
  Obscurely famous in his rut,
  Unknown, unpopular, "uncut,"
  Where Byron thrilled a continent,
  To thrill an auction-room content,
  He struggles through oblivion's bogs,
  To gain a place in--catalogues!
  And falls asleep and joins the dust
  In simple hope and modest trust
  That, though Posterity neglect
  His bones, his books it will collect,
  And these will grow--O prospect fair!--
  From year to year more "scarce" and "rare."




[Sidenote: An Attack of Alliteration]

Have you noticed the Renaissance of alliteration in the new journalism?
The early English Poets made alliteration the chief element of their
poetry, and in modern times Swinburne has paid more attention to it (and
to rhyme) than to meaning, with the result that there has arisen a school
of poets who don't mean anything--and say it. In the olden days, a bride
was bonny, and was requested to busk herself in consequence; all of which
was intelligible. Nowadays, the poet would call a basilisk bonny rather
than miss his alliteration. Is it because the new journalism is so
imaginative and emotional that it throws off alliterative phrases as
naturally and unconsciously as Whittier confesses he did in writing "The
Wreck of Rivermouth"? It is sometimes difficult to believe that
providence is not on the side of the evening bills. When Balmaceda died
he committed Suicide by Shooting himself in Santiago--of all places in
the world. Boulanger, if from a local point of view he died less
satisfactorily, was yet careful to employ a Bullet. It is for the sake of
the phrase-makers that Burglars good-naturedly prefer Bermondsey, and
that Tigers do not escape from their cages to play in Tragedies till the
show arrives at Tewkesbury. The Baboon is already so largely alliterative
in himself that it was an excess of generosity that made one recently
attack an infant under such circumstances as to allow the report to be
headed, "Baby Bitten by a Baboon in a Backyard at Bow." Alliteration has
become a mighty factor in politics: it is fast replacing epigram, while
its effects on moral character are tremendous. That "hardened criminal,"
Mr. Balfour, might have been a good man instead of a "base brutal bully,"
if his name had only commenced with an X. He is a noteworthy martyr to
the mania of the times. I am convinced that the Death of the Duke of
Devonshire was accelerated by anxiety to please the sub-editors, and it
is a source of real regret to me to reflect that my own death can afford
them no supplementary gratification of this nature.




[Sidenote: The Humorous]

To start anything exclusively funny is a serious mistake. This was why
poor Henry J. Byron's "Mirth" was so short-lived. It died of laughing. A
friend of mine, with a hopeless passion for psychological analysis, says
that the reason people do not laugh over comic papers is that the element
of the unexpected is wanting. This, he claims, is the essence of the
comic. You laugh over a humorous remark in the middle of a serious essay,
over a witty epigram flashed upon a grave conversation, over the slipping
into the gutter of a ponderous gentleman--it is the shock of contrast,
the flash of surprise, that tickles. Now this explanation of why people
do not laugh over comic papers is obviously wrong, because you are
surprised when you see a joke in a comic paper; at the same time, it
contains an element of truth. The books which gain a reputation for
brilliance are those which are witty at wide intervals; the writer who
scintillates steadily stands in his own light.




[Sidenote: The Discount Farce]

Having started your magazine, you will begin humorously enough by
affixing a mock price to it. What a strange world of make-believe it is!
We are so habituated to shams that we cannot help shamming even where
there is nothing to be gained by it. Why is music published at four
shillings when you can buy it for one and four, or at most one and eight?
Why are novels published at thirty-one and six and the magazines at a
shilling? "Shilling shockers" are sold at ninepence, which is as comical
as selling "tenpenny nails" at sixpence. The same principle rules in
other trades. It almost seems as if there is an ineradicable instinct in
humanity for getting things below their price, even if at more than their
value. Hence the marked popularity of "sales" and "reductions." The idea
of getting things cheap reconciles one to getting things one doesn't
want. The craze for cheap things leads one into frightful extravagance.
In some shops the weakness of humanity is pandered to without disguise,
and every article is ticketed with a little card, from which the first
price is carefully ruled out, and even on the second price you get a
discount for cash. This same discount for cash is at least intelligible,
but business men are painfully familiar with another wonderful deduction.
After you wait months for your money, you get a cheque less "discount on
payment." This seems to involve an exasperating Hibernicism. "On
payment," forsooth! So long as it remains unpaid, the debt due to you is,
say, one hundred pounds. But the moment you really get it, it shrinks to
ninety-five. Why not call it ninety-five at the start and be done with
it? But, no! men will not give up the subtle pleasure of discounts,
ineffably childish though it be. The rather deaf lady who being asked six
shillings a yard for stuff replied "Sixteen shillings a yard! I'll give
you eleven," and who, when her mistake was pointed out, said "I couldn't
think of paying more than four and sixpence" was a genuine type of the
population of these islands.




[Sidenote: The Franchise Farce]

One American defense of bribery is as clever as it is cynical. It amounts
to this: that universal suffrage is such a peril to the commonweal that
having been given prematurely, it must insidiously be nullified in
practice, even at the cost of universal corruption; in short, if the old
society is to be preserved, universal franchise must be transformed into
universal corruption. What an ironic commentary on the constitution that
was founded by George Washington, who couldn't tell a lie! The honour of
America, it appears, "rooted in dishonour" stands, and "faith unfaithful"
makes its politicians falsely true. When one remembers some of the other
gigantic evils of the society thus conserved by corruption, when one
thinks of the great immoral capitalists, playing their game regardless of
whom they ruin or whom they enrich, when one thinks of the squalid slums
of the great cities, one wonders whether the society which these things
shadow were not better damned. It were cleaner, at any rate, to abolish
universal franchise than to flaunt this farce in the eyes of Europe. If
universal suffrage was a mistake, if indeed the gift of the franchise
does not develop a man's conscience and education--and certainly bribery
is not the way to give him a chance of such development--then why not
honestly admit that America has made this mistake, that the ideals of the
Pilgrim Fathers were inferior to Tammany Hall's, and that even the negro
is not a man and a brother?

Does our American reply that it is impossible now to take back the
franchise? But on his own showing the electors merely regard it as an
opportunity for extracting "boodle." All that would be impossible, then,
is to take away this ancient concession without compensation. The
electors must be bought out at the full market-value of their votes, with
a few cents and corpse-revivers thrown in for their loss of amusement. At
every election dollars and drinks for the ex-electors would be
circulating freely under the direction of the Treasury. And, _ex
hypothesi_, the bulk, or a number of electors sufficient to annul the
danger to society, will accept the liquidation, and thus the dishonest
will be honestly weeded out of the electorate. But if the cynics were
wrong, and there remained among the poorer electorate men sufficiently
honest to retain their votes, and sufficiently numerous to swamp the old
society--why, then the devil take the old society! The object of
government is only the good of the majority, and these men, being the
majority, have every right to select their own form of good. If they were
mistaken, nature would soon convince them of their mistake, and the next
generation would profit by the object-lesson. Demos would go on, a sadder
and a wiser man.

The solution of the question is that the people must not only govern: it
must be fit to govern. To corrupt it with dollars, to drowse it with
drink, is only to put off the inevitable day. It were far wiser to help
it to educate itself for its functions. For, if the revolutionary
economic ideas that are in the air are false, they will destroy
themselves. And if they are true, they have got to be realised, and will
get themselves realised. No amount of corruption will save society in the
long run. Meantime, either let universal suffrage operate honestly, or
let it be suspended or abolished. Let even those States which have
enfranchised the black man, and which now, in accordance with the deep
Machiavellian principle, brazenly revealed by our American, dishonestly
render his vote nugatory by a reliable inaccuracy in the counting,
withdraw their spurious Christianity. A double standard of morals subtly
infects the whole core of the nation. Corruption cannot be localised; it
creeps and spreads through all departments of thought and action. To give
with the right hand, and take away with the left in exchange for a few
dollars, is a manoeuvre unworthy of a great nation. The transaction is
fair; let it be above board, let it be lifted into the plane of ethics.
To found society upon a farce is to lower those ideals by which, as much
as by bread, a nation lives.




[Sidenote: The Modern War Farce]

The horrors of war seem to have reached the vanishing point in our latest
African campaign. The smallness of the English losses is appalling. I do
not see the fun of fighting (_i.e._, of paying taxes) if all the spice
and relish is to be taken out of the results. I want more blood for my
money--hecatombs of corpses. Two men killed in a whole battle?
Ridiculous! If I cannot have my war at my own doors, and hear the bands
and the cannon I have paid for, I must at least have sensational
battle-fields--Actiums and Waterloos and Marengos. What is the use of war
if it does not even serve to reduce our surplus population? Soldiering
was never so healthy an occupation as to-day; one fights only a few days
a year at the utmost, and if the pay is poor, so is that of the scavenger
and the engine-driver and the miner, and everybody else who does the
dirty work of civilisation, and does it, too, without pomp and
circumstance and brass bands and laureates.




[Sidenote: Fireworks]

If people cannot do without sulphur and noise, there are always
fireworks. It is difficult to imagine festivity without them, and yet
there must have been a time when rockets did not rise or Catherine wheels
go round. You cannot have fireworks without gunpowder, and every
school-boy knows that gunpowder was only invented in--I haven't got a
dictionary of dates handy. Surely we ought to let off fireworks on Roger
Bacon's birthday. "They let off fireworks when he was born," say the
French in a slyly witty proverb, which is a circumlocutory way of saying
that a man won't set the Thames on fire. For "he has not invented
gunpowder" is the French equivalent for this idiom of ours, and it is
obvious to the meanest intellect that a man whose birth was celebrated by
fireworks could not have been the inventor of gunpowder. And yet there
were fireworks of a kind from the earliest times, from the first
appearance of stars in the firmament with their wandering habits and
shooting expeditions. And, indeed, did not humanity long regard the
heavens as a firework show for its amusement, a set piece entirely for
its delectation? Mankind has always been fond of playing with fire--ever
since Prometheus stole it from heaven and burnt his fingers. I am
convinced the ancients only used bonfires for messages so as to enjoy the
flare-up on the mountains. Who would not fight when summoned by a tongue
of flame?

  And the red glare on Skiddaw roused the burghers of Carlisle.

Roman candles were unknown to the Romans, but they enjoyed themselves
with torches, and these were the fireworks at wedding fetes. The golden
rain in which Jupiter wooed Danae was another sort of hymeneal fireworks.
There were fireworks at the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The love
of fireworks is a natural passion. Does not nature amuse herself with
fireworks, especially on tropical summer nights? She loves to flash her
lightnings (which are not to be put out by the rain), and to crash her
thunder (which, as everybody knows, is only the report of the meeting of
two electric clouds). And who does not admire her grand pyrotechnic
display--twice daily--at sunrise and at sunset, or her celebrated local
effect, the Aurora Borealis?

I have loved fireworks from boyhood, and would rather have had dry bread
and fireworks than cake with jam. In manhood often I have listened to the
long-drawn ecstatic "aw" of the Crystal Palace crowd. I have even written
a poem on fireworks. Here it is:--

  A dazzling fiery show of sphery rainbows,
  Whereof each wonder, monarch of a moment,
  Yields up its glory to the next one's splendour,
  And sadly sinks into the arms of darkness.

Is it not a true simile of the favour of the fickle crowd? The most
brilliant phenomena are forgotten after a moment. Life and Time are full
of such fireworks--religions, philosophies, fashions, dynasties. And
overhead the sure stars shine on. In literature fireworks rarely last.
They are too clever to live. A humble rushlight lasts longer. "All
fireworks are unsound," says Steinitz. He is talking of chess, and chess
is very much like life. Whistler has painted fireworks--I mean
literally--in his blue and silver nocturne of old Battersea Bridge.
Tennyson has painted them in his "Welcome to Alexandra" and elsewhere.

  Flash, ye cities, in rivers of fire!
  Rush to the roof, sudden rocket, and higher,
  Melt into stars for the land's desire!

"Sudden rocket." How good the adjective is! A poet I know spent hall a
day in finding the correct epithet for rockets, and was equally pleased
and annoyed to discover subsequently that he had chosen the same
adjective as the Master.




[Sidenote: Time's Forelock.]

Nowadays we let off all our fireworks a day before the fair and tug Time
by his forelock. A magazine coming out in January must be dated February
at the very earliest. We "go ahead" in an Irish-American sense, and
cannot endure not to be in advance of our age. We live entirely in the
future, and are too busy to live just at present. Christmas falls late in
October and extends to the end of November, the period being marked by
heavy showers of Christmas numbers. The Jews begin all their festivals
the day before, and Christmas is by far the most Jewish of our holidays.
Our evening papers come out in the morning, though this will right itself
in time, for they are getting earlier and earlier, and will ultimately
come out the evening before. Dr. Johnson's line about Shakespeare, "And
panting Time toils after him in vain," is truer of the man of to-day.
What's that you say? All this has been said before? Naturally.




[Sidenote: Diaries.]

Who is the most marvellous man? He who keepeth a diary. And by keeping a
diary I mean keeping it for the whole year, from January 1st to December
31st--keeping it, moreover, by daily entry. Only one year in my life did
I succeed in filling up every department of the three hundred and
sixty-five, and even then I was often in arrears. Diaries are for those
who lead cloistral lives and pure, so that the task is trivial, and
whatsoever record of their own leap to light they shall not be shamed.
Diaries are not for those whose existence is a whirlpool; for such the
blank page is an added perturbation, a haunting whiteness beseeching the
blackness of diurnal autobiography, an I O U that calls for instant
satisfcation. To the spontaneous vexings of conscience has been added an
artificial pricking at the neglect of a supererogatory duty. How have I
blonched to see day adding itself to day, unrecorded, time flying without
being "kodak'd" on the wing; and each new neglect retarding the day of
reckoning even while it aggravated it! Then have I felt myself sinking
beneath the self-imposed

  Yoke, intolerable, not to be borne
  Of the too vast orb of my fate,

yearning for a smaller circumference and a shorter biography. At the
outset one begins a diary, as one practises a new virtue, or plays with a
new toy--enthusiastically. For the first few days of January the entries
are rich in psychological and episodical matter. Then gradually the
interest trails off; to the fertile plains of narrative and analysis
succeeds a barren desert, relieved only by a few dates of appointments.
With Mark Twain it will be remembered the entries were reduced to "Got
up, washed, went to bed." The keeping of a diary is generally the first
New Year resolution to be broken. How eloquent these old diaries filled
up for a month or two--and the rest silence!

On second thoughts there is a more marvellous than the most marvellous
man. It is he who keepeth a pecuniary diary. I know one such. He has kept
a perfect and absolutely complete record of every farthing he has laid
out since the days when farthings were his standard of currency. Which of
us would dare do this, or, doing, would dare cast a backward glance on
the financial past? There is a crude, relentless actuality about items of
expenditure, not to be softened by euphemistic phrasing. Surely a truer
proverb than any of its species would be: "Tell me what you buy, and I'll
tell you what you be." And to think, in reviewing your pecuniary
biography, that, though you owe no man a farthing, you have still to pay
the bill; that many things you have bought have yet to be paid for "over
and over again," as the Master Builder said, "over and over again."




[Sidenote: "Looking Backward"]

Looking backward is a luxury which should be indulged in only
moderation--say once in fifty years. The preachers will tell you
differently. But life is so restless and feverish nowadays that there is
no time for obeying the preachers. It is as much as we can do to find
time to listen to them. Goethe says, "He who looks forward sees only one
way to pursue, but he who looks backward sees many." This is the last
word on the subject. It speaks volumes. But as you cannot walk through
any of those backways, what is the use of bothering to look for them?
True, your own experience enables you to give advice to others. But
advice is a drug in the market. What am I saying? A drug! No, no! Even a
drug is taken sometimes. Advice never is. We learn only from our own
mistakes, and when it is too late to profit by them. No; there is not
much profit in looking backwards. Often it tends to make you pessimistic,
to sap your energy, to petrify you, as it did Lot's wife. At other times,
contrariwise, it makes you expel such salt as is already in you,
dissolved in tears--

  So sweet, so sad, the days that are no more.

Yet what is this but another form of Buskin's "Pathetic fallacy"? Those
divinely sweet, sad days were in reality just as commonplace as to-day.

  Life is a chaos of comic confusion,
    Past things alone take a halo harmonious;
  So from illusion we wake to illusion,
    Each as the rest just as true and erroneous.

A familiar form of the new illusion we wake to is seen in the exclamation
that so often follows retrospection: "Oh, what a fool I was!" As a rule,
nothing can be more conceited than this use of the past tense. A few
people, perhaps, can look back complacently upon "a well-spent life"
(wherein all the years have been laid out to advantage, and every hour
has been made to go as far as seventy-five minutes, and every odd second
has been worth a row of pins at least); but I should not care to meet
them. For the bulk of us it is best to press on, doing what our hand
findeth to do, and letting the dead past bury its dead. It is quite
enough to know we cannot escape paying the funeral bills. One of my
friends found himself let in for the discharge of a number of extra
bills, owing to his retrospective proclivities. He was just beginning to
overcome the adverse financial fates when, taking a complacent survey of
his past, he was horrified to find it bristling with forgotten debts.
Looking backward nearly ruined that man. Another of my friends lost his
life entirely through it. He was an old man and a celebrity, and a
publisher offered him L2000 for his memoirs. Unfortunately my friend had
a very bad memory and no diaries, and, like my other friend, he was
conscientious. The publisher's offer tantalized him terribly. He did not
know what to do. At last, in despair, he determined to drown himself. On
the moment before his death all his past life would come back to him and
pass before his mental vision. Of course I was to rescue him the instant
he lost consciousness, have him rubbed with hot towels and the rest of
it. We went out bathing together, and everything came off as arranged,
all except his resurrection. He was too old for such experiments.

A cynical Frenchman has defined life as the collection of recollections
for the time when you shall have no memory. It is, at any rate, true (and
the preachers are welcome to the moral) that the keenest joys of the
senses leave a scant deposit in the memory, and that if sensual pleasures
are doubled in anticipation, it is the spiritual that are doubled in
looking backward.




[Sidenote: Long Lives]

Just as there are many persons of whose existence you are unaware till
you read their obituaries, so there are many of whose celebrity you are
ignorant till you see the advertisement of their biographies. On all
sides we are flooded with big books about little people. What is this new
disease that has come upon us? Life is short but a "Life" is long. Can
there be any one man in this great procession of the suns who deserves
the two royal octavo volumes, which is the least monument that the pious
biographer builds? The perspective is all wrong. Bossuet got the history
of the world into a fifth of the space. How keen must be the struggle for
life amid these shoals of "Lives." How futile and vain this aspiration
for a "Life" beyond the grave! Vainer still the bid for immortality, when
one's own hand raises the mendacious memorial. It is an open question
whether even Marie Bashkirtseff's self-hewn shrine will stand--she, who
sacrificed her life to her "Life." If it does, it will not be by virtue
of its veracity. I would not trust George Washington himself to write a
perfectly accurate record of a prior day. As for the average biography,
it is but the "In Memoriam" of memory. A friend of mine has written some
excellent fiction and some entertaining reminiscences; only he has
mis-labelled his books, and called his fiction "reminiscences," and his
reminiscences "fiction."

  VIVE LA MORT!

  Wherefore do the critics rage?
  'T is the Biographic Age.
  Every dolt who duly died
  In a book is glorified
  Uniformly with his betters;
  All his unimportant letters
  Edited by writers gifted,
  Every scrap of MS. sifted,
  Classified by dates and ages,
  Pages multiplied on pages,
  Till the man is--for their pains--
  Buried 'neath his own Remains.
  Every day the craze grows stronger,
  Art is long, but "lives" are longer.
  Those who were the most in view
  Block the stage _post mortem_ too.
  Hark the tongues of either sex--
  Reminiscences of X!
  Of his juvenile affections
  Hundreds write their Recollections,
  (None will recollect their writings)
  Telling of his love for whitings
  Fried in butter, or his fancy
  For bananas, buns, and Nancy.
  Thank the gracious gods on high,
  Every day some "Life" must die:
  Death alone is our salvation.
  Though'tisdubious consolation
  That of all these countless "Lives"
  Only the unfit survives.




[Sidenote: Men and Bookmen]

The literary market is inundated with people who have no right to a
stall. Aristocrats are badgered for books merely because they have the
titles; and to have achieved success in any other profession than
literature is the surest recommendation to the favour of the publishers.
If I had to start my literary career over again, I should commence by
hopping on one leg through the Pyrenees, or figuring in a big divorce
case; anything short of assassination, which makes one's success too
posthumous. It is most unfair, this doubling of the parts of doing and
writing. Our modern heroes and heroines are quite too self-conscious;
amid all their deeds of derring-do they have their eye on Mudie's. The
old way was better. Even before the Pyramids were reared, when books were
pictures and letters were cuneiform, heroes had their poets and kings
their laureates. You can no more imagine Agamemnon, after the fall of
Troy, rushing off to write an account of it for "Bentley's," than you can
imagine Helen certifying that she found Pears' soap matchless for the
complexion. It was better for the heroes as well as for the writers.
Aeneas would never have dared to draw such constant attention to his
"piety" as Virgil does; and even Louis Quatorze would have hesitated to
describe the taking of Namur in the language of Boileau--

  Et vous, vents, faites silence:
  Je vais parler de Louis.

The true hero nowadays is the man who conquers himself and does not write
books.




[Sidenote: James I. on Tobacco]

But even ancient kings did write sometimes, as witness this of James I: I
hold it aye to be a Kings part to the Body-Politicke of all euils &
excesses, & would fain demonstrate afresh to my dear Countrey-men how
abhorrent to Heauen is this stinking incense that ascendeth day & night;
but amid the heat & burden of the day I cannot find an hour to examine
into this matter _de nouo_, & must needs be content with commending to
the readers of "Without Prejudice" my booklet, "A Counterblaste to
Tobacco," imprinted _Anno_ 1604, wherein they will find the abuses of
this foreign custome duly set forth at length. But, on second thoughts,
perchance these moderns read nothing but what is under their noses, so I
will shortly recapitulate my main positions, merely adding that my
objections to Smoak are to-day even stronger than when I wrote. (1) It is
a fallacie of the vulgar that _because_ the braines of men are colde &
wet, therefore _Tobacco_ Smoak, being hote and dry, is good for them; a
conclusion which no more followeth on the Premiss than the Ratiocination
of one who should apply a cake of cold lead to his stomacke, because the
Liver, being the fountaine of blood, is always hote. Moreover, the Smoak
hath also a venomous qualitee. (2) It is a vulgar fallacie that the
affection of mankind for the Practise is a proof that it is good for
them; inasmuch as men are ledd astray by a mode, & furthermore, the
affectation & conceit of the patient persuadeth him he is benefited; yet
how shall one drug cure of all diseases men of all complexions? (3) Men
are by this custom disabled in their goods, spending many pounds a year
upon this precious stinke, and are no better than drunkards. (4) It is a
great iniquitee & against all humanity that the husband shall not bee
ashamed to reduce thereby his delicate, wholesome and cleane complexioned
wife to that extremitee that either shee must also corrupt her sweete
breath therewith, or else resolve to live in a perpetual stinking
torment. In short, tis a custome lothsome to the eye, hateful to the
Nose, harmefull to the braine, dangerous to the Lungs, & in the blacke
stinking fume thereof neerest resembling the horrible Stigian smoke of
the pit that is bottomeless.




[Sidenote: A Counterblaste to James I.]

So please your Majestie, I would beg leave in all loyaltie & service to
cry you mercy on behalf of the foreign weed, _Tobacco_, which stands for
all time condemned by the potent _Counterblaste_ of a monarch, the
maruelle of _Christendom_, whose brow hath borne at once the bays of
Apollo, the laurels of Mars, & the crownes of Scotia & Anglia. And
_imprimis_ I would venture humbly to obserue that your Majesties
arguments are to the last Degree asinine. Euen the title--which, as is
customarie with great personages, is the best part of your Majesties
book--is marred by an unseemlie concession to paronomasia. That your
Majesties manifold abuses of the Logicks may be better espied, I will
take them _seriatim_. (1) The ground founded upon the Theoricke of a
deceiuable apparence of Reason--your Majestie is mistaken in thinking
that I hold it a sure aphorisme in the Physickes. For the braines are
neuer colde & wet saue when there is water on them; & those who do not
Smoak haue no braines for _Tobacco_ to benefit. (2) Your Majesties
argumentation proueth how zealously your Majestie striueth to liue up to
the nickname of the _British Solomon_. And, of a veritie, I could not
myself run atilt more cunningly at this popular fallacie; though I might
back up your Majestie with a most transparent illustration--to wit, that
the affection of Mankind for monarchs is no proof that they are good for
them. (3) I denie that _Tobacco_ wastes ones substance, & I would refer
your Majestie to my demonstration of the Extrauagance of not smoaking.
(4) And is it not an advantage that it resembleth to the Stigian smoak of
the pit? The more we accustom ourselves thereto, the lesse we shall
suffer when we join your Majestie. Will your Majestie kindlie recommend a
Brande? Nor can I conclude without a word as to the ill-taste of that
supplement to your Majesties booklet--a tax of Six Shillings &
Eighte-Pence uppon euery Pounde-Waighte of _Tobacco_, ouer & aboue the
Custome of Two Pence uppon the Pound-Waighte usuallye paide heretofore.
Did your Majestie hope to effect so little by Reason that your Majestie
must needs fall back on Reuenue? Hauing challenged this habit by the
Kings pen, how unmannerly to resort to the coastguards cutlass & fight
the custome at the Custome House. Was it, perhaps, that your Majestie was
wishful to promote English Agriculture or was getting up a cornere in
Cabbaiges?

Howsoever, Smoak hath suruiued the _Stuarts_. May I offer your Majestie a
Cigarre?




[Sidenote: Valedictory]

And now, gentle reader, the hour has come for parting. You have kept me
company a long time; tolerant of all my whimsies and vagaries, and not
too restive when I became serious and heavy. I have written for you in
many places and in many moods, and I cannot hope to have escaped the mood
of dulness.

  Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books;
    Or surely you'll grow double;
  Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks:
    Why all this toil and trouble?

Ah, dear Wordsworth, 't is easy enough to answer your question. Still, at
last the pen falls from my tired fingers.

  Books! 't is a dull and endless strife:
    Come, hear the woodland linnet!
  How sweet his music! On my life,
    There's more of wisdom in it.

Yes, I will go down and hear the woodland linnet, there is one in the
bird-shop round the corner. Ah me! he will not pipe--his is the wisdom of
silence. Never mind; the pavements are flooded with sunshine, and the
folk are walking gaily, and the omnibuses roll along top-heavy, and there
is a blue strip of sky over the Strand. Yes, Spring is here, and the
violets are blooming in the old women's baskets. How happy everybody
seems! Even the sandwich-men have lost their doleful air. The sap is
stirring in their boards. They are dreaming of their ancient springtides,
when they edited magazines or played "Hamlet." And so, having taken up my
pen again to tell you how I dropped it, let me not lay it down without
bidding you a fond and last farewell--without prejudice.








This eBooks was produced as a DP project (Delphine Lettau PM)




MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC.

BY

MOLIERE


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE.

_WITH SHORT INTRODUCTIONS AND EXPLANATORY NOTES_.

BY

CHARLES HERON WALL



'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac', acted on October 6, 1669, is nothing but
a farce. But Moliere excels in farce as well as in higher comedy, and
'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac' is one of the best of its kind. The
attacks upon the doctors of the time are not exaggerated. Moliere
acted the part of Mr. de Pourceaugnac.




PERSONS REPRESENTED.


MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC. ORONTE, _father to_ JULIA.

ERASTE, _lover to_ JULIA.

SBRIGANI, _a Neapolitan adventurer_.

FIRST PHYSICIAN.

SECOND PHYSICIAN.

AN APOTHECARY.

A PEASANT.

A FEMALE PEASANT.

FIRST SWISS.

SECOND SWISS.

A POLICE OFFICER.

TWO INFERIOR POLICE OFFICERS.

JULIA, _daughter to_ ORONTE.

NERINE, _an intriguing woman, supposed to come from Picardy._

LUCETTE, _supposed to come from Gascony._

*       *       *       *       *

The scene is in Paris.




MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC.




ACT I.

SCENE I.--ERASTE, A LADY SINGER, TWO MEN SINGERS, _several others
performing on instruments_, DANCERS.


ERA. (_to the_ MUSICIANS _and_ DANCERS). Carry out the
orders I have given you for the serenade. As for myself, I will
withdraw, for I do not wish to be seen here.




SCENE II.--A LADY SINGER, TWO MEN SINGERS, _several others
performing on instruments_, DANCERS.

LADY (_sings_).
  Spread, charming night, spread over every brow
    The subtle scent of thy narcotic flower,
  And let no wakeful hearts keep vigil now
    Save those enthralled by love's resistless power.
  More beautiful than day's most beauteous light,
  Thy silent shades were made for love's delight.

FIRST SINGER.
  Love is sweet when none our wills oppose;
  Then peaceful tastes our gentle hearts dispose;
  But tyrants reign, who gave us birth and life.
  Ah! love is sweet when love is free from strife.

SECOND SINGER.
  All who strive 'gainst love must fall;
  Perfect love will conquer all.

ALL THREE.
  Let us love with an eternal ardour!
  Let parents frown, and try in vain to cure,
  Absence, hardship, or cruel fortune's rigour
  Will only strengthen love when true and pure.

_First entry of the_ BALLET.
(_Dance of the two_ DANCING MASTERS.)

_Second entry of the_ BALLET.
(_Dance of the two_ PAGES.)

_Third entry of the_ BALLET.
(_Four_ SPECTATORS, _who quarrelled during the dance, now
dance, sword in hand, fighting all the while_.)

_Fourth entry of the_ BALLET.
(_Two_ SOLDIERS _separate the combatants, and dance with
them_.)




SCENE III.--JULIA, ERASTE, NERINE.

JUL. Oh dear, Eraste! take care that we are not discovered. I am so
afraid of being seen with you; all would be lost after the command I
have received to the contrary.

ERA. I see nobody about.

JUL. (_to_ NERINE). Just keep watch, Nerine, and be careful that
nobody comes.

NER. (_going to the farther end of the stage_). Trust me for
that: and say all you have to say to each other.

JUL. Have you thought of anything to favour our plan, Eraste? And do
you think that we shall succeed in breaking off that marriage which
my father has taken into his head?

ERA. We are at least doing all we can for it, and we have ready many
schemes to bring such an absurd notion to naught.

NER. (_running towards_ JULIA). I say, here is your father.

JUL. Ah! let us separate quickly.

NER. No, no; don't go; I made a mistake.

JUL. How absurd you are, Nerine, to give us such a fright!

ERA. Yes, dear Julia, we have plenty of stratagems ready for the
purpose; and, in accordance with the permission you have given me, we
will not hesitate to make use of every means. Do not ask me what it
is we are going to do; you will have the fun of seeing it, and, as at a
comedy, it will be nice for you to have the pleasure of being surprised
without my letting you know beforehand what is going to take place.
This is telling you that we have many schemes in hand for the
occasion, and that our clever Nerine and the dexterous Sbrigani have
undertaken to bring the affair to a successful issue.

NER. Yes, we have indeed. Is your father crazy to think of entangling
you with his lawyer of Limoges; that Mr. de Pourceaugnac, whom he
has never seen in his life, and who comes by the coach to take you
away before our very eyes? Ought three or four thousand crowns, more
or less--and that, too, upon the word of your uncle--to make him refuse
a lover you like? Besides, are you made for a Limousin? If he has taken
it into his head to marry, why does he not take one of his own
countrywomen, and let Christians be at peace? The very name of
Pourceaugnac puts me in a frightful rage. I boil over with Mr. de
Pourceaugnac. If it were only because of the name, I would do
anything to prevent the match. No, you shall not be Mrs. de
Pourceaugnac. Pourceaugnac! Was ever such a name heard of! [Footnote:
Pourceaugnac equals _pourceau_, "a young pig," plus the local
ending _-gnac_.] No, I could never put up with Pourceaugnac; and
we will abuse the man to such an extent, and play him so many tricks,
that he will have to return to Limoges, Mr. de Pourceaugnac.

ERA. Here is our cunning Neapolitan, who will give us news.




SCENE IV.--JULIA, ERASTE, SBRIGANI, NERINE.

SBRI. Our man has just come, Sir. I saw him at a place three leagues
away from here, where the coach stops; and I studied him for more
than half an hour in the kitchen, where he went down to breakfast,
and I know him now perfectly. As to his appearance, I will say nothing
about it; you will see for yourselves what nature has done for him, and
if his dress is not the very thing to set that off. But as for his
understanding,  I can tell you beforehand that it is among the dullest I
have met with for a long time. We shall find in him a fit subject to work
upon as we like. He is just the man to fall into all the traps laid for
him.

ERA. Is all that possible?

SBRI. Perfectly true, and I am skilled in the knowledge of men.

NER. (_pointing to_ SBRIGANI). This is a famous man, Madam; and
your affair could not be trusted to better hands. He is the hero of
the age, for the wonders he has performed. A man who, twenty times in
his life, has generously braved the galleys to serve his friends;
who, at the peril of his arms and shoulders, [Footnote: Compare the
"royal cautery" in 'The Flying Doctor'] knows how to bring to a
successful issue the most difficult enterprises; and who is, in
short, banished from his country for I don't know how many honourable
actions he has generously engaged in.

SBRI. I am ashamed to hear the praises with which you honour me, and
I could most justly extol the marvellous things you did in your life;
I could particularly speak of the glory you acquired when you cheated
at play that young nobleman we brought to your house, and won twelve
thousand crowns from him; when you handsomely made that false
contract which ruined a whole family; when with such greatness of
soul you denied all knowledge of the deposit which had been entrusted
to you, and so generously gave evidence which hung two innocent
people.

NER. These are trifles not worth mentioning, and your praises make me
blush.

SBRI. Then I will spare your modesty. Let us leave that aside, and
speak of our business. To begin with, I will quickly rejoin our
countryman, while you, on your side, will see that all the other
actors in the comedy are kept in readiness.

ERA. And you, Madam, pray remember your part, that in order to
conceal our aim the better, you are to affect to be quite perfectly
delighted with your father's resolutions.

JUL. If it only depends on that, things will be sure to succeed.

ERA. But, dear Julia, if everything were to fail?

JUL. I will declare my real inclinations to my father.

ERA. And if he persists in his designs in spite of your inclinations?

JUL. I will threaten to shut myself up in a convent.

ERA. But if, notwithstanding all that, he wished to force you to this
marriage?

JUL. Why, what would you have me say?

ERA. What do I want you to say?

JUL. Yes.

ERA. What is said when one loves truly?

JUL. But what?

 ERA. That nothing shall force you; that in spite of all your father
can do, you promise to be mine.

JUL. Ah me! Eraste, be satisfied with what I do now, and leave the
future alone. Do not perplex me in my duty, by speaking of sad
expedients to which we may not be obliged to have recourse. Allow me
to be led by the course of events.

ERA. Will....

SBRI. Sir, here is our man. Be careful.

NER. Ah! what a guy! [Footnote: Sbrigani and Nerine are merely the
conventional rogues of the stage. Compare Mascarille, Scapin.]




SCENE V.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, SBRIGANI.

MR. POUR. (_turning to the side he came from, and speaking to the
people who are following him_). Well, what is it? What is the
matter? What do you want? Deuce take this stupid town, and the people
who live in it! Nobody can walk a step without meeting a lot of asses
staring and laughing like fools at one. You boobies, mind your
business; and let folk pass without grinning in their faces. Deuce
take me if I don't knock down the first man I see laughing.

SBRI. (_speaking to the same people_). What are you about? What
is the meaning of such conduct? What is it you want? Is it right to
make fun like that of strangers who come here?

MR. POUR. Here is a man of sense at last.

SBRI. What manners! And what is there to laugh at?

MR. POUR. Quite right.

SBRI. Is there anything ridiculous in this gentleman?

MR. POUR. I ask you?

SBRI. Is he not like other people?

MR. POUR. Am I crooked or hunchbacked?

SBRI. Learn to distinguish people.

MR. POUR. Well said.

SBRI. This gentleman's qualities call for your respect.

MR. POUR. Perfectly true.

SBRI. He is a person of quality.

MR. POUR. Yes, a gentleman from Limoges.

SBRI. A man of intelligence.

MR. POUR. Who has studied the law. [Footnote: Compare act ii. scene
xii.]

SBRI. He does you too much honour in coming to this town.

MR. POUR. Ay, indeed.

SBRI. This gentleman has nothing in him that can make you laugh.

MR. POUR. Certainly not.

SBRI. And the first who laughs at him, I will call to account.

MR. POUR. (_to_ SBRIGANI). Sir, I am extremely, obliged to you.

SBRI. I am sorry, Sir, to see a person like you received after such a
fashion.

MR. POUR. Your servant, Sir.

SBRI. I saw you breakfasting this morning, Sir, with the other
passengers; and the grace with which you ate created in me at once a
great friendship for you; and as I know that you have never been here
before, and that you are a perfect stranger, I am glad I met you, to
offer you my services at your arrival, and to assist you among these
people, who do not always behave to strangers of quality as they
should.

MR. POUR. You are really very kind.

SBRI. I have told you already; the moment I saw you, I felt an
inclination for you.

MR. POUR. I am greatly obliged to you.

SBRI. Your countenance pleased me.

MR. POUR. You do me much honour.

SBRI. I read honesty in it.

MR. POUR. I am your servant

SBRI. Something amiable.

MR. POUR. Ah! ah!

SBRI. Graceful.

MR. POUR. Ah! ah!

SBRI. Sweet.

MR. POUR. Ah! ah!

SBRI. Majestic.

MR. POUR. Ah! ah!

SBRI. Frank.

MR. POUR. Ah! ah!

SBRI. And cordial.

MR. POUR. Ah! ah!

SBRI. Believe that I am entirely yours.

MR. POUR. I am greatly obliged to you.

SBRI. I speak from the bottom of my heart.

MR. POUR. I believe you.

SBRI. If I had the honour of being known to you, you would find that
I am altogether sincere.

MR. POUR. I do not doubt it.

SBRI. An enemy to deceit.

MR. POUR. I feel sure of it.

SBRI. And that I am incapable of disguising my thoughts.

MR. POUR. It is exactly what I think.

SBRI. You look at my dress, which is not like that of other people;
but I came originally from Naples, at your service; and I always like
to keep up the way of dressing as well as the sincerity of my
country. [Footnote: The Neapolitans had no great reputation for
sincerity.]

MR. POUR. You are quite right. For my part, I was desirous of
appearing in the court dress for the country. [Footnote: _Mode de
la cour pour la campagne_.]

SBRI. Truly, it becomes you better than it does all our courtiers.

MR. POUR. Exactly what my tailor told me. The coat is suitable and
rich; it will tell here among these people.

SBRI. You will go to the Louvre, no doubt?

MR. POUR. Yes; I must go and pay my court.

SBRI. The king will be charmed to see you.

MR. POUR. I believe so.

SBRI. Have you fixed upon rooms?

MR. POUR. No; I was going to look for some.

SBRI. I shall be very glad to go with you; I know all this city well.

 SCENE VI.--ERASTE, MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, SBRIGANI.

ERA. Ah, who is this? What do I see? What a happy meeting! Mr.
de Pourceaugnac! How delighted I am to see you! What! anyone
would think that you find it difficult to remember me!

MR. POUR. Sir, I am your servant.

ERA. Is it possible that five or six years can have made you forget
me? Do you not remember the best friend of the de Pourceaugnacs?

MR. POUR. Yes, yes. (_Aside to_ SBRIGANI) Deuce take me if I
know who he is.

ERA. There is not one of the de Pourceaugnacs of Limoges that I do
not know, from the greatest to the smallest; I visited only them
during my stay there, and I had the honour of seeing you every day.

MR. POUR. The honour was mine, Sir.

ERA. You do not remember my face?

MR. POUR. Yes, yes. (_To_ SBRIGANI) I don't know him a bit.

ERA. You do not remember that I had the pleasure of drinking with you
I don't know how many times?

MR. POUR. Excuse me. (_To_ SBRIGANI) I don't know anything about
it.

ERA. What is the name of that pastrycook who cooks such capital
dinners?

MR. POUR. Petit-Jean.

ERA. Just so. We used often to go there together to enjoy ourselves.
How do you call that place where people go for a walk?

MR. POUR. The cemetery of the Arenes.

ERA. Exactly. It is there I enjoyed so many happy hours of your
pleasant talk. Don't you remember it all now?

MR. POUR. Pardon me; yes, I remember. (_To_ SBRIGANI) Deuce take
me if I do.

SBRI. (_aside to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). There are a hundred
things like that which one is apt to forget altogether.

ERA. Let us embrace, I pray, and renew our former friendship.

SBRI. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). This man seems to have a great
affection for you.

ERA. Tell me some news of all the family. How is that gentleman
your ... he who is such an honest man?

MR. POUR. My brother the sheriff? [Footnote: _Consul_ in the
south equalled _echevin_ in the north. Both words are obsolete
in this sense.]

ERA. Yes.

MR. POUR. He is as well as can be.

ERA. I am delighted to hear it. And that good tempered man? You know,
your....

MR. POUR. My cousin, the assessor?

ERA. Exactly.

MR. POUR. Always gay and hearty.

ERA. It gives me much pleasure to hear it. And your uncle, the....

MR. POUR. I have no uncle.

ERA. But you had one in those days?

MR. POUR. No; only an aunt....

ERA. Ah! it's what I meant; your aunt; Mrs.... How is she?

MR. POUR. She died six months ago.

ERA. Alas! poor woman. She was so good, too!

MR. POUR. We have also my nephew, the canon, who almost died of the
smallpox.

ERA. What a pity if it had happened!

MR. POUR. Do you know him also?

ERA. Indeed I do; a tall handsome fellow.

MR. POUR. Not so very tall.

ERA. No; but well-shaped.

MR. POUR. Yes, yes.

ERA. He's your nephew, isn't he?

MR. POUR. Yes.

ERA. Son of your brother or your sister?

MR. POUR. True.

ERA. A canon of the church of.... How do you call it?

MR. POUR. Saint Stephen.

ERA. Just so; I don't know any other.

MR. POUR. (_to_ SBRIGANI). He knows all my relations.

SBRI. He knows you better than you think.

MR. POUR. You must have lived a long time in our town, I see.

ERA. Two whole years.

MR. POUR. You were there, then, when our governor was godfather to my
cousin the assessor's child?

ERA. To be sure; I was one of the first invited.

MR. POUR. The thing was well done.

ERA. Very.

MR. POUR. The dinner was well got up.

ERA. Yes, indeed.

MR. POUR. Then you must remember the quarrel I had with that
gentleman from Perigord.

ERA. Yes.

MR. POUR. He met with his match, eh?

ERA. Ah! ah!

MR. POUR. He slapped my face; but I paid him back handsomely.

ERA. Very handsomely, By the bye, I shall not allow you to go to any
other house but mine.

MR. POUR. I would not....

ERA. Nonsense! I will not allow one of my best friends to go anywhere
but to my house.

MR. POUR. It would be disturb....

ERA. No; deuce take it all. You shall stay with me.

SBRI. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). Since he will have it so, I
advise you to accept.

ERA. Where is your luggage?

MR. POUR. With my servant, where we stopped.

ERA. Send somebody to fetch it.

MR. POUR. No. I forbade him to let it go out of his sight, for fear
of swindlers.

SBRI. You did quite right.

MR. POUR. It is good to be cautious in this place.

ERA. We always know a man of sense.

SBRI. I will accompany this gentleman, and bring him back where you
wish.

ERA. Do so. I have a few orders to give; but you only need come to
that house yonder.

SBRI. We will come back presently.

ERA. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). I shall expect you with great
impatience.

MR. POUR. (_to_ SBRIGANI). I find an acquaintance when I little
expected to meet with one.

SBRI. He looks like an honest man. (_Exeunt._)

ERA. (_alone_). Ah! ah! Mr. de Pourceaugnac, you will get it
hot! Everything is ready, and I have only to give the word. Soho!
there.




SCENE VII.--ERASTE, AN APOTHECARY.

ERA. I think, Sir, that you are the doctor to whom somebody went to
speak in my name.

APO. No, Sir. I am not the doctor; such an honour does not belong to
me. I am only an unworthy apothecary; at your service.

ERA. Is the doctor at home, then.

APO. Yes; he is in there, trying to get rid quickly of some patients.
I will tell him that you are here.

ERA. No; you need not disturb him; I will wait till he has done. I
have to entrust to his care a certain relation of mine he was told
about today. He is attacked with a sort of madness that we should
like to see cured before we marry him to anyone.

APO. I know; I know all about it. I was there when he was told of
this affair. Upon my word, Sir; upon my word, you could not apply to
a more skilful doctor. He is a man who understands medicine
thoroughly, as well as I do my A B C; [Footnote: _Ma croix de par
Dieu_, "my Christ-cross-row," or "Criss-cross-row," in old and
provincial English.] and who, were you to die for it, would not abate
one iota of the rules of the ancients. Yes, he always follows the
high-road--the high-road, Sir, and doesn't spend his time finding out
mares' nests. For all the gold in the world he would not cure anybody
with other medicines than those prescribed by the faculty.

ERA. He is quite right. A patient should not wish to be cured unless
the faculty consents to it.

APO. It is not because we are great friends that I speak so of him;
but it is a pleasure to be his patient, and I had rather die by his
medicines than be cured with those of another. For, whatever may
happen, we know for certain that things are always in due order; and
should we die under his care, our heirs have nothing to reproach us
with.

ERA. A great comfort to a dead man.

APO. Certainly; it is pleasant to have died according to rules.
Moreover, he is not one of those doctors who let a disease off. He is
an expeditious man--expeditious, Sir, who likes to clear off his
patients; and when they are to die, the thing is done in no time.

ERA. There is, to be sure, nothing like going through the business
quickly.

APO. Indeed, what is the use of haggling over the matter, and beating
so long about the bush? One should know offhand the long and short of
an illness.

ERA. You are quite right.

APO. Why, he did me the honour of taking care of three of my
children; they died in less than four days, whereas with another they
would have lingered for more than three months.

ERA. It is a blessing to have friends like these.

APO. Decidedly. I have still two children left, of whom he takes care
as if they were his own; he attends them, and physics them as he
pleases, without my interfering in the least; and very frequently on
my return from the city, I am quite surprised to find that they have
been bled or purged by his direction.

ERA. This is kind care indeed!

APO. Here he is, here he is; here he is coming.




SCENE VIII.--ERASTE, 1ST PHYSICIAN, APOTHECARY, COUNTRYMAN,
COUNTRYWOMAN.

C. MAN. Sir, he can hold out no longer; he says he feels the greatest
pains imaginable in his head.

1ST PHY. The patient is a fool; for in the disease by which he is
attacked it is not his head, according to Galen, but the spleen,
which must give pain.

C. MAN. However this may be, Sir, he has had for the last six months
a laxity with it.

1ST PHY. That's right. It is a sign that his body is clearing. I will
go and see him in two or three days; but if he dies before, mind you
do not forget to give me notice, for it is not proper that a doctor
should go to visit a dead man.

C. WOM. (_to_ PHYSICIAN). My father, Sir, is getting worse and
worse.

1ST PHY. It is no fault of mine; I send him remedies; why does he not
get better? How many times has he been bled?

C. WOM. Fifteen times, Sir, in twenty days.

1ST PHY. Fifteen times?

C. WOM. Yes.

1ST PHY. And he does not get better?

C. WOM. No, Sir.

PHY. It is a sign that the seat of the malady is not in the blood. He
must be purged as many times, to see if it is in the humours; and if
this does not succeed, we will send him to the bath.

APO. This is the _beau-ideal_ of physic.




SCENE IX.--ERASTE, 1ST PHYSICIAN, APOTHECARY.

ERA. (_to the_ PHYSICIAN). It was I, Sir, who sent to you few
days ago about a relation of mine who is not quite right in his mind;
and I want him to live in your house, as it would be more convenient
for you to attend to him, and to prevent him from being seen by too
many people.

1ST PHY. Yes, Sir, I have got everything ready; and I will take the
utmost care of him.

ERA. Here he is.

1ST PHY. That is most fortunate; for I have with me just now an old
physician, a friend of mine, with whom I should be glad to consult
concerning this disorder.



SCENE X.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, ERASTE, 1ST PHYSICIAN, APOTHECARY.

ERA. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). I am obliged to leave you a
moment for a little affair which requires my presence; (_showing
the_ PHYSICIAN) but this person, in whose hands I leave you, will
do for you all he possibly can.

1ST PHY. I am bound by my profession to do so; and it is enough that
you should lay this duty upon me.

MR. POUR. (_aside_). It is his steward, no doubt; he must be a
man of quality.

1ST PHY. (_to_ ERASTE). Yes, Sir; I assure you that I shall
treat this gentleman methodically, and in strict accordance with the
rules of our art.

MR. POUR. Indeed, I do not ask for so much ceremony; and I have not
come here to trouble you so.

1ST PHY. Such a duty is a pleasure to me.

ERA. (_to_ 1ST PHYSICIAN). Nevertheless, here are ten pistoles
beforehand, as an earnest of what I have promised you.

MR. POUR. No, if you please; I won't hear of your spending anything
on my account, nor do I wish you to send for anything particular for
me.

ERA. Ah, pray, do not trouble yourself; it is not for that you
imagine.

MR. POUR. I beg of you to treat me only as a friend.

ERA. It is exactly what I mean to do. (_Aside to the_ PHYSICIAN)
I particularly recommend you not to let him slip out of your hands,
for at times he tries to escape.

1ST PHY. You need not fear.

ERA. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). Pray excuse the incivility I
commit.

MR. POUR. Don't mention it. You are really too kind.




SCENE XI.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, 1ST PHYSICIAN, 2ND PHYSICIAN,
APOTHECARY.

1ST PHY. It is a great honour to me to be chosen to do you a service.

MR. POUR. I am your servant.

1ST PHY. Here is a clever man, one of my brethren, with whom I will
consult concerning the manner of our treating you.

MR. POUR. There is no need of so much ceremony, I tell you; I am
easily satisfied.

1ST PHY. Bring some seats. (_Servants come in and place
chairs._)

MR. POUR. (_aside_). These servants are rather dismal for a
young man.

1ST PHY. Now, Sir; take a seat, Sir. (_The two_ PHYSICIANS
_make_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC _sit between them_.)

MR. POUR. (_seated_). Your very humble servant. (_Each_
PHYSICIAN _takes one of his hands, and feels his pulse._) What
are you about?

1ST PHY. Do you eat well, Sir?

MR. POUR. Yes; and drink still better.

1ST PHY. So much the worse! That great craving for cold and wet is a
sign of the heat and aridity that is within. Do you sleep well?

MR. POUR. Yes; when I have made a hearty supper.

1ST PHY. Do you dream much?

MR. POUR. Now and then.

1ST PHY. Of what nature are your dreams?

MR. POUR. Of the nature of dreams. What the deuce is the meaning of
this conversation?

1ST PHY. Have a little patience. We will reason upon your affair in
your presence; and we will do it in the vulgar tongue, so that you
may understand better.

MR. POUR. What great reasoning is there wanted to eat a mouthful?

1ST PHY. Since it is a fact that we cannot cure any disease without
first knowing it perfectly, and that we cannot know it perfectly
without first establishing its exact nature and its true species by
its diagnosis and prognosis, you will give me leave, you, my senior,
to enter upon the consideration of the disease that is in question,
before we think of the therapeutics and the remedies that we must
decide upon in order to effect a perfect cure. I say then, Sir, if
you will allow me, that our patient here present is unhappily
attacked, affected, possessed, and disordered by that kind of madness
which we properly name hypochondriac melancholy; a very trying kind
of madness, and which requires no less than an Aesculapius deeply
versed in our art like you; you, I say, who have become grey in
harness, as the saying hath it; and through whose hands so much
business of all sorts has passed. I call it hypochondriac melancholy,
to distinguish it from the other two; for the celebrated Galen
establishes and decides in a most learned manner, as is usual with
him, that there are three species of the disease which we call
melancholy, so called, not only by the Latins, but also by the
Greeks; which in this case is worthy of remark: the first, which
arises from a direct disease of the brain; the second, which proceeds
from the whole of the blood, made and rendered atrabilious; and the
third, termed hypochondriac, which is our case here, and which
proceeds from some lower part of the abdomen; and from the inferior
regions, but particularly the spleen; the heat and inflammation
whereof sends up to the brain of our patient abundance of thick and
foul fuliginosities; of which the black and gross vapours cause
deterioration to the functions of the principal faculty, and cause
the disease by which he is manifestly accused and convicted. In proof
of what I say, and as an incontestable diagnostic of it, you need
only consider that great seriousness, that sadness, accompanied by
signs of fearfulness and suspicion--pathognomonic and particular
symptoms of this disease, so well defined by the divine ancient
Hippocrates; that countenance, those red and staring eyes, that long
beard, that habit of body, thin, emaciated, black, and hairy--signs
denoting him greatly affected by the disease proceeding from a defect
in the hypochondria; which disease, by lapse of time, being
naturalised, chronic, habitual, ingrained, and established within
him, might well degenerate either into monomania, or into phthisis,
or into apoplexy, or even into downright frenzy and raving. All this
being taken for granted, since a disease well-known is a disease half
cured, for _ignoti nulla est curatio morbis_, it will not be
difficult for you to conclude what are the remedies needed by our
patient. First of all, to remedy this obdurate plethora, and this
luxuriant cacochymy throughout the body, I opine that he should be
freely phlebotomised; by which I mean that there should be frequent
and abundant bleedings, first in the basilic vein, then in the
cephalic vein; and if the disease be obstinate, that even the vein of
the forehead should be opened, and that the orifice be large, so that
the thick blood may issue out; and, at the same time, that he should
be purged, deobstructed, and evacuated by fit and suitable
purgatives, i.e. by chologues and melanogogues. And as the real
source of all this mischief is either a foul and feculent humour or a
black and gross vapour, which obscures, empoisons, and contaminates
the animal spirits, it is proper afterwards that he should have a
bath of pure and clean water, with abundance of whey; to purify, by
the water, the feculency of the foul humour, and by the whey to
clarify the blackness of the vapour. But, before all things, I think
it desirable to enliven him by pleasant conversations, by vocal and
instrumental music, to which it will not be amiss to add dancers,
that their movements, figures, and agility may stir up and awaken the
sluggishness of his spirits, which occasions the thickness of his
blood from whence the disease proceeds. These are the remedies I
propose, to which may be added many better ones by you, Sir, my
master and senior, according to the experience, judgment, knowledge
and sufficiency that you have acquired in our art. _Dixi_.

2ND PHY. Heaven forbid, Sir, that it should enter my thoughts to add
anything to what you have just been saying! You have discoursed too
well on all the signs, symptoms, and causes of this gentleman's
disease. The arguments you have used are so learned and so delicate
that it is impossible for him not to be mad and hypochondriacally
melancholic; or, were he not, that he ought to become so, because of
the beauty of the things you have spoken, and of the justness of your
reasoning. Yes, Sir, you have graphically depicted, _graphice
depinxisti_, everything that appertains to this disease. Nothing
can be more learnedly, judiciously, and ingeniously conceived,
thought, imagined, than what you have delivered on the subject of
this disease, either as regards the diagnostic, the prognostic, or
the therapeutic; and nothing remains for me to do but to congratulate
this gentleman upon falling into your hands, and to tell him that he
is but too fortunate to be mad, in order to experience the gentle
efficacy of the remedies you have so judiciously proposed. I approve
them in toto, _manibus et pedibus descendo in tuam sententiam_.
All I should like to add is to let all his bleedings and purgings be
of an odd number, _numero deus impare gaudet_, to take the whey
before the bath, and to make him a forehead plaster, in the
composition of which there should be salt--salt is a symbol of
wisdom; to whitewash the walls of his room, to dissipate the
gloominess of his mind; _album est disgregativum visas_; and to
give him a little injection immediately, to serve as a prelude and
introduction to those judicious remedies, from which, if he is
curable, he must receive relief. Heaven grant that these remedies,
which are yours, Sir, may succeed with the patient according to our
wish!

MR. POUR. Gentlemen, I have been listening to you for the last hour.
Are we acting a comedy here?

1ST PHY. No, Sir; we are not acting a comedy.

MR. POUR. What does it all mean? What are you about with this
gibberish and nonsense of yours?

1ST PHY. Ah! Insulting language! A diagnostic which was wanting for
the confirmation of his disease. This may turn to mania.

MR. POUR. (_aside_). With what kind of people have they left me
here. (_He spits two or three times._)

1ST PHY. Another diagnostic: frequent expectoration.

MR. POUR. Let us cease all this, and go away.

1ST PHY. Another: anxiety to move about.

MR. POUR. What is the meaning of all this business? What do you want
with me?

1ST PHY. To cure you, according to the order we have received.

MR. POUR. Cure me?

1ST PRY. Yes.

MR. POUR. S'death! I am not ill.

1ST PHY. It is a bad sign when a patient does not feel his illness.

MR. POUR. I tell you that I am quite well.

1ST PRY. We know better than you how you are; we are physicians who
see plainly into your constitution.

MR. POUR. If you are physicians, I have nothing to do with you; and I
snap my fingers at all your physic.

1ST PRY. H'm! h'm! This man is madder than we thought.

MR. POUR. My father and mother would never have anything to do with
remedies; and they both died without the help of doctors.

1ST PHY. I do not wonder if they have begotten a son who is mad.
(_To the_ 2ND PHYSICIAN) Come, let us begin the cure; and,
through the exhilarating sweetness of harmony, let us dulcify,
lenify, and pacify the acrimony of his spirits, which, I see, are
ready to be inflamed. (_Exeunt_.)




SCENE XII.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC (_alone_).

What the devil is all this? Are the people of this place crazy? I
never saw anything like it; and I don't understand it a bit.




SCENE XIII.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, TWO PHYSICIANS (_in grotesque
clothes_).

(_They all three at first sit down; the PHYSICIANS rise up at
different times to bow to MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, Who rises up as often
to bow to them in return_.)

THE TWO PHYSICIANS.
  Buon di, buon di, buon di!
  Non vi lasciate uccidere
    Dal dolor malinconico.
  Noi vi faremo ridere
  Col nostro canto armonico;
    Sol per guarirvi.
  Siamo venuti qui.
  Buon di, buon di, buon di!

1ST PHYSICIAN.
  Altro non e la pazzia
    Che malinconia.
      Il malato
    Non e disperato
  Se vol pigliar un poco d'allegria,
    Altro non e la pazzia
    Che malinconia.

2ND PHYSICIAN.
  Su; cantate, ballate, ridete.
    E, se far meglio volete,
  Quando sentite il deliro vicino
      Pigliate del vino,
  E qualche volta un poco di tabac.
  Allegramente, Monsu Pourceaugnac.

[Translation:]

THE TWO PHYSICIANS.
  Good day, good day, good day!
    Yield not yourself a prey
    To melancholy sway.
  We'll make you laugh, I trow,
  With songs harmonious, gay.
    Unto us your cure is dear,
    For that alone we're here.
  Good day, good day, good day!

1ST PHYSICIAN.
  Nought else is madness true
  Save melancholy blue.
    Not lost is he,
    Though sick he be,
  Who sips of mirth the dew.
  Nought else is madness true
  Save melancholy blue.

2ND PHYSICIAN.
  Up then! sing loud, and dance and play,
    "Better still I'd do!" you say.
  Delirium's nigh--if you must pine,
    Take first some wine;
  And sometimes, too, take your tabac
  Right joyfully, Monsu Pourceaugnac.




SCENE XIV.--BALLET.




SCENE XV.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, AN APOTHECARY.

APO. Sir, here is a little remedy; a little remedy which you must
take, if you please; if you please.

MR. POUR. How? I have no occasion for anything of the kind.

APO. It was ordered, Sir; it was ordered.

MR. POUR. Ah! What noise and bother.

APO. Take it, Sir; take it, Sir. It will do you no harm; it will do
you no harm, &c.

(MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC _runs away, the_ APOTHECARY, _&c. after
him_.)




SCENE XVI.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, AN APOTHECARY, TWO PHYSICIANS (_in
grotesque clothes_).

THE TWO PHYSICIANS.
  Piglialo su,
  Signor Monsu;
  Piglialo, piglialo, piglialo su,
  Che non ti fara, male, &c.

[Translation:]
Take it, take it. Sir; it will do you no harm, &c.




ACT II.

SCENE I.--1ST PHYSICIAN, SBRIGANI.


1ST PHY. He has forced through every obstacle I had placed to hinder
him, and has fled from the remedies I was beginning to prepare for
him.

SBRI. To avoid remedies so salutary as yours is to be a great enemy
to oneself.

1ST PHY. It is the mark of a disturbed brain and of a depraved reason
to be unwilling to be cured.

SBRI. You would have cured him, for certain, in no time.

1ST PHY. Certainly; though there had been the complication of a dozen
diseases.

SBRI. With all that he makes you lose those fifty well-earned
pistoles.

1ST PHY. I have no intention of losing them; and I am determined to
cure him in spite of himself. He is bound and engaged to take my
remedies; and I will have him seized, wherever I can find him, as a
deserter from physic and an infringer of my prescriptions.

SBRI. You are right. Your medicines were sure of their effect; and it
is so much money he takes from you.

1ST PHY. Where could I find him?

SBRI. No doubt, at the house of that goodman Oronte, whose daughter
he comes to marry; and who, knowing nothing of the infirmity of his
future son-in-law, will perhaps be in a hurry to conclude the
marriage.

1ST PHY. I will go and speak to him at once.

SBRI. You should, in justice to yourself.

1ST PHY. He is in need of my consultations; and a patient must not
make a fool of his doctor.

SBRI. That is well said; and, if I were you, I would not suffer him
to marry till you have physicked him to your heart's content.

1ST PHY. Leave that to me.

SBRI. (_aside, and going_). For my part, I will bring another
battery into play; for the father-in-law is as much of a dupe as the
son-in-law.




SCENE II.--ORONTE, 1ST PHYSICIAN.

1ST PHY. A certain gentleman, Sir, a Mr. de Pourceaugnac, is to marry
your daughter; is he not?

ORO. Yes; I expect him from Limoges, and he ought to have been here
before now.

1ST PHY. And he has come; he has run away from my house, after having
been placed under my care; but I forbid you, in the name of the
faculty, to proceed with the marriage you have decided upon, before I
have duly prepared him for it, and put him in a state to have
children well-conditioned both in mind and body.

ORO. What is it you mean?

1ST PHY. Your intended son-in-law was entered as my patient. His
disease which was given me to cure is a chattel which belongs to me,
and which I reckon among my possessions. I therefore declare to you
that I will not allow him to marry before he has rendered due
satisfaction to the faculty, and submitted to the remedies which I
have ordered for him.

ORO. He is suffering from some disease?

1ST PHY. Yes.

ORO. And from what disease, if you please?

1ST PHY. Don't trouble yourself about that.

ORO. Is it some disease....?

1ST PHY. Doctors are bound to keep things secret. Let it suffice you
that I enjoin both you and your daughter not to celebrate the wedding
without my consent, upon pain of incurring the displeasure of the
faculty, and of undergoing all the diseases which we choose to lay
upon you.

ORO. If that is the case, I shall take good care to put a stop to the
marriage.

1ST PHY. He was entrusted to me, and he is bound to be my patient.

ORO. Very well.

1ST PHY. It is in vain for him to run away; I will have him sentenced
to be cured by me.

ORO. I am very willing.

1ST PHY. Yes; he must either die or be cured by me.

ORO. I consent to it.

1ST PHY. And if I cannot find him, I will make you answerable, and
cure you instead of him.

ORO. I am in very good health.

1ST PHY. No matter. I must have a patient, and I will take anyone I
can.

ORO. Take whom you will, but it shall not be me. (_Alone_) Did
you ever hear of such a thing!




SCENE III.--ORONTE, SBRIGANI _as a Flemish merchant_.

SBRI. Sir, py your leafe, I pe one voreign marchant, and vould like
ask you one littel news.

ORO. What, Sir?

SBRI. Put you de hat on de head, Sir, if you pleace.

ORO. Tell me. Sir, what you want.

SBRI. I tell nozink, Sir, if you not put de hat on de head.

ORO. Very well, then, what is it, Sir?

SBRI. You not know in dis town one Mister Oronte?

ORO. Yes, I know him.

SBRI. And vat for one man is he, Sir, if you pleace?

ORO. He is like any other man.

SBRI. I ask you, Sir, if he one man of money is?

ORO. Yes.

SBRI. But very mooch rich, Sir?

ORO. Yes.

SBRI. It does me mooch pleasure, Sir.

ORO. But why should it?

SERI. It is, Sir, for one littel great reason for us.

ORO. But why?

SBRI. It is, Sir, dat dis Mr. Oronte his tauchter in marriage to a
certain Mr. Pourgnac gifes.

ORO. Well!

SBRI. And dis Mr. Pourgnac, Sir, is one man vat owes mooch golt to
ten or twelf Flemish marchants vat come here.

ORO. This Mr. de Pourceaugnac owes a great deal to ten or twelve
merchants?

SBRI. Yes, Sir; and for de last eight months ve hafe obtain one
littel judgment against him, and he put off all de credeetors till
dis marriage vat Mr. Oronte gifes to his tauchter.

ORO. Ho! ho! So he puts off paying his creditors till then?

SBRI. Yes, Sir; and vid great defotion ve all wait for dis marriage.

ORO. The idea is not bad. (_Aloud_) I wish you good day.

SBRI. I tank de gentleman for de favour great.

ORO. Your very humble servant.

SBRI. I pe, Sir, more great obliged don all py de goot news vat the
Mister gife me. (_Alone, after having taken off his beard, and
taken off the Flemish dress which he has put over his_) Things
don't go badly. All is going on swimmingly. I must throw off this
disguise and think of something else. We will put so much suspicion
between the father-in-law and his son-in-law that the intended
marriage must come to nothing. They are both equally fit to swallow
the baits that are laid for them, and it is mere child's play for us
great sharpers when we find such easy gulls.




SCENE IV.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, SBRIGANI.

MR. POUR. (_thinking himself alone_). _Piglialo su, piglialo
su, Signor Monsu_. What the deuce does it all mean? (_Seeing_
SBRIGANI) Ah!

SBRI. What is the matter, Sir? what ails you?

MR. POUR. Everything I see seems injection.

SBRI. How is that?

MR. POUR. You can't think what has happened to me in that house where
you took me.

SBRI. No! What has happened?

MR. POUR. I thought I should be well feasted there.

SBRI. Well?

 MR. POUR. I leave you in this gentleman's hands. Doctors dressed in
black. In a chair. Feel the pulse. In proof of what I say. He is mad.
Two big, fat-faced fellows, with large-brimmed hats. _Buon di, buon
di._ Six pantaloons. Ta, ra, ta, toi, ta, ra, ta, ta, toi.
_Allegramente, Monsu Pourceaugnac_, Take, Sir; take, take. It is
gentle, gentle, gentle. _Piglialo su, Signor Monsu; piglialo,
piglialo su_. I never was so surfeited with absurdities in all my
life.

SBRI. What does it all mean?

MR. POUR. It means, Sir, that this gentleman, with all his kissing
and hugging, is a deceitful rascal, who has sent me to that house to
play me some trick.

SBRI. Is it possible?

MR. POUR. It is, indeed. They were a dozen devils at my heels, and I
had all the difficulty in the world to escape out of their clutches.

SBRI. Just fancy how deceitful people's looks are; I should have
taken him for the most affectionate friend you have. It is a wonder
to me how there can exist such rascals in the world.

MR. POUR. My imagination is full of it all; and it seems to me that I
see everywhere a dozen injections threatening me.

SBRI. This is really too bad! how treacherous and wicked people are!

MR. POUR. Pray, tell me where Mr. Oronte lives. I should be glad to
go there at once.

SBRI. Ah! ah! you are of a loving disposition, I see; and you have
heard that Mr. Oronte has a daughter?

MR. POUR. Yes; I am come to marry her.

SBRI. To ma ... to marry her?

MR. POUR. Yes.

SBRI. In wedlock?

MR. POUR. How could it be otherwise?

SBRI. Oh! it is another thing, and I beg your pardon.

MR. POUR. What is it you mean?

SBRI. Oh, nothing.

MR. POUR. But, pray!

SBRI. Nothing, I tell you. I spoke rather hastily.

MR. POUR. I beg of you to tell me what it is.

SBRI. No; it is not necessary.

MR. POUR. Pray do.

SBRI. No; I beg you to excuse me.

MR. POUR. What! are you not one of my friends?

SBRI. Yes, certainly; nobody more so.

MR. POUR. Then you ought not to hide anything from me.

SBRI. It is a thing in which a neighbour's honour is concerned.

MR. POUR. That I may oblige you to treat me like a friend, here is a
small ring I beg of you to keep for my sake.

SBRI. Let me consider a little if I can in conscience do it. (_Goes
away a small distance from_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC.) He is a man who
looks after his own interests, who tries to provide for his daughter
as advantageously as possible; and one should injure nobody. It is
true that these things are no secret; but I shall be telling them to
a man who knows nothing about it, and it is forbidden to talk scandal
of one's neighbour. All this is true. On the other hand, however,
here is a stranger they want to impose upon, who comes in all good
faith to marry a girl he knows nothing about, and whom be has never
seen. A gentleman all openheartedness, for whom I feel some
inclination, who does me the honour of reckoning me his friend, puts
his confidence in me, and gives me a ring to keep for his sake.
(_To_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC) Yes, I think that I can tell you how
things are without wounding my conscience. But I must try to tell it
all to you in the mildest way possible, and to spare people as much
as I can. If I were to tell you that this girl leads a bad life, it
would be going too far. I must find some milder term to explain
myself. The word coquette does not come up to the mark; that of
downright flirt seems to me to answer the purpose pretty well, and I
can make use of it to tell you honestly what she is.

MR. POUR. They want to make a fool of me then?

SBRI. But it may not be so bad as people think; and after all, there
are men who set themselves above such things, and who do not think
that their honour depends upon....

MR. POUR. I am your servant; I have no wish to adorn my person with
such a head-dress, and the Pourceaugnacs are accustomed to walk with
their heads free.

SBRI. Here is the father.

MR. POUR. Who? this old man?

SBRI. Yes. Allow me to withdraw.




SCENE V.--ORONTE, MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC.

MR. POUR. Good morning, Sir; good morning.

ORO. Your servant, Sir; your servant.

MR. POUR. You are Mr. Oronte; are you not?

ORO. Yes.

MR. POUR. And I, Mr. de Pourceaugnac.

ORO. Ah, indeed!

MR. POUR. Do you think, Mr. Oronte, that the people of Limoges are
fools?

ORO. Do you think, Mr. de Pourceaugnac, that the people of Paris are
asses?

MR. POUR. Do you imagine, Mr. Oronte, that a man like me can be dying
for a wife?

ORO. Do you imagine, Mr. de Pourceaugnac, that a daughter like mine
can be dying for a husband?




SCENE VI.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, JULIA, ORONTE.

JUL. I have just been told, father, that Mr. de Pourceaugnac has
come. Ah, there he is, no doubt; my heart tells me so. How handsome
he is! How splendidly he holds himself. How pleased I am to have such
a husband! [Footnote: See act i, scene iv] Give me leave to kiss him
and to show him....

ORO. Softly, daughter, softly.

MR. POUR. (_aside_). Heyday! At what a pace she goes, and how
she takes fire!

ORO. I should very much like to know, Mr. de Pourceaugnac, for what
reason you....

JUL. (_approaches_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, _looks at him with a
languishing look, and tries to take his hand_). How pleased I am
to see you! And how impatient I am to....

ORO. Hey! daughter, go away; will you?

MR. POUR. (_aside_). What a free and easy young damsel!

ORO. I should like to know what made you have the boldness to....
(JULIA _continues as above_.)

MR. POUR. (_aside_). By Jove!

ORO. (_to_ JULIA). Again! What do you mean?

JUL. May I not kiss the husband you have chosen for me?

ORO. No; go in.

JUL. Allow me to look at him.

ORO. Go in, I tell you.

JUL. I should like to stop here, if you please.

ORO. I will not suffer it. If you do not go in immediately, I....

JUL. Very well then, I will go in.

ORO. My daughter is a foolish girl who does not understand things.

MR. POUR. (_aside_). How taken she is with me!

ORO. (_to_ JULIA, _who has stopped_). You won't go.

JUL. When will yon marry me to this gentleman?

ORO. Never. You are not intended for him.

JUL. I will have him, I will have him; you promised him to me.

ORO. If I promised him to you, I take my promise back again.

MR. POUR. (_aside_). She would fain eat me.

JUL. Do what you will, we will be married in spite of everybody.

ORO. I shall know how to prevent it, I forewarn you. What madness has
taken hold of her?




SCENE VII.--ORONTE, MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC.

MR. POUR. I say, our intended father-in-law, don't give yourself so
much trouble; I have no intention of running away with your daughter;
and your pretence won't take at all.

ORO. And yours will in no way succeed.

MR. POUR. Did you think that Leonardo de Pourceaugnac is a man to buy
a pig in a poke, and that he has not the sense to find out what goes
on in the world, and to see if, in marrying, his honour is safe?

ORO. I do not know what you mean; but did you take into your head
that a man of sixty-three years old has so little common sense, and
so little consideration for his daughter, as to marry her to a man
who has you know what, and who was put with a doctor to be cured?

MR. POUR. This is a trick that was practised upon me, and there is
nothing the matter with me.

ORO. The doctor told us so himself.

MR. POUR. The doctor told a lie. I am a gentleman, and I will meet
him sword in hand.

ORO. I know what I ought to believe, and you can no more impose upon
me in this matter than about the debts you are bound to pay on your
marriage day.

MR. POUR. What debts?

ORO. It is of no use to affect ignorance. I have seen the Flemish
merchant who with other creditors obtained a decision against you
eight months ago.

MR. POUR. What Flemish merchant? What creditors? What decision
obtained against me?

ORO. You know perfectly well what I mean.




SCENE VIII.--MR. DR POURCEAUGNAC, ORONTE, LUCETTE.

LUC. (_pretending to be a woman from Languedoc_). [Footnote:
Somerset dialect is employed here.] Oh, yeu be yur, be'e! an' I've
avoun thee to las, arter all this yur traepsin' vurwurd an' backward.
Cans thee now, yeu rascal; cans leuk me in the fae-as?

MR. POUR. What is it this woman wants?

LUC. What do I want o' thee, yeu villun! Thee's mak wise neet to know
me, disn? an' thee disn turn rid nuther, eempodent oseburd that thee
art! What! thee witn turn colour vur to leuk me in the fae-as!
(_To_ ORONTE) I baent saaf, Maister, nif'tis yeu that they do
zay 'ee weeshth vur to marry wi' the darter o'? but 'owsomever I
zwear to yeu, I be the weiv o' un, an' that zeben yur agone when 'ee
was a travellin' drue Pezenas, he made out, we' 'iz falseness, that
'ee knowth zo wul 'ow vur act vur to come over my 'art, an' zo by one
way or tother vur to git me vur to gee unmy 'an vur to marry un.

ORO. Oh! oh!

LUC. The rascal lef me dree yur arterwurds, purtendin' that 'eed agot
some bizness vur to deu in 'iz own country, an' ivur sinz I 'ant
ayeard no news at all o' un; but when I wadn thinkin' nothin' 'tall
'bout 'ee, I yeard 'em say as 'ow 'ee was acomin' yur, into this yur
town, vur to be amarried agee'an wi' another young ummun, that her
father an' mother 'd apromised teu un athout knowin' nothin' 'ow that
'ee was amarried avore. Zo I starts toracly, an' I be acome yur to
this yur place so zeun's ivur I pausible keud, vur to staup this yur
wicked marridge, an' vur to show op, avore all the wurld, the very
wissest man that iver was.

MR. POUR. What wonderful impudence!

LUC. Eempurence! Baent yeu ashee'amd o' yurzul vur to mak sport o'
me, 'stid o' bein' abroke down wi' eenward feelins, that thee wicked
'art aurt vur to gee thee?

MR. POUR. Do you mean to say that I am your husband?

LUC. Villun! dis dare to zay tidn zo? Ah! thee's know wul 'nuf, wiss
luck to me, that tis all zo treu's the Gauspel; an' I weesh to Heben
twadn zo, an' that thee'ds alef me so eenocent an' so quiet like eens
I used to be, avore thy charms an' thy trumpery, bad luck, made me
vur to 'sake it all! I nivur sheudn abin abrought down vur to be the
pour weesh thing that I be now--vur to zee my man, cruel like, mak a
laughin' sport of all the love that I've a 'ad vorn, an' lef me
athout one beet o' pity, vur the mortal pain I've abeared, 'bout the
shee'amful way 'eev asard me.

ORO. Really, I feel quite ready to weep. Go! you are a wicked man!




SCENE IX.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, NERINE, LUCETTE, ORONTE.

NER. (_pretending to be from Picardy_).[Footnote: Lowland Scotch
is employed here.] Oh! Aa can stand nowt more; aa'm rait winded! Ah!
good for nowt, thou's made me run well for it; thou'lt not 'scape me
now. Joostice! Joostice! Aa forbid the weddin. (_To_ ORONTE)
He's my ain man, Mast-ther, and as sh'd joost loik to ave him stroong
up, the precious hang-dog there.

MR. POUR. Another!

ORO. What a devil of a man!

LUC. An' what be yeu a-tullin' o', wai yur vurbeedin' an' yur
'angin'? Thiki man's yo-ur uzban, is ur?

NER. You're rait, Missis, an aa'm joost his woif.

LUC. That's a lie then; 'tis me that's the rail weiv o' un; an eef
'ee ought vur to be a'anged, why 'tis me that ought vur to 'ave it
adeud.

NER. Me; aa can mak nowt o' that soort o' talk.

LUC. I do tul 'ee 'ow that I be 'is weiv.

NER. His woif?

LUC. Ees fie!

NER. Aa tell ye once more, that it's me at's joost that.

LUC. An' I vows an' declares as 'ow tez me, my own zul.

NER. 'Twere fowr yeer agone 'at he wed me.

LUC. An' me, tez zeben yur sinz 'e teuk me vur 'iz weiv.

NER. Aa can proove aal 'at aa say.

LUC. All my naibours knowth ut.

NER. Owr town can well witness to it.

LUC. All Pezenas zeed us amarried.

NER. All Sin Quintin helpt at owr weddin'.

LUC. Thur cant be nort more saafur.

NER. Nowt can be more sartin.

LUC. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). Dis thee dare to zay ort gin
ut, yeu villun?

NER. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). Canst thou deny me, wicked man?

MR. POUR. One is as true as the other.

LUC. What eemperence! What, yeu rogue, yeu don't mind poor leedle
Franky an' poor leedle Jinny--they that be the outcomin's o' our
marridge?

NER. Joost look, there's cheek! What! thou's forgot yon poor cheel,
owr little Maggy, 'at thou's lef me for a pledge o' thy faith?

MR. POUR. What impudent jades!

LUC. Yur Franky! Yur Jinny, come both o' ee, come both o' ee, come
an' mak yur bad rascal of a father own to 'ow ee've asard all o' us.

NER. Coom hither, Maggy, maa cheel, coom heere quick, an' shame your
fayther of th' impudence 'at he's gotten.




SCENE X.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, ORONTE, LUCETTE, NERINE, SEVERAL
CHILDREN.

CHI. Fayther! fayther! fayther!

MR. POUR. Deuce take the little brats!

LUC. What yeu, villun, artn thee fit to drap, vur to tak to yur
chillurn arter jis farshin, an' to keep thee eyes vas, 'feerd thee
mids show lig a father teu 'em? Thee shetn git away vrom me, yeu
scaulus oseburd! I'll volly thee ivery place, and cry op thee
wickedness 'gin I've asard thee out, an' 'gin I've amade thee zwing.
Rascal, I sheud like vur to mak thee zwing vor't, an' that I sheud.

NER. Wilt not bloosh to spaik yon words, an' to tak no thowt o'th
kissin' o' yon poor cheel? Thou'lt not get clear o' ma claws; aa can
tell thee! an spoit o' thy showin' thy teeth, aa'l mak thee know 'at
aa'm thy woif, an' aa'l mak thee hang for it.

CHIL. Fayther! fayther! fayther!

MR. POUR. Help! help! Where shall I run?

ORO. Go; you will do right to have him punished, and he richly
deserves to be hanged.




SCENE XI.--SBRIGANI (_alone_).

Everything has been done according to my wish, and is succeeding
admirably. We will so weary out our provincial that he will only be
too thankful to leave the place.




SCENE XII:--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, SBRIGANI.

MR. POUR. Ah! I am murdered! What vexation! What a cursed town!
Assassinated everywhere!

SBRI. What is it, Sir? Has anything new happened?

MR. POUR. Yes; it rains doctors and women in this country.

SBRI. How is that?

MR. POUR. Two jabbering jades have just been accusing me of being
married to both of them, and have threatened me with justice.

SBRI. This is a bad business, for in this country justice is terribly
rigorous against that sort of crime.

MR. POUR. Yes; but even if there should be information, citation,
decree, and verdict obtained by surprise, default, and contumacy, I
have still the alternative of a conflict of jurisdiction to gain
time, and a resort to the means of nullity that will be found in the
court case.

SBRI. The very terms, and it is easy to see that you are in the
profession, Sir.

MR. POUR. I? Certainly not; I am a gentleman. [Footnote: Compare act
i. scene v.]

SBRI. But to speak as you do, you must have studied the law.

MR. POUR. Not at all. It is only common sense which tells me that I
shall always be admitted to be justified by facts, and that I could
not be condemned upon a simple accusation, without witnesses,
evidence, and confrontation with my adverse party.

SBRI. This is more clever still.

MR. POUR. These words come into my head without my knowledge.

SBRI. It seems to me that the common sense of a gentleman may go so
far as to understand what belongs to right and the order of justice,
but not to know the very terms of chicane.

MR. POUR. They are a few words I remember from reading novels.

SBRI. Ah! I See.

MR. POUR. To show you that I understand nothing of chicane, I beg of
you to take me to a lawyer to have advice upon this affair.

SBRI. Willingly. I will take you to two very clever men; but, first,
I must tell you not to be surprised at their manner of speaking. They
have contracted at the bar a certain habit of declaiming which looks
like singing, and you would think all they tell you is nothing but
music.

MR. POUR. It does not matter how they speak, as long as they tell me
what I wish to know!




SCENE XIII.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, SBRIGANI, TWO LAWYERS, TWO
ATTORNEYS, TWO SERGEANTS.

1ST LAWYER (_drawling out his words_).
  Polygamy's a case, you find,
  A case of hanging.

2ND LAWYER (_singing and speaking very fast_).
  Your deed
  Is plain and clear,
  And all the gear
  Of wigs and law
  Upon this flaw
  One verdict bear.
  Consult our authors,
  Legislators and glossators,
    Justinian, Papinian,
    Ulpian and Tribonian,
  Fernand, Rebuffe, Jean Imole, [*]
  Paul Castro, Julian Barthole, [*]
    Jason, Aloyat, and Cujas
    That mighty mind!
  Polygamy's a case, you'll find,
    A case of hanging.
[* Footnote: The French forms have been retained for the sake of the
rhyme.]

BALLET, _while the_ 2ND LAWYER _sings as before_.

  All nations civilised,
    French, Dutch, and English,
    Portuguese, Germans, Flemish,
    Italians and Spanish,
  By wisdom's sceptre swayed,
  For this the self-same law have made.
    The affair allows no doubt,
    Polygamy's a case,
    A case of hanging.

(MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, _irritated, drives them all away_.)




ACT III.

SCENE I.--ERASTE, SBRIGANI.


SBRI. Yes; everything is succeeding splendidly; and as his knowledge
of things is very shallow, and his understanding of the poorest, I
put him in such a terrible fright at the severity of the law in this
country, and at the preparations which were already set on foot to
put him to death, [Footnote: Bigamists were really put to death.]
that he is determined to run away, and in order the better to escape
from the people who, I have told him, are placed at the city gates to
stop him, he has decided upon disguising himself as a woman.

ERA. How I should like to see him dressed up in that way!

SBRI. Take care you carry out the farce properly; and whilst I go
through my parts with him, you go and.... (_Whispers to him_.)
You understand, don't you?

ERA. Yes.

SBRI. And when I have taken him where I mean.... (_Whispers_.)

ERA. All right.

SBRI. And when the father has been forewarned by me....
(_Whispers_.)

ERA. Nothing could be better.

SBRI. Here is our young lady. Go quickly; she must not see us
together.




SCENE II.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC (_as a lady_), SBRIGANI.

SBRI. For my part, I don't think any one can know you, and you look
exactly like a lady of birth.

MR. POUR. I am so astonished that in this province the forms of
justice should not be observed.

SBRI. Yes; as I have already told you, they begin by hanging a man,
and try him afterwards.

MR. POUR. What unjust justice!

SBRI. It is devilishly severe, particularly on this kind of crime.

MR. POUR. Still, when one is innocent?

SBRI. Ah me! They care little for that, and, besides, they have here
a most intolerable hatred for the people of your province; and
nothing gives them more pleasure than to hang a man from Limoges.
[Footnote: Moliere seems to have had a grudge against Limoges.
Compare act i. scene i.]

MR. POUR. What have the people from Limoges done to them?

SBRI. How do I know? They are downright brutes, enemies to all the
gentility and merit of other cities. For my part, I am in the
greatest fear on your account, and I should never comfort myself if
you were hanged.

MR. POUR. It is not so much the fear of death that urges me to fly as
the fact of being hanged, for it is a most degrading thing for a
gentleman, and would ruin one's title of nobility.

SBRI. You are right; after such a thing they would contest your right
of bearing a title of nobility. [Footnote: Noblemen were beheaded.]
But, be careful, when I lead you by the hand, to walk like a woman,
and to assume the manners and the language of a lady of quality.

MR. POUR. Leave that to me; I have seen people of high standing in
the world. The only thing that troubles me is that I have somewhat of
a beard.

SBRI. Oh! it's not worth mentioning. There are many women who have as
much. Now, let us just see how you will behave yourself. (MR. DE
POURCEAUGNAC _mimics a lady of rank_.) Good.

MR. POUR. Why, my carriage is not here! Where is my carriage?
Gracious me! how wretched to have such attendants! Shall I have to
wait all day in the street? Will not some one call my carriage for
me?

SBRI. Very good.

MR. POUR. Soho! there, coachman. Little page! Ah! little rogue, what
a whipping you will get by and by! Little page-boy! little page-boy!
Where in the world is that page-boy? Will that little page never be
found? Will nobody call that little page for me? Is my little page
nowhere to be found?

SBRI. Marvellous! But there is one thing that I see does not do. This
hood is a little too thin; I must go and fetch you a thicker one, to
hide your face better in case of any accident.

MR. POUR. What shall I do in the meantime?

SBRI. Wait for me here. I will be back in a moment; you have only to
walk about.

(MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC _walks forward and backward on the stage,
mimicking the lady of rank._)




SCENE III.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, TWO SWISS.

1ST SWISS (_without seeing_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). Come you, make
haste, mein comrad, ve vill, both of us, go to ze market-place; to
zee dis Porcegnac at de chustice, which him contemns to pe hung py de
neck.

2ND SWISS. (_without seeing_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). Ve moost hire
one vindow to zee dis chustice.

1ST SWISS. Man says dat zey alreaty a great new gallow plant hafe, to
hang dis Porcegnac to it.

2ND SWISS. It will pe, yes, a great pleazure to see dis Limossin
hung.

1ST SWISS. Ja! to see him vaggle de feet up zere pefor all de
peoples!

2ND SWISS. He pe one funny man, he pe; man says dat he married dree
times hafe.

1ST SWISS. Ze room fellow! he vant dree wifes all to himself! one
fery much pe quite enough for him.

2ND SWISS (_perceiving_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC.) Ah! goot tay,
missy.

1ST SWISS. Vat do you zere all by self.

MR. POUR. I am waiting for my servants, gentlemen.

2ND SWISS. You pe prooty, missy?

MR. POUR. Gently, sirs.

1ST SWISS. Missy, vill you come and amuse you on de market-place? Ve
will make you zee one little hanging fery prooty.

MR. POUR. I am much obliged to you.

2ND SWISS. It is a Limossin chentleman vat will hung pe fery prootily
at a great gallow.

MR. POUR. I am not desirous to see it.

1ST SWISS. You hafe one much funny prest....

MR. POUR. Ah! this is too much! and such odious things are not said
to a woman of my position.

2ND SWISS. You go avay.

1ST SWISS. Me vill let not you.

2ND SWISS. Put I vill, I tell ye. (_Both lay hold of_ MR. DE
POURCEAUGNAC _roughly_.)

1ST SWISS. I vill not let you.

2ND SWISS. You hafe told one fery mooch lie.

1ST SWISS. You hafe told one lie yourself.

MR. POUR. Help! help! police!




SCENE IV.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, THREE POLICE OFFICERS, TWO SWISS.

OFF. What is it? what is the meaning of this violence? and what are
you doing to this lady? Be off at once, unless you wish to be put in
prison.

1ST SWISS. Goot, you gone, you vill not hafe her.

2ND SWISS. Goot, you gone too, you vill not hafe her also.




SCENE V.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, THREE POLICE OFFICERS.

MR. POUR. I am much obliged to you, Sir, for saving me from those
insolent fellows.

OFF. Oh! oh! This is a face which is deucedly like that which was
described to me.

MR. POUR. It is not I, I assure you.

OFF. Oh! oh! what does this mean?

MR. POUR. I don't know.

OFF. What is it, then, that makes you say that?

MR. POUR. Nothing.

OFF. This manner of speaking is somewhat ambiguous, and you are my
prisoner.

MR. POUR. O, Sir, I pray!

OFF. No, no; to judge by your appearance and your manner of speaking,
you must be that Mr. de Pourceaugnac we are looking for, although you
are disguised in this manner, and you must come to prison at once.

MR. POUR. Alas!




SCENE VI.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, SBRIGANI, THREE POLICE OFFICERS.

SERI. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). Heavens! what does this mean?

MR. POUR. They have discovered who I am.

OFF. Yes, yes; I am delighted about it.

SERI. (_to the_ OFFICER). Ah, Sir! for my sake! do not take him
to prison; you know that we have been friends a long while.

OFF. I cannot help it.

SBRI. You are a man to hear reason, Is there no way of adjusting this
matter with the help of a few pistoles?

OFF. (_to his subordinates_). Go farther back.




SCENE VII.--MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC, SBRIGANI, A POLICE OFFICER.

SBRI. (_to_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC). You must give him some money
for him to let you go. Be quick.

MR. POUR. (_giving some money to_ SBRIGANI). Ah! cursed place.

SBRI. Here, Sir.

OFF. How much is there?

SBRI. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.

OFF. No; I have express orders.

SBRI. (_to the_ OFFICER, _who is going_). Pray wait. (_To
_ MR. DE POURCEAUGNAC) Be quick, give him as much again.

MR. POUR. But....

SBRI. Be quick, I tell you; don't waste time; you would be happy,
would you not, if you were hanged?

MR. POUR. Ah! (_Gives more money to_ SBRIGANI.)

SBRI. (_to the_ OFFICER). Here, Sir.

OFF. (_to_ SBRIGANI). I must go off with him, for I should not
be in safety here after this. Leave him to me, and don't stir from
this place.

SBRI. I beg of you to take the utmost care of him.

OFF. I promise you not to leave him one moment till I see him safe.

MR. POUR. (_to_ SBRIGANI). Farewell! This is the first honest
man I have found in this town.




SCENE VIII.--ORONTE, SBRIGANI.

SBRI. (_affecting not to see_ ORONTE). Ah! What a strange
adventure! What terrible news for a father! Poor Oronte, how much I
pity you! What will you say? How will you ever be able to bear with
such a misfortune?

ORO. What is it? Of what misfortune do you speak?

SBRI. Ah, Sir! This wretch of a Limousin has run away with your
daughter!

ORO. Run away with my daughter!

SERI. Yes; she became so infatuated with him that she has left you to
follow him. It is said that he has a charm to make all women fall in
love with him.

ORO. Quick! Justice! Let the police be set after them!




SCENE IX.--ORONTE, ERASTE, JULIA, SBRIGANI.

ERA. (_to_ JULIA). Come along; you shall come in spite of
yourself. I will put you in your father's hands. Sir, here is your
daughter, whom I had to take by force from the man with whom she was
running away; it is not for her sake that I did it, but entirely for
yours. For, after such conduct, I ought to despise her, and it is
enough to cure me altogether of my love.

ORO. Ah! infamous girl that you are!

ERA. (_to_ JULIA). How could you treat me in that way, after all
the proofs of affection I have given you? I do not blame you for
being obedient to your father's will; he is wise and judicious in all
he does; and I do not complain of him for having preferred another to
me. They told him that that other man was richer than I by four or
five thousand crowns, and four or five thousand crowns are a good
round sum, and are enough to make a gentleman break his word; but
that you should forget in a moment all the love I had for you, suffer
yourself to fall madly in love with the first new-comer, and
shamefully follow him; without the consent of your father, after all
the crimes that were charged upon him! It is what all the world will
condemn, and what my heart can never cease to reproach you with.

JUL. Well, yes; I fell in love with him, and I wanted to follow him,
since my father had chosen him to be my husband. Whatever you may
say, he is a very honest man, and all the crimes they accuse him of
are so many detestable falsehoods.

ORO. Be silent; you are an impertinent hussy, and I know better than
you.

JUL. They are some tricks they have played him, and (_showing_
ERASTE) it is he himself, no doubt, who managed it all, to disgust
you with him.

ERA. What! I should be capable of such a thing?

JUL. Yes, you.

ORO. Be silent, I tell you. You are a silly girl.

ERA. You need not think that I have any wish to prevent the match,
and that it is because I love you that I hastened to rescue you. I
have already told you that it is only because of the regard I have
for your father. I could not bear to see an honourable man exposed to
the shame of all the gossip that would be occasioned by such an
action.

ORO. I am truly and sincerely obliged to you, Sir.

ERA. Farewell, Sir! I had the greatest desire to enter into your
family; I did everything to deserve such an honour; but I have been
unfortunate, and you did not judge me worthy of that honour. It will
not prevent me from retaining towards you all those feelings of
esteem and regard which your person demands; and although I cannot be
your son-in-law, I shall always be at your service.

ORO. Stay. Your behaviour touches my heart, and I give you my
daughter in marriage.

JUL. I won't have any other husband than Mr. de Pourceaugnac.

ORO. And I will have you marry Eraste at once.

JUL. No; I will not.

ORO. I shall give it you about the ears.

ERA. No, no, Sir; don't use violence towards her, I pray you.

ORO. I will have her obey me, and I will show her that I am the
master.

ERA. Do you not see how fast in love she is with that man; and would
you have me possess the body while another has the heart?

ORO. He has thrown some charm upon her. You may be sure that she will
change before long. Give me your hand. Come.

JUL. No!

ORO. Ah! What, rebellion! Your hand, I tell you, at once. Ah!

ERA. Do not think that it is because of my love for you that I agree
to marry you; it is your father only I am in love with, and it is him
whom I marry.

ORO. I am truly obliged to you, and I add ten thousand crowns to my
daughter's portion. Quick; a notary to draw up the contract.

ERA. In the meanwhile, let us enjoy the pleasures of the season, and
fetch in those masks whom the report of Mr. de Pourceaugnac's wedding
has attracted hither.




SCENE X.--A BALLET





End of Project Gutenberg's Monsieur de Pourceaugnac, by Poquelin (Moliere)





This eBook was produced by David Starner, Michael Kaelbling,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




This series of SCANDINAVIAN CLASSICS was published by the
American-Scandinavian Foundation in the belief that greater
familiarity with the chief literary monuments of the North will
help Americans to a better understanding of Scandinavians, and
thus serve to stimulate their sympathetic co-operation to good
ends.

                *       *       *       *       *

                      SCANDINAVIAN CLASSICS

                           VOLUME XVII



                           EARLY PLAYS

                               by


                          HENRIK IBSEN

                *       *       *       *       *

                           EARLY PLAYS


                 CATILINE, THE WARRIOR'S BARROW,
                         OLAF LILJEKRANS


                               by

                          HENRIK IBSEN


                TRANSLATED FROM THE NORWEGIAN BY
                      ANDERS ORBECK, A. M.

      _Assistant Professor of English in the University
                           of Montana_

                *       *       *       *       *

                            _To

                          O. W. Firkins

                       Teacher and Friend
                         and Inspirer of
                       these Translations._

                *       *       *       *       *


                            CONTENTS


                          INTRODUCTION

                            CATILINE

                      THE WARRIOR'S BARROW

                         OLAF LILJEKRANS

                 LIST OF FOUNDATION PUBLICATIONS

                *       *       *       *       *


                          INTRODUCTION


One of the most remarkable facts about Ibsen is the orderly
development of his genius.  He himself repeatedly maintained that
his dramas were not mere isolated accidents.  In the foreword to
the readers in the popular edition of 1898 he urges the public to
read his dramas in the same order in which he had written them,
deplores the fact that his earlier works are less known and less
understood than his later works, and insists that his writings
taken as a whole constitute an organic unity.  The three of his
plays offered here for the first time in English translation will
afford those not familiar with the original Norwegian some light
on the early stages of his development.

_Catiline_, the earliest of Ibsen's plays, was written in
1849, while Ibsen was an apothecary's apprentice in Grimstad.  It
appeared in Christiania in the following spring under the
pseudonym Brynjolf Bjarme.  The revolutionary atmosphere of
1848-49, the reading of the story of Catiline in Sallust and
Cicero in preparation for the university examinations, the
hostility which existed between the apprentice and his immediate
social environment, the fate which the play met at the hands of
the theatrical management and the publishers, his own struggles
at the time,--are all set forth clearly enough in the preface to
the second edition.  The play was written in the blank verse of
Oehlenschlaeger's romantic dramas.  Ibsen's portrayal of the
Roman politician is not in accord with tradition; Catiline is not
an out-and-out reprobate, but an unfortunate and highly sensitive
individual in whom idealism and licentiousness struggle for
mastery.  Vasenius, in his study of the poet (_Ibsens
Dramatiska Diktning in dess Forsta Skede_, Helsingfors, 1879),
insists that Ibsen thus intuitively hit upon the real Catiline
revealed by later nineteenth century research.  The poet seems
not to have heard of Duma's _Catiline_, which appeared about
the same time, nor of earlier plays on the subject by Ben Jonson
and others.  The struggle in Ibsen's play is centered in the soul
of Catiline; not once do his political opponents appear on the
scene.  Only one critic raised his voice in behalf of the play at
the time of its appearance, and only a few copies of the original
edition survive.  Ibsen issued in 1875 a revised edition in
celebration of his twenty-fifth anniversary as an author.  Since
then a third edition has been issued in 1891, and a fourth in
1913.

_The Warrior's Barrow_, Ibsen's second play, was finished in
1850 shortly after the publication of _Catiline_.  Ibsen
entered upon his literary career with a gusto he seems soon to
have lost; he wrote to his friend Ole Schulerud in January, 1850,
that he was working on a play about Olaf Trygvesson, an
historical novel, and a longer poem.  He had begun _The
Warrior's Barrow_ while he was still at Grimstad, but this
early version, called _The Normans_, he revised on reaching
Christiania.  In style and manner and even in subject-matter the
play echoes Oehlenschlaeger.  Ibsen's vikings are, however, of a
fiercer type than Oehlenschlaeger's, and this treatment of viking
character was one of the things the critics, bred to
Oehlenschlaeger's romantic conception of more civilized vikings,
found fault with in Ibsen's play.  The sketch fared better than
_Catiline_: it was thrice presented on the stage in
Christiania and was on the whole favorably reviewed.  When Ibsen
became associated with the Bergen theater he undertook another
revision of the play, and in this version the play was presented
on the stage in 1854 and 1856.  The final version was published
in the _Bergenske Blad_ in 1854, but no copy of this issue
has survived; the play remained inaccessible to the public until
1902, when it was included in a supplementary volume (Volume X)
to Ibsen's collected works.  The earlier version remained in
manuscript form until it was printed in 1917 in _Scandinavian
Studies and Notes_ (Vol. IV, pp. 309-337).

_Olaf Liljekrans_, which was presented on the Bergen stage
in 1857, marks the end of Ibsen's early romantic interest.  The
original idea for this play, which he had begun in 1850, he found
in the folk-tale "The Grouse in Justedal," about a girl who alone
had survived the Black Death in an isolated village.  Ibsen had
with many others become interested in popular folk-tales and
ballads.  It was from Faye's _Norwegian Folk-Tales_ (1844)
that he took the story of "The Grouse in Justedal."  His interest
was so great that he even turned collector.  Twice during this
period he petitioned for and received small university grants to
enable him to travel and "collect songs and legends still current
among the people."  Of the seventy or eighty "hitherto
unpublished legends" which he collected on the first of these
trips only a few have ever appeared in print; the results of his
second trip are unknown.  Ibsen had great faith in the
availability of this medieval material for dramatic purposes; he
even wrote an essay, "The Heroic Ballad and Its Significance for
Artistic Poetry," urging its superior claims in contrast to that
of the saga material, to which he was himself shortly to turn.
The original play based on "The Grouse in Justedal" was left
unfinished.  After the completion of _Lady Inger of Ostrat_
and _The Feast at Solhoug_ he came back to it, and taking a
suggestion from the ballad in Landstad's collection (1852-3) he
recast the whole play, substituted the ballad meter for the
iambic pentameters, and called the new version _Olaf
Liljekrans_.  _Olaf Liljekrans_ indicates clearly a
decline in Ibsen's interest in pure romance.  It is much more
satirical than _The Feast at Solhoug_, and marks a step in
the direction of those superb masterpieces of satire and romance,
_Brand_ and _Peer Gynt_.  The play was twice presented
on the stage in Bergen with considerable success, but the critics
treated it harshly.

The relationship of the revised versions to the original versions
of Ibsen's early plays is interesting, and might, if
satisfactorily elucidated, throw considerable light on the
development of his genius.  It is evident that he was in this
early period experimenting in metrical forms.  He employed blank
verse in _Catiline_, in the original version of _The
Grouse in Justedal_, and even as late as 1853 in the revision
of _The Warrior's Barrow_.  There can be no question but
that he was here following the Ochlenschlaeger tradition.
Unrhymed pentameter, however, did not seem to satisfy him.  He
could with difficulty keep from falling into rhyme in
_Catiline_, and in the early version of _The Warrior's
Barrow_ he used rhymed pentameters.  After the revision of
this play he threw aside blank verse altogether.  "Iambic
pentameter," he says in the essay on the heroic ballad, "is by no
means the most suitable form for the treatment of ancient
Scandinavian material; this form of verse is altogether foreign
to our national meters, and it is surely through a national form
that the national material can find its fullest expression."  The
folk-tale and the ballad gave him the suggestion he needed.  In
_The Feast at Solhoug_ and the final version of _Olaf
Liljekrans_ he employed the ballad meter, and this form became
the basis for the verse in all his later metrical plays.

Six years intervened between _The Grouse in Justedal_ and
_Olaf Liljekrans_, and the revision in this case amounted
almost to the writing of a new play.  Fredrik Paasche in his
study (_Olaf Liljekrans_, Christiania, 1909) discusses the
relation of _Olaf Liljekrans_ to the earlier form of the
play.  Three years intervened between the first and final
versions of _The Warrior's Barrow_.  Professor
A. M. Sturtevant maintains (_Journal of English and Germanic
Philology_, XII, 407 ff.) that although "the influence of
Ochlenschlaeger upon both versions of _The Warrior's Barrow_
is unmistakable," yet "the two versions differ so widely from
each other ... that it may be assumed that ... Ibsen had begun to
free himself from the thraldom of Ochlenschlaeger's romantic
conception of the viking character."  He points out the influence
of Welhaven and Heiberg on the second version, elaborates upon
the superior character-delineation, and shows in considerable
detail the "inner necessity ... which brings about the change of
heart in Gandalf and his warriors."

The revision of _Catiline_ came twenty-five years after the
original version, and consisted largely of linguistic changes.
Ibsen seems never to have completely disowned this play; it has
been included in all the complete editions, whereas _The
Warrior's Barrow_ and _Olaf Liljekrans_ appear only in
the first complete edition, and were even then relegated to a
supplementary volume.  In suggesting the revision of
_Catiline_, Ibsen proposed "to make no change in the thought
and ideas, but only in the language in which these are expressed;
for the verses are, as Brandes has somewhere remarked, bad,--one
reason being that the book was printed from my first rough
uncorrected draft."  He had at that time not developed his
careful craftsmanship, and sought in the revision merely to put
the drama into the form which he had originally had in mind, but
which at that time he had been unable to achieve.  The changes
that were actually made are summarized by D. A. Seip (Ibsen,
_Samlede Digter Verker_, 1918, VII, 114) who quotes Halvdan
Koht and Julius Elias (Ibsen, _Efterladte Skrifter_, III):
"The two editions 'agree in the sequence of tenses, with a few
exceptions also in the sequence of speeches, and on the whole
even in the sequence of lines.  The changes involve principally
the poetic expression itself; after the second act they become
more and more extensive, and the last two acts have been
augmented with 100 lines.'  ...  Not infrequently there appear
words and expressions which are suggestive of Ibsen's later
works."

These plays now appear for the first time in English translation.
A. Johnstone published in _Translations from the Norse, by a
B. S. S._ (Gloucester, about 1876), an English rendering of
the first act of _Catiline_ and a synopsis of the last two
acts.  William Archer explains at length his omission of
_Catiline_ from his edition of Ibsen.  "A great part of the
interest lies in the very crudities of its style, which it would
be a thankless task to reproduce in translation.  Moreover, the
poet impaired even its biographical value by largely rewriting it
before publication.  He did not make it, or attempt to make it, a
better play, but he in some measure corrected its juvenility of
expression.  Which version, then, should a translator choose?  To
go back to the original would seem a deliberate disregard of the
poet's wishes; while, on the other hand, the retouched version is
clearly of far inferior interest.  It seems advisable, therefore,
to leave the play alone, as far as this edition is concerned."
_Olaf Liljekrans_ and _The Warrior's Barrow_ were acted
in English in London in 1911 and 1912 respectively, but the
English renderings used in these presentations have never
appeared in print.

The text of _Catiline_ in the present translation is that of
the revised version as given in the edition of 1906-07; the text
of the other two plays is that of the edition of 1898-1902.  The
meters of the original have been carefully reproduced.  The great
difficulty of rendering the ballad and lyrical meters of Ibsen
into adequate English verse has made some stylistic changes
necessary, such as the substitution of masculine for feminine
rhymes, and the occasional alteration of the sense in slight
measure.

I take this opportunity to acknowledge my gratitude to Professor
O. W. Firkins, now of _The Weekly Review_, who suggested the
translating of these plays and who offered from time to time
invaluable criticisms; to Professor Howard M. Jones, of the
University of Texas, Professor S. B. Hustvedt, of the University
of Minnesota, and Professor W. W. Lawrence, of Columbia
University, who read all or parts of these translations and made
many helpful suggestions; and to Professor G. P. Krapp, of
Columbia University, and my wife, who were of assistance in
various ways.

  ANDERS ORBECK.

_New York, January 3, 1921._

                *       *       *       *       *




                            CATILINE



                      A Drama in Three Acts



                              185O

                *       *       *       *       *


                  PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


The drama _Catiline_, with which I entered upon my literary
career, was written during the winter of 1848-49, that is in my
twenty-first year.

I was at the time in Grimstad, under the necessity of earning
with my hands the wherewithal of life and the means for
instruction preparatory to my taking the entrance examinations to
the university.  The age was one of great stress.  The February
revolution, the uprisings in Hungary and elsewhere, the Slesvig
war,--all this had a great effect upon and hastened my
development, however immature it may have remained for some time
after.  I wrote ringing poems of encouragement to the Magyars,
urging them for the sake of liberty and humanity to hold out in
the righteous struggle against the "tyrants"; I wrote a long
series of sonnets to King Oscar, containing particularly, as far
as I can remember, an appeal to set aside all petty
considerations and to march forthwith at the head of his army to
the aid of our brothers on the outermost borders of Slesvig.
Inasmuch as I now, in contrast to those times, doubt that my
winged appeals would in any material degree have helped the cause
of the Magyars or the Scandinavians, I consider it fortunate that
they remained within the more private sphere of the manuscript.
I could not, however, on more formal occasions keep from
expressing myself in the impassioned spirit of my poetic
effusions, which meanwhile brought me nothing--from friends or
non-friends--but a questionable reward; the former greeted me as
peculiarly fitted for the unintentionally droll, and the latter
thought it in the highest degree strange that a young person in
my subordinate position could undertake to inquire into affairs
concerning which not even they themselves dared to entertain an
opinion.  I owe it to truth to add that my conduct at various
times did not justify any great hope that society might count on
an increase in me of civic virtue, inasmuch as I also, with
epigrams and caricatures, fell out with many who had deserved
better of me and whose friendship I in reality prized.
Altogether,--while a great struggle raged on the outside, I
found myself on a war-footing with the little society where I
lived cramped by conditions and circumstances of life.

Such was the situation when amid the preparations for my
examinations I read through Sallust's _Catiline_ together
with Cicero's Catilinarian orations.  I swallowed these
documents, and a few months later my drama was complete.  As will
be seen from my book, I did not share at that time the conception
of the two ancient Roman writers respecting the character and
conduct of Catiline, and I am even now prone to believe that
there must after all have been something great and consequential
in a man whom Cicero, the assiduous counsel of the majority, did
not find it expedient to engage until affairs had taken such a
turn that there was no longer any danger involved in the attack.
It should also be remembered that there are few individuals in
history whose renown has been more completely in the hands of
enemies than that of Catiline.

My drama was written during the hours of the night.  The leisure
hours for my study I practically had to steal from my employer, a
good and respectable man, occupied however heart and soul with
his business, and from those stolen study hours I again stole
moments for writing verse.  There was consequently scarcely
anything else to resort to but the night.  I believe this is the
unconscious reason that almost the entire action of the piece
transpires at night.

Naturally a fact so incomprehensible to my associates as that I
busied myself with the writing of plays had to be kept secret;
but a twenty-year old poet can hardly continue thus without
anybody being privy to it, and I confided therefore to two
friends of my own age what I was secretly engaged upon.

The three of us pinned great expectations on _Catiline_ when
it had been completed.  First and foremost it was now to be
copied in order to be submitted under an assumed name to the
theater in Christiania, and furthermore it was of course to be
published.  One of my faithful and trusting friends undertook to
prepare a handsome and legible copy of my uncorrected draft, a
task which he performed with such a degree of conscientiousness
that he did not omit even a single one of the innumerable dashes
which I in the heat of composition had liberally interspersed
throughout wherever the exact phrase did not for the moment occur
to me.  The second of my friends, whose name I here mention since
he is no longer among the living, Ole C. Schulerud, at that time
a student, later a lawyer, went to Christiania with the
transcript.  I still remember one of his letters in which he
informed me that _Catiline_ had now been submitted to the
theater; that it would soon be given a performance,--about that
there could naturally be no doubt inasmuch as the management
consisted of very discriminating men; and that there could be as
little doubt that the booksellers of the town would one and all
gladly pay a round fee for the first edition, the main point
being, he thought, only to discover the one who would make the
highest bid.

After a long and tense period of waiting there began to appear in
the meantime a few difficulties.  My friend had the piece
returned from the management with a particularly polite but
equally peremptory rejection.  He now took the manuscript from
bookseller to bookseller; but all to a man expressed themselves
to the same effect as the theatrical management.  The highest
bidder demanded so and so much to publish the piece without any
fee.

All this, however, was far from lessening my friend's belief in
victory.  He wrote to the contrary that it was best even so; I
should come forward myself as the publisher of my drama; the
necessary funds he would advance me; the profits we should divide
in consideration of his undertaking the business end of the deal,
except the proof-reading, which he regarded as superfluous in
view of the handsome and legible manuscript the printers had to
follow.  In a later letter he declared that, considering these
promising prospects for the future, he contemplated abandoning
his studies in order to consecrate himself completely to the
publishing of my works; two or three plays a year, he thought, I
should with ease be able to write, and according to a calculation
of probabilities he had made he had discovered that with our
surplus we should at no distant time be able to undertake the
journey so often agreed upon or discussed, through Europe and the
Orient.

My journey was for the time being limited to Christiania.  I
arrived there in the beginning of the spring of 1850 and just
previous to my arrival _Catiline_ had appeared in the
bookstalls.  The drama created a stir and awakened considerable
interest among the students, but the critics dwelt largely on the
faulty verses and thought the book in other respects immature.  A
more appreciative judgment was uttered from but one single
quarter, but this expression came from a man whose appreciation
has always been dear to me and weighty and whom I herewith offer
my renewed gratitude.  Not very many copies of the limited
edition were sold; my friend had a good share of them in his
custody, and I remember that one evening when our domestic
arrangements heaped up for us insurmountable difficulties, this
pile of printed matter was fortunately disposed of as waste paper
to a huckster.  During the days immediately following we lacked
none of the prime necessities of life.

During my sojourn at home last summer and particularly since my
return here there loomed up before me more clearly and more
sharply than ever before the kaleidoscopic scenes of my literary
life.  Among other things I also brought out _Catiline_.
The contents of the book as regards details I had almost
forgotten; but by reading it through anew I found that it
nevertheless contained a great deal which I could still
acknowledge, particularly if it be remembered that it is my first
undertaking.  Much, around which my later writings center, the
contradiction between ability and desire, between will and
possibility, the intermingled tragedy and comedy in humanity and
in the individual,--appeared already here in vague
foreshadowings, and I conceived therefore the plan of preparing a
new edition, a kind of jubilee-edition,--a plan to which my
publisher with his usual readiness gave his approval.

But it was naturally not enough simply to reprint without further
ado the old original edition, for this is, as already pointed
out, nothing but a copy of my imperfect and uncorrected concept
or of the very first rough draft.  In the rereading of it I
remembered clearly what I originally had had in mind, and I saw
moreover that the form practically nowhere gave a satisfactory
rendering of what I had wished.

I determined therefore to revise this drama of my youth in a way
in which I believe even at that time I should have been able to
do it had the time been at my disposal and the circumstances more
favorable for me.  The ideas, the conceptions, and the
development of the whole, I have not on the other hand altered.
The book has remained the original; only now it appears in a
complete form.

With this in mind I pray that my friends in Scandinavia and
elsewhere will receive it; I pray that they will receive it as a
greeting from me at the close of a period which to me has been
full of changes and rich in contradictions.  Much of what I
twenty-five years ago dreamed has been realized, even though not
in the manner nor as soon as I then hoped.  Yet I believe now
that it was best for me thus; I do not wish that any of that
which lies between should have been untried, and if I look back
upon what I have lived through I do so with thanks for everything
and thanks to all.

  HENRIK IBSEN.

_Dresden, February, 1875._

                *       *       *       *       *


                       DRAMATIS PERSONA


LUCIUS CATILINE     A noble Roman.

AURELIA             His wife.

FURIA               A vestal.

CURIUS              A youth related to Catiline.

MANLIUS             An old warrior.

LENTULUS            Young and noble Roman.

GABINIUS              "    "    "    "

STATILIUS             "    "    "    "

COEPARIUS             "    "    "    "

CETHEGUS              "    "    "    "

AMBIORIX            Ambassador of the Allobroges.

OLLOVICO              "    "    "    "

                    An old MAN.

                    PRIESTESSES and SERVANTS in the Temple of
                    Vesta.

                    GLADIATORS and WARRIORS.

                    ESCORT of the Allobroges.

                    Sulla's GHOST.

                *       *       *       *       *


                             SETTING

The first and second acts are laid in and near Rome, the third
act in Etruria.

                *       *       *       *       *




FIRST ACT

[The Flaminian Way outside of Rome.  Off the road a
wooded hillside.  In the background loom the walls and
the heights of the city.  It is evening.]

[CATILINE stands on the hill among the bushes, leaning
against a tree.]

CATILINE.  I must!  I must!  A voice deep in my soul
Urges me on,--and I will heed its call.
Courage I have and strength for something better,
Something far nobler than this present life,--
A series of unbridled dissipations--!
No, no; they do not satisfy the yearning soul.

CATILINE.  I rave and rave,--long only to forget.
'Tis past now,--all is past!  Life has no aim.

CATILINE.  [After a pause.]
And what became of all my youthful dreams?
Like flitting summer clouds they disappeared,
Left naught behind but sorrow and remorse;--
Each daring hope in turn fate robbed me of.

[He strikes his forehead.]

CATILINE.  Despise yourself!  Catiline, scorn yourself!
You feel exalted powers in your soul;--
And yet what is the goal of all your struggle?
The surfeiting of sensual desires.

CATILINE.  [More calmly.]
But there are times, such as the present hour,
When secret longings kindle in my breast.
Ah, when I gaze on yonder city, Rome,
The proud, the rich,--and when I see that ruin
And wretchedness to which it now is sunk
Loom up before me like the flaming sun,--
Then loudly calls a voice within my soul:
Up, Catiline;--awake and be a man!

CATILINE.  [Abruptly.]  Ah, these are but delusions of the night,
Mere dreaming phantoms born of solitude.
At the slightest sound from grim reality,--
They flee into the silent depths within.

[The ambassadors of the Allobroges, AMBIORIX and OLLOVICO, with
their Escort, come down the highway without noticing CATILINE.]

AMBIORIX.  Behold our journey's end!  The walls of Rome!
To heaven aspires the lofty Capitol.

OLLOVICO.  So that is Rome?  Italy's overlord,
Germany's soon,--and Gaul's as well, perchance.

AMBIORIX.  Ah, yes, alas;--so it may prove betimes;
The sovereign power of Rome is merciless;
It crushes all it conquers, down to earth.
Now shall we see what lot we may expect:
If here be help against the wrongs at home,
And peace and justice for our native land.

OLLOVICO.  It will be granted us.

AMBIORIX.  So let us hope;
For we know nothing yet with certainty.

OLLOVICO.  You fear somewhat, it seems?

AMBIORIX.  And with good reason.
Jealous was ever Rome of her great power.
And bear in mind, this proud and haughty realm
Is not by chieftains ruled, as is our land.
At home the wise man or the warrior reigns,--
The first in wisdom and in war the foremost;
Him choose we as the leader of our people,
As arbiter and ruler of our tribe.
But here--

CATILINE.  [Calls down to them.]
--Here might and selfishness hold sway;--
Intrigue and craft are here the keys to power.

OLLOVICO.  Woe to us, brethren, woe!  He spies upon us.

AMBIORIX.  [To CATILINE.]
Is such the practice of the high-born Roman?
A woman's trick we hold it in our nation.

CATILINE.  [comes down on the road.]
Ah, have no fear;--spying is not my business;
By chance it was I heard your conversation.--
Come you from Allobrogia far away?
Justice you think to find in Rome?  Ah, never!
Turn home again!  Here tyranny holds sway,
And rank injustice lords it more than ever.
Republic to be sure it is in name;
And yet all men are slaves who cringe and cower,
Vassals involved in debt, who must acclaim
A venal senate--ruled by greed and power.
Gone is the social consciousness of old,
The magnanimity of former ages;--
Security and life are favors sold,
Which must be bargained for with hire and wages.
Not righteousness, but power here holds sway;
The noble man is lost among the gilded--

AMBIORIX.  But say,--who then are you to tear away
The pillars of the hope on which we builded?

CATILINE.  A man who burns in freedom's holy zeal;
An enemy of all unrighteous power;
Friend of the helpless trodden under heel,--
Eager to hurl the mighty from their tower.

AMBIORIX.  The noble race of Rome--?  Ah, Roman, speak--
Since we are strangers here you would deceive us?
Is Rome no more the guardian of the weak,
The dread of tyrants,--ready to relieve us?

CATILINE.  [Points towards the city and speaks.]
Behold the mighty Capitol that towers
On yonder heights in haughty majesty.
See, in the glow of evening how it lowers,
Tinged with the last rays of the western sky.--
So too Rome's evening glow is fast declining,
Her freedom now is thraldom, dark as night.--
Yet in her sky a sun will soon be shining,
Before which darkness quick will take its flight.

[He goes.]

                *       *       *       *       *

[A colonnade in Rome.]

[LENTULUS, STATILIUS, COEPARIUS, and CETHEGUS enter,
in eager conversation.]

COEPARIUS.  Yes, you are right; things go from bad to worse;
And what the end will be I do not know.

CETHEGUS.  Bah!  I am not concerned about the end.
The fleeting moment I enjoy; each cup
Of pleasure as it comes I empty,--letting
All else go on to ruin as it will.

LENTULUS.  Happy is he who can.  I am not blessed
With your indifference, that can outface
The day when nothing shall be left us more,
Nothing with which to pay the final score.

STATILIUS.  And not the faintest glimpse of better things!
Yet it is true: a mode of life like ours--

CETHEGUS.  Enough of that!

LENTULUS.  Today because of debt
The last of my inheritance was seized.

CETHEGUS.  Enough of sorrow and complaint!  Come, friends!
We'll drown them in a merry drinking bout!

COEPARIUS.  Yes, let us drink.  Come, come, my merry comrades!

LENTULUS.  A moment, friends; I see old Manlius yonder,--
Seeking us out, I think, as is his wont.

MANLIUS.  [Enters impetuously.]
Confound the shabby dogs, the paltry scoundrels!
Justice and fairness they no longer know!

LENTULUS.  Come, what has happened?  Wherefore so embittered?

STATILIUS.  Have usurers been plaguing you as well?

MANLIUS.  Something quite different.  As you all know,
I served with honor among Sulla's troops;
A bit of meadow land was my reward.
And when the war was at an end, I lived
Thereon; it furnished me my daily bread.
Now is it taken from me!  Laws decree--
State property shall to the state revert
For equal distribution.  Theft, I say,--
It is rank robbery and nothing else!
Their greed is all they seek to satisfy.

COEPARIUS.  Thus with our rights they sport to please themselves.
The mighty always dare do what they will.

CETHEGUS.  [Gaily.]  Hard luck for Manlius!  Yet, a worse mishap
Has come to me, as I shall now relate.
Listen,--you know my pretty mistress, Livia,--
The little wretch has broken faith with me,
Just now when I had squandered for her sake
The slender wealth that still remained to me.

STATILIUS.  Extravagance--the cause of your undoing.

CETHEGUS.  Well, as you please; but I will not forego
My own desires; these, while the day is fair,
To their full measure I will satisfy.

MANLIUS.  And I who fought so bravely for the glory
And might which now the vaunting tyrants boast!
I shall--!  If but the brave old band were here,
My comrades of the battlefield!  But no;
The greater part of them, alas, is dead;
The rest live scattering in many lands.--

MANLIUS.  Oh, what are you, the younger blood, to them?
You bend and cringe before authority;
You dare not break the chains that bind you fast;
You suffer patiently this life of bondage!

LENTULUS.  By all the Gods,--although indeed he taunts us,
Yet, Romans, is there truth in what he says.

CETHEGUS.  Oh, well,--what of it?  He is right, we grant,
But where shall we begin?  Ay, there's the rub.

LENTULUS.  Yes, it is true.  Too long have we endured
This great oppression.  Now--now is the time
To break the bonds asunder that injustice
And vain ambition have about us forged.

STATILIUS.  Ah, Lentulus, I understand.  Yet hold;
For such a thing we need a mighty leader,--
With pluck and vision.  Where can he be found?

LENTULUS.  I know a man who has the power to lead us.

MANLIUS.  Ah, you mean Catiline?

LENTULUS.  The very man.

CETHEGUS.  Yes, Catiline perchance is just the man.

MANLIUS.  I know him well.  I was his father's friend;
Many a battle side by side we fought.
Often his young son went with him to war.
Even his early years were wild and headstrong;
Yet he gave open proof of rare endowments,--
His mind was noble, dauntless was his courage.

LENTULUS.  We'll find him, as I think, most prompt and willing.
I met him late this evening much depressed;
He meditates in secret some bold plan;--
Some desperate scheme he long has had in mind.

STATILIUS.  No doubt; the consulate he long has sought.

LENTULUS.  His efforts are in vain; his enemies
Have madly raged against him in the senate;--
He was himself among them; full of wrath
He left the council--brooding on revenge.

STATILIUS.  Then will he surely welcome our proposal.

LENTULUS.  I hope so.  Yet must we in secret weigh
Our enterprise.  The time is opportune.

[They go.]

                *       *       *       *       *

[In the Temple of Vesta in Rome.  On an altar in the
background burns a lamp with the sacred fire.]

[CATILINE, followed by CURIUS, comes stealing in
between the pillars.]

CURIUS.  What, Catiline,--you mean to bring me here?
In Vesta's temple!

CATILINE.  [Laughing.]  Well, yes; so you see!

CURIUS.  Ye gods,--what folly!  On this very day
Has Cicero denounced you in the council;
And yet you dare--

CATILINE.  Oh, let that be forgotten!

CURIUS.  You are in danger, and forget it thus--
By rushing blindly into some new peril.

CATILINE.  [Gaily.]  Well, change is my delight.  I never knew
Ere now a vestal's love,--forbidden fruit;--
Wherefore I came to try my fortune here.

CURIUS.  What,--here, you say?  Impossible!  A jest!

CATILINE.  A jest?  Why, yes,--as all my loving is.
And yet I was in earnest when I spoke.
During the recent games I chanced to see
The priestesses in long and pompous train.
By accident I cast my roving eye
On one of them,--and with a hasty glance
She met my gaze.  It pierced me to the soul.
Ah, the expression in those midnight eyes
I never saw before in any woman.

CURIUS.  Yes, yes, I know.  But speak--what followed
then?

CATILINE.  A way into the temple I have found,
And more than once I've seen and spoken to her.
Oh, what a difference between this woman
And my Aurelia!

CURIUS.  And you love them both
At once?  No,--that I cannot understand.

CATILINE.  Yes, strange, indeed; I scarcely understand myself.
And yet--I love them both, as you have said.
But oh, how vastly different is this love!
The one is kind: Aurelia often lulls
With soothing words my soul to peace and rest;--
But Furia--.  Come, away; some one approaches.

[They hide themselves among the pillars.]

FURIA.  [Enters from the opposite side.]
Oh, hated walls,--witnesses of my anguish.
Home of the torment I must suffer still!
My hopes and cherished aspirations languish
Within my bosom,--now with feverish chill
Pervaded, now with all the heat of passion,
More hot and burning than yon vestal fire.

FURIA.  Ah, what a fate!  And what was my transgression
That chained me to this temple-prison dire,--
That robbed my life of every youthful pleasure,--
In life's warm spring each innocent delight?

FURIA.  Yet tears I shall not shed in undue measure;
Hatred and vengeance shall my heart excite.

CATILINE.  [Comes forward.]
Not even for me, my Furia, do you cherish
Another feeling,--one more mild than this?

FURIA.  Ye gods! you, reckless man,--you here again?
Do you not fear to come--?

CATILINE.  I know no fear.
'Twas always my delight to mock at danger.

FURIA.  Oh, splendid!  Such is also my delight;--
This peaceful temple here I hate the more,
Because I live in everlasting calm,
And danger never lurks within its walls.

FURIA.  Oh, this monotonous, inactive life,
A life faint as the flicker of the lamp--!
How cramped a field it is for all my sum
Of fervid longings and far-reaching plans!
Oh, to be crushed between these narrow walls;--
Life here grows stagnant; every hope is quenched;
The day creeps slowly on in drowsiness,--
And not one single thought is turned to deeds.

CATILINE.  O Furia, strange, in truth, is your complaint!
It seems an echo out of my own soul,--
As if with flaming script you sought to paint
My every longing towards a worthy goal.
Rancour and hate in my soul likewise flourish;
My heart--as yours--hate tempers into steel;
I too was robbed of hopes I used to nourish;
An aim in life I now no longer feel.

CATILINE.  In silence still I mask my grief, my want;
And none can guess what smoulders in my breast.
They scoff and sneer at me,--these paltry things;
They can not grasp how high my bosom beats
For right and freedom, all the noble thoughts
That ever stirred within a Roman mind.

FURIA.  I knew it!  Ah, your soul, and yours alone,
Is born for me,--thus clearly speaks a voice
That never fails and never plays me false.
Then come!  Oh, come--and let us heed the call.

CATILINE.  What do you mean, my sweet enthusiast?

FURIA.  Come,--let us leave this place, flee far away,
And seek a new and better fatherland.
Here is the spirit's lofty pride repressed;
Here baseness smothers each auspicious spark
Ere it can break into a burning flame.
Come, let us fly;--lo, to the free-born mind
The world's wide compass is a fatherland!

CATILINE.  Oh, irresistibly you lure me on--

FURIA.  Come, let us use the present moment then!
High o'er the hills, beyond the sea's expanse,--
Far, far from Rome we first will stay our journey.
Thousands of friends will follow you outright;
In foreign lands we shall a home design;
There shall we rule; 'twill there be brought to light
That no hearts ever beat as yours and mine.

CATILINE.  Oh, wonderful!--But flee?  Why must we flee?
Here too our love for freedom can be nourished;
Here also is a field for thought and action,
As vast as any that your soul desires.

FURIA.  Here, do you say?  Here, in this paltry Rome,
Where naught exists but thraldom and oppression?
Ah, Lucius, are you likewise one of those
Who can Rome's past recall without confession
Of shame?  Who ruled here then?  Who rule to-day?
Then an heroic race--and now a rabble,
The slaves of other slaves--

CATILINE.  Mock me you may;--
Yet know,--to save Rome's freedom from this babble,
To see yet once again her vanished splendor,
Gladly I should, like Curtius, throw myself
Into the abyss--

FURIA.  I trust you, you alone;
Your eyes glow bright; I know you speak the truth.
Yet go; the priestesses will soon appear;
Their wont it is to meet here at this hour.

CATILINE.  I go; but only to return again.
A magic power binds me to your side;--
So proud a woman have I never seen.

FURIA.  [With a wild smile.]  Then pledge me this; and
swear that you will keep
Whatever you may promise.  Will you, Lucius?

CATILINE.  I will do aught my Furia may require;
Command me,--tell me what am I to promise.

FURIA.  Then listen.  Though I dwell a captive here,
I know there lives a man somewhere in Rome
Whom I have sworn deep enmity to death--
And hatred even beyond the gloomy grave.

CATILINE.  And then--?

FURIA.  Then swear, my enemy shall be
Your enemy till death.  Will you, my Lucius?

CATILINE.  I swear it here by all the mighty gods!
I swear it by my father's honored name
And by my mother's memory--!  But, Furia,--
What troubles you?  Your eyes are wildly flaming,--
And white as marble, deathlike, are your cheeks.

FURIA.  I do not know myself.  A fiery stream
Flows through my veins.  Swear to the end your oath!

CATILINE.  Oh, mighty powers, pour out upon this head
Your boundless fury, let your lightning wrath
Annihilate me, if I break my oath;
Aye, like a demon I shall follow him!

FURIA.  Enough!  I trust you.  Ah, my heart is eased.
In your hand now indeed rests my revenge.

CATILINE.  It shall be carried out.  But tell me this,--
Who is your foe?  And what was his transgression?

FURIA.  Close by the Tiber, far from the city's tumult,
My cradle stood; it was a quiet home!
A sister much beloved lived with me there,
A chosen vestal from her childhood days.--
Then came a coward to our distant valley;--
He saw the fair, young priestess of the future--

CATILINE.  [Surprised.]  A priestess?  Tell me--!  Speak--!

FURIA.  He ravished her.
She sought a grave beneath the Tiber's stream.

CATILINE.  [Uneasy.]  You know him?

FURIA.  I have never seen the man.
When first I heard the tidings, all was past.
His name is all I know.

CATILINE.  Then speak it out!

FURIA.  Now is it famed.  His name is Catiline.

CATILINE.  [Taken aback.]
What do you say?  Oh, horrors!  Furia, speak--!

FURIA.  Calm yourself!  What perturbs you?  You grow pale.
My Lucius,--is this man perhaps your friend?

CATILINE.  My friend?  Ah, Furia, no;--no longer now.
For I have cursed,--and sworn eternal hate
Against myself.

FURIA.  You--you are Catiline?

CATILINE.  Yes, I am he.

FURIA.  My Sylvia you disgraced?
Nemesis then indeed has heard my prayer;--
Vengeance you have invoked on your own head!
Woe on you, man of violence!  Woe!

CATILINE.  How blank
The stare is in your eye.  Like Sylvia's shade
You seem to me in this dim candle light.

[He rushes out; the lamp with the sacred fire goes out.]

FURIA.  [After a pause.]  Yes, now I understand it.  From my eyes
The veil is fallen,--in the dark I see.
Hatred it was that settled in my breast,
When first I spied him in the market-place.
A strange emotion; like a crimson flame!
Ah, he shall know what such a hate as mine,
Constantly brewing, never satisfied,
Can fashion out in ruin and revenge!

A VESTAL.  [Enters.]  Go, Furia, go; your watch is at an end;
Therefore I came--.  Yet, sacred goddess, here--
Woe unto you!  The vestal fire is dead!

FURIA.  [Bewildered.]
Dead, did you say?  So bright it never burned;--
'Twill never, never die!

THE VESTAL.  Great heavens,--what is this?

FURIA.  The fires of hate are not thus lightly quenched!
Behold, love bursts forth of a sudden,--dies
Within the hour; but hate--

THE VESTAL.  By all the gods,--
This is sheer madness!

[Calls out.]

THE VESTAL.  Come!  Oh, help!  Come, help!

[VESTALS and temple SERVANTS rush in.]

SOME.  What is amiss?

OTHERS.  The vestal fire is dead!

FURIA.  But hate burns on; revenge still blazes high!

THE VESTALS.  Away with her to trial and punishment!

[They carry her out between them.]

CURIUS.  [Comes forward.]
To prison now they take her.  Thence to death.--
No, no, by all the gods, this shall not be!
Must she, most glorious of womankind,
Thus perish in disgrace, entombed alive?--
Oh, never have I felt so strangely moved.
Is this then love?  Yes, love it is indeed.--
Then shall I set her free!--But Catiline?
With hate and vengeance will she follow him.
Has he maligners not enough already?
Dare I still others to their number add?
He was to me as were an elder brother;
And gratitude now bids me that I shield him.--
But what of love?  Ah, what does it command?
And should he quake, the fearless Catiline,
Before the intrigues of a woman?  No;--
Then to the rescue work this very hour!
Wait, Furia;--I shall drag you from your grave
To life again,--though at the risk of death!

[He goes away quickly.]

                *       *       *       *       *

[A room in CATILINE's house.]

CATILINE.  [Enters impetuous and uneasy.]
"Nemesis then indeed has heard my prayer,
Vengeance you have invoked on your own head!"
Such were the words from the enchantress' lips.
Remarkable!  Perchance it was a sign,--
A warning of what time will bring to me.

CATILINE.  Now therefore I have pledged myself on oath
The blood avenger of my own misdeed.
Ah, Furia,--still I seem to see your eye,
Wildly aflame like that of death's own goddess!
Your words still echo hollow in my ears;--
The oath I shall remember all my life.

[During the following AURELIA enters and approaches him
unnoticed.]

CATILINE.  Yet, it is folly now to go on brooding
Upon this nonsense; it is nothing else.
Far better things there are to think upon;
A greater work awaits my energies.
The restless age is urgent with its plea;
Toward this I must direct my thought in season;
Of hope and doubt I am a stormy sea--

AURELIA.  [Seizes his hand.]
And may not your Aurelia know the reason?
May she not know what moves within your breast,
What stirs therein and rages with such madness?
May she not cheer and soothe your soul to rest,
And banish from your brow its cloud of sadness?

CATILINE.  [Tenderly.]  O, my Aurelia,--O, how kind and tender--.
Yet why should I embitter all your life?
Why should I share with you my many sorrows?
For my sake you have borne enough of anguish.
Henceforth upon my own head I shall bear
What ill-designing fate allotted me,--
The curse that lies in such a soul as mine,
Full of great spiritual energies,
Of fervent longings for a life of deeds,
Yet dwarfed in all its work by sordid cares.--
Must you, too, sharing in my wretched life,
Bitter with blasted hopes, then with me perish?

AURELIA.  To comfort is the role of every wife,
Though dreams of greatness she may never cherish.
When the man, struggling for his lofty dream,
Reaps nothing but adversity and sorrow,--
Her words to him then sweet and tender seem,
And give him strength sufficient for the morrow;
And then he sees that even the quiet life
Has pleasures which the most tumultuous lacks.

CATILINE.  Yes, you are right; I know it all too well.
And yet I cannot tear myself away.
A ceaseless yearning surges in my breast,--
Which only life's great tumult now can quiet.

AURELIA.  Though your Aurelia be not all to you,--
Though she can never still your restless soul,--
Your heart yet open to a gentle word,
A word of comfort from your loving wife.
Though she may never slake your fiery thirst,
Nor follow in their flight your noble thoughts,--
Know this, that she can share your every sorrow,
Has strength and fortitude to ease your burden.

CATILINE.  Then listen, dear Aurelia; you shall hear
What has of late depressed so deep my spirits.
You know, I long have sought the consulate--
Without avail.  You know the whole affair--
How to increase the votes for my election,
I have expended--

AURELIA.  Catiline, no more;
You torture me--

CATILINE.  Do you too blame my course?
What better means therefor had I to choose?--
In vain I lavished all that I possessed;
My one reward was mockery and shame.
Now in the senate has my adversary,
The crafty Cicero, trampled me to earth.
His speech was a portrayal of my life,
So glaring that I, even I, must gasp.
In every look I read dismay and fear;
With loathing people speak of Catiline;
To races yet unborn my name will be
A symbol of a low and dreadful union
Of sensuality and wretchedness,
Of scorn and ridicule for what is noble.--
And there will be no deed to purge this name
And crush to earth the lies that have been told!
Each will believe whatever rumor tells--

AURELIA.  But I, dear husband, trust no such reports.
Let the whole world condemn you if it will;
And let it heap disgrace upon your head;--
I know you hide within your inmost soul
A seed that still can blossom and bear fruit.
Only it cannot burst forth here in Rome;
Poisonous weeds would quickly prove the stronger.
Let us forsake this degradation's home;--
What binds you here?  Why should we dwell here longer?

CATILINE.  I should forsake the field,--and go away?
I should my greatest dreams in life surrender?
The drowning man still clutches firm and fast
The broken spars--though hope is frail and slender;
And should the wreck be swallowed in the deep,
And the last hope of rescue fail forever,--
Still clings he to the lone remaining spar,
And sinks with it in one last vain endeavor.

AURELIA.  But should a kindly seacoast smile on him,
With groves all green along the rolling billows,
Hope then awakens in his heart again,--
He struggles inward, toward the silvery willows.
There reigns a quiet peace; 'tis beautiful;
There roll the waves, in silence, without number;
His heated brow sweet evening breezes cool,
As weary-limbed he rests himself in slumber;
Each sorrow-laden cloud they drive away;
A restful calm his weary mind assuages;--
There he finds shelter and prolongs his stay
And soon forgets the sorry by-gone ages.
The distant echo of the world's unrest
Alone can reach his dwelling unfrequented.
It does not break the calm within his breast;--
It makes his soul more happy and contented;
It calls to mind the by-gone time of strife,
Its shattered hopes and its unbridled pleasures;
He finds twice beautiful this quiet life--
And would not change it for the greatest treasures.

CATILINE.  You speak the truth; and in this very hour
From strife and tumult I could go with you.
But can you name me some such quiet spot,
Where we can live in shelter and in peace?

AURELIA.  [Joyful.]  You will go, Catiline?  What happiness,--
Oh, richer than my bosom can contain!
Let it be so, then!  Come!  This very night
We'll go away--

CATILINE.  But whither shall we go?
Name me the spot where I may dare to rest
My head in homely peace!

AURELIA.  How can you ask?
Have you forgot our villa in the country,
Wherein I passed my childhood days, where since,
Enraptured during love's first happy dawn,
We two spent many a blithesome summer day?
Where was the grass indeed so green as there?
Where else the groves so shady and sweet-smelling?
The snow-white villa from its wooded lair
Peeps forth and bids us there to make our dwelling.
There let us flee and dedicate our life
To rural duties and to sweet contentment;--
You will find comfort in a loving wife,
And through her kisses banish all resentment.

[Smiling.]

AURELIA.  And when with all the flowers of the land
You come to me, your sovereign, in my bowers,
Then shall I crown you with the laurel band,
And cry, All hail to you, my king of flowers!--
But why do you grow pale?  Wildly you press
My hand,--and strangely now your eyes are glowing--

CATILINE.  Aurelia, alas, past is your happiness;--
There we can never, never think of going.
There we can never go!

AURELIA.  You frighten me!
Yet, surely,--you are jesting, Catiline?

CATILINE.  I jest!  Would only that it were a jest!
Each word you speak, like the avenging dart
Of Nemesis, pierces my heavy heart,
Which fate will never grant a moment's rest.

AURELIA.  O gods! speak, speak!  What do you mean?

CATILINE.  See here!
Here is your villa,--here your future joys!

[He draws out a purse filled with gold and throws it on the
table.]

AURELIA.  Oh, you have sold--?

CATILINE.  Yes,--all I sold today;--
And to what end?  In order to corrupt--

AURELIA.  O Catiline, no more!  Let us not think
On this affair; sorrow is all it brings.

CATILINE.  Your quiet-patience wounds me tenfold more
Than would a cry of anguish from your lips!

[An old SOLDIER enters and approaches CATILINE.]

THE SOLDIER.  Forgive me, master, that thus unannounced
I enter your abode at this late hour.
Ah, be not wroth--

CATILINE.  What is your errand here?

THE SOLDIER.  My errand here is but a humble prayer,
Which you will hear.  I am a needy man,
One who has sacrificed his strength for Rome.
Now I am feeble, can no longer serve;
Unused my weapons rust away at home.
The hope of my old age was in a son,
Who labored hard and was my one support.
Alas,--in prison now he's held for debt.
And not a ray of hope--.  Oh, help me, master!

[Kneeling.]

THE SOLDIER.  If but a penny!  I have gone on foot
From house to house; each door is long since closed.
I know not what to do--

CATILINE.  The paltry knaves!
A picture this is of the many's want.
Thus they reward the old brave company.
No longer gratitude is found in Rome!
Time was I might have wished in righteous wrath
To punish them with sword and crimson flames;
But tender words have just been spoken here;
My soul is moved; I do not wish to punish;--
To ease misfortune likewise is a deed.--
Take this, old warrior;--clear with this your debt.

[He hands him the purse with the gold.]

THE SOLDIER.  [Rising.]
O gracious lord,--dare I believe your words?

CATILINE.  Yes; but be quick, old man; go free your son.

[The SOLDIER goes hurriedly out.]

CATILINE.  A better use,--not so, Aurelia dear?--
Than bribery and purchasing of votes?
Noble it is to crush the tyrant's might;
Yet quiet solace too has its reward.

AURELIA.  [Throws herself in his arms.]
Oh, rich and noble is your spirit still.
Yes,--now I know my Catiline again.

                *       *       *       *       *

[An underground tomb with a freshly walled-in passage
high on the rear wall.  A lamp burns faintly.]

[FURIA, in long black robes, is standing in the tomb
as if listening.]

FURIA.  A hollow sound.  'Tis thunder rolls above.
I hear its rumble even in the tomb.
Yet is the tomb itself so still--so still!
Am I forever damned to drowsy rest?
Never again am I to wander forth
By winding paths, as ever was my wish?

FURIA.  [After a pause.]
A strange, strange life it was;--as strange a fate.
Meteor-like all came--and disappeared.
He met me.  A mysterious magic force,
An inner harmony, together drew us.
I was his Nemesis;--and he my victim;--
Yet punishment soon followed the avenger.

FURIA.  [Another pause.]
Now daylight rules the earth.--Am I perchance
To slip--unknowing--from the realm of light?
'Tis well, if so it be,--if this delay
Within the tomb be nothing but a flight
Upon the wings of lightning into Hades,--
If I be nearing even now the Styx!
There roll the leaden billows on the shore;
There silently old Charon plies his boat.
Soon am I there!  Then shall I seat myself
Beside the ferry,--question every spirit,
Each fleeting shadow from the land of life,
As light of foot he nears the river of death,--
Shall ask each one in turn how Catiline
Fares now among the mortals of the earth,--
Shall ask each one how he has kept his oath.
I shall illumine with blue sulphur light
Each spectral countenance and hollow eye,--
To ascertain if it be Catiline.
And when he comes, then shall I follow him;--
Together we shall make the journey hence,
Together enter Pluto's silent hall.
I too a shadow shall his shade pursue;--
Where Catiline is, must Furia also be!

FURIA.  [After a pause, more faintly.]
The air is growing close and clammy here,--
And every breath in turn more difficult.--
Thus am I drawing near the gloomy swamps,
Where creep the rivers of the underworld.

FURIA.  [She listens; a dull noise is heard.]
A muffled sound?  'Tis like the stroke of oars.
It is the ferryman of shades who comes
To take me hence.  No, here--here will I wait!

[The stones in the freshly walled-in passage are broken asunder.
CURIUS comes into view on the outside; he beckons to her.]

FURIA.  Ah, greetings, Charon!  Are you ready now
To lead me hence, a guest among the spirits?
Here will I wait!

CURIUS.  [Whispering.]  I come to set you free!

                *       *       *       *       *




SECOND ACT

[A room in CATILINE's house with a colonnade in the
rear; a lamp lights up the room.]

[CATILINE paces the floor back and forth; LENTULUS and
CETHEGUS are with him.]

CATILINE.  No, no!  I say, you do not understand
Yourselves what you demand of me.  Should I
Turn traitor and incite a civil war,--
Besmear my hand with Roman blood?  No, no!
I'll never do it!  Let the entire state
Condemn me if--

LENTULUS.  You will not, Catiline?

CATILINE.  No.

LENTULUS.  Tell me,--have you nothing to avenge?
No insult?  No one here you fain would strike?

CATILINE.  Let him who will avenge; I shall not stir.
Yet silent scorn is likewise a revenge;--
And that alone shall be enough.

CETHEGUS.  Aha,--
Our visit was, I see, inopportune.
Yet doubtless will the morrow bring you back
To other thoughts.

CATILINE.  But why the morrow?

CETHEGUS.  There are mysterious rumors in the air.
A vestal recently was led to death--

CATILINE.  [Surprised.]
A vestal,--say you?  Ah, what do you mean?

LENTULUS.  Why, yes, a vestal.  Many people murmur--

CATILINE.  What do they murmur?

CETHEGUS.  That in this dark affair
You are not altogether innocent.

CATILINE.  This they believe of me?

LENTULUS.  Such is the rumor;
Of course,--to us, to all your good old friends,
Such talk is trifling and of no account;--
The world, however, judges more severely.

CATILINE.  [Deep in thought.]  And is she dead?

CETHEGUS.  Undoubtedly she is.
An hour's confinement in the convict tomb
Is quite enough--

LENTULUS.  That is not our affair.
It was not therefore that we spoke of her.
But hear me, Catiline!  Bethink yourself.
You sought the consulate; and all your welfare
Hung on that single fragile thread of hope.
Now is it sundered; everything is lost.

CATILINE.  [Still deep in thought.]
"Vengeance you have invoked on your own head!"

CETHEGUS.  Shake off these useless thoughts; they profit naught;
Act like a man; still can this fight be won;
A bold resolve now--; you have friends enough;
Speak but the word, and we shall follow you.--
You are not tempted?  Answer!

CATILINE.  No, I say!
And why are you so eager to conspire?
Be honest!  Are you driven by thirst for freedom?
Is it in order to renew Rome's splendor
That you would ruin all?

LENTULUS.  Indeed, 'tis not;
Yet surely is the hope of personal greatness
Sufficient motive for our enterprise!

CETHEGUS.  And means enough to taste the joys of life
Are not, in truth, to be so lightly scorned.
That is my motive;--I am not ambitious.

CATILINE.  I knew it.  Only mean and paltry motives,
The hope of private vantage, urge you on.
No, no, my friends; I aimed at nobler things!
True, I have sought with bribes and promises
To seize ere now the consulate, and yet
My plan was greater and comprised much more
Than means like these would point to.  Civic freedom,
The welfare of the state,--these were my aims.
Men have misjudged, appearances belied me;
My fate has willed it so.  It must so be!

CETHEGUS.  True;  but the thought of all your many friends
Whom you can save from ruin and disgrace--?
You know, we shall ere long be driven to take
The beggars' staff because of our wild living.

CATILINE.  Then stop in season; that is my resolve.

LENTULUS.  What, Catiline,--now you intend to change
Your mode of life?  Ha, ha! you surely jest?

CATILINE.  I am in earnest,--by the mighty gods!

CETHEGUS.  Then there is nothing we can do with him.
Come, Lentulus, the others we'll inform
What answer he has given.  We shall find
The merry company with Bibulus.

CATILINE.  With Bibulus?  How many a merry night
We have caroused at Bibulus' table!
Now is the tempest of my wild life ended;
Ere dawns the day I shall have left the city.

LENTULUS.  What is all this?

CETHEGUS.  You mean to go away?

CATILINE.  This very night my wife and I together
Shall bid farewell to Rome forevermore.
In quiet Gaul we two shall found a home;--
The land I cultivate shall nourish us.

CETHEGUS.  You will forsake the city, Catiline?

CATILINE.  I will; I must!  Disgrace here weighs me down.
Courage I have to bear my poverty,
But in each Roman face to read disdain
And frank contempt--!  No, no; that is too much!
In Gaul I'll live in quiet solitude;
There shall I soon forget my former self,
Dull all my longings for the greater things,
And as the vaguest dream recall the past.

LENTULUS.  Then fare you well; may fortune follow you!

CETHEGUS.  Remember us with kindness, Catiline,
As we shall you remember!  To our brothers
We will relate this new and strange resolve.

CATILINE.  Then give them all a brother's hearty greeting!

[LENTULUS and CETHEGUS leave.]

[AURELIA has entered from the side, hut-stops frightened at the
sight of those who are leaving; when they are gone she
approaches CATILINE.]

AURELIA.  [Gently reprimanding.]
Again these stormy comrades in your house?
O Catiline--!

CATILINE.  This was their final visit.
I bade them all farewell.  Now every bond
Forevermore is broken that bound me fast
And fettered me to Rome.

AURELIA.  I've gathered up
Our bit of property.  Not much perhaps;--
Yet, Catiline, enough for our contentment.

CATILINE.  [Engrossed in thought.]
More than enough for me who squandered all.

AURELIA.  Oh, brood no more on things we can not change;--
Forget what--

CATILINE.  Happy he who could forget,--
Who could the memory tear from out his soul,
The many hopes, the goal of all desires.
Ah, time is needed ere I reach that state;
But I shall struggle--

AURELIA.  I shall help you strive;
You shall be comforted for all your loss.
Yet we must leave as soon as possible.
Here life calls to you with a tempter's voice.
Is it not so,--we go this very night?

CATILINE.  Yes, yes,--we leave this very night, Aurelia!

AURELIA.  The little money left I've gathered up;
And for the journey it will be enough.

CATILINE.  Good!  I shall sell my sword and buy a spade.
What value henceforth is a sword to me?

AURELIA.  You clear the land, and I shall till the soil.
Around our home will grow in floral splendor
A hedge of roses, sweet forget-me-nots,
The silent tokens of a chastened soul,
When as some youthful comrade you can greet
Each memory recurrent of the past.

CATILINE.  That time, Aurelia?  Ah, beloved, I fear--
That hour lies in a distant future's keeping.

CATILINE.  [In a milder tone.]
But go, dear wife, and, while you may, repose.
Soon after midnight we shall start our journey.
The city then is lapped in deepest slumber,
And none shall guess our hidden destination.
The first glow in the morning sky shall find us
Far--far away; there in the laurel grove
We'll rest ourselves upon the velvet grass.

AURELIA.  A new life opens up before us both--
Richer in happiness than this that's ended.
Now will I go.  An hour's quiet rest
Will give me strength--.  Good-night, my Catiline!

[She embraces him and goes out.]

CATILINE.  [Gazes after her.]
Now is she gone!  And I--what a relief!
Now can I cast away this wearisome
Hypocrisy, this show of cheerfulness,
Which least of all is found within my heart.
She is my better spirit.  She would grieve
Were she to sense my doubt.  I must dissemble.
Yet shall I consecrate this silent hour
To contemplation of my wasted life.--
This lamp,--ah, it disturbs my very thoughts;--
Dark it must be here,--dark as is my soul!

[He puts out the light; the moon shines through the pillars in
the rear.]

CATILINE.
Too light,--yes, still too light!  And yet, no matter;--
The pallid moonlight here does well befit
The twilight and the gloom that shroud my soul,--
Have ever shrouded all my earthly ways.

CATILINE.  Hm, Catiline, then is this day your last;
Tomorrow morning you will be no longer
The Catiline you hitherto have been.
Distant in barren Gaul my life shall run
Its course, unknown as is a forest stream.--
Now am I wakened from those many visions
Of power, of greatness, of a life of deeds;--
They vanished like the dew; in my dark soul
They struggled long and died,--unseen of men.

CATILINE.  Ah, it is not this dull and drowsy life,
Far from all mundane tumult, that affrights me.
If only for a moment I could shine,
And blaze in splendor like a shooting star,--
If only by a glorious deed I could
Immortalize the name of Catiline
With everlasting glory and renown,--
Then gladly should I, in the hour of triumph,
Forsake all things,--flee to a foreign strand;--
I'd plunge the dagger in my exiled heart,
Die free and happy; for I should have lived!

CATILINE.  But oh,--to die without first having lived.
Can that be possible?  Shall I so die?

[With uplifted hands.]

CATILINE.  A hint, oh angry powers,--that it is
My fate to disappear from life forgotten,
Without a trace!

FURIA.  [Outside behind the pillars.]  It is not, Catiline!

CATILINE.  [Taken aback.]
Who speaks?  What warning voice is this I hear?
A spirit voice from out the underworld!

FURIA.  [Comes forward in the moonlight.]  I am your shadow.

CATILINE.  [Terrified.]  What,--the vestal's ghost!

FURIA.  Deep must your soul have sunk if you recoil
From me!

CATILINE.  Speak!  Have you risen from the grave
With hatred and with vengeance to pursue me?

FURIA.  Pursue you,--did you say?  I am your shadow.
I must be with you wheresoe'er you go.

[She comes nearer.]

CATILINE.  She lives!  O gods,--then it is she,--no other,
No disembodied ghost.

FURIA.  Or ghost or not,--
It matters little; I must follow you.

CATILINE.  With mortal hate!

FURIA.  Hate ceases in the grave,
As love and all the passions do that flourish
Within an earthly soul.  One thing alone
In life and death remains unchangeable.

CATILINE.  And what?  Say forth!

FURIA.  Your fate, my Catiline!

CATILINE.  Only the gods of wisdom know my fate,--
No human being.

FURIA.  Yet I know your fate.
I am your shadow;--strange, mysterious ties
Bind us together.

CATILINE.  Bonds of hatred.

FURIA.  No!
Rose ever spirit from the dankest grave
For hate and vengeance?  Listen, Catiline!
The rivers of the underworld have quenched
Each earthly flame that raged within my breast.
As you behold me here, I am no longer
The stormy Furia,--wild and passionate,--
Whom once you loved--

CATILINE.  You do not hate me then?

FURIA.  Ah, now no more.  When in the tomb I stood,--
And faltered on the path that separates
This life from death, at any moment ready
To greet the underworld,--lo, seized me then
An eerie shuddering; I know not what--;
I felt in me a mystic transformation;--
Away flowed hate, revenge, my very soul;
Each memory vanished and each earthly longing;--
Only the name of "Catiline" remains
Written in fiery letters on my heart.

CATILINE.  Ah, wonderful!  No matter who you are,--
A human form, a shadow from the dead,--
There lies withal a dreadful fascination
In your dark eyes, in every word you speak.

FURIA.  Your mind is strong as mine; yet you give up,
Disheartened and irresolute, each hope
Of triumph and dominion.  You forsake
The battlefield, where all your inmost plans
Could grow and blossom forth into achievement.

CATILINE.  I must!  Inexorable fate decrees it!

FURIA.  Your fate?  Why were you given a hero's strength,--
If not to struggle with what you call fate?

CATILINE.  Oh, I have fought enough!  Was not my life
A constant battle?  What are my rewards?
Disgrace and scorn--!

FURIA.  Ah, you are fallen low!
You struggle towards a high and daring goal,
Are eager to attain it; yet you fear
Each trifling hindrance.

CATILINE.  Fear is not the reason.
The goal I sought is unattainable;--
The whole was but a fleeting dream of youth.

FURIA.  Now you deceive yourself, my Catiline!
You hover still about that single project;--
Your soul is noble,--worthy of a ruler,--
And you have friends--.  Ah, wherefore hesitate?

CATILINE.  [Meditating.]
I shall--?  What do you mean--?  With civil blood--?

FURIA.  Are you a man,--yet lack a woman's courage?
Have you forgot that nimble dame of Rome,
Who sought the throne straight over a father's corpse?
I feel myself a Tullia now; but you--?
Scorn and despise yourself, O Catiline!

CATILINE.  Must I despise myself because my soul
No longer harbors selfish aspirations?

FURIA.  You stand here at a cross-road in your life;
Yonder a dull, inactive course awaits you,--
A half-way something, neither sleep nor death;--
Before you, on the other hand, you see
A sovereign's throne.  Then choose, my Catiline!

CATILINE.  You tempt me and allure me to destruction.

FURIA.  Cast but the die,--and in your hand is placed
Forevermore the welfare of proud Rome.
Glory and might your silent fate conceals,
And yet you falter,--dare not lift a hand!
You journey yonder to the forests, where
Each longing that you cherished will be quenched.
Ah, tell me, Catiline, is there no trace
Of thirst for glory left within your heart?
And must this princely soul, for triumphs born,
Vanish unknown in yonder nameless desert?
Hence, then!  But know that thus you lose forever
What here you could by daring deeds attain.

CATILINE.  Go on, go on!

FURIA.  With trembling and with fear
The future generations will recall
Your fate.  Your life was all a daring game;--
Yet in the lustre of atonement it would shine,
Known to all men, if with a mighty hand
You fought your way straight through this surging
throng,--
If the dark night of thraldom through your rule
Gave way before a new-born day of freedom,--
If at some time you--

CATILINE.  Hold!  Ah, you have touched
The string that quivers deepest in my soul.
Your every word sounds like a ringing echo
Of what my heart has whispered day and night.

FURIA.  Now, Catiline, I know you once again!

CATILINE.  I shall not go!  You have recalled to life
My youthful zeal, my manhood's full-grown longings.
Yes, I shall be a light to fallen Rome,--
Daze them with fear like some erratic star!
You haughty wretches,--you shall soon discover
You have not humbled me, though for a time
I weakened in the heat of battle!

FURIA.  Listen!
Whatever be the will of fate,--whatever
The mighty gods decree, we must obey.
Just so!  My hate is gone;--fate thus decreed,
And so it had to be!  Give me your hand
In solemn compact!--Ah, you hesitate?
You will not?

CATILINE.  Will--?  I gaze upon your eyes:
They flash,--like lightning in the gloom of night.
Now did you smile!  Just so I've often pictured
Nemesis--

FURIA.  What?  Herself you wish to see,--
Then look within.  Have you forgot your oath?

CATILINE.  No, I remember;--yet you seem to me
A Nemesis--

FURIA.  I am an image born
From your own soul.

CATILINE.  [Meditating.]  What is all this you say?
I sense but vaguely what I fail to grasp;
I glimpse mysterious, strangely clouded visions,--
But can not understand.  I grope in darkness!

FURIA.  It must be dark here.  Darkness is our realm;--
In darkness is our rule.  Give me your hand
In solemn pledge!

CATILINE.  [Wildly.]  O lovely Nemesis,--
My shadow,--image of my very soul,--
Here is my hand in everlasting compact.

[He seizes her hand violently; she looks at him with a stern
smile.]

FURIA.  Now we can never part!

CATILINE.  Ah, like a stream
Of fire your touch went coursing through my veins!
'Tis blood no more that flows, but fiery flames;--
My breast now cabins and confines my heart;
My sight grows dull.  Soon shall a flaming sea
Illumine with its light the Roman state!

[He draws his sword and brandishes it.]

CATILINE.  My sword!  My sword!  Do you see how it flashes?
Soon will it redden in their tepid blood!--
What change is this in me?  My brow burns hot;
A multitude of visions flit before me.--
Vengeance it is,--triumph for all those dreams
Of greatness, regal power, and lasting fame.
My watch-word shall be: livid flames and death!
The capitol!  Now first I am myself!

[He rushes out; FURIA follows him.]

                *       *       *       *       *

[The inside of a dimly illumined tavern.]

[STATILIUS, GABINIUS, COEPARIUS, and other young
ROMANS enter.]

STATILIUS.  Here, comrades, we can while away the night;
Here we are safe; no one will overhear us.

GABINIUS.  Ah, yes; now let us drink, carouse, enjoy!
Who knows how long it will be granted us?

STATILIUS.  No, let us first await whatever tidings
Lentulus and Cethegus have for us.

GABINIUS.  Bah, let them bring whatever news they will!
Meanwhile the wine is here; come, let us taste.
Quick, brothers, quick,--let's have a merry song!

[SERVANTS bring in wine and glasses.]

THE ASSEMBLED FRIENDS.  (Sing.)

  Bacchus, all praise to thee!
  Joyful we raise to thee
  Brimful the beaker!
  Hail to thee, hail!
  Wine, red and glowing,
  Merrily flowing,
  Drink of the wine-god,--
  This be our song.

  Gracious and friendly
  Smiles father Liber;
  Drunkenness waits us;
  Clear is the wine.
  Come, do not tarry!
  Wine will make merry,
  Joyful and airy,
  Body and soul.

  Thou above all the
  Glittering bubbles,
  Sparkling Falernian,
  Glorious drink!
  Courage and power,
  These are your dower.
  Gladsome the gift you
  Bring to the soul.

  Bacchus, all praise to thee!
  Joyful we raise to thee
  Brimful the beaker!
  Hail to thee, hail!
  Wine, red and glowing,
  Merrily flowing,
  Drink of the wine-god,--
  This be our song.

[LENTULUS and CETHEGUS enter.]

LENTULUS.  Cease all your song and merriment!

STATILIUS.  What now?
Is Catiline not in your company?

GABINIUS.  Surely he was quite willing?

COEPARIUS.  Come, say forth!
What was his answer?

CETHEGUS.  Ah, quite otherwise
Than we expected was his answer.

GABINIUS.  Well?

LENTULUS.  Well, all of our proposals he declined;--
He would not even hearken to our counsels.

STATILIUS.  Is this the truth?

COEPARIUS.  And wherefore would he not?

LENTULUS.  In short, he will not.  He forsakes his friends,--
Abandons us,--and leaves the city.

STATILIUS.  What?
He leaves, you say?

CETHEGUS.  'Tis true;--he goes away
This very night.  Yet,--blamed he can not be;
His ground was valid--

LENTULUS.  Fear was his excuse!
In danger he forsakes us faithlessly.

GABINIUS.  That is the friendship of our Catiline!

COEPARIUS.  Never was Catiline faithless or afraid!

LENTULUS.  And yet he leaves us now.

STATILIUS.  Our hopes go with him.
Where's now the man to take the leadership?

COEPARIUS.  He'll not be found; our plan we must forego.

LENTULUS.  Not yet, not yet, my friends!  First you shall hear
What I will say.  Now what have we resolved?
That we should win at last by force of arms
What an unrighteous destiny denied.
Tyrants oppress us;--yet we wish to rule.
We suffer want;--yet wealth is our desire.

MANY VOICES.  Yes, wealth and power!  Wealth and power we want!

LENTULUS.  Yes, yes; we chose a comrade as our chief,
On whom there was no doubt we could rely.
Our trust he fails and turns his back to danger.
Ah, brothers,--be not daunted.  He shall learn
We can succeed without him.  What we need
Is some one man, fearless and resolute,
To take the lead--

SOME.  Well, name us such a man!

LENTULUS.  And should I name him, and should he comeforth,--
Will you then straightway choose him as your leader?

SOME.  Yes, we will choose him!

OTHERS.  Yes, we will, we will!

STATILIUS.  Then name him, friend!

LENTULUS.  Suppose it were myself?

GABINIUS.  Yourself?

COEPARIUS.  You, Lentulus--!

SEVERAL.  [In doubt.]  You wish to lead us?

LENTULUS.  I do.

CETHEGUS.  But can you?  Such a task requires
The strength and courage of a Catiline.

LENTULUS.  I do not lack the courage, nor the strength.
Each to his task!  Or will you now turn back,
Now when the moment seems most opportune?
'Tis now or never!  All things prophesy
Success for us--

STATILIUS.  Good;--we will follow you!

OTHERS.  We'll follow you!

GABINIUS.  Well, now that Catiline
Forsakes our cause, you are no doubt the man
To lead us in our enterprise.

LENTULUS.  Then hear
What plan of action I have outlined.  First--

[CATILINE enters hastily.]

CATILINE.  Here, comrades, here I am!

ALL.  Catiline!

LENTULUS.  He?
Oh, damned--

CATILINE.  Speak out,--what do you ask of me?
Yet stay; I know already what it is.
I'll lead you on.  Say--will you follow me?

ALL (EXCEPT LENTULUS).  Yes, Catiline,--we follow if you lead!

STATILIUS.  They have deceived us--

GABINIUS.  --and belied your name!

COEPARIUS.  They said you did intend to leave the city
And wash your hands completely of our cause.

CATILINE.  Yes, so I did.  Yet now no more; henceforth
Only for this great purpose do I live.

LENTULUS.  What is this mighty purpose you proclaim?

CATILINE.  My purpose here is higher than you think--
Perhaps than any thinks.  Ah, hear me, friends!
First will I win to us each citizen
Who prizes liberty and values most
The public honor and his country's weal.
The spirit of ancient Rome is yet alive;--
The last faint spark is not yet wholly dead.
Now into brilliant flames it shall be fanned,
More glorious than ever flames before!
Alas, too long the stifling gloom of thraldom,
Dark as the night, lay blanketed on Rome.
Behold,--this realm--though proud and powerful
It seems--totters upon the edge of doom.
Therefore the stoutest hand must seize the helm.
Rome must be cleansed,--cleansed to the very roots;
The sluggish we must waken from their slumber,--
And crush to earth the power of these wretches
Who sow their poison in the mind and stifle
The slightest promise of a better life.
Look you,--'tis civic freedom I would further,--
The civic spirit that in former times
Was regnant here.  Friends, I shall conjure back
The golden age, when Romans gladly gave
Their lives to guard the honor of the nation,
And all their riches for the public weal!

LENTULUS.  Ah, Catiline, you rave!  Nothing of this
Had we in mind.

GABINIUS.  What will it profit us
To conjure up again those ancient days
With all their dull simplicity?

SOME.  No, no!
Might we demand--

OTHERS.  --and means enough to live
A gay and carefree life!

MANY VOICES.  That is our aim!

COEPARIUS.  Is it for others' happiness and freedom
We stake our lives upon a throw of dice?

THE WHOLE GROUP.  We want the spoils of victory!

CATILINE.  Paltry race!
Are you the offspring of those ancient fathers?
To heap dishonor on your country's name,--
In such a way you would preserve its lustre!

LENTULUS.  And you dare taunt us,--you who long since were
A terrifying token--

CATILINE.  True, I was;
I was a terror to the good; and yet,
So paltry as you are was never I.

LENTULUS.  Restrain your tongue; we brook no ridicule.

MANY.  No, no,--we will not--

CATILINE.  [Calmly.]  So?  You timid brood,--
You dare to think of doing something,--you?

LENTULUS.  Ah, down with him!

MANY VOICES.  Yes, down with Catiline!

[They draw their daggers and rush in on him; CATILINE calmly
removes the cloak from his breast and regards them with a cold,
scornful smile; they lower their daggers.]

CATILINE.
Thrust!  Thrust!  You dare not?  Oh, my friends, my friends,--
I should respect you, if you plunged your daggers
In this uncovered bosom, as you threaten.
Is there no spark of courage in your souls?

SOME.  He means our weal!

OTHERS.  His taunts we have deserved.

CATILINE.  You have, indeed.--Yet, see,--the hour is come
When you can wash away the blot of shame.
All that is of the past we will forget;--
A new existence is in store for us.

CATILINE.  [With bitterness.]
Fool that I am!  To stake success on you!
Burns any zeal within this craven mob?

CATILINE.  [Carried away.]
Time was my dreams were glorious; great visions
Rushed through my mind or swept before my gaze.
I dreamed that, winged like Icarus of old,
I flew aloft beneath the vault of heaven;
I dreamed the gods endued my hands with strength
Of giants, offered me the lightning flash.
And this hand seized the lightning in its flight
And hurled it at the city far beneath.
And when the crimson flames lapped all, and rose
As Rome fell crumbling in a heap of ruins,--
Then called I with a loud and mighty voice,
And conjured Cato's comrades from the grave;
Thousands of spirits heard my call and came,--
Took life again--raised Rome from out her ashes.

[He breaks off.]

CATILINE.  These were but dreams!  Gods do not conjure up
The by-gone past into the light of day,--
And parted spirits never leave the grave.

CATILINE.  [Wildly.]  Is now this hand unable to restore
The ancient Rome, our Rome it shall destroy.
Where marble colonnades now towering stand,
Pillars of smoke through crackling flames shall whirl;
Then shall the Capitol crumble from its heights,
And palaces and temples sink to ruin!

CATILINE.  Swear, comrades, that you dedicate your lives
To this great purpose!  I shall take the lead.
Say,--will you follow me?

STATILIUS.  We'll follow you!

[Several seem to be in doubt, and speak in whispers to one
another.  CATILINE regards them with a scornful smile.]

LENTULUS.  [In an undertone.]
'Tis best we follow him.  In sunken ruins
We're likeliest to realize our goal.

ALL.  [Shouting.]  Yes, Catiline; we'll all--all follow you!

CATILINE.  Swear to me by the gods of our great sires
That you will heed my every nod!

THE WHOLE GROUP.  [With uplifted hands.]  Yes, yes;
We swear in all things blindly to obey!

CATILINE.  Then singly steal your way, by different paths,
Into my house.  Weapons you there will find.
I shall come later; you shall then discover
What plan of action I propose.  Now go!

[They all go out.]

LENTULUS.  [Detains CATILINE.]
A word!  Know you the Allobrogian tribes
Have to the Senate sent ambassadors
With grievances and charges?

CATILINE.  Yes, I know.
They came today into the city.

LENTULUS.  Good.
What if we should attune them to our plans?
With them all Gaul will rise up in revolt;
And stir up strife against our enemies.

CATILINE.  [Reluctant.]
Ah, we should seek barbarian allies?

LENTULUS.  But such a league is a necessity.
With our own strength alone the fight is lost;
Help from without--

CATILINE.  [With a bitter smile.]  Ah, Rome is fallen low!
Her walls no longer harbor men with strength
Enough to overthrow a tottering ruin!

[They go out.]

                *       *       *       *       *

[A garden to the rear of CATILINE's house, which is
visible through the trees.  To the left a
side-building.]

[CURIUS, CETHEGUS, and OTHER CONSPIRATORS enter
cautiously from the right in whispered conversation.]

CURIUS.  But is it really true what you relate?

CETHEGUS.  Yes, every word is true.  A moment since
It was decided.

CURIUS.  He takes charge of all?

CETHEGUS.  Of everything.  Just speak with him yourself.

[All, except CURIUS, enter the house.]

CURIUS.  An eerie night!  How all my thoughts are tossed
About in circles!  Did I dream perchance?
Ah, real or fancied,--now I am awake,--
Whichever way I turn I see her form.

[CATILINE enters from the right.]

CATILINE.  [Goes toward him.]
You here, my Curius?  I have missed you much.--
My visit with the vestal took a turn
Quite unexpected--

CURIUS.  [Confused.]  So?  Yes, you are right!

CATILINE.  I shall no longer think of this affair.
It was a visit fraught with fate for me.

CATILINE.  [Meditating.]
The furies, we are told, return at times
From the dark underworld to follow us
Through life forever.--Ah, if it were so!

CURIUS.  [Uneasy.]  What?  Have you seen her--?

CATILINE.  She was here tonight.--
Yet let this be forgotten.  Curius, listen,--
A weighty undertaking is on foot--

CURIUS.  I know it all.  Cethegus told me here--

CATILINE.  Who knows what issue for this work the gods
Have set?  Perchance it is my destiny
To perish now, crushed by malignant forces,--
And never reach my goal.  Well, be it so!
But you, dear Curius, you whom I have loved
Since childhood,--you shall not be drawn within
This fateful maelstrom.  Promise me,--remain
Within the city if I elsewhere choose
To open my attack,--which is quite likely;
Nor aid us till success has crowned our work.

CURIUS.  [Moved.]
Oh, what a friend and father!  All this care--!

CATILINE.  You promise this?  Then here we say farewell;
Wait but a moment; I shall soon return.

[He goes into the house.]

CURIUS.  [Gazing after him.]
He loves me still.  Of naught is he distrustful.

[LENTULUS and OTHER CONSPIRATORS enter from the right.]

LENTULUS.  Ah, Curius, did not Catiline just now
Pass through the garden?

CURIUS.  Yes, he is within.

[They go into the house.]

CURIUS.  [Paces about uneasy.]
How shall I curb this longing in my soul?
There is a restless turmoil in my blood.
Ah, Furia,--what a strange, mysterious woman!
Where are you?  When shall I see your face again?

CURIUS.  Where has she fled?  Ah, shadow-like she slipped
Away, when I had freed her from the grave.
And those mysterious, prophetic words,--
And more, her eyes, gleaming at once and dimmed--!
What if it were but madness?  Has the grave
With all its terror darkened--?

FURIA.  [Behind him among the trees.]  No, pale youth!

CURIUS.  [With a cry.]  My Furia!  You--?

FURIA.  [Comes nearer.]  Here dwells Catiline.
Where he is,--there must Furia also be.

CURIUS.  Oh, come with me, beloved.  I shall lead
You into safety.  Think--if some one saw you!

FURIA.  The dead need have no fear.  Have you forgotten--
You took my corpse and brought it from the grave?

CURIUS.  Again those terrifying words!  Oh, hear me;--
Come to your senses,--come with me away!

[He tries to seize her hand.]

FURIA.  [Thrusts him wildly back.]
You reckless fool,--do you not shrink with fear
Before this child of death, but risen up
A fleeting moment from the underworld?

CURIUS.  Before you now I fear.  And yet this fear,
This strange, mysterious dread, is my delight.

FURIA.  What would you me?  In vain is all your pleading.
I'm of the grave, and yonder is my home;--
With dawn's approach I must again be speeding
Back to the vale of shadows whence I come.
You doubt me,--do not think that I have sat
Among the pallid shades in Pluto's hall?
I tell you, I was even now below,--
Beyond the river and the gloomy marshes.

CURIUS.  Then lead me there!

FURIA.  You?

CURIUS.  I shall gladly follow,
Though you should lead me through the jaws of death!

FURIA.  It cannot be!  On earth we two must part;--
Yonder the dead and living dare not meet.--

FURIA.  Why do you rob me of my fleeting moments?
I've but the hours of night in which to work;
My task is of the night; I am its herald.
But where is Catiline?

CURIUS.  Ah, him you seek?

FURIA.  Yes, him I seek.

CURIUS.  Then him you still pursue?

FURIA.  Why rose I from the spirit underworld
Tonight, if not because of Catiline?

CURIUS.  Alas, this fury that has seized your soul--!
Yet you are lovely even in your madness.
Oh, Furia, think no more of Catiline!
Come, flee with me!  Command me,--I shall serve you!

[He prostrates himself before her.]

CURIUS.  A prostrate slave I here entreat of you
One single look.  Oh, hear me, Furia, hear me!
I love but you!  A sweet and lethal fire
Consumes my soul, and you--ah, you alone--
Can ease my suffering.--

FURIA.  [Looks towards the house.]  Yonder there's a light--
And many men.  What now is going on
Within the house of Catiline?

CURIUS.  [Jumps up.]  Again
This name!  Around him hover all your thoughts.
Oh, I could hate him--!

FURIA.  Has he then resolved
To launch at last the daring enterprise
He long has cherished?

CURIUS.  Then you know--?

FURIA.  Yes, all.

CURIUS.  Ah, then you doubtless know, too, he himself
Is foremost in this daring enterprise?
Yet, I adjure you, beg you, think no more
Of Catiline!

FURIA.  Answer me this alone;
'Tis all I ask of you.  Do you go with him?

CURIUS.  He is to me a tender father--

FURIA.  [Smiling.]  He?
My Catiline?

CURIUS.  Ah!

FURIA.  He,--round whom my thoughts
Course without rest?

CURIUS.  My brain is in a tumult--
I hate this man--!  Oh, I could murder him!

FURIA.  Did you not lately swear you were prepared
To do my bidding?

CURIUS.  Ask me what you will;
In everything I serve you and obey!
I only beg,--forget this Catiline.

FURIA.  I shall forget him first--when he has stepped
Into his grave.

CURIUS.  [Draws back.]  Ah, you demand that I--?

FURIA.  You need not use the steel; you can betray
His enterprise--

CURIUS.  Murder and treachery
At once!  Remember, Furia, he is still
My foster-father and--

FURIA.  --My aim in life!
Ah, timid fool,--so you dare speak of love,--
Who lack the fortitude to strike him down
That stands across your path?  Away from me!

[She turns her back on him.]

CURIUS.  [Holding her back.]
No;--do not leave me!  I am in all things willing!
A shudder chills me as I look on you;
And yet I cannot break this net asunder
Wherein you trapped my soul.

FURIA.  Then you are willing?

CURIUS.  Why do you mock me with such questioning?
If I am willing?  Have I any will?
Your gaze is like the serpent's when 'tis fixed
With magic power upon the bird, that circles
Wildly about in terror-stricken awe,
Drawn ever nearer to the dreadful fangs.

FURIA.  Then to your task!

CURIUS.  And when I've sacrificed
My friendship to my love for you,--what then?

FURIA.  I shall forget that Catiline existed.
Then will my task be ended.  Ask no more!

CURIUS.  For this reward I should--?

FURIA.  You hesitate?
Is then your hope so faint that you forget
What gifts a grateful woman can bestow,
When first the time--?

CURIUS.  By all the powers of night,--
I'll not delay!  He only stands between us.
Then let him perish!  Quenched is every spark
Of feeling for him; every bond is sundered!--
Who are you, lovely vision of the night?
Near you I'm turned to marble, burned to ashes.
My longing chills me,--terror fires the soul;
My love is blended hate and sorcery.
Who am I now?  I know myself no more;
One thing I know; I am not he I was,
Ere you I saw.  I'll plunge into the deep
To follow you!  Doomed--doomed is Catiline!
I'll to the Capitol.  This very night
The senate is assembled.  Then farewell!
A written note betrays his enterprise.

[He goes out hastily.]

FURIA.  [To herself.]
The heavens grow dark; soon will the lightning play.
The end is fast approaching, Catiline;--
With measured steps you journey to your grave!

[The Allobrogian ambassadors, AMBIORIX and OLLOVICO, come out of
the house without noticing FURIA, who stands half concealed in
the shade between the trees.]

AMBIORIX.  So then it is decided!  Venturesome
It was to enter into such a compact.

OLLOVICO.  True;
Yet their refusal of each righteous claim
Opens no other way to liberty.
The prize of victory,--should our friends succeed,--
Outweighs indeed the perils of the conflict
That now awaits us.

AMBIORIX.  Brother, so it is!

OLLOVICO.  Emancipation from the rule of Rome,--
Freedom long lost is surely worth a struggle.

AMBIORIX.  Now we must hasten homeward with all speed,
Kindling through Gaul the flames of insurrection.
It will be easy to persuade the tribes
To 'rise up in revolt; they'll follow us
And join the partisans of Catiline.

OLLOVICO.  Hard will the fight be; mighty still is Rome.

AMBIORIX.  It must be risked.  Come, Ollovico, come!

FURIA.  [Calls warningly to them.]  Woe unto you!

AMBIORIX.  [Startled.]  By all the gods!

OLLOVICO.  [Terrified.]  Ah, hear!
A voice cries warning to us in the dark!

FURIA.  Woe to your people!

OLLOVICO.  Yonder stands she, brother,--
The pale and ill-foreboding shadow.  See!

FURIA.  Woe unto all who follow Catiline!

AMBIORIX.  Home, home!  Away!  We'll break all promises!

OLLOVICO.  A voice has warned us, and we shall obey.

[They go out hurriedly to the right.]

[CATILINE comes out of the house in the background.]

CATILINE.  Ah, desperate hope--to think of crushing Rome
With such a host of cowards and poltroons!
What spurs them on?  With frankness they confess--
Their only motive is their want and greed.
Is it then worth the trouble for such aims
To shed men's blood?  And what have I to win?
What can I gain?

FURIA.  [Invisible among the trees.]  Revenge, my Catiline!

CATILINE.  [Startled.]
Who speaks!  Who wakes the spirit of revenge
From slumber?  Came this voice then from the deep
Within my soul?  Revenge?  Yes, that's the word,--
My watch-word and my battle-cry.  Revenge!
Revenge for all the hopes and all the dreams
Which ever a vindictive fate destroyed!
Revenge for all my years of wasted life!

[The CONSPIRATORS come armed out of the house.]

LENTULUS.  Still rest the shades of darkness on the city.
Now is it time to break away.

SEVERAL.  [Whispering.]  Away!

[AURELIA comes out of the side-building without noticing the
CONSPIRATORS.]

AURELIA.  Beloved,--are you here?

CATILINE.  [With a cry.]  Aurelia!

AURELIA.  Say,--
Have you been waiting for me?

[She becomes aware of the Conspirators and rushes to him.]

AURELIA.  Gracious gods!

CATILINE.  [Thrusts her aside.]  Woman, away from me!

AURELIA.  Speak, Catiline!
These many men in arms--?  And you as well--?
Oh, you will go--

CATILINE.  [Wildly.]  Yes, by the spirits of night,--
A merry journey!  See--this flashing sword!
It thirsts for blood!  I go--to quench its thirst.

AURELIA.  My hope,--my dream!  Ah, blissful was my dream!
Thus am I wakened from my dreaming--

CATILINE.  Silence!
Stay here,--or follow!  But my heart is cold
To tears and lamentations.--Friends, behold
How bright the full moon in the west declines!
When next that full moon in its orient shines,
An avalanche of fire shall sweep the state
And all its golden glory terminate.
A thousand years from now, when it shall light
Mere crumbling ruins in the desert night,--
One pillar in the dust of yonder dome
Shall tell the weary wanderer: Here stood Rome!

[He rushes out to the right; all follow him.]

                *       *       *       *       *




THIRD ACT

[CATILINE's camp in a wooded field in Etruria.  To the
right is seen CATILINE's tent and close by it an old
oak tree.  A camp fire is burning outside the tent;
similar fires are to be seen among the trees in the
background.  It is night.  At intervals the moon breaks
through the clouds.]

[STATILIUS lies stretched out asleep by the camp fire.
MANLIUS paces back and forth in front of the tent.]

MANLIUS.  Such is the way of young and buoyant souls.
They slumber on as peaceful and secure
As though embosomed in their mothers' arms,
Instead of in a forest wilderness.
They rest as though they dream some merry game
Were held in store for them when they awake,
Instead of battle,--the last one, perchance,
That will be theirs to fight.

STATILIUS.  [Awakes and rises.]  Still standing guard?
You must be weary?  I'll relieve you now.

MANLIUS.  Go rest yourself instead.  Youth needs his sleep;
His untamed passions tax his native strength.
'Tis otherwise when once the hair turns gray,
When in our veins the blood flows lazily,
And age weighs heavily upon our shoulders.

STATILIUS.  Yes, you are right.  Thus I too shall in time,
An old and hardened warrior--

MANLIUS.  Are you sure
The fates decreed you such a destiny?

STATILIUS.  And pray, why not?  Why all these apprehensions?
Has some misfortune chanced?

MANLIUS.  You think no doubt
That we have naught to fear, foolhardy youth?

STATILIUS.  Our troops are strongly reenforced--

MANLIUS.  Indeed,--
With fugitive slaves and gladiators--

STATILIUS.  Well,--
Grant that they are; together they may prove
No little aid, and all the tribes of Gaul
Will send us help--

MANLIUS.  --Which has not yet arrived.

STATILIUS.  You doubt that the Allobroges will keep
Their promised word?

MANLIUS.  I know these people well
From days gone by.  However, let that pass.
The day that dawns will doubtless bring to light
What destinies the gods have set for us.

MANLIUS.  But go the rounds, my friend, and ascertain
If all the guards perform their proper tasks.
For we must fend against a night attack;
We know not where the enemy makes his stand.

[STATILIUS goes into the forest.]

MANLIUS.  [Alone by the camp fire.]
The clouds begin to gather thick and fast;
It is a dark and storm-presaging night;--
A misty fog hangs heavy on my breast,
As though foreboding mishap to us all.
Where is it now, that easy carefree spirit
With which in former times I went to war?
Ah, can it be the weight of years alone
That now I feel?  Strange--strange, indeed,--last night
Even the young seemed sorely out of heart.

MANLIUS.  [After a pause.]
The gods shall know revenge was not the aim
For which I joined and followed Catiline.
My wrath flared up within me for a space
When first I felt I had been wronged, insulted;--
The old blood is not yet entirely cold;
Now and again it courses warmly through my veins.
But the humiliation is forgotten.
I followed Catiline for his own sake;
And I shall watch o'er him with zealous care.
Here stands he all alone amidst these hosts
Of paltry knaves and dissolute companions.
They cannot comprehend him,--he in turn
Is far too proud to wish to fathom them.

[He throws some branches on the fire and remains standing in
silence.  CATILINE comes out of the tent.]

CATILINE.  [To himself.]
Midnight approaches.  Everything is hushed;--
Only to my poor eyes sleep fails to come.
Cold is the night wind; 'twill refresh my soul
And give me strength anew--.  I sorely need it!

[He becomes aware of MANLIUS.]

CATILINE.  'Tis you, old Manlius?  And do you stand guard
Alone on such a night?

MANLIUS.  Oft have I stood
Guard over you in childhood's early days.
Say, do you not recall?

CATILINE.  Those days are gone;
With them, my peace; wherever now I go,
I'm haunted by a multitude of visions.
All things find shelter in my bosom, Manlius;--
Save peace alone.  That--that is far away.

MANLIUS.  Cast off these gloomy thoughts and take your rest!
Remember that the morrow may require
Your utmost strength for our deliverance.

CATILINE.  I cannot rest.  If I but close my eyes
One fleeting moment in forgetful slumber,
I'm tossed about in strange, fantastic dreams.
Here on my couch I lay now, half asleep,
When these same visions reappeared again,
More strange than ever,--more mysterious
And puzzling--.  Ah, if I could only know
What this forebodes!  But no--

MANLIUS.  Confide your dream
To me.  Perhaps I can expound its meaning.

CATILINE.  [After a pause.]
If I slept or if I waked, scarcely can I say;
Visions fast pursued each other in a mad array.
Soon a deepening twilight settles over everything;
And a night swoops down upon me on her wide-spread wing,
Terrible and dark, unpierced, save by the lightning's flare;
I am in a grave-like dungeon, filled with clammy air.
Lofty is the ceiling and with thunderclouds o'ercast;
Multitudes of shadow forms go racing wildly past,
Whirl around in roaring eddies, as the ocean wave
Draws the raging storm and breaks against a rocky cave.
Yet amid this frenzied tumult children often come,
Decked in flowers, singing of a half-forgotten home.
Soon the darkness round them changes to a vivid glare,--
Dimly in the center I descry a lonely pair;
Ah, two women,--stern the one and gloomy as the night,--
And the other gentle, like the evening in its flight.
How familiar to my eyes the two lone figures seemed!
With her smiling countenance the one upon me beamed;
Like the zigzag lightning flashed the other's piercing eye;
Terror seized my soul,--yet on I gazed in ecstasy.
Proudly upright stands the one, the other leans in weariness
On the solitary table, where they play a game of chess.
Pawns they barter, or they move them now from place to place;--
Then the game is lost and won,--she fades away in space,--
She who radiantly smiled, ah, she who lost the game;
Instantly the bands of children vanish whence they came.
Tumult rises; darkness deepens; but from out the night
Two eyes fix upon me, in a victor's gloating right;
Then my brain reels; I see nothing but those baleful eyes.
But what else I dreamed of in that frenzied slumber lies
Far within me hidden, buried deep beyond recall.
Could I but remember.  Gone forever is it all.

MANLIUS.  Remarkable, indeed, my Catiline,
Is this your dream.

CATILINE.  [Meditating.]  If I could but remember--
But no; my memory fails me--

MANLIUS.  Brood no longer
Upon these thoughts.  For what are dreams, indeed,
But pale chimeras only, darkling visions,
On nothing founded, and by naught explained?

CATILINE.  Yes, you are right; I will no longer brood;--
Already I am calm.  But go your way;
You need some rest.  The meanwhile I shall walk
In privacy and meditate my plans.

[MANLIUS goes into the forest.]

CATILINE.  [Paces for some time back and forth by the
camp fire, which is about to go out; then he stops and
speaks thoughtfully.]  If I could only--.  Ah, it is unmanly
To brood and be distressed by thoughts like these.
And yet,--here in the stillness of the night,
This lonely solitude, again I see
Rising before me life-like all I dreamed.

[A SHADOW, attired like an old warrior in armor and toga, stems
to rise from the earth among the trees a short distance from
him.]

CATILINE.  [Recoils before THE SHADOW.]
Great powers of heaven--!

THE SHADOW.  Greetings, Catiline!

CATILINE.  What will you have?  Who are you, pallid shade?

THE SHADOW.  One moment!  It is here my right to question,--
And you shall answer.  Do you no longer know
This voice from ages long since passed away?

CATILINE.  Methinks I do; yet certain I am not--.
But speak, whom seek you at this midnight hour?

THE SHADOW.  'Tis you I seek.  Know that this hour alone
Is granted me as respite here on earth.

CATILINE.  By all the gods!  Who are you?  Speak!

THE SHADOW.  Be calm!
Hither I come to call you to account.
Why do you envy me the peace of death?
Why do you drive me from my earthy dwelling?
Why do you mar my rest with memories,
That I must seek you, whisper menaces,
To guard the honor I so dearly bought?

CATILINE.  Alas! this voice--!  Somehow I seem to know--

THE SHADOW.  What is there left of my imperial power?
A shadow like myself; yes, scarcely that.
Both sank into the grave--and came to naught.
'Twas dearly bought; dear, dear was it attained.
For it I sacrificed all peace in life,
And waived all claims to peace beyond the grave.
And now you come and want to wrest from me
With daring hands what little I have left.
Are there not paths enough to noble deeds?
Why must you choose the one that I have chosen?
I gave up everything in life to power;
My name--so dreamed I--should forever stand,
Not beaming like a star with friendly lustre,--
No, like a flash against the midnight sky!
I did not covet fame, the goal of hundreds,
For magnanimity and noble deeds;
Nor admiration;--far too many share
That fate already: so will many more
Until the end of time.  Of blood and horror
I wished to build me my renown and fame.
With silent dread, as on some meteor
That now appears in mystery and is gone
Again,--men should gaze back upon my life,
And look askance on me, whom no one ever,
Before or since then, dared to emulate.
Yes, thus I dreamed and dreamed,--and was deceived.
Why did I not surmise, when you stood near me,
The secret thoughts then growing in your soul.
Yet, Catiline, beware; know that I see
Beyond the veil that hides from you the future.
Written among the stars--I read your fate!

CATILINE.  You read my fate?  Expound it then to me!

THE SHADOW.  No, first beyond death's gloomy gate
  Shall fade away the mists that hide
  The gruesome and the nobly great,
  Borne ever on by time and tide.
  This from thy book of fate alone
  A liberated soul may tell thee:
  Perish thou shalt by deed thine own,
  And yet a stranger's hand shall fell thee.

[THE SHADOW glides away as in a mist.]

CATILINE.  [After a pause.]
Ah, he has vanished.  Was it but a dream?
No, no; even here he stood; the moonbeams played
Upon his sallow visage.  Yes, I knew him!
It was the man of blood, the old dictator,
Who sallied from his grave to frighten me.
He feared lest he should lose the victor's crown,--
Not the reward of honor, but the terror
Whereby his memory lives.  Are bloodless shades
Spurred onward also by the thought of glory?

[Paces to and fro uneasily.]

CATILINE.  All things storm in upon me.  Now Aurelia
In gentle admonition speaks,--and now
In me reechoes Furia's warning cry.
Nay, more than that;--out of the grave appear
The pallid shadows of a by-gone age.
They threaten me.  I should now stop and pause?
I should turn back?  No.  I shall venture on
Unfaltering;--the victory soon is mine!

[CURIUS comes through the forest in great agitation.]

CURIUS.  O Catiline--!

CATILINE.  [Surprised.]  What, you,--you here, my friend!

CURIUS.  I had to--

CATILINE.  Wherefore staid you not in town?

CURIUS.  Fear prompted me; I had to seek you here.

CATILINE.  You rush for my sake blindly into danger.
You thoughtless lad!  Yet, come into my arms!

[Moves to embrace him.]

CURIUS.  [Draws back.]
No!  Do not touch me!  Do not even come near me!

CATILINE.  What ails you, my dear Curius?

CURIUS.  Up!  Break camp!
Flee, if you can, even this very hour!
On every highway come the enemy troops;
Your camp is being surrounded.

CATILINE.  Calm yourself;
You rave.  Speak, has the journey shaken you--?

CURIUS.  Oh no; but save yourself while there is time!
You are betrayed--

[Prostrates himself before him.]

CATILINE.  [Starts back.]  Betrayed!  What are you saying?

CURIUS.  Betrayed by one in friendly guise!

CATILINE.  You err;
These stormy friends are loyal even as you.

CURIUS.  Then woe to you for all their loyalty!

CATILINE.  Compose yourself!  It is your love for me,
Your interest in my safety, that has wakened
Imaginary dangers in your mind.

CURIUS.  Oh, do you know these words do murder me?
But flee!  I do entreat you earnestly--

CATILINE.  Be calm and speak your mind.  Why should I flee?
The enemy knows not where I make my stand.

CURIUS.  Indeed he does,--he knows your every plan!

CATILINE.  What, are you mad?  He knows--?  Impossible!

CURIUS.  Oh, were it so!  But use the hour remaining;
Still you may save yourself perhaps in flight!

CATILINE.  Betrayed?  No,--ten times no; impossible!

CURIUS.  [Seizes his dagger and holds it out to him.]
Catiline, plunge this dagger in my bosom;--
Straight through the heart!  'Twas I betrayed your plans!

CATILINE.  You?  What madness!

CURIUS.  Yes, it was in madness!
Ask not the reason; scarce I know myself;
I say,--I have revealed your every counsel.

CATILINE.  [In bitter grief.]
Now have you killed my faith in sacred friendship!

CURIUS.  Oh, send the dagger home, and torture me
No longer with forbearance--!

CATILINE.  [Kindly.]  Live, my Curius!
Arise!  You erred;--but I forgive you all.

CURIUS.  [Overcome.]
O Catiline, my heart is crushed with grief--!
But hasten; flee!  There is no time to tarry.
Soon will the Roman troops invade your camp;
They're under way; on every side they come.

CATILINE.  Our comrades in the city--?

CURIUS.  They are captured;--
Some were imprisoned, most of them were killed!

CATILINE.  [To himself.]  What fate--what fate!

CURIUS.  [Again holds out the dagger to him.]
Then plunge it in my heart!

CATILINE.  [Looks at him calmly.]  No, you were but a tool.
You acted well--

CURIUS.  Oh, let me die and expiate my sin!

CATILINE.  I have forgiven you.

CATILINE.  [As he goes.]  But one thing now
Is there to choose!

CURIUS.  [Jumps up.]  Yes, flight!

CATILINE.  Heroic death!

[He goes away through the forest.]

CURIUS.  'Tis all in vain!  Ruin awaits him here.
This mildness is a tenfold punishment!
I'll follow him; one thing I shall be granted:--
To perish fighting by the hero's side!

[He rushes out.  LENTULUS and TWO GLADIATORS come stealing among
the trees.]

LENTULUS.  [Softly.]  Some one was speaking--

ONE OF THE GLADIATORS.  Aye, but now all's quiet.

THE OTHER GLADIATOR.  Perchance it was the sentinel relieved
Of duty.

LENTULUS.  That may be.  This is the place;
Here shall you wait.  Are both your weapons sharp,
Ground for their purpose?

THE FIRST GLADIATOR.  Bright as is the lightning!

THE SECOND GLADIATOR.
Mine, too, cuts well.  In the last Roman games
Two gladiators died beneath this sword.

LENTULUS.  Then stand you ready in this thicket here.
And when a man, whom I shall designate,
Goes toward the tent, then shall you rush out quick
And strike him from behind.

THE FIRST GLADIATOR.  It shall be done!

[Both GLADIATORS conceal themselves; LENTULUS goes spying
around.]

LENTULUS.  [To himself.]
It is a daring game I here attempt;--
Yet must it be performed this very night,
If done at all.--If Catiline should fall,
No one can lead them on except myself;
I'll purchase them with golden promises,
And march without delay upon the city,
Where still the senate, struck with panic fear,
Neglects to arm itself against the danger.

[He goes in among the trees.]

THE FIRST GLADIATOR.  [Softly to the other.]
Who is this stranger we must fall upon?

THE SECOND GLADIATOR.  What matters it to us who he may be?
Lentulus pays our hire; the blame is his:
He must himself defend the act we do.

LENTULUS.  [Returns quickly.]
Stand ready now; the man we wait is coming!

[LENTULUS and the GLADIATORS lie in wait among the bushes.]

[Soon after, CATILINE comes through the forest and goes toward
the tent.]

LENTULUS.  [Whispering.]
Out!  Fall upon him!  Strike him from behind!

[All three rush on CATILINE.]

CATILINE.  [Draws his sword and defends himself.]
Ah, scoundrels,--do you dare to--?

LENTULUS.  [To the GLADIATORS.]  Cut him down!

CATILINE.  [Recognizes him.]
You, Lentulus, would murder Catiline?

THE FIRST GLADIATOR.  [Terrified.]  He it is!

THE SECOND GLADIATOR.  [Draws back.]  Catiline!  I'll never use
The sword on him.  Come flee!

[Both GLADIATORS make their escape.]

LENTULUS.  Then die by mine!

[They fight; CATILINE strikes the sword from the hand of
Lentulus; the latter tries to escape, but CATILINE holds him
fast.]

CATILINE.  Murderer!  Traitor!

LENTULUS.  [Entreating.]  Mercy, Catiline!

CATILINE.  I spell your plans upon your countenance.
You wished to murder me, and put yourself
Into the chieftain's place.  Was it not so?

LENTULUS.  Yes, Catiline, it was even so!

CATILINE.  [Looks at him with repressed scorn.]  What then?
If 'tis the power you want,--so let it be!

LENTULUS.  Explain,--what do you mean?

CATILINE.  I shall resign;
And you may lead the army--

LENTULUS.  [Surprised.]  You resign?

CATILINE.  I shall.  But be prepared for all events;
Know this--our undertaking is revealed:
The senate is informed of every plan;
Its troops hem us about--

LENTULUS.  What do you say?

CATILINE.  Now shall I call a council of our friends;
Do you come too,--announce your leadership;
I shall resign.

LENTULUS.  [Detains him.]  One moment, Catiline!

CATILINE.  Your time is precious; ere the dawn of day
You may expect an onslaught--

LENTULUS.  [Anxiously.]  Hear me, friend!
Surely you jest?  It is impossible--

CATILINE.  Our project, I have told you, is betrayed.
Show now your firmness and sagacity!

LENTULUS.  Betrayed?  Then woe to us!

CATILINE.  [Smiles scornfully.]  You paltry coward!
You tremble _now_;--yet _you_ would murder _me_;
You think a man like you is called to rule?

LENTULUS.  Forgive me, Catiline!

CATILINE.  Make your escape
By hurried flight, if still it can be done.

LENTULUS.  Ah, you permit me then--?

CATILINE.  And did you think
It was my purpose to forsake this post
In such an hour as this?  You little know me.

LENTULUS.  O, Catiline--!

CATILINE.  [Coldly.]  Waste not your moments here!
Seek your own safety;--I know how to die.

[He turns away from him.]

LENTULUS.  [To himself.]
I thank you for these tidings, Catiline;--
I shall make use of them to serve my end.
'Twill stand me in good stead now that I know
This region well; I'll seek the hostile army
And guide it hitherward by secret paths,
To your destruction and to my salvation.--
The serpent that you trample in the dust
So arrogantly still retains its sting!

[He goes.]

CATILINE.  [After a pause.]
This is the trust I built my hopes upon!
Thus one by one they leave me.  Oh ye gods!
Treason and cowardice alone stir up
The sullen currents of their slavish souls.
Oh, what a fool am I with all my hopes!
I would destroy yon viper's nest, that Rome,--
Which is long since a heap of sunken ruins.

[The sound of arms is heard approaching; he listens.]

CATILINE.  They come, they come!  Still are there valiant men
Among them.  Ah, the joyous clang of steel!
The merry clash of shields against each other!
Anew the fire kindles in my breast;
The reckoning is near,--the mighty hour
That settles every doubt.  I hail the day!

[MANLIUS, STATILIUS, GABINIUS, and many OTHER CONSPIRATORS come
through the forest.]

MANLIUS.  Here, Catiline, come your friends and comrades true;
In camp I spread the alarm, as you commanded--

CATILINE.  And have you told them--?

MANLIUS.  Yes,--they know our plight.

STATILIUS.  We know it well, and we shall follow you
With sword in hand to fight for life and death.

CATILINE.  I thank you all, my comrades brave in arms!
But do not think, my friends, that life or death
Is ours to choose;--our only choice is this:
Death in heroic battle with the foe,
Or death by torture when like savage beasts
We shall be hounded down relentlessly.
Ah, which do you prefer?  To risk in flight
A wretched life prolonged in misery,
Or like your proud and worthy sires of old
To perish nobly on the battlefield?

GABINIUS.  We choose to fight and die!

MANY VOICES.  Lead us to death!

CATILINE.  Then let us be off!  Through death we shall achieve
The glorious life of immortality.
Our fall, our name, through distant generations
Shall be proclaimed with lofty pride--

FURIA.  [Calls out behind him among the trees.]  --O terror!

SOME VOICES.  Behold,--a woman--!

CATILINE.  [Startled.]  Furia!  You--you here?
What brought you here?

FURIA.  Ah, I must lead you on
To your great goal.

CATILINE.  Where is my goal, then?  Speak!

FURIA.  Each mortal seeks his goal in his own way.
And you seek yours through ever hopeless strife;
The struggle yields defeat and certain death.

CATILINE.  Yet also honor and immortal fame!
Go, woman!  Great and noble is this hour!
My heart is closed against your raucous cries.

[AURELIA appears in the door of the tent.]

AURELIA.  My Catiline--!

[She stops, terrified at the sight of the throng.]

CATILINE.  [Painfully.]  Aurelia,--oh, Aurelia!

AURELIA.  What is the trouble?  All this stir in camp--
What is on foot here?

CATILINE.  You I could forget!
What will your fate be now--?

FURIA.  [Whispers scornfully, unnoticed by AURELIA.]
Ah, Catiline,
Already wavering in your high resolve?
Is this your death defiance?

CATILINE.  [Flaring up.]  No, by the gods!

AURELIA.  [Comes nearer.]
Oh, speak, beloved!  Keep me in doubt no longer--

FURIA.  [In an undertone behind him.]
Flee with your wife--the while your comrades die!

MANLIUS.  Tarry no longer; lead us out to battle--

CATILINE.  Oh, what a choice!  And yet,--here is no choice;--
I must go on,--I dare not stop midway.

CATILINE.  [Calls out.]  Then follow me to battle on the plain!

AURELIA.  [Throws herself in his arms.]
Catiline,--do not leave me,--take me with you!

CATILINE.  No, stay, Aurelia!

FURIA.  [As before.]  Take her, Catiline!
Worthy your death will be, as was your life,
When you are vanquished--in a woman's arms!

CATILINE.  [Thrusts AURELIA aside.]
Away, you who would rob me of my fame!
Death shall o'ertake me in the midst of men.
I have a life to atone, a name to clear--

FURIA.  Just so; just so, my gallant Catiline!

CATILINE.  All things I will uproot from out my soul
That bind me to my life of empty dreams!
All that is of the past shall henceforth be
As if 'twere not--

AURELIA.  Oh, cast me not away!
By all the love I bear you, Catiline,--
I beg you, I adjure,--let us not part!

CATILINE.  My heart is dead, my sight is blind to love.
From life's great mockery I turn my eyes;
And gaze but on the dim, yet mighty star
Of fame that is to be!

AURELIA.  O gods of mercy!

[She leans faint against the tree outside the tent.]

CATILINE.  [To the Warriors.]  And now away!

MANLIUS.  The din of arms I hear!

SEVERAL VOICES.  They come, they come.

CATILINE.  Good!  We will heed their warning.
Long was our night of shame; our dawn is near--.
To battle in the crimson sky of morning!
By Roman sword, with Roman fortitude,
The last of Romans perish in their blood!

[They rush out through the forest; a great alarm, rent with
battle-cries, is heard from within the camp.]

FURIA.  He is gone forever.  My great task in life is done.
Cold and rigid we shall find him in the morning sun.

AURELIA.  [Aside.]
In his passion-glutted bosom then should love no longer dwell?
Was it nothing but a dream?  His angry words I heard full well.

FURIA.  Hark, the weapons clash; already at the brink
of death he stands;
Soon a noiseless shadow he will hasten toward the spirit
lands.

AURELIA.  [Startled.]
Who are you, prophetic voice, that yonder comes to me,
Like the night-owl's cry of warning from some far-off tree!
Are you from the clammy underworld of spirits come
Hence to lead my Catiline into your gloomy home?

FURIA.  Home is ay the journey's goal, and all his wanderings lay
Through the reeking swamps of life--

AURELIA.  But only for a day.
Free and noble was his heart, his spirit strong and true,
Till around it serpent-like a poisoned seedling grew.

FURIA.
So the plane-tree, too, keeps fresh and green its leafy dress,
Till its trunk is smothered in a clinging vine's caress.

AURELIA.
Now did you betray your source.  For time and time again
Echoed from the lips of Catiline this one refrain.
You the serpent are, who poisoned all my joy in life,
Steeled his heart against my kindness through your deadly strife.
From those waking night-dreams well I know your infamy,
Like a threat I see you stand between my love and me.
With my husband at my side I cherished in my breast
Longings for a tranquil life, a home of peace and rest.
Ah, a garden-bed I planted in his weary heart;
As its fairest ornament our love I hedged apart.
Flower and all have you uprooted with malignant hand;
In the dust it lies where thriving it did lately stand.

FURIA.  Foolish weakling; you would guide the steps of Catiline?
Do you not perceive his heart was never wholly thine?
Think you that in such a soil your flower can survive?
In the sunny springtime only violets can thrive,
While the henbane grows in strength beneath a clouded grey;
And his soul was long ago a clouded autumn day.
All is lost to you.  Soon dies the spark within his breast;
As a victim of revenge he shall go to his rest.

AURELIA.  [With increasing vehemence.]
Thus he shall not perish; no, by all the gods of day!
To his weary heart my tears will somehow force a way.
If I find him pale and gory on the battlefield,
I shall throw my arms about him and his bosom shield,
Breathe upon his speechless lips the love within my soul,
Ease the pain within him and his suffering mind console.
Herald of revenge, your victim from you I shall wrest,
Bind him to the land of sunshine, to a home of rest;
If his eyes be dimmed already, stilled his beating heart,
Linked together arm in arm we shall this life depart.
Grant me, gods of mercy, in return for what I gave,
By the side of him I love, the stillness of the grave.

[She goes.]

FURIA.  [Gazes after her.]
Seek him, deluded soul;--I have no fear;
I hold the victory safe within my hands.

FURIA.  The roar of battle grows; its rumble blends
With death-cries and the crash of broken shields.
Is he perchance now dying?  Still alive?
Oh, blessed is this hour!  The sinking moon
Secludes herself in massive thunderclouds.
One moment more it will be night anew
Ere comes the day;--and with the coming day
All will be over.  In the dark he dies,
As in the dark he lived.  O blessed hour!

[She listens.]

FURIA.  Now sweeps the wind by, like an autumn gust,
And lapses slowly in the far-off distance.
The ponderous armies slowly sweep the plain.
Like angry ocean billows on they roll,
Unyielding, trampling down the fallen dead.
Out yonder I hear whines and moans and sighs,--
The final lullaby,--wherewith they lull
Themselves to rest and all their pallid brothers.
Now speaks the night-owl forth to welcome them
Into the kingdom of the gloomy shadows.

FURIA.  [After a pause.]
How still it is.  Now is he mine at last,--
Aye, mine alone, and mine forevermore.
Now we can journey toward the river Lethe--
And far beyond where never dawns the day.
Yet first I'll seek his bleeding body yonder,
And freely glut my eyes upon those features,
Hated and yet so fair, ere they be marred
By rising sunshine and by watchful vultures.

[She starts to go, but is suddenly startled at something.]

FURIA.  What is that gliding o'er the meadow yonder?
Is it the misty vapors of the moor
That form a picture in the morning chill?
Now it draws near.--The shade of Catiline!
His spectre--!  I can see his misty eye,
His broken shield, his sword bereft of blade.
Ah, he is surely dead; one thing alone,--
Remarkable,--his wound I do not see.

[CATILINE comes through the forest, pale and weary, with
drooping head and troubled countenance.]

CATILINE.  [To himself.]  "Perish thou shalt by deed thine own,
And yet a stranger's hand shall fell thee."
Such was his prophecy.  Now am I fallen--
Though struck by no one.  Who will solve the riddle?

FURIA.  I greet you after battle, Catiline!

CATILINE.  Ah, who are you?

FURIA.  I am a shadow's shadow.

CATILINE.  You, Furia,--you it is!  You welcome me?

FURIA.  Welcome at last into our common home!
Now we can go--two shades--to Charon's bark.
Yet first--accept the wreath of victory.

[She picks some flowers, which she weaves into a wreath during
the following.]

CATILINE.  What make you there?

FURIA.  Your brow I shall adorn.
But wherefore come you hither all alone?
A chieftain's ghost ten thousand dead should follow.
Then where are all your comrades, Catiline?

CATILINE.  They slumber, Furia!

FURIA.  Ah, they slumber still?

CATILINE.  They slumber still,--and they will slumber long.
They slumber all.  Steal softly through the forest,
Peer out across the plain,--disturb them not!
There will you find them in extended ranks.
They fell asleep lulled by the clang of steel;
They fell asleep,--and wakened not, as I did,
When in the distant hills the echoes died.
A shadow now you called me.  True, I am
A shadow of myself.  But do not think
Their slumber yonder is so undisturbed
And void of dreams.  Oh, do not think so!

FURIA.  Speak!
What may your comrades dream?

CATILINE.  Ah, you shall hear.--
I led the battle with despairing heart,
And sought my death beneath the play of swords.
To right and left I saw my comrades fall;
Statilius first,--then one by one the rest;
My Curius fell trying to shield my breast;
All perished there beneath Rome's flaming sword,--
The sword that me alone passed by untouched.
Yes, Catiline was spared by the sword of Rome.
Half-stunned I stood there with my broken shield,
Aware of nothing as the waves of battle
Swept o'er me.  I recovered first my senses
When all grew still again, and I looked up
And saw the struggle seething--far behind me!
How long I stood there?  Only this I know,--
I stood alone among my fallen comrades.
But there was life within those misty eyes;
The corners of their mouths betrayed a smile;
And they addressed their smile and gaze to me,
Who stood alone erect among the dead,--
Who had for ages fought for them and Rome,--
Who stood there lonely and disgraced, untouched
By Roman sword.  Then perished Catiline.

FURIA.  False have you read your fallen comrades' dreams;
False have you judged the reason of your fall.
Their smiles and glances were but invitations
To sleep with them--

CATILINE.  Yes, if I only could!

FURIA.  Have courage,--spectre of a former hero;
Your hour of rest is near.  Come, bend your head;--
I shall adorn you with the victor's crown.

[She offers the wreath to him.]

CATILINE.  Bah,--what is that?  A poppy-wreath--!

FURIA.  [With wild glee.]  Well, yes;
Are not such poppies pretty?  They will glow
Around your forehead like a fringe of blood.

CATILINE.  No, cast the wreath away!  I hate this crimson.

FURIA.  [Laughs aloud.]
Ah, you prefer the pale and feeble shades?
Good!  I shall bring the garland of green rushes
That Sylvia carried in her dripping locks,
The day she came afloat upon the Tiber?

CATILINE.  Alas, what visions--!

FURIA.  Shall I bring you rather
The thorny brambles from the market-place,
With crimson-spots, the stain of civic blood,
That flowed at your behest, my Catiline?

CATILINE.  Enough!

FURIA.  Or would you like a crown of leaves
From the old winter oak near mother's home,
That withered when a young dishonored woman
With piercing cries distraught leaped in the river?

CATILINE.  Pour out at once your measures of revenge
Upon my head--

FURIA.  I am your very eye,--
Your very memory, your very doom.

CATILINE.  But wherefore now?

FURIA.  His goal at length attained,
The traveller spent looks back from whence he came.

CATILINE.  Have I then reached my goal?  Is this the goal?
I am no longer living,--nor yet buried.
Where lies the goal?

FURIA.  In sight,--if you but will.

CATILINE.  A will I have no longer; my will perished
When all the things I willed once, came to naught.

CATILINE.  [Waves his arms.]
Away,--away from me, ye sallow shades!
What claim you here of me, ye men and women?
I cannot give you--!  Oh, this multitude--!

FURIA.  To earth your spirit still is closely bound!
These thousand-threaded nets asunder tear!
Come, let me press this wreath upon your locks,--
'Tis gifted with a strong and soothing virtue;
It kills the memory, lulls the soul to rest!

CATILINE.  [Huskily.]
It kills the memory?  Dare I trust your word?
Then press your poison-wreath upon my forehead.

FURIA.  [Puts the wreath on his head.]
Now it is yours! Thus decked you shall appear
Before the prince of darkness, Catiline!

CATILINE.  Away! away!  I yearn to go below;--
I long to pass into the spirit lands.
Let us together go!  What holds me here?
What stays my steps?  Behind me here I feel
Upon the morning sky a misty star;--
It holds me in the land of living men;
It draws me as the moon attracts the sea.

FURIA.  Away!  Away!

CATILINE.  It beckons and it twinkles.
I cannot follow you until this light
Is quenched entirely, or by clouds obscured,--
I see it clearly now; 'tis not a star;
It is a human heart, throbbing and warm;
It binds me here; it fascinates and draws me
As draws the evening star the eye of children.

FURIA.  Then stop this beating heart!

CATILINE.  What do you mean?

FURIA.  The dagger in your belt--.  A single thrust,--
The star will vanish and the heart will die
That stand between us like an enemy.

CATILINE.  Ah, I should--?  Sharp and shining is the
dagger--

CATILINE.  [With a cry.]
Aurelia!  O Aurelia, where--where are you?
Were you but here--!  No, no,--I will not see you!
And yet methinks all would be well again,
And peace would come, if I could lay my head
Upon your bosom and repent--repent!

FURIA.  And what would you repent?

CATILINE.  Oh, everything!
That I have been, that I have ever lived.

FURIA.  'Tis now too late--too late!  Whence now you stand
No path leads back again.--Go try it, fool!
Now am I going home.  Place you your head
Upon her breast and see if there you find
The blessed peace your weary soul desires.

FURIA.  [With increasing wildness.]
Soon will the thousand dead rise up again;
Dishonored women will their numbers join;
And all,--aye, they will all demand of you
The life, the blood, the honor you destroyed.
In terror you will flee into the night,--
Will roam about the earth on every strand,
Like old Actean, hounded by his dogs,--
A shadow hounded by a thousand shades!

CATILINE.  I see it, Furia.  Here I have no peace.
I am an exile in the world of light!
I'll go with you into the spirit realms;--
The bond that binds me I will tear asunder.

FURIA.  Why grope you with the dagger?

CATILINE.  She shall die.

[The lightning strikes and the thunder rolls.]

FURIA.  The mighty powers rejoice at your resolve!--
See, Catiline,--see, yonder comes your wife.

[AURELIA comes through the forest in an anxious search.]

AURELIA.  Where shall I find him?  Where--where can he be!
I've searched in vain among the dead--

[Discovers him.]

AURELIA.  Great heavens,--
My Catiline!

[She rushes toward him.]

CATILINE.  [Bewildered.]  Speak not that name again!

AURELIA.  You are alive?

[Is about to throw herself in his arms.]

CATILINE.  [Thrusting her aside.]  Away!  I'm not alive.

AURELIA.  Oh, hear me, dearest--!

CATILINE.  No, I will not hear!
I hate you.  I see through your cunning wiles.
You wish to chain me to a living death.
Cease staring at me!  Ah, your eyes torment me,--
They pierce like daggers through my very soul!
Ah, yes, the dagger!  Die!  Come, close your eyes--

[He draws the dagger and seizes her by the hand.]

AURELIA.  Keep guard, oh gracious gods, o'er him and me!

CATILINE.  Quick, close your eyes; close them, I say;--in them
I see the starlight and the morning sky--.
Now shall I quench the heavenly star of dawn!

[The thunder rolls again.]

CATILINE.  Your heart; your blood!  Now speak the gods of life
Their last farewell to you and Catiline!

[He lifts the dagger toward her bosom; she escapes into the
tent; he pursues her.]

FURIA.  [Listens.]  She stretches out her hand imploringly.
She pleads with him for life.  He hears her not.
He strikes her down!  She reels in her own blood!

[CATILINE comes slowly out of the tent with the dagger in his
hand.]

CATILINE.  Now am I free.  Soon I shall cease to be.
Now sinks my soul in vague oblivion.
My eyes are growing dim, my hearing faint,
As if through rushing waters.  Ah, do you know
What I have slain with this my little dagger?
Not her alone,--but all the hearts on earth,--
All living things, all things that grow and bloom;--
The starlight have I dimmed, the crescent moon,
The flaming sun.  Ah, see,--it fails to rise;
'Twill never rise again; the sun is dead.
Now is the whole wide realm of earth transformed
Into a huge and clammy sepulchre,
Its vault of leaden grey;--beneath this vault
Stand you and I, bereft of light and darkness,
Of death and life,--two restless exiled shadows.

FURIA.  Now stand we, Catiline, before our goal!

CATILINE.  No, one step more--before I reach my goal.
Relieve me of my burden!  Do you not see,
I bend beneath the corpse of Catiline?
A dagger through the corpse of Catiline!

[He shows her the dagger.]

CATILINE.  Come, Furia, set me free!  Come, take this dagger;--
On it the star of morning I impaled;--
Take it--and plunge it straightway through the corpse;
Then it will loose its hold, and I am free.

FURIA.  [Takes the dagger.]
Your will be done, whom I have loved in hate!
Shake off your dust and come with me to rest.

[She buries the dagger deep in his heart; he sinks down at the
foot of the tree.]

CATILINE.  [After a moment comes to consciousness
again, passes his hand across his forehead, and speaks
faintly.]  Now, mysterious voice, your prophecy I understand!
I shall perish by my own, yet by a stranger's hand.
Nemesis has wrought her end.  Shroud me, gloom of night!
Raise your billows, murky Styx, roll on in all your might!
Ferry me across in safety; speed the vessel on
Toward the silent prince's realm, the land of shadows wan.
Two roads there are running yonder; I shall journey dumb
Toward the left--

AURELIA.  [From the tent, pale and faltering, her
bosom bloody.]  --no, toward the right!  Oh, toward Elysium!

CATILINE.  [Startled.]
How this bright and lurid picture fills my soul with dread!
She herself it is!  Aurelia, speak,--are you not dead?

AURELIA.  [Kneels before him.]
No, I live that I may still your agonizing cry,--
Live that I may lean my bosom on your breast and die.

CATILINE.  Oh, you live!

AURELIA.  I did but swoon; though my two eyes grew blurred,
Dimly yet I followed you and heard your every word.
And my love a spouse's strength again unto me gave;--
Breast to breast, my Catiline, we go into the grave!

CATILINE.  Oh, how gladly would I go!  Yet all in vain you sigh.
We must part.  Revenge compels me with a hollow cry.
You can hasten, free and blithesome, forth to peace and light;
I must cross the river Lethe down into the night.

[The day dawns in the background.]

AURELIA.  [Points toward the increasing light.]
No, the terrors and the gloom of death love scatters far.
See, the storm-clouds vanish; faintly gleams the morning star.

AURELIA.  [With uplifted arms.]
Light is victor!  Grand and full of freshness dawns the day!
Follow me, then!  Death already speeds me on his way.

[She sinks down over him.]

CATILINE.  [Presses her to himself and speaks with his last
strength.]  Oh, how sweet!  Now I remember my forgotten dream,
How the darkness was dispersed before a radiant beam,
How the song of children ushered in the new-born day.
Ah, my eye grows dim, my strength is fading fast away;
But my mind is clearer now than ever it has been:
All the wanderings of my life loom plainly up within.
Yes, my life a tempest was beneath the lightning blaze;
But my death is like the morning's rosy-tinted haze.

[Bends over her.]

CATILINE.
You have driven the gloom away; peace dwells within my breast.
I shall seek with you the dwelling place of light and rest!

CATILINE.  [He tears the dagger quickly out of his breast and
speaks with dying voice.]
The gods of dawn are smiling in atonement from above;
All the powers of darkness you have conquered with your love!

[During the last scene FURIA has withdrawn farther and farther
into the background and disappears at last among the trees.
CATILINE's head sinks down on AURELIA's breast; they die.]

                *       *       *       *       *

                      THE WARRIOR'S BARROW

                          [Kaempehojen]

                   A Dramatic Poem in One Act

                              1854

                *       *       *       *       *

                       DRAMATIS PERSONA

RODERIK             An old recluse.

BLANKA              His foster-daughter.

GANDALF             A sea-king from Norway.

ASGAUT              An old viking.

HROLLOUG             "   "   "

JOSTEJN              "   "   "

Several VIKINGS

HEMMING             A young scald in Gandalf's service.

                *       *       *       *       *

                             SETTING

The action takes place on a small island off the coast of Sicily
shortly before the introduction of Christianity into Norway.

An open place surrounded by trees near the shore.  To the left
in the background the ruins of an old temple.  In the center of
the scene a huge barrow upon which is a monument decked with
flower wreaths.

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE I

[At the right of the stage sits RODERIK writing.  To
the left BLANKA in a half reclining position.]

BLANKA.  Lo! the sky in dying glory
  Surges like a sea ablaze,--
  It is all so still before me,
  Still as in a sylvan maze.
  Summer evening's mellow power
  Settles round us like a dove,
  Hovers like a swan above
  Ocean wave and forest flower.
  In the orange thicket slumber
  Gods and goddesses of yore,
  Stone reminders in great number
  Of a world that is no more.
  Virtue, valor, trust are gone,
  Rich in memory alone;
  Could there be a more complete
  Picture of the South effete?

[Rises.]

BLANKA.  But my father has related
  Stories of a distant land,
  Of a life, fresh, unabated,
  Neither carved nor wrought by hand!
  Here the spirit has forever
  Vanished into stone and wave,--
  There it breathes as free as ever,
  Like a warrior strong and brave!
  When the evening's crystallizing
  Vapors settle on my breast,
  Lo!  I see before me rising
  Norway's snow-illumined crest!
  Here is life decayed and dying,
  Sunk in torpor, still, forlorn,--
  There go avalanches flying,
  Life anew in death is born!
  If I had the white swan's coat--

RODERIK.  [After a pause writing.]
"Then, it is said, will Ragnarok have stilled
The wilder powers, brought forth a chastened life;
All-Father, Balder, and the gentle Freya
Will rule again the race of man in peace!"--

[After having watched her for a moment.]

RODERIK.  But, Blanka, now you dream away again;
You stare through space completely lost in thought,--
What is it that you seek?

BLANKA.  [Draws near.]  Forgive me, father!
I merely followed for a space the swan,
That sailed on snowy wings across the sea.

RODERIK.  And if I had not stopped you in your flight,
My young and pretty little swan! who knows
How far you might have flown away from me,--
Perchance to Thule?

BLANKA.  And indeed why not?
To Thule flies the swan in early spring,
If only to return again each fall.

[Seats herself at his feet.]

BLANKA.  Yet I--I am no swan,--no, call me rather
A captured falcon, sitting tame and true,
A golden ring about his foot.

RODERIK.  Well,--and the ring?

BLANKA.  The ring?  That is my love for you, dear father!
With that you have your youthful falcon bound,
I cannot fly,--not even though I wished to.

[Rises.]

BLANKA.  But when I see the swan sail o'er the wave,
Light as a cloud before the summer wind,
Then I remember all that you have told
Of the heroic life in distant Thule;
Then, as it seems, the bird is like a bark
With dragon head and wings of burnished gold;
I see the youthful hero in the prow,
A copper helmet on his yellow locks,
With eyes of blue, a manly, heaving breast,
His sword held firmly in his mighty hand.
I follow him upon his rapid course,
And all my dreams run riot round his bark,
And frolic sportively like merry dolphins
In fancy's deep and cooling sea!

RODERIK.  O you,--
You are an ardent dreamer, my good child,--
I almost fear your thoughts too often dwell
Upon the people in the rugged North.

BLANKA.  And, father, whose the fault, if it were so?

RODERIK.  You mean that I--?

BLANKA.  Yes, what else could I mean;
You live yourself but in the memory
Of early days among these mighty Norsemen;
Do not deny that often as you speak
Of warlike forays, combats, fights,
Your cheek begins to flush, your eye to glow;
It seems to me that you grow young again.

RODERIK.  Yes, yes, but I have reason so to do;
For I have lived among them in the North,
And every bit that memory calls to mind
Is like a page to me from my own saga.
But you, however, fostered in the South,
Who never saw the silver-tinted mountains,
Who never heard the trumpet's echoing song,--
Ah, how could you be moved by what I tell?

BLANKA.  Oh, must a human being see and hear
All things but with his outer senses then?
Has not the inner soul, too, eye and ear,
With which it can both see and hearken well?
'Tis true it is with eyes of flesh I see
The richly glowing color of the rose;
But with the spirit's eye I see within
A lovely elf, a fairy butterfly,
Who archly hides behind the crimson leaves,
And singeth of a secret power from heaven
That gave the flower brightness and perfume.

RODERIK.  True, true, my child!

BLANKA.  I almost do believe
That just because I do not really see,
The whole looms up more beautiful in thought;
That, father, is the way with you at least!
The ancient sagas and heroic lays,--
These you remember, speak of with delight,
And scratch in runic script upon your parchment;
But if I ask about your youthful life
In Norway's distant realm, your eyes grow dark,
Your lips are silent, and it seems at times
Your bosom houses gloomy memories.

RODERIK.  [Rises.]
Come, speak no more, good child, about the past.
Who is there then whose youthful memories
Are altogether free from self-reproach;
You know, the Norsemen are a savage lot.

BLANKA.  But are the warriors of the South less fierce?
Have you forgot that night, now ten years past,
The time the strangers landed on the coast,
And plundered--?

RODERIK.  [Visibly ill at ease.]  Say no more now,--let us hence;
The sundown soon will be upon us;--come!

BLANKA.  [As they go.]  Give me your hand!

[Stops.]

BLANKA.  No, wait!

RODERIK.  What is the matter?

BLANKA.  I have today for the first time forgot--

RODERIK.  And what have you forgot?

BLANKA.  [Points to the barrow.]  Behold the wreath!

RODERIK.  It is--

BLANKA.  The withered one of yesterday;
I have forgot today to make the change;
Yet, let me take you to the cabin first,
Then shall I venture out in search of flowers;
The violet never is so sweet and rare
As when the dew has bathed its silver lining;
The budding rose is never quite so fair
As when 'tis plucked in child-like sleep reclining!

[They go out at the back to the right.]

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE II

[GANDALF and the VIKINGS enter from the right.]

ASGAUT.  Now we shall soon be there.

GANDALF.  Point out the place!

ASGAUT.  No, wait till we have gone beyond the wood.
There was still standing on the rocky cliff
Against the sea a remnant of the wall,--
I dare say it is standing there to-day.

JOSTEJN.  But tell us, king, what can it profit us
To tramp about here on the isle like fools?

HROLLOUG.  Yes, tell us what shall--

GANDALF.  You shall hold your tongues!
And blindly follow where your king commands!

GANDALF.  [To ASGAUT.]
It seems to me, however, you cleaned house
Too well when you were last here on the isle;
You might have left a little, I should think,
For me and my revenge!

HROLLOUG.  You are the king,
And loyalty we pledged you at the thing,
But when we followed you upon the war path,
It was to win our share of fame and glory.

JOSTEJN.  And golden treasures, Hrolloug, golden treasures.

SEVERAL.  That, Gandalf, is the law, and heed it well!

GANDALF.  I know the law perhaps as well as you;
But is there not since days of old a law
And covenant with us that when a kinsman
Falls slain before the enemy and his corpse
Unburied lies a prey unto the raven,
Blood vengeance must be had?

SOME.  Yes, so it is!

GANDALF.  Then stand you ready with your sword and shield,--
You have a king to avenge and I a father!

[Commotion among the VIKINGS.]

JOSTEJN.  A king?

HROLLOUG.  A father?

GANDALF.  Wait,--I shall relate
How all this stands.  You know, my father was
A mighty viking.  Twelve years gone it is
Since he the last time sallied forth one spring
With Asgaut there and all his old time warriors.
Two years he roamed about from strand to strand,
Visiting Bratland, Valland, even Blaaland;
At length he went and harried Sicily,
And there heard stories of a wealthy chief,
Who lived upon this island in a castle
With sturdy walls built on a rocky base,
And in it there were costly treasures hid.
At night he took his men and went ashore,
And razed the castle walls with fire and sword.
Himself went foremost like an angry bear,
And in the fury of the fight saw not
How all his warriors fell about him dead;
And when the morning sun rose in the east,
There lay the castle smouldering in ruin.
Asgaut alone survived with one or two,--
My father and the hundred others there
Had ridden to Valhalla through the flames.

ASGAUT.  I hoisted every sail upon the bark,
And turned the prow straight homeward to the North;
There sought I all in vain for Gandalf king;
The youthful eagle, I was told, had flown
Across the sea to Iceland or the Faroes.
I hastened after him but found no trace,-
Yet everywhere I went his name was known;
For though his bark sped cloud-like in the storm,
Yet flew his fame on even swifter wings.
At last this spring I found him, as you know;
It was in Italy; I told him then
What things had happened, how his father died,
And Gandalf swore by all Valhalla's gods
Blood-vengeance he would take with fire and sword.

JOSTEJN.  It is an ancient law and should be honored!
But had I been in your place, Gandalf king,
I should have lingered on in Italy,--
For there was gold to win.

HROLLOUG.  And honor too.

GANDALF.  That is your loyalty to your dead king.

JOSTEJN.  Come, come now; no offence; I merely meant
The dead could wait perhaps.

ASGAUT.  [With suppressed rage.]  You paltry race!

JOSTEJN.  But now that we are here--

HROLLOUG.  Yes; let us raise
Unto the king a worthy monument!

SOME.  Yes, yes!

OTHERS.  With bloodshed and with fire!

ASGAUT.  Now that I like!

GANDALF.  And now away to spy around the island;
For even tonight blood-vengeance shall be mine;
If not, I must myself fall.

ASGAUT.  So he swore.

GANDALF.  I swore it solemnly by all the gods!
And once again I swear it--

HEMMING.  [With a harp on his shoulder has during the
preceding emerged from among the WARRIORS and cries
out imploringly.]  Swear not, Gandalf!

GANDALF.  What troubles you?

HEMMING.  Swear not here in this wood!
Here in the South our gods can never hear;
Out on your bark, up North among the hills,
There they still hearken to you, but not here!

ASGAUT.  Have you too breathed the poison of the South?

HEMMING.  In Italy I heard the pious monks
Tell lovely stories of the holy Christ,
And what they told still lingers in my mind
Through night and day and will no more be gone.

GANDALF.  I had you brought with me because in youth
You showed great promise of poetic gifts.
You were to see my bold and warlike deeds,
So that when I, King Gandalf, old and gray,
Sat with my warriors round the oaken table,
The king's young scald might while away
Long winter evenings with heroic lays,
And sing at last a saga of my deeds;
The hero's fame voiced in the poet's song
Outlives the monument upon his grave.
But now, be off, and if you choose go cast
Your harp aside and don the monkish cowl.
Aha!  King Gandalf has a mighty scald!

[The VIKINGS go into the forest to the left; HEMMING follows
them.]

ASGAUT.  It is a mouldy time we live in now;
Our faith and customs from the olden days
Are everywhere upon the downward path.
Lucky it is that I am growing old;
My eyes shall never see the North decay.
But you, King Gandalf, you are young and strong;
And wheresoe'er you roam in distant lands,
Remember that it is a royal task
To guard the people and defend the gods!

[He follows the rest.]

GANDALF.  [After a pause.]  Hm, he has no great confidence in me.
'Tis well he went!  Whenever he is near,
It is as if a burden weighed me down.
The grim old viking with his rugged face,--
He looks like Asathor, who with his belt
Of strength and Mjolnir stood within the grove,
Carved out in marble, near my father's home.
My father's home!  Who knows, alas! how things
Around the ancient landmarks now may look!--
Mountains and fields are doubtless still the same;
The people--?  Have they still the same old heart?
No, there is fallen mildew o'er the age,
And it is that which saps the Northern life
And eats away like poison what is best.
Well, I will homeward,--save what still is left
To save before it falls to utter ruin.

GANDALF.  [After a pause during which he looks around.]
How lovely in these Southern groves it is;
My pine groves can not boast such sweet perfume.

[He perceives the mound.]

GANDALF.  What now?  A warrior's grave?  No doubt it hides
A countryman from those more stirring days.
A warrior's barrow in the South!--'Tis only just;
It was the South gave us our mortal wound.
How lovely it is here!  It brings to mind
One winter night when as a lad I sat
Upon my father's knee before the hearth,
The while he told me stories of the gods,
Of Odin, Balder, and the mighty Thor;
And when I mentioned Freya's grove to him,
He pictured it exactly like this grove,--
But when I asked him something more of Freya,
What she herself was like, the old man laughed
And answered as he placed me on my feet,
"A woman will in due time tell you that!"

GANDALF.  [Listening.]
Hush!  Footsteps in the forest!  Quiet, Gandalf,-
They bring the first fruits of your blood-revenge!

[He steps aside so that he is half concealed among the bushes to
the right.]

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE III

[GANDALF.  BLANKA with oak leaves in her hair and a
basket of flowers enters from the left.]

BLANKA.  [Seated at the left busily weaving a flower wreath.]
Fountains may murmur in the sunny vales,
Resplendent billows roll beneath the shore;
Nor fountain's murmur, nor the billow's song
Has half the magic of those flowers there,
That stand in clusters round the barrow's edge
And nod at one another lovingly;
They draw me hither during night and day,--
And it is here I long to come and dream.
The wreath is done.  The hero's monument,
So hard and cold, shall under it be hid.
Yes, it is beautiful!

[Pointing to the mound.]

BLANKA.  A vanished life,
Of giant strength, lies mouldering in the ground,--
And the memorial which should speak to men,--
A cold unyielding stone like yonder one!
But then comes art, and with a friendly hand
She gathers flowers from the breast of nature
And hides the ugly, unresponsive stone
With snow-white lilies, sweet forget-me-nots.

[She ascends the barrow, hangs the wreath over the monument, and
speaks after a pause.]

BLANKA.  Again my dreams go sailing to the North
Like birds of passage o'er the ocean waves;
I feel an urging where I long to go,
And willingly I heed the secret power,
Which has its royal seat within the soul.
I stand in Norway, am a hero's bride,
And from the mountain peak watch eagle-like.
O'er shining waves the vessel heaves in sight.--
Oh, like the gull fly to your fatherland!
I am a Southern child, I cannot wait;
I tear the oaken wreath out of my hair,--
Take this, my hero!  'Tis the second message
I greet you with,--my yearning was the first.

[She throws the wreath.  GANDALF steps forth and seizes it.]

BLANKA.  What's this?  There stands a--

[She rubs her eyes and stares amazed at him.]

No, it is no dream.
Who are you, stranger?  What is it you seek
Here on the shore?

GANDALF.  Step first from off the mound,--
Then we can talk at ease.

BLANKA.  [Comes down.]  Well, here I am!

BLANKA.  [Aside as she looks him over.]
The chain mail o'er his breast, the copper helmet,--
Exactly as my father has related.

BLANKA.  [Aloud.]  Take off your helmet!

GANDALF.  Why?

BLANKA.  Well, take it off!

BLANKA.  [Aside.]
Two sparkling eyes, locks like a field of grain,--
Exactly as I saw him in my dream.

GANDALF.  Who are you, woman?

BLANKA.  I?  A poor, poor child!

GANDALF.  Yet certainly the fairest on the isle.

BLANKA.  The fairest?  That indeed is possible,
For here there's no one else.

GANDALF.  What,--no one else?

BLANKA.  Unless my father be,--but he is old
And has a silver beard, as long as this;
No, after all I think I win the prize.

GANDALF.  You have a merry spirit.

BLANKA.  Not always now!

GANDALF.  But tell me, pray, how this is possible;
You say you live alone here with your father,
Yet I have heard men say most certainly
The island here is thickly populated?

BLANKA.  It was so once, three years ago or more;
But,--well, it is a sad and mournful tale--
Yet you shall hear it if you wish.

GANDALF.  Yes, certainly!

BLANKA.  You see, three years ago--

[Seats herself.]

BLANKA.  Come, seat yourself!

GANDALF.  [Steps back a pace.]  No, sit you down, I'll stand.

BLANKA.  Three years ago there came, God knows from whence,
A warlike band of robbers to the isle;
They plundered madly as they went about,
And murdered everything they found alive.
A few escaped as best they could by flight
And sought protection in my father's castle,
Which stood upon the cliff right near the sea.

GANDALF.  Your father's, did you say?

BLANKA.  My father's, yes.--
It was a cloudy evening when they burst
Upon the castle gate, tore through the wall,
Rushed in the court, and murdered right and left.
I fled into the darkness terrified,
And sought a place of refuge in the forest.
I saw our home go whirling up in flames,
I heard the clang of shields, the cries of death.--
Then everything grew still; for all were dead.--
The savage band proceeded to the shore
And sailed away.--I sat upon the cliff
The morning after, near the smouldering ruins.
I was the only one whom they had spared.

GANDALF.  But you just told me that your father lives.

BLANKA.  My foster-father; wait, and you shall hear!
I sat upon the cliff oppressed and sad,
And listened to the awful stillness round;
There issued forth a faint and feeble cry,
As from beneath the rocky cleft beneath my feet;
I listened full of fear, then went below,
And found a stranger, pale with loss of blood.
I ventured nearer, frightened as I was,
Bound up his wounds and tended him,--

GANDALF.  And he?

BLANKA.  Told me as he recovered from his wounds,
That he had come aboard a merchantman,
Had reached the island on the very day
The castle was destroyed,--took refuge there
And fought the robber band with all his might
Until he fell, faint with the loss of blood,
Into the rocky cleft wherein I found him.
And ever since we two have lived together;
He built for us a cabin in the wood,
I grew to love him more than any one.
But you must see him,--come!

GANDALF.  No, wait,--not now!
We meet in ample time, I have no doubt.

BLANKA.  Well, all right, as you please; but rest assured
He would be glad to greet you 'neath his roof;
For you must know that hospitality
Is found not only in the North.

GANDALF.  The North?
You know then--

BLANKA.  Whence you come, you mean?  Oh, yes!
My father has so often told of you
That I the moment that I saw you--

GANDALF.  Yet you
Were not afraid!

BLANKA.  Afraid?  And why afraid?

GANDALF.  Has he not told you then,--of course if not--

BLANKA.  Told me that you were fearless heroes?  Yes!
But pray, why should that frighten me?
I know you seek your fame on distant shores,
In manly combat with all doughty warriors;
But I have neither sword nor coat of mail,
Then why should I fear--

GANDALF.  No, of course, of course!
But still, those strangers who destroyed the castle?

BLANKA.  And what of them?

GANDALF.  Only,--has not your father
Told you from whence they came?

BLANKA.  Never!  How could he!
Strangers they were alike to him and us.
But if you wish I'll ask him right away.

GANDALF.  [Quickly.]  No, let it be.

BLANKA.  Ah, now I understand!
You wish to know where you can seek them now,
And take blood-vengeance, as you call it.

GANDALF.  Ah,
Blood-vengeance!  Thanks!  The word I had forgot;
You bring me back--

BLANKA.  But do you know, it is
An ugly practice.

GANDALF.  [Going toward the background.]  Farewell!

BLANKA.  O, you are going?

GANDALF.  We meet in time.

[Stops.]

GANDALF.  Tell me this one thing more:
What warrior is it rests beneath the mound?

BLANKA.  I do not know.

GANDALF.  You do not know, and still
You scatter flowers on the hero's grave.

BLANKA.  My father led me here one morning early
And pointed out to me the fresh-made mound,
Which I had never seen upon the strand.
He bade me say my morning prayers out here,
And in my supplications to remember
Those who had harried us with sword and fire.

GANDALF.  And you?

BLANKA.  Each morning from that day to this
I sent a prayer to heaven for their salvation;
And every evening flowers afresh I wove
Into a garland for the grave.

GANDALF.  Yes, strange!
How can you pray thus for your enemy?

BLANKA.  My faith commands me.

GANDALF.  [Vehemently.]  Such a faith is craven;
It is the faith which saps the hero's strength;
'Twas therefore that the great, heroic life
Died feebly in the South!

BLANKA.  But now suppose
My craven faith, as you see fit to call it,
Could be transplanted to your virgin soil,--
I know full well, there would spring forth a mass
Of flowers so luxuriant as to hide
The naked mountain.

GANDALF.  Let the mountain stand
In nakedness until the end of time!

BLANKA.  O!  Take me with you!

GANDALF.  What do you mean?
I sail for home--

BLANKA.  Well, I shall sail with you;
For I have often traveled in my dreams
To far-off Norway, where you live mid snow
And ice and sombre woods of towering pines.
There should come mirth and laughter in the hall,
If I could have my say, I promise you;
For I am merry;--have you any scald?

GANDALF.  I had one, but the sultry Southern air
Has loosened all the strings upon his harp,--
They sing no longer--

BLANKA.  Good!  Then shall I be
Your scald.

GANDALF.  And you?--You could go with us there,
And leave your father and your home?

BLANKA.  [Laughing.]  Aha!
You think I meant it seriously?

GANDALF.  Was it
Only a jest?

BLANKA.  Alas! a foolish dream
I often used to dream before we met,--
Which often I no doubt shall dream again,
When you--

[Suddenly breaking off.]

BLANKA.  You stare so fixedly.

GANDALF.  Do I?

BLANKA.  Why, yes!  What are you thinking of?

GANDALF.  I?  Nothing!

BLANKA.  Nothing?

GANDALF.  That is, I scarcely know myself;
And yet I do--and you shall hear it now:
I thought of you and how you would transplant
Your flowers in the North, when suddenly
My own faith came as if by chance to mind.
One word therein I never understood
Before; now have you taught me what it means.

BLANKA.  And that is what?

GANDALF.  Valfader, it is said,
Receives but half the warriors slain in battle;
The other half to Freya goes by right.
That I could never fully comprehend;
But--now I understand,--I am myself
A fallen warrior, and to Freya goes
The better part of me.

BLANKA.  [Amazed.]  What does this mean?

GANDALF.  Well, in a word, then know--

BLANKA.  [Quickly.]  No, say it not!
I dare not tarry longer here to-night,--
My father waits, and I must go; farewell!

GANDALF.  O, you are going?

BLANKA.  [Takes the wreath of oak leaves which he has
let fall and throws it around his helmet.]  You can keep it now.
Lo, what I hitherto bestowed on you
In dreams, I grant you now awake.

GANDALF.  Farewell!

[He goes quickly out to the right.]

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE IV

BLANKA.  [Alone.]
  He is gone!  Ah, perfect stillness
  Rules upon the barren strand.
  Perfect stillness, grave-like stillness
  Rules my heart with heavy hand.
  Came he then to vanish only
  Through the mist, a ray of light?
  Soon he flies, a sea-gull lonely,
  Far away into the night!
  What is left me of this lover?
  But a flower in the dark:
  In my loneliness to hover
  Like a petrel round his bark!

[The war trumpet of the Vikings is heard from the left.]

BLANKA.  Ah!  What was that!  A trumpet from the wood!

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE V

[BLANKA, GANDALF from the right.]

GANDALF.  [Aside.]  It is too late!

BLANKA.  O, there he is again!
What do you want?

GANDALF.  Quick,--quick, away from here!

BLANKA.  What do you mean?

GANDALF.  Away!  There's danger here!

BLANKA.  What danger?

GANDALF.  Death!

BLANKA.  I do not understand you.

GANDALF.  I thought to hide it from you,--hence I went
To call my people to the ship again
And sail away; you never should have known,--
The trumpet warns me that it is too late,--
That they are coming.

BLANKA.  Who are coming?

GANDALF.  Then know,--
The strangers who once harried on the isle
Were vikings like myself.

BLANKA.  From Norway?

GANDALF.  Yes.
My father, who was chief among them, fell,--
Hence must he be avenged.

BLANKA.  Avenged?

GANDALF.  Such is
The custom.

BLANKA.  Ah, I see now!

GANDALF.  Here they come!
Stand close behind me!

BLANKA.  Man of blood,--away!

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE VI

[The Preceding.]

[ASGAUT, HEMMING and the VIKINGS, who lead RODERIK
between them.]

ASGAUT.  [To GANDALF.]  A meagre find, yet something, to be sure.

BLANKA.  My father!

[She throws herself in his arms.]

RODERIK.  Blanka!  O, my child!

JOSTEJN.  A woman!
He will have company.

ASGAUT.  Yes, straight to Hell!

BLANKA.  O father, wherefore have you never told me--

RODERIK.  Hush!  Hush! my child!

[Points to GANDALF.]

RODERIK.  Is this your chieftain?

ASGAUT.  Yes.

ASGAUT.  [To GANDALF.]
This man can tell you how your father died;
For he was in the thick of it, he says,
The only one to get away alive.

GANDALF.  Hush!  I will nothing hear.

ASGAUT.  Good; let us then
Begin the task.

BLANKA.  O God! what will they do?

GANDALF.  [In an undertone.]  I cannot, Asgaut!

ASGAUT.  [Likewise.]  Is our king afraid?
Has woman's flattering tongue beguiled his mind?

GANDALF.  No matter,--I have said--

ASGAUT.  Bethink yourself,--
Your standing with your warriors is at stake.
Your word you pledged Valhalla's mighty gods,
And if you fail a dastard you'll be judged.
Do not forget our faith is insecure--
And wavering; one blow can strike its root,
And if the blow comes from the king above,
It will have had a mortal wound.

GANDALF.  Ah me!
That was a most unhappy oath I swore.

ASGAUT.  [To the VIKINGS.]  Now ready, warriors!

BLANKA.  Will you murder him,
An old, defenseless man?

ASGAUT.  Down with them both!

BLANKA.  O God!

HROLLOUG.  The woman is too fair!  Let her
Return with us.

JOSTEJN.  [Laughing.]  Yes, as a warrior maid.

GANDALF.  Stand back!

RODERIK.  O spare,--O spare at least my child!
The slayer of your chieftain I will bring you,
If you will only spare her!

GANDALF.  [Quickly.]  Bring him here,
And she is free.  What say you?

THE VIKINGS.  She is free!

BLANKA.  [To RODERIK.]  You promise that?

ASGAUT.  Then fetch him!

RODERIK.  Here he stands!

SOME.  Ha, that old man!

GANDALF.  O woe!

BLANKA.  No, no, you shall not--

RODERIK.  Struck by this hand the viking found his death,
Now rests he peacefully in yonder mound!

GANDALF.  My father's barrow!

RODERIK.  He was strong and brave;
Wherefore I laid him here in viking style.

GANDALF.  Since he is buried, then,--

ASGAUT.  Though he be buried,
The fallen king cries for revenge,--strike, strike!

BLANKA.  He is deceiving you!

BLANKA.  [To GANDALF.]  Do you not see
It is alone his daughter he would save?
Yet, how should your kind understand a soul
That sacrifices all--

GANDALF.  I do not understand?
You do not think I can?

GANDALF.  [To the VIKINGS.]  He shall not die!

ASGAUT.  How so?

BLANKA.  O father!  He is good like you.

ASGAUT.  You mean to break your oath?

GANDALF.  No, I shall keep it!

JOSTEJN.  Then what have you in mind?

HROLLOUG.  Explain!

GANDALF.  I swore
To take revenge or else to die myself.
Well, he is free,--I to Valhalla go.

BLANKA.  [To RODERIK.]  What does he mean?

ASGAUT.  Your honor you would save?--

GANDALF.  Go,--hold a ship in readiness for me,
With hoisted sail, the pyre light in the prow;
In ancient fashion I shall go aboard!
Behold, the evening breeze blows from the strand,--
On crimson wings I sail into Valhalla!

[JOSTEJN goes out to the right.]

ASGAUT.  Ah, 'tis the woman who has cast her spell on you!

BLANKA.  No, you must live!

GANDALF.  I live?  No, to the gods
I must be true, I cannot break with them.

BLANKA.  Your oath is bloody, Balder hates it.

GANDALF.  Yes,
But Balder lives no longer with us now!

BLANKA.  For you he lives; your soul is gentleness.

GANDALF.  Yes, to my ruin!  It became my task
As king to keep intact our great ideal,--
But I lack strength enough!  Come, Asgaut, you
Shall take the kingly sceptre from my hand;
You are a warrior of the truest steel;
On me the Southern plague has been at work.
But if I cannot for my people live,
I now can die for them.

ASGAUT.  Well said, King Gandalf!

BLANKA.  Then need no more be said!  Die like a hero,
Faithful and true unto the very end!
But now that we must part forever,--know,
That when you die yourself to keep your oath
You are then likewise marking me for death!

GANDALF.  What!  You for death?

BLANKA.  My life was like a flower,
Transplanted in an unfamiliar soil,
Which therefore slumbered in its prison folds:
Then came a sunbeam from the distant home,--
O, that was you, my Gandalf!  Opened then
The flower its calyx.  In another hour,
Alas! the sunbeam paled,--the flower died!

GANDALF.  O, have I understood you right?  You could?
Then is my promise thrice unfortunate!

BLANKA.  But we shall meet again!

GANDALF.  O, nevermore!
You go to heaven and the holy Christ,
I to Valhalla; silent I shall take
My place among the rest,--but near the door;
Valhalla's merriment is not for me.

JOSTEJN.  [Returns with a banner in his hand.]
See, now the bark is ready, as you bade.

ASGAUT.  O, what a glorious end!  Many a man
Will envy you, indeed.

GANDALF.  [To BLANKA.]  Farewell!

BLANKA.  Farewell!
Farewell for life and for eternity!

RODERIK.  [Struggling with himself.]  Wait!  Wait!

[Prostrates himself before BLANKA.]

RODERIK.  Mercy, I cry!  Forgive, forgive me!

BLANKA.  O God!

GANDALF.  What means he?

RODERIK.  All will I confess:
My whole life here with you has been deceit!

BLANKA.  Ah, terror has unhinged his mind!

RODERIK.  No, no!

RODERIK.  [To GANDALF, after he has risen.]
You are released forever from your vow;
Your father's shadow needs no blood revenge!

GANDALF.  Ah, then explain!

BLANKA.  Oh, speak!

RODERIK.  Here stands King Rorek!

SOME.  The fallen king?

BLANKA.  O heavens!

GANDALF.  [In doubt.]  You,--my father?

RODERIK.  See, Asgaut!  Do you still recall the scratch
You gave me on our earliest viking trip,
The time we fought about the booty?

[He uncovers his arm and shows it to ASGAUT.]

ASGAUT.  Yes,
By Thor, it is King Rorek!

GANDALF.  [Throws himself in his arms.]  Father!  Father!
A second time now have you given me life.
My humble thanks!

RODERIK.  [Downcast; to BLANKA.]  And you now--what will you
Grant the old robber?

BLANKA.  Love as hitherto!
I am your daughter!  Has not three years' care
Wiped off each spot of blood upon your shield?

ASGAUT.  Yet now explain,--how comes it that you live!

GANDALF.  She saved his life.

RODERIK.  Yes, like a friendly elf
She healed my wounds and cared for me,
And all the while she told me of the faith
These quiet people in the South believe,
Until my rugged heart itself was moved.
And day by day I kept the truth from her;
I did not dare to tell her--

GANDALF.  But the mound there?

RODERIK.  I laid therein my armor and my sword,
It seemed to me the grim old savage viking
Was buried then and there.  Each day my child
Sent up a prayer for him beside the mound.

ASGAUT.  Farewell!

GANDALF.  Where do you go?

ASGAUT.  Northward again!
I now see clearly that my time is past--
So likewise is the viking life.  I go
To Iceland; there the plague has not yet come.

ASGAUT.  [To BLANKA.]  You, woman, take my place beside the king!
For Thor is gone--and Mjolnir out of gear;
Through you now Balder rules.--Farewell!

[He goes.]

GANDALF.  Yes, Balder ruleth now, through you, my Blanka!
I see the meaning of my viking life!
'Twas not alone desire for fame and wealth
That drove me hence from my forefathers' home;
No, that which called me was a secret longing,
A quiet yearning after Balder.  See,
Now is the longing stilled, now go we home;
There will I live in peace among my people.

GANDALF.  [To the VIKINGS.]  And will you follow?

ALL.  We will follow you!

GANDALF.  And you, my Blanka?

BLANKA.  I?  I too am born
A Northern child; for on your mountain sides
The choicest flowers of my heart took root.
To you it was I journeyed in my dreams,
From you it was that I received my love.

RODERIK.  And now away!

GANDALF.  But you?

BLANKA.  He comes with us!

RODERIK.  I shall remain.

[He points to the mound.]

RODERIK.  My barrow waits for me.

BLANKA.  And should I leave you here alone?

HEMMING.  No, no!
Be not afraid!  For I shall close his eyes
And sing to him a saga from the mound;
My last song it will be.

HEMMING.  [Moved as he seizes GANDALF's hand.]
Farewell, my king!
Now have you found a better scald than I.

RODERIK.  [With firmness.]
It must be so, my Gandalf; you are king,
And you have sacred duties to discharge.

[He puts their hands together.]

RODERIK.  You are the children of the coming dawn,--
Go yonder where the royal throne awaits you;
I am the last one of the by-gone age,
My throne--it is the barrow--grant me that!

[GANDALF and BLANKA throw themselves silently into his arms.
RODERIK ascends the burial mound.--HEMMING with his harp seats
himself at his feet.]

GANDALF.  [With resolution.]  And now to Norway!

HROLLOUG.  Home!

ALL.  To Norway!  Home!

BLANKA.  [Fired as she seizes the banner from JOSTEJN's hand.]
Yes, now away!  Our course shall northward run
O'er ocean billow on through storm and sun.
Soon fades the daylight o'er the glacier's peak,
Soon is the viking life a memory bleak!
Already sits the hero on his mound;
The time is past when he could sail around
With sword and battle cry from strand to strand.
Thor's hammer will no longer rule the land,
The North will be itself a giant grave.
But bear in mind the pledge All-Fader gave:
When moss and flowers shall the barrow hide,
To Idavold the hero's ghost shall ride,--
Then Norway too shall from the grave be brought
To chastened deeds within the realm of thought!

                *       *       *       *       *

                         OLAF LILJEKRANS

                      A Play in Three Acts

                              1857

                *       *       *       *       *

                       DRAMATIS PERSONA

LADY KIRSTEN LILJEKRANS.

OLAF LILJEKRANS     Her son.

ARNE OF GULDVIK.

INGEBORG            His daughter.

HEMMING             His page.

THORGJERD           An old fiddler.

ALFHILD.

Wedding GUESTS.

RELATIVES of Arne of Guldvik.

MAIDS and SERVANTS of Lady Kirsten.

                *       *       *       *       *

                             SETTING

The action takes place in the middle ages, in a mountain,
district.

                *       *       *       *       *




FIRST ACT

[A thickly wooded hillside which leads up to higher
mountain regions; in a deep ravine a swift river runs
from the background out to the right; over the river
lie some old logs and other remnants of a dilapidated
bridge.  Huge rocks lie scattered in the foreground;
far away can be seen the summits of snow-capped
mountain peaks.  Evening twilight rests over the
landscape; later on the moon appears.]



SCENE I

[THORGJERD stands on a rocky projection near the river
and listens to the various choruses which are heard
off the stage.]

CHORUS OF LADY KIRSTEN'S RETINUE.  [Deep in the wood to the
right.]
With ringing of bells we hurry along,
We wander in field and in dell;
O Christian, come, give heed to our song,
Awake from your magic spell.

RELATIVES OF ARNE OF GULDVIK.  [Far away to the right.]
Now hasten we all
To the wedding hall;
The foal runneth light and gay!
The hoofs resound
On the grassy ground
As the merry swains gallop away!

LADY KIRSTEN'S RETINUE.  [A little nearer than before.]
We conjure you forth from mountain and hill,
From the places which hold you bound.
Awake to our call, come, free your will
From elves that hover around!

[THORGJERD disappears in the ravine where the river runs; after
a rapid interplay the choruses are heard much nearer.]

ARNE'S RELATIVES.  Our way we shorten with jest and with song,
And all of the bridal night.

LADY KIRSTEN'S RETINUE.  With tears we wander the whole day long,
We search to the left and the right.

ARNE'S RELATIVES.  [In close proximity, yet still outside the
scene.]  To wedding and banquet, to song and dance,
Both servants and hand-maidens throng.

LADY KIRSTEN'S RETINUE.  [Nearer than before.]
Olaf Liljekrans!  Olaf Liljekrans!
Why sleep you so deep and so long?

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE II

[ARNE of Guldvik appears with his relatives, men and
women, minstrels, etc., in the background to the right
on the other side of the river; they are all in
festive attire.  Shortly afterwards HEMMING from the
same side.]

ONE OF THE RETINUE.  See, here goes the way.

ANOTHER.  No, here!

A THIRD.  Not at all, it must be here.

ARNE OF GULDVIK.  Well, well, are we now astray again!

ARNE OF GULDVIK.  [Calls.]  Hemming!  Where is Hemming?

HEMMING.  [Enters.]  Here!

ARNE.  Have I not told you to keep yourself close so as to be of
some service to me?

HEMMING.  It was Mistress Ingeborg--she wanted,--and so--

ARNE.  [Annoyed.]  Mistress Ingeborg!  Mistress Ingeborg!  Are
you Mistress Ingeborg's maid?  You are my page; it is me you
shall serve.  Do you not get your keep and wage therefor?  Come,
tell us where the way goes,--we are stuck.

HEMMING.  [Uncertain.]  The way?  Well now, I am little
acquainted up here, but--

ARNE.  I might have known it,--that is always the service you
give me!  Well, we shall have to spend the night in the
wilderness, as sure as I am Arne of Guldvik.

HEMMING.  [Who has in the meantime spied the remnants of the
bridge.]  Aha, no need of that; here we can get across.

ARNE.  Why didn't you tell us so in the first place?

[All cross the river and come forward on the stage.]

ARNE.  [Looks about.]  Yes, now I have my bearings again.  The
river there is the boundary between Lady Kirsten's dominions and
mine.

ARNE.  [Points to the left.]  Down there lies her estate; in
another hour or two we can sit cozily in the bridal house, but
then we must hurry along.

ARNE.  [Calls.]  Ingeborg!--Hemming!  Now where's Ingeborg?

HEMMING.  In the rear, up on the hillside.

HEMMING.  [Points to the right.]  She is playing with her
bridesmaids; they gather green twigs from the cherry trees and
run about with joy and laughter.

ARNE.  [Bitterly but in subdued voice.]  Hemming! this wedding
makes me sick; there are so many vexations about it.

ARNE.  [Gazes out to the right.]  There they run,--just look at
them!  It was she who hit upon the idea of going over the
mountain instead of following the highway; we should reach our
goal the sooner, she thought;--and yet notwithstanding--hm!  I
could go mad over it; tomorrow is she to go to the altar.  Are
these the decorous customs she ought to observe!  What will Lady
Kirsten say when she finds my daughter so ill disciplined?

ARNE.  [As HEMMING starts to speak.]  Yes, for that she is; she
is ill disciplined, I say.

HEMMING.  Master!  You should never have married your daughter
into Lady Kirsten's family; Lady Kirsten and her kinsmen are
high-born people--

ARNE.  You art stupid, Hemming!  High-born, high-born!  Much good
that will do,--it neither feeds nor enriches a man.  If Lady
Kirsten is high-born, then I am rich; I have gold in my chests
and silver in my coffers.

HEMMING.  Yes, but your neighbors make merry over the agreement
you have concluded with her.

ARNE.  Ah, let them, let them; it is all because they wish me
ill.

HEMMING.  They say that you have surrendered your legal right in
order to have Ingeborg married to Olaf Liljekrans; I shouldn't
mention it, I suppose,--but a lampoon about you is going the
rounds, master!

ARNE.  You lie in your throat; there is no one dares make a
lampoon about Arne of Guldvik.  I have power; I can oust him from
house and home whenever I please.  Lampoon!  And what do you know
about lampoons!--If they have composed any songs, it is to the
honor of the bride and her father!

ARNE.  [Flaring up.]  But it is a wretched bit of verse
nevertheless, really a wretched bit of verse, I tell you.  It is
no man skilled in the art of poetry who has put it together, and
if I once get hold of him, then--

HEMMING.  Aha, master! then you know it too?  Is there some one
who has dared sing it to you?

ARNE.  Sing, sing!  Now don't stand there and delay me with your
twaddle.

ARNE.  [To the others.]  Away, my kinsmen; little must we delay
if we are to reach the bridal house before midnight.  You should
have heard what Hemming is telling.  He says there is a rumor
around that Lady Kirsten has baked and brewed for five whole days
in honor of our coming.  Is it not so, Hemming?

HEMMING.  Aye, master!

ARNE.  He says she owns not the beaker of silver so costly but
she places it on the table shining and polished; so splendid a
feast she has not prepared since the king came to visit her
blessed lord twenty years ago.  Is it not true, Hemming?

HEMMING.  Aye, master!

HEMMING.  [Whispering.]  But, master, it is ill-thought to say
such things; Lady Kirsten is proud of her birth; she thinks this
marriage is somewhat of an honor to you; little you know how she
intends to show herself to her guests.

ARNE.  [Softly.]  Ah, what nonsense!

ARNE.  [To the others.]  He says Lady Kirsten gives herself no
rest; both day and night she is busy in pantry and cellar.  Is it
not--?

ARNE.  [Startled as he looks out to the right.]  Hemming! what is
that?  See here, who is that coming?

HEMMING.  [With a cry.]  Lady Kirsten Liljekrans!

ALL.  [Astonished.]  Lady Kirsten!

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE III

[The Preceding.  LADY KIRSTEN comes with her HOUSE
CARLS from the left.]

LADY KIRSTEN.  [To her followers, without noticing the others.]
Now just a little farther and I am sure we shall find him.

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Taken aback, aside.]  Arne of Guldvik!  Heaven
help me!

ARNE.  [As he goes to meet her.]  The peace of God, Lady Kirsten
Liljekrans!

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Composes herself and gives him her hand.]  The
peace of God to you!

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Aside.]  Does he then know nothing?

ARNE.  [Contentedly.]  And well met at the boundary!  Indeed,
this pleases me; yet almost too great is the honor you show me.

LADY KIRSTEN.  What mean you?

ARNE.  I mean too great is the honor you show me, when you travel
miles over fields and wildernesses in order to bid me welcome on
your land.

LADY KIRSTEN.  Ah, Lord Arne--

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Aside.]  He knows nothing as yet!

ARNE.  And that on a day like this, when you have enough things
to attend to; 'tis at your house we celebrate the wedding of our
children, since my estate lies too far from the church, and yet
you come here to meet me with all your servants.

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Embarrassed.]  I beg you, say no more about that.

ARNE.  Aye, I will speak of it loudly; the village people have
said that you pride yourself on your noble birth, that you look
down upon me and mine, and that you entered into the agreement
only in order to put an end to the long-standing disputes which
grew troublesome now that you have become a widow and begin to
grow old; and if that had not been the case, you would never--

LADY KIRSTEN.  How can you listen to what evil tongues invent?
No more will we think of our differences which have lasted since
the days of your ancestors.  I think our families have suffered
enough these years, yours as well as mine.  Look around you, Lord
Arne!  Is not the hillside here like the wildest of upland
pastures?  And yet in our fathers' days it was a region much
frequented and rich.  A bridge there was across the river, and a
highway from Guldvik to my father's house.  But with fire and
sword they sallied forth from both sides; they laid everything
waste that they came upon, for it seemed to them that they were
too near neighbors.  Now all sorts of weeds grow in the highway,
the bridge is broken, and it is only the bear and the wolf that
make their homes here.

ARNE.  Yes, they ran the road around the mountain below; it is a
good deal longer and they could thus better keep an eye on one
another; but there is little need of that now,--which is well and
good for both of us.

LADY KIRSTEN.  To be sure, to be sure!  But Ingeborg, the bride,
where is she?  I do not see her, and the bridesmaids likewise are
lacking; surely she is not--

ARNE.  She follows in the rear; she must shortly be here.
But--listen, Lady Kirsten!  One thing I will tell you, as well
first as last, although, I should think, you know it.  Ingeborg
has at times whims and moods,--I swear to you she has them,
however well disciplined she may be.

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Expectant.]  Well, what then?

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Aside.]  Is she too--

ARNE.  Such things you must tame; I, as her father, will never
succeed, but you will no doubt find ways and means.

LADY KIRSTEN.  Aye, rest you assured.

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Aside.]  And Olaf, who is nowhere to be seen!

HEMMING.  [Who has looked out to the right.]  There comes
Mistress Ingeborg.

HEMMING.  [Aside.]  How fair she is advancing foremost in the
group!

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Slowly to her servants.]  You will keep silent
about your errand up here.

A SERVANT.  You may be sure of that.

HEMMING.  [Aside, sighing, as he continues to look out
to the right.]  Ah, happy is Olaf, who will have her!

                *       *       *       *       *



SCENE IV

[The Preceding.  INGEBORG and the Bridesmaids come over
the bridge.]

INGEBORG.  [Still in the background.]  Why do you run away from
me?  What good will that do?  There can be no wedding anyway
before I come.

INGEBORG.  [Notices LADY KIRSTEN and her retinue.]  Lady Kirsten!
you here?  Well, I am glad of that.

[Casually to the retinue.]

[To LADY KIRSTEN as she looks about.]

LADY KIRSTEN.  Olaf!

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Aside.]  Woe is me! now it will out.

ARNE.  Yes, Olaf, indeed!  Ha, ha, ha!  I must have been blind;
'tis well the bride sees better than I; for I have not noticed
that the bridegroom is lacking; but now I understand very well
how it comes that we meet here,--it is he who is causing--

LADY KIRSTEN.  He--you mean--you know, that--

ARNE.  I mean it has grown tedious for him down there in the
festive hall.  Aye, aye, I remember now my own wedding day; at
that time I also was young.  He has had a great desire to meet
the bride, and accordingly he prevailed upon you to go with him.

LADY KIRSTEN.  He greatly desired, to be sure, to meet the bride,
but--

INGEBORG.  But what?

LADY KIRSTEN.  Olaf is not here with us.

HEMMING.  [Approaches.]  Not with you!

ARNE.  And why not?

INGEBORG.  Speak, I beg you!

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Embarrassed and jestingly.]  Truly, it appears
the bride also is anxious!  Come along, come along with me down
to the bridal hall; there, I imagine he will be found.

HEMMING.  [Whispering to ARNE.]  Master! remember I gave you
warning.

ARNE.  [Suspiciously to LADY KIRSTEN.]  First answer me; then
shall we follow.

LADY KIRSTEN.  Well then,--he is ridden out to the hunt.

LADY KIRSTEN.  [As she is about to go.]  Come, 'tis fast growing
dark.

INGEBORG.  To the hunt?

LADY KIRSTEN.  Aye!  Does that surprise you?  You know the song
of course:
  "The knight likes to ride in the forest around,
  To test his horse and his hound!"

INGEBORG.  Does he think so little of his young bride that he
uses the wedding days to go hunting wild animals?

LADY KIRSTEN.  Now you are jesting.  Come along, come along!

ARNE.  [Who has in the meantime kept his eye on LADY KIRSTEN and
her retinue.]  No, wait, Lady Kirsten!  I hardly dare measure
myself in wisdom with you, but one thing clearly I see, and that
is that you are concealing your real errand up here.

LADY KIRSTEN.  [Confused.]  I?  How can you think that?

ARNE.  From one thing and another I can see you are concealing
something.  You are strangely downcast, and yet you pretend to be
playful in spirit; but it won't do--

LADY KIRSTEN.  'Tis nothing new for you to think ill of me and
mine.

ARNE.  Perhaps; but never did I do so without just cause.

AR